

===== BOOK: toc.txt =====


    
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE TRIAL OF CHRIST

  

FROM A LEGAL
 AND
 SCRIPTURAL VIEWPOINT

  

by

  

DAVID K. BREED, LL.B.

  

of the

  

St. Louis Bar

  

WITH A FOREWORD

  

by

  

CLARENCE EDWARD MACARTNEY, D.D., LL.D., Litt.D.
 Pittsburgh, Pa.

  

SAINT LOUIS

  

THOMAS LAW BOOK COMPANY

  

[1948]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, March 2008, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion as required by law at the time.

[p. 2]

Copyright

1948

David K. Breed

[p. 3]

TO

ERNEST BANCROFT CONANT,

Professor of Law, Christian Gentleman and My Good Friend, whose emphasis upon the modernity of Ancient Truths first stimulated in me an interest in Roman Law, and whose friendship through the years will always be an inspiration--this little book is affectionately dedicated.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

FOREWORD

By Reverend Clarence Edward Macartney
 Pastor, First Presbyterian Church
 Pittsburgh, Pa.

The great fact, and the Eternal Fact, in the life of Jesus was his death for our sins upon the Cross. This was the fact which St. Paul declared he preached to the Corinthians "first of all"; not that they were the first to hear it; not that it merely came first in the enumeration of the great truths of the Gospel; but that it was first in importance, the Eternal Fact of Redemption. The steps, therefore, by which Jesus was brought to the Cross, although ever of the greatest interest, are secondary in importance to the death of Christ on the Cross.

Christian lawyers have always found the records of the trial of Jesus of great interest. This interest has led the author of this book to make a careful study from a lawyer's standpoint of the trial of Jesus. He brings out the fact that Jesus was tried six times in twelve hours; before Annas, before Caiaphas,

[p. 5]

before the Sanhedrin, before Pilate, before Herod, before Pilate again. Of course, the real judicial trial was that before the Sanhedrin. According to the author there were seventeen errors in these trials which might be classified as "reversible;" that is, such errors as today would warrant a superior court in reversing the judgment of the lower court. Among these errors he notes the following: No process could take place on one of the feast days; no process could be started at night. Caiaphas publicly declared before the trial that Christ deserved death. Jesus had no counsel to defend him. Pilate declared Jesus not guilty, and yet accepted the verdict of the mob and sent him to crucifixion. It was illegal for the Sanhedrin to convict a man on the same day as the trial.

This is a carefully done book, and those who wish to follow out the experiences of our Lord on that same night in which he was betrayed will find much of interest and instruction in it.

Unlike some others who have written about the trial of Jesus, this author has a true and scriptural understanding of what the trial of

[p. 6]

[paragraph continues] Jesus led to; that is, his sacrificial and atoning death for sin upon the Cross; for he says,

"Christianity is not a religion; it is a revelation. The word 'religion' comes from a Greek root meaning the act of man searching out for God, pagan man trying to find God. But when Very God became flesh and dwelt among us, revealed Himself in the person of Christ, and died to save us from our sin, religion ceased for all believers in Jesus."

Those who read this book may be interested to know that the author, a St. Louis lawyer, comes naturally by an interest in theological and scriptural questions, for he is a direct descendant of America's greatest thinker and theologian, Jonathan Edwards.

CLARENCE EDWARD MACARTNEY.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

In preparing this little study with the purpose of being both legally accurate and theologically sound, I wish to make special acknowledgement to Myrt A. Rollins, Jr., Esq., for permission to draw heavily upon materials collected by his late grandfather Senator James M. Rollins; to my office associate Oliver Blackinton, Esq., for kindly advice in some legal questions and for reading the manuscript, and to my brother, Rev. M. Edwards Breed, for great assistance in locating and collecting the Christian sources, and reading and criticising the manuscript.

I am also thankful to Dr. Macartney for his very gracious "Foreword."

D. K. B.                 

Saint Louis, Missouri
 March 15, 1948

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

  

TABLE OF CONTENTS

        FOREWORD

       By Dr. Macartney

       <page 4>

     
      ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

       By the Author

       <page 7>

     
      CHAPTER I

       THE SCOPE OF OUR STUDY

       <page 9>

     
      CHAPTER II

       LEGAL BACKGROUND AND SOURCES OF THE RECORD

       <page 12>-<page 16>

     
       

       Concept of legal history--of Due Process of Law--of a Reversible Error--of   Court Reporting and The Gospels as a court reporter's record

        

     
      CHAPTER III

       THE RECORD OF THE TRIALS

       <page 17>-<page 37>

     
       

       Wherein we quote the Record as given in Matthew--Mark--Luke--and John

        

     
      CHAPTER IV

       REVERSIBLE ERRORS

       <page 38>-<page 43>

     
       

       Wherein we define a Reversible Error and list 17 Errors in the actual   Trial of Christ

        

     
      CHAPTER V

       FIVE COURTS AND SIX TRIALS

       <page 44>-<page 50>

     
       

       A--Biographical

        

     
       

       B--Chronology of the Trials

       <page 47>-<page 50>

     
      CHAPTER VI

       ARGUMENT AS TO JEWISH TRIALS

       <page 51>-<page 61>

     
       

       Wherein we examine the law of the Sanhedrin and the errors it made

        

     
      CHAPTER VII

       ERRORS IN THE ROMAN TRIALS

       <page 62>-<page 65>

     
       

       Pilate and Herod and their Mistakes

        

     
      CHAPTER VIII

       A LESSON IN CITIZENSHIP

       <page 66>-<page 72>

     
      EPILOGUE

       OUR REDEEMER

       <page 73>-<page 78>

     
      APPENDIX A

       LAWYERS IN THE SANHEDRIN

       <page 79>-<page 82>

     
      APPENDIX B

       BIBLIOGRAPHY

       <page 83>-<page 86>

     
      INDEX

        

       <page 87> ff

     
 
     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

CHAPTER I

  

THE SCOPE OF OUR STUDY

"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." [*1] The death of Christ as the sacrifice of God for man is the greatest fact in the story of salvation, except His glorious resurrection. No legalistic study of The Trial of Christ can take the place of the Evangelistic message of The Christ. To many lawyers, no trial of history is quite so interesting as the Trial of Christ. Our purpose will be to re-examine the trial in the light of the Roman and Jewish laws of that era, and our laws today, in order to call the attention of Christian people to the legal significance of that trial--and, perchance, to demonstrate again the fact that there is no substitute for Christian faith.

Our approach to the subject will be in legalistic style, a style perhaps not too familiar

[p. 10]

to lay minds, but that most adaptable to our subject.

In preparing a case on Appeal today, an attorney edits and files in The Supreme Court

(1) a digest of the charges, the pleadings, the testimony and judgment in the lower court (called collectively "The Record"),

(2) a list of the points on which he intends to rely as grounds for reversal of the judgment below (called an "Assignment of Errors"),

(3) a repetition of the Assignment of Errors, with reference to legal publications as authority for the propositions relied on as error, usually somewhat amplified in form and known as "Points and Authorities," and, finally, (4) an essay discussing the record, errors and authorities in logical sequence and known as an "Argument." In most Appellate and Supreme Courts these documents must be printed and the practice is to print The Record as a separate volume, combining the Errors, Authorities and Argument under another cover.

We will follow the above classification with one modification, that we will combine the Authorities with the Errors and give within these pages a statement of the following:

[p. 11]

A. In Chapter II, some comment on the nature of law and the sources of the Record of The Trial of Christ;

B. In Chapter III, that Record, as we have it in the four Gospels;

C. In Chapter IV, a discussion of the term "Reversible Error" and a list of the Errors in The Trial of Christ;

D. In Chapters V, VI, VII and VIII, we explain and argue the various errors listed in Chapter IV, and draw from these arguments A Lesson in Citizenship; and,

E. In the Epilogue we summarize our study to emphasize that Christ is Our Redeemer.

A word as to the authorities. Our study is not unique, and an attempt is made to credit its sources, both legalistic and theological. For brevity's sake, the standard legal citations are given in our footnotes and the theological works referred to in an abbreviated form, to all of which a key is found in an Appendix.

Footnotes

^9:1 John 3:16.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

  

CHAPTER II

  

LEGAL BACKGROUND AND SOURCES OF THE RECORD

To a Christian Lawyer, the Trial of Christ has a deep significance because we know that the legalistic errors in that trial, condemnable though they be, nevertheless fulfilled prophecy and thereby served a purpose. Theological writers have many works that show how the Old Testament Prophecies were fulfilled in what did take place; indeed, many passages of the Gospel Record are quoted from the Prophets. A further word on this point will be found in our Epilogue, but we limit ourselves, for the present, to the legal phases of the Trial of Christ.

In using the word "trial" in its legalistic sense, the author is not unmindful of the fact that Christ was thrice "tried", or, more properly speaking, tempted by the Devil. However, any study of the trial in the spiritual sense is left to homiletical writings, such as Dr. Clarence Edward Macartney's recent

[p. 13]

book, Trials of Great Men of the Bible, in which Chapters XI and XV deal with the temptations of Christ.

Christian and Jewish people alike in every generation are taught considerable from the Old Testament Scriptures dealing with the Mosaic Law. Those who are not themselves attorneys perhaps little realize that many of the basic principles of modern law go back to ancient roots. At least one modern writer has attempted to prove, for example, that the idea of due process of law expressed in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of The United States was not an invention of reformers of our Civil War era but rather a recognition in modern law that it is illegal to punish one who has not been duly convicted of crime upon a trial conducted with due deference to the law of evidence. [*2]

In modern times, Sir William Blackstone, a great British statesman and jurist, wrote that "When civil society is once formed, government at the same time results, of

[p. 14]

course, as necessary to preserve and to keep that society in order. Unless some superior be constituted, whose commands and decisions all the members are bound to obey, they would still remain as in a state of nature, without any judge upon earth to define their several rights and redress their several wrongs." [*3] In other words, the function of Government is to give all people security from the encroachment of one another, upon what has been called in our basic American law, "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness."

To make our point very clear, before proceeding to a further chapter where we will deal in detail with "Reversible Errors," it seems well to emphasize that in modern legal parlance a mistake made by a trial judge is deemed Reversible Error, if the mistake is so serious as to be grounds for a new trial. Glaring examples would be to let a man's partner sit on a jury at his trial; for a Judge to hear a case in which lie is an interested party, or has already formed an opinion; or

[p. 15]

to permit a witness to testify to hearsay instead of facts. These are some of the "Reversible Errors" on which a new trial can be had and are often spoken of by misinformed business men as "technicalities," as when they say a certain gangster "got off on a technicality" or "got a new trial on a technicality."

Before leaving our discussion of legal principles, it seems well to point out that after a Court Reporter has taken down the testimony of a trial in the first instance, upon appeal being taken to a higher court by either party, the higher Court does not again hear the witnesses but passes upon the case upon the typewritten or printed transcription of the notes taken by the Court Reporter. Such notes together with the various formal documents filed by lawyers in the lower court are (as we have written) referred to collectively as "the record on appeal." Although the Court erred in the Trial of Christ by not keeping any records (so far as we know) when at that time court reporters were known to Roman and Hebrew law and custom, [*4] the record in the

[p. 16]

synoptic Gospels is, however, sufficient to enable us to pass intelligent review, were we an Appellate Court, upon the illegalities of the Trial of Christ.

Footnotes

^13:2 Cf., Numbers 35:30: "Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any person to cause him to die." See also, White, The Law in the Scriptures, p. 122.

^14:3 Commentaries on the Laws of England, (1765) Cooley's 2nd ed., (1876) page 47 (*49) . All editions of Bl. Comm. are star-paged to the original.

^15:4 Writing, of course, was common in the first century, A. D., and there have been researches tending [p. 16] to show that there were quite detailed court records in those days which have been discovered by Christian Archaeologists; Cf., Rev. Harry Rimmer, Voices from the Silent Centuries, pp. 60, 61, 81, inter alia. St. Paul did a good deal of writing. Cf., on writing in ancient times, William Albright, From the Stone Age to Christianity, pp. 192, 257. On ancient procedure generally, Wigmore, A Panorama of the World's Legal Systems, (Washington Law Book Co.,) 3 vols. 1928, 1 vol. reprint 1936, Chap. III Hebrew Law, and Chap. VII, Roman Law. Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, 27th impression, vol. II, p. 555 states that the Sanhedrin customarily had short-hand court-reporters.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

  

CHAPTER III

  

THE RECORD OF THE TRIALS

We have referred in a previous Chapter to the fact that the Gospels refer in some detail to the Trial of Christ. Since we have referred to the record on appeal as the legal basis for trial study, no record of an actual court-reporter being extant, we include as the best record available the passages given us in the Gospels. Those passages, containing a record of The Trial of Christ are:

Matthew 26:57-27:2; 27:11-26;
 Mark 14:53-15:15;
 Luke 22:54-23:24; and,
 John 18:12-19:16; inclusive.

We quote the record, as given in the Authorized Version: [*5]

ST. MATTHEW, in Chapters 26 and 27, verses as numbered:

Chapter 26 of Matthew:

"57. And they that had laid hold on Jesus

[p. 18]

led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and elders were assembled.

58. But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest's palace, and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.

59. Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death;

60. But found none: yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came two false witnesses,

61. And said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.

62. And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?

63. But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God.

64. Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

[p. 19]

65. Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.

66. What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death.

67. Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands,

68. Saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee?

69. Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee.

70. But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou sayest.

71. And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth.

72. And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.

73. And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee.

[p. 20]

74. Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew.

75. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly."

Chapter 27 of Matthew:

"When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death;

2. And when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor."

.         .         .

"11. And Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest.

12. And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.

13. Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?

14. And he answered him to never a word; insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.

[p. 21]

15. Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would.

16. And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.

17. Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?

18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.

19. When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.

20. But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.

21. The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas.

22. Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus which is called Christ? They all say unto him, Let him be crucified.

23. And the governor said, Why, what evil

[p. 22]

hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.

24. When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it.

25. Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on our children.

26. Then released he Barabbas unto them; and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified."

ST. MARK, in Chapters 14 and 15, verses as numbered:

Chapter 14 of Mark:

"53. And they led Jesus away to the high priest: and with him were assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.

54. And Peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire.

55. And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus to put him to death; and f ouiid none.

[p. 23]

56. For many bare false witness against him, but their witness [*6] agreed not together.

57. And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him, saying,

58. We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build another made without hands.

59. But neither so did their witness agree together.

60. And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?

61. But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?

62. And Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

63. Then the high priest rent his clothes,

[p. 24]

and saith, What need we any further witnesses?

64. Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.

65. And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands.

66. And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the maids of the high priest:

67. And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.

68. But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.

69. And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by, This is one of them.

70. And he denied it again. And a little after, they that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them: for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agreeth thereto.

71. But he began to curse and to swear,

[p. 25]

saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak.

72. And the second time the cock crew. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept."

Chapter 15 of Mark:

"And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate.

2. And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering said unto him, Thou sayest it.

3. And the chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered nothing.

4. And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee.

5. But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled.

6. Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired.

7. And there was one named Barabbas,

[p. 26]

which lay bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection.

8. And the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he had ever done unto them.

9. But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews?

10. For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy.

11. But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release Barabbas unto them.

12. And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What will ye then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews?

13. And they cried out again, Crucify him.

14. Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil hath he done? And they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him.

15. And so Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified."

ST. LUKE, in Chapters 22 and 23, verses as numbered:

[p. 27]

Chapter 22 of Luke:

"54. Then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the high priest's house. And Peter followed afar off.

55. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and were set down together, Peter sat down among them.

56. But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon him, and said, This man was also with him.

57. And he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not.

58. And after a little while another saw him, and said, Thou art also of them. And Peter said, Man, I am not.

59. And about the space of one hour after another confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this fellow also was with him: for he is a Galilean.

60. And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou sayest. And immediately, while he yet spake, the cock crew.

61. And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.

[p. 28]

62. And Peter went out, and wept bitterly.

63. And the men that held Jesus mocked him, and smote him.

64. And when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote thee?

65. And many other things blasphemously spake they against him.

66. And as soon as it was day, the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their council, saying,

67. Art thou the Christ? tell us. And he said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not believe:

68. And if I also ask you, ye will not answer me, nor let me go.

69. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.

70. Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say that I am.

71. And they said, What need we any further witness? for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth."

[p. 29]

Chapter 23 of Luke:

"And the whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate.

2. And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ a King.

3. And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answered him and said, Thou sayest it.

4. Then said Pilate to the chief priests and to the people, I find no fault in this man.

5. And they were the more fierce, saying, He stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning from Galilee to this place.

6. When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilean.

7. And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time.

8. And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard many things of him; and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him.

[p. 30]

9. Then he questioned with him in many words; but he answered him nothing.

10. And the chief priests and scribes stood and vehemently accused him.

11. And Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate.

12. And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together: for before they were at enmity between themselves.

13. And Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people,

14. Said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people: and, behold, I, having examined him before you, have found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him:

15. No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him; and, lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him.

16. I will therefore chastise him, and release him.

17. (For of necessity he must release one unto them at the feast.)

[p. 31]

18. And they cried out all at once, saying, Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas:

19. (Who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder, was cast into prison.)

20. Pilate therefore, willing to release Jesus, spake again to them.

21. But they cried, saying, Crucify him, crucify him.

22. And he said unto them the third time, Why, what evil hath he done? I have found no cause of death in him: I will therefore chastise him, and let him go.

23. And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed.

24. And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required."

ST. JOHN, in Chapters 18 and 19, verses as numbered:

Chapter 18 of John:

"12. Then the band and the captain and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound him,

13. And led him away to Annas first; for he

[p. 32]

was father in law to Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.

14. Now Caiaphas was he, which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people.

15. And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple: that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest.

16. But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.

17. Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He saith, I am not.

18. And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals; for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself.

19. The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.

20. Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing.

[p. 33]

21. Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said.

22. And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so?

23. Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?

24. Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.

25. And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said therefore unto him, Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not.

26. One of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?

27. Peter then denied again: and immediately the cock crew.

28. Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment: and it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the passover.

[p. 34]

29. Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring ye against this man?

30. They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.

31. Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, it is not lawful for us to put any man to death:

32. That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should die.

33. Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews?

34. Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?

35. Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done?

36. Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should

[p. 35]

not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.

37. Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.

38. Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at all.

39. But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the passover: will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?

40. Then cried they all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber."

Chapter 19 of John:

"Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him.

2. And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and they put on him a purple robe,

[p. 36]

3. And said, Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote him with their hands.

4. Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.

5. Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man!

6. When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him.

7. The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.

8. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid;

9. And went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.

10. Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?

[p. 37]

11. Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore he that delivereth me unto thee hath the greater sin.

12. And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar.

13. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha.

14. And it was the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour: and he saith unto the Jews, Behold your King!

15. But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar.

16. Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. And they took Jesus, and led him away."

Footnotes

^17:5 We quote in the Order of the Canon of Scripture, knowing most scholars hold Mark was the earliest of the writers.

^23:6 Consult other translations on this verse; compare, Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon; Revised Standard says "their testimony did not agree"; Weymouth, accord; Goodspeed, "their evidence did not agree"; from all of which we see that the testimony was conflicting even from the mouths of false witnesses.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

REVERSIBLE ERRORS

"Reversible Error" is defined in modern law as "such an error as warrants the appellate court in reversing the judgment and remanding the cause." [*7] For generations an error has been held not reversible unless, at the time it was made, the party against whom it was made, through his attorney, made specific objection to the action of the trial court and saved a specific "exception" to the ruling; but in 1943 Missouri abolished exceptions and provided in its new Code for Civil Procedure that "it is sufficient that a party, at the time the ruling of the Court is made or sought, makes known to the court the action which he desires the court to take or his objection to the action of the court and his grounds therefor; and if a party has no opportunity to object to a ruling or order at the time it is made, the absence of an objection does not thereafter prejudice him." [*8]

[p. 39]

[paragraph continues] The said Code, Section 140, goes on to say that "No Appellate court shall reverse any judgment, unless it believes that error was committed by the trial court against appellant, [*9] and materially affecting the merits of the action." [*10] Exceptions still have to be saved in criminal causes in Missouri, and from a purely technical standpoint there may have been no reversible error in the Trial of Christ, merely because Jesus saved no exceptions, made no objection,--"opened not his mouth." [*11] The only statements Jesus did make were in the nature of admissions of His power. [*12]

IF, however, errors had been pointed out to the trial courts--Annas, Caiaphas, The Sanhedrin, Pilate and Herod--then IF an appeal had been had, Jesus would have been able to assign seventeen errors in the trials. [*13]

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] We shall note these errors here and annotate them in the footnotes, before passing on to discuss the trials in detail.

These errors are:

1. No process could take place on the Jewish Sabbath or on feast days. [*14]

2. No process could be started at night or even afternoon for a trial before a regular Sanhedrin court. [*15]

3. It was error for Caiaphas, acting as Judge, to have sought words from the mouth of Christ upon which to convict Him, without first making a prima-facie case with other witnesses. [*16]

4. Caiaphas' Palace was not the meeting place of the Sanhedrin: it was error to hold a trial there. [*17]

[p. 41]

5. It was error for Caiaphas to have acted as Judge after having publicly declared that Christ deserved death. [*18]

6. It was error to have left Him unguarded, to the unrestrained license of the mob in the gallery of Caiaphas' palace or court for an hour or more. [*19]

7. The Sanhedrin had no jurisdiction in Capital Cases, having been divested of that jurisdiction by the Romans forty years before. [*20]

8. The Sanhedrin, if existent, had no power except at a regular meeting. [*21]

9. It was error not to appoint someone to defend Him--Jesus had no counsel. [*22]

[p. 42]

10. It was error not to have "warned" the witnesses in this capital case, in a Sanhedrin court. [*23]

11. The courts erred by not taking into consideration the guilt or innocence of Jesus. [*24]

12. It was error to take Christ, as prisoner, before Annas. [*25]

13. In modern times it would have been error to require Christ to testify y as a witness against Himself, [*26] but in those days in a trial for Blasphemy there seems to have been authority in favor of requiring what we know as "self incrimination" [*27]--this will be discussed in detail in a later chapter.

14. Roman Law required trials to be public, and the private trial of Christ before Annas and Caiaphas was error. [*28]

[p. 43]

15. It was error to convict a man on the testimony of false witnesses; [*29]--under modern law the Jury determines the credibility of the Witnesses. [*30]

16. Pilate having announced Jesus not guilty, erred in permitting the verdict of the "mob" to stand. [*31] The record shows Christ, after Pilate found "no harm" in Him, [*32] was sent to Herod, then back to Pilate, then turned over to be crucified.

17. It was unlawful and therefore error for the Sanhedrin to convict on the same day as the trial; they could acquit the same day but had to hold a verdict of "guilty" under advisement at least two days. [*33]

Footnotes

^38:7 54 Corpus Juris, p. 745.

^38:8 Mo, Code Civil Procedure, Sec. 122; Laws of Mo., 1943, p. 389.

^39:9 Christ would have been the Appellant!

^39:10 Ibid, Section 140, p. 395.

^39:11 Isaiah 53:7.

^39:12 Matt. 26:63, 64; Mk. 14:62; Luke 22:67 thru 70; John 18:20, 23, 34, 36 and 37 and 19:11.

^39:13 We are indebted for this list to loan by Myrt A. Rollins, Jr., Esq., of material and permission to quote from (privately published) The Arrest, Trial and Conviction of Jesus Christ From a Lawyer's Standpoint, written by his grandfather, the late James M. Rollins, Esq., of St. Louis, about 1900; p. 21 ff.

^40:14 Edersheim, op. cit., II, p. 557; Rabbi A. P. Drucker, The Trial of Jesus from Jewish Sources, pp. 8 and 10; Chandler, The Trial of Jesus from a Lawyer's Standpoint, 2 vols., 1908, I pp. 219 & 263.

^40:15 Edersheim, op. cit. II, p. 557; Drucker, op. cit., p. 8; Chandler op. cit., I, 238 and 260.

^40:16 Some authorities dispute this assertion in Blasphemy cases where the witness would become guilty upon testifying; see discussion infra, next chapter.

^40:17 Edersheim, op. cit., II, p. 556; Drucker, op. cit., p. 8.

^41:18 This point is also in dispute, as we discuss in next chapter, because a desire for Jesus death may not be an opinion that He was guilty of Blasphemy; see, John 11:50; Drucker, op. cit., p. 7; Chandler, op. cit., I, 238; Chandler says there ought to have been several judges; MISHNA Pirke Aboth, IV, 8.

^41:19 Edersheim, II, 563.

^41:20 Edersheim, II, 567; see Strachan, The Fourth Gospel, p. 312 et seq., contra; The Sanhedrin had power over capital offenses at various times but scholars differ on this point; cf., Drucker, op. cit., p. 5; Chandler, op. cit., I, 176 ff., points out that although Herod had put 45 members of the Sanhedrin to death about 30 A.D., the Sanhedrin did exist and had power; see also, Josephus, Ant., xiv, 9, 4; Matthew 16:21; 20:18; Emanuel Deutsch, The Talmud, p. 32.

^41:21 Edersheim, II, 556; Drucker, p. 10; inferentially in Chandler, op. cit., I, 265.

^41:22 Implied by Edersheim, II, 555.

^42:23 Edersheim, II, 557.

^42:24 Ibid.

^42:25 Edersheim, II, 547, 548.

^42:26 Numbers 35:30; U. S. Const. Amendment V (Due Process); Edersheim, II, 557, 558.

^42:27 Drucker, op. cit., 7; Seminary lectures of Prof. John Wick Bowman, Ph. D., D. D., quoted in correspondence by Rev. M. Edwards Breed, (Presbyterian), Chillicothe, Mo.; MISHNA, San., 6:2.

^42:28 Edersheim, II, 568; public trial today, U. S. Const., Amend. VI.

^43:29 Edersheim, II, 558; Chandler, I, 127 ff (Chap. IX); Deut. 17:6; Num. 35:30.

^43:30 Jacobs vs. Danciger, 328 Mo. 458, 41 S. W. 2d, 389, 77 A. L. R. 1237; see also, 15 Corpus Juris, 1346.

^43:31 Roman Law, XII Tab. IX, 6, "The decrees of the Twelve Tables forbid any uncondemned man whomever be put to death"; in modern law, "Double Jeopardy" is forbidden; U. S. Const. Amend. V; Mo. Const. 1875 Art. II, Sec 23; Mo. Const. 1945 Art. I, Sec. 19 prohibits both "Double Jeopardy" and "Self Incrimination"; although right against self-incrimination is waivable.

^43:32 John 18:38; John 19:4; etc. There is some question as to whether Pilate's language was broad enough to be a technical acquittal.

^43:33 Edersheim, II, 555; Chandler, I, 279; Mendelsohn, Criminal Jurisprudence of the Ancient Hebrews, p. 141.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

CHAPTER V

  

FIVE COURTS AND SIX TRIALS

Jesus, arrested about midnight in the Garden of Gethsemane, was tried six times before he was crucified the following noon. Six trials in twelve hours! Peloubet's Bible Dictionary gives the time of this chronology as follows: [*34]

          1.

       Before Annas

       FRIDAY

     
      2.

       Before Caiaphas

       1 to 5 A. M.

     
      3.

       Before the Sanhedrin

     
      4.

       Before Pilate

       5 to 6 A. M.

     
      5.

       Before Herod

     
      6.

       Before Pilate Again

     
   From a standpoint of technical law, the personnel of a legally constituted court is of slight significance. Yet historians know that the course of law has been at times altered and history influenced by the character of judges. Marshall and Holmes, of the United States Supreme Court, Lord Mansfield, Lord Eldon, and Sir William Blackstone of England,

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Moses of the Hebrews, Justinian of the Romans, Solon of the Greeks, Dean Wigmore of Northwestern University Law School and Dean Pound of Harvard have all made great contributions to law and legal literature. So, in a study of the trial of Christ, one should know something about Annas, Caiaphas, Pilate, and Herod.

This is  true because, as we shall see, Christian and Jewish scholars alike agree that the trial of Christ was not a proper trial, the Christians [*35] contending that prophecy was fulfilled, [*36] the Jews contending that the Christians falsely blame the Jews for a Roman crime. [*37]

  

A. BIOGRAPHICAL

Annas, his five sons, and his father-in-law Caiaphas, all held the Jewish High-Priesthood during the first century, A. D., [*38] and it

[p. 46]

appears from the New Testament that at the time of the arrest of Jesus, Caiaphas was actually in office as High Priest, [*39] his son-in-law, Annas, being a former High Priest but also holding the title for life. [*40] Caiaphas was a wily politician in the Sanhedrin who had held office as High Priest for eighteen years, [*41] although custom was to elect for a one year term. Rollins describes Annas as a nefarious moneylending Sadducee, a political friend of the Romans, [*42] while we know that Caiaphas had conspired with Judas to betray Christ; [*43] and that none of the writers give either man any praise.

Herod was Roman Governor of Galilee; Pilate, of Judea. Both happened to be in Jerusalem for the Passover crowd. Herod was a son of Herod the Great, who had ordered the slaughter of the infants thirty years before, [*44] and probably hated Jesus.

Pilate was the fifth Roman governor of

[p. 47]

[paragraph continues] Judea [*45] and was noted for his cruel and arbitrary administration of the government. He was also weak at times and has been greatly criticized by historians. Rabbi Drucker, in his analysis of the Trial of Christ, not only pictures Pilate as a persecutor of the Jews but states that Caiaphas was a Roman spy [*46] and that the historian Tacitus correctly stated that "Jesus, called Christ, was crucified by Pilate for promoting a rebellion among the Jews." [*47] We do know that Pilate was a craven coward and was afraid to release Jesus.

  

B. CHRONOLOGY OF THE TRIALS

1. Jesus was taken first to Annas, who was not then High Priest and had no power, so took no formal action but merely "marked time" as it were, until Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin were ready for action. [*48]

2. Caiaphas was High Priest and seems to have questioned Jesus privately prior to

[p. 48]

the convening of the Sanhedrin. [*49] Mr. Chandler, in his two volume work on the Trial of Jesus devotes a whole volume to the Biblical Record, Jewish Law and the Jewish Trials (Volume I), filling up his second volume with a discussion of the Roman Trial of Jesus, and while most of his discussion is interesting, it is longer than necessary. Suffice it to say that Caiaphas' examination of Jesus was merely preparatory to the formal Sanhedrin trial. John gives the clearest account of the action before Caiaphas alone, [*50] probably in the presence only of Peter who had followed afar off. [*51]

3. The Sanhedrin was a court in the limited sense of the word. It had legislative, executive, judicial, civil, criminal, and ecclesiastical powers over the Jews, and its judges were 72 descendants of Moses. It had to meet legally in daylight, in the forenoon, in a certain room, with court reporters present; and its rules of procedure were so strict that an unanimous verdict of guilt meant

[p. 49]

acquittal. [*52] There could be unanimous verdicts of acquittal, but no unanimous verdicts of guilt. But the Sanhedrin (in violation of its rules) moved quickly to try Jesus on a charge of Blasphemy, [*53] on the testimony of two false witnesses who contradicted each other, [*54] but Jesus here broke His silence and said He is Christ. [*55] Then the Sanhedrin unanimously found Him guilty of Blasphemy, but had no power to put Him to death without the consent of Pilate. The Sanhedrists at this point spit on Jesus, while some struck Him with their hands. [*56] In the morning, [*57] they sent Jesus to Pilate.

4. Pilate was Roman Governor and not interested at all in the Jewish charges of Blasphemy, so he found no harm in Jesus. He was impressed though with the "trumped up" charge of Treason; but when Jesus said His kingdom is "not of this world," [*58] and that Pilate had "no power at all against me

[p. 50]

except it were given thee from above: therefore he that hath delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin," [*59] Pilate was less interested than before and sent Jesus to Herod.

5. Herod questioned Jesus at length but, getting no answer, sent Jesus back to Pilate. [*60]

6. Pilate had Jesus before him a second time, and again tried to appease the Jews by releasing Jesus as a Holiday Pardon, but they demanded the release of Barabbas, then Pilate delivered Jesus up to be crucified by Roman soldiers on the demand of the Jewish mob. [*61] However, Pilate required that it be inscribed over the Cross, "Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews. " [*61a]

Footnotes

^44:34 1925 Edn., pp. 779 & 780.

^45:35 Edersheim, Chandler, Rollins, among our citations.

^45:36 Compare: Mk. 14:62 with Ps. 110:1 and Dan 7:13; Mk. 15:1 with Is. 53:8; Mk. 15: 3-5 with Is. 53:7; John 19:1-3 with Is. 53:3, 5, 7; John 19:36 with Num. 9:12; John 19:37 with Zech. 12:10; etc.

^45:37 Rabbi Drucker, op. cit., entire work, especially pp. 18-19; Rabbi Klausner, Jesus of Nazareth, (Danby Trans), pp. 339-48, inclusive, 413, 414.

^45:38 Peloubet's Bible Dict., 35; Klausner, op. cit., 339.

^46:39 John 18:3.

^46:40 Peloubet, op. cit., 35; Klausner, 339.

^46:41 Klausner, 340.

^46:42 Rollins, op. cit., 17 & 18; Compare, Strachan, op. cit., pp. 244 and 308 on Annas & Caiaphas.

^46:43 Matt. 26:3-5.

^46:44 Matt. 2:16-20.

^47:45 Tacitus Ann., xv:44; Peloubet, op. cit., 518.

^47:46 Op. cit., p. 38 ff; loyal Jews thought all Sadducees were quislings.

^47:47 Drucker, p 27; Tacitus, Ann., xv:44.

^47:48 Only John gives the story as to Annas; John 18:13-15.

^48:49 Matt. 26:57 & 58; Mk. 14:53; Luke 22:54 & 55; John 18:19-24.

^48:50 John 18:19-24.

^48:51 John 18:16-18 & 25-27.

^49:52 Chandler, Op. Cit., I, 279.

^49:53 Matt. 26:59-66; Mark 14:55-64.

^49:54 Mark 14:59.

^49:55 Mark 14:62; compare, Ps. 110:1 and Dan. 7:13.

^49:56 Mark 14:64 & 65; Matt. 26:67; Compare, Isaiah 50:6.

^49:57 Mark 15:1; John 18:28; Matt. 27:1 & 19; Lu. 22:66.

^49:58 John 18:36.

^50:59 John 19:11.

^50:60 Luke 23:7-12.

^50:61 Matt. 27:27 ff; Mark 15:16 ff; Luke 23:26 ff; John 19:17 ff., especially verse 23.

^50:61a John 19:19-22, inclusive.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

ARGUMENT AS TO JEWISH TRIALS

We have listed in a previous chapter some seventeen reversible errors in the trial of Christ. Chandler, in his lengthy discussion, lists many more. Rollins lists eighteen. But the number is not important because one error is enough to justify reversal of a case under modern law, [*62] and there have been instances where many allegations of error were brushed aside by an appellate court, as in the Lindbergh  case, where Mr. Hauptmann unsuccessfully charged the Court with 57 errors. [*63] Men like Rabbi Drucker, in examining the Trial of Christ, claim it never could have taken place because the members of the Sanhedrin were too learned to err as widely as they did, and too religious to hold such proceedings before the morning hour of

[p. 52]

worship in the Temple. But ample proof of what was done exists in the sacred writings of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, the historical writings, [*64] and the admissions of later Jewish scholars like Rabbi Klausner, to whom we have referred.

As to the particular errors in the trial, we know that the Romans had shorn the Sanhedrin of much of its old power as the highest court of Judaism; yet we also know that it was tolerated by the Romans as a sort of provisional or local government in Jerusalem at the time, much as our Government gives a partial freedom to our American Indians in tribal matters, or as the British heretofore permitted sovereignty of some Princes and Maharajahs in interior India. We do know that the Sanhedrin still had some power, subject to Appeal to the Romans; [*65] and that in modern times there has always been a like appeal from India and The Dominions to

[p. 53]

the Privy Council in England, [*66] and is now a right of appeal to The Supreme Court of the United States from colonial courts in Hawaii or Porto Rico. [*67]

Thus established, the Sanhedrin did have jurisdiction to give punishment for Blasphemy, provided it met in a certain place, during the morning hour after the morning worship service in the Temple had ended, and conducted its sessions according to all the required procedure which included rules that it should not meet on feast days or the Sabbath, nor without having court reporters present, and then should reach a verdict of guilty only on a divided vote after two days' deliberation. We have given these requirements and referred to the authorities in our chapter on the Assignments of Error.

Similar restrictions on the power of the Courts are in effect today. Title 28 of the Judicial Code of the United States covers a few hundred printed pages that are filled with the jurisdictional details of our courts

[p. 54]

[paragraph continues] --how that they shall meet in certain cities on certain days and that appeals from District Courts in the various states are heard by a particular Circuit Court of Appeals for that Circuit (or area), how the nation is divided into ten judicial circuits, how that appeals from Alaska, Hawaii, and the United States District Court for China go to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (which includes the seven most western states), while those from Porto Rico go to the First Circuit (Maine Area), Virgin Islands to the Third Circuit (Pennsylvania area), and Canal Zone cases to the Fifth Circuit which embraces several states that border on the Gulf of Mexico. All ten of the Circuit Courts of Appeals are reversible on certain points by our Supreme Court. [*68]

The first two errors we assign, as to process on a Holiday, or at night, are ideas that existed from time immemorial, [*69] and still exist with modifications. No process issues in Missouri on Sundays or Holidays, for example, except where necessary to keep

[p. 55]

a defrauder or nonresident from absconding. [*70] Modern Courts can, however, validly be in session at night, although the practice is not to begin a hearing later than midafternoon, except for the convenience of some out-of-town witness who must needs go home on a night train.

The third alleged error revolves around the action of Caiaphas in trying to get Jesus to testify against himself. We all know that in modern jurisprudence, no human right is quite so closely guarded as that, in a trial before a jury no man shall be compelled to be a witness against himself in a criminal case. [*71] On the other hand, prior to the actual trial, police of our time interrogate suspects for hours in an effort to obtain a "confession", and unless unfairness or duress is shown these confessions are competent evidence. [*72] Furthermore, some scholars argue that Caiaphas' action was necessary because any witness who testified to Christ's claims of Messiahship would himself commit blasphemy.

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] Perhaps this point may be well taken. However we feel that Jews could have been found to testify to the fact of blasphemy without repeating the exact words of our Saviour. We know that in actual courtroom practice today, witnesses frequently use the expression "obscene and vulgar language" and Judges seldom press them for exact phraseology. Our feeling is that Caiaphas went too far and that a modern Court would reverse the judgment on this point.

The fourth error we assign is that Caiaphas had no jurisdiction because his palace was not the meeting place of the Sanhedrin. English Courts at one period of their history were rather strict about the Courts at Westminster Hall. American State Courts have been more liberal, perhaps due to the fact that in pioneer days circuit judges actually rode the circuit and held court on horseback or under a tree or wherever justice demanded, although our Federal Courts have usually been better housed, more dignified, and therefore more strict in matters of place --or "venue" as we call it. In the last decade or more, however, the increase of copyright

[p. 57]

causes in our Federal Courts has caused our Judges, on occasion, to adjourn from the Courthouse to the Cinema' to determine whether or not two motion pictures were so similar as that the latter infringed the copyright of the older; and our feeling is that this point is not so important, although Edersheim points out that it would have been a valid objection at the time. [*73]

Caiaphas is alleged to have erred a fifth time, by sitting as Judge in the case after having expressed a desire for Jesus' death. [*74] No doubt there should have been several judges in the Sanhedrin trial and if any were prejudiced against Jesus, he should not sit in judgment in the case. [*75] Surely this would have been gross error before any American court today. In fact, Judges often disqualify themselves if there is any question of self-interest involved. During the third week of May, 1947, a Judge in an Illinois murder case refused to proceed and called in a substitute Judge because two sons of the regular judge were attorneys opposing each other in the

[p. 58]

case. Those who argue that Caiaphas did err in this regard base their argument on John 11:50 where Caiaphas is quoted as desiring Jesus' death, while others say there is little or no evidence as to whom Judas conspired with. We feel that error was committed.

Jesus was left unguarded on Caiaphas' Palace Porch and was abused by the mob. [*76] This was cruel and unjustified. Those who abused Him should have been punished--but as grounds of reversible error the argument is a weak one.

No modern law references can be given on several of the points, for the reason that the Courts in America have never had occasion to pass upon the powers of the Sanhedrin. As to the power of that body in Capital Cases [*77] and when not regularly in session [*78] enough has already been said. [*79]

Jesus had no counsel! Here is implied what is probably the most serious defect in the whole procedures, both Jewish and Roman.

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] Here is a question on which there can be little doubt. All the writers agree that Jesus had no counsel, and there is no Scripture that says he did. The problem raised is as to whether there were lawyers before the Sanhedrin in those days. The writings of St. Paul abound in legal references, and there is some evidence that he was a lawyer. [*80] Chandler denies that there were counsel for Christ before the Sanhedrin, or counsel at all, ever, but says part of the Judges should have defended Him and that an unanimous verdict was error because there always had to be a doubt of guilt and if a verdict was unanimous a prisoner had to be freed. [*81] Defendants today have a constitutional right to counsel and we feel that failure to provide counsel for Jesus was error both before the Sanhedrin and, as we shall see later, before Pilate. [*82]

To summarize here: The Jewish trial was illegal from start to finish under the then

[p. 60]

existing Hebrew Law; the arrest was illegal; [*83] the private examination before Caiaphas was illegal; [*84] the informal indictment was illegal because the Sanhedrin was a trial court [*85] with no power to originate charges; [*86] the Sanhedrin had no power to hold a trial at night, [*87] or before the morning sacrifice [*88] or on a holiday or Sabbath; [*89] or to conclude a trial by a verdict of "guilty" on the day the trial commenced; [*90] or to convict upon an unsupported confession without corroborative evidence; [*91] or by an unanimous verdict; [*92] and sentence was passed in the wrong room, upon irregular balloting and the High Priest unlawfully rent his clothing; [*93] sentence

[p. 61]

was passed by a prejudiced court [*94] without a diligent inquiry into the merits of the case. [*95]

We submit that this last point is the crux of the case: that if the Sanhedrin had really heard and honestly weighed the evidence they would have concluded that Christ is the Messiah--is Our Redeemer! [*96]

Footnotes

^51:62 Rose vs. Knobelock, (Kansas City Ct. App., Mo., 1946) 194 S. W. 2d, 943.

^51:63 Hauptmann vs. State, 115 N. J. L. 412, 180 Atl. 809, Cert. den. 296 U. S. 649, Hab. Cor. Den., 297 U. S. 693.

^52:64 Tacitus, Ann., xv:44; Whiston (Ed), Works of Josephus, p. 497; Smith, The Life and Letters of St. Paul; Chandler op. cit.; Edersheim, op. cit.; etc.

^52:65 Smith, op. cit., p. 30; Wilfley, St. Paul the Herald of Christianity, p. 22; Encyc. of Religion & Ethics, vol. ix, p. 185; Goldberg & Benderly, Student's Outline of Jewish Knowledge, v. 3, pp. 516 ff.

^53:66 Blackstone's Commentaries, *231.

^53:67 Judicial Code, Sec. 128 as Amended; in, Federal Code Annotated, vol. 7, Sec. 225 of title 28, p. 715; U. S. C. A., tit. 28,  section 128.

^54:68 Fed. Code Ann. Tit. 28, Sec. 225 ff.,  225 (d) ff.

^54:69 See footnotes 7 and 8, supra.

^55:70 Missouri Code of Civil Procedure, Sec. 8; Revised Statutes of Missouri (1939) Sec. 907.

^55:71 U. S. Constitution, Amend. V; Numbers 35:30; Wigmore, Laws of Evidence, Sec. 2039.

^55:72 State vs. Faber, (Mo., 1945) 182 S. W. 2d, 552.

^57:73 Edersheim, op. cit., II, 556.

^57:74 Rollins, op. cit., p. 21 & ff.

^57:75 See footnote 18.

^58:76 Mark 14:65; Edersheim, op. cit., II, 563.

^58:77 See footnote 20, Supra.

^58:78 See footnote 21, Supra.

^58:79 See discussion, Supra, of our pioneer circuit courts and our system generally.

^59:80 See Appendix A, Infra, as to Lawyers,  St. Paul.

^59:81 See discussion, Infra.

^59:82 Edersheim, op. cit. II, 555; Missouri Constitution of 1945, Art. I, Sec. 18; Constitution of U. S., Amendment VI.

^60:83 Chandler, op. cit., I, 219-238.

^60:84 Ibid, 238-247.

^60:85 Compare, modern distinction between a Grand Jury and a Petit Jury--beyond the scope of our study; See, Corpus Juris, or Bouvier's Law Dictionary on "Grand Jury" or "Petit Jury".

^60:86 Chandler, Ibid, I, 248-254.

^60:87 Ibid, 255-259.

^60:88 Ibid, 260-262.

^60:89 Ibid, 263-266; Mishna, San., I, 1.

^60:90 Chandler, op. cit., I, 267-270.

^60:91 Ibid, 271-278.

^60:92 Ibid, 279-286; But American Law usually requires an unanimous verdict in criminal cases; consult local Statutes.

^60:93 Chandler, op. cit., I, 286-294; Leviticus 21:10; Leviticus 10:6.

^61:94 Chandler, op. cit., I, 295-308; see, for proof of prejudice, John 7:37-53; John 11:41-53; Luke 22:1-3; Matt. 26:3-5; on false witnesses, Deut. 19:18-21; on "Due Process", Num. 35:30.

^61:95 See Deut. 13:14.

^61:96 See our last chapter, Infra.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

ERRORS IN THE ROMAN TRIALS

Mr. Rollins [*97] says Rome had "nothing to do with the arrest of Christ other than to furnish the soldiers to accompany the accusers" and then goes on in a homiletical style, to review the public career of Jesus as a background for the tria1, [*98] and after a brief discussion of the Sanhedrists and their actions, [*99] devotes the remainder of his book [*100] to a discussion of Pilate, Herod and Pilate's wife, in narrative fashion and without citation of authorities. Mr. Chandler [*101] devotes considerable space to extraneous discussions of Roman Law and Procedure and concludes that while Pilate commenced the hearings in proper dignity and reached an opinion that would result in an acquittal, he  into compliance with the wishes of the Jewish mob. We confine ourselves to

[p. 63]

technicality as to the issues involved, and refer the reader to Chandler for a more abstract discussion of Roman Jurisprudence.

There are two documents in ancient Roman Law that are basic, The Laws of The Twelve Tables [*102] and the Code of Justinian. [*103] We need concern ourselves only with the former to convict Pilate of legal error in his treatment of Jesus. [*104] We will cite table and sentence from the Twelve Tables as we have cited Chapter and Verse from The Bible.

The Gospels give the Roman trial considerable mention, [*105] and yet only a few statements are made which we need examine in order to establish that Roman government was supreme over the Sanhedrists and that Christ "was condemned to death in the reign of Tiberius by the Procurator Pontius Pilate." [*106]

Now--What does the record show and wherein did Pilate err?

[p. 64]

1. Pilate did not hold hearing until dawn, [*107] but some say he should have compelled the Sanhedrin to obey the Jewish and Roman law against night trials. [*108]

2. Pilate erred in permitting the Sanhedrists to examine Jesus in private [*109] when trials had to be public in those days [*110] as now. [*111]

3. Pilate erred in not requiring the testimony of witnesses, Roman Law agreeing with the Jewish and our law on this point. [*112]

4. Pilate should have released Jesus when he found "no harm" in Him. [*113] On this point the Law of the Twelve Tables is crystal clear. Archeologists have not found all of the stone fragments of The Twelve Tables, but Professor Conant explains that all have been collated by Bruns from other sources and

[p. 65]

[paragraph continues] Conant translates as Table IX, verse 6, "The decrees of the Twelve Tables forbid any uncondemned man whomever be put to death." [*114] All of the best writers agree that Pilate, finding no harm in Jesus, should have released him then and there. [*115]

Footnotes

^62:97 Op. cit., p. 5.

^62:98 pp. 5-16.

^62:99 pp. 17-43.

^62:100 pp. 44-70.

^62:101 Op. cit., Volume II.

^63:102 Promulgated in 450 B. C.

^63:103 529-534 A. D.

^63:104 Conant's translation of the Bruns' Text, (1928) St. Louis Law Review, Vol. xiii No. 4.

^63:105 Matt. 27:11-26; Mk. 15:2-15; Lu. 23:1-24; John 18:30-19:16.

^63:106 Tacitus, Annales, xv:44; Apostle's Creed, "suffered under Pontius Pilate"; John 19:16; Luke 23:24; Mark 15:15; Matthew 27:26.

^64:107 Matt. 27:1.

^64:108 XII TAB. I, 7, 8; Edersheim, op. cit., II, 557; Drucker, op. cit., pp. 8 & 10; Chandler, op cit., I, 219, 238, 260, 263.

^64:109 John 18:28--"They themselves went not into the judgment hall."

^64:110 XII TAB. I, 7.

^64:111 U. S. Constitution, Amendment VI.

^64:112 Footnotes 29 and 111, Supra; XII TAB. VIII, 23.

^64:113 Matt. 27:24 "this just man"; Lu. 23:4, 14, 22; John 18:38.

^65:114 Conant, XII TAB. IX, 6, quoting, "SALVANUS, (de gubern. dei. 8, 5, 24): 'Interfici--indemnatum quemeunque hominem etiam XII tabularum decreta velverunt.'"

^65:115 Rollins, op. cit., 23, 47; Chandler, op. cit., II, 116, 152, and works cited.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

A LESSON IN CITIZENSHIP

The Author has spoken before meetings of various ward organizations in St. Louis on the subject, "Political Lessons from the Trial of Christ." Under such circumstances the utmost care is taken to avoid religious differences and to point out that the trial of Christ has a three-fold significance: the Technical aspect, the Citizenship aspect, and the Messianic aspect. To an unlearned political audience the technical portion which we have reviewed has to be stated in simple terms, in order to put the larger emphasis on the idea that the remedy for legal laxity is to honestly endeavor to get reform.

To illustrate, when the Lindbergh defendant, Hauptmann, [*116] assigned in an Appellate Court some 57 alleged errors in his trial for the kidnapping and murder of young Lindbergh, a good church friend of mine ventured

[p. 67]

the opinion that he would "get off on a technicality." We are glad he did not. At the time, I told my friend that the technicalities of the law are for the protection of all people, innocent and guilty alike. The duty of a good citizen is not to wail over apparent technical miscarriages of justice but rather to join hands with his fellows to correct the existing procedural evils. How many of those who condemned the Supreme Court for avoiding a Child Labor law some twenty-five years ago, [*117] ever turned their hands to aid in the campaign to amend the Constitution of The United States so as to permit regulation of this evil? How many of those who scorn politics as "dirty" ever do anything to clean them up? How many so-called professing Christians ever let their voice be heard in a political meeting?

Intelligent reform of the law requires not only desire on the part of the reformer for a betterment of conditions, not only the political stamina and influence to get the legislative group to adopt his program, but most of all an intelligent understanding of legal history

[p. 68]

and precedent leading up to the existing dilemma, in order that the reformer will be able to point out to this age the factual errors of history. In drawing from the errors of the trial of Christ, therefore, a lesson in citizenship, it is well that we have in mind the history of law and the theory of human government. Archeology has its place in such a study but is quite beyond the scope of our brief presentation. [*118] The basic principles of the law have remained unchanged for four thousand years, [*119] and most of the great lawgivers of history have either been trained in the law or inspired of God. Somewhere the author has read that it was not mere accident that Moses was rescued from the river by Pharaoh's daughter, but that as a result of his upbringing in the royal palace Moses was educated in the Egyptian universities of that day and had some knowledge of existing law

[p. 69]

and of medicine as well. No doubt he had access to the Code of . Roman Law in force when Christ was tried, as we have pointed out, was the Laws of the Twelve Tables. [*120] Some years ago the author wrote his graduation thesis (unpublished) on "The Twelve Tables in Modern American Law" and demonstrated that 87 of the 113 sections of The Twelve Tables were in accord with our law, in principle if not in detail, in 1930 A.D., Two Thousand Three Hundred Eighty Years after they were promulgated! [*121] My brother [*122] has quite properly reminded the writer, time and time again, that the law is not an end unto itself but a means of enforcing some semblance of earthly justice until the world is raptured by the

[p. 70]

[paragraph continues] Second Coming of Christ: No man was ever saved by mere law!

The writings of St. Paul are very rich in their legal references. [*123] In our Appendix we mention the legalism of Paul in more detail. The Bible tells us he had been a student under the great and learned Gamaliel. [*124] Whether or not Paul was learned in the law, the idea of the Church as the Body of Christ is clearer to a legal mind if one remembers that corporations were known to law as far back as 500 B. C., [*125] and that corporate existence is the only worldly example of anything that resembles immortality. [*126]

Our point is that the legalisms in Paul's

[p. 71]

writings and the existence of corporations in those days in Greek and Roman Law--even the Hebrew corporate existence of the Sanhedrin--all aid one in understanding Christ. We will refer again to the precious promise that, "In My Father's house are many mansions, . . . I go to prepare a place for you. " [*127] Archeology has discovered court records in Egypt in the  Greek language in which the word "Mansion" used in the passage quoted is used in the sense of "Habitable real estate acceptable for bail bond." [*128] We are sure our Heavenly Home will be habitable like that.

A great sage once said that one cannot stand still. The minute a movement stops growing, it deteriorates. As long as there were other worlds to conquer, Rome was a powerful state but when progress stopped the Empire fell. The public is prone to point out the laxities in our laws and government and lay the blame to two groups--the lawyers and the politicians. A failure of the Roman government to enforce the rigid laws in that great trial in Jerusalem caused the greatest

[p. 72]

public murder in history. From that failure we can learn the value of enforcement--the political lesson that the technicalities of a system of law should be enforced. We can learn that the remedy for a defective law is not wholesale violation but amendment.

So let us now as Christians use what influence we have to bring about those changes in Government and in law that will be for the greatest public good, remembering that good earthly government derives its power from the just consent of the governed. Let us teach the public to vote intelligently at every election, and to respect and obey the legal technicalities of existing government while working for their improvement. If we can thus educate the public to the intelligent use of elections we shall render real service to the people of the United States.

Footnotes

^66:116 Hauptmann v. State, 115 N. J. L. 412, 180 Atl. 809, certiorari denied 296 U. S. 649, habeas corpus denied, 297 U. S. 693.

^67:117 Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co., (1922) 259 U. S. 20.

^68:118 Cf., Smith, "The Romance of the Greek New Testament", in The Sunday School Times, Feb. 1, 1947, Vol. 89, p. 99.

^68:119 Compare Gaius' Institutes, (Postes Transl.) Bk. I, Sec. I; Code of ; Ten Commandments (Exodus xx) of which the Commandments I, II, X, are not now American law; Numbers 35:30; U. S. Const., Amendment XIV; McCune Gill, "Getting Back to Justinian", in 62 American Law Review, p. 301 (1928); Wigmore, A Panorama of the World's Legal Systems, 3 vols.

^69:120 450 B. C.; Text available in English in St. Louis Law Review for June, 1928 (Conant translation of Bruns' Text) .

^69:121 The ideas of the Twelve Tables appear outside Roman Law and Anglo-American Law, and there was once a discussion as to whether they were copied from the Code of Confucius or not; consult, further on this point, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, (Scribners' 1915) title "Law" in volume 7, pp. 820, 830, and 877; Sir John Legge, Confucian Analects (Hongkong, 1861); Jernigan, China in Law and Commerce, (London, 1915).

^69:122 The Rev. M. Edwards Breed, First Presbyterian Church, Chillicothe, Mo.

^70:123 See, for example, 1 Tim. 1:5, 8; Gal. 3:15; Heb. 9:15; Rom. 10:4; 1 Cor., Ch. 10; 1 Cor. 14:21; etc.

^70:124 Acts 22:3; Gal. 1:13 & 14; Phil. 3:4-10; etc.

^70:125 Fletcher, Cyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations, 20 vols., 1931, vol. 1, p. 1; Blackstone's Commentaries, I, 468; Sohm, Institutes of Roman Law, (Ledlie's Trans., 1926) p. 186; Maine, Ancient Law, 4th ed., p. 183; Ulpian, Frag. 22, 5; Corpus Juris, (Modern legal encyclopedia not to be confused with Justinian C. J.), vol. 14, p. 51; etc.

^70:126 See the great definition by Marshall, C. J., in Dartmouth College vs. Woodward, 4 Wheaton 518, 4 L. Ed. 629 1. c. 659. The following are the dates of origin of well known modern corporations still existing: Dartmouth College, 1769; Yale, 1701; St. Peters' College, Cambridge, England, 1284; Hudson Bay Co., 1670, see The Governors etc. for Hudson Bay vs. Hudson Bay Fur Co., 33 Fed. 2d. 801.

^71:127 John 14:2.

^71:128 Rimmer, Voices from the Silent Centuries, p. 68.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

EPILOGUE--OUR REDEEMER

"Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." [*129] Thus spoke Jesus of Nazareth, the Christ of God, the Saviour of the world--who in His earthly ministry never once used the word "religion." [*130] Christianity is not a religion; it is a revelation.

The word "religion" comes from a Greek root meaning the act of man searching out for God, pagan man trying to find God. But when Very God became flesh and dwelt among us, revealed Himself in the person of Christ, and died to save us from our sins, religion ceased for all believers in Jesus. True, many laymen and ministers use the term "Christian Religion" in a broad sense to embrace that which is actually Christian Revelation. We could quote columns of the words of The Master, and each would emphasize our point. During the trial before

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] Pilate, Jesus made this startling statement: "Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above." [*131] To a thief on a neighboring cross who confessed, He said: "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise." [*132] To His disciples; in that poignant fourteenth chapter of John, Jesus discussed the heavenly mansions He has gone to prepare for us, promised to return to take us there, and told us that the Father dwelleth in him to do the works.

Who could make these startling promises? Could an imposter make them and not be found out? What does the trial teach us of Our Redeemer? Did the Jews prove Jesus an imposter? If the trial proved Jesus was an imposter, why did Pilate have it inscribed on the cross, "THE KING OF THE JEWS" [*133] instead of, "He said he was king of the Jews."?

The reason is that the Jews failed to see the true import of the trial. This was not a trial of Christ by the Jews or by the Romans

[p. 75]

for that matter. It was a trial of the whole world by God Himself in the person of Christ, posing as a defendant, come to save the world, come in fulfillment of prophecy, come to die as the Lamb of God--the Paschal, sacrificial Lamb of God crucified to save men from their sins. The New Testament record constitutes not only an accurate fulfillment of prophecy, but its very words in some places quote the actual language of the great Jewish prophets. The crowd did spit in his face. [*134] He was crucified between two thieves [*135] and reviled by the crowd. [*136] The trial did follow the pattern of Isaiah 53. Jesus was trying the world. As the omnipotent Son of God, co-equal with God, Jesus knew everything. He knew the law. He had astonished the Rabbis with his legal knowledge when He was but twelve years old. He had power to make a legal record, to take an Appeal, to rely on the technicalities of the law, had He desired: but He knew He had to die to save the sinful world of men--and He went gloriously

[p. 76]

to his death saying, "Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit." [*137]

No one can fully understand the technical legal violations of the Trial of Christ and not be impressed again with the accuracy in which God in His Grace has fulfilled such prophecies as that beautiful fifty-third chapter of Isaiah with which we close our study:

"1. Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the LORD revealed?

2. For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

3. He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

4. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the

[p. 77]

chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.

6. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

8. He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken.

9. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.

10. Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the LORD shall prosper in his hand.

[p. 78]

11. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.

12. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors."

Footnotes

^73:129 Matt. 11:28.

^73:130 Ernest Gordon, "A Survey of Religious Life and Thought", in The Sunday School Times, Jan. 11, 1947, p. 30 (6).

^74:131 John 19:11.

^74:132 Luke 23:43.

^74:133 Mark 15:26; John 19:19 thru 22.

^75:134 Compare, Isaiah 50:6 with Matt. 27:67, for example.

^75:135 Isaiah 53:12.

^75:136 Psalm 22:7 & 8.

^76:137 Luke 23:46.

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

  

APPENDIX A

  

LAWYERS IN THE SANHEDRIN

We have raised a question as to how far the Mosaic "lawyers" in the Sanhedrin were learned in secular law as we have used the term "law" in this work. The idea of St. Paul as a lawyer, for example, is referred to in passing in Smith, Life and Letters of St. Paul, p. 30; Xenophan P. Wilfley, St. Paul the Herald of Christianity, pp. 17 & 22; Encyclopedia of Religion & Ethics, XI, p. 185; Goldberg & Benderly, Outline of Jewish Knowledge, Student's Edition, III, p. 516; Edersheim, op. cit., II 556; Wigmore's Panorama of the World's Legal Systems (1 vol. "Desk" reprint 1928) pp. 113 and 119 quoting Mischna, V, on Sanhedrin application of the civil law of bailments; Whiston's edition of Josephus' Works, p. 497; Peloubet's Bible Dictionary, p. 591. None of these except Senator Wilfley refers to Paul as a lawyer but we know that Paul was a Pharisee, and a member of the Sanhedrin, and that the Sanhedrin

[p. 80]

had legislative, executive, judicial, civil, criminal and ecclesiastical power under the Romans, only Roman Citizens having a right of appeal to Rome. Paul's writings abound in references to Roman Law which, judging from their content, he must have known considerable about; see Acts 25:8; Gal. 3:15; I Tim., Chap. 1; and Wilfley, op. cit.

According to a concordance at hand, the word "Lawyer" is found in the Bible only in the following usages:

(1) Matt. 22:35: "then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying," (Great Commandment).

(2) Luke 7:30: "But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God--."

(3) Luke 10:25: "And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying . . ."

(4) Luke 11:45 ff: Several references where Jesus rebuked the Pharisees and Lawyers for too much ritualism and (v. 52) for throwing away the key of knowledge. Did he mean that they were trying to make legal exactitude a substitute for salvation? This

[p. 81]

passage may be basis for our very argument that as Christians we should observe but alter harsh technicalities of law!

(5) Luke 14:3: "And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees--"concerning eating meat on the sabbath and also teaching that Acts of Mercy are always permissible.

(6) Titus 3:13: "Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently--."

In Luke, the closing part of the second chapter, we find a narrative of Jesus staying behind at the age of twelve, discussing with the Doctors in the Temple and amazing them with his knowledge, but the record does not show any legal discussions.

For our own part, we cannot see how the Sanhedrists could handle civil and criminal matters unless they knew civil and criminal law. Mr. Wilfley, an astute exemplar at the Bar in St. Louis for half a century before his death about 1940, is the only modern lawyer whom we have found writing a life of Paul, and we feel satisfied to hold with him that the Sanhedrists and Paul were trained in secular law. We agree that they

[p. 82]

were primarily church luminaries, dealing with and interpreting the Mosaic Law, but when we consider that seven of the ten commandments and much of the other Mosaic Law is enforced in our courts today, and that Paul quoted Roman Law with unfailing accuracy, the conclusion seems to us unescapable that the Sanhedrists were learned in the law, even though not practicing lawyers in a modern sense. We regret that limitations of space and scope of this brief study prevent further discussion of this interesting issue. It is significant that in his "Trial of Christ", Rabbi Drucker tries to repudiate Christ by showing that the Sanhedrists were too good lawyers to be a party to such a farcical "trial."

     
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 83]

  

APPENDIX B

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The following authorities have been cited or referred to in this work:

(Listed in the Order of Citation) [**]

The Holy Bible

Edward J. White, Esq., The Law in the Scriptures, (Thomas Law Book Company, St. Louis) .

Sir William Blackstone, Esq., Commentaries on the Laws of England, (1765) Cooley's 2nd Amer. Edn. (1876).

Rev. Clarence Edward Macartney, Trials of Great Men of the Bible.

Rev. Harry Rimmer, Voices from the Silent Centuries.

Rev. William F. Albright, From the Stone Age to Christianity.

Prof. John H. Wigmore, Esq., A Panorama of the World's Legal Systems.

[p. 84]

Rev. Alfred Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus The Messiah.

Thayer's, Greek-English Lexicon.

Corpus Juris, (a 72 volume modern legal encyclopedia not to be confused with the Justinian Corpus Juris Civilis also referred to).

Missouri Code of Civil Procedure (1945) passed in 1943 and effective January 1, 1945; Laws Mo., '43, p. 389.

James M. Rollins, Esq., The Arrest, Trial and Conviction of Jesus Christ from a Lawyer's Standpoint.

Rabbi A. P. Drucker, The Trial of Jesus from Jewish Sources.

W. M. Chandler, Esq., The Trial of Jesus from a Lawyer's Standpoint.

Mischna. Pirke Aboth.

Rev. R. H. Strachan, The Fourth Gospel.

Josephus, Antiquities.

Emmanuel Deutsch, The Talmud.

U. S. Constitution, Amendments V & VI & XIV.

Missouri Constitution, (1875) Art. II Sec. 23; (1945) Art. I, Sec. 19.

[p. 85]

The Twelve Tables (450 B. C.) Conant's Translation in St. Louis Law Review, June, 1928 (Bruns' Text).

Court opinion, Jacobs v. Danciger, 328 Mo. 458.

Rabbi Mendelsohn, Criminal Jurisprudence of the Ancient Hebrews.

Rabbi Joseph Klausner, Jesus of Nazareth.

Peloubet's Bible Dictionary

Tacitus, Annals.

Court Opinion, Rose v. Knobeloch, 194 S. W. 2d, 943.

Court Opinions, Hauptmann v. State, 116 N. J. L. 412 and other books (Lindbergh Kidnapping Case).

Whiston, Editor, Works of Josephus.

Rev. David Smith, The Life and Letters of St. Paul.

Xenophon P. Wilfley, Esq., St. Paul the Herald of Christianity.

Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics.

Profs. Goldberg & Benderly, Student's Outline of Jewish Knowledge.

Judicial Code of The United States, in various law books.

Prof. John H. Wigmore, Esq., Law of Evidence.

[p. 86]

Court Opinion, State v. Faber, (Mo. 1945) 182 S. W. 2d 552.

Revised Statutes of Missouri, 1939, Sec. 907.

Missouri Constitution of 1945, Art. I Sec. 18.

Bouvier's Law Dictionary.

Court Opinion, Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co., 259 U. S. 20.

Rev. H. Framer Smith, "The Romance of the Greek New Testament" in The Sunday School Times, Feb. 1, 1947.

Gaius' Institutes.

McCune Gill, Esq., "Getting Back to Justinian", in American Law Review, vol. 62 p. 301; (1928).

Sir John Legge, Esq., Confucian Analects. Prof. Rudolph Sohm, Institutes of Roman Law, (Ledlie's Translation, Oxford, 1926) .

Sir Henry S. Maine, Esq., Ancient Laws.

Ulpian, Frag.

Court Opinion, Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 4 Wheaton 518.

Court Opinion, Hudson Bay Co.'s Governors v. Hudson Bay Fur Co., 33 Fed. 2d 801.

Rev. Ernest Gordon, "A Survey of Religious Life and Thought", in The Sunday School Times, January 11, 1947.

Footnotes

^83:* Doctoral titles omitted as we use "Rev," "Rabbi," or "Esq." to show whether or not author is a Minister, Rabbi or Lawyer.

    
The Trial of Christ, by David K. Breed, [1948], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

INDEX [**]

(References are to Pages)

Annas, biog., <page 45>; mentioned, <page 4>, <page 39>, <page 44>

Albright, Rev. Wm., <page 16> ftn.

Appellant, Christ would be, <page 39> ftn.

Appellate History & Procedure, <page 53>

Apostles' Creed, <page 63>

Archeology, aid to research, <page 68>, <page 71>

Argument as to Jewish Trials, <page 51> ff

-- as to Roman Trials, <page 62> ff

Assignment of Errors, defined, <page 10>

 

Blackinton, Oliver, Esq., <page 7>

Blackstone's Commentaries, <page 13>, <page 14>

Blasphemy, <page 42>, <page 49>, <page 56>

Bowman, Rev. John Wick, <page 42>

Breed, Rev. M. Edwards, <page 7>, <page 42>, <page 69>

 

Caiaphas, <page 4>, <page 44>

Caiaphas' Palace not proper meeting place, <page 40>, <page 56>

Chandler, W. M. Esq., cited, <page 41> ff

-- discussed, <page 48>, <page 62>

Christ, as an Appellant, <page 39>

Christianity a Revelation, not a religion, <page 6>, <page 73>

Citizenship, lesson in, <page 66>

Commentaries, by Blackstone, <page 13>, <page 14>

Conant, Ernest Bancroft, Esq., <page 3>, <page 63>, <page 64>, <page 69>

Confucian Code, <page 69>

Constitution of U. S., <page 13>

Counsel, Jesus had no, <page 41>, <page 58>

Court Reporters in Sanhedrin, <page 15>, <page 16>, <page 48>

Corpus Juris Civilis (Justinian), <page 63>

Corpus Juris (Modern Legal Ency.), <page 38>, <page 43>

Criminal Jurisprudence of the Ancient Hebrews (Mendelsohn), <page 43>

 

Deutsch, The Talmud (Rabbi Emmanuel), <page 41>

Dominion rule, Jerusalem by Rome, <page 52>; compared with British Dominions, <page 52>

"Double Jeopardy", <page 43>

[p. 88]

Drucker, Rabbi A. P., cited, <page 40> ff, discussed, <page 47>, <page 82>

"Due Process of Law", <page 13>, <page 42>

 

Edersheim, Life & T. of Jesus, etc., <page 16>, <page 40> ff

Edwards, Jonathan, <page 6>

Errors, assignment of, <page 10>; reversible, defined, <page 38>; illus., <page 14>; in trial of Christ, listed, <page 40> ff; discussed, <page 51> ff Exceptions to court rulings, explained, <page 39>

Fourth Gospel, The--by Strachan, <page 41>

 

Gaius, <page 68>

Gamaliel, <page 70>

Gospel Record of the Trials, quoted, <page 17> ff

-- Matthew's, <page 17> ff

-- Mark's, <page 22> ff

-- Luke's, <page 26> ff

-- John's, <page 31> ff

Government, function of earthly, <page 14>

, Code of, <page 68>

Herod, biog., <page 46>; actions of, <page 50> ff

 

Isaiah's Prophecy fulfilled, (Is. 53), <page 76> ff

 

Jesus, had no counsel, <page 58>

Jewish Law, <page 9>

Jewish Trials of Christ, <page 51> ff

John's Gospel gives the Record, <page 17>, <page 31> ff

Josephus, <page 41>

Jurisdiction of Sanhedrin, <page 41> ff

Justinian Corpus Juris (Code), <page 63>

 

Klausner, Rabbi Joseph, <page 52>

 

Law and the Scriptures (book), <page 13>

-- Jewish, <page 9>

-- Roman, <page 9>

-- not a panacea for ills, <page 69>

Lawyers in Sanhedrin, <page 59>, <page 79> ff

-- in New Testament, <page 79> ff

Life & Times of Jesus the M., see Edersheim

Luke's Gospel gives the Record, <page 17>, <page 26> ff

 

Macartney, Rev. Clarence Edward, <page 4>, <page 7>, <page 12>

Mark's Gospel, earliest <page 17>, gives the Record, <page 17>, <page 22> ff

[p. 89]

Matthew's Gospel gives the Record, <page 17> ff

Mendelsohn, Crim. Jur. of Anc. Hebrews, <page 43>

Mischna, ftns., pp. <page 41> ff

Mosaic Law, <page 13>

Moses, <page 45>, <page 68>

 

Numbers, 35:30 & "Due Process", <page 13>

 

Paul, as a lawyer, <page 59>, <page 70>, <page 79> ff; quotes Roman L <page 82>

Pilate, <page 5>, biog. <page 46> ff, errors in trial, <page 63> ff

Pirke Aboth (Mischna), <page 41>

Political Lessons from Trial of Christ, <page 66> ff

Process (of Court) Due Process, <page 13>

-- Illegal on sabbath, <page 5>, <page 40>, <page 54>

-- Illegal at night, <page 5>, <page 40>, <page 54>

Prophecy of Isaiah (chap. 53) fulfilled, p. <page 75> ff

 

Record on Appeal (modern), <page 10>; of trial of Christ, <page 17> ff; by Matthew, <page 17>; by Mark, <page 22> ff; by Luke, <page 26> ff; by John, <page 31> ff

Redeemer, Christ as our, <page 73> ff

Religion, Christianity not, <page 6>, <page 73>

Reporters, in Court, <page 15>, <page 16>

Revelation not a religion, <page 6>, <page 73>

Reversible Error defined, <page 38>; illustrated, <page 14>; in trial of Christ listed, <page 40>; discussed, <page 60> ff, <page 64> ff

Rimmer, Rev. Harry, <page 16>, <page 71>

Rollins, Senator J. M., Esq., <page 7>, <page 39>; discussed <page 62> ff

-- Myrt A., Jr., Esq., <page 7>, <page 39>

Roman Law, <page 9>, <page 43>, <page 63>, <page 82>

Roman Trial of Christ, <page 62> ff

Salvanus, <page 65>

Sanhedrin, <page 5>, <page 40>, <page 41>; Court reporters in, <page 16>; jurisdiction of, <page 41>, <page 48>, <page 52>, <page 53>; lawyers in, <page 59>, <page 79> ff; verdict of as illegal, <page 40>, <page 60>

Scope of this book, <page 9>

Self Incrimination, law of, <page 40>, <page 42>, <page 43>, <page 55> ff

Stone Age to Christianity (book) cited, <page 16>

 

Tacitus, <page 47>, <page 63>

Talmud, <page 41> ff

Technicalities defined and discussed, <page 15>, <page 67> ff

Ten Commandments, mentioned, in modern law, <page 68>

[p. 90]

Trials of Christ, six in twelve hours, <page 4>; chronology, <page 47> ff; errors in, <page 40> ff; Jewish, <page 51> ff; Roman, <page 62> ff; fulfills Prophecy, <page 76> ff

Trials should be public, <page 42>

Trials of Great Men of the Bible (book), <page 13>

Trial of Jesus from Jewish Sources (Drucker), <page 40> ff

Trial of Jesus from a Lawyer's Standpoint (Chandler), <page 40> ff

Twelve Tables (of Roman Law), <page 43>, <page 63>, <page 64>, <page 65>

 

United States Constitution, <page 13>, <page 42>, <page 43> ff, <page 55>

Unanimous Verdict illegal in Sanhedrin, <page 53>, <page 60>

 

Verdict of Sanhedrin, illegal, <page 43>, <page 53>, <page 60>

Voices from the Silent Centuries (Rimmer), <page 16>, <page 71>

 

White, The Law in the Scriptures, <page 13>

Wigmore, A Panorama &c., <page 16>, <page 68>; Laws Evidence, <page 55>

Witnesses, false <page 23>, <page 41> ff; "warned" in capital cases, <page 42>

Writing, history of, <page 14>

 

 

Footnotes

^87:* Biblical quotations are not indexed.

 

    


===== BOOK: toth.txt =====


     
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIELD COLUMBIAN MUSEUM

  

PUBLICATION 96

  

ANTHROPOLOGICAL SERIES VOL. VIII

  

THE TRADITIONS OF THE HOPI

  

BY

  

H. R. VOTH

  

THE STANLEY McCORMICK HOPI EXPEDITION

  

GEORGE A. DORSEY

  

Curator, Department of Anthropology

  

CHICAGO, U. S. A.

  

March, 1905

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, February 2001, by John Bruno Hare. Reformatted, August 2003. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

NOTE.

The traditions of the Hopi here presented were collected in the vernacular and without an interpreter, by Mr. H. R. Voth, during the last two years, in connection with other investigations among the Hopi which he made for this institution. As in previous years, Mr. Stanley McCormick has very generously provided the means for this additional investigation, and it is a great pleasure to acknowledge the debt of gratitude under which he has again placed this department.

GEORGE A. DORSEY,
 Curator, Dept. of Anthropology.

CHICAGO, January 1, 1905.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

CONTENTS.

           

       Page

     
      1. Origin Myth

       <page 1>

     
      2. Huruing Wuhti and the Sun

       <page 5>

     
      3. coming of the Hopi from the Under-World

       <page 10>

     
      4. The Wanderings of the Hopi

       <page 16>

     
      5. The Origin of Some Oraibi Clans

       <page 26>

     
      6. The Snake Myth

       <page 30>

     
      7. The Snake Myth

       <page 35>

     
      8. The Wanderings of the Bear Clan (Hon-Namu)

       <page 36>

     
      9. The Wanderings of the Spider Clan (Kohkang-Namu)

       <page 38>

     
      10. The Origin of the Yayaatu Society

       <page 41>

     
      11. The Origin of Some Mishongnovi Clans

       <page 47>

     
      12. The Destruction of Palatkwapi

       <page 48>

     
      13. The Revenge of the Katcinas

       <page 63>

     
      14. How the Circle (Pongo) Katcina and his Wife became Stars

       <page 65>

     
      15. The Kokoshori Katcina and the Shongopavi Maiden

       <page 71>

     
      16. How Ball-Head (Tatciqto) Wedded an Oraibi Maiden

       <page 73>

     
      17. The Aho'li and the other Walpi Katcinas

       <page 77>

     
      18. The Two War Gods and the Two Maidens

       <page 81>

     
      19. The Pookonghoyas and the Cannibal Monster

       <page 82>

     
      20. Pookonghoya and his Brother as Thieves

       <page 84>

     
      21. How the Po'okongs destroyed Cooyoko and his Wife

       <page 86>

     
      22. How Po'okong Killed the Bear

       <page 89>

     
      23. The Po'okongs Attend a Dance

       <page 90>

     
      24. How Po'okong Won a Bride

       <page 92>

     
      25. How the Antelope Maiden was Reconciled

       <page 99>

     
      26. The Po'okongs and the Balolookong

       <page 102>

     
      27. How the Yellow Corn-Ear Maiden became a Bull Snake

       <page 105>

     
      28. A Journey to the Skeleton House

       <page 109>

     
      29. Journey to the Skeleton House

       <page 114>

     
      30. Skeleton Woman and the Hunter

       <page 120>

     
      31. Masauwuu Marries a Maiden

       <page 122>

     
      32. Masauwuu and the Hano Hunters

       <page 123>

     
      33. The Two Yayaponchatu trade in Oraibi

       <page 123>

     
      34. The Kohonino Hunter

       <page 124>

     
      35. The White Corn-Ear Maiden and the Sorcerers

       <page 126>

     
      36. Watermelon-Rind Woman (Holo'ko'p Wuhti)

       <page 131>

     
      37. The Youth and Maiden who Played Hide and Seek for their Life

       <page 136>

     
      38. The Maiden who Stole the Youth's Costume

       <page 141>

     
      39. The Two Pueblo Maidens who were Married to the Night

       <page 143>

     
      40. How Hiyonatitiwa Defeated the Plan of his Enemies

       <page 146>

     
      41. The Shongopavi Maiden who Turned into a Dog

       <page 150>

     
      42. The Blind Man and the Lame Man

       <page 151>

     
      43. Big Head and Goat Horn

       <page 153>

     
      [p. vi]

        

     
       

       Page

     
      44. Kavushkavuwnom and Shoviviounom

       <page 153>

     
      45, How the Children of Pivanhonkapi Obtained Permission to Catch   Birds

       <page 154>

     
      46. The Jug Boy

       <page 155>

     
      47. The Crow as a Spirit of Evil

       <page 156>

     
      48. The Maiden and the Coyote

       <page 157>

     
      49. Chorzhvuk'iqolo and the Eagles

       <page 159>

     
      50. The Hawk and the Child

       <page 167>

     
      51. Muvingwa, the Two Oraibi Children, and the Humming-Bird

       <page 169>

     
      52. The Kalatoto who Wished to have Hair on his Head

       <page 172>

     
      53. The Child who Turned into an Owl

       <page 173>

     
      54. The Children and the Lizards

       <page 175>

     
      55. The Rooster, the Mocking-bird, and the Maiden

       <page 176>

     
      56. The Toad and the Snow Katcinas

       <page 180>

     
      57. The Locust that Came to Life while Being Roasted

       <page 181>

     
      58. The Coyote and the Turtles

       <page 182>

     
      59. The Water Serpent and the Coyote

       <page 184>

     
      60. The Coyote and the Balolookong (Water Serpent)

       <page 187>

     
      61. Balolookongwuu and the Coyote

       <page 187>

     
      62. The Coyote and the Frog

       <page 189>

     
      63. The Coyote, the Bat, and the Humming-Bird

       <page 189>

     
      64. The Coyote and the Humming-Bird

       <page 102>

     
      65. How the Coyote was Deceived by the Wren

       <page 193>

     
      66. The Aahtu and the Coyote

       <page 194>

     
      67. The Coyote and the Turtle-Dove

       <page 195>

     
      68. The Coyote and the Blue Jays

       <page 196>

     
      69. The Coyote and the Eagle

       <page 198>

     
      70. The Coyote and the Red Eagle

       <page 198>

     
      71. The Coyote and the Turkeys

       <page 199>

     
      72. The Chiro and the Coyote

       <page 201>

     
      73. The Coyote and the Porcupine

       <page 202>

     
      74. The Coyote and the Badger

       <page 204>

     
      75. The Badger and the Coyote

       <page 206>

     
      76. The Badger, the Coyote, and the Kohonino Maiden

       <page 207>

     
      77. The Coyote and the Kokontu Maiden

       <page 210>

     
      78. The Coyote and the Grasshopper

       <page 211>

     
      79. The Coyote and the Grasshopper

       <page 212>

     
      8o. The Three Maidens and the Coyote

       <page 213>

     
      81. How the Coyotes had a Katcina Dance

       <page 215>

     
      82. The Coyote and his Prey

       <page 216>

     
      83. The Bull-Snake and the Tcu'vo

       <page 216>

     
      84. The Snakes and the Locusts

       <page 217>

     
      85. The Squirrel and the Chipmunk

       <page 221>

     
      86. A Bet Between the Cooyoko and the Fox

       <page 222>

     
      87. The Little Gray Mice and the Little Brown Mice

       <page 223>

     
      88. The Badger and the Small Gray Mice

       <page 224>

     
      89. The Badger and the Small Gray Mice

       <page 228>

     
      90. The Mice, the Owl, and the Hawk

       <page 229>

     
      91. The Sparrow Hawk and the Ha'kwa

       <page 230>

     
      92. The Sparrow-Hawk and the Grasshopper

       <page 231>

     
      [p. vii]

        

     
       

       Page

     
      93. The Crow and the Hawk

       <page 232>

     
      94. The Red Eagle's Song

       <page 234>

     
      95. The Red Eagle and the Owl

       <page 234>

     
      96. The Bee and the Asya

       <page 235>

     
      97. The Grasshoppers and the Oraibi Maiden

       <page 236>

     
      93. How the Beetles Produced Rain

       <page 238>

     
      99. Why the Ants are so Thin

       <page 239>

     
      100. La'vovolvipiki And No'nvovolpiki

       <page 239>

     
      101. The Destruction of Pivanhonkapi

       <page 241>

     
      102. The Destruction of Sikyatki

       <page 244>

     
      103. The Destruction of Aovatovi

       <page 246>

     
      104. The Destruction of Aovatovi

       <page 254>

     
      105. How an Oraibi Chief Punished his People

       <page 255>

     
      106. A Katcina Race Contest between the Walpi and the Oraibi

       <page 256>

     
      107. The Last Fight with the Navaho

       <page 258>

     
      108. A Hopi Raid on a Navaho Dance

       <page 266>

     
      109. A Raid on the Hopi Villages

       <page 267>

     
      110. The Early Spanish Missions at Oraibi

       <page 268>

     
      Abstracts

       <page 273>

     
    

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE TRADITIONS OF THE HOPI.

  

1. ORIGIN MYTH. [*1]

A very long time ago there was nothing but water. In the east Huruing Wuhti [*2], the deity of all hard substances, lived in the ocean. Her house was a kiva like the kivas of the Hopi of to-day. To the ladder leading into the kiva were usually tied a skin of a gray fox and one of a yellow fox. Another Huruing Wuhti lived in the ocean in the west in a similar kiva, but to her ladder was attached a turtle-shell rattle.

The Sun also existed at that time. Shortly before rising in the east the Sun would dress up in the skin of the gray fox, whereupon it would begin to dawn--the so-called white dawn of the Hopi. After a little while the Sun would lay off the gray skin and put on the yellow fox skin, whereupon the bright dawn of the morning--the so-called yellow dawn of the Hopi--would appear. The Sun would then rise, that is, emerge from an opening in the north end of the kiva in which Huruing Wuhti lived. When arriving in the west again, the sun would first announce his arrival by fastening the rattle on the point of the ladder beam, whereupon he would enter the kiva, pass through an opening in the north end of the kiva, and continue his course eastward under the water and so on.

By and by these two deities caused some dry land to appear in the midst of the water, the waters receding eastward and westward. The Sun passing over this dry land constantly took notice of the fact, that no living being of any kind could be seen anywhere, and mentioned this fact to the two deities. So one time the Huruing Wuhti of the west sent word through the Sun to the Huruing Wuhti in the east to come over to her as she wanted to talk over this matter. The Huruing Wuhti of the east complied with this request and proceeded to the West over a rainbow. After consulting each other on this point the two concluded that they would create a little bird; so the

[p. 2]

deity of the east made a wren of clay, and covered it up with a piece of native cloth (mochapu). Hereupon they sang a song over it, and after a little while the little bird showed signs of life. Uncovering it, a live bird came forth, saying: "Uma hinok pas nui kita' nawakna?" (why do you want me so quickly). "Yes," they said, "we want you to fly all over this dry place and see whether you can find anything living." They thought that as the Sun always passed over the middle of the earth, he might have failed to notice any living beings that might exist in the north or the south. So the little Wren, flew al over the earth, but upon its return reported that no living being existed anywhere. Tradition says, however, that by this time Spider Woman (Kohk'ang Wuhti), lived somewhere in the south-west at the edge of the water, also in a kiva, but this the little bird had failed to notice.

Hereupon the deity of the west proceeded to make very many birds of different kinds and form, placing them again under the same cover under which the Wren had been brought, to life. They again sang a song over them. Presently the birds began to move under the cover. The goddess removed the cover and found under it all kinds of birds and fowls. "Why do you want us so quickly?" the latter asked. "Yes, we want you to inhabit this world." Hereupon the two deities taught every kind of bird the sound that it should make, and then the birds scattered out in all directions.

Hereupon the Huruing Wuhti of the west made of clay all different kinds of animals, and they were brought to life in the same manner as the birds. They also asked the same question: "Why do you want us so quickly?" "We want you to inhabit this earth," was the reply given them, whereupon they were taught by their creators their different sounds or languages, after which they proceeded forth to inhabit the different parts of the earth. They now concluded that they would create man. The deity of the east made of clay first a woman and then a man, who were brought to life in exactly the same manner as the birds and animals before them. They asked the same question, and were told that they should live upon this earth and should understand everything. Hereupon the Huruing Wuhti of the east made two tablets of some hard substance, whether stone or clay tradition does not say, and drew upon them with the wooden stick certain characters, handing these tablets to the newly created man and woman, who looked at them, but did not know what they meant. So the deity of the east rubbed with the palms of her hands, first the palms of the woman and then the palms of the man, by which they were enlightened so that they understood the

[p. 3]

writing on the tablets. Hereupon the deities taught these two a language. [*1].After they had taught them the language, the goddess of the east took them out of the kiva and led them over a rainbow, to her home in the east. There they stayed four days, after which Huruing Wuhti told them to go now and select for themselves a place and live there. The two proceeded forth saying that they would travel around a while and wherever they would find a good field they would remain. Finding a nice place at last, they built a small, simple house, similar to the old houses of the Hopi. Soon the Huruing Wuhti of the west began to think of the matter again, and said to herself : "This is not the way yet that it should be. We are not done yet," and communicated her thoughts to the Huruing Wuhti of the east. By this time Spider Woman had heard about all this matter and she concluded to anticipate the others and also create some beings. So she also made a man and woman of clay, covered them up, sang over them, and brought to life her handiwork. But these two proved to be Spaniards. She taught them the Spanish language, also giving them similar tablets and imparting knowledge to them by rubbing their hands in the same manner as the woman of the East had done with the "White Men." Hereupon she created two burros, which she gave to the Spanish man and woman. The latter settled down close by. After this, Spider Woman continued to create people in the same manner as she had created the Spaniards, always a man and a woman, giving a different language to each pair. But all at once she found that she had forgotten to create a woman for a certain man, and that is the reason why now there are always some single men.

She continued the creating of people in the same manner, giving new languages as the pairs were formed. All at once she found that she had failed to create a man for a certain woman, in other words, it was found that there was one more woman than there were men. "Oh my!'' she said, "How is this?" and then addressing the single woman she said: ''There is a single man somewhere, who went away from here. You try to find him and if he accepts you, you live with him. If not, both of you will have to remain single. You do the best you can about that." The two finally found each other, and the woman said, "Where shall we live?" The man answered: "Why here, anywhere. We shall remain together." So he went to work and built a house for them in which they lived. But it did not take

[p. 4]

very long before they commenced to quarrel with each other. "I want to live here alone," the woman said. "I can prepare food for myself." ''Yes, but who will get the wood for you? Who will work the fields?" the man said. "We had better remain together." They made up with each other, but peace did not last. They soon quarreled again, separated for a while, came together again, separated again, and so on. Had these people not lived in that way, all the other Hopi would now live in peace, but others learned it from them, and that is the reason why there are so many contentions between the men and their wives. These were the kind of people that Spider Woman had created. The Huruing Wuhti of the west heard about this and commenced to meditate upon it. Soon she called the goddess from the east to come over again, which the latter did. "I do not want to live here alone," the deity of the west said, "I also want some good people to live here." So she also created a number of other people, but always a man and a wife. They were created in the same manner as the deity of the east had created hers. They lived in the west. Only wherever the people that Spider Woman had created came in contact with these good people there was trouble. The people at that time led a nomadic life, living mostly on game. Wherever they found rabbits or antelope or deer they would kill the game and eat it. This led to a good many contentions among the people. Finally the Woman of the west said to her people: "You remain here; I am going to live, after this, in the midst of the ocean in the west. When you want anything from me, you pray to me there." Her people regretted this very much, but she left them. The Huruing Wuhti of the east did exactly the same thing, and that is the reason why at the present day the places where these two live are never seen.

Those Hopi who now want something from them deposit their prayer offerings in the village. When, they say their wishes and prayers they think of those two who live in the far distance, but of whom the Hopi believe that they still remember them.

The Spanish were angry at Huruing Wuhti and two of them took their guns and proceeded to the abiding place of the deity. The Spaniards are very skillful and they found a way to get there. When they arrived at the house of Huruing Wuhti the latter at once surmised what their intentions were. "You have come to kill me," she said; "don't do that; lay down your weapons and I shall show you something; I am not going to hurt you." They laid down their arms, whereupon she went to the rear end of the kiva and brought out a white lump like a stone and laid it before the two men, asking

[p. 5]

them to lift it up. One tried it, but could not lift it up, and what was worse, his hands adhered to the stone. The other man tried to assist him, but his hands also adhered to the stone, and thus they were both prisoners. Hereupon Huruing Wuhti took the two guns and said: "These do not amount to anything," and then rubbed them between her hands to powder. She then said to them: "You people ought to live in peace with one another. You people of Spider Woman know many things, and the people whom we have made also know many, but different, things. You ought not to quarrel about these things, but learn from one another; if one has or knows a good thing he should exchange it with others for other good things that they know and have. If you will agree to this I shall release you. They said they did, and that they would no more try to kill the deity. Then the latter went to the rear end of the kiva where she disappeared through an opening in the floor, from where she exerted a secret influence upon the stone and thus released the two men, They departed, but Huruing Wuhti did not fully trust them, thinking that they would return, but they never did.

Footnotes

^1:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi), The events here related are supposed to have happened in the lower world. The increasing of the various peoples and tribes, and the constant contentions among them, finally led to the emigration from the nether world through the sipapu into this world, the account of which is related by variant traditions of the Hopi.

^1:2 The nearest literal translation that can be given of this name, which appears so frequently in Hopi mythology and ceremonies is Hard Being Woman, i. e., woman of that which is hard, and the Hopi say she is the owner of such hard objects as shells, corals, turquoise, beads, etc.

^3:1 Some Hopi say that these two people were the ancestors of what are now called the White Man, and the people say that they believe this language taught to these two people was the language of the present White Man.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

2. HURUING WUHTI AND THE SUN [*1]

Aliksai! A very long time ago there was nothing here in the world but water. Only away off in the west where Huruing Wuhti lived there was a small piece of land where she lived. She lived in a hill or bluff called Talaschomo. Huruing Wuhti owned the moon, the stars, [*2] and all the hard substances, such as beads, corals, shells, etc. Away in the east lived the Sun, painted up very beautifully. The Sun was very skillful. One time Huruing Wuhti sent the Moon to the Sun, throwing him through (the intervening) space so that he fell down in front of the Sun. He told the Sun that Huruing Wuhti wanted him; then he arose and passed through the sky back to the west. The Sun also soon rose and followed the Moon to the west, to the house of Huruing Wuhti. "Have you come?" the latter said. "Yes, I have come. Why do you want me? I have come because you wanted me." "Thanks," the Huruing Wuhti said, "thanks that you have come, my father, because you shall be my father." "Yes," the Sun said, "and you shall be my mother, and we shall own all things together." "Yes," Huruing Wuhti said,

[p. 6]

"now let us create something for you." "All right, thank you," the Sun replied.

Hereupon they entered another chamber which was very beautiful, and there all kinds of the skins of different kinds of animals and birds were hanging. So Huruing Wuhti got out a bundle and placed it on the floor. It was a large piece of old native cloth (mochapu). She then placed on the floor all kinds of bird skins and feathers. Hereupon she rubbed her body and arms, rubbing off a great many small scales from her cuticle. These she took into her hands, rubbing the two palms of her hands together, and then placing these small scales on the feathers and skins. Hereupon she covered the whole with the mochapu. The Sun kindled a little fire at the east side of the pile. Huruing Wuhti then took hold of two corners of the cloth and began to sing, moving the corners to the time of her singing. The Sun took hold of the other two corners and also waved them, but he did not sing. After they had waved the corners four times, the things under the covering commenced to move, and soon they began to emit sounds, whistling and chirping the way the different birds do. Hereupon Huruing Wuhti took off the covering saying: "We are done, be it this way." There were all different kinds of birds, those that fly around in the summer when it is warm. As she took off the covering the birds commenced to fly, passed through the opening and flew out into the air, but soon all returned, gathering again in front of the two. "You shall own these," Huruing Wuhti said to the Sun, "they are yours." "Thanks," the Sun replied, "that they are mine." Huruing Wuhti then handed to the Sun a large jar made of a light transparent material like quartz crystal. Into this the Sun placed all the birds, closing up the jar.

Hereupon the Sun said: "Now, let us create something for you, too." "Very well," Huruing Wuhti said. Then the Sun placed a small quantity of different kinds of hair on the floor. Furthermore, a little quantity of the different kinds of paints that he was painted up with. He then let his beard (rays) drop upon these objects, also shook his wings towards them. They then covered up the things again, each took hold of two corners of the covering, and the Sun then sang a song. Soon something began to move under the covering, and when they removed the latter an antelope, deer, cotton-tail rabbit, jack-rabbit, and mountain sheep jumped up, and after running around in the large room for a while, they returned and assembled again in front of the two. "You take these, you shall own them," the Sun said to Huruing Wuhti. "All right, thank you," the latter said. Hereupon these animals took places close to the Huruing

[p. 7]

Wuhti, whom they considered as their mother afterwards. "You shall own these, they shall be yours," the Sun said once more to Huruing Wuhti, for which she thanked him.

The latter then put the Sun into an opening in the floor of the house, through which the Sun departed with the vessel containing the birds. After having passed through the opening, the Sun returned under the earth to the east again, and when he came out he turned over the land which belonged to Huruing Wuhti, and which had been under water, and by so doing made the world (tu'wakachi) land. The Sun at once noticed a great many beings come out of the water and moving. about on the shore of the land. He first called them the Water Lice (ba-atuhtu), but when he had risen to the middle of the sky he noticed that they were people, and he called them White People (Bahanas), some Spaniards (Castilians), and others Mormons (Mamona). He then poured out of the jar all the birds which then went flying around in the air and increased.

From this time on the Sun always went towards the west, entering the house of Huruing Wuhti, passing out below, and returning to the east again. When he came there this time Huruing Wuhti said: "Have you come?" "Yes," the Sun said. "Thanks," the Huruing Wuhti replied, "let us create something again. What have you found out?" "Yes," the Sun said, "land has come out every where, and everything is beautiful, and the water is beautiful, too. Now, to-morrow when I shall rise there will be blossoms and flowers and grass all over the land. "Very well," Huruing Wuhti said, "but let us make something now again. What shall we make?" Hereupon she fed the Sun honey, and other good food. When the Sun was through eating, Huruing Wuhti again said: "Well, now, what shall we make? Let us use the covering again," placing the same covering that they had used upon the floor. Hereupon Huruing Wuhti rubbed her legs and feet, rubbing off some more particles of cuticle. These she took into her hands, working them into a small ball, which she placed on the floor, and covered it up with the mochapu. They then again took hold of the four corners of the covering, Huruing Wuhti singing a song. Soon something moved under the covering and the crying of a little child was heard, which soon said: "I am hot, am perspiring." They uncovered it and found a little maiden. "O my!" Huruing Wuhti said: "Only one has been created. That is not good, it must not be this way." Hereupon she put on the covering again and, then repeated the song. Soon a second voice was heard, and removing the covering they found a little boy, the little brother of the mana. His first sound was a groan as that of a

[p. 8]

small child. Hereupon he also said: "I am very warm," and wiped off the perspiration from his face and body. "Have you come?" Hurtling Wuhti said. "Yes, we have come. Thanks," she replied.

They were brother and sister. So the children sat up. "Have you anything to say?" Huruing Wuhti asked them. "Yes," they said, "why do you want us?" "Yes," Huruing Wuhti replied, "why my father, the Sun, has made a beautiful earth and I want you to live on this earth. That is why I want you. So I want you to go eastward now, and wherever you find a good piece of land, there you settle down. By and by others, too, shall come to you.'' Before they started the Sun asked Huruing Wuhti who these two were, how they should be called? And Huruing Wuhti named the youth Muyingwa, and the maiden Yahoya. Hereupon the two started and left.

The Sun and Huruing Wuhti prepared. to create some more. It was at this time still night. Huruing Wuhti now rubbed her abdomen with both hands, and took from her umbilicus a small quantity of the scales which she twisted together. All this scaly matter, thus rubbed from her body, she then placed on the floor, covering it up with the aforesaid cloth. They again took hold of the corners, sang over it, and as they lifted up the corners the fourth time, something began to move under the covering. They took the covering off and there was another being all in perspiration. It was again a maiden. She wiped off the perspiration from her body with some sand that was on the floor, and sat up. Huruing Wuhti told her not to rub her body any more, as the sand had already adhered to her body and the latter was dry. She hereupon told the maiden that she should be called Sand Clan member (Tuwa-wungwa), and Lizard Clan member (Kukuts-wungwa). Huruing Wuhti hereupon sent the maiden off after the other two, giving her, however, one grain of shelled corn before she left.

By this time it became a little lighter and the Sun said to Huruing Wuhti, she should hurry up. So the latter this time rubbed her face, and the inside of her nose, and from the scales thus rubbed off she formed a little ball, placed it on the floor, and again covered it. They went through the same process as before. Soon they heard a child crying like a Hopi child would cry, and another one like the crying of a coyote. Removing the covering, they found a youth and a maiden, both also perspiring profusely and wiping off the perspiration. "Why do you want us?" the children asked. "Yes," Huruing Wuhti said, "we have made this beautiful world here and there is hardly anybody living there yet, and that you should live here

[p. 9]

somewhere we wanted you." She then said that the mana should be a Burrowing Owl Clan member (Kokop-wungwa), and the youth coyote Clan member (Ish-wungwa). Hereupon she gave one grain of shelled corn to each one and told them now to follow the others, and that they should travel quickly.

Hereupon they created once more in the same manner as before. When they were ready to lift up the covering they heard somebody grunt, and another one seemed to be angry, so after they had partly lifted up the covering they dropped it again, but the two under it said, "Remove that, we are very hot." So they removed it and there was one child like a Hopi. It was the one that had grunted like a bear. To this one Huruing Wuhti gave the name Bear-Clan member (Hon-wungwa). She gave a grain of shelled corn to him and sent him on. The other, Head-with-the-Hair-Pushed-over-it-Backward (Talqoto), was a Navaho, and to him Huruing Wuhti gave a little piece of spoiled meat-and sent him on. This is the reason why the Navaho use meat, instead of corn like the Hopi.

Hereupon the Sun again passed through the opening in the floor, returning to the east under the earth. The next day when he arose again and had traveled a distance, he saw in the distance smoke arising at different places, and noticed that the people who had been created were camping there. As he rose higher he saw at a distance a maiden and a youth who were traveling along, but seemed to be very tired. The maiden would sometimes carry her little brother on her back, then she would set him down and the two would join hands and travel along together. When the Sun came nearer he asked them: "Where do you come from? Who are you?" "Yes," they said, "We have come out away off there somewhere." "All right, the Sun said," you travel on." Hereupon he gave them water to drink and a little corn for food. He then said to the youth that he should be called Sun Clan member (Tawa-wungwa), and to the maiden he gave the name Forehead Clan member (Kal-wungwa), whereupon he told them to travel on east ward. The Sun and Forehead clans later came to Shupaulavi, the Bear Clan to Shongopavi, and the Burrowing Owl Clan to Mishongnovi, while the Sand Clan went to Walpi. Muyingwa and his sister settled down somewhere west of a large spring situated south of Shongopavi.

Footnotes

^5:1 Told by Kuhkiuma (Shupaulavi).

^5:2 This is the only instance where I have heard the moon and stars spoken of as being owned or controlled by Huruing Wuhti. The informant did not know the songs mentioned in this tale.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10]

  

3. COMING OF THE HOPI FROM THE UNDER-WORLD. [*1]

A long time ago the people were living below. There were a great many of them, but they were often quarreling with one another. Some of them were very much depraved. They abused the women and the maidens, and that led to very many contentions. So the chiefs, who were worried and angry over this, had a council and concluded that they would try to find another place to live. So they first sent out a bird named Motsni, to find a place of exit from this world. He flew up high but was too weak and returned without having been successful. They then sent the Mocking-bird (Yahpa). He was strong and flew up very high and found a place of exit. Returning, he reported this to the chiefs.

In the meanwhile the chiefs had caused a great flood. Many Balololkongwuus [*2] came out of the ground with the water, and a great portion of the people were destroyed. When the Mocking-bird had made his report to the chiefs the latter said: "All right, that is good. We are going away from here.'' They then announced through the crier that in four days they would leave, and that the women should prepare some food, and after they had eaten on the fourth day they would all assemble at the place right under the opening which the Mocking-bird had found. This was done.

The chiefs then planted a pine-tree (calavi), sang around it, and by their singing made it to grow very fast. It grew up to the opening which the Yahpa had found, and when the chiefs tried and shook it, they found that it was fairly strong, but not strong enough for many people to climb up on, especially its branches, which were very thin. So they planted another kind of pine (lo'oqo), sang around it, and made it also to grow up fast. This tree and its branches was much stronger than the other, but while the first one had grown through the opening, this one did not reach it entirely, its uppermost branches and twigs spreading out sideways before they reached the opening. Hereupon they planted in the same manner a reed (bakavi), which proved to be strong, and also grew through the opening like the calavi. Finally they planted a sunflower (ahkawau), and as it was moist where they planted it, it also grew up very fast and to a great size, its leaves also being very large; but the sunflower did not reach the opening. Its very large disk protruded downward before it reached the opening. The sunflower was covered with little thorns all over.

Now they were done with this.

[p. 11]

Hereupon Spider Woman, Pookonghoya, his brother Balo'ongawhoya, and the Mocking-bird that had found the opening, climbed up on the calavi in the order mentioned. After they had emerged through the opening, Pookonghoya embraced the calavi, his brother the reed, both holding them firmly that they should not shake when the people were climbing up. The Mocking-bird sat close by and sang a great many songs, the songs that are still chanted at the Wuwuchim ceremony. Spider Woman was also sitting close by watching the proceedings. Now the people began to climb up, some on the calavi, others on the lo'oqo, still others on the ahkavu and on the bakavi. As soon as they emerged, the Mocking-bird assigned them their places and gave them their languages. To one he would say: "You shall be a Hopi, and that language you shall speak." To another: "You shall be a Navaho, and you shall speak that language." And to a third: "You shall be an Apache, a Mohave, a Mexican,", etc., including the White Man. The language spoken in the underworld had been that of the following Pueblo Indians: Kawahykaka, Akokavi, Katihcha, Kotiyti; these four branches of the Pueblo Indians speaking essentially the same language.

In the under-world the people had been very bad, there being many sorcerers and dangerous people, just like there are in the villages to-day who are putting diseases into the people. Of these Popwaktu, one also found his way out with the others. The people kept coming out, and before they were all out the songs of the Mocking-bird were exhausted. "Hapi! pai shulahti! Now! (my songs) are gone," and at once the people who were still on the ladders commenced returning to the under-world, but a very great many had already come out, an equally large number having remained in the under-world, but the Kik-mongwi from below was with the others that came out of the kiva. The people who had emerged remained around the sipapu, as the opening was, and has ever since been called.

At this time no sun existed and it was dark everywhere. The half-grown son of the Kik-mongwi took sick and died, so they buried him. His father was very angry. "Why has some Powaka come out with us?" he said. "We thought we were living alone and wanted to get away from those dangerous men. That is the reason why we have come out, and now one has come with us." Hereupon he called all the people together and said: "On whose account have I lost my child? I am going to make a ball of this fine com-meal and throw it upward, and on whose head that ball alights, him I shall throw down again through the sipapu." Hereupon he threw the ball upward to a great height, the people all standing and watching. [p. 12] When it came down it fell upon the head of some one and was shattered. "Ishohi! so you are the one," the chief said to him. But as it happened this was the chief's nephew (his younger sister's son). [*1] "My nephew, so you are nukpana (dangerous); why have you come out with us? We did not want any bad ones here, and now you have come with us. I am going to throw you back again." So he grabbed him in order to throw him back. "Wait," he said, "wait! am going to tell you something." "I am going to throw you back," the chief replied. ''Wait," his nephew said again, "until I tell you some thing. You go there to the sipahpuni and you look down. There he is walking." "No, he is not," the chief replied, "I am not going to look down there, he is dead." But he went and looked down and there he saw his boy running around with other children, still showing the signs of the head washing which the Hopi practice upon the dead immediately after death. "Yes, it is true, it is true," the chief said, "truly there he is going about." "So do not throw me down there," his nephew said, "that is the way it will be. If any one dies he will go down there. Let me remain with you, I am going to tell you some more." Then the chief consented and let his nephew remain.

It was still dark, and as there was no sunshine it was also cold, and the people began to look for fire and for wood, but as it was so dark, they could find very little wood. They thus lived there a while without fire, but all at once they saw a light in the distance and the chief said: "Some one go there and see about it." When they had still been in the lower world they had occasionally heard footsteps of some one up above. So some one went in search of the light, but before he had reached it he became tired and returned. Another was sent and he got there. He found a field in which corn, watermelons, beans, etc., were planted. All around this field a fire was burning, which was kept up by wood, and by which the ground was kept warm so that the plants could grow. The messenger found a very handsome man there. He had four strands of turquoise around his neck and very large turquoise ear pendants. In his face he had two black lines running from the upper part of his nose to his cheeks, and made with specular iron. By his side was standing his friend (a mask) which looked very ugly, with large open eye-holes and a large mouth. So it was Skeleton (Masauwuu) whom they had heard walking about from the other world. "Who are you?" Skeleton asked the messenger. ''Where do you come from?" "Yes," he replied, "we have come from below, and it is cold here. We are freezing and we have no fire.

[p. 13]

"You go and tell your people and then you all come here to me." So he returned and the people asked him: "Now, what have you found out? Have you found anybody?" "Yes," he said, "I have found somebody and he has a good crop there." Skeleton had fed the messenger with some of his good things which he had there. The people had not brought much food with them from below and so they had not very much left. The people were very glad for this invitation and went to the place where Skeleton lived. But when they saw the small field they thought: "Well, that will be gone in a very short time," but Skeleton always planted and the food was never gone. When they came there they gathered some wood and built a fire and then they warmed themselves and were happy. Skeleton gave them roasting ears, and watermelons, melons, squashes, etc., and they ate and refreshed themselves. Some of the plants were very small yet, others still larger, so that they always had food.

So the people remained there, made fields, and they always kept up a fire near the fields, which warmed the ground so that they could raise a crop. When the crop had matured they gathered it all in, and when they now had provisions they planned to start off again, but there was still no sun, and it was cold. So they talked about this, saying: "Now, it ought not remain this way." So the chiefs all met in council with Skeleton, and talked this matter over in order to see whether they could not make a sun as they had had it in the underworld, but they did not just know how to do it. So they finally took a piece of dressed buffalo hide (hakwavu), which they cut in a round shape, stretched it over a wooden ring, and then painted it with white du'ma (kaoline). They then pulverized some black paint (toho) [*1] with which they drew a picture of the moon around the edge of this disk, sprinkling the center of the disk with the same black color. They then attached a stick to this disk. Hereupon they stretched a large piece of white native cloth (mochapu) on the floor and placed this disk on it. All these objects they had brought with them from the under-world.

They then selected some one (the story does not say whom) and directed him to stand on this moon symbol. Hereupon the chiefs took the cloth by it, corners, swung it back and forth, and then threw it upward, where it continued swiftly flying eastward into the sky. So the people sat and watched. All at once they noticed that it became light in the east. Something was burning there as they thought. The light became brighter and brighter, and something came up in the east. It rose higher and higher, and where the people were it

[p. 14]

became lighter and lighter. So now they could go about and they were happy. That turned out to be the moon, and though it was light, the light was only dim and the people , when working in the fields, would still occasionally cut off their plants because they could not see very distinctly, and it was still cold and the people were freezing, and they still had to keep the ground warm with fires. So. the people were thinking about it. The chiefs again met in council, and said: "Ishohi! It is better already, it is light, but it is not quite good yet. it is still cold. Can we not make something better?" They concluded that perhaps the buffalo skin was not good, and that it was too cold, so they decided that this time they would take a piece of mochapu. They again cut out a round piece, stretched it over a ring, but this time painted it with oxide of copper (cakwa). They painted eyes and a mouth on the disk, and decorated the forehead of what this was to resemble in yellow, red, and other colors. They put a ring of corn-husks around it, which were worked in a zigzag fashion. [*1] Around this they tied a tawahona, that is, a string of red horse-hair, finally thrusting a number of eagle-tail feathers into a corn-husk ring, fastened to the back of the disk. In fact, they prepared a sun symbol as it is still worn on the back of the flute players in the Flute ceremony. To the forehead of the face painted on the disk they tied an abalone shell. Finally the chief made nakwakwosis of the feathers of a small yellowish bird, called irahoya, which resembles a fly-catcher, but has some red hair on top of the head. [*2]

Of these nakwakwosis the chief tied one to the point of each eagle-tail feather on the sun symbol. They then placed this symbol on the white cloth again, again asked some one to stand on it, and, as in the case of the moon, they swung the cloth with its contents into the air, where it kept twirling upward and upward towards the east. Soon they again saw a light rise in the east. It became brighter and brighter and warmer. That proved to be the sun, and it had not come up very high when the Hopi already felt its warmth. [*3] After

[p. 15]

the sun had been created and was rising day after day, the people were very happy, because it was now warm and very light, so that they could attend to their work very well. The children were running around and playing. They were now thinking of moving on. They had a great many provisions by this time, and so the chiefs again met in a council to talk the matter over. "Let us move away from here," the chiefs said; "let us go eastward and see where the sun rises, but let us not go all together. Let some take one route, others another, and others still further south, and then we shall see who arrives at the place where the sun rises first. So the people started. The White People took a southern route, the Hopi a more northern, and between them traveled what are now the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico. Often certain parties would remain at certain places, sometimes for several years. They would build houses and plant.

Soon they became estranged from each other, and would begin to attack and kill one another. The Castilians were especially bad, and made wars on other people. When starting, the chiefs had agreed that as soon as one of the parties should reach the place where the sun rises, many stars would fall from the sky, and when that would happen all the traveling parties should remain and settle down where they would be at that time. The White People having taken a southern route, were more gifted than the other people. When they had become very tired carrying their children and their burdens, one of the women bathed herself and took the scales that she had rubbed off from her body and made horses of these scales. These horses they used after that for traveling, so that they could proceed very much faster. In consequence of this they arrived at the place where the sun rises before any of the other parties arrived there. And immediately many stars fell from the sky. "Aha!" the people said who were still traveling; "Some one has already arrived." Hereupon they settled down where they were. It had also been agreed upon before the different parties started, that whenever those who did not reach the place where the sun rises should be molested by enemies, they should notify those who had arrived at the sunrise, and the latter, would then come and help them.

[p. 16]

Footnotes

^10:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

^10:2 Great water serpent.

^12:1 According to others it was a maiden.

^13:1 These paints are still universally used in their ceremonies.

^14:1 Lamavantiva says that the Hopi are very secretive about making this zigzag ring. They do not want any one to witness the manufacturing of this peculiar object.

^14:2 The Hopi say that this red spot resembles fire, and hence the feathers of this bird are very much prized for prayer-offerings, whose object it is to produce warm weather.

^14:3 Which is said to come partly from those small nakwakwosis and partly from the glittering shell which is said to also contain heat. As the shell glitters the light is said to proceed from the sun on account of that shell. The man that was thrown up with the sun is said to hold the sun in front of himself, but the rotation of the sun is caused by the Huruing Wuhti of the east and the Huruing Wuhti of the west who keep drawing and rotating the sun with a string. The man who was thrown up with the moon is also said to be still behind the moon, but instead of holding the moon in the center, as is the case of the sun, he still holds her by a stick that they attached to it when the moon was made. The increase and decrease of the moon is caused by a covering which is probably the piece of cloth in which the moon disk and the man were thrown into the sky at the time when the moon was created.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

4. THE WANDERINGS OF THE HOPI. [*1]

A very long time ago they were living down below. Everything was good there at that time. That way of living was good down there. Everything was good, everything grew well; it rained all the time, everything was blossoming. That is the way it was, but by and by it became different. The chiefs commenced to do bad. Then it stopped raining and they only had very small crops and the winds began to blow. People became sick. By and by it war, like it is here now, and at last the people participated in this. They, too, began to talk bad and to be bad. And then those who have not a single heart, the sorcerers, that are very bad, began to increase and became more and more. The people began to live the way we are living now, in constant contentions. Thus they were living. Nobody would listen any more. They became very bad. They would take away the wives of the chiefs.

The chiefs hereupon became angry and they planned to do something to the people, to take revenge on them. They began to think of escaping. So a few of the chiefs met once and thought and talked about the matter. They had heard some sounds away up, as of footsteps, as if somebody was walking there, and about that they were talking. Then the Kik-mongwi, who had heard the sounds above, said that they wanted to investigate above and see how it was there, and then if the one above there wanted them, they wanted to try to go out. So the others were willing too that they wanted to find out about that, and then if they were permitted they wanted to move up there. So they were now thinking who should find out. So they made a Pawaok'aya, [*2] sang over it, and thus brought it to life. "Why do you want me?" the bird said. "Yes," the chief said, "we are not living well here, our hearts are not light, and they are troubling us here, and now I have been thinking about these few children of mine here and we want to see whether we can find some other way of living. Away above there somebody seems to be walking, and now we thought maybe you could go up there and see about that and find out for us, and that is the reason why we want you." "All right," the Pawaok'aya said, "all right, I shall go up there and find out about it." Hereupon the chief planted a lo'oqo (species of pine or fir), but they saw that it did not reach up, but that its point was turning downward. Hereupon they planted a reed by the side of the pine and that reached up. They then told the Pawaok'aya to go up now and if he

[p. 17]

should find anybody to tell him and then if he were willing they would go.

So the Pawaok'aya ascended, flying in circles upward around these two ladders. When he came up to the top he found an opening there, through which he went out. After he came out he was flying around and around, but did not find anybody, so he returned to the opening again and came down. As he was very tired he fell down upon the ground before the chiefs. When he was somewhat revived they asked him, "Now, what have you found out?" "Yes," he said, "I went through there and there was a large space there, but I did not find anybody. When I did not find anybody I became hungry and thirsty and very tired, so I have come back now." "Ishohi! (Oh!)" they said. "Very well, now who else will go?" and they were thinking. "Somebody else shall go," they said, and they kept thinking about it.

So they made another one, but this time a small one, and when they were singing over it it became alive. When it had become alive they saw that it was a Humming-bird (Tohcha), [*1] which is very small, but very swift and strong. "Why do you want me?" the bird said. "Yes," they said, "our children here are not with good hearts. We are not living well here; we are living here in trouble. So we want you to go up there for us and see what you can find out, and if the one up there is kind and good, we think of going up there, and that is the reason why we want you. So you go up there; you hunt somebody, and if he is gentle and kind, we shall go up there." So the Tohcha flew upward, circling around the two trees, went through the opening and flew around and around, and not finding anybody also became tired and came back. He flew lower and lower and alighted in front of the chiefs, exhausted. When he had somewhat revived, they asked him: "Now, then, what have you heard, what have you found out?" "Yes," he said, "yes, I flew around there that way and became tired and exhausted and have come back." "Ishohi!" they said again, "now then, we shall send somebody else."

They then created another one, and sang over it. But this time they had made a larger one, and when they had chanted their song over it, it became alive and it was a Hawk (Kisha). "Why do you want me?" the Hawk also said. "Yes," they replied, "yes, these our children do not listen to us, they worry us, and we are living in trouble here, and that is why we want you. You go up there and find out for us and inform us." So the Hawk flew up also, passed through the opening,

[p. 18]

and circled around for some time in the space above the opening, But he also became tired and returned, exhausted. So when he was somewhat revived, they asked him: "What did you find out?" and he told them the same as the others had, that he had not found anyone. "Ishohi!" they said, "we shall try it once more."

So they made another one, and sang over it again. While they were singing over it it became alive, and it was the Motsni. "Why do you want me?" the latter asked. "Yes," they said, "our children here do not listen to us, they have bard hearts, and we are living in trouble here. So we have been thinking of leaving here, but these here have not found anybody there, so you go up too, and you find out for us. And, if you find some one there who is kind and gentle and has a good heart, why you tell us and we shall go up there." So he flew up too, and having passed through the opening, he kept flying around and looking about, as he was very strong. Finally he found the place where Oraibi now is, but there were no houses there yet, and there somebody was sitting, leaning his head forward, and as the Motsni came nearer he moved it to the side a little. Finally he said: "Sit down, you that are going around here, sit down. Certainly you are going around here for some reason. Nobody has seen me here yet." "Yes," the Motsni said, "down below we are not living well, and the chiefs there have sent me up here to find out, and now I have found you, and if, you are kind, we have thought of coming up here, since I now have found you. Now you say, you tell, me if you are willing, and I shall tell them so, and we will come up here." This one whom the Motsni had found was Skeleton (Masauwuu). "Yes," he said, "now this is the way I am living, here. I am living here in poverty. I have not anything; this is the way I am living here. Now, if you are willing to live here that way, too, with me and share this life, why come, you are welcome." "All right," the Motsni said, "whatever they say down there, whatever they say. Now, I shall be off." "All right," Skeleton said, whereupon the Motsni left.

So he returned and descended to where the chiefs were sitting, but this one did not drop down, for he was very strong, and he came flying down to them. What have you found out?" they asked the bird. "Yes," he said, "I was up there and I have found him away off. But it is with you now; he also lives there poorly, he has not much, he is destitute. But if you are satisfied with his manner of living, why you are welcome to come up there." "All right," they said, and were happy. "So that is the way he is saying, so he is kind, we are welcome, and we are going."

At that time there were all kinds of people living down there, the

[p. 19]

White Man, the Paiute, the Pueblo; in fact, all the different kinds of people except the Zuni and the Kohonino, who have come from another place. Of all these people some whose hearts were not very bad had heard about this, and they had now assembled with the chiefs, but the greater part of the people, those whose hearts were very bad, were not present. They now decided that they would leave. The chief told them that in four days they were to be ready to leave. So during the four days those who knew about it secretly told some of their friends whose hearts also were at least not very bad, that after four days they were going to leave. So the different chiefs from the different kinds of people assembled with small parties on the morning of the fourth day, after they had had their morning meal. They met at the place where they were appointed to meet, and there were a good many. "We are a great many," the chief said, "may be there will be some here among them whose heart is not single. Now, no more must come, this is enough." So they commenced to climb up the reed, first the different chiefs, the Village chief (Kik-mongwi), who was also at the same time the Soyal-mongwi, the Flute chief (La'n-mongwi), Horn chief (Al-mongwi), Agave chief (Kwan-mongwi), Singer chief (Tao-mongwi), Wuwuchim chief (Kel-mongwi), Rattlesnake chief (Tcu'-mongwi), Antelope chief (Tco'b-mongwi), Marau chief (Marau-mongwi), Lagon chief (Lagon-mongwi), and the Warrior chief (Kalehtak-mongwi or Po'okong). And then the people followed and a great many went out. By this time the people in the lower world had heard about this, and they now came crowding from all sides towards the trees. When the Kik-mongwi above there saw that so many were coming he called down to stop. "Some of those Popwaktu," he said, "are going to come up too, I think, so that is enough, stop now!" He then commenced to pull up the reed so that a great many people that were still on it dropped back.

So they now moved on a little bit to the rim or edge of the opening, and there they gathered, and there were a great many of them, The Kik-mongwi now addressed them and said: "Now this many we have come out, now we shall go there, but we want to live with a single heart. Thus long we have lived with bad hearts. We want to stop that. Whatever that one there (referring to the Motsni) tells its, We want to listen to, and the way he says we shall live. Thus he instructed them.

In a little while the child of the chief, a small boy, became sick and died. 'Ishohi!" the chief said, "A Powaka has come out with us," and they were thinking about it. Then he made a ball of fine meal and threw it upward, and it alighted on the head of a maiden. So

[p. 20]

he went there and grabbed her, saving: "So you are the one. On your account my child has died. I shall throw you back again." He then lifted her to the opening. "I am going to throw you down here,'' he said, "you have come out with us and we shall now live in the same way here again." But she did not want to. "No," she said, "you must not throw me down, I want to stay with you, and if you will contend with one another again I shall always talk for you (be on your side). Now, you go and look down there and you will see your child going around down there." So he looked down and there he saw his child running around with the others. "That is the way it will be," the maiden said to the chief; "if any one dies, he will go down there and he will remain there only four days, and after the four days he will come back again and live with his people." [*1] Hereupon the chief was willing that she should remain and he did not throw her down, but he told her that she could not go with them right away. When they should leave, when they had slept, after the first day she might follow them. So she remained there near the opening.

Hereupon Po'okong looked around all over and he found out that towards one side it was always cold. It was at this time dark yet, so Spider Woman (Kohk'ang Wuhti) took a piece of white native cloth (owa) and cut a large round piece out of it on which she made a drawing. She was assisted by the Flute priest. They sang some songs over it, and Spider Woman then took the disk away towards the east. Soon they saw something rise there, but it did not become very light yet, and it was the moon. So they said they must make something else. Spider Woman and the Flute priest then took a piece of buckskin, cut a circular piece out of it, and made on it a drawing of the sun symbol, as is still used by the Flute priest to-day. They sang over this, whereupon Spider Woman took that away and in a little while something rose again, and now it became light and very warm. But they had rubbed the yelks of eggs over this sun symbol and that is what makes it so very light, and that is why the chickens know when it is light and yellow in the morning, and crow early at the sunrise, and at noon, and in the evening, and now they know all about the time. And now the chief and all the people were happy because it was light and warm.

The chiefs now made all different kinds of blossoms and plants and everything. They now thought of starting and scattering out. The language then spoken was the Hopi language. This language

[p. 21]

was dear and sacred to the Hopi chief, and he wanted to keep it alone to himself and for the Hopi, but did not want the people who would scatter out to take this language along, and so he asked the Mockingbird (Yahpa), who talks everything, to give to the different people a different language. This the Mocking-bird did, giving to one party one language, to another party another language, and so on, telling them that these languages they should henceforth speak. Hereupon they sat down to eat a common meal, and the chief laid out a great many corn-ears of different lengths which they had brought from the under-world. "Now," he said, "you choose of these corn-ears before you start." So there was a great wrangle over these corn-ears, every one wanting the longest ears, and such people as the Navaho, Ute, Apache, etc., struggled for and got the longest corn-ears, leaving the small ones for the Hopi, and these the chief took and said: "Thanks, that you have left this for me. Upon this we are going to live. Now, you that took the long corn-ears will live on that, but they are not corn, they will be kwahkwi, lahu, and such grasses that have seed." And that is the reason why these people rub out the tassels of those grasses now and live on them; and the Hopi have corn, because the smaller ears were really the corn.

The chief had an elder brother, and he selected some: of the best foods-that tasted well, such as no'okwiwi, [*1] meats, etc. They were now ready to start, and then the chief and his elder brother talked with each other and agreed that the elder brother should go with a party ahead towards the sunrise, and when he would arrive there he should touch the sun, at least with his forehead, and then remain and live there where the sun rises. But they should not forget their brethren, they should be looking this way, towards the place where they would settle down. A So Wuhti (old woman, grandmother) went with each party. Each party also took a stone upon which there were, some marks and figures, and that fitted together. They agreed that if the Hopi should get into trouble again, and live again the same way as they did in the lower world, the elder brother should come back to them and discover the Powakas who caused the trouble, and cut off their heads.

The elder brother and his party started first, and they became the White Men as they traveled eastward. The chief and his party started next, both taking a southern route. The maiden that had been found to be a Powaka, and who had been left behind at the opening, followed these two parties after they had left.

The people hereupon formed different parties, each party following

[p. 22]

a certain chief, and all traveling eastward. They usually stopped for longer or shorter periods at certain places, and then traveled on again. For this reason there are so many ruins all over the country. The Pueblo Indians also passed through about here where the Hopi now live. The-White Men were more skillful than the others and got along better. Spider Woman, who was with them, made horses and burros for them, on which they traveled when they got tired, and for that reason they went along much faster. The party that brought Powak-mana with them settled down at Palatkwapi, where they lived for quite a while, and these did not yet bear a particular clan name.

The other parties traveled different routes and were scattered over the country, each party having a chief of its own. Sometimes they would stay one, two, three, or four years at one place, wherever they found good fields or springs. Here they would raise crops so that they had some food to take with them when they continued their journeys, and then moved on again. Sometimes when they found good fields but no water they would create springs with a bauypi. This is a small perforated vessel into which they would place certain herbs, different kinds of stones, shells, a small balolookong, bahos, etc., and bury it. In one year a spring would come out of the ground where this was buried. During this year, before their spring was ready, they would use rainwater, because they understood how to create rain. When they continued their journeys they usually took such a bauypi out of the ground and took it with them.

Before any of the parties had arrived at the place where the Hopi now live they began to become bad. Contentions arose among the parties. They began to war against each other. Whenever a certain party possessed something, another party would attack and kill them on account of those possessions. For that reason some of them built their villages on top of the bluffs and mesas, because they were afraid of other parties. Finally some of them arrived at Mu'enkapi. [*1] These were the Bear clan, Spider clan, Hide Strap clan, Blue-bird clan, and the Fat Cavity [*2] clan; all of which had derived their names from a dead bear upon which these different parties had come as they were traveling along.

While these parties lived near Mu'enkapi for some time another party had gone along the Little Colorado river, passed by the place that is now called the Great Lakes, and arrived at Shongopavi, where

[p. 23]

they started a village at the place where now the ruins of old Shongopavi are, east of the present village. These people were also called the Bear clan, but they were different Bear people from those living at Mu'enkapi about that time. Shongopavi was the first village started., When these Bear people arrived at Shongopavi, Skeleton was living at the place where Oraibi now is, where he had been living all the time. The clan that had stopped northeast of Mu'enkapi soon moved to the place where Mu'enkapi now is, but did not remain there long. The Bear clan, the Hide Strap clan, and the Blue-bird clan soon moved on towards Oraibi. When the Spider clan arrived at Mu'enkapi they made marks or wrote on a certain bluff east of Mu'enkapi, saving that this place should always belong to the Hopi, that no one should take it away from them, because there was so much water there. Here the Hopi should always plant. [*1]

Soon after the Spider clan had moved on towards Oraibi the Snake clan arrived. When these Snake people saw the writing on the bluff they said. has been writing here that they wanted to own this. Let us write also that we want to own this here, too." So they wrote the same thing on the bluff. After they had left the place, the Burrowing Owl clan arrived, and they also wrote the same thing on the bluff. But they all had heard that Skeleton was living where Oraibi now is, and so they all traveled on towards Oraibi. When the Bear clan arrived at Natuwanpik'a, a place a very short distance west of Kuiwanva, [*2] Skeleton came to meet them there. "We have arrived here,'' the Hon-wungwa said, "we would like to live here with you, and we want you to be our chief. Now, what do you think about it? Will you give us some land?" But Skeleton replied, "No, I shall not be chief. You shall be chief here, you have retained your old life. You will be the same here as you were down in the under-world. Someone that is Powaka has come out with you and it will be here just the same as it was down there when he comes here. But when the White Man, your elder brother, will come back here and cut off the heads of the bad ones, then I shall own all this land of mine myself. But until then you shall be chief. I shall give you a piece of land and then you live here."

Hereupon he stepped off a large tract of land, going east of where they were, and then descending the mesa west of K'oqo'chmovi, then towards the present trail towards Oraibi, up the trail, past the present village site, down the mesa on the west side, along the trail towards'

[p. 24]

Momoshvavi, including that spring, and back up the mesa. This piece of land he allotted to the Bear clan. The leader of the Bear Clan now asked him where he lived. He said he lived over there at the bluff of Oraibi, and that is where they should live also. So this clan built its houses right east of the bluff of Oraibi where there are now the ruins.

The Bear clan brought with them the Soyal cult, the A'ototo, and the Soyal Katcinas. Soon other clans began to arrive. When a clan arrived usually one of the new arrivals would go to the village and ask the village chief for permission to settle in the village. He usually asked whether they understood anything to produce rain and good crops, and if they had any cult, they would refer to it and say, "Yes, this or this we have, and when we assemble for this ceremony, or when we have this dance it will rain. With this we have traveled, and with this we have taken care of our children." The chief would then say, "Very well, you come and live in the village." Thus the different clans arrived: First, the Hide Strap clan, the Blue-bird clan, the Spider clan, etc. While these different clans were arriving in Oraibi, other clans were arriving in Walpi and Mishongnovi, and settling up those villages. When a new clan arrived, the villa e chief would tell them:" Very well, you participate in our cult and help us with the ceremonies," and then he would give them their fields according to the way they came. And that way their fields were all distributed.

One of the first clans to arrive with those mentioned was the Bow clan, which came from the south-west. When the village chief asked the leader of this clan what he brought with him to produce rain, he said, ''Yes, I have here the Shaalako Katcinas, the Tangik Katcinas, the Tu'kwunang Katcina, and the Shawiki Katcina. When they dance it usually rains." "Very well," the village chief said, "you try it." So the Aoat-wungwa arranged a dance. On the day before the dance it rained a little, and on the last day when they had their dance it rained fearfully. All the washes were full of water. So the village chief invited them to move to the village and gave them a large tract of land. He told them that they should have their ceremonies first. This was the Wu'wuchim ceremony, the chief of the Bow clan being the leader of this ceremony. So this ceremony was the first one to take place.

Then followed the Soyal ceremony, in charge of the village chief. And then in the Baho month the Snake and the Flute ceremonies, which change about every two years. The Snake cult was brought by the Snake clan, the Antelope cult by the Blue-bird clan, and the

[p. 25]

Flute cult by the Spider clan. The Lizard, which also arrived from the north-west, brought the Marau cult, and the Parrot clan the Lagon cult. Others came later. Small bands living throughout the country when they could hear about the people living in Oraibi would sometimes move up towards Oraibi and ask for admission to live in the village. In this way the villages were built up slowly.

At that time everything was good yet. No wicked ones were living in the village at that time. When the Katcinas danced it would rain, and if it did not rain while they danced, it always rained when the dance was over, and when the people would have their kiva ceremonies it would also rain. But at that time they had not so many Katcinas. There were only the Hopi Katcinas, which the Hopi brought with them from the under-world. They were very simple but very good. People at that time lived happily, but by this time the Popwaktu had increased at Palatkwapi. The one Powaka maiden that had come with these people from the under-world had taught others her evil arts. And so these wicked ones had increased very much until finally Palatkwapi was destroyed by a great water produced by the Balolookongs. Nearly all the people were destroyed, but a few succeeded in reaching dry land in the flood and they were saved.

They traveled northeastward and finally came to Mato'vi, and from there to Walpi. From Walpi they scattered to the different villages, teaching their evil arts to others. They would put sickness into the people so that the people contracted diseases and died. They also turned the Ute Indians and the Apache, who used to be friends of the Hopi, into their enemies, so that after that these tribes would make wars on the Hopi. They also caused contentions among the Hopi. The Navaho also used to be friends of the Hopi, but these Popwaktu would occasionally call the Ute and the Apache to make raids on the Hopi. They also turned the Navaho into our enemies, and then the White Men came and made demands of the Hopi. The White Men are also called here by these Popwaktu, and now the White Men are worrying the Hopi also.

But the Hopi are still looking towards their elder brother, the one that arrived at the sunrise first, and he is looking from there this way to the Hopi, watching and listening how they are getting along. Our old men and. ancestors (wu'wuyom) have said that some White Men would be coming to them, but they would not be the White Men like our elder brother, and they would be worrying us. They would ask for our children. They would ask us to have our heads washed (baptized), and if we would not do what they asked us they would

[p. 26]

beat us and trouble us and probably kill us. But we should not listen to them, we should continue to live like the Hopi. We should continue to use the food of the Hopi and wear the clothes of the Hopi. But those Popwaktu of the Hopi would help the White Men, and they would speak for the White Men, because they would also want to do just the same as those White Men would ask them to do. And now it has come to that, our forefathers have been prophesying that. We are now in trouble. Our children are taken away from us, and we are being harassed and worried.

Footnotes

^16:1 Told by Yukioma (Oraibi).

^16:2 Species of bird of a bluish black color.

^17:1 I have not been able to fully identify this bird, but from the description given me, believe it to be the humming-bird, though it may be the wren.

^20:1 This is the way the narrator stated it. The meaning is not quite clear but probably it refers to the belief of the Hopi that the souls of the dead remain in the grave three days, leaving the grave on the fourth day to travel to the skeleton house to live with the departed Hopi.

^21:1 A stew prepared of mutton, shelled corn, etc.

^22:1 A little stream, about fifty miles north-west of Oraibi.

^22:2 Said to refer to traces of fat found in the cavities of the cadaver of the bear when this party found the dead bear.

^23:1 The narrator says that this "writing" was effaced by Tuba, the Hopi chief who founded Tuba city, his wife Katcinmana, and others who wanted that land.

^23:2 About a mile north-west of Oraibi.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

5. THE ORIGIN OF SOME ORAIBI CLANS. [*1]

Away down the sipapu in the under-world the people lived in the same manner as they do here. The wife of the chief of the Bear clan often danced in the Butterfly dance (Polihtikivee), at which the chief got angry. The Spider clan had also a chief. The Bear chief sent the Po'okong to limit for them another life (katci) or world and see whether they could not get out. He was so angry at his wife's participating in the dance, fearing that she would be led astray, he wanted to go away and leave her.

Po'okong and his younger brother Balo'ongahoya went in search of another world, and when they returned, reported that there was an opening right above them. Po'okong had reached it by means of a reed on which he had spit and thus made it strong. The chief said, as they were still dancing (the Butterfly dance) they would move in four days. After four days they were still dancing, and the chief said to some one that he would not tell his wife anything, but try to find another wife. So he left, being accompanied by Po'okong and, Balo'ongahoya, the Polis still dancing wildly. They started and went out, Po'okong first, then Balo'ongahoya, then the Bear clan chief, who was followed by the Spider clan chief. Then the Bear clan people, the Spider clan people, and after them many other people came out. When many were out the Bear chief closed the opening. When they were out the chief said, ''Well, what now?" They were in the dark yet, the entrance, however, being closed. The chief sent the Eagle who flew around hunting an opening or light. H returned, and the chief asked: ''Taa um hin nawoti?" "Well, I found an opening and made it more light, but it is very hot high up yet. Send another one." So the chief sent the Buzzard (Wicoko). The latter ascended higher but got burned (hence he has no feathers on his head and wings), but he made it lighter, When he returned that chief said: "Thank

[p. 27.]

you. Well, now what? Now it is somewhat better. The sky has been opened somewhat more and it is much lighter." The question arose: Which way? The Bear clan spoke for the South, the Spider clan for the north, and the latter talking more and getting the greater crowd, the Spider clan went northward.

Footnotes

^26:1 Told by Wikvaya (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

a. THE SPIDER CLAN

This clan traveled northward. The chief first, the people following. After four nights they carne to a nice country, where the "North Old Man" (Kwinae Wuhtaka) lives. But it was cold there.

The chief decided that there they would stay. So the people were glad and began to plant corn, watermelon, melons, sweet corn, etc. The chief had brought with him the cult and altar of the Blue Flutes. When the corn began to grow the chief put up his altar, sang and fluted, but he did all that alone. So the corn, etc., grew nicely, but when it tasseled and the ears began to develop, it became cold and the crop was destroyed. "Ishohi!" (Oh!) the people exclaimed.

They tried it another year, but the same: thing was repeated in every respect. Again no crop. Another year it was tried, but now the corn only began to tassel, and the fourth year it was still very small when the frost killed it. Then there was dissatisfaction. "Ishohi! (Oh!) Our Father, you have spoken falsely, you said it was good here." So they all also started southward after the Bear People.

After the first night the chief said to his wife: "You bathe yourself." This she did (in warm water). Then she rubbed her body and collected the small scales which she had rubbed from her skin and handed them to her husband. He laid them on a blanket until there was a considerable quantity of them. He then wrapped this in a reed receptacle, sang over it and waved it four times, whereupon the scales turned into burros and rushed out. "What is that?" the people asked. "Those are burros," the chief said. So they were glad that now they would not have to carry everything themselves any longer, and the chief said that now they would move on towards the rising sun.

The chief and his wife repeated the same performance, but instead of burros, Spaniards came out. To them the chief said: You put supplies and your things on the burros and follow the other Hopi (that is, the Bear clan), and when you overtake them, kill them. So the Castilians went south, and the Spider people went south-east, following a Stream (Nono'pbaya, a rolling stream, because of the high recoiling waves). They came to a nice place where they stayed one

[p. 28]

year and planted and reaped a crop. From there they proceeded south-east, stopped another year at a certain place, where they again planted, but were harassed by enemies. They saved a portion of the crop and proceeding farther south-east they ascended a bluff or mesa, staying another year and planting in the valleys.

Thus they stopped in all at ten different places, but being constantly harassed by the people along the water, they never planted more than once. Finally they arrived where the sun rises and the Americans (Bahanas) live. With them they became friends; here they planted, their children learned the language a little, and they stayed there three years. They also here learned that the Bear clan had been there and had already gone westward again. The Spider people followed, arrived at Oraibi, where they found , the Bear clan, whom they joined. Their chief was then Machito. They also had the A'ototo and Aholi Katcinas.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

b. THE BEAR CLAN

This clan had gone south from the sipahpuni. They had with them the A'ototo Katcina. They soon found the Young Corn Ear (Pihk'ash) people with the Aholi Katcina, who wanted to join them. So the Bear clan chief took them along. They stopped at a place and here had a good crop because they had the two Katcinas with them. The next year they came to a clear stream. In all they stopped ten times before arriving at the Americans, where the sun rises. Here they stopped four years. Their children learned a little English. The land being scarce, the Americans told them to go west and hunt land for themselves, and if anybody would be bad to them (nukpana) and cause their children to die, they (the Americans) would come and cut the Nukapana's heads off. This was told them, because they (the Americans) had been told that down in the old home there had been Popwaktu (sorcerers, etc.). So they traveled westward, found the Pueblo, but no good land that they could get. So they finally arrived at Shongopavi, where some people lived, and there they settled down.

One time the people saw that the chief, Machito, held a sweet corn-ear between every two fingers, at the same time eating from the other hand. Corn was very scarce at that time, so the people spoke to him about his greediness, at which he got angry and left, taking with him the A'ototo and Aholi. Hunters later found them at a rock, now Bean Spreading Place (Bahpu-Moyanpi), where there is still a stone on which there is some writing called Machitutubeni. Machito left his wife at Shongopavi, also his people, who then formed

[p. 29]

the Shongopavi Bear clan. When the hunters found him they informed the people at Shongopavi.

Some went there to get them back, but Machito would not listen to them. Then his wife went to him but he would not listen to her either. So they left him. Machito took a big stone and went with them for some distance to make the landmark between Oraibi and Shongopavi. The people said several times: "Put it here." But he would not listen until arriving at a place called "Ocapchomo," where he placed it, thus making a landmark between the fields of the Shongopavi and his own.

Then Machito and the two Katcinas went up the Oraibi mesa where they remained. Later the Spider people arrived. Machito asked about their wanderings and they told him. He wanted to know why the corn would not grow although they had the Flute cult. The Spider clan chief accused the "North Old Man." Machito then said: "All right, you may live here, but as your cult does not seem to be effective, you watch the sun for me, and when he has arrived at his south limit, you tell me, and we shall have the Soyal ceremony. Also your pu'htavi does not seem to have been good, so I want you to make my kind of pu'htavi." [*1]

After the matter had been settled between Machito and the Spider clan chief, the latter's people came up. Among these were also the Lizard clan, to which the Sand clan is related. These names were given to people while wandering. One would find and see something, perhaps under peculiar circumstances, and he called after it. The Lizard people were also asked what they knew and when they said the Marau cult, they were also permitted to stay, but were requested to co-operate in the Soyal ceremony. For that reason Pungnanomsi, who is of the Bear clan, and village chief, now makes the puhu (road) in the night of the Marau ceremony from the natsi at the south end of the kiva towards the rising sun.

The Rattle-snake (Tcu'a) clan also came with the Spider clan to Oraibi, but it is not known how or where this clan became a part of the Spider clan, The Badger people understand medicines, hence they prepare the medicine--for instance, charm liquid--for the Flute, Snake, Marau, and other ceremonies.

Another Badger clan and the Butterfly (Powul) came from Kishi-wuu. These brought the Powamu and Katcina cult.

The Divided Spring (Batki) clan came from where the sun rises.

[p. 30]

They came to the village of Oraibi and arranged a contest at Muyiovatki where each planted corn, the Blue Flutes sweet corn, the others, Wupakao, over which they played the whole day. The sweet corn grew first, and so the Blue Flutes to this day go to the village in processions, etc., first closing the well (batni) on the plaza. Later the Drab Flutes (Masitalentu) had to throw their meal, mollas, etc., from a distance to the warrior (Kelehtaka) of the Cakwalalentu, who put them into the well in the booth for them.

Footnotes

^29:1 It is thought that this refers to the mutual celebrating of the Soyal ceremony, in which all are supposed yet to participate. Machito had brought the Soyal altar and cult with him. The Pihk'ash People had Aholi Katcina and the screen (Omawn) now used in the Soyal and the corn Ceremonies. The A'ototo has the water and rain.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

6. THE SNAKE MYTH. [*1]

At Tokoonavi, north of the Grand Canyon, lived people who were then not yet Snake people. They lived close to the bank of the river. The chief's son often pondered over the Grand Canyon and wondered where all that water went to. "That must certainly make it very full somewhere," he thought to himself. So he spoke to his father about it. ''So that is what you have been thinking about," the latter said. "Yes," his son answered, "I want to go and examine it." The father gave his consent and told his son that he should make a box for himself that would be large enough for him to get into, and he should arrange it so that all openings in the box could be closed. This the boy did, making also a long pole (according to others a long baho), with which he could push the box in case it became fast or tangled up anywhere.

When he was ready he took a lot of bahos and some food, went into the box, and allowed himself to be pushed into the water, on which he then floated along. Finally he came to the ocean, where he drifted against an island. He found the house of Spider Woman (Kohk'ang Wuhti) here, who called him to come to her house. He went over and found that he could not get through the opening leading to her house. "How shall I get in?" he said; "the opening is too small." She told him to enlarge it. This he did and then entered. He told her a story and gave her a baho, and said that he had come after beads, etc. She pointed to another kiva away out in the water and said that there were some beads and corals there. but that there were some wild animals guarding the path to it. "If you had not informed me, how could you have succeeded in getting there and how would you have gotten back? But I shall go with you," she said, "because you have given me a baho, for which I am very glad." She then gave the young man some medicine and seated herself behind his right ear. He spurted the medicine over the water and immediately a road like a rainbow was formed from the

[p. 31]

dwelling of Spider Woman to the other kiva. On this they went across the water. As they approached the kiva to which they were going they first encountered a panther, who growled fiercely. The young man gave him a green baho and spurted some medicine upon him, which quieted him. A little farther on they met a bear, whom they quieted in the same manner. Still farther on they came upon a wildcat, to which they also handed a baho, which quieted the animal. Hereupon they met a gray wolf, and finally a very large rattle-snake (K'ahtoya), both of which they appeased in the same manner as the others. They then arrived at the kiva, where they found at the entrance a bow standard (Aoat natsi). They then descended the ladder and found in the kiva many people who were dressed in blue kilts, had their faces painted with specular iron (yalahaii), and around their necks they wore many beads. The young man sat down near the fireplace, Spider Woman still being seated on his ear, but no one spoke. The men looked at him, but remained silent. Presently the chief got a large bag of tobacco and a large pipe. He filled the latter and smoked four times. He then handed the pipe to the young man and said: "Smoke and swallow the smoke." The swallowing of the smoke was a test: any one not being able to do that was driven off. Spider Woman had informed the young man about this test, so he was posted. When he commenced to smoke she whispered to him: "Put me behind you." This he did in an unobserved manner, so when he swallowed the smoke she immediately drew the smoke from him [*1] and blew it away, and hence he did not get dizzy. The men who did not observe the trick were pleased and said to him: ''All right, you are strong; you are certainly some one. Thank you. Your heart is good: you are one of us; you are our child." "Yes." he said, and handed them some red nakwakwosis and a single green baho with red points, such as are still made in Shupaulavi in the Antelope society.

They then became very friendly, saving that the were very happy over the bahos. On the walls of the kiva were hanging many costumes made of snake skins. Soon the chief said to the people: "Let us dress up now," and turning to the young man bid him to turn away so that he would not see what was going on. He did so, and when he looked back again the men had all dressed up in the snake costumes and had turned into snakes, large and small, bull-snakes, racers, and rattle-snakes, that were moving about on the floor hissing, rattling, etc. While he had turned away and the snake People had been dressing themselves, Spider Woman had whispered

[p. 32]

to him that they were now going to try him very hard, but that he should not be afraid to touch the snakes; and she gave him many instructions.

Among those present in the kiva had also been some pretty maidens who had also put on snake costumes and had turned into serpents. One of them had been particularly handsome. The chief had not turned into a snake, and was sitting near the fireplace. He now turned to the young man and said to him: "You go now and select and take one of these snakes." The snakes seemed to be very angry and the young man got frightened when they stared at him, but Spider Woman whispered to him not to be a coward, nor to be afraid.

The prettiest maiden had turned into a large yellow rattle-snake (Sik'a-tcua), and was especially angry. Spider Woman whispered to the young man, that the one that acted so very angrily was the pretty maiden and that he should try to take that one. He tried, but the snake was very wild and fierce. "Be not afraid," Spider Woman whispered, and handed him some medicine. This he secretly chewed and spurted a small quantity of it on the fierce snake, whereupon it immediately became docile. He at once grabbed it, held and stroked it four times upward, each time spurting a little medicine on it, and thus freeing it from its anger. The chief was astonished and said: "You are very something, thanks. Now, look away again." He did so and when he turned back he saw that all the snakes had assumed the forms of men and women again, including the maiden that he had captured. They now were all very good to him, and talked to him in the kindest manner, because they now considered him as initiated and as one of them. He was now welcome, and the chief invited him to eat. The mana whom the young man had taken got from another room in the kiva some bread made of fresh corn-meal, some peaches, melons, etc., and set this food before the young man. Spider Woman whispered to the young -man to give her something to eat too, which he did secretly. She enjoyed the food very much and was very happy.

Now the chief asked the man why he came, etc. "I hunt a lolomat katcit (good life) and was thinking about the water running this way, and so this way it runs. I have come also to get Hopi food from here. I also heard that there lives a woman here somewhere, the Huruing Wuhti, from whom I want beads." "What have you for her?" they asked. "These bahos," he said. "All right, you will get there. But now you sleep here." But Spider Woman wanted to get back. He told them that he wanted to go out a little while.

[p. 33]

went and took Spider Woman home, and put her down. She invited him to come and eat with her. She had a povo'lpik'i off which she lived and which never gave out, but he left her and returned to the Snake kiva, where he was welcomed and called brother and son-in-law (moo'nangwuu), although he had not yet married, but only caught the mana. So he remained there. That evening and night the chief told him all about the Snake cult, altar, etc., etc., and instructed him how he must put this up, and do that, when he would return. He did not sleep that night.

In the morning he again went out on the same excuse as the previous evening, and went to Spider Woman, who went out. She made a rainbow road into the ocean to a high bluff where Huruing Wuhti lived, and to which they ascended on a ladder. They went in and found an old hag, but on all the walls many beads, shells, etc. The woman said nothing. The young man gave her the bahos, then she, said faintly, "Askwali!" (Thanks!) At sundown she went into a side chamber and returned a very pretty maiden with fine buffalo and wildcat robes, of which she made a bed, and after having fed him, invited him to sleep with her on the bed. Then Spider Woman ,whispered he should comply with her request, then he would win her favor and get the beads. So he did as requested.

In the morning he awoke and found by his side an old hag, snoring. He was very unhappy, He stayed all day, the hag sitting bent up all day. In the evening the change, etc., that occurred on the previous day was repeated, but the hag after this remained a pretty maiden. He remained four days and nights with Huruing Wuhti, who is the deity of the hard substances. After four days he wanted to go home, so she went into a room on the north side and got a turquoise bead; then from a room west the same: from a room South a reddish bead (catsni); from one east, a hard white bead (huruingwa), a shell. Then she gave him a few of all kinds of beads and told him to go home now, but charging him not to open the sack, because if he did they would be gone, and if he did not they would increase. "You go to the Snakes, who will give you clothes, food, etc."

He then returned to the Snake kiva. There he staved four days and four nights, sleeping with his wife. When he was ready to go home the chief said: "Take this mana with you. You have won us. Take it all with you, take of our food. Practice the ceremonies there that I told you about. This woman will bear you children and then you will be many and they will hold this ceremony for you." So they started. At Spider Woman's house he told his wife, ''You stay

[p. 34]

here. I will go to the rear." So he went to Spider Woman's house and she asked: ''Well, did you get the mana?" "Yes," he said. "Well, you take everything along." But she forbid him to touch his wife while they would be on the way, as then his beads would disappear and also his wife.

So they started. The beads were as yet not heavy. During the night they slept separately. In the morning they found that the beads had increased, and they kept increasing as they went along the next day. The next night they spent in the same way. They were anxious to see whether the beads and shells had increased, but did not dare to do so. The third night was again spent, and the contents of the bag increased the same as the previous two nights. The bag with the beads and shells now became very heavy and the young man was very anxious to see them, but his wife forbade him to open the sack. The fourth night was spent in the same manner, and when they arose in the morning the sack was nearly full and was very heavy. Spider Woman had also put some strings into the bag with the beads, and the beads were strung onto these strings a,; they kept increasing.

They now approached the home of the young man, and the latter was very anxious to get home in order to see the contents, of the sack, so they traveled on. [*1] When they had nearly one more day's travel to make the sack had become full. During the last night the man opened the sack, although his wife remonstrated most energetically. He took out many of the finest beads and shells and spread them on the floor before them, put them around his neck, and was very happy. So they retired for the night. In the morning they found that all the beads except those which Huruing Wuhti had given to the man had disappeared. Hence the Hopi have so few beads at the present day. If that man had at that time brought home with him all the beads which he had, they would have many. So when they arrived at home they were very despondent.

At that time only the Divided or Separated Spring (Batki) clan and the Po'na (a certain cactus) clan lived at that place, but with the arrival of this young couple a new clan, the Snake clan, had come to the village. Soon this new woman bore many children. They were snakes who lived in the fields and in the sand. They grew very rapidly and went about and played with the Hopi children, whom they sometimes bit. This made the Hopi very angry and they said: "This is not good," and drove them off, so they were very unhappy.

[p. 35]

The woman said to her husband: "You take our children back to my home and there we shall go away from here alone." Then the man's father made bahos, gave them to his son, who put all the snakes with the bahos into his blanket and took them back to his wife's home, and there told the Snake people why he brought their children and the bahos. They said it was all right. Hence the Snake priests, when carrying away the snakes from the plaza after the snake dance, take with them and deposit with the snakes some bahos, so that they should not themselves return to the village.

When the Snake man returned to his village lit and his wife traveled south-eastward, stopping at various places. All at once they saw smoke in the distance, and when they went there they found a village perched son the mesa. This was the village of Walpi. They at once went to the foot of the mesa on which Walpi was situated and announced their presence. So the village chief went down to them from the mesa, and asked what they wanted. They asked to be admitted to the village, promising that they would assist the people in the ceremonies. The chief at first showed himself unwilling to admit then), but finally gave his consent and took them up to the village. From that time the woman bore human children instead of little snakes. These children and their descendants became the Snake clan, of whom only very few are now living.

Soon also the Batki and Po'na clan came to Walpi and found admittance to the village. At Walpi the Snake people made the first Snake tiponi, Snake altar, etc., and had the first Snake ceremony. From here the Snake cult spread to the other villages, first to Shongopavi, then to Mishongnovi, and then to Oraibi. At the first Snake ceremony the Snake chief sent his nephew to the north, to the west, to the south, and to the east to hunt snakes. He brought some from each direction, The chief then hollowed out a piece of baho, made of cottonwood root. Into this he put the rattles of three of the snakes and the fourth snake entirely. He then inserted into it a corn-ear, and tied to it different feathers of the eagle, the oriole, blue-bird, parrot, magpie, Asya, and topockwa, winding a buckskin String around these feathers. When he had made this tiponi, the first ceremony was celebrated, and afterwards it took place regularly,

Footnotes

^30:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

^31:1 Through the rectum.

^34:1 The woman was pregnant--"quickly, like snakes." The man wanted to cohabit with her but she forbade him.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

7. THE SNAKE MYTH. [*1]

At Wu'hkok'ieqo the Pihk'ash and Kokop clans. The old men often wondered where the Colorado River was flowing. So they built a box, put provisions in, and a pole to push and guide the box with

[p. 36]

when it got fast. They made also four bahos, put them and a young man into the box, and sent the box off floating down the river.

After a while the box would go no farther, and so the young man got out. He saw water everywhere. In the midst of it was a house. But how should he get there? Presently Huruing Wuhti came out there and called him four times. Then he consented to go to her. She rolled a corn-meal ball across the water, which made a road. On this he went to her house. In the evening Huruing Wuhti sent him into a side room saying that something was coming. It was the Sun. He was sitting on a disk attached to a pole like a spindle and made a great noise. He was dressed like some Katcinas (Powamu and others) and nicely painted up with fine sik'ahpik'i. Her house is open below. He came in and assorted the bahos that had been offered to him on his course around the earth. Those offered by the bad people were thrown away; those from the good people were put in a row. He then came into Huruing Wuhti's house and bathed his body. After his bath he ate some hurushik'i, oongawi, etc. When he was through eating he put on his paint and clothes again, went down into his house and under the earth to the east and west on his course again. During this course eastward the people below the earth see him there. In the east he goes down in his house. Hence, the bahos offered to the Sun are carried eastward to the Sun Shrines of the Sun clan (tawa kihus). There east lived also "Flutes" (La'lentu), who are always playing and then the sun rises. For that reason at the Flute ceremony the gray fox skin (la'tayo natsi) is put up at the white dawn (qoyangwunuptu), then the yellow fox skin (sikahtayo natsi) at the yellow dawn (sik'angwunuptu).

Then the Sun there lays off his clothes again, bathes his body, is fed by the Sun clan (Tawa-namu), arrays himself again, mounts a bluff (chochokpi), and again proceeds on his course gathering the bahos, etc., that are offered to him as he sweeps westward.

Footnotes

^35:1 Told by Sik'anakpu (Mishongnovi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

8. THE WANDERINGS OF THE BEAR CLAN (HON-NAMU). [*1]

After we had left the sipahpuni the Bear people separated and went ahead of the others. [*2] First they came somewhere near the present

[p. 37]

site of Phoenix, and stayed there awhile. They remained for or shorter or longer periods at many different places. Finally they came to the Little Colorado River, and about there it was where they assumed the clan name, but just exactly where the place was nobody can tell. Their forefathers say that the party once came upon a dead bear that they looked at, and from that they were called forever afterwards the Bear clan. Another party that traveled with them took the hide of the bear, of which the hair had already been removed by little animals (Mu'yi. Pl. Mu'mutyu), who use hair or wool for their nests or burrows. These people took the skin and cut from it carrying straps (piqo'sha), from which they were called Piqo'sha clan. Another party came upon the bear at just this time and were called Mu'yi clan, after the small mice mentioned before. These three clans arrived there just about the same time, and hence are considered as closely related to one another.

Shortly after another party passed by and found many blue-birds sitting upon the cadaver eating from it; so they were called the Bluebird clan (Chorzh-namu). Still later another party, came upon the scene and found the remains of the cadaver full of spider web, so this party was called Spider (Kohk'ang) clan. By and by a sixth migrating party came along. By this time the bones of the bear were bleached already. They took the skull, tied yucca leaves to it and carried it along as a drinking vessel in the manner in which the chief's or priest's jugs (mongwikurus) are carried at the present time, and from this. that party was called the jug (Wikurzh) clan. [*1] Finally a seventh party came along and found the place where the bear had been killed swarming with ants, so they were called the Ant (An-namu) clan.

These seven clans have derived their names from the same origin, and are now considered as being related to one another. The Bear clan is also said to have halted at various places along the Little Colorado River. From there they moved eastward, stopping for some time at a place called Badger Spring (Honanva). [*2]

From this place they again moved eastward, stopped at a place called Makwutavi, and from here they finally moved to Mato'vi, a large spring a number of miles south of Shongopavi. At this place they also remained for a considerable length of time, but finally they moved northward to the present site of Shongopavi, where they

[p. 38]

remained. They being the first to arrive at this place, they have ever since considered themselves to be the leading clan in the village, the village chief having also been chosen from their clan. A few persons of the Bear clan moved from here to Oraibi, where the chieftainship of the so-called Liberal or Friendly faction is still held by that clan, the Conservative or Hostile faction of that village selecting their chief from the Spider clan. Two of this clan moved to the villages of Shupaulavi and Mishongnovi, where the office of the village chief has also remained in this clan to the present day.

The Bear clan brought with them the altar paraphernalia, song, etc., of the Blue Flute cult. When they stopped and planted anywhere they would perform the Blue Flute ceremony and sing the songs, and their crop would then grow and mature very quickly, so that they would have something to eat. They also brought with them the Hu Katcina, the Bear (Hon) Katcina, the A'ototo [*1] Natacka, his wife Cooyok Wuhti, and finally the Cooyoko Tahaam. [*2]

Later on other clan and migrating parties arrived at Shongopavi asking of the Bear clan admission to the village. If proper arrangements could be made with the Bear clan they remained; if not, they moved on. Many of the large and small ruins with which the country is covered date back to the time of the migration of these different clans, showing the places where they made stays of shorter or longer duration.

Footnotes

^36:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

^36:2 The Hopi agree in their different tales that after leaving the sipahpuni, not only the different nationalities scattered and took different routes towards the East, but also those people whom they considered their forefathers, scattered and traveled eastward in smaller and larger bodies. They stopped at various places for shorter or longer periods, and it was in these wanderings that the different clans were created, and it is by reason of this separation and of the traveling eastward of the different bodies by different routes, that the traditions and tales of the different clans vary so considerably from each other. The following is a tale of the experiences of the Bear clan as given by one of the principal men in Shupaulavi, a member of different secret orders, and one of the best story tellers and singers.

^37:1 According to others Wikorzh from wihu, fat, and koro, cavity, because they say the eyes in the cadaver had disappeared from their cavities, some dried fat or fatty meat still adhering to the socket walls. This latter explanation is very likely correct. Compare tale No. 9.

^37:2 My informant was unable to explain why this spring was called by that name and not after Bear Clan.

^38:1 Meaning obscure but perhaps referring to the rattle with the antelope scapulas.

^38:2 The meaning of these last three names is also obscure. Lomavantiwa claims that he has information as to whether these Katcinas performed any dances or rites while the clan was still migrating. He says that his information about Katcinas, dances, etc., only dates back to the time when they already lived in the villages and the Katcina clans came.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

9. THE WANDERINGS OF THE SPIDER CLAN (KOHK'ANG-NAMU). [*3]

In the under-world many people became very bad. They had many contentions, and began to kill the people and also killed the chief's son; so the chief concluded that they would move away from there. But the question was, how to get out?' So he sent the Motsni to find a place where they could get out. He flew up and found an opening, and came back and reported the same to the chief. So the Village Chief (Kik-mongwi) and the Crier Chief (Chaak-mongwi) planted a pine (calavi), which grew up very fast, but did not quite reach the opening. They then planted a reed (bakavi) which also grew up fast and reached through the opening. On this reed they climbed till, first the Horn people (Aaltu), who then stood outside and held the protruding part of the reed or ladder. Many people then followed.

[p. 39]

The Mocking-bird (Yahpa) was sitting outside and distributed the languages to the People. As they were climbing up one of them dropped one of his moccasins. Below the Hopi had pretty moccasins, but as this moccasin was dropped and the man had to make another one, and could not make it as nicely as the other one had been, the Hopi now have not very nice moccasins. The people had not yet all come out when the chief stopped them and closed up the opening, but one of the sorcerers (Popwaktu) had also come out.

From here the people now started on different routes, the White Man taking the most southern route. All the other people took different routes further north. The 'Hopi brought with them Mu'yingwu, whose body consisted entirely of corn, his feet being ears of corn, so that he could not move very fast. The Hopi were to have the horse, but as they tried to ride him they could not do so, as they did not put any bridle on him; so the Navaho, wearing a band around their head, tried it and they could ride him. The two matched together better for that reason because they also bridled the pony, probably with yucca leaves.

They had not gone very far when the chief's son took sick and died. They thought that the sorcerer who was with them had killed him, but the latter said: "Nobody has died, he is not dead; just go and look down into the opening through which we came. He is down there." So the chief went and looked down there, and beheld his child walking about in the other world. So they took the Powaku with them. He said that hereafter no one would be really dead, but the people who would die would simply go back to the lower world. After they had travelled for some time, just how long tradition does not say, the Coyote who had carried the stars in his hand, and was traveling with the Hopi people, threw the stars into the sky so that from that time it was somewhat light during the night.

The White People had taken with them the Spider which was very skillful, so that when they had traveled some distance the Spider rubbed some scales from her skin, and from these created burros. These the White Men afterwards used for carrying their burdens. So they got along faster and reached the place where the sun rises first. When they arrived there a star arose in the south, which told the other migrating people that some one had arrived at the sunrise. This was a signal that they had agreed upon before starting. This star is said to have influence over the animals, and the old people say that whoever wants to own a horse, cattle, sheep, etc., should pray to this star, which the Hopi are doing to this day.

So the people traveled on. All at once one party came upon a

[p. 40]

bear that had died there. They were called the Bear (Honawu) clan. Right after them came another party, who cut straps from the skin of the bear and were called Piqosha clan, the name given by the Hopi to this peculiar strap. Another party followed and found the cadaver covered with spider web, from which they were called Spider (Kohk'ang) clan. A fourth party found blue-birds sitting on the cadaver and they were called the Blue-bird (Choro) clan. A fifth party found that maggots had eaten out the eyes, leaving the cavities bare with a little fat still attached to the bone. From this they were called Fat Cavity clan (Wikorzh-namu). A sixth migrating party came upon the scene and found that a mole had dug his way up under the place where the cadaver had been lying, and hence they were called Mole (Mu'yi) clan. [*1] Here the parties who had thus received their clan names soon separated, and the Spider clan after this wandered about and stopped at various places for a long time. The other clans did the same, living shorter or longer periods at one place, which accounts for the many smaller and larger ruins with which the country is covered.

Finally the Spider clan arrived at a spring (about four miles north of the present village sites of Mishongnovi and Shupaulavi) called Homiqopu. Here they remained for some time, there still being ruins at that place. From here this clan moved to a place about a mile northeast of Shupaulavi, called Chukuvi. At the foot of the mesa on which this village was situated was a very large spring. The Squash (Batanga) clan then ruled in this village, the chief belonging to that clan. The Sand (Tuwa) clan was also one of the clans being numerous in the village at that time. The inhabitants of the different villages were often harassed by enemies, among them the Utes and Apache. It seems that even the inhabitants of the different villages often made raids on each other. For this reason the inhabitants of Chukuvi and those of old Mishongnovi, which was situated, however, west of its present location, way down the mesa, moved on the mesa and built the present village of Mishongnovi.

In Mishongnovi the Blue-bird clan was then in charge of the village, the chief belonging to that clan, but it seems that this clan, shared the chieftainship with the following clans, which furnished the Kik-mongwi, the Village Chief, in the order named, for four year,

[p. 41]

a new chief being elected every four years: After the Blue-bird clan followed the Bear clan, then the Batki clan, and lastly, the Squash clan, The Sand clan, having lived in the village of Chukuvi, is said to have moved to Oraibi, east of which village they had had fields while they were still living at Chukuvi. At the time when the people lived at Chukuvi, Shupaulavi was also inhabited, but it seems that the people then, too, lived farther down, probably at the so-called First Ledge, but when Mishongnovi was built the people of Shupaulavi also moved on to the top of the mesa.

Footnotes

^38:3 Told by Tawiima (Mishongnovi).

^40:1 Traditions with regard to the clans having received their names on this occasion vary somewhat. While some say the name of the Wikurzh-namu is derived from a netted gourd (wikuru), others, as in this tale, derived the name from wikoro, as explained in the text. Furthermore, the order of the clans having received their names here somewhat differs in the different tales; and lastly some also mentioned an Ant clan as the last one having obtained its name. Cf. tale No, 3, "The Wanderings of the Bear Clan."

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

10. THE ORIGIN OF THE YAYAATU SOCIETY. [*1]

Ishyaoi! In Oraibi they were living. In the home of the Reed clan lived the Yayaa-mongwi. This Fraternity has now died out, but its altar paraphernalia are still kept in the house. A long time ago a man and his wife had one little boy. Some children of the village would often visit this boy. They were lazy, though their parents often told them to work, and get wood, herd sheep, etc. They would not listen, but often assembled at this house where they would prepare some food in the corners in front of the house, having stolen the food in the village. In a corner in front of the house they would build their fire, The wood they stole from the different houses in the village. So the men in the village were very angry at them and so were the mothers of these children. "You are lazy," they often told them. "You do not want to work, and we are not going to feed you." So they would go and steal some food in the houses and eat that.

One time the priest's son suggested to the others: "Let us go and get some wood ourselves. Some one go and steal a hide strap (piqo'sha) somewhere." So after they had eaten they went through the village and gathered up piqo'shas of different lengths and returned. They left the village on the east, drank at K'eqo'chmovi, and then went farther east and gathered some dry brush in the valley. After they had all gathered their bundles the priest's son said: "Are you all done?" "Yes,'' they said. "All right, then let us go home now," he said. But just when they were ready to start a Hawk in the form of a man carne upon them. He wore many strands of beads around his neck and had a black line painted with specular iron running over his nose down to the cheeks. The hair of all of the children was very much disheveled, so he laughed at them. "Are you getting wood?" he said. "Yes," they replied, and he again laughed at them.

[p. 42]

His kiva was close by. "You come in here," he said to the children, so they went in. It was a kiva just like those in the village. He invited them to sit down on the banquette that ran along the wall, so they sat down. He then took a seat near the fire-place, filled a pipe and took two puffs from it. He then said to the children that they should take a seat near the fireplace, too. He handed the pipe first to the priest's son, who smoked, addressing the man as "My father" (Inaa), which pleased the man very much. All then smoked, one after another, all exchanging terms of relationship, the older ones addressing the younger ones, "My younger brother," and the younger ones the older ones as "My older brother." He then said to them that they should remain, as he was going to feed them, and after having eaten they might go home.

Hereupon he went into another room and brought back a large roll of qo'mi (a bread made of the meal of roasted sweet corn-ears) which he fed to them. After they had eaten he went into another chamber and brought forth a large roll of kilts, eagle wing feathers (kwavok'i), ear pendants, eagle breath feathers, to be tied into the hair, beads, etc., and handed all these to the children. Hereupon he dressed up all the boys, tying the kilts behind. He then handed an eagle feather to each one and directed them to stand in a line. Hereupon Kish Taka, the Hawk-man, took a mo'chapu, which is a native cloth or owa, wrapped it up, and holding it under his left arm, took a stand at the south end of the line, saving to the youths: "Now then, whatever you see me do, you do the same." Hereupon he commenced to go around the kiva crying, "Ow" (long drawn). They went around in a circle in the kiva four times emitting the same sounds at short intervals. Hereupon he went up the ladder, the youths following him. Outside he again told them to do as they would see him do. He jumped off the kiva, ran about through the brush, the youths always following him and all constantly saying. "Ow, ow." Suddenly he threw down the mo'chapu, spreading it on the ground, grabbed the priest's son, threw him on the cloth, and then asked the other youths to take a hold of the cloth at different places and in this way they carried the priest's son to the kiva, throwing him through the opening into the kiva.

Hereupon they waited, and in a little while the youth came out of the kiva again, unharmed. Hereupon he grabbed another of the youths and they threw him down, and in this same manner every one was thrown into the kiva and came out unharmed. Then the Hawk-man went into the kiva, being followed by all of the youths. He was called the uncle of the youths. After they had entered the kiva

[p. 43]

he drew aside a curtain from one of the inner chambers and in the room behind the curtain were four round ovens (koici) dug into the earth, in which an old woman kept up a fire. The Hawk-man then grabbed the priest's son, threw him into one of the ovens, the old woman spurting some medicine on him as he fell in. Hereupon the other youths were thrown into the ovens. As soon as the costumes were burned off the bodies, the Hawk-man took them out again and placed all the, bodies north of the fireplace in the kiva, and covered them with the aforementioned piece of native cloth. When this was done he sat down and sang a song over the bodies. Soon the bodies under the cloth began to move and the priest's son was the first to come out, the others following soon, all now being alive again.

Hereupon he told them to sit down on the banquette on the west side of the kiva. The old woman now came out and washed the heads of the youths, giving a perfect white ear of corn (chochmingwuu) to each one. The Hawk hereupon addressed them, saying: "Thanks, that you are now done. You are now prepared. You can go home now. Take your wood to the Blue Flute (Cakwalanvi) kiva, and enter that kiva and remain there. Do not go into the houses to get something to eat, but wait for me there. After sundown I shall come to you." Hereupon he handed an eagle wing feather (kwavok'i) to the priest's son, whereupon the youths left.

When they came with their bundles of wood to the Blue Flute kiva the people saw them and said: "Aha! the lazy boys have gotten their own wood. Now maybe they will not steal any more." When they had put down their wood, they ran to the houses where they had gotten the burden straps and threw them on and into the houses, without, however, entering them. They all returned to the kiva at once without having partaken of any food. The sun had now gone down. They waited awhile and after the evening dawn had disappeared and it was quite dark they heard somebody come. It was the Hawk, in whose kiva they had been, and he at once entered the kiva. "Are you all sitting here?" the Hawk asked. "Yes, we are all here. Sit down," the youths replied. So the Hawk took a seat near the fireplace and at once filled a pipe and they all smoked.

The Hawk had brought with him a small bowl and some kwiptoci (meal from white corn that has first been soaked and then popped). Of this meal he made a gruel in the bowl, which he fed to the youths.

He then told them that they should not go home, but early in the morning some of them should take a seat in the north end of the kiva and the others in the south end of the kiva. The first should be fire jumpers (Tovuchochoyanik'am) and also Yayaatus. The others

[p. 44]

should be the singers (Tataok'am). Between the two parties he sprinkled a meal line on the floor of the kiva. One he selected to act as watchman. He should keep up the fires at the fireplace and keep out intruders. He told them that they should remain in a sitting posture in the kiva all of the next day and that they should fast all day. In the evening he would return and feed them again. Thus they were assembled here in the kiva, and each one had his "mother" (his white corn-ear) standing against the wall by his side. The people were wondering the next day why the little thieves, as they called them, were not coming out to hunt something to eat. Finally one of the women approached the kiva, looked in, and saw them sitting in an erect posture. "Oh," she said to the people, "they are assembled (yu'ngiota) in there."

They remained in this way in the kiva for four days, their uncle coming every night to feed them and look after them. Early in the morning after the fourth clay he washed their heads. The following day it was Totokya (a name always applied to the day preceding a ceremony). In the evening of this day the Hawk-man brought with him the costumes for the youths, consisting of kilts, beads, eagle feathers, twisted yarn (naalongmurukpu), ear pendants, ankle bands, and also some yellow paint (sik'ahpik'i). All these he placed on the floor north of the fireplace. During the night the youth who had been watching the fireplace in the kiva dug four ovens on the plaza south-west of the kiva, while the others buried a long cotton string in the ground on the same plaza. They also stretched long strings along the houses of the village, pasting them to the walls with qo'mi dough. Early in the morning the watcher of the kiva went around through the village begging for some wood. With this he heated the four ovens on the plaza. The people wondered what he was going to do, some suggesting that perhaps he was going to bake some pikami (a food prepared in small ovens outside of the houses for festal occasions).

While this youth was beating the ovens the Hawk dressed up all the others in the kiva. He painted a wide yellow band from shoulder to shoulder running down over the chest; the lower arms and lower legs he also painted yellow, and a yellow ring around the abdomen. Their faces he covered with corn-pollen. They had many strands of beads and also some strands of the twisted yarn consisting of dark blue and brownish red yarn. Large bunches of eagle feathers were tied to the top of their heads, and an eagle tale feather was tied on each side of their head in such a manner that their points extended backward. From these tail feathers were also

[p. 45]

suspended strands of the twisted yarn. Old Hopi Women's belts were tied over the kilts. Strands of the same yarn were tied around their wrists.

At about noon the singers came out first, each one throwing a pinch of sacred meal towards the sun. The Hawk-man and the old woman remained in the kiva. As soon as the singers had emerged from the kiva they went with long strides to the plaza (the same where now the Snake dance takes place) where they lined up and sang.

As soon as they had formed in line the Yayaatu also emerged from the kiva and went to the plaza with long strides, the priest's son carrying this time the mochapu which the Hawk-man had used when initiating the youths. While the first party continued singing, the Yayaatu rummaged through the village, ascending the roofs of the houses, jumping onto the people, tearing up and throwing down chimneys, taking hold of children and people and swinging them over the edge of the roof and threatening to throw them down, etc. The people got very angry at them and beat them with sticks, so they finally returned to the plaza. Arriving there, the priest's son, now the leading priest of this order, banding the mochapu to one of the others, jumped into one of the ovens. The others drew him out dead, wrapped him up in the mochapu, took him to the kiva and threw him into it. Here he was at once resuscitated by the Hawk-man and the old woman and came up apparently unharmed, having on again the same costume as the one that had been burned off his body in the oven. While this was going on, others had jumped into the various ovens and were drawn out immediately, thrown into the kiva, and treated the same way.

By this time the parents and relatives of these youths became very much alarmed and began to cry and complain that their children were killed that way, but the young man that had been watching the kiva told them not to come near, saying that they were going to have a dance yet. After they were through with this performance, their leader went into the kiva and brought out a mochapu, in which he had something wrapped up. This he placed on the ground on the plaza and all the Yayaatu crowded around this bundle. Covering another large mochapu over them, they occupied themselves for a short time with the bundle. They then threw off the covering and standing in a circle around the bundle they sang. In a little while they opened the bundle and there were many fine, large watermelons in it. Leaving these watermelons on the plaza, the leader again went Into the kiva, brought out another bundle, over and around which they went through the same performance. Uncovering this bundle

[p. 46]

a great many little cotton-tail rabbits jumped up, which they distributed. among the children. The singers kept up their singing during all these performances.

The Yayaatu now all entered the kiva. Soon they came out again, some hunting and uncovering the strings that they had buried and attached to the houses. Others that followed them wound the strings up on balls. Whenever one string was found and wound up, another one was hunted and wound, so they all went through the village hunting and winding the strings that they had buried. Suddenly they all proceeded to the house of the Cotton-tall Rabbit clan (Tab-namu), where Homihoiniwa and his family now live, and here one of the strings ran into a water-jug. This they lifted up without drawing the string out, and carried it also to the plaza where they split it in two. It was found that on the inside a cloud symbol was painted in each half jug. They lifted up the two parts of the jug and showed the cloud symbols to the people. Hereupon they covered up the two parts, sang over them, and when they took the covering off the jug was whole again as before, whereupon they returned it to the house.

The leader once more went into the kiva and came back with a bowl containing some diluted white kaolin (dumakuyi). This they took to the top of the Marau kiva, which is so situated that from it a long high bluff, which is called Canavitoika, can be plainly seen in the distance (probably eight or ten miles to the west). The Yayaatu now gathered around the bowl and putting eagle feathers into the white kaolin they moved them up and down in the air, as if whitewashing that distant bluff, and behold, the bluff, though far away, at once assumed a white color. All the people could plainly see that it was being whitewashed, though it is far away. Hereupon they returned to the plaza. the singers now stopping their singing. They cut up the watermelons and distributed slices. All then entered the kiva again, the mothers and the relatives of these youths now crowding towards this kiva wanting to get their children. The watcher of the kiva kept them back, saying, however, that they had not yet been discharmed.

When they had all entered the kiva the Hawk-man discharmed them and then set no'ekwiwi and white piki before them, saying: "Now eat and then you sleep in the kiva one night. In the morning when your people come for you you can go with them." In the evening the mothers again came and clamored for their children, but the youth, that was watching the kiva, told them to go home, as they were going to sleep there one night. The Hawk-man and the old

[p. 47]

woman then wrapped up all the costumes and other paraphernalia returned to their kiva in the valley east of the village. Only the corn-ear mothers they left for each one. In the morning the youths all went to their homes, and after that they were no longer bad and dangerous. They formed the Yayaatu Society and directed their prayers towards the place where their uncle, the Hawk-man, lived, and where they had been initiated.

Footnotes

^41:1 Told by Wikvaya (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

11. THE ORIGIN OF SOME MISHONGNOVI CLANS. [*1]

The Batki clan and the Sand clan come from Palatkwapi. When traveling, the Sand clan would spread sand [*2] on the ground and plant corn. The Batki clan would cause it to thunder and rain (by singing), the crop would grow in a day and they would have something to eat. At Homolovi (Winslow) they lived a long time. They brought with them the Soyal cult, the Lagon cult, and the Soyal Katcina. They went to Aoatovi. Here they were not welcome, and hence moved on to Mishongnovi, where they found the Bear, Parrot and Crow clans. They were asked what they knew to produce rain and crops. They spread the sand, made corn grow, etc., whereupon they were welcomed and their leader was made the chief of the village.

The spring Toriva was then very small. But the Batki-namu had brought from the Little Colorado River mud, grass, and water in a mongwikuru. This they put into the spring and that increased the flow of the water, and there was also much grass around it formerly, when there were fewer burros than there are now. The Bear clan had the Antelope cult, the Parrot and the Crow clans the Blue Flute cult. The Crane and the Eagle clans had the position of the village crier, and the Drab Flute cult. The Batki were admitted to the Antelope and Blue Flute Fraternities, and hence Sik'anakpu makes the cloud symbols in the ceremony of the Blue Flute society.

After that the Young Corn-Ear (Pihk'ash) or Corn-Ear (Kao') clan came from the east, from the Pueblo, Sik'anakpu thinks. According to Sik'anakpu the earlier clans came to Mishongnovi as follows:

The Parrot and Crow clans, who had the Blue Flute cult and the village chief.

The Bear clan, who brought the Antelope altar now used in the Snake ceremony.

[p. 48]

The Crane and Eagle clan brought the Drab Flute and Marau cult, and had the village crier.

The Katcina clan, with the Katcinas.

The Sand clan, with the Lagon, Soyal, and Snake cult.

The Batki clan. These had no cult, but controlled the water.

The Young Corn-Ear clan. These had no special cult, but brought a better quality of corn.

Before the Batki people came, the corn was very small. They made it rain and so it grew large. The Pihk'ash clan brought better and larger corn with them.

Footnotes

^47:1 Told by Sik'anakpu (Mishongnovi).

^47:2 He says the lizards and snakes would come into the sand, and hence these names are also applied to the Sand clan.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

12. THE DESTRUCTION OF PALATKWAPI. [*1]

After all the people, except the Zunis, had come out from the underworld through the sipahpuni, they remained for some time with Skeleton (Masauwuu) (see Story No. 3). When they were traveling eastward from here on different routes, and in different sections and parties, a large party came to a place called Palatkwapi, somewhere south-east of Flagstaff, in southern Arizona. Among these were the Divided Water clan (Batki-namu). [*2]

So these people had their clan name before they arrived at the above -mentioned place, but with them a great many other people stopped at Palatkwapi. Here they remained for a long time, for the truth of which statement the extensive ruins at that place are proof. The name seems to be derived from a high bluff of red stone. The people, especially the young men, here became very bad. They ill-treated the people sometimes in a disgraceful manner. [*3] One time a young man again shamefully mistreated an old man, who then became very angry. This old man belonged to the Batki clan. He went and reported the same to the village chief (Kik-mongwi), crier chief (Chaak-mongwi) and the warrior chief (Kalehtak-mongwi), so they assembled in the old man's house and asked him what was the matter, why he had called them. "Yes," the old man answered, "these young men here are very bad, they treat one very mean when one goes to the rear, and I am angry at them, so I called you here to tell you about it, what you think about it." So they talked the matter over and the village chief said: "We shall move away from here." So he called his son and told him: "You run to a distant place, Pine Ridge

[p. 49]

(Loqo'nmuru). [*1] So the young man ran and when he came back his father asked him: "How is it now, are you strong?" "Yes," the son replied, "my legs are strong now." "All right," the father said. Both of them were sorcerers (Powaka), bad men.

Hereupon the father dressed four masks for him: the mask of the Yahponcha, the La'nang Katcina, Aha Katcina (Oraibi: Kuruwa), and the Katcin-mana. The first resembles that of Skeleton (Masauwuu), only it had small bunches of hair on each side and in front. All these masks the young man put on his head, first that of the Mana, secondly the La'nang Katcina mask, thirdly the Aha mask, and lastly that of the Yahponcha. The father had dressed them during the night. He then strung a number of fingers which he had cut off of old dry corpses, and tied them to both of his son's wrists as rattles. He furthermore prepared a long cedar-bark fuse which he handed to the young man. After he had thus dressed his son, the chief said: "Now you run back to Pine Ridge and set the pine timber there on fire, then you come back here." The son did as he had been told and coming back he climbed up to the house of his father. He now acted as a Ghost (dualangwu). The people had not noticed his going or coming. After he had arrived in the house he ground corn on his sister's small mealing stone. While he was grinding he sang: "Tu'tawunaha! tu'tawunaha!" [*2] Hereupon he left the house and again ran away and set other timbers on fire.

The next night he returned, again ground a little corn, and departed, This time the people became suspicious, and when they assembled in their kivas in the morning they inquired who had been about. They said: "Some one had gone into the house of the chief and ran away again," and they requested some young men to hide away the next night and watch. By this time several fires could be seen in the distant timbers. The next night a number of young men watched, hiding away at the different corners of the village, and one also in the recess of the plaza. During the night the Powaka again lighted several fires in the timbers and came rushing into the village. When he arrived there his fuse had gone out, but they saw him enter into the village and ascend into the house of the village chief, where they heard him grinding and singing again. He again immediately left the house and passed one of the watchers, the latter jumping up, but the ghost dashed by, springing across the plaza, where the watcher became so scared that he did not make himself known, but remained in a crouching position, So he dashed away and lighted other fires.

[p. 50]

In the morning they talked the matter over in. the kivas, saying to the watchers: "You are of no account. Next night we shall watch again, many of us." They agreed that they would watch at different places, one also taking a position on the path that led down from the village through a river or creek that passed by. So during the night many watchers were distributed and hid away in the corners and recesses of the streets, a weakly young man, an orphan, taking a position near the aforesaid path at the river. They again noticed the fires in the woods and all at once saw the ghost running towards the village again, crossing the plaza, and running up the ladder of the village chief's house. Again they heard him grind and sing for a few minutes, then he left the house. The watchers jumped up and wanted to grab him, but he jumped over them and tore away from them. The small plaza was filled with people, but he jumped over them and escaped, as he was very strong. But descending the trail to the water he came upon the lonely watcher there, who jumped up, grabbed him, and held him, crying out to the people on the plaza: "I have the dualangwu." So the people rushed down to the water and saw that the young man had caught the ghost. The people then led him back to the village and put him into a kiva, made a light, and there they saw a Yahponcha sitting. The father had told him that in the fourth night they would capture him, and so this became true.

Hereupon the crier cried out in the village: "You that are living here, all of you come and assemble here." So the people all assembled there and filled the kiva. The old men were crying and said: "There is some reason for this, certainly it is not without some purpose that he goes around this way and acts so. He certainly wants to do something bad." The village chief now requested that some one go and take off the masks from the ghost. Then some one approached him, but the masks were fastened securely around his neck, so the man cut the strings with his knife and took off the first mask and laid it on the floor, and behold! there was another mask. So he took that off and laid it on the floor, but found that there was another mask, and he took that one off and laid it on the floor. But he saw that there was a fourth mask and that was a Katcin-mana mask, so he took that off and they all looked at the personage, and behold! it was the chief's son. "Puyaami!" they all said (an expression of regret and sorrow). "That is the chief's son!" They found that he had some bahos tied to each wrist and to each ankle. These they untied, also placing them on the floor.

He was a nice, clean, handsome youth; had turquoise ear pendants,

[p. 51]

and many nice beads; his head was nicely washed, and on his face he had two black lines painted with yalahai, two lines running from the upper part of the nose to the cheeks. The young man who had now been exposed then said: "Take these bahos and thrust them into the ground, one at the plaza, and the others in the different corners of a house," which he designated. He furthermore told them that for four days they should have a feast, and having said this he left the kiva and went to his home. The people thought about it a great deal and were unhappy. They did not know what it meant, and whether or not some evil was planned for them, but they killed their sheep and prepared a feast and ate and feasted for four days. During the third day, they especially prepared much food, and were feasting all day and all night; still many of them were looking for and expecting some evil to befall them the next day, but the sun rose higher and higher and nothing happened to them, and when evening came they felt very much relieved, saying: "Nothing has happened to us," and they became happy again. Thus three years passed without any especial evil happenings, but in the fourth year something happened. The young man when telling the people that they should feast for four days, had not told them right.

The people had been right in their suspicions that something evil might befall them after their four days of feasting, but instead of it happening after the four days, the plan of the ghost had been that it should happen at the end of four years, which, however, he had not told them. In the fourth year the expected evil came upon them. The old man, who had four years before complained to the village chief of the bad conduct of the young men of the village, was still living. He was still angry, and in the fourth year he prepared many bahos of hard wood: tuvavi, mopuovi, tave, kwingvi. He made the points of the bahos very sharp and made very many of them. In the fall of the fourth year when they had gathered in their crop, the village chief said to the crier chief, who was also bad and in league with the village chief: "Our time has now come. You cry out that the people again should feast four days." So the Crier Chief announced saying: "You that live here, thus I am informing you, all that have something living, kill the same and eat it for four days. All that have something good, eat it and have a feast." But the people were full of mistrust. They were afraid that at the expiration of the four days some evil would befall them, and they did not comply with the requests of the chiefs; they did not prepare a feast.

During the night following the announcement the chiefs met with

[p. 52]

the aforesaid old man, who told them that they should dress him up and put him into the tiwonyapavi (Katcina shrine on the plaza in which there was a stone image of a Katcina and which was supposed to belong to the Katcinas). So they dressed him up, painting his back black, his chest and abdomen red, and both sides of the front part of his body green. On the arms, chest, and legs they made the typical marks of Po'okong (two short lines). To the back of his head they fastened a pohtakni, [*1] of the tail of a sparrow-hawk, extending upwards with the points of the feathers. To the top of his head they fastened a horn. His face was also painted black. He was to represent the Balolookong. He wore no costume.

When they were done they went to the plaza during the night when all the people were asleep. They dug a hole in the shrine already mentioned above, so that it would admit the man entirely. Hereupon they placed in his arms all the bahos that he had made, and with them they placed a Balolookong whistle. They also gave him a little bowl with some water, into which he could blow the whistle, as is still done in some ceremonies. They then covered up the opening with a large flagstone, covering earth and dust over it to destroy all appearances of the opening that had been made, and finally placed a piece of native cloth over it. They then commenced to sing some sorcerer's songs. When they sang the third song, the old man in the ground began to eject rumbling, roaring sounds, and told the chiefs: "I have been successful, I have reached my object." "All right," they said, and left the old man remaining in the ground. None of the inhabitants of the village had noticed anything. The buried man then thrust about half of his hand through an opening that he had made, and when the people arose in the morning, they noticed the hand and said: "Something is protruding here." The old man then sang:

Ala kwikwi, ala kwikwi,
 Ala kwikwi, ala kwikwi, kwi--(with a rising inflection).

As he sang the last word he lowered his little finger. The sun was now rising. The next morning he sang the same words, lowering the next finger, and on the third morning he again sang the same song and lowered the third finger. By this time the people, who had seen and heard it, felt very unhappy and were afraid that some evil would befall them. They now noticed, that at the places where four years previously the bahos had been planted by the direction of the ghost, water began to come out of the ground. These bahos had

[p. 53]

really been Balolookongs, who, it seems, had finally entered the ground and were now bringing out the water from the ground.

The people now became alarmed and began to suspect that probably a flood was about to destroy their village. That night they killed their sheep and prepared food and had a great feast, thinking that probably the next day they would all be destroyed anyway. On the fourth day just before sunrise, the old man in his grave sang the same words again and lowered the fourth finger as he finished his little song. Immediately he emerged from the opening in the form of a large Balolookong, and now Balolookongs were shooting forth from the ground with streams of water in all parts of the village, from the fireplaces in the kivas, in the houses from the water vessels, and in fact everywhere. Water began to fill the houses in the village. Soon the houses began to fall, burying many of the inhabitants under the falling walls. A number of them fled to the higher places on the east side of the village, where there was a large, strong house. In one of the houses a few old men climbed up on the shelves on which are usually placed the trays with corn meal in Hopi houses. Here they sat in a crouched position and turned into turkeys. The water rose so high that their tails began to hang into the water. It did not reach the houses in the eastern part of the village where the people had assembled. None of the chiefs were destroyed. So when they had assembled in the house mentioned the chiefs met in council and asked what they were going to do now. So they began to make bahos, took beads and turquoise, first crushed them and then ground them into powder. Of this powder they made two balls which they placed onto a tray on which they also had placed the bahos that they had made. There were a great many of these bahos. They then called the Village Chief's son, who had caused the destruction, and his sister, a very pretty maiden. They dressed up the latter in the same manner in which the Flute-manas are costumed, putting a white robe on her, over which they tied a white kilt, and an eagle-breath feather in her hair above her forehead, beads around her neck, etc. Her chin was painted black, white lines running from ear to ear over her upper lip.

The young man was clothed in a plain white kilt and black zigzag lines were painted on his legs, arms, and the back and front part of his body. These two were to drive back the Balolookongs. The water was still coming out of the ground and the Balolookongs still shooting swiftly through the water. The one that had been the old man, who was buried on the plaza, was the largest and most powerful of the Balolookongs and was still standing at the place where he

[p. 54]

had emerged from the ground. The rumbling of the falling houses could still be heard. When the two were dressed, the young man took some bahos in his left hand, the mana took the tray containing the two balls and the rest of the bahos, and thus they began to wade into the waters. They made straight for the large Balolookong, which was considered the chief of the water serpents. Arriving at the place where he stood, the young man grasped and encircled the serpent with both arms and pressed him down into the water, whereupon the serpents as well as the young man and his sister disappeared under the water and never returned.

Immediately the water began to fall and disappear in a comparatively short time, the powder of the beads and of the turquoise, which the mana had brought to the water serpent as an offering, causing the ground to dry and to become hard quickly because the powder was made of very hard substances. The water-serpents had all disappeared, but so had the young man and his sister. The place where the village had stood was full of mud and the people could not get there for some time yet. Everything was destroyed there. Only the old men who had been turned into turkeys survived. They had been very old and bald-headed, which is the reason that the turkeys to-day have no hair or feathers on their head. In one house, however, which stood somewhat high, two children, two little brothers, had been sleeping during the flood and had not been drowned, but they had very little to eat now. The younger one had found a little piki in a tray, which they ate.

The people in the eastern part of the village soon set to work to prepare to emigrate. They baked piki and made other food of the provisions that they still had left. Early in the morning the day after the water serpents had disappeared they took some of the food which they had prepared, and made a food altar (tono'sh-pongya), eastward from the village. Packing up the things, and especially the food which they had prepared, they all passed by this food altar, the village chief at the head of the line. Each one took a little quantity of each kind of food that they had placed there and ate it. They then passed on. The ground was still soft and muddy from the flood The two children that had survived in the village had not been found and were left. They soon became hungry and hunted something to eat. Occasionally they would find a little corn hanging on some of the walls that were still standing, or some other food The older brother would carry his little brother on his back. In the evening they would cry because they were lonely. The turkeys that had been Hopi saw the children and pitied them, but, although they cried

[p. 55]

over them so that the tears would roll from their eyes, they could not say anything to them. Finally one of the turkeys took such a pity on the children that he commenced to talk to them. "You poor ones," he said to them, "how will you take care of yourselves here? There is some corn hanging on the walls yet, but you cannot reach it. You go to the east there to those other houses. There the people made food when they left. There is a food altar standing there yet, of which you may eat!" So the children went there and found many trays full of piki standing on the ground. Of that they satisfied their hunger. They also found a few rabbit-skin blankets in a house and so they lived there.

The people that had left the village traveled on. One day the big Balolookong came out of the ground again and looked after the people. The place where he came out was now a large opening like a koici (a cistern-like oven in which sweet corn is steamed). He was a very large serpent and (the Hopis say), as no one was there to put him back again, he remained standing there. The two children by and by consumed all the food that they had found there and they began to suffer. They wanted to go back to their house but saw that water serpent standing there, and so they were afraid and did not know how to get back to their house, but their food was nearly all gone. Balolookong saw the children and had sympathy with them. They were the children of his daughter so he was their grandfather. He cried over their fate, the tears rolling down his cheeks. Stretching up high, he looked whether the mother of the children had gone very far, and saw the people, as they had not moved away very far, but the children were still afraid to go back to their house. Finally the serpent began to speak to them in Hopi: "Come here. Come here. Be not afraid of me, I am your grandfather." The children looked up and listened when they heard somebody speak to them. So they went to the serpent, who said to them: "I am your grandfather. I pity you, but what will you eat here? There is some corn yet, but you cannot reach it, it is hanging so high on the walls. You find a place where there is some sweet corn strung on a string hanging on the wall; then pile up some stones, and climbing on the stones, throw some of the ears down with a stick. These you take with you as food and then follow your parents. They are not very far yet and you will overtake them. But whenever you get ready to go you come here to me first. Now you go and hunt a knife, and if you find one bring it to me, maybe I shall want to follow them sometime, too." So the children went through the houses and sure enough found a sharp knife of flint. They also found in one of the houses some corn

[p. 56]

hanging on strings on the wall not very high up. They piled up some stones and loosened some of the corn-ears with a stick so that a good deal of it fell down. This they ate and satisfied their hunger. They intended to leave the next morning. "To-morrow we will follow our parents," they said. So the next morning early they went to their grandfather and said to him that they would now go. He asked them whether they had any food to take with them. They said: "Yes, we have wrapped up some of the corn that we have found strung up and hanging on some of the walls and that we have thrown down." He said: "You follow your parents, and I shall stand here and keep looking after you so that nothing will happen to you. But you take your knife and be not afraid, but cut a piece out of my back. This you take with you and give it to the chiefs and tell them: "This is a piece of meat from the Balolookong, and when at any time it does not rain you make bahos and rub a little of this meat among the paint with which you paint the bahos, and it will certainly rain." The children refused to cut out the piece of flesh, saying: ''That will hurt you very much." "No, no," he said, "be not afraid." Finally they were willing, took the knife and cut out quite a large piece of flesh. They found that the meat was very tender and when they had cut out the piece the wound closed up immediately.

So they started after their people. In the evening they were very tired and slept all night. The next evening they were again very tired and slept on a ridge that was covered with pine-trees. The older brother carried his younger brother and also the food and he was nearly exhausted. They were also very thirsty and hungry, but they were so weak that they could hardly eat the hard corn. On the third day at about noon they were nearly exhausted and were very thirsty. They sat down under a pine-tree. Their food was also all consumed. As soon as they had sat down they fell over and fell asleep.

Cotukvnangi, [*1] the God of Thunder, lived in the sky and saw the children and took pity on them. He concluded to descend and help them. He took a gourd vessel full of water and some rolls of nuva-muhpi (piki made of meal of fresh roasting ears) and then descended to where the children were. They were sleeping, their mouths where dry and parched. Soon the younger brother awoke and there somebody was sitting by their side, somebody very terrible. The personage had three very long horns or projections on the head, two standing sideways, and one standing upward on top of the head. They

[p. 57]

were of ice. His costume also consisted of ice and was full of little fringes or icicles that rattled all over his body. On the head he also had two large ice ridges representing clouds. [*1]

The little boy was very much frightened and grasped his brother and cried: "Get up, there is somebody here." So the elder brother jumped up and beheld the Cotukvnangi. He also was very much frightened and the two children embraced each other and cried. While the children looked downward, Cotukvnangi removed his mask and when they again looked up they saw a very handsome man. "Do not cry, do not cry," he said to the children, "here, drink; I have brought some water for you," and handed them the gourd vessel, from which they drank and quenched their thirst. He then handed them the food, and they ate it and satisfied their hunger.

You remain here, "he said," you remain here at least two or three days and eat and drink this, and when you have recovered and become strong then follow your people. They are not far away. They are right east of here." After he had said this and the children were not just looking towards him he rose again and disappeared in the sky. When the children looked for him he was gone.

So they slept there that night, staved the next day and remained another night, and the following day at about noon Cotukvnangi again appeared to them bringing them some more of the same kind of food, also some water melons and drinking water. Cotukvnangi remained with them that afternoon and after the sun had gone down he began to talk to them, talking to them all that night. Cotukvnangi is the great warrior chief, and he now gave to these two youths the lightning and the thunder, and he told them how to kill enemies and that when they had killed their enemies they should take their scalps; and he taught them the songs that they were to sing when they returned from their war expeditions and after they had killed some one, and told them that. when they came to their home they should throw the scalps into the kiva, on the cloud symbol made with corn-meal by the warrior chief. They should then cut out a round piece of bear skin which they should place on the floor in the kiva and encircle it by a line of corn-meal. The warrior who had brought home the scalp should sit on this bear skin for three days and three nights, and on the morning of the fourth day the warrior should wash his head in the kiva (tokasnaya). Then he should go to his home where his k'aamu, [*2] should also wash his head. Then he should put the scalp which he had brought on a stick and

[p. 58]

perform a dance on the plaza in which his kaamu should accompany him.

After having thus explained to them many things about wars, and taught them many war and battle songs all night, it had become morning and he told them that now they should follow their people, He told them that their parents would probably not know them, but they would ask who they were, and they should then take hold of their mother and tell her who they were and she would then probably know them. Then Cotukvnangi returned to the sky. The lightning arrow (hohu) and the thunder he had promised them, but had not yet delivered to them. He told them that whenever they needed them, wanting to go and kill some one, they should pray to him and he would give them those things. So the two brothers started off after they had refreshed themselves with the morning meal once more. Arriving at Homolovi [*1] they came upon their people. They lived in two little villages, and in the one farthest north only a few people lived, and here they found their mother.

The older brother was still carrying his younger brother as the latter was very tired. "Somebody has come," the people said. "Who has come? Whose children have come? Where are you from?" they asked. "We are from way over therefrom the village," they said. "We have followed you. You have gone this way and our mother and our father are here and we have come after them." So they called the people together and said: "Come here and see if there is anybody here who did not bring their children with them," and then the people gathered around the children. The people commenced to ask now the different women whether there was any one who had failed to bring their children with them, but no one was found. They also asked the mother of the two children but she also denied. When no one could be found that would claim the two boys, they recognized their mother and went to her, taking hold of her hands, and said: "Our mother, we have come," then the mother remembered and acknowledged that her two children had remained in the house sleeping when they had fled, but she, of course, had thought that they had perished. And when she now saw her children before her, she embraced them and cried. So the children remained with their mother.

The people living in the smaller village were the Batki-namu. Those living in the larger village were the people most of whom later constituted the Forehead clan (Kal-namu). The two youths the told the people about the piece of flesh that they had cut from the

[p. 59]

back of Balolookong, and had brought with them. So when the Batki people made bahos they rubbed a little of this meat into the paint with which they painted the bahos, and then it thundered and rained. Before that it had rained only a very little, and hardly ever was there any lightning and thunder. After this there came heavy rains and weather, which made the Batki people "Great Batki" people'

The two youths grew up to be young men, but they became bad, warring and fighting the Hopi children and the other youths, and when they had grown up they remembered what their father, the Thunder, had told them. They said to each other: "We have now grown up, let us go out and ask our father for what he has promised us, and then let us go and kill some one." To their mother and the people they said that they were going to kill some deer, and so she prepared some food for them and they started off. In the evening they gathered some wood and built a fire. Cotukvnangi saw them and came down to them again. "You have now reached your object," he said to them. "Yes," they replied. "It is well that you have come," he said. "Close by here are some Apache, and whoever becomes a warrior for having killed them, he is a great warrior, because they are fierce. These Navaho do not amount to much, and it is well that you have come in this direction." So during the night he instructed them bow to go out and kill the Apache, also teaching them some war songs. Hereupon he went home again. He first told them, however, that he would watch them, and that he would kill their enemies for them. They would do it, he said, but it would be he that would do it through them. Then when they were through they should come back again and he would come down again, then they would talk together and from here they should go back again to their home.

So in the morning they proceeded and soon came upon some Apache (Utsaamu). There were a great many of them, who at once became-excited and ran towards them and began to surround them. The two brothers at once began to shoot arrows into the crowd for some time, but did not hit any one, neither did the Apache hit them. The brothers had put the lightning (talwipiki) and the thunder (umu'kpi) under their clothing. After they had been shooting for some time, they became tired, and the older brother all at once said: "Now then it seems they are upon us. How long yet will this last? Hereupon he drew forth the lightning and the thunder and aimed at the Apache and shot the lightning into the crowd. All their enemies were slain, their camps burned up, and the two brothers

[p. 60]

laughed at their slain enemies. The Apache had previously made many raids on the Hopi at Homolovi, and for this reason the two brothers had finally gotten very angry and taken revenge upon their enemies.

Among the Apache warriors had been one very large and fierce one. This one they hunted up among the slain, scalped him and cut out his heart. Then taking the moccasins and costumes from all the slain, they returned, While they had killed all the warriors they had destroyed only one tent in which there had been women and children. This had been blown to pieces by the thunder. The objects in the other camps, in which the women and children were, they had left untouched. When they again arrived at the place where they had previously camped, Cotukvnangi again descended and talked with them during the night. He gave them further instructions with regard to warfare, but among other things he told them that they should not be the war chiefs among their people, but when they now came to their village, whomever they should select, on him they should throw the scalp which they had now brought, and he should be the war chief.

In the morning Cotukvnangi again ascended and the two returned to their home, singing war songs as they went along. They went, however, to the larger village, as in the village where their mother lived there were so very few people, and here the rejoicings and rites, to be mentioned presently, occurred. When they arrived at the village they were received by the shouts of their people, who surrounded them, and snatching away the trophies that they had brought with them, swung them around, by which it is said they were discharmed from any bad influence, and then they threw them among the people--a custom which was always observed when Hopi warriors returned from their expeditions.

While the rejoicings and wranglings were going on, the older brother took the scalp which he had been carrying on a stick while they were dancing, and forcibly threw it at one of the inhabitants from the larger village, saying: "It is you, you shall be our war chief. We give this to you. You shall lead us after this." Hereupon they followed him, going around the village four times. They then entered the kiva where the two brothers instructed them as to the rites to be observed in connection with their warfare. They drew the cloud symbol already referred to on the floor, whereupon the newly appointed war chief threw the scalp upon the symbol. They then cut out a piece of bear skin, sprinkled a ring of corn meat around it, and placed the war chief upon it, where he had to remain for three

[p. 61]

days. Hereupon followed the public war dance on the plaza on the fourth day (as already referred to on a previous page).

The people lived here in Homolovi a number of years, but how many cannot be ascertained. Finally they concluded to move on north-eastward because, it is claimed, there were so many mosquitos there which would sting their children and their people and caused great suffering. The Hopi say the reason why the people held out so long, although they always suffered from the mosquitos, was that they had such good fields there from which they raised good crops. The mosquitos are called by most of the Hopi salt flies (o'ong-totoptu), but they are also called shipaulavitu by some, from which it seems the present inhabitants of the village of Shupaulavi have derived their name. Then the migrating party had reached a certain bluff, called Coyote Spring Bluff (probably about twenty-five or thirty miles northeast of Winslow), they remained there, but not very long it seems. Here they separated, the Batki clan proceeding northeastward to Aoatovi , the others going northward towards a place a few miles west of Mato'vi. Here they again remained for a number of years as they had good fields there. They finally proceeded farther north to a place called Nashiwamu (about a mile south of Shongopavi), where they probably remained about three years. Just as they arrived at this place, the sun arose, the upper part of the sun (his forehead, the Hopis say), just looming up above the horizon.

For this reason they were ever afterwards the Forehead clan (Kal-namu). They made repeated efforts to get permission from the village chiefs of Shongopavi to move on the mesa into the village, but their efforts were unsuccessful. It seems that the chief had heard something of their doings in Palatkwapi, because he claimed that they were dangerous, bad people (Nu'nukpantu). In the third year they concluded that they would return to their previous home at Homolovi.

The chief of Shupaulavi, which village, however, was not called by that name at that time, but was called Waki (refuge house), heard that these people were going to return and so he went to them and invited them to move up to and settle down in his village, which invitation they accepted, They are still by far the most numerous clan in the village of Shupaulavi. The village was from that time called Shupaulavi, after the name of the new arrivals, who were called by that name because they had fled from Homolovi on account of the mosquitos which they called by that name. At that time Shupaulavi was considerably larger than Shongopavi, the latter having lost a great many inhabitants a long time before, when the people of that

[p. 62]

village killed a number of Spanish and destroyed their missions, on which occasion a number of Shongopavi fled to Shupaulavi.

The chief of Shongopavi seems to have borne a grudge against Shupaulavi, because later on he informed the Spaniards in New Mexico, probably at Sante Fe, that they should come and take away the inhabitants of Shupaulavi, and said that this was the latter's own wish. So one time the news reached the villages that many Spaniards had arrived at Keams Canyon where they were camping. The next day they came to Walpi where they inquired who it was that wanted to be taken away. The chief of Walpi and the chief of Shupaulavi were good friends with each other, and as soon as the Walpi chief heard about the matter he quickly proceeded to Shupaulavi and informed his friends about it, saying: ''The Spaniards have come because they have heard that you wanted them to come and take you east. They have come for you and for no one else," ''That is false," the Shupaulavi chief said. "It is not I that want that, it must be some one else. It is probably the chief of Shongopavi." "All right," the chief of Walpi said, "you had then better go and meet the Spanish chief and tell him about it. You take some presents with you, perhaps a tu'ihi and a blue shirt. Give these to this Spanish chief, shake hands with him, embrace him, and tell him how the matter is." So the chief of Shupaulavi wrapped up a tu'ihi and a blue shirt and went with his friend. When they arrived in the kiva where the leader of the Spaniards was, the latter, who was a powerful man, stood and looked at the new arrivals with his arms akimbo, The two men eyed each other for some time. Finally the Spaniard gave the Shupaulavi chief his hand and shook it. The Shupaulavi chief embraced him, the Spanish officer doing the same. All people present were crying. The chief at once drew forth the presents which he had brought, and handed them to the Spanish officer. "This is yours," he said. "I have heard that you came to get my children and my people. It is not I that wished it, it must be some one else. It certainly is not I." The Walpi chief then asked the officer: "Is this the man that carne to you and said that he wanted you to come and get his people?" "No," the officer said, "this is not the man." "Thanks, thanks, thanks," the Hopi said on all sides, and came and shook hands with the officer. "Thanks that this is not the man." [*1]

"No," he repeated, "I never wanted that, it must be the chief of Shongopavi." The officer then said that the next day he would

[p. 63]

bring his soldiers to a place west of Walpi where there was a large pool of water at that time. He said that they were tired and would rest there awhile. He also explained that they had brought with them a good deal of clothing which they had wanted to give to the people which they had expected to take along. "Now," he said, "What shall we do with these clothes? You tell your people that they should come to-morrow when we are camping there at that water and visit us, and if any of them have anything that they would like to sell we would like to trade with them, giving them clothing which we have brought along, and taking back some of your things."

The Shupaulavi chief consented to this and went home and told his people about it. All were very happy now that the impending danger had been averted. The next morning after they had eaten their breakfast the people from all the villages proceeded to the camp of the Spaniards where they were trading all day. In the evening the Hopi all returned to their villages, the Spaniards camping there for the night. In the morning after breakfast the latter returned.

After that the Spaniards never encroached on the Hopi any more, but the Shongopavi chief, whose village at that time was very small, spread the news that the Spaniards would come back again some time to Shupaulavi and got them. This so scared the people at Shupaulavi that a majority of them left the village and moved over to Shongopavi, which it is said accounts partly for the small number of inhabitants in the village of Shupaulavi.

Footnotes

^48:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

^48:2 Lomavantiwa claims that this clan brought with them from the lower world a small water vessel which was later supplanted by the mongwikuru (a netted gourd vessel). He said that this small vessel was their tiponi, and from that they derived their name.

^48:3 A favorite sport being to follow those who went to attend to a call of nature, rush upon them and throw them backward, thus soiling their bodies.

^49:1 Simply for practice, it seems from the story.

^49:2 The meaning of this could not be ascertained.

^52:1 A number of feathers which are arranged side by side, but close together, forming a fan shaped head-dress which is worn on many ceremonial occasions by various dancers.

^56:1 Usually called Cotukvnangwuu.

^57:1 Similar ridges are still made on the top of the mask of the Tukwunangw Katcina.

^57:2 Clan aunts.

^58:1 A place a few miles north of the present Winslow.

^62:1 The Hopi say that the chief of Shongopavi was a Powaka (sorcerer), who was able to fly when he wanted to do so. He had been over in New Mexico during some night and had informed the Spanish chief himself, being back the next day.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

13. THE REVENGE OF THE KATCINAS. [*1]

Haliksai! This place, Kao'tukvi, is somewhere east of the Pueblo Indians, and a long time ago many people lived there. West of them was a large mountain like the San Francisco Mountains (near Flagstaff). in these mountains lived many Katcinas. Those people sometimes had ceremonies (hihta totok'a yu'ngwa), but they did not yet know the Katcinas.

One time some of the Katcinas also assembled in their kiva in the mountains, and dressed up, getting ready for a dance. They then descended and came to the village in the night, where they commenced to dance on the plaza. The people were still sleeping, but soon heard the noise of the dance and arose and came to the Plaza. Here they saw the Katcinas dance. The latter, however, did not accompany their dance by singing.

By the side of the line of dancers danced a Katcina Uncle (Katcina

[p. 64]

Taha). The people, not knowing what or who the dancers were. became angry and concluded among themselves that they wanted to kill them. The Katcinas heard what the people said about wanting to kill them and ran away. West of the village they Jumped from a bluff into a large crack. These were the Snow (Nuva) Katcinas, the Uncle being a Hototo Katcina. The Katcina Uncle was in the lead when they jumped in the crack. Here the people who had followed them set fire to them and burned them up. The Katcina Uncle who was at the bottom was not burned. Early in the morning he crept out and returned home to the mountains, singing the following song as he walked along:

Tanayo, tanayo,
 Kayohatii! kayahatii!
 Tanayo, tanayo, tanayo, tanayo
 Kayohatii! kayahatii!
 Nahanahay, Hototo, palaka.
 I myself (the) Hototo emerged.
 [The meaning of this line only could be ascertained.]
 Shiwana towitowi ahaha (a) cloud.
 Towiwikaliyoyokana yaaahihi h- h-; h-
 Towiwikaliyoyokanayaaahihi h- h- h-
 [The "h," with a rising inflection to imitate sobbing.

The Katcinas living in the mountains had fields at the foot of the mountains where they were planting corn and watermelons. Here the Hehea was hoeing with a wooden hoe (wik'a), still used by the Hehea Katcinas in their dances. It was early in the morning. All at once he heard somebody singing, raised his wik'a and listened, but just then the singing stopped. The Katcina again commenced to hoe, and again heard the singing. Listening again he heard the singing and the sobbing and behold' somebody was walking along crying.

When the Hototo arrived at the Hehea Katcina the latter asked: "Why are you walking along saving, something and crying "Yes,'' the Hototo replied, "We were there in the Hopi village dancing, then they came out and threatened to kill us, so we ran away and jumped into the gulch west of the village, and there we were piled up, and all were burned up by the Hopi except myself. I had jumped in first and was not burned and escaped unharmed. That is the reason why I was moaning as I went along." The Hehea Katcina then also commenced to moan as follows:

[p. 65]

Ochitana, iyawa, iyava
 Ochitana! iyava, iyava.
 Alas! (This is the only word of which meaning could be obtained.)
 Hininiya ihihi io hiiohiio, h- h- h- h-.

Hereupon they both went home into the mountain where there were a great many Katcinas, men, women, youths, and maidens. "Why do you come alone?" they asked the Hototo. The latter hereupon repeated what he had said to the Hehea Katcina. "We shall sometime take revenge," said the chief of the Katcinas, and ordered the Katcinas to assemble and to dress up. Hereupon they made it hail for three days. Early in the morning of the fourth day they caused a cloud to rise which hovered over the mountains. This was their emblem or standard (natsi); it was a very beautiful cloud. Then the Katcinas ate their morning meal.

The people in the village saw the cloud. They had gone to their fields early in the morning for they had many fields around the village. After breakfast many more clouds began to rise above the mountains, towering upon each other. They soon spread out and during the afternoon they covered the sky, coming up from all four sides. The corn of the Hopi had at this time begun to mature and the people felt very happy over the clouds. They expected that they would have a good rain now. Towards noon it began to thunder and to rain in the mountains and the clouds began to move towards the Hopi village. When they had arrived there it was thundering and lightning and it rained great hailstones. All the crops were destroyed, and even the people, although they left their houses and fled to the kivas, were killed. Only one man and one woman remained alive. When everything had been destroyed, the clouds said: "We will stop now and return," and then they began to disperse in all directions, some of them returning to the mountains. The Katcinas were then happy saying, "Now we have revenged ourselves, let it be thus." The woman that had been spared again bore children and the village was by and by again inhabited.

Footnotes

^63:1 Told by Puhu'nomtiwa (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

14. HOW THE CIRCLE (PONGO) KATCINA AND HIS WIFE BECAME STARS. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi the people were living. In the north-western part of the village was at that time a kiva called Hamis-kiva. Somewhat south of this kiva close to the present site of the, Hano-kiva

[p. 66]

lived a maiden. She persistently refused to marry any young man in the village. At Red Sand (Palanvisa), a place north-east of the village, some maidens were playing the game "jumping over the trays." The maiden mentioned above never played with the other maidens, but one time she went out intending to play with the maidens. When she came to the edge of the mesa she sat down and watched the other maidens play. A young man dressed in a blue Hopi blanket came by and asked her why she did not play with the other maidens. "Yes," she said, "I never play with them." Hereupon he sat down beside her and they talked together a little while, then the maiden returned to her home.

In the evening she was grinding corn. While she was grinding a Katcina came to the village, danced first near the Coyote (Ish) kiva, then at the Singer (Tao) kiva, then at the Public plaza (Kiconvee), then at the Wrinkle (Wikolapi) kiva, and finally at the Hamis-kiva. Hereupon he left the village. The next morning the mana again proceeded to the place at the edge of the mesa where she had been sitting the previous day, and again the youth joined her. This time he asked her if she would marry him if her father and mother were willing. She consented. He told her that if they were willing he would come and get her the next day. He then told her that he was the Katcina who was dancing in the village, saying that he would again dance at the same places as usual, and then after he would be through she should come and meet him at "The Place-Where-Scalps-are-Dressed" (Yovutzrhrokwanpi). Hereupon they parted.

In the evening she was again grinding corn and the Katcina again went through the village dancing at the places mentioned, and singing the following song while he was dancing, singing the same song at each place:

Achipolaina, achipolaina,
 Koohochunisha, kowishkunishaa,
 Palainaiya ---------------- --aya.
 Waa-i-aha-ihihi.

The mana had in the meanwhile obtained the permission of her parents to marry the youth. The mother filled a tray with meal for her, with which the mana proceeded to the place named by the Katcina. Here she was met by the Katcina after he had made his round through the village. From here they proceeded to the place called Kocantuika, a bluff named after a certain plant, kocana. [*1]

When they arrived here they saw a kiva and a light in it. A voice called out from the kiva inviting them to come in. They entered

[p. 67]

and found here a great many different Katcinas. The youth was the Circle (Pongo) Katcina. Hereupon the youth handed the mana some piki made of fresh roasting ears, and also some watermelon slices, which she ate. They then remained in this kiva, the mana preparing the food for the Katcinas, and the latter preparing the bridal costume for the mana. Every night the Pongo Katcina would go to the village and dance, as already explained. When the bridal costume was finished the mana went home in the same manner in which brides go home to-day. Her husband followed her, so they lived in the house of her parents after that. Her parents now found out that the husband of their daughter was a Katcina.

By and by she bore two children, which were also Circle Katcinas. One time the young mother was drying corn-meal, stirring it in a pot over the fire. When she was done with this she left her house and went to the edge of the mesa outside of the village. Her husband had gone to visit the Katcinas at the Katcina kiva mentioned before. While the woman was outside of the village some one approached her. It was the Hototo Katcina. He told her that she should go with him, to which she consented. They descended the mesa south of the village and went southward to Shongopavi. When the Circle Katcina returned to the house he found his wife gone. Following her tracks, he found that she had gone away with some one, and soon heard who it was that had taken her away. He returned to the house, took his two children and went with them to the Katcina house already mentioned. Here they remained. The two little Katcinas learned the Katcina songs and dances.

After a while the father and his two children concluded to try to find the mother of the two youths. So the people cooked some roasting ears and other food for them, whereupon they proceeded to the village, taking the food with them. Here they danced at Pisavi, a place a short distance east of the Pongovi kiva. While they danced they sang the following song:

Ahahahahai ahahaai
 Ahahahaha ihihihihihi
 Umungu uyungnaya
 Umungu uchioli
 Ahahahahai ihihihihi-hi-hi-hi.

When they were through singing, the father asked the women among the spectators whether some one would not nurse the children for these roasting ears that they had brought with them, but no one was willing. They went to the plaza, repeated their dancing and

[p. 68]

singing, whereupon the father again asked the women that some one nurse his children for the roasting ears, but no one was willing. They then proceeded to the Coyote kiva, where the same thing was repeated. No one being willing to nurse the two children, they left the village and when they came to the last row of houses, where the Katcinas often rest when they have dances now, a woman approached them declaring that she was willing to nurse the children. After she had nursed them and they had given her the roasting ears, they left the village along the trail leading south-eastward. Here they traced the mother to Sik'akvu, a bluff on top of the mesa about three miles southeast of Oraibi.

Here they found a kiva where they heard some one singing the following song:

Tciihiihihio tcihihiokaaha,
 Tcihihiokaaha tcihihiokaaha,
 Ha, ha, ha!

It was the Hahaii Wuhti, who was opening comiviki as she was singing. When they heard the song they looked into the kiva and were noticed by the Hahaii Wuhti. "Oh!" she said, "here I am meeting you with this song. Recently somebody was fetching your mother by here." The three went into the kiva and were invited to remain over night. They were fed by the Hahaii Wuhti the comiviki. When they had eaten they danced, singing the following song:

Ahahahaihahaiiya toywihihiovohokahai,
 Ahahaahaaiahaiya toywihihiovohokahai,
 Ocarasotikiiihi, polaihainahai,
 Kahaahaowkuruhukahai, koaowaikurukahaihai.

In the morning they proceeded eastward. In the evening of the next day they arrived at a place called Owl Spring (Mongkba). Here they found another Hahaii Wuhti in a kiva, who was also engaged in opening comiviki. She was singing the same song that the other Hahaii Wuhti had been singing. When the three arrived they looked into the kiva. When the woman noticed them she said, "Uti! here you some one is going about and I am meeting you with this song. Recently some one fetched your mother by here." They went in and were fed by the Hahaii Wuhti, whereupon they again danced and sang the same song which they sang at the place of the other Hahaii Wuhti. They stayed over night at this kiva., and during the night the Hahaii Wuhti went to Ki'shiwuu, where many different kinds of Katcinas had a dance. When one party had danced and gone away, another party would come and perform their dance and leave. [p. 69] Then another party, and so on. When all had danced, Hahaii Wuhti returned to her home and told the three Circle Katcinas about the dance. She told them about it; then they also went and performed a dance at Ki'shiwuu, which, it seems, was not far away. When they were through they again returned to Mongkba. Here they remained until it became morning.

In the morning Hahaii Wuhti again went to Ki'shiwuu to be present at another dance, the three Circle Katcinas remaining behind. When they had all danced Hahaii Wuhti again Invited the three Katcinas. The people who had seen them in the last dance during the night and had not observed them during the day were waiting for them, thinking that they probably would come. They went over and also performed their dance. Before they went over Hahaii Wuhti told them that their mother was at Ki'shiwuu and that she would see them dance and she would certainly be anxious to return with them. They performed their dance on the public plaza, singing the same song that they had sung at the places of the two Hahaii Wuhtis, When they were through they again returned and soon met their mother, who had recognized them and had gone before them. So they took their mother back with them.

Before they reached Mongkba night befell them, so they stopped. The father said to the two children they should go ahead to their grandmother, the Hahaii Wuhti, which they did. He then took a pointed stick and killed his wife with it by thrusting it into her throat. Leaving the body at the place, he followed his two sons, but before he reached the place where they were the skeleton of his wife followed him. The two boys had safely gotten into the house of their grandmother, but their father ran away, being followed by the skeleton. He finally arrived at the First Mesa, rushed into the village of Hano and there into a kiva where a number of women were making jugs. He begged them to hide him as something was pursuing him. Hereupon one of the women hid him under a pile of clay which they were using for making their pottery. The skeleton then arrived, saving, "Hava! Did my husband not come here?" she asked. "No," they replied. "Yes," the skeleton said, "because his tracks end here," and hereupon she entered the kiva. She threw aside all the piles of clay and material that was lying there, and finally came to the pile under which the man was hidden.

When he noticed that she was close by he jumped up, ran up the ladder and westward towards Walpi, being pursued by the skeleton of his wife. In Walpi he again entered a kiva. Here they were practicing a war dance. "Hide me quickly," he said, "some one is

[p. 70]

following me." "Come here," they said, and handed him a drum. So he beat the drum. The skeleton soon arrived and entered the kiva after having spoken the same words as in Hano. She shoved the dancers aside, but when she came to the one who was beating the drum, he threw aside the drum and rushed out, running to Mishongnovi. Here he again rushed into a kiva where they were assembled for the Lagon ceremony. The women were making trays. He again asked to be hidden as he was being pursued by some one. One of the women told him to be seated in her lap, which he did. She covered him with a tray that she was working on and continued her work. Soon the skeleton arrived, asked the same questions, and was again answered in the negative. She came in, looked around, driving the women from one place of the kiva into another, until she arrived at the one who had her husband. When he saw that he could not remain hidden he rushed out and ran towards Shongopavi. Here they also were assembled for the Lagon ceremony and the same thing was repeated that took place in Mishongnovi.

From here he ran towards Mato'vi (about fifteen miles south of Shongopavi). At this place the Flute society had a ceremony. They were assembled at the spring when he arrived, He again repeated the same request to be hidden, as he was being pursued. They told him to go into the spring to a certain sunflower stalk that was growing in the spring. This he should mount and hide in its top. He did so. When the skeleton arrived and asked whether her husband was not there the Flute priest told her, "Yes, he has entered the spring." So she went to the edge of that spring and entered it. Looking into the water she saw the sunflower stalk reflected in the water and on top of it her husband. Thinking that he was in the water she dived in and disappeared.

The pursued man came down and joined the Flute players. On the fourth day they heard somebody pound yucca roots in the water. When the sun rose the woman came out of the water, dressed in a bridal costume, and carrying in her arms a reed receptacle which contained another bridal robe and the white belt. She appeared in exactly the same manner as the newly married bride appears on the morning when she returns from the home of her husband to that of her own mother. When she came out the two priests called the two together, placed them back to back, made a road with sacred meal for each one; the one road southward, and the other northward. The priests told them to proceed four steps, each one in the direction they were facing. Then they should turn and meet again. But the man returned when he had taken three steps instead of four. The Flute

[p. 71]

priests were very angry and called at the woman to run. She started, and her husband started after her. "You shall always follow each other this way," the Flute priests said. They both ran westward, and are still running in that way. The two stars, Nango'sohu pursue each other because one constantly follows the other, sometimes overtaking it and then again remaining behind, are these two personages.

Footnotes

^65:1 Told by Lomanomtiwa (Oraibi).

^66:1 Phellopterus multinerva.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

15. THE KOKOSHORI KATCINA AND THE SHONGOPAVI MAIDEN. [*1]

In Shongopavi they were living, and over there at Kishiwu [*2] the Katcinas were living, and the Kokoshori was going about at the Hopi village. Bui he was stealing the Hopi children, and (one time) a Shongopavi woman went to get water and her child followed her, crying. The mother threw a stone back because she was angry. The child now was afraid and sat down there and cried there. Thus the Kokoshori arrived and pitied it. Now he said (to the child): "Oh! now why do you cry?" The child said, "My mother has been hurting me." "Let us go to my house," he said. The child was a little girl.

Now the child sat upon the back of the Katcina and the latter took it along. They now arrived at the village of those who lived at Kishiwu. [*2] There were a great many Katcinas. They saw somebody coming carrying a little girl. Now, those Katcinas were glad. "You, whom do you bring there?" they said. Now the Hahai Wuhti was very happy. "Ishuni!" she said. Now he put it down. "Where did you get that?" said the Hahai Wuhti. "I went about at Shongopavi and the mother of this one went to get water, and this one followed her, and alas! she threw at it with a stone, and I pitied it and have brought it." And now they pitied the child. "Very well," they said. "Alas! Why is it thus." Now they fed it. The Hahai Wuhti spread out povo'lpiki, handed the child a vessel with peaches, she also cut up melons, split a watermelon, and laid before it some steamed corn. Having done this she said. "Now eat." And the child ate. When it had eaten a little it was satisfied.

After that it lived there. Now they always provided food for it. And because it ate this food it became big very soon. But now it became homesick. In the night the Katcinas danced. After the dance they would distribute steamed corn, watermelons and melons, but the child would only eat one occasionally, because it was homesick. It did not talk, it was sad. Now they said, "Come, let us

[p. 72]

take it to the village." Now the Kokoshori went to look after the father and the mother, and, alas! they too were homesick. They only lived a little yet, they were very homesick. They were no longer sitting up because they were so homesick. When he returned to Kishiwu he said, "Why, your parents are very homesick." And now they who lived there busied themselves. "Now then, dress yourself," said the chief, ''when you are dressed we shall fetch you."

Now they all put on something and now the Katcinas came and fetched the child. But the little girl had on an ato'o and a beautiful belt and a pretty dress and some fine moccasins. But a Qo'oqoqlom carried something in a burden basket on his back, a melon, peaches, and watermelons, etc. All the Katcinas brought something to eat. When they came to the village it rained very hard. So they arrived at Shongopavi. They did not arrive dancing, but singing and walking. They sang as follows:

Kokooshori, Kokooshori, Kokooshori,
 Hakipa tiwungwiniyata
 Whose raised (we),
 Okwatowakae. Yuyata, Nayata
 Because (we) pitied (her). Mothers, fathers,
 Amutpipoo kachiyata nawoto.
 In front of them or their home heard (the girl)
 Katchiyata nawoto hap itamu,
 The home (of) having heard now we
 Ohokio! mana wungwupui
 Alas! maiden bringing up (her)
 Soon shuhtokinihihi.
 Not will forget.
 Ahayahai Kokohoshori,
 Kokohoshori shori
 Ahahaha ihihihihihi.

They now arrived (at the parents' house). "Now go up, here you live," they said (to the girl), so she went into the house, but her mother was sleeping. "My mother, get up, my father, get up, I have come," said the little maiden. Now they looked up a little, and recognized the child. Now they sat up quickly and embraced the child at once. Now the father also did so. The maiden now cried, but she was now comforted and was happy. They now revived and they were good. Now they (the Katcinas) came to offer some food. Now they ascended to the house and entered it. The Qo'oqoqlom had wrapped up some meat and laid it down. He also laid

[p. 73]

down some peaches and watermelons, so that everything there became filled up; and they also now distributed some among the people. Having done that they went home. "You must at once send your father," the Katcinas instructed the mana, "then your father will make the following announcement:

"You people that are living here, thus I am informing you; from your houses there you must come down. Now you know our friends have brought something for us, and now you must all put that away somewhere, and to-morrow, when the sun shall rise, then we shall examine it."

The Katcinas now went home, and the rain clouds went home, and hence it did not rain, and the people were now thinking: "Why did he announce that we should clean our houses?" but the people now slept. Now, in the morning the sun was rising and they looked through their houses, and they were filled with everything; corn ears, watermelons, melons, meat, beans, and with everything. And from then the people were rich on account of that maiden. So they were very happy.

But when after a while they had eaten all that, they had no longer meat to eat. The maiden now became homesick after Kishiwu, and she thought of going there. She became sick and died, and on that account she went to Kishiwu, and there she is now living.

Footnotes

^71:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

^71:2 This name is spoken differently in different villages: Ki'shiwuu, Kishiwu, and Kishiwu.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

16. HOW BALL-HEAD (TATCIQTO) WEDDED AN ORAIBI MAIDEN. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi the people were living. At the place where Tuwa-mana now lives, right east of the public plaza, lived a maiden who persistently refused to marry any of the young men of the village, although many of them were wooing her. North of the village at Achamali, lived an old woman with her grandson. "My grandmother," he said to her one time. "What is it?" she answered. "Yes," he said, "I am going to visit that maiden there in the village, and see whether she will not marry me." "Alas!" she replied, "she will not want you," "I am going to try it anyhow," he answered. So one evening, after they had eaten, he put his wildcat robe on, of which at that time nearly every young man had one, and proceeded to the village. It was moonlight.

When he came to the house he stood outside at the corner of the house. The maiden was grinding corn opposite an open window. He went up to the place where she was grinding corn, looked through the opening, and saw that she was very busy grinding corn. "Stop

[p. 74]

a little," he said. She stopped and asked: "Why do you want me to stop?" "Yes," he said, "I came to you." "Who are you?" she asked., "Yes," he said, "it is I." And hereupon she began to guess, mentioning many names of young men in the village, and asked whether he was that one or that one. Finally she said: "Are you not living north of the village there?" "Yes," he answered. "So you are that one," she said. "All right, I am willing that we should live together." "That is what I came for," the young man said. "Very well," the maiden replied, "I shall ask my mother, and if she is willing, we shall live together. So you go home now and sleep."

After he had left she went down and spoke to her parents, telling them that the young man living north of the village at Achamali had asked her to marry him. They said that they would be glad if he would live with them and he was welcome, "If he has not spoken a falsehood he will certainly come back again," they said. Whereupon they retired for the night.

When the young man arrived at his home, he was asked by his grandmother what he had found out. "Yes," he said, ''I have good news; she is willing." Hereupon they too retired for the night. In the morning the grandmother said to her grandson: "You have a big field here. Some of your corn has certainly matured, so you prepare some steamed sweet corn." "Very well," he said. So he gathered some sweet corn-ears, heated his oven, and threw into it a good many corn-ears. In the evening they were done. He took them out, took off the husks, and strung the corn-ears on strings of yucca leaves, preparing about ten bunches of corn ears, By this time the sun had gone down. After a little while he wrapped up the corn-ears that he had strung up, and proceeded to the village.

The maiden was still grinding corn. He left the presents on the ground in front of the house, on the plaza, and went up. "Have you come?" the maiden said. "Yes," he replied. "Very well," she said, come in." Hereupon he went down, got his bundle. and brought it in. A fire was burning at the fireplace. He took a seat by the side of the fireplace. The maiden stopped her grinding and took a seat on the opposite side. The young man had a mask on with three nodules on top, from which small turkey feathers were suspended. It was the Ball-Head (Tatciqto). He handed the maiden the sweet corn-ears that he had brought, saying to her, "You take this and eat it." She was happy and thanked him for it. "Thanks," she said, "on your account I shall eat it." Hereupon she took part of the corn down to her parents who were also glad, and ate of it because they were new corn ears.

[p. 75]

Returning to the room where the young man was sitting, they conversed together for a while. ''Very well," the maiden said, "I shall now save the corn-meal that I am grinding, then sometime I shall come over to your house." Whereupon they separated, the young man going back to his house, and the mana also retiring for the night. Hereupon the maiden ground blue corn for four days. On the fifth day she ground white corn. Every evening the young man brought over some fresh sweet corn-ears, which the people of the house ate. In the evening of the fifth day he did not bring any, but he came to fetch his bride. She and her mother filled a large tray full of the white meal, tied it up in an ato'o, which she then took in her hands, and followed the young man to his house. When they arrived there he went in first. His grandmother welcomed the maiden to her house and invited her repeatedly to come in. The young man also told her to come in.

So she entered. She first handed the tray with meal to the grandmother,, who thanked her for it, and put the meal away. They then ate the evening meal, which consisted of corn, melons, and watermelons. After having conversed for some little time they retired for the night, the mana sleeping with the grandmother. Early in the morning when the yellow dawn was appearing the grandmother and the maiden went out to kuivato (to make prayer-offerings, consisting of sacred meal, to the dawn and rising sun). Returning to the kiva, the grandmother got out four Kohonino trays (chukavotas) and a lot of corn, which the mana was shelling, filling the four trays. When they were filled, the grandmother told her grandson to go and call his animals.

He went out and called them by saying "pi-pi-pi-pi!" whereupon a great many chickens came running to the kiva. When they had come in, the young man first took one tray, scattering the corn to the chickens. When they had eaten that he scattered the corn from another tray, and so on until they were all emptied. He then told them to sit down on the banquette that was running along the wall all around the kiva, which they did. The four empty trays he placed in a row north of the fireplace, Hereupon he said to the chickens: "I am going to sing for you now, so you listen to me attentively, and then afterward s sing the same way."

Hereupon he hung a little drum over his shoulder, gave a signal on the drum, when all the chickens looked at him and listened attentively, while the young man sang the following song, accompanying it by beating the drum:

[p. 76]

Aha ihi aha
 Kowakoho ngumanta (The chicken was grinding meal),
 Angwushihi ngumanta (The crow was grinding meal).
 Takahayakwi, tanaymahka.
 Ahaha! ihihihihii!

The mana was sitting near the fireplace. While the young man was singing the song, the chickens all swayed their bodies from side to side to the time of the singing, and by doing so ground the corn which they had taken into their bodies. When he had sung the song five times he said to the chickens: "Now then, come and vomit your meal into these trays." So one after the other came and vomited the meal which it had ground in its body into the tray. It was very fine white meal. When they were all through they left the kiva.

In this way the chickens assisted the maiden in getting all that corn ground quickly, so that she did not have to grind it herself as is usually the case. This meal they then used afterwards. But the young man had no cotton, and so no bridal costume was prepared for the bride, for which she was sorry. The young man, however, was a hunter and often brought home rabbits and other game. After the maiden had lived there awhile the grandmother said to her: "Now then, you have been here a long time, you prepare some good food." This the mana did in the morning, preparing some pik'ami and other food. The young man again went hunting and returned with rabbits. The grandmother prepared a great deal of no'qkwiwi. In the evening they spread the food on the floor, filling a great many bowls and trays. When they had spread out the food the grandmother went out and called out: "You my neighbors here, come in and eat, and be not slow about it, but come in and eat."

Hereupon the three sat down and commenced to eat. While they were eating the people began to come in. The first one that came in carried under his arm a large white bridal robe; the second one a small bridal robe; the third one a white knotted belt; the fourth one a pair of bridal moccasins; and the fifth one a reed receptacle. Having placed the same on the floor, they sat down and ate. Hereupon they exhorted the young man, saying to him that when he would now take his bride home and live there in the village he should be good to the people and he should not be angry at them, but should benefit them, whereupon they left the kiva.

Early in the morning the grandmother made some yucca suds and washed the mana's head. When her hair was dry she took her out and sprinkled meal to the rising sun. When they returned she

[p. 77]

dressed her up in the bridal costume. The young man put four watermelons in a blanket, and just as the sun was rising they all went out, the grandmother sprinkling a road of meal for her children, and then told them to go on now, whereupon they proceeded to the village, to the house of the bride. Arriving at the house they were welcomed by the mother of the bride who took the bridal costume and also the watermelons, which the young man had brought and put everything away. Hereupon the young people lived in the village, and as the young man was a Katcina the village prospered, it always rained and they had much to eat. But by and by his wife went astray, at which her husband became angry and left the village, returning to his house again. After that it did not rain so much, the people became poor, and it is still that way.

Footnotes

^73:1 Told by Macahongva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

17. THE AHO'LI AND OTHER WALPI KATCINAS. [*1]

Aliksai! In Walpi and Sitcomovi they were living, but not at the places where the villages now are, but where they used to be. In Walpi lived an old man, the Aho'li Katcina. He had with him a little maiden who was his sister, the Katcin-mana. As he was very old and feeble this maiden would always lead him. In the other village, Sitcomovi, lived a youth with his old grandmother, and as she also was very feeble he took care of her and used to lead her. One time the Aho'li and the little maiden went to their field 'south of Walpi where they wanted to plant. They carried with them little pouches containing seeds. In their field was a baho shrine, and when they came to their field the Katcina first deposited some prayer-offerings in the shrine, first some corn-meal and then also some nakwakwosis which he drew forth from his corn-meal bag. This bag he had tied around his neck.

In this shrine lived Mu'yingwa and his sister Naya'ngap Wuhti. "Have you come?" Mu'yingwa said. "Yes, we have come," they replied. "Thanks," Naya'ngap Wuhti said, "thanks, our father, that you have come. You have remembered us. No one has thought about us for a long time and brought some offering here, but you have thought about us." And she began to cry. Hereupon Aho'li gave to each one a stick upon which some nakwakwosis were strung, and also some corn-meal. Hereupon Naya'ngap Wuhti was crying still more. "Yes, we have come here," the Katcina said, "we are pitying our people because they have not had any crops for a long time, and now we thought about you here and have

[p. 78]

brought these prayer-offerings here. And now you pity them and let it rain now, and when it rains then a crop will grow again and they will have something to eat, and they will then be strengthened and revived, because they are only living a very little now.

Hereupon he took out his little bundles of seed and gave to the goddess a small quantity of yellow, blue, red, and white corn as an offering. These he placed before her on the ground. The two deities then arose. Mu'yingwa had in his left hand a mongkoho, mongwikuru, and a perfect corn-ear (chochmingwuu). These he pointed upwards towards the sky. The female deity held in her hand a squash, which was filled with all kinds of seeds, and as Mu'yingwa pointed up the objects towards the sky she raised the squash with both hands, and then forcibly threw it on the ground on the seeds which the Aho'li had placed there. "There," she said, "in this way I have now planted for all of your people these seeds and they will now have crops." Thereupon Mu'yingwa handed the objects which he held in his hand to the Katcina, saying, "You take these with you and with them you produce rain and crops for your children, the people in Walpi."

So the Aho'li and the Katcin-maha returned, first going to their booth, or shelter (kisi), that was near by in the field. Here they partook of the food which they had brought with them. "Thanks," the Aho'li said, "thanks that our father was willing. We shall not now go back to the village in vain." "Yes, thanks," the mana also said. Hereupon they returned to the village. It was now late in the afternoon. As they passed the top of the mesa upon which Walpi is now situated, they heard somebody singing on top of the bluff, but they went on, and arriving at their kiva they sat down north of the fireplace and smoked over the objects which they had brought with them. "Thanks that we have returned," the Aho'li said, ''that we have not been too late for our people. We shall now possess our people." And as they were smoking and thus talking somebody came and entered the house. It was the youth who lived with his old grandmother in Sitcomovi. He came in. "Thanks that you have come," he said, "thanks that you have come and provided something for our people here," whereupon he shook hands with them. "Sit down," Aho'li said, "and smoke, too." So the youth filled the pipe with tobacco that he had brought with him and also smoked over the objects. He took special pains to blow the smoke in ringlets upon the objects. After he had done that four times, also praying to the objects, they became moist so that the water was beginning to flow from them, indicating that their efforts

[p. 79]

had been successful and that these objects would produce rain, which was symbolized by this moisture.

Hereupon the youth prepared to return to his home, but Aho'li restrained him and said: "Now, tomorrow when the sun rises we shall make a prayer-offering and you must do the same, because when we came we heard somebody sing away up there somewhere." So early the next morning they dressed up in their costumes, the Katcina being dressed in a tu'ihi, a kilt, and his mask; his body also being painted nicely. In his right band he carried a stick, nato'ngpi, to the middle of which were tied beads and a bundle of bahos. In his left hand he carried the objects which he had obtained the previous day. The mana was dressed as the Katcin-manas are yet dressed to-day. She carried in her left arm a tray (pota), containing different kinds of seeds. They proceeded to a baho shrine west of the present village of Walpi, half-way down the mesa. Here they sprinkled a little meal to the sun and on the shrine, this little rite being called kuivato. As they were performing this rite they again heard the same voice singing on top of the mesa, which they had heard before.

There were then no villages on top of the mesa, but the shrine of Talawhtoika was there already, and at this shrine some one was singing. When looking up they say that it was the Big-Horn (Wopakal) Katcina. Hereupon they returned to their house, but immediately started up on the mesa to look for and meet the one that they had heard singing. So they went up and reached the top of the mesa somewhat west of the bahoki. Here they noticed some one dressed in a white mask with very small openings for the mouth and eyes. His body was also white and he wore a thin bandoleer with blue yarn over his shoulder. He was standing by the side of the shrine shaking a rattle of bones slowly up and down. After having shaken the rattle four times he started off. "Wait," the Aho'li Katcina said, "wait, we have heard some singing up here and want to see who it is." "Yes," the other Katcina, which was the A'ototo, replied, "yes, I am not singing, but we are two of us here, and the other one was singing." By this time the Big-Horn Katcina came from the west end of the mesa holding in his left hand a bow, and having a quiver strung over his right shoulder. He had a green mask with a big horn on the right side and an ear on the left. He wore a nice kilt, nice ankle bands, and his body was painted up nicely. When he arrived at the shrine he asked the A'ototo: "Why do you tarry here?" "Yes," the A'ototo replied, "these are detaining me." "Why?" the Big-Horn Katcina asked. "We heard some

[p. 80]

body singing here," the Aho'li replied, "and we came up here to see who it was, and so it is you. Now, what do you think," he continued, "let us go down all together and then we shall possess the people," and he told the Katcinas about what they had obtained and were going to do. So the two Katcinas were willing and they prepared to go down.

The A'ototo took the lead and was followed by the Aho'li Katcina, and the mana, the Big-Horn Katcina coming last. This way they went down a part of the way at a place west of the present village of Hano. Here they made a baho shrine (bahoki), erecting some stones as a mark between the villages of Hano and Sitcomovi. This shrine is still there. They then went farther down to the present gap north of Hano to the large shrine with the twisted stone which is still there, Here they met somebody coming out of that shrine and then going up and down there. It was somebody dangerous (nukpana), who had large protruding eyes and a big mouth in his mask, and many rattles around his body and along the front part of his legs. His arms were painted white, his body red. Around his shoulders he had a small blanket of rabbit skin. On his feet he had old, torn, black moccasins. In his right hand he had a large knife, in his left hand a crook, to which a number of mosililis were attached. [*1] It was the Cooyoko, who used to kill and devour children there. When the Katcinas saw him they said to him: "Do not trouble us, we are going to possess these people here. We are going home now. You can destroy the bad ones, since you are bad anyway, but do not trouble us.

Hereupon they descended and went to their home. When they arrived at the house of the Aho'li, which was a very beautiful house, the Aho'li said: "Now, here we are, and you stay with us. It is not good down here it does not rain, but up there where you are it is better. When it will rain here you can go back, but we want to help the people first. So to-morrow morning we shall go to the fields and plant for the people. "During the night they did not sleep but they were singing all night, on their masks, which they had standing in a row in the north side of the room. When the yellow dawn was appearing before sunrise it commenced to rain, and it rained hard. Towards noon the Katcinas dressed up, putting on their masks, went out, crossed the mesa, came to the fields south of the mesa, and there they beheld large fields of corn, patches filled with melons, watermelons, and squashes. Everything was growing beautifully.

[p. 81]

Having looked around a little while they turned around, taking with them a watermelon, an ear of fresh corn, and a melon. It was still raining so that their feet sank deep into the ground.

When they arrived close to the mesa somebody met them. It was Big-Skeleton (Wokomasauwuu), who owns the earth and the fields. He lived about half-way down the mesa near the mesa point. He told the Katcinas that they should go up the mesa and prepare a house there and live there, and from there they should perform their rites. So they went up on top of the mesa and have lived there ever since. Soon after that the Walpi also commenced to move up the mesa and build the new village, where it is at the present time situated.

Footnotes

^77:1 Told by Kuhkuima (Shupaulavi).

^80:1 Mosililis, cone-shaped shells from one to two inches long, which are tied by means of thin buckskin thongs to sticks that are from six to eight inches long and bent at one end. These rattles are highly prized by the Hopi and are used in various ceremonies, but, chiefly in those of the Flute Fraternities. Shells of this kind are among the objects found in the ruins of Tusayan.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

18. THE TWO WAR GODS AND THE TWO MAIDENS. [*1]

A long time ago Pookonghoya and his little brother Balo'ngahoya lived north of the village at the shrine of the Achamali. One day they heard that two beautiful maidens were watching some fields west of the village of Hu'ckovi, of which the ruins may still be seen a few miles north-west of Oraibi. They concluded that they would go hunting and at the same time visit those two maidens. When they arrived there the maidens joyfully greeted them and they were joking and teasing each other. The maidens believed that the two brothers had come with the intention to marry them, and they said, in a half-jesting manner, to their suitors: "We will cut off an arm from each one of you, and if you do not die you may own us." The younger brother was at once willing, saying to his elder brother: "They are beautiful; let us not be afraid of having our arm cut off." The elder brother hesitated, saying, that that would hurt. So the younger brother said, "I am willing," laid his right arm over the edge of the mealing trough at which the maidens had been working, and one of the maidens struck the arm with the upper mealing stone and cut it off, the arm dropping into the trough or bin. His elder brother hereupon laid his arm over the edge of the bin, which consisted of a thin, sharp slab, and the other maiden also cut his arm off with her mealing stone. Now the two brothers said: "If we recover, we shall come after you. Hand us our arm, now." The maidens did so and the two brothers left, each one carrying his severed arm, Arriving at their home north of Oraibi, they told their grandmother what had happened. "There," she said, "you have been in something again and have done some mischief." "Yes," they said, "We met two beautiful

[p. 82]

maidens and liked them very much, and so we allowed them to cut off our arms. Very well, she said, "I am going to set you right again." So she asked them to lay down north of the fireplace. She placed the two arms by their sides, covered them up, whereupon she commenced to sing a song. When she was through singing, she told them now to get up. They did so and found their arms healed. The next day they proceeded to the house of the maidens, who were surprised to see them fully recovered. The older of the two sisters was the prettier one and Pookonghoya wanted to choose that one. His younger brother protested, saying: "Yesterday you were not willing to have your arm cut off, as you were then afraid, and now you want to have the first choice. I had my arm cut off first and I am going to choose first," to which his elder brother finally consented. They slept with the maidens that night and then left them and returned to their home north of Oraibi.

Footnotes

^81:1 Told by Qoyawainia (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

19. THE POOKONGHOYAS AND THE CANNIBAL MONSTER. [*1]

A very long time ago a large monster, whom our forefathers called Shita, lived somewhere in the west, and used to come to the village of Oraibi and wherever it would find children it would devour them. Often also grown people were eaten by the monster. The people became very much alarmed over the matter, and especially the village chief was very much worried over it. Finally he concluded to ask the Pookonghoyas for assistance. These latter, namely Pookonghoya and his younger brother Balo'ngahoya, lived north of and close to the village of Oraibi. When the village chief asked them to rid them of this monster they told him to make an arrow for each one of them. He did so, using for the shaft feathers, the wing feathers of the bluebird. These arrows he brought to the little War Gods mentioned. They said to each other: "Now let us go and see whether such a monster exists and whether we can find it." So they first went to Oraibi and kept on the watch around the village. One time, when they were on the east side of the village at the edge of the mesa, they noticed something approaching from the west side. They at once went there and saw that it was the monster that they were to destroy. When the monster met the two brothers it said to them: "I eat you" (Shita). Both brothers objected. The monster at once swallowed the older one and then the other one. They found that it was not dark inside of the monster, in fact, they found themselves on a path which the younger brother, who had been swallowed last, followed,

[p. 83]

soon overtaking his older brother. The two brothers laughed and said to each other: ''So this is the way we find it here. We are not going to die here." They found that the path on which they were going was the oesophagus of the monster, which led into its stomach. In the latter they found a great many people of different nationalities which the monster had devoured in different parts of the earth; in fact, they found the stomach to be a little world in itself, with grass, trees, rock, etc.

Before the two brothers had left their home on their expedition to kill the monster, if possible, their grandmother had told them that in case the monster should swallow them too, to try to find its heart; if they could shoot into the heart the monster would die. So they concluded that they would now go in search of the heart of the monster. They finally found the path which led out of the stomach, and after following that path quite a distance they saw way above them hanging something which they at once concluded must be the heart of the monster. Pookonghoya at once shot an arrow at it, but failed to reach it, the arrow dropping back. Hereupon his younger brother tried it and his arrow pierced the heart, whereupon the older brother also shot his arrow into the heart. Then it became dark and, the people noticed that the monster was dying. The two brothers called all the people together and said to them: "Now let us get out." They led them along the path to the mouth of the monster, but found that they could not get out because the teeth of the monster had set firmly in death. They tried in vain to open the mouth but finally discovered a passage leading up into the nose. Through this they then emerged.

It was found that a great many people assembled there north of the village. The village chief had cried out that a great many people had arrived north of the village and asked his people to assemble there too. They did so and many found their children and relatives that had been carried off by the monster, and were very glad to have them back again.

The two brothers then said to the others that they should now move on and try to find their own homes where they had come from, which they did, settling down temporarily at different places, which accounts for the many small ruins scattered throughout the country The old people say that this monster was really a world or a country, as some call it, similar to the world that we are living in.

Footnotes

^82:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84]

  

20. POOKONGHOYA AND HIS BROTHER AS THIEVES. [*1]

Aliksai! At Shongopavi they were living; at the place where Shongopavi used to be and where there are still the ruins of the old village, they were living. North of the village, but close by, lived Po'okong [*1] and his brother. They lived there with their grandmother. Often they would play with their ball, and one time they were also playing with their ball, striking it, and playing with it towards Toriva. When they arrived here they were thirsty, and went into the spring to drink water. When they had satisfied their thirst they were going to continue their playing, when they saw a lot of bahos at the place where the water comes out. "Let us take these along," the younger brother said, and taking one of the bahos, he swallowed it. "You swallow one too," he then said to his elder brother; but by this time the latter discovered in the recess in the rocks somewhat high up, some potsherds, or bowls, with different kinds of paints which the Flute priests had deposited there. "Let us take some of this," he said to his younger brother, whereupon he put into his ball, through little holes and openings that had been made in the buckskin covering through long usage, some of each kind of paint. After having put the paints into the ball he sewed up the holes. Hereupon he replaced the ball again and then said to his brother: "Now let us go, and before we will get home it will rain if we continue to beat our ball now in this way."

So they started, beating the ball towards the Corn-Ear Bluffs that are still standing at the place where the old village of Mishongnovi used to be. One of the brothers was beating the ball forward and the other one backward, and in this way they proceeded to the village. Before they had reached the village, the people of Mishongnovi had discovered them. They were beating their ball around north of the village for a little While, the children of the village looking on and shouting at them. Hereupon they entered the village and kept beating their ball through the village. All at once they entered one of the kivas and found that the Flute priests were assembled in this kiva for their ceremony. In one of the trays that were standing on the floor was lying a lightning frame, thunder board, netted water jug, etc. This tray they grabbed and went out. None of the priests said anything.

Hereupon they went into another kiva where the Snake priests

[p. 85]

were assembled for their ceremony. They were just washing the snakes in a bowl. The Pookonghoyas grabbed a bull-snake (lolo'okong), put it into a snake-sack and left the kiva, the younger brother holding this bag under one arm, the elder brother carrying the tray with the objects. In this manner they proceeded towards the Corn-Ear bluffs,, constantly beating their ball. When they arrived at the Corn-Ear Bluffs they found a great many bahos, little artificial melons, watermelons, and peaches which the Hopi had made and deposited in the different niches, cracks, etc. They had been deposited here by the different societies in their different ceremonies as prayer-offerings, that they might have an abundance of these things. On top of the rocks they saw the Watcher (Tu'walahka), who owns this rock. It was Cotukvnangwuu, who was sitting there in the form of an old man. "Oh my!" the younger brother said, "How many prayer-offerings there are here! Let us steal some of them and take them home;" but the elder brother refused to do so, so the younger brother ascended the rock along a crack and took from one of the places where the prayer-offerings had been deposited a corn baho, a watermelon, and a melon, and brought them down.

Hereupon they started homeward again, beating their ball. They again went by the spring Toriva where they drank, this time, however, not stealing anything. They then started towards Shongopavi along the trail. After they had gone a little distance they shot the lightning frame, and twirled the bullroarer several times. By the time they had reached the canyon, or gulch, right east of Shongopavi, and as they were beginning to ascend to the village, clouds had gathered in the sky and it began to thunder and rays of lightning began shooting through the sky. Soon it began to rain.

They began to run towards their house, and just as they arrived there they once more shot the lightning frame and twirled the thunder board. By this time it thundered very hard and loud, and lightning was flashing. One of the Hopi houses in the village was struck and shattered. By this time they had arrived at their house. "Who are those little mischief makers that are coming there?" their grand Mother said. "You are bad." But the two brothers rushed into the house and put the lightning frame, thunder board, the snake, the little artificial melons, bahos and the paint, which they had brought with them, quickly but secretly into two pots which they covered up. And because the Pookonghoyas afterwards had these things they were the cause that it always rained and the Hopi had good crops.

Footnotes

^84:1 Told by Kuhkuima (Shupaulavi).

2 Po'okong and the diminutive form Pookonghoya are used promiscuously by the Hopi, as may be seen in several of these tales.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

21. HOW THE PO'OKONGS DESTROYED COOYOKO AND HIS WIFE. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi the people were living, but there were a great many people at that time living there, and it frequently happened that when the men or women would get wood, some of them did not return, and the people were thinking about it and wondering what became of these people, whether they had gone away or whether they had been killed. They were worried about it. So one time a man again went after wood. He took his straps, tied them around his body and went to Hotvala (a spring about five miles northwest of Oraibi). North of this spring he gathered some wood, made the usual frame-work of wooded sticks into which he piled the wood, put the wood on his back, and went to the path leading to Oraibi, when he heard a voice. Somebody was singing the following song:

Iya yahina kilicina hanaa,
 Iya yahina kilicina hanaa,
 Honayish pichiya cakicta,
 Koovna ahinahina,
 Toyashkakolita Cooyokooo.

[These words are archaic and are not understood by the Hopi.}

It was the Cooyoko. When he saw that somebody came with wood, he said: "Now then, I shall feast upon that one." The man carrying the wood, however, quickly threw down his large burden of wood and crawled under it. When the Cooyoko arrived at the place he could not find the man, and thought he had escaped. ''Let me go on farther, I may find some one else," he said, and so proceeded to another place in the woods singing the same song again. Here he found a woman getting a burden of wood ready. "Now then, I shall feast upon that one," he said again.

When the woman saw him she was very much afraid and ran and climbed a juniper-tree, micturating as she did so. When the Cooyoko arrived at the tree he noticed some moisture on the ground and said: "There must be clouds somewhere, it has been raining." So he left the place and went westward saying: "I shall hunt somebody else," and as he went along he sang the same song again. The man whom he had met first, had in the meanwhile escaped, and the woman also climbed down, when the Cooyoko had left her, and ran away to the village. These two informed the people in the village that it was Cooyoko who killed the Oraibi people. When the village chief heard this he was very sorry and was thinking. He was thinking in the night who could help him.

[p. 87]

So the next morning he went over to the shrine of Achamali (about one-eighth of a mile north of Oraibi), where the Po'okongs (Pookonghoya and Balo'ongawhoya) lived with their grandmother, Spider Woman. Spider Woman told him to come in and sit down. The two brothers were playing with their ball and did not hear the chief enter. The woman told them to stop, as some one had come in, but they would not listen, so she struck one over the back. "What Is It?" he said, but continued to play. She finally grasped him by both arms and told him to stop as somebody had come in. So they stopped their playing. Hereupon she said to the chief: "Now, what is it? You certainly have come for some reason." "Yes," he said; "these, my children here in Oraibi when they get wood they are killed, and it is Cooyoko who kills them, and I want you to take revenge on him. That is the reason why I have come here.'' "Yes," they said, "he does it. He is our uncle and he is bad, but we shall help you. We shall go there." Hereupon the chief asked them what they would want for it. They said that he should make some of those balls, when they had killed him, because those were what they wanted.

The chief hereupon returned to the village. The next morning the two brothers took their bow, their arrows, which consisted of lightning, and their ball. As they went along they kept striking their ball before them. One of them struck it forward, and the other one backward, and in this way they slowly proceeded. They finally arrived at the Cooyoko's house. This was located at Munaovi on top of the mesa, a short distance east of Oraibi (about four miles). When they came here they looked into the house, but Cooyoko was gone. His wife, Cooyok Wuhti, had also gone away. They followed the tracks of the latter westward, and found her at a place sitting and killing white lice in her dress. "There is somebody sitting," they said to each other, and laughed at her. "Now let us do something to her," the elder brother said, "because she does not notice us." Hereupon they both shot a lightning arrow at her, which shattered 'her to pieces. "Now, let, us go to the house," they said, which they did.

When they arrived there Cooyoko had not yet returned, so they went in and looked around. They found in one of the rooms still fresh human flesh that had just been fried, and they found hanging on the wall a great many beads, clothing, and scalps that had been taken from the Hopi whom the Cooyoko had killed. Here they now waited for the return of Cooyoko. Soon they heard him come. He was singing the same song that he had been singing before. "He

[p. 88]

is coming now," the youths said to each other, and when he carne upon the roof of the house or kiva they heard him throw down some, thing. "He has killed somebody again, because he is throwing down something," they said to each other. When Cooyoko came into the kiva he found no one there, and said to himself: ''She has not yet returned," referring to his wife, "because there is no fire at the fireplace." He laid down his bow and arrows and his stone axe, and hunted for something to eat.

The Pookonghoyas had hidden themselves behind the mealingbin. When they saw him walking around there they said to each other: "Now let us kill him." So each one shot lightning arrows at him and he was killed. The Pookonghoyas hereupon took his knife, scalped him, and then took many beads and a great many other things that they found in the house, and returned to their home. So they were now very wealthy. Going home they did not strike their ball before them because they had so many things to carry. When they had arrived in their home they had a dance, swinging the scalp of the Cooyoko while they were dancing and singing the following song:

          Aynikohinahina,
   Aynikohinahina,
   Aynikohinahina,
   Hataina, hataina,
   Aynikohinahina
   Pookonghoyo, Cooyoyoko
   (The) Pookongs, (the) Cooyoko.
   Taalcha, hataina hataina
   Aynikohina hina.

       The words are archaic and no longer understood except the two proper names   and the word taalcha. The last word is said to be the Navaho word for kill.

     
   When the village chief heard that they had returned he cut two round pieces out of a large buckskin and made two nice balls of these two pieces. He also made a ball stick for each one. These he took and went to the house of the Po'okongs. What have you found out?" he asked them. "We have killed them." they replied. "Thanks," he said, "that you have killed them." Hereupon he handed them the balls and sticks. After that the Hopi always returned when they went after wood.

Footnotes

^86:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

  

22. HOW PO'OKONG KILLED THE BEAR. [*1]

Mishongnovi they were living, and a bear used to kill the people. At the Skeleton Katcina house lived the Po'okong with his grandmother, and the bear was killing the people. If some one went to his field he was killed. The chief was unhappy over it and was thinking about it. He was thinking about sending Po'okong after it, and for this now the time had arrived. And now he made a bow for the Po'okong of hard wood, and he made arrows and put parrot feathers on the arrows, and on one of the arrows he put blue-bird feathers. He also made a ball that he cut from a buckskin. He sewed it and put cotton into it and then tied it up tightly. He made one of them and rubbed red ochre (cuta) on it, and for the grandmother he made one baho.

When he was done he brought this to the house of the Po'okong.

The grandmother asked: "What are you doing?" "Yes," he said, "when these, my children, are killed by a bear I am not happy."

"Hao," she said to him, and now the chief said: "Yes, hence I have brought this for you," and then he handed it to the grandmother. She was happy. "Thanks," she said, "thanks." Then he said to the Po'okong: "With this you kill the bear, because I have made this for you;" whereupon he gave the ball, the bow and arrows, and the ball stick to the Po'okong. "Thanks, thanks," the Po'okong said, and was happy. Now he went to hunt the bear. The bear was just going around to hunt for some one, and the Po'okong was also going about in that way, and sure enough, something came to him, running. Now it stood up, holding up the paws. Now the Po'okong being seated, aimed. "Haha (very well)," the bear had now about arrived, but when he had not yet quite arrived, the Po'okong shot and hit him in the throat. When he had shot the bear fell, and now he hit him with the ball stick, and the bear died.

He then skinned him, the legs first, but he did not cut the abdomen. He left the skin in the form of a bag, pulling it over his head like a shirt, but from the feet he cut off the claws. Now he filled it up tightly with dry grass. When he was done he had made something like a bear. Oh! it was like an ugly bear. Now he tied a woollen rope around his neck. Then he tied it to himself and dragging it ran very fast, screaming: "Uhu, a bear is following me," as he ran. Now the people saw it. Sure enough, a bear came following somebody, and he had almost caught him. "Why, he is following the Po'okong," the people said, and then they ran. Now they

[p. 90]

told the grandmother, "A bear is following your grandchild." Now alas! the grandmother ran away crying, and went into her kiva.

The Po'okong ascended to the house and threw the bear to the grandmother. The grandmother now, because she was so seared, died at once. The Po'okong laughed at the grandmother and kicked her. "Get up," he said to her, and the grandmother woke up. When she sat up she whipped her grandchild hard. "You are naughty, you have scared me," she said to him; but he had been dragging something dead. The chief was very happy because he heard that he had killed him. From that time the bear stopped. After that he killed no more people. So after that it was better.

Footnotes

^89:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi)

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

23. THE PO'OKONGS ATTEND A DANCE. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi the people were living, and north of the village at Achamali lived the Po'okongs with their grandmother, Spider Woman. One time the Po'okongs heard that the Lalakontu were going to have a dance at Shongopavi. "Our grandmother," they said, "Ha!" she answered. "They are going to have a dance at Shongopavi," the Po'okongs said, "and we want to go and look on, too." "Very well," she said, "you go there, but you are unsightly, and no one will invite you in to eat, so you take this food along." Hereupon she handed them a little hurushuki. They took this and their feathered arrows and their corn-husk wheels and left.

As they went along they changed about in throwing their wheels and shooting their feathered arrows at them. They thus arrived at the village, passed through the village, and down the mesa south of it, away into the fields in the valley south-east of Oraibi. It was noon by the time they got there. Here they came to a sand hill, where a great deal of kutuk-wuhci (a kind of grass) was growing. As the wind was blowing hard the grass was waving and producing a hissing noise. When the Po'okongs saw it, they said: "This grass is dancing here, let us attend this dance," whereupon they stooped down and looked at the grass as it was swaying from side to side, being moved by the wind.

In the evening they returned to the village, not, however, playing this time as they went along. When they arrived at their grandmother's house she asked: "Have you come?" "Yes," they replied, "and we are very tired." "To be sure," she said, "because it is far to Shongopavi. Did you see the dance well? How did they dance?" "Yes," they said, "we looked at it well and we enjoyed it.

[p. 91]

We went to the fields south-east of Oraibi and there on a sand hill we found something in tassels there, and the wind was waving it, and it always said, psh-sh-sh-sh-sh-, and there we remained and looked .at that dance." "You are fools," Spider Woman said; "that was not Shongopavi. Shongopavi is farther on and is away high up, and when the Lalakontu dance they hold potas in their hands and wave them up and down, and then they throw them into the air and the men shout and catch these potas. Now, I was thinking that you would also bring one that we could put our hurushuki in, and that is the reason why I sent you. Why, what you saw there was simply kutuk-wuhci that was waving in the wind. Fools you are!"

They were then living there and soon a Lalakontu dance occurred at Mishongnovi. "Now, I am going to send you there," Spider Woman said to the Po'okongs; "the Oraibis are certainly going there too, to look on. But you must go, straight ahead there and not be playing as you go along. When you go down you will see the Oraibis going and you follow them, and when you get there you look on well. You will see them throw trays. You will hear the men shout and get the trays. You look at everything well and do not be slow about it; now go on. "When they had eaten their meal Spider Woman said: "Now, do not take your wheels and arrows along." So they started and passed along through the village and followed the trail. They saw the Oraibis going to Mishongnovi. They followed them this time without playing on the road, and finally they also arrived at Mishongnovi. But they were filthy, and the phlegm that was running out of their noses they would wipe over their hands, and the people saw it. As the dance was going on, and the trays and sieves were thrown up, the Po'okongs saw the men getting them, but they did not get any. Then the people of Mishongnovi invited their friends to come to their houses and eat with them, but no one invited the Po'okongs. So they became very hungry, and towards evening they said to each other: "Let us go home now, because we are getting hungry. But we are going to take some trays along." While the women were dancing the two went into the circle and each one snatched a tray from one of the dancers and then they ran home.

When the grandmother saw the pretty trays that they had brought she was very happy. "Thanks," she said, "thanks. Now you have been there, now you have seen it, and you have brought some pretty trays in which we shall keep our hurushuki." "Yes," they said, we were there and saw the dance. So that is the way they are doing. We enjoyed it. But no one invited us to eat, and we are Very hungry." Hereupon Spider Woman placed some hurushuki

[p. 92]

before them and fed them. The Po'okongs were angry that they had not been fed in Mishongnovi.

At that time the Hopi found salt at a place north-west, not quite so far away as they have to get it now. The salt belonged to the Po'okongs, so they said: "We are going to remove that salt farther away. If they had fed us, although we are unsightly, they could continue to get it from the place close by; but as they have not fed us we are going to remove it far away, so that they will be put to a greater trouble in getting their salt." Spider Woman at first objected, but they would not listen and started. Arriving at the nearest place where there was some salt they picked that up and carried it away a long distance, descended a very steep bluff with it, and laid it down there. So ever since the Hopi can find only a very little salt at the first place and have to get most of their salt from that farther place, which is so very deep down and so difficult of access.

Footnotes

^90:1 Told by Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

24. HOW PO'OKONG WON A BRIDE. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi they were living. There were a great many people. At Pik'achvi lived a family who had a pretty maiden who persistently refused all offers of marriage. Pookonghoya and his brother Balo'onghoya, who lived at Pookongwawarzhpi with their grandmother, Spider Woman, heard about this. They were thinking about it, and one time said to their grandmother: "Our grandmother!" "What is it?" she replied. "There is a maiden in the village," they said, "who refuses to marry any one of the young men of the village. We are going to try, too." "You poor ones," she said, "you are too small and you are unsightly, she certainly will not want you." But they would not listen and said, "But we are going to try it, anyway." "Very well," she said, "you go and try it, but she will not want you because you are not handsome."

So in the evening they took some squash seed and gathered some little sticks and went to the village. West of the house where the maiden lived a great many mice were living among the rocks. Here the Po'okongs set a number of stone traps, putting the squash seed into them. While they were engaged in setting the traps towards evening, the maiden happened to go by there and- saw them at work. "What are you doing here?" she asked. "Yes," they said," we are setting traps here for the mice." "You come to my house and set traps there, too," she said to them; "there are a great many mice there.

[p. 93]

So she took them over to her house where they set traps in different parts of the house, also close to the mealing bin. They finally asked whether they did not have a piki tray. The mother fetched one from another room and they set that near the mealing tray, instead of a small stone like in the other traps. "Now, to-morrow you must look after these traps," they said to the maiden, and left. They at once went hunting and killed an antelope. This they took to the house of the maiden during the night and placed it under the piki tray, making it appear as if it had been caught in that trap. When the maiden examined the traps the next morning she found something large under the piki tray, and looking at it she saw that it was an antelope. She at once called her father. "My father," she said, "you go in there. Something large has been caught there, and do not be slow about it." He was still sleeping, but got up at once, went into the room, and saw that something large had been caught there. "Thanks," he said. "Why this is an antelope; why, an antelope has been caught here." Hereupon he took it out of the trap and carried it into his kiva.

Here he skinned the antelope and cut it up into pieces. A part of the meat his wife cooked as no'ekwiwi, the rest he dried, and they were very happy over it. In the evening the Po'okongs took some more squash seed and again repaired to the village, where they set traps as they had done on the previous evening. While they were doing so the maiden was eating of the antelope meat and then again went to the place where the Po'okongs were setting the traps. Here she met them. "Have you come again?" she asked them." Yes, "they replied." When you are done here," she continued, "you come to our house again and set traps there, because something large was trapped there this morning and we are very happy over it."

They went with her to the house and there set traps everywhere again. When they came to the tray the maiden said to them: "Here something large was caught last night and of that we are eating now. We are very happy over it. So you must set that again, too." While they were setting this the father came in and asked them: "Are you setting traps here again?" "Yes," they replied. "Very well," he said, "last night an antelope was caught in this trap and of that we have been eating and we are very happy over it. You have by that terminated something here (referring to the persistent refusals of the maiden to enter into marriage), so if to-morrow morning something is caught in this trap again, you come here to-morrow evening and get our daughter."

In the night the Po'okongs killed a deer, of which they owned

[p. 94]

many, and carried it to the house of the maiden, where they placed it under the piki tray trap. In the morning when the maiden arose she saw something under the trap with big antlers. Running to her father she called him, saying: "My father, come quickly. There is something large in the trap." So he came and found a deer there. "Thanks," he said, "this is a deer," and taking it out they carried it to the kiva where he skinned it and cut up the meat. His wife again cooked a part of it, while he hung all the rest up to dry. There was a great deal of meat hanging outside of his house and they were very happy over it.

"To-night you wait for somebody here," he said to his daughter, Towards evening they were eating of the meat that the mother had cooked, and in the evening the maiden was grinding corn. In the house of the two Po'okongs the two brothers were getting ready to go to the house of the maiden, but they began to quarrel about it. "I am going," Po'okong said. "No, indeed," his brother replied, "I'm going," and thus they were contending with each other. "Now, why do you quarrel about this?" their grandmother asked them. "Certainly Po'okong must go because he is the older one." Thus she spoke to them.

So in the evening Po'okong proceeded to the house of the maiden, whom he found grinding corn in an upper room. He entered and said: "I have come because your father wished it that way." "Very well," she said, and went to call her father. Her father went to Po'okong and told him; "Yes, you know I told you that you could come and fetch our daughter because you have trapped this game for us, which we are eating and for which we are glad." Hereupon the mother filled a tray with meal for her daughter, and Po'okong then led her away to his house in order to marry her. When they arrived there the grandmother told them to come in, but she doubted whether her grandchild had brought the maiden until she saw her enter. She was then very happy and told them to sit down. She took the tray of meal from the maiden and put it away into an inner room towards the north. Coming out she placed before the maiden a small tray with a very small quantity of hurushuki, and invited the maiden to eat. The latter took the entire quantity and placed it into her mouth. Spider Woman was watching her and when she saw that she put all the hurushuki into her mouth, she said: "You must not do that, why that is 'very something,' and you must just, take a very little of it." So the maiden replaced the hurushuki into the tray and then put a very small quantity into her mouth. When she began to eat this it increased in her mouth so that her mouth was

[p. 95]

filled. She repeated this until she was satisfied and then there was some of the hurushuki left.

When the maiden had eater they soon retired for the night, the maiden sleeping with the grandmother. Early the next morning the grandmother and the maiden went out to throw an offering of sacred meal to the sun, which they did close by the entrance of the kiva. Returning to the kiva the grandmother, or Spider Woman, got some corn-ears, shelled them, and then the maiden ground this corn for three days. Early on the fourth day when the yellow dawn was rising, the grandmother went out and called out to her neighbors that they should come in and assist in washing the heads of the two. She then went in and brought out the maiden and told her to be sitting close to the kiva entrance and then wait. Soon a great many clouds came and rained upon the maiden, thus washing and bathing her. "Thanks," the grandmother said, "that you have thus washed the bride." Hereupon she took her into the kiva.

The maiden then again ground corn all day, and in the evening prepared some chukuviki. Spider Woman got some meat from one of the inner rooms, of which they then all ate. The next day this was repeated, and the maiden then made some comiviki, and in this way she prepared food for all of them day after day. But she felt unhappy because no one was carding and spinning cotton and preparing a bridal costume for her, as is always done for a bride. That way they were living there for some time. The two Po'okongs were constantly playing with their ball and stick, also with feathered arrows, but no one was preparing a bridal costume for the bride, about which she was very unhappy. But Spider Woman would often go into an inner room and they would frequently hear her say, "Thanks, thanks," to some one, but the maiden did not know to whom she was talking, but there in that room the spiders were preparing a bridal costume, first carding the cotton, then spinning it, placing it onto a loom and then weaving it.

Finally Spider Woman said one day to the bride: "you prepare some pikami now. Your parents are homesick after you and we shall then send you home." The maiden prepared some pikami, and Spider Woman some no'okwiwi, and in the evening the maiden took Out the pikami from the oven, Spider woman dipped out the no'okwiwi, and all ate and then retired for the night. In the morning Spider Woman prepared some yucca suds and with it washed the heads of Po'okong and his bride. She then entered an inner room and brought forth a complete bridal costume, which she handed to the maiden. She then again went into an inner room and brought

[p. 96]

out a large quantity of meat which she handed to Po'okong. He tied it into a bundle. Hereupon Spider Woman dressed up the bride in the bridal costume, the way it is done to-day, and then sent her on to her mother's house. Po'okong followed her, carrying on his back a large quantity of meat.

Before they started Spider Woman instructed Po'okong that when his wife shall have taken him home now to her house and he should stay there, he should not talk much, but in the evening he should sit on the floor with his arms folded over his knees and he should be looking at his wrist bands (by which she meant that he should simply be, sitting there silently, as the Hopi are usually sitting on their floors and observe silence). While they were going to the village the men who had gotten up early were sitting on their housetops and saw them come. "Here somebody is coming," they said. The two went to the house of the maiden's parents where they were welcomed by the mother, who said, "Thanks that you have come," and received from them what they were carrying.

The mother cooked all the meat which Po'okong had brought, in a vessel, and prepared a feast. After they had eaten they sat and conversed. Po'okong sat on the floor with his arms folded over his knees, but instead of looking at his wrist band, he took it off, and holding it before his eyes he looked through it. The people kept looking at him and said among themselves: "So that is his custom, that is the way he does." After they had all conversed a while they retired for the night. Early in the morning Po'okong went to his house to visit Spider Woman. When he arrived there she asked him whether he had done as she had told him to do about the wrist band. He replied: "When we were through eating and they had taken away and all the things, and the men were conversing, I took off my arm band and held it before my eyes and looked through it." "You are naughty," his grandmother said, "I did not tell you to do that way. If any one becomes a son-in-law he has to sit there quietly with his hands folded over his knees close before his face so that his eyes appear to be, looking at his arm band. You are ka hopi."

Hereupon he returned to the house of his wife again. After s(we time it was planting time and the men began to plant. Po'okong went to Spider Woman and said: ''It is planting time and we are going to plant." "Very well," she said, and gave him a small parcel of different kinds of corn to plant. This he took over to the house where he saw his father-in-law ready to go and plant. He had prepared a small sack full of corn, but Po'okong said to him: "Do not take that along, I have brought some planting-corn with me." [p. 97] Hereupon he produced a very small parcel. "That is not enough," his father-in-law said. "Yes, let us take this," Po'okong said, ''this is a great deal." "Very well," his father-in-law replied, "we shall take that," whereupon he put away the sack of corn which he had gotten ready.

Hereupon they proceeded to the field of his father-in-law and commenced to plant. Po'okong always put one grain into the hole which he had made with his planting stick, but when the man planted the first hill he put in a great deal, the way the Hopi do to-day. When Po'okong saw it he said: "You must not do that way, but just put in one grain, that is enough." The man immediately replaced the corn into the sack and put in one grain of corn only, after that, and when they were done planting they had not planted all the corn. It had kept increasing. The corn, which they had planted, soon grew up and when it rained it became larger and larger. One time it rained heavily and then much grass also came up.

Po'okong went to visit Spider Woman again. "Have you planted?" she asked him. "Yes," he said. "And when it rained a little," she kept on inquiring, "did the grass come up?" "Yes," he said, "much grass and weeds came up." She then told him that a son-in-law ought to help his father-in-law to hoe his field, so he should return and go and do that. He should take his hoe and form ant hills throughout the field (referring to the small piles of sand and earth that are formed as one is drawing a hoe through the ground; in other words, she meant that he should diligently hoe the field). "Very well," he replied, and returned to the house, where he asked for a hoe. They gave him one and he went to the field. Here, however, he laid it down and at once began to hunt ants. Finding a very large ant hill at the edge of the field he put the ants together with the earth into his blanket and formed small ant hills throughout the field, scattering ants in that way all through the corn-field.

The next morning he again proceeded to his grandmother who asked him: "I told you yesterday to go and hoe the field, what have you done about it? How much did you hoe?" "Yes," he said, "you told me yesterday, so I went to the field, laid down my hoe, and then hunted ant hills along the edge of the field, and when I found a large one I placed it into my little blanket and made little ant hills throughout the field, all day." "Now, that is the way you have done again," she said. "You certainly are a fool. I did not tell you that, I meant that when a man is hoeing and he draws his hoe through the weeds from different sides, the earth and sand is drawn together ill little piles, or hills. These are called ant hills. That is what I

[p. 98]

told you to do. You are a fool, a fool you are. You go back again, take your hoe, and expose the moist ground by removing the dry surface in cutting off the weeds (wiklolantanangwu)."

He returned to the house, and the next morning when they had their morning meal he asked for a little grease of fat. They hunted some, tied it up, and handed it to him. He took his hoe and fat, and went to the field. Here he laid down his hoe and taking a little of the tallow which he had brought with him, he scattered it all through the corn-field, an act which in the Hopi language is expressed by the same word, wiklolantanangwu. Hereupon he returned to the house without having hoed any at all. Early the next morning he again visited Spider Woman. "Have you come again?" she asked. "Yes," he replied. ''Now," she said, "you remember what I told you to do yesterday. Have you done that way this time at least?" "Yes," he said, "when we had eaten yesterday's morning meal I asked my wife's mother for some tallow, which she gave me. I wrapped it up and took it along to the field where I scattered it throughout the field." "You are a fool, you are a fool, you are a great fool. I never told you to do that. I told you to go and hoe the corn, and you know if any man hoes and cuts off the weeds he stirs the dry surface and the moist ground appears a little, and this is what I meant, this is what I told you to do. But you go now, take your hoe and you go and hoe the field."

When he returned to the house he found his father-in-law sitting and meditating, evidently being very sad. He had been to the field several times, and although his son-in-law had always gone to the field he did not find any work done there. The grass was growing, the corn was becoming tired (dry) and wilted, and he was thinking whether his daughter should not send his son-in-law away. While he was thus thinking, Po'okong came to the house. When the latter saw his father-in-law sitting there and evidently being very disappointed, he asked him why he was so sad. "Yes," the man said, "I have been thinking about our field. The grass and weeds are growing and the corn is getting tired. There ought to be some corn ears forming by this time, but it is getting dry." "So that is what you are thinking about," his son -in-law said. "Now, you must not think about that any more. I shall go there to-day and we shall finish hoeing that field to-day." Hereupon the two went to the field.

Spider Woman had in the meanwhile asked the clouds to hoe the field of her grandchild, and when the two commenced to hoe, a cloud was forming over the San Francisco mountain. Soon many clouds

[p. 99]

began to move towards the village. When they had hoed a little it commenced to rain. They ran to a shelter where they sat and waited while it was raining. The water soon began to run through the com-field in little streamlets and covered up with sand and earth, the grass in the field. When it stopped raining the two went through the field and saw that the weed's had all been covered up by the floods. "Thanks," the old man said, "that these have cleaned the field for us. We shall go home now." So they went home, and that way were quickly through ridding their field of the weeds.

They were now living happily in their home. By and by Po'okong's wife bore a little son who grew up and played with the children. His father soon made him a bow and arrows with which he learned to shoot. He sometimes shot the Oraibi children and killed them. At this the Oraibi became very angry and said that Po'okong should not live in the village, but they should move away to their own house. So one time Po'okong said, "I am going to go back. I shall take my little son with me, on whose account they are driving us away. But you shall stay here at your father's and mother's," he said to his wife. So he took his little boy on his back and returned to his home where he remained.

Footnotes

^92:1 Told by Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

25. HOW THE ANTELOPE MAIDEN WAS RECONCILED. [*1]

Aliksai! At Zuni the people were living, and the two sons of the village chief were racing with each other. At a place called Aamusha some one dangerous (nukpana), lived. A path led by this place, and as the two brothers were racing they came to this bluff and when they were close by they heard some one call, "Come here. There is something beautiful here, come and see it. Oh, no, there is nothing there," the boys said. "Yes, come and see, there is something beautiful here," the voice replied. So they approached closer, and they saw on the top of the bluff a beautiful maiden. It was an Antelope Maiden. She at once drew up the elder brother by a long, deep inhalation. She then said to the younger brother: "Even if you bring your beads here, the most valuable possession of the Zunis, I shall not give you back your brother, as I do not want your beads."

Hereupon the younger brother ran home. "Why do you come alone?" his father said. "Yes," he said, "when we were racing there a beautiful maiden called us and then drew my brother up with her breath, on top of the bluff. "Oh!" the father said, "Yes, some one dangerous lives there." The father then told his son to

[p. 100]

go and hunt up the Pookonghoyas and ask their assistance. He cut a round piece from the middle of a buckskin and made a ball which he tied to a stick; also an arrow, to which he fastened blue-bird and parrot feathers, and finally gave his boy some tobacco and then sent him (on his errand. Going south, he all at once heard some one calling, and saw Pookonghoya and his brother, both being very small, wandering and playing around there. He went first to the house where Spider Woman (So Wuhti), [*1] the grandmother of the two brothers lived. She called to the latter and said, "Stop, and come here, some one has come," but they at first did not listen; so she called again. They then came into the kiva and the messenger, handing them the presents, said to them, "This I have brought for you. Way over there lives a pretty maiden who drew my brother up to her, and now my father has made these things and told me to bring them to you in order to see what you thought about it and could do for us." They told him to go westward to the Mole, his uncle. They said he would come to a hollow place where a ladder was protruding, there the Mole lived, and he should see what the Mole thought about it.

So the young man went to the house of the Mole, who told him to go northward to his uncle. So he proceeded northward and came to a little opening in the ground from which there came a breeze. "This must be the place," the young man said, and thereupon a great strong wind came out of the opening. It was the Storm (Hu'k'angwuu), who then invited him to come in, so he went in and found a Hopi sitting in the house. He was a handsome man, nicely dressed up, wearing a bandoleer over each shoulder, also two buckskins tied crosswise over his chest. He wore a hurunkwa on his head, a kilt about his loins, and had black lines on each cheek, while his body was painted up like the bodies of warriors. When they were seated, Hu'k'angwuu asked him why he had come, then he related his story. Hu'k'angwuu then said: "Let us smoke, then we will see what we think about it." So he got out a large pipe and the young man smoked, swallowing all the smoke without again exhaling it. He then said to his host. "Itaha!" [*2] "Itiwaya," [*3] the uncle replied; and then added: "You are surely my nephew. Now, what is it that you want? what has happened?" He then said: "My older brother and I were racing there and came to a place where a beautiful maiden called us and she drew my brother up, and now my father sent me out to see whether we could

[p. 101]

do anything to get him back. Our beads, she said, she does not want. His uncle then said, ''You go to Walpi (a Hopi village distantly located), and see the Snake people there, who used to have snake dances here and were driven away from here to Walpi when the snakes bit somebody, and see what they have to say about it.

So the young man proceeded to Walpi, although it was far away. So he came to Walpi and there found the Snake people. They were handsome and dressed up like warriors and like Snake people (Tcutcucona).

When he had entered they asked him: "Why have you come here?" "Yes," he said, "we were racing there where we live, and coming to the bluff, Aamusha, somebody spoke to us and said: "You come here, come in here. There is something handsome in here," and then she drew up my elder brother, and now my uncle, Storm, told me to come here and see you. Now, are you the ones, and what now? What do you think about it?" "We shall see," they said, and then began to smoke. The young man again swallowed all the smoke, which pleased the Snakes [*1] and they said, "You are truly our nephew. What is it that you want?" ''Yes," he said, "we were racing there and that maiden drew up my elder brother and said that she did not want our stone beads even if we would bring them.'' "Yes," the Snakes said, "she does not want them." The Tcutcucona then showed him a baho, saying, ''This the maiden wants, she does not want beads, but she wants such bahos. You look at this baho well and then make one like it; or," they continued, "we shall make one for you. You take that along and then you look at it well and make bahos like it and give them to the maiden. These she wants." So he took one with him and returned home.

When he arrived at his home he showed the baho; they looked at it and then made a good many of them. With these they proceeded to the place where the maiden had enticed the young man. The young man, his father, the two Po'okongs, their grandmother (Spider Woman) and Storm were in the party. Spider Woman had taken a seat behind the ear of Pookonghoya. When they arrived at the bluff the father said, ''We have come to get my child." "What have you brought with you?" the maiden replied. "We have brought these bahos," the father said, and hereupon Storm raised them all up and lifted them on the bluff. The mana at once fled into her house, and Storm pushed the whole party into the house also. "What have you brought?" the mana again asked. "This we have brought, this here."

[p. 102] Whereupon they showed her the bahos. "Thanks," she said, "these I want. Of course I shall give him to you, but let us first play a game," whereupon she spread sand upon the floor." Now, you play first," she said. So the Hopi planted different kinds of seed in the sand and thrust the bahos into the sand around the border, whereupon the things planted grew up quickly. "Thanks," she said, "you certainly know something. These I want and you shall certainly take him along. But we shall race first, we shall follow the sun." So she and the young man that had procured the baho arranged for a race. The young man mounted an eagle breath feather, the mana turning into a Tokchii (a swift snake, similar to the racer). They started together, but by and by the mana got ahead of the young man. They circled around the sun, started back, the maiden still being in the lead. Spider Woman then took a reed, pointed it towards the racers, and by a strong inhalation drew the young man forward, increasing his speed so that he arrived at the house first, thus having beaten the mana in the race. The mana then said, "You take him along, you have beaten me." Whereupon she drew him forth from another room. He was nearly dead. In the inner room were many bones of young men who had perished there. The Antelope Maiden had been angry because no bahos had been made for her for a long time, and hence she had killed so many young men. But since these people now revived her bahos, she was reconciled, and after that killed no more people, and the Zunis were freed from this danger.

Footnotes

^99:1 Told by Tawiima (Mishongnovi).

^100:1 Kohk'ang Wuhti (Spider Woman) is often called So Wuhti (Old Woman or Grandmother).

^100:2 My uncle (on father's side).

^100:3 My nephew (on brother's side).

^101:1 The idea that swallowing the smoke, when smoking, is considered as an accomplishment, requiring special courage and strength, occurs in various Hopi tales.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

26. THE PO'OKONGS AND THE BALOLOOKONG. [*1]

Aliksai! In Mishongnovi where now are the ruins, the people lived, and there lived a family consisting of a father, mother, a youth, and a maiden. One day at noon the latter went after water to Toriva. There was a great deal of water in the spring at that time. As she was dipping out the water it began to move and a Balolookong came out. He at once began to draw the maiden with strong inhalations towards him, embraced her, and disappeared with her into the water. Her mother was waiting for her to return, but she did not come. When she did not return the mother began to worry and said she would go and look for her. Following her tracks and not meeting her on the way, she went down to the spring. There she hunted for her tracks but only found them descending to the water. The jug was standing there, but the daughter could not be found, so she

[p. 103]

finally picked up the jug and the old blanket in which the jug had been carried and went home. "I have found the tracks," she said to her husband, "but they simply lead to the edge of the water, and cannot find our child anywhere." "Oh!" the father replied; so the father bestirred himself and made a ball and an arrow: to the latter he tied some blue-bird feathers. These he took to the house of Pookonghoya and his younger brother Balo'ongahoya, who lived somewhat higher up, north of the village.

When he arrived at their house the two youths were romping about. "Be quiet," their grandmother, Spider Woman, said, "be quiet, somebody has come here." So they were quiet. "Sit down, sit down," she said to the man, and then set some hurushiki [*1] before him, of which he ate. It was just a small ball, but as he ate from it it kept increasing again. When he was done she said to him, "Now why do you come? What is the matter?" "Yes," he said, "yes, yesterday our daughter went after water and she did not return. Her foot tracks only lead to the edge of the stream, and now I came here, as you have a strong heart, and thought that may be you could do something for us." Hereupon he handed two bows to the youths and an eagle nakwakwosi, which he had also prepared, to Spider Woman. They were all happy over these things. "Askwali," she said, "yes, these, my youths, know about it, for they have seen it. Balolookong dragged your daughter into the water, and to-morrow we will bestir ourselves and we shall go there. Now, you go back and invite your friends and you must also go to work making nakwakwosis." Spider Woman also instructed him that they should then dress up the brother of the maiden.

So he went home, invited his friends, and they made many nakwakwosis which they placed into a handsome tray. Early the next morning Spider Woman and the two youths repaired to the village. When they had arrived there they dressed up the brother of the lost maiden, putting a kilt, sash, bunch of breath feathers, numerous strands of beads, and ear pendants on him. He took a ball in his right hand, and the talawayi (a stick with two eagle feathers and a string of horse hair attached to it) in his left hand. The father took the tray with prayer-offerings, and the chief of the village also went along. Spider Woman told the young man not to be afraid. While the Po'okong and his younger brother would sing at the spring he should dance, and if the Balolookong pitied them and would come out With his sister, he should not be afraid and he should not cry, but should grab his sister and then strike the Balolookong with the tonipi

[p. 104]

(a club with a stone attached to it), which the Po'okongs had handed to him.

When they had arrived at the spring they stood there. "Now we are ready," the young man said. Hereupon the Po'okongs sing the following song:

          Slowly:

       Aha'naha vuyuna ha
   Aha'naha yuyuna ha
   Aha'naha yuyuna ha hahahaia

        

     
      Fast:

       Ahainahai vuyuna ha
   Ahainahai vuyuna ha
   Ahainahai vuyuna ha hahahaina.

       Words are all archaic.

     
    

While they were singing the young man was shaking his ball and holding the talawayi in his left arm, dancing at the edge of the spring to the time of the singing. All at once the water began to move and the Balolookong came out holding the maiden in his left arm. She was still nicely dressed, having her turquoise ear-pendants still in her ears. "My elder brother," she said, to her brother, "take me. ''Yes, you go nearer now, and have a big heart, but do not cry," Spider Woman urged him. So he approached the edge of the spring and reached for his sister. But as he did so he began to cry and immediately the Balolookong disappeared in the water with the maiden. "Oh!" they all said. "Now let us try it again," Spider Woman suggested. "Let us try, it once more, but you must not be afraid; you must have a big heart; you must not cry. I did not tell you you must do this way, but have a big heart this time." And now they were ready again.

As they were singing the same song that they had sung before, the young man again shaking his ball and dancing at the edge of the water, the water again began to move and the Balolookong once more came out, again holding the mana in his left arm. ''Now go nearer, close to the edge," Spider Woman urged him, "do not be afraid now" So he danced slowly to the edge of the water and again his sister reached out her hands towards him and said: "My elder brother, take me." So when he was still dancing he held out his hand, grasped the maiden and struck the Balolookong on the head with the club. Immediately the serpent released the maiden and only his skin was floating on the water like a sack. "Thanks the maiden said, "thanks! You were slow in taking me, you cried." Hereupon he drew her out of the water. "Thanks!" Spider Woman said, "thanks that you were not too late." Hereupon they put other clothes on the

[p. 105]

maiden and laid a puhu of red feathers for her on the path.  The tray with all the nakwakwosis they threw into the spring for the maiden, because with this price they had purchased the mana back from the water serpent. And they threw the prayer-offerings into the spring that nothing further should befall the mana.

They then returned to the village, but it seems that Balolookong just left his skin and slipped back into the water when he was struck, because he is still there and is occasionally seen by women, and whoever sees him becomes sick. Only lately, the narrator continued, he was seen by a woman, Corn-Ear (Kao), but the women that have seen him say that he now is just small. One time he was also seen by a man. Sometimes those who see him get sick, because he is dangerous.

After they had returned to the village Spider Woman and the two Po'okongs returned to their house. And so that way they were in time to save the mana.

Footnotes

^102:1 Told by Sik'ahpiki (Shupaulavi).

^103:1 Prepared of corn-meal and water and sometimes formed into balls.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

27. HOW THE YELLOW CORN-EAR MAIDEN BECAME A BULL SNAKE AND REVENGED HERSELF. [*2]

A long time ago two maidens lived in Oraibi. They were close friends and often used to grind corn together, one time at the house of one, at another time at the house of the other. But after a little while they both fell in love with a certain young man of the village, which led to disagreement and quarrels between them. The Yellow Corn-Ear maiden was possessed of supernatural powers and concluded to destroy her friend and rival. One time early in the morning they were both going to get some water from Spider Spring, which is located somewhat north-east of the village. They took their so-called maiden's jugs (monwikurus) with them. When they were returning to the village they came to a sand hill, and the Yellow Corn-Ear maiden suggested that they rest there for a little while.

After some time she said to her friend: ''Let us play here for a little while. You go down this hill and I shall throw something at you. You catch it and throw it back to me," whereupon she drew forth from her bosom a very pretty little wheel that showed all the colors of the rainbow. When her friend had reached the foot of the hill she threw this wheel at her, and when her friend caught it it was

[p. 106]

so heavy that it threw her down. When she rose she had been turned into a coyote. Her friend at the top of the hill laughed at her and said, "You have been quarreling with me about that young man, now that is what you get for it. Now, you go about that way." Whereupon she picked up her jug and went to the village.

The other maiden, now a coyote, felt very sad and ascended the hill to her water jug, which she tried to carry but could not do so in her present form. She waited there until evening and was crying most of the time. After dark she tried to enter the village, but the dogs of the village immediately drove her away. She made a large circuit around the village and tried to enter it from another side, but was again driven away by the dogs. So she went westward, and having become very hungry by this time, she was thinking where she might find something to eat. It was in the fall of the year, and the people were watching their crops in the fields, so she thought she might perhaps find something in some of the sheds or temporary shelters in which the people were living, and approaching one of them she found on top of a shelter two roasted ears of corn that had been left there. These she ate. She then made another effort to enter the village but as soon as the dogs of the village smelled her presence she was again driven away. She then concluded that she could not get into the village and again went westward. She knew that somewhere west of Apohnivi there was a place called Yungachaivi, where some herders had also built temporary shelters and were staying while they were herding their sheep at that place. She thought that perhaps there she might find some shelter and food.

By and by she arrived at a hut which belonged to two Qo'oqoqlom Katcinas who were hunting in that region. In this but she found a great deal of rabbit meat, a good many rabbit skins and some entrails of rabbit. The latter and the meat were slightly baked. She was very hungry and ate a little of the entrails, which she did not like very much, however. It was about the time of the morning meal and the two hunters had had their early meat and had already left for the hunt. She was very tired, having spent all the night trying to get into the village and find shelter, and so concluded to remain and rest here all day. In the evening the two Qo'oqoqlom hunters returned. When coming near their hut one of them said, "There is a coyote in our hut and has eaten some of our meat. Let us kill him." Whereupon he got ready his bow and arrows and was aiming at the intruder, when the other one said: "No, let us try to capture him alive and take him home to our grandmother, Spider Woman." Upon entering the hut they heard the coyote sob and saw tears trickling

[p. 107]

down his eyes. "Oh!" one of the hunters said, "This coyote is sad and has been crying. Let us feed him." So he took a large piece of meat, broke it in two and gave a portion of it to the visitor, who ate it with relish. Hereupon they concluded that they would go home that evening. They tied up the meat and the skins, and also tied the feet of the coyote, and loading everything upon their backs they returned to their home, which was at Katcina Gap (Katcinvala), a short distance northwest of Oraibi.

Arriving there they called to Spider Woman saying, "We have brought you an animal. Come and help us lift it off of our backs." She did so and expressed her satisfaction at the present that she had received. They then placed the coyote and the meat north of the fireplace. The woman looked closely at it and then said to the two hunters: "Alas! that poor one! That is no coyote. Thanks that you have not killed it. Where did you find it?" They told her that they had captured it in their but where they had been hunting, and related all the circumstances. She at once sent one into the village after some Tomoala, [*1] the other one she sent to the woods after some juniper branches.

While they were gone she boiled some water, and when the man with the Tomoala returned, she poured the water into a vessel and put a hook from the pods of the Tomoala into the neck and another one into the back of the coyote. She then placed the latter into the water, covered it with a piece of native cloth (mochapu), then placed her hand upon the cover, took hold of the two hooks and kept twisting and turning them, by which operation she pulled off the skin of the coyote. Throwing aside the covering of the vessel she threw away the skin, and in the vessel was found the maiden whom she had thus restored. She still had her clothes on and her hair tied in whorls just as she had left the village. The woman asked her how she had met with this fate, and the maiden told her the whole story. Spider Woman comforted her saying, "You poor one. That Yellow Corn-Ear maiden is bad, but you will take revenge on her."

Hereupon the other hunter returned with the juniper branches. She took the maiden, the branches, and the water into another room and there bathed the maiden, then gave her some corn which the maiden ground into meal. After a number of days Spider Woman told the maiden that she should go home now as her mother was very homesick after her child, but she said she would call somebody in first; so she ascended her housetop and cried out to her neighbors that they should come in. In response to her announcement a great many

[p. 108]

Katcinas who lived around there came into her house, asking her what she wanted of them. "Yes," she said, "there is this maiden here and I want you to return her to her house," and then told them the whole story. They were willing. She then dressed up the maiden nicely, putting her hair into new whorls and placing over her shoulders a new ato'o, and then instructed her that she should have her father make two bahos and a number of nakwakwosis for the leader of the Katcinas and for the leader of the singing, and also told her how she should behave towards and get even with her enemy, the Yellow Corn-Ear maiden. Hereupon they went to the village, the maiden going in the rear of the line of Katcinas. Having arrived near the house of the village chief (Kik-mongwi), where the Pongowe kiva is at present situated, they performed their first dance, singing while they danced.

This was at early dawn, the so-called white dawn (qoyangwunu). Their singing at once arrested the attention of some of the early risers, who hastened to the place where the Katcinas were dancing. Soon the news was whispered around that the Katcinas had brought a maiden to the village, and some soon recognized the girl and ran to the house of her parents. The latter, however, refused to believe the news, and four messengers had to be sent to them before they believed. They then went to the dancers, who in the meanwhile had arrived at the dancing plaza in the center of the village. "So you have come," the mother said, and began to cry and wanted to take her daughter with her, but the latter said, "Wait a little," and then told her father that he should take two bahos and a number of nakwakwosis, and while he did this the Katcinas continued their dancing and the mana remained waiting by their side. When finally the father brought the prayer-offerings he gave one baho to the leader, the other to his daughter. After the dancing was over, the daughter gave her baho to the leader of the singing. The nakwakwosis were distributed among the other Katcinas, and after the father had thanked the Katcinas for returning his child and had told them that he was very happy, they returned to their home, the parents taking with then] their daughter.

She rested there during the whole day, but early the next morning went to grind corn, singing a little song which told about her recent adventures. Her friend, the Yellow Corn-Ear maiden, heard her sing and at once visited her, expressing her great delight at her return. She was treated cordially, the maiden just having returned not manifesting any ill-feeling towards her at all, according to the instructions of Spider Woman. She was biding her time. They ground

[p. 109]

corn together all day again as they had done formerly. In the evening they went after water again to the same spring where they had gotten water before. While they were filling their jugs the Yellow Corn-Ear maiden noticed that her friend was dipping her water with a peculiar little vessel (which Spider Woman had given to her) and that the water, as it was running into the jug, looked very beautiful, showing the different colors of the rainbow. She said to her friend: "What have you there? Let me see that little cup." "Yes," her friend said, "that is a very good cup, and the water tastes well from it, too." Hereupon she drank from it and handed it to her friend. She admired it very much and also drank from it. Immediately she fell down and was turned into a bull snake. "There! You remain that way now too," the Blue Corn-Ear maiden said; "you tried to destroy me, but you will now have to remain that way because no one will help you and restore you." She then laughed, picked up her jug and returned to the village.

The bull snake left the place and wandered about. It often gets hungry, but as it cannot run very fast it has difficulty in getting its prey, hence it captures its prey by charming and drawing it towards it by its powerful inhalations, which is still frequently observed by the Hopi. It lives on little rabbits, mice, birds, squirrels, etc., which it charms by its inhalations and then kills them.

This maiden in the form of a bull snake later on went to the village once and there was killed by her own parents, who of course did not know that they had killed their own daughter. Hereupon the maiden, or rather her soul, was liberated and could then go to the Skeleton House. Ever since some of the sorcerers (Popwaktu) will occasionally leave their graves in the form of bull snakes. Bull snakes are often seen coming out of certain graves still wound in the yucca leaves with which the corpse was tied up when laid away. If such a bull snake in which a sorcerer is supposed to have entered happens to be killed, the soul of the sorcerer living in it is set free and then goes to the Skeleton House (Maski).

Footnotes

^105:1 A pu'hu (road or path) consists of one or more small feathers--usually eagle feathers-to the stub end of which are fastened a single and a twisted string. These feathers are placed near springs, in front of shrines, altars, on paths and near graves, as paths for clouds, spirits, deities, etc., Whom the Hopi wish to follow the paths.

^105:2 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^107:1 Martyinia proboscidae, Miller.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

28. A JOURNEY TO THE SKELETON HOUSE. [*1]

In Oraibi the people were living, and over there at Honletsnoma's house there lived a youth. He was always sitting at the edge of the mesa early in the morning; He was always thinking about that graveyard there. "Is it true that some one is really living there?" he thought. "Is it true that if some one dies he goes somewhere?"

[p. 110]

thus he was thinking. ''If only some one would tell me whether these that are buried here are living somewhere." Now, at last he got some corn meal, then he went to the edge again, and then he prayed with it to the Sun and said: "Now then, have you perhaps seen anywhere these that are buried here?" Thus he prayed. "Now, if you have seen them somewhere, inform me." Having thus prayed he returned. And then after that he thus continued to pray. After having thus prayed for four days he sat down there and some one came ascending the mesa. The one that ascended asked him: "Now, why do you want me?" "Yes," said the one that was sitting there, "I am always thinking about those who are buried there, whether it is true that they are living in some other life." "Now," he, the Sun, said, yes, they are living. Are you really anxious to see them?" Now the young man answered. ''Yes," he said. "Very well," answered the Sun, "I shall then give you this here." He handed him something. "When you will sleep in the evening, eat a little of this, but you tell your mother and them all about it." "Very well," the youth said. "I shall leave," said the Sun.

The young man now went home to his house. He arrived there. His mother was preparing food. When they had eaten he said to his father: "My father," he said, "is it really true that if some one die he remains somewhere? I want to find out about it." Now, hereupon the mother said to him: "You must not do that way; yet it is for you (to say)." "Yes," said the young man, "yes, as soon as I shall sleep in the night I shall not wake up quickly; hence, as soon as the sun is risen and is high up, you must work on me and then maybe I shall return and wake up." Now the father said, "Very well." It now was evening. He now ate a little of the medicine. Upon that he slept. He was entirely dead and he went to the Skeleton House. He came to Apohnivi. There was a plain trail. On the north side he descended and there somebody was sitting, but that one had died long ago and (behold!) it was that one. He recognized him.

That one said, "Have you come?" "Yes," the young man said. "Now you carry me," said the one who was sitting there, "at least four steps. There you set me down." "No, I am in a hurry," the young man said to him, and thereupon proceeded. Now the one that was sitting there cried. When he (the youth) had gone a little was again some one was sitting there. He spoke to him in the same manner. He again did not want to. Now he ascended Bow Height (Aoatovi), but there somebody went backward and forward and carried something. It was a woman. She had in a carrying basket some very hard stone (kalavi), but a bow string was her burden band. [p. 111] It had cut into her head skin. Now that woman said, "Take this from me." "No," the young man said, "I am in a hurry,'' and proceeded.

.Again somebody came, and now he had reached him, but this one was carrying a mealing stone. His burden band was a hair string. Cactus was tied to the right foot of that one and pona (also a species of cactus) to his left foot, so how could he get along fast? If he hurried a little that pricked him very much. Now that one said, "Take this away from me.'' "No , he replied, I am in a hurry," and again he proceeded. After that he ran fast. Now then he came to the salt, and there somebody was shaking a bell very loudly. Now he arrived at him, and it was the Kwanitaka. The Kwanitaka said to him: "Have you come?" "Yes," the young man said. The Kwanitaka now said, "Have you seen them? Thus you want it. Now I shall inform you. There where you first came upon one, that one is very wicked. He does not want rain in summer. That one when he does something offensive to these here clouds they all run away. Then again, you know, you arrived at another one. That one killed some one. That one when he put something bad into somebody he died from it, hence when will those arrive here? You see when they have taken four steps, there they remain again. Then these at Aoatovi are carrying something. They also take four steps and then remain there, but they always remain eight 'times' before they proceed, hence when shall they arrive here? Now go on, but you go this way here (pointing to one of two diverging roads). Now you go on happily and then somewhere some one will ring again." And sure enough when he drew near, somebody was ringing, and again he arrived at some one who spoke to him in the same manner. ''Have you come?" he said. "Yes," the young man answered. "All right, go on," said the Kwanitaka, and taking hold of the young man he led him. Now they came somewhere, and there was a fire. Now they arrived there and it was very deep there, like a corn steaming oven (koici), but it was burning very much. "Don't you know, those that you first came upon, they come here. Them I burn up here. Those wicked ones there in Oraibi, them I burn up here, but they at least will come out. Do you see, as soon as burned, as soon as it smokes, it comes out. Now you see sometimes it (the air) is filled with smoke. Now that (smoke) is these. They eat nothing. They are never happy. But it was themselves when they planned it. Now then, let us be this way again."

Now they arrived at a place where it was very deep and where it was very dark deep in. "Here I throw some of them in, but they

[p. 112]

always remain in here. They never come out. Now, come on, let us be back, Thus you wanted to understand this. Now he left him. Now he returned to the other Kwanitaka, and he arrived there. And he again said, "Have you come?" "Yes," said the young man, and again he led him to a road, directing him to the other of the two roads. "That way you go," he said, and now he came somewhere to a village, but it was a large village. They lived there in white houses only. There at the extreme edge of the village a Kwanitaka was going up and down, He said, ''Have you come? Come this way," and then took hold of him and took him to the village. He arrived there. There another chief, a Kwanitaka, stood close at the village. "Have you come?" he said to them. "Yes," they answered together, whereupon he said, "Now please enter." Upon that this other also took hold of the young man and they entered, and sure enough, there also some were living and he knew them. He had been a chief in Oraibi a long time ago. Now the Kwanitaka said to the young man. ''This way, this you wanted to know." But in a large blossom he was living. That deceased chief and three other chiefs were living in blossoms that were standing one after the other. "Thanks," said the Kwanitaka, ''these were never bad in Oraibi: they were always good, therefore they are here this way now. Now, then, let us go and look there, too." So they again entered. There all kinds of grasses and plants and blossoms of every description were. "Thus these are living here," said the Kwanitaka. "This you wanted to know, hence now you took well. When you return you tell them. You see if any one is not wicked there in Oraibi he shall certainly come here. Here you have seen it. You see, there a road has been prepared for them. Now as soon as you arrive you tell them everything about this our life here, and if some one thinks to himself (has his welfare at his heart) he must live accordingly. Thus you wanted it. Because you have entered our dwelling, here everywhere you have found out everything, but as soon as you think of coming here sometime, you must eat a little of your medicine again, but you must tell this to your mother and your father and to them, but they must never do that way, and if they do not believe my talk they shall never live with us here. Now then, proceed. Run fast, as your father and mother are waiting for you."

Now then, from there he ran very fast. He arrived at the Kwanmongwi, where the road divided. He said to him, ''Have you come?" "Yes," the young man said. "Very well," he replied, "run fast now, your father and mother are waiting for you." He now came running very fast. At Aoatovi he again came upon them who were

[p. 113]

being punished there, those who because they had stolen. They were going to the Skeleton House, but were still punished there, but they were concerned that their thieving should come to an end, [*1] and then sometime they might arrive at them in the Skeleton House. Now when he came upon them the one that was sitting there said to him: "So you have come back again!" "Yes," the young man replied, and at once proceeded, running very fast. Now he came upon the woman. She said, "So you have come back again!" "Yes," he answered, and upon that proceeded, running very fast.

He now came upon the one that had killed some one, north of Apohnivi. "So you have come back again," said the one that was punished there, "Yes," he answered. Having said this, he proceeded, running. Now he arrived a little north of Apohnivi. Now there the one that did not want it to rain was sitting. He also said the same thing. "Yes," the young man said, and proceeded, running. Now he arrived at his house in Oraibi and entered his body. Now when the sun was rising he awoke and sat up. He was thinking. The sun was somewhat high already. Now his mother, because she was through making the food, came to look after him and he had awoke. "Are you awake?" the mother said, "Yes," he replied. "Come then, let us eat; come this way," the mother said. "Very well," answered the young man. So they were eating. When they had eaten the father asked the young man: "Now what have you found out?" "Yes," he said, "yes, truly they are living. I have seen everything there in the Skeleton House and there the chief told me thus, thus I tell you. There that Kwanmongwi burns these wicked ones there, and these others he throws into the dark, and then again, these that have been chiefs here they live well there and they are chiefs there again. I have seen their way of living there. So when some time you will not see me here, you must not worry over that; truly they are living there." Thus he told them. And after that they were living together. By and by the young man wanted to go back again, and he said to his father, "My father, my mother." they said. "I shall go back again," he answered. "very well," said the father, and that night he took some of that medicine and then slept, but now he was really dead. And (in the morning) the mother, in order that he should eat, in order that he should refresh himself, looked after her boy, but he had died. Now they wrapped him up and put him away, there below Kuivo. There they buried him.

[p. 114]

After that they lived (alone), but they, the father and the mother, were homesick after their boy.

Now the father went to his field, and when he came there he hoed his field. Then at the edge of the field something was running. It was a bird, a Bachro. Now the Bachro spoke. "Alas!" he said, "alas, my father is homesick after me." "Yes," the father said, "I am homesick after you." The Bachro said, "Now you must not be that way; why I told you (all about it). In four days I shall come back again, hence you must both come." Having said this he flew away. Now, after four days the father said to the mother: "Let us go together." ''Very well," she said. Now his wife prepared some lunch and then they left. When they arrived there they were making the field. Now the husband said to his wife, "Now somebody will come." "Who?" she asked. When they were still thus talking it arrived. Close by them something was whistling, and now he came running towards them and arrived at them. As soon as he had arrived at them he said, "Alas, you are homesick after me." Now the father said, "Yes." "Now you must not be that way," he said. ''I live well." Now the mother said: "Yes, I am homesick after you." Now again he said, "You must not be that way. I shall come and see you. Having said this he again flew away. In the evening they went home and surely after that when the father was walking in the field that came there. After that they continued to live there.

Footnotes

^109:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^113:1 The meaning is somewhat obscure, but the narrator explained that those souls wished that their thefts and the attending punishment might terminate so that they could go on to the other world.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

29. A JOURNEY TO THE SKELETON HOUSE. [*1]

Haliksai! In Shongopavi the people were living first, and there a young man was often sitting at the edge of the village looking at the graveyards and wondering what became of the dead, whether it is true that they continue to live somewhere. He spoke to his father about it. His father could not tell him very much. "We do not know much about it," he said; "so that is what you are thinking about." His father was the village chief. He said to his son that he would speak to the other chiefs and to his assistants about it, which he did. He talked about it especially to the village crier, and told them that those were the things that his son was thinking about, and whether they knew anything about it. "Yes," they said, The Badger Old Man (Honan Wuhtaka) has the medicine for it and knows about it. We shall inform him." So they called the Badger Old Man. When he arrived he asked them what they wanted with him. "Yes," they said, "this young man is thinking about these dead,

[p. 115]

Whether they live anywhere, and you know about it, you have medicine for that, and that is the reason why we called you." ''Very well," he said, "so that is why you wanted me. I shall go and get my medicine."

So he went over to his house and looked over his medicines and finally found the right one. "This is the medicine," he said, and took it, returning to the village. "Very well," he said; "now when does he want to find out about it?" "To-morrow," they said. "Very well; have you a white kilt?" "Yes," the village chief replied. "You put this on your son the next morning," he said, "and then you blacken his chin with toho (a black shale), and tie a small eagle feather (piphu) to his forehead." The next morning they dressed up the young Man as they were instructed, preparing him as they prepare the dead. Hereupon the Badger Old Man spread a white owa on the floor and told the young man to lie down on it. He then placed some medicine into his mouth, which the young man ate. He also placed some medicine into his ears and some on his heart. Then he wrapped him up in a robe, whereupon the young man, after moving a little, "died." "This is the medicine," the Badger Old Man said, "if he eats this he will go far away and then come back again. He wanted to see something and find out something, and with this medicine he will find out."

After the young man had fallen asleep he saw a path leading westward. It was the road to the Skeleton house. This road he followed and after a while he met some one who was sitting there. ''What have you come for?" he asked the young man. "Yes," he replied, "I have come to find out about your life here." "Yes," the other one replied, "I did not follow the straight road; I did not listen, and I now have to wait here. After a certain number of days I can go on a little, then I can go on again, but it will be a long time before I shall get to Skeleton house." This one was simply living in an inclosure of sticks. That was all the house and protection he had.

From here the young man proceeded westward. The path led through large cactus and through many agave plants so that sometimes it could hardly be distinguished. He finally arrived at the rim of a steep bluff. Here somebody was sitting. He asked the young Man why he had come, and the latter told him. "Very well," the chief said. "Away over there is the house that you are going to," but as there was a great deal of smoke in the distance the young man could not see the house. But hereupon the chief placed the young man's kilt on the ground, placed the young man on it, then lifted it up, and holding it over the precipice he threw it forward, whereupon

[p. 116]

the young man was slowly descending on the kilt as if he were flying with wings.

When he had arrived on the ground below the bluff he put on his kilt again and proceeded. In the distance he saw a column of smoke rising from the ground. After he had proceeded a distance he came upon Skeleton Woman (Mas Wuhti). He asked her what that was. ''Yes," she said, ''some of those who had been wicked while living in the village were thrown in there. There is a chief there who tells them to go over this road, and throws them in there. Those who are thrown in there are destroyed, they no longer exist. You must not go there," she added, "but you keep on this road and go straight ahead towards Skeleton house." When he arrived there he could not see any one at first except a few children who were playing there. ''Oh!" they said, "here a Skeleton has come." There was a very large village there, so he went in and now the people or Skeletons living there heard about him. So they assembled there on all sides and looked at him. ''Who are you?" they asked the young man. "I am the village chief's son. I came from Shongopavi."

So they pointed him to the Bear clan, saying, "Those are the people that you want to see. They are your people." Because there were a great many different clans there. They are sleeping there in the daytime. So the Skeleton took him over to the house where his clan lived. "Here your ancestors are," they told him, and showed him the ladder that led up to the house, but the rungs of the ladder were made of sunflower stems. He tried to go up but the first rung broke as soon as he stepped on it, but when the Skeletons went up and down the ladder the rungs did not break. So he was wondering how he should get up. "I shall stay down here," he said; "I shall not go up. You bring me food here and feed me down here," he said to them. So the Skeletons brought him some melon, watermelon, and chukuviki.

When they saw him eat they laughed at him, because they never eat the food, but only the odor or the soul of the food. That is the reason why they are not heavy. And that is the reason why the clouds into which the dead are transformed are not heavy and can float in the air. The food itself the Skeletons threw out behind the houses. So this young man, when he was wandering around there, would sometimes eat of it. When he had eaten they asked him what he had come for. "Yes," he said, ''I was always thinking whether Skeletons live somewhere. I spoke to my father about it and told him that I wanted to go and find out whether they were staying somewhere, and my father was willing and he dressed me up in this way

[p. 117]

and the Badger Old Man gave me some medicine that knows about this so that I could go and find out." "So that is what you have come for; so that is why you have come here. Now, you look at us. Yes, we are thus." Thus they spoke to him, and then added: "This is the way we are living here. It is not light here; it is not as light as where you live. We are living poorly here. You must go back again, you cannot stay with us here yet; your flesh is still strong and 'salty.' you eat food yet; we only eat the odor of the food. Now you must work there for us. Make nakwakwosis for us at the Soyal ceremony. These we tie around our foreheads and they represent dropping rain. We then shall work for you here, too. We shall send you rain and crops. You must wrap up the women when they die, in the owa, and tie the big knotted belt around them, because these owas are not tightly woven and when the Skeletons move along on them through the sky as clouds, the thin rain drops through these owas and the big raindrops fall from the fringes of the big belt. Sometimes you cannot see the clouds very distinctly because they are hidden behind these nakwakwosis just as our faces are hidden behind them."

Looking around, the young man saw some of the Skeletons walking around with big burdens on their backs, consisting of mealing stones, which they carried over their forehead by a thin string that had cut deeply into the skin. Others carried bundles of cactus on their backs, and, as they had no clothes on, the thorns of the cactus would hurt them. They were submitted to these punishments for a certain length of time, when they were relieved of them and then lived with the other people there. At another place in the Skeleton house he saw the chiefs who had been good here in this world and had made a good road for other people. They had taken their tiponis [*1] with them and set them up there, and when the people here in the villages have their ceremonies and smoke during the ceremonies, this smoke goes down into the other world to the tiponis or mothers and from there rises up in the form of clouds.

After the young man had seen everything at this place he returned. When he arrived at the steep bluff he again mounted his kilt and a slight breeze at once lifted him up. The chief that was living here at the top of the bluff who had assisted the young man in getting down was a Kwaniita. He had a big horn for a head-dress. This chief told him that he should return now. "You have now seen how they live here; it is not good, It is not light here; no one should desire to come here. Your father and mother are mourning for you

[p. 118]

now, so you return home." On his way back nothing happened to him and he did not meet anybody. When he had just about arrived at his house his body, that was still lying under the covering in the room where he had fallen asleep, began to move, and as he entered his body he came to life again. They removed the covering, the Badger Old Man wiped his body, washed off the paint from his face, discharmed him, and then he sat up. They fed him and then asked him what he had found out.

"Yes," he said, ''because I wanted to find out this, you dressed me up and laid me down here. Then you fed me something and put some medicine on my heart. After I had died I traveled westward, and when I was traveling I came upon a woman. She lived in an inclosure of brush and she was slowly moving westward and had not yet reached her destination by a Ion distance. She asked me where I was going and I told her that I was going to the Skeleton house and asked her where that was. She said that I was not very far away any more. Then I proceeded and passed through a great deal of cactus that was growing very closely so that I could hardly get through and had to step carefully. Then there was a place where it was clear. After that I came through a great many o'co (another species of cactus) plants, where I again had to work my way through carefully. When I came out of this I traveled on and came to a very steep bluff.

"When I arrived there somebody was sitting there. He had a large horn head-dress with one horn. He had the chief's decoration in the face, a white line under the right eye running around the outside of the eye. It was a Kwaniita. 'You help me down here,' I told him. 'What with?' he asked. Then I laid down my kilt. The chief placed me on this kilt, then he lifted it up and raised me above the precipice, when I slowly descended as if I were flying. From here I went on and came to a place where there was a great deal of smoke coming out of the ground. Here I met a Skeleton woman. She told me not to go there, but that I should go straight ahead on the path, as that place is where the wicked people were thrown in and burned. Then I traveled on and finally came to the Skeleton house. Here some children saw me and said, 'Aha, a Skeleton has come.' I looked around and could not see any one; then I remembered that they meant myself. I then entered the Skeleton house where many rows of houses like in the village are.

"The children had already told them that a Skeleton had come so the people came down from their houses and gathered outside. They asked me who I was, and when I told them, they said I was from the Bear clan, and showed me the place where the Bear people lived

[p. 119]

When I tried to go up the ladder the rungs broke because they were made of sunflower stalks. So I told the people and they came down and fed me. I was the only one that was actually eating, and I saw that they threw away the food to the rear of the houses. I asked them why they did so, and they told me that they were eating the soul or the odor of the food only. They then asked me why I had come and I told them. They said: 'Your flesh is still "salty." You will not stay with us here. Thus we are living here. We are not living like you Hopi live. It is light there, but here it is not light. We are living poorly here. Some of us have only very few nakwakwosis left on our foreheads. They are worn out so we cannot see very well through them any more. You must make many nakwakwosis and bahos for us in the village and we shall also work for you here. you make prayer-offerings for us and we shall provide rain and crops and food for you. Thus we shall assist each other. So you go back now and you tell them in the village that we are living here and that we are living here in the dark, and tell them that no one should wish to come here. For some it is not yet at all time to come, but if their hearts are not good and they are angry they will come here sooner, so tell them that no one should desire to travel this way. Now you return right straight, and do not tarry anywhere.' And so I came straight back.

"It is really true that the Skeletons are living somewhere, and I also saw that those who are bad here and wicked are punished there. They have to carry heavy burdens. Some carry mealing stones, and others cactus, the thorns of which prick them. Especially are those punished there in the other world that are bad to the maidens and women here. I have seen it all myself now, and I shall after this remember that and think that we are living in the light here. They are not living in the light there. So I shall not want to be thinking about that place, and no one should desire to go there, because here we are living better: we are living in the light here. I have seen it myself, and we should not think about that world so much." "Very well," they all said that were sitting around; "very well; so that is the way. Honan Wuhtaka said to the young man: "Now you must not think about that any more. You must go home now and live there strong. Do not think about these things any more."

Footnotes

^114:1 Told by Sikahpiki (Shupaulavi).

^117:1 The tiponi is the palladium of the priest, and usually consists of an ear of corn to which are wrapped feathers of different bird, pieces of turquoise and shells, etc., and into which are sometimes placed different objects held sacred by the priest.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

  

30. SKELETON WOMAN AND THE HUNTER. [*1]

Aliksai! A long time ago the people were living in Mishongnovi, where now are the old ruins of the ancient village of Mishongnovi. In the village lived a very poor youth by the name of Kochoilap Tiyo (Fire-Keeping-Up-Youth), though just why he was called that way the tale does not say. He would usually sit in a corner of the kiva. When the people were spinning they would throw away the little pieces of impure wool that they picked from their piles of wool, and of these the youth mentioned had finally made himself a bed, on which he would sleep.

One time when it was winter and very cold, there was snow on the ground. The young men of the village were on the hunt, while the older men were in the kiva. They asked the youth why he had not gone along on the hunt. "Yes," he said, "I have no moccasins." "Well, you ought to be with them on the hunt," they said. "But I have no moccasins here," he replied again. The old men said, "You go into the houses and perhaps you will find a sheep pelt hanging before an opening. Bring that here." So he went and found one and brought it into the kiva. They soaked it in water and made him a pair of moccasins, They then sent the youth to find an old piece of blanket (no'mo), of which they made him some leggings or socks. After he had wrapped up his feet and had put on his moccasins they gave him an old patched blanket, which he also put on and tied a string around the blanket for a belt. They then gave him a bow and arrows and some throwing sticks. Hereupon they explained to him all about the difference between the rabbit tracks and those of other animals, as he had never been on the hunt before.

So he left the village and commenced to hunt. By and by he could hear the shoutings of the other hunters and he went in their direction. Soon he saw tracks in the snow and began to think that perhaps this is a rabbit track. He saw where the rabbit had been sitting and so he finally concluded that he had discovered the tracks of the rabbit and followed them for a long distance. Some of the hunters who had found something began to return home, but he followed the tracks. Finally he came upon a jack-rabbit who was very tired. Him he killed and he was so happy over his first game that he stroked the rabbit for quite a while. He then tied a string to its legs, and taking it on his back he thought of returning. It was getting dark and it commenced to rain. He started back, and after

[p. 121]

having traveled for some distance it was very dark and he came to a bluff where there was a place called Kawaylova. [*1] Here he saw a light, and coming nearer he found a kiva and looking in he noticed

a pretty woman in the kiva. He was by this time wet and very cold. She invited him to come in, so he went in.

He sat down at the fireplace and warmed himself. She then gave him some pikami and oongawa to eat, but he discovered that the first was prepared of the brain of corpses and the other of flies, so although he was very hungry he did not eat anything. While he pretended to eat something he dropped the food in front of himself before he put it into his mouth. His rabbit he had left outside. He went and got it and handed it to the woman, who was Skeleton Woman. She was very happy over it and thanked him for it. She then said to him: "I am going to dance, and when I am through dancing we shall go to sleep together. You keep up the fire for me while I am dancing." Hereupon she went into another chamber of the kiva. While the young man was sitting at the fireplace he looked up and saw that the opening of the kiva was closed with many threads that were stretched across the opening in every direction. "How shall I get out of this?" he thought to himself, but just then he happened to think that he had a very small knife with him. This he drew out and began to sharpen it, Then the woman came out again and danced, singing the following song:

Mamanhoymuiyuu, mamanhoymuiyuu,
 The maidens, the maidens.
 Mucunkuy amuyu [Archaic].
 Hokwae, hokwae.

but she was no longer the handsome woman, she now was a skeleton with exposed teeth and thin, bony legs.

When she turned around, while dancing, the youth jumped up, ran up the ladder, cut the strings with which the opening was closed, and ran away, the woman shouting after him, "Oh, my husband!" After running a distance the youth again came to a bluff called Cituhoilawhka. Here he again saw a light and approaching it he found another kiva. Looking in he saw a lively dance in progress. "Come in," some one said to him, so he entered. "Hide me quickly," he said to the dancers, "somebody is pursuing me," for the Skeleton Woman had followed him. "All right," they said, "come in quickly, dress up and dance with us," These were the crickets (nanakanchorzhtu). [*2] They took some soaked clay, rubbed it over his body,

[p. 122]

and prepared him as one of the dancers. So he was dancing along and they were singing the following song as they danced:

Hanatoili hanatoili,
 Hanatoili hanatoili
 Yamushkiki, yamushkiki,
 Ruk! ruk!
 (Meaning obsolete.)

All at once Skeleton Woman arrived at the entrance, and looking in, shouted: "How, how, is my husband not here?" but they danced on, pretending not to hear her. "He certainly must be here," she said. "I am going to come in." So she entered and examined the dancers and going through the crowd, hunted for the youth. While she was hunting one of the dancers whispered to the youth to run out now. This he did, running towards the village. The Skeleton Woman again followed him but failed to overtake him. He was very much frightened when he arrived at the village. For a long time he said very little, but was sitting quietly at his place in the kiva.

Footnotes

^120:1 Told by Sik'ahpik'i (Shupaulavi).

^121:1 Horse-vulva, from the peculiar shape of the rock which somewhat resembled that organ.

^121:2 Sing: Naka'nchoro.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

31. MASAUWUU MARRIES A MAIDEN. [*1]

Aliksai! In old Mishongnovi they were living. At Mastopk'ave Masauwuu lived with his grandmother, Mas Wuhti. In the village lived a beautiful maiden who persistently refused all offers of marriage. So Masauwuu one time went to pay her a visit. He came as a very handsome young man. She was grinding corn when he entered her house. She invited him to sit down, and asked who he was. He told her who he was. He had a great many strands of beads around his neck and long turquoise ear-pendants in his ears and was dressed up nicely. They were sitting on the opposite sides of the fireplace and conversed with each other all the evening. She told him that she would be willing to marry him.

The next morning she sent a large tray full of muhpiki (piki made of the meal of young roasted corn-ears) to Masauwuu's grandmother, for which the latter was very glad. She then told Masauwuu that from the gift which the mana had sent she inferred that the mana was willing to marry him. "Yes," he said, "and she asked whether I was rich, and I told her yes; now what shall we pay her back for the presents that she has sent us?" So his grandmother gave him a large quantity of rabbit meat, which he wrapped up and carried over to the house of the maiden. She thanked him for it and again

[p. 123]

gave him something to eat. The next morning he came to her house and took her over to his grandmother's house, where they lived forever afterwards.

Footnotes

^122:1 Told by Kuhkuima (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

32. MASAUWUU AND THE HANO HUNTERS. 

In Hano the people were living. In the winter it snowed very much and there was much snow, and the Hano went hunting. North of the village they were hunting towards the Sun shrine, and they were hunting rabbits there in the snow. There were a great many rabbits. When they had killed a great many they went home, but still hunting. North of Walpi, at Puhuvavi there lived the Masauwuu. In order to hunt he lived there. He was also hunting in the night. During the day he was sleeping all day. There were a great many rabbits. When he was still sleeping the Hano arrived. The Masauwuu was living at Big Rock (Wuwu'koa). When the Hano came a cotton-tail was running and they followed him. "Hava! hava!" they said, and pursued him. The rabbit jumped down just where the Masauwuu was sleeping. The Hano also jumped down, making a great deal of noise. The Masauwuu had a great deal of game under the rock.

Now the Masauwuu jumped up quickly and ran. He ran against a point of the rock, then he ran in a different direction and again ran against the rock. He had thus perforated his head. In that way he again ran against the rock from place to place. When his head was full of holes the blood was streaming down. A long time ago he used to have a white head, but on account of the Hano now he always has a bloody head. Now they distributed his game. From there they proceeded, tired. Had the Hano not been going around there the Masauwuu would still have a white head.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

33. TWO YAYAPONCHATU TRADE IN ORAIBI. [*2]

Haliksai! A long time ago the Oraibi were living in Oraibi. North of the present peach orchards (about three-fourths of a mile north of Oraibi), lived the Yayaponchatu. These are not Hopi, but they are beings something like the skeletons. They have white faces and white bodies, disheveled hair, and wear kilts of black and white striped cloth. They understand the fire and more than once caused villages to be destroyed by fire. They were the cause of the destruction

[p. 124]

by fire of Pivanhonk'ape, and also one time of Oraibi, when a great many people perished.

The Oraibi at that time did the same as they are doing now when they want to barter. They would put the things they wanted to sell together on a pile in a kiva, and then send some one around to the different kivas to trade the things off for what they were in need of. One time the Yayaponchatu heard that the Oraibi were again trading. They were out of native tobacco (piva), so they sent two of their number to the village to trade for some tobacco. West of the place where now Nakwayeshtiwa lives was then a kiva called Blue-bird Height (Chorzhovi). 

To this kiva the two Yayaponchatus came first. They laid down on the roof of the kiva and let down the bunches of broom grass (wuhci), which they had brought with them to trade. "I came to trade" (Nu buy!) they said. "Have you come to trade something?'' answered those in the kiva, "whee!" (with a rising inflection). "Very well," they said from the kiva, "what is it that you want?" "Tobacco we want" (Tangunache wiwinche), they answered. The men in the kiva looked up and said, "What is it? We do not understand you." Hereupon one of the Yayaponchatu whispered, "piva, piva, hut-hut-hut" (the latter words, however, were spoken with an inhalation). "O," they said, "tobacco he wants." So one of them, who had a supply, went and got some and gave it to one of the barterers. They were happy over it.

The two now proceeded to the Mots kiva, which was located a few yards west of the present Wikolapi kiva, where the same exchange of words was repeated that had taken place at the previous kiva. Here the second one traded his broom grass for a sack of tobacco, whereupon the two returned to their village, being happy over their purchase. Here in the village they smoked the tobacco that they had obtained from the Oraibi.

Footnotes

^123:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

^123:2 Told by Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

34. THE KOHONINO HUNTER. [*2]

Haliksai! A long time ago the Kohonino came out at the place where the salt comes out. They ascended, traveled southward, and there built some houses in cliffs, where they lived. They were always

[p. 125]

hunting deer, antelope, mountain sheep, etc. One time one of the Kohonino was also going to hunt. He soon discovered a flock of mountain sheep in one of the cliffs. He shot and hit one of the larger bucks, which however got away. He followed him all day, and finally the animal got tired and arrived at a place where he was about to jump down, when the hunter shot him again. He began to stagger and finally fell, but before he died he tumbled partly down the bluff, where he died. The hunter climbed down to the place where the animal was lying, but his foot slipped and he fell down, too. He fell deeper, rolling over the ledge on which the animal was lying. His fall was so severe that both of his eyes fell out and he remained lying there unconscious.

When evening came the Kohonino in the village waited for the young man to return, but when he did not return they finally ate their evening meal and kindled their fire, still waiting for the hunter to return, but he did not come. They kept up their fire all night and did not go to sleep. In the night the hunter revived, but as a skeleton (masauwuu). He arose and went towards the place where his people were living, but he pitied himself, saving, "Oh! I!" and then began to moan as follows:

Havacova [*1] Kahnina,
 At Blue, Blue Kohoninas,
 Iwayahana. Haara
 It will be good. Eyes
 Paama takoyma! Hinayahanaa [*2]
 All gone, Oh! Oh!
 Hanina [*3] takoyma
 Oy ovoyoy ah --------.

While he was thus moaning he proceeded towards the bluff where his people were living. They were still up and had lights burning. When he came close to the village they saw and heard him. One of them said, "Listen! A coyote goes crying" (Mo! kushash chavoko). Another one said, "No, a wolf goes crying" (Opa, hatakwi chavoko). "No" (Opa), a third one said, "A Skeleton is crying" (Maiyoma chavoko). They now looked and by that time the Skeleton had come within the radius of the light of their camp-fires. Then they saw that it was a Skeleton. "Oh!" (Ma!) they said, "it is a Skeleton" (Maviyoma). "Oh! we all shall flee" (Ma! payam kiwakvako). [*4]

[p. 126]

Hereupon they all picked up their things, the women throwing their children on their backs, the men their buckskins, meat, etc., and then they fled. The Skeleton took possession of the houses that the Kohonino had left, and has been living there ever since. The Kohonino went westward and finally arrived at a very steep bluff. This they ascended and settled down there in the valley near Green Bluff, where they have been living ever since, and this is why the Kohonino settled down at this place.

Footnotes

^124:1 This kiva was last occupied by women and was dismantled probably about forty years ago. The flag-stones of the floor were used for the floor in the present Kwan kiva, and the timbers were used for reconstructing the Cakwalanvi kiva, those of the latter kiva being used in reconstructing the Coyote and the Singer kivas. It is said that the reason for this exchange was that the old, heavy timbers in the Cakwalanvi kiva were somewhat rotten and so had to be used on narrower kivas, while the Cakwalanvi kiva used the longer timbers of the Chorzhovi kiva in reconstructing their wider kiva.

^124:2 Told by Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

^125:1 After Green Bluff (Cakwatupka), where they now live.

^125:2 The narrator was unable to give the meaning.

^125:3 The narrator was unable to give the meaning.

^125:4 These phrase, are in the Kohonino language.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

35. THE WHITE CORN-EAR MAIDEN AND THE SORCERERS. [*1]

A long time ago when there were a great many people living in Oraibi there lived a beautiful maiden in the village by the name of White Corn-Ear Maiden (Qotca-Awats-Mana). This maiden persistently refused all offers that were made to her by various young men to marry her. The inhabitants of the Wikolapi kiva at that time were sorcerers (Popwaktu), and being angry at that maiden they decided to destroy her. One day they agreed that in the night they would meet in the sorcerers' house at Skeleton Gulch (Masposove), so called, it is said, because at one time a great many people of the Badger clan were killed there by the Oraibi, and their corpses thrown into the gulch. At this meeting they decided that the next day they would make a wheel, such as are still used by the children for a certain play, and also a number of feathered arrows, and that one of these arrows should be poisoned with rattlesnake poison. With this latter the maiden should be hurt, and after her death, which was expected as a matter of course, she was to 'be taken to the sorcerers' house, where they were assembled. So this was done, and the sorcerers wrapped into the wheel the breath of that maiden, but just in what manner that was obtained is not known.

When the wheel and the arrows were completed, a number of young men played with them on the street in front of the maiden's house, and when one time she came down the ladder and passed the players to go on an errand, the man holding the poisoned arrow pretended to shoot at the wheel, but wounded her foot with it. When she returned after a short time her foot was badly swollen and she related to her parents what had happened to her. During the night she died. The sorcerers upon hearing that the maiden had died, again repaired to their place at the Skeleton Gulch and there changed themselves into coyotes, wolves, foxes, etc., whereupon they waited until the maiden had been buried and her friends who had

[p. 127]

buried her had returned to the village. Then they approached the graveyard from different places, imitating at different times the sounds of those animals.

The brother of the deceased maiden being very deeply grieved at the death of his sister, sat at the edge of the mesa watching the grave and thus saw what happened. When he beheld these animals approaching the grave his first impulse was to shoot at them, but when he got his bow and arrow ready he heard some of them speak, and at once knew that they were not animals but Hopi sorcerers; so he desisted, and heard one of them say that those who had brought old wrappings with them should now tear them all to small pieces, so that the people in the village should think and believe that coyotes had eaten the corpse and that the pieces were remnants of the wrappings of the body. So this was done and then the body itself disinterred. One of the sorcerers that had changed himself into a grey wolf swung the body upon his back and carried it away, being followed by all the others.

The young man immediately followed them at some distance to their place of meeting, which they reached in a roundabout way. He saw the body lying north of the fireplace, and heard one of them say that they should hurry up: whereupon he immediately ran back to the village, thinking to whom he might appeal for help, who would be strong enough and have courage enough to rescue the body of his sister. So he went to the war chief. Arriving at his house he announced his presence. The war chief's wife first heard him and replied to his call. She then awoke her husband, saving, "Some one is calling outside." They invited him in, made a fire, and then he told them his story, asking the old war chief to assist him, and expressing his determination to go right back and try to rescue the body of his sister. The war chief at once promised assistance. He took down two war costumes, shields, weapons, etc., and gave one to the young man, putting the other one on himself. The young man was impatient and urged that they depart, but the old war chief asked him to wait a little, took a bone whistle, went outside and whistled upwards, whereupon immediately a great noise was heard and a small man entered the room. This was Cotukvnangwuu, the Star and Cloud deity, living in the sky. ''Why do you want me so quickly?" he asked. "Yes," the old man said, ''this young man wants you." And he then told him the facts and asked whether he would assist them. The deity at once promised assistance. "Wait a little," the old war chief said, "I am going to call some one else." So he whistled again and immediately the Hawk came flying down into the

[p. 128]

room. ''Why do you want me so quickly?'' he asked. "Yes," the, old warrior said, "This young man needs you," and after telling him the story, asked whether he would assist them. The Hawk also promised to go with them. "Wait a little," the old warrior said for the third time, "I shall call some one else." Whereupon he spit into his left hand, whistled again, and then a great many skeleton flies (mastotovi) came and drank his spittle, whereupon he closed the hand upon them. Then they all departed, going to the place of the assembled sorcerers, which resembled a Hopi kiva. They at once entered the kiva without being noticed, however, by the sorcerers. These were just busy resuscitating the maiden. They had taken off the wrappings from the body, had covered the body with a native cloth (mochapu), and were singing a song.

The wheel containing the breath of the mana, and with which they had been playing, the sorcerers had brought with them. One of the oldest of the sorcerers took out the breath that had been wrapped up in the wheel, put it back into the body again, whereupon the mana revived. Her first expression was, "Aha," whereupon she threw aside the cover and said, "It is hot here, I am very hot." "Undoubtedly you are," the old man said to her. She then looked around and when she saw that she was among the sorcerers she began to cry bitterly. All present had by this time reassumed their forms as Hopi again. An old woman then washed the face of the maiden, rubbed corn meal on it, combed her hair and tied it up in whorls and dressed her up nicely. In the meanwhile a bed had been prepared for her and she was told to retire and lie down on the bed. [*1] She was still crying bitterly. When she had seated herself on the couch the old man approached her, but just then the old warrior liberated one of the skeleton flies and immediately the humming of the fly arrested the attention of some of those present. They said: "Listen, somebody is in the kiva." Some at once noticed the large fly, others said they could not see anything. The old man, who was then sitting by the side of the mana, looked up and also saw the fly. At this moment the Hawk rushed into the kiva, threw aside the old man, grabbed the mana, swung her on his back and carried her out of the kiva. "Hihih'ya," the old man exclaimed, as he recovered from his astonishment. "What is it?" others asked. "Why the maiden is gone," he said. At this juncture the brother of the maiden spoke up, saying: "Why nothing is the matter," and now those present in the kiva for the first time noticed the presence of their enemies.

[p. 129]

"So you have watched us," the old man said to the young man. "Yes," the latter said, "I saw you take out the body of my sister and followed you up to the time when you were singing over her body here in the kiva." The old warrior then also spoke and asked them why they had done this; what they wanted with that maiden; they might have known that they would make the heart of her brother sad, etc. The old man replied, "We have nothing to say, but let us measure each other and see who is the stronger, and let us see whether you are brave and whether you understand anything. you let us see what you are first." "No," the warrior said, "we did not bring this about, you wanted this that way and we challenge you to show what you are first." "All right," the old man said, and gave orders to extinguish the fire. Hereupon the warriors took their shields into their hands and immediately the sorcerers shot small dangerous arrows at them, which could be heard flying against their shields at short intervals. The warriors responded with their war cry, Eha-ha-ha. In a short time the old man said, "Kindle the fire again, because they are certainly dead by this time." When the fire was kindled the warriors were all still standing, and said, "We are not dead yet." They were then challenged to show their skill. The fire was again extinguished and the war chief then drew from a pocket a little sack containing live bees. These he liberated and they flew upon the sorcerers, their wives and children and stung them. Soon pitiful cries were heard from all sides and the old man begged that the warriors should desist. The war chief recalled the bees and sent them out of the kiva.

"Do not kindle that fire," Cotukvnangwuu said, "we are not through yet." Hereupon he drew forth a ray of lightning, threw it among them and they were all torn to pieces, the kiva being filled with a bright light. When the lightning had done its work and it had become dark in the kiva the warrior waited until they felt the warm blood of their victims touching their feet. The old warrior then said to their destroyed enemies: "This is what has happened to you. You ought not to be living, because you are dangerous, you are bad. You took away and ill treated this young man's sister; but you are very skillful, you will undoubtedly restore yourselves again," and thereupon they left the kiva and returned to the village.

The old warrior and the young man replaced their war costume in the warrior's house. Cotukvnangwuu ascended to the sky again, where he found the maiden which the Hawk had taken there. In the house where they lived up there the skin of an Eagle Body (Kwatokuu)

[p. 130]

was hanging on the north wall, a skin of a Kwayo and a skin of the Hawk (Kisha) on the east wall. Here the mana stayed for some time grinding the corn meal and preparing food for these great warriors. After some time she was told that they would now take her home again. So the Hawk again took her on his back and swiftly descended to the earth, where he deposited her near the village of Oraibi, from where she went home. Complying with instructions that she had received from the war chiefs before, she told her parents that she had died, that these chiefs from above had rescued her and that they had told her she should soon come back again, at least for a visit, and that she would soon go back again; but whenever she would die they should not wrap her up and tie her body. She stayed in her home for a while and all at once had disappeared, but in four days returned, saying that she had visited those war chiefs above. After a while she went again and stayed six days. This she repeated a third time, staying ten days the third time. Her mother, now getting used to it, did not worry much about it, but after a while she failed to awake one morning and they found that she had fallen asleep never to awake again. They treated her body the same as bodies of eagles are treated when they are buried. They tied nakwakwosis to her hands and legs, laid a great many nakwakwosis on her breast and folded her garments over her and thus buried her without wrapping her up or tying her body. She was this time buried on the west side of the village. Her brother watched the grave for four days, but this time it was not disturbed.

Important events had in the meanwhile occurred in the house of the sorcerers where the latter had been destroyed. Cotukvnangwuu had descended, entered the kiva, and restored his victims, but as a punishment he had not given back to the different individuals the parts and members that had been torn from their bodies, but had thoroughly mixed up the different parts of the different bodies. Before he left he told them: "You are bad, and this shall be your punishment. You shall be ridiculed by the people." Thereupon he left them. In the morning when it began to become light the poor people observed in great consternation what had happened to them. Here an old man found that he had one of his own legs while the other leg was that of some woman; one arm was of the natural size while the other one was that of a little child; here the head of a woman had been healed to the body of a man, and so on. They were very much discouraged, and the old man suggested at once that they had better not be among the living very long, and he said that when they should come back to the kiva he was going to drop himself from

[p. 131]

the ladder and thus kill himself. When they came to the village they at once became the laughing stock of the people.

The wife of one of the men of the village had also been among the sorcerers, and she had had one of her legs substituted by the old, wrinkled leg of an old man. She was ashamed and would not show this to her husband and so kept it carefully covered up. When her husband asked her what was the matter, she said that she had a sore leg. Other similar instances occurred.

The old leader of the sorcerers soon went to the Wikolapi kiva, and when he was about to descend the ladder his foot slipped and he fell down the ladder. The shaft of the spindle which he held in his hand pierced his throat and thus he died. After that nearly every day one of these poor victims met with some accident and after a comparatively short time they were all dead. When the last one had died the maiden again descended from the sky to the village where she lived for quite a while. When she finally died she went to the sky where she lived with the war chiefs again.

Footnotes

^126:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^128:1 She was also told that as she had persistently refused to marry one of the young men of the village, all the men present would cohabit with her, which was to be her punishment.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

36. WATERMELON-RIND WOMAN (HOLO'KOP WUHTI). [*1]

Haliksai! The people were living in Oraibi. At the place where now old Qomahoiniva lives, lived a very pretty maiden, who refused all offers of marriage. At the place where Sikamoniwa at present lives, lived a young man by the name of Piwitamni. He lived there with his grandmother. He had derived his name from the fact that he always patched his grandmother's wrappers and blankets.

Many young men in the village asked for the hand of the pretty maiden when she would shell corn in the evening, and they would come and woo her, but she refused all offers. Piwitamni's grandmother once told him to visit the maiden too, and ask for her hand in marriage, but he said that she would certainly refuse him because he was poor and his blanket was very much patched. One time she gave him two little fawns and said to him: "When the maiden goes south of the village to a certain rock, you go and meet her there and take these two little fawns with you." So in the evening he did as she had told him to do and went up to the maiden where she was pulverizing some rock with a hard stone. "What are you doing?" he asked her. "I am doing this way," she said, whereupon she looked around and saw the two little fawns. "What have you there?" She asked. "They are my two little animals," he answered. She was glad and said, "Give me these and I shall own them." So he

[p. 132]

gave them to her. She took them to the village and showed them to her father and mother, as she still had parents.

The young man also returned to his grandmother and she asked him: "Well, how has it turned out?" "Why she took them to her home." "All right," she said. By this time the sun had set and the grandmother said to the young man, "Now go to the maiden's house and you speak to her parents, and if they talk good to you you bring her to my house. So in the evening he went over to the maiden's house and the parents recognized him. They asked him whether these were his two little fawns and whether he had given them to their daughter. He said he had. "All right," they said, and seemed to be glad. Then they turned to their daughter and said, "You have found each other. You fill your tray with meal and go with him." So she filled her tray with meal and went along with the young man. When they arrived at the young man's house the grandmother was very happy and greeted her. "Come in," she said, and assigned her a seat. She found that the maiden was a very pretty girl. She then gave her some little hurushiki (a certain Hopi food) and some meat from the breast of the chiro, with some brine. When the maiden had eaten, she asked: "Where shall I sleep?" So the grandmother showed her a small room with blankets in it which were also very much patched up, so that she had a very poor looking bed.

For four days she ground corn there, as is the custom of the Hopi. When the young men of the village heard about it they were very sad. But while usually relatives and friends provide a bridal costume for the newly married maidens, there was no one to prepare this costume for this maiden, and hence there was no one for whom she could prepare meals except the poor grandmother. When she had been there for some time, the grandmother said to her grandchild. ''It is now a long time, you go and cry out this evening that your relatives should come here to-night and eat." During that day they prepared some pikami for the feast that night. So in the evening he cried out, saving: "You my uncles, come here and partake of this food, and do not be slow about it." So in the evening they arrived and partook of the food. The young bride set before them the pikami which she had prepared. The grandmother went into an inner room and got from there a great deal of no'okwiwi (a dish consisting of venison, shelled corn, salt, and water), which the maiden had not noticed before. This she also set before her guests, of whom a great many had come in by this time. When they had eaten they said, "Thanks, that our bride has prepared this feast and that we have

[p. 133]

eaten it, You remain here and see we have prepared your costume. There it is wrapped up in this bundle. To-morrow you look at it." so in the morning the grandmother opened the bundle, and there were the two bridal robes, the moccasins, and the big belt in the reed receptacle.

The people had heard that Piwitamni's bride would go home and they all wanted to see her, and said that she would not have a bridal costume on because nobody had prepared one for her. So they all went on their houses and waited for her. All at once the old grandmother accompanied the young bride to the ladder which the bride descended, and behold! she was dressed up in an owa. [*1] They were astonished, not having heard of any costume being prepared for her. The old grandmother sprinkled a road of corn meal for the bride and then the latter, carrying her bundle with the second owa and the belt in front of her, went home to her parents. Her father and mother were very happy and they welcomed her. "Thanks, that you have come and somebody has prepared something for you," they said.

Later on the bride took some corn-meal to her own parents, and her husband also brought some to her parents, and then they lived in their parents' house. But Piwitamni lived with his wife and was always very poor and had nothing. The parents of the wife were now wondering and waiting whether he would provide for his wife and make some clothing for her. But he did as he had done for his grandmother, that is, repaired and patched, but never made any new clothes for her and only made and worked a very small field. He proved to be lazy. While the others raised fine crops and watermelons and filled their houses with them, this young man raised hardly anything, and his poor wife had to live partly on watermelon rinds which were thrown away by other people, so from that fact she derived her name, and the others laughed at her husband.

The young man also had a place in one of the kivas, but he usually had very little to eat. When the other people received their food from their homes, nobody brought him anything, He generally got very little because they were so poor. He never received any meat to eat and always ate by himself on the floor of the kiva. Only one old man had pity on him and sat by his side when he ate. The other people laughed at him. One time he went home and his old grandmother asked him what the people were saying to him in the kiva. He said that some of the people who were rich always brought a

[p. 134]

great deal to eat to the kiva, especially a great deal of meat, and one had said to him that he would feed his wife with good food and then he would take her away from him. So the next day when it was noon again, the men from the kiva all went to get their mid-day meal again. The old man who was sitting with Piwitamni said to him: "You wait, go and get your food when they are all done." The, again brought in a great many victuals, especially a great deal of meat. Finally Piwitamni asked them, "Is that all?" They said, "Yes." "All right," he said, "so I am going to get my food now", and left the kiva.

When he had arrived at his grandmother's house she went into one of the rooms and got out a great many watermelons, which she placed in blankets. "Take these to the kiva first," she said. When he came to the kiva they looked up and said, "Somebody is carrying a big burden." So he came in and placed the watermelons on the floor at the place where he was usually sitting. All the others looked at those fine watermelons with envy and astonishment. He then went out again and proceeded to his grandmother's house. When he arrived there she asked him: "Have you come?" "Yes," he said. "Now what else do you want?" she asked. "My meat," he said. So she went into another room again and brought out a great deal of meat. It was antelope meat which she gave him, and he wrapped up a great quantity of it and carried it into the kiva. When they saw him come in they all looked up again and there he placed a great quantity of meat on the floor and then he commenced to eat. The old man who had always been with him was very happy and exclaimed, "Aha," so the two were eating again. When they were done eating the old man turned to the others at the other end of the kiva and said to them:" Now, if any one is coveting this, come here and get the watermelons and take them to his children and the meat, that is left and take it to his wife." They were at first hanging down their heads, but soon came and took what was left and enjoyed it. Only one man did not come. He said, "Wait until to-morrow, how will it be then? To-morrow we shall not bring any food into the kiva, we shall not eat, but let us then bring our wealth (robes, dresses, belts, buckskins, etc.), into the kiva, and whoever proves to be the richest and bring in the most shall live with your wife." So the young man went over to his grandmother's house again and she asked him what the men had said. He said that to-morrow they were all going to bring into the kiva their wealth.

So the next day they were in the kiva all forenoon and at noon one of them suggested that now they go and get their possessions,

[p. 135]

"All right," the old man said, who was sitting with Piwitamni. "You go first because you wanted to have it this way." So they all went out and got their possessions and hung them up on the poles and pins in the kiva, filling them entirely. Others brought theirs in and the kiva was filled. They then said to Piwitamni: "Now then you go, too." "Yes," his comrade said, "you go and hunt at least something too, and bring it in." So he left the kiva and after he was gone his friend asked the others in the kiva to prepare many poles in the kiva for his friend to put his things on.

When he came to his grandmother's house she went into a room and brought forth a great many sashes. "Take these over to the kiva first," she said. So when he came to the kiva they looked up again and saw that somebody brought a great bundle. He placed them on the floor and said to his friend: "Now you hang all these up," and then left the kiva. Arriving at his grandmother's house she again went into a room and brought forth something and it was buckskins in great quantities. He took them over to the kiva. The men there looked up as he arrived at the kiva entrance and saw that he had a great bundle. He placed these buckskins on the floor and his friend, the old man, suspended them over poles. He again returned to his grandmother's house and this time he brought back a large bundle of large buckskins which were also hung up in the kiva by the old man. A fourth time he went and this time brought a large bundle of women's belts. So it was shown that he was very rich. Most of what was in the kiva belonged to Piwitamni. "Now then, what have you to say?" the old man said to the other men. So Piwitamni was ahead again.

Hereupon the old man took all these things that Piwitamni had brought into the kiva over to his house and gave them to his wife. Hereafter he was wealthy and no one dared to take her away from him. But the other men wanted one more test. They said the next day they would go from house to house and the man in whose house the most corn was found should own Piwitamni's wife. So the next day all the men from the kiva, including Piwitamni and his old friend, went around in the village from house to house and examined the piles of corn. In some houses they found a great deal of corn.

But when they came to the house of Piwitamni they found the house was filled with corn, watermelons, and squashes, so he had gotten ahead of them and no one ever dared to take away from him his wife.

That rich woman, who was after that no longer called Watermelon-rind Woman, may still be living somewhere.

Footnotes

^131:1 Told by Wikvaya (Oraibi).

^133:1 A white blanket made of cotton, two of which form a part of the bridal outfit. See "The Oraibi Marriage Ceremony," by H. R Voth, published by the Field Columbian Museum.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

37. THE YOUTH AND MAIDEN WHO PLAYED HIDE AND SEEK FOR THEIR LIFE. [*1]

Ishyaoi! In Oraibi the people were living. At the west end of the south row of houses lived a youth. A short distance north-east of the present Honani kiva lived a maiden. One day the youth went down to the west side of the mesa to watch his father's fields. As he passed the house of the maiden she asked where he was going. "I am going to watch my father's fields," he said: "May I not go along?" she asked. "Yes," he said, thinking that she was only joking, and passed on. The mana wrapped up some fresh piki rolls (muhpi) and followed the youth. "So you have come," he said to her by way of greeting when she had arrived. "Yes," she said, and opening her blanket showed him her piki, which they ate together. "Let us play hide and seek now," she said, "and the one who is found four times shall be killed." "All right," he replied, "you hide first because you wanted it." "No, you hide first," she said, and so finally they agreed that the mana would go and hide first. "But you must not look after me," she warned the youth, and spread her blanket (ushimni) over him.

She then ran through the growing corn and finally hid under some u'yi (Corrispermum hyssopi folium Linn). As soon as she had hidden she called out "tow." The young man then commenced to hunt her but could not find her. Finally he said: "I cannot find you, come out." So she came out and they went back to the place where they had eaten, and the youth then went to hide himself, covering up the mana with her blanket. He hid under a bush of pawihchoki. Having hidden, he called out, "tow," whereupon the mana hunted for him and found him. Hereupon they again returned, the youth was covered up and the mana again went among the growing corn to hide. Finding a large corn-stalk, she pulled out the tassel, crawled into the opening and put the tassel in again. She then signaled to the youth, and he came and looked for her. Following her tracks he found. that she had been running through the corn-field. So he hunted throughout the corn-field and then at the edge among the herbs and grasses, but could not find her. Finally he noticed that her tracks seemed to come to an end near a large corn-stalk, but he could not find her anywhere. Finally he called out, "I cannot find you, where are you?" "Here I am," she replied, and throwing out the corn-tassel she jumped out. So for the second time he had failed to find her.

They again returned to the edge of the field, the mana now covering

[p. 137]

herself up. The youth now, as, he went through the field, was thinking, "Where shall I hide? It is time that she does not find me again." As he passed along the edge of the field he heard a voice. "Listen to me," someone said. "Come up here. I have pity on you. One time she has already found you, and she will certainly find you again." This was the Sun. Hereupon the latter threw down a rainbow upon which the youth climbed to the Sun, who hid him behind his back saying, "Here she will not find you." So the mana followed his tracks all through the field, and went to the edge of the field to a small knoll, but could not find him. She followed them again throughout the field and returned to the same place. By this time she was puzzled where he could be. Her hair whorls were hanging down out of shape. She was thinking and thinking where he might be. Finally she pressed a few drops of milk out of her breast, examined the drops in her hand, and seeing the sun reflected in them, she discovered the boy behind him. She at once said: "Ma, there you are; I have found you. Come down."

The youth now again covered himself up and the mana went to hide away the third time. But this time the youth lifted up a corner of the covering and watched her, in which direction she went. When he followed her tracks throughout the corn-field he could not find her. Her tracks led to a patch of watermelons and squashes, but as the runners covered the ground he could not find her there. He returned to the corn-field and hunted, but not finding her anywhere he again followed her tracks to the watermelon patch. Finally he gave up in despair and called out: "I cannot find you, come out." She then burst open a watermelon, saying: "Here I am, and you did not find me," and came out.

The youth by this time became unhappy. They again returned and the maiden covering herself up, the youth went to hide away, but was very unhappy. Running through the corn-field and along its edge, he all at once heard a voice. "Where are you going? I have pity on you. You come in here," and looking down he saw a small hole by the side of a small corn-stalk. It was the house of Spider Woman. This he entered and she quickly spun some web across the opening. The mana again went to hunt for the youth. Running through the corn-field repeatedly, she finally traced his tracks to the edge of the corn-field, but could not find him anywhere. She then drew-forth from her bosom a mirror, which was probably a quartz crystal. Through this she hunted first upward, hoping to find him somewhere above again, but failed to find him. She then turned it downward and all at once saw the opening of the Spider's hole reflected

[p. 138]

in it. "Come out," she at once called out, "I have found you. You are in there." Spider Woman said: "Well, you will have to go out, she has found you." He was very dejected by this time because there was only one chance for him left; but he came out.

For the fourth time the mana went to hide away. The youth again lifted up a corner of the covering and looked after her and saw that she was again running towards the watermelon patch. On one side of the corn-field was a ditch and as it had rained shortly before, there was some water in this ditch and a number of tadpoles were in this water. The mana crossed the watermelon patch, went into the ditch, entered the water and turned into a tadpole. The boy again went in search of the mana, following her tracks through the cornfield and through the watermelon patch down to the ditch, but failed to find her. He returned and hunted throughout the field, and being very tired, he returned to the water, stooped down and drank some. He was very sad by this time, but he hunted once more. Finally he again followed her tracks to the edge of the water, and knowing that she must be there somewhere, he called out: "I cannot find you, just come out," and immediately she emerged from the water and said: "I was here when you were drinking water and I looked right at you." He then remembered that a tadpole had looked up out of the water when he was drinking, but he, of course, never thought that that could be the maiden.

So they returned again to the same place, and as they went back the youth was very much discouraged. "Only one chance left for me," he thought, "where shall I hide that she will not find me?" After the mana had covered herself he again went away. Passing the house of Spider Woman, the latter said to him: "Alas! (Okiwa!) where are you going? You go there a little to the east to your uncle, the Aha (a species of worm that lives in rotten wood); he lives in the takachki (a temporary shade or shelter) and maybe he will hide you." So the youth went there and when he arrived there called out, "My uncle, put me in there." So the Ahu pulled out a loose knot from one of the corner poles, which was that of a pinon-tree. This post was hollow, and into this the Ahu put the youth, closing up the opening after he had entered. So the mana went and hunted for the youth, following his tracks through the corn-field, and found that he had been going up and down and back and forth, and finally she tracked them to the aforesaid shelter. Arriving at this place she hunted, but at first could not find him. She then put the tips of her right hand fingers, one after another, into her mouth, wet them slightly, then pressed the point of her forefinger into her right ear, and

[p. 139]

immediately she heard the youth in his hiding place and told him to come out, as she had found him.

They then returned to their place again, but the mana said: "Let us now return again to the shelter where I found you." So they returned and sat down close to the shelter on the north side. The mana hereupon dug a hole close to one of the corner posts and then said to the youth: "I have beaten you, I have beaten you. You take off your shirt." he did so. It was a blue shirt such as the Hopi used to wear. "Now take off your beads," she said, and, not knowing what she intended to do, he did so. She hereupon grabbed him by the hair, jerked out a knife from behind her belt, bent him over the hole that she had made, and cut his throat, letting the blood run into the hole. [*1] She then closed up this hole, dug another one somewhat to the north and dragged the body to it, burying it in this grave.

Hereupon she took the shirt and the beads with her and went home. When the young man did not return to his home his parents became worried and inquired at the maiden's house. "We thought you both had gone to our field to watch," they said. "Do you not know where Kwavu'hu is?" "Yes," she said, "we were there together, but he drove me away, and I do not know where he is." So the parents were very sad. They had killed a sheep shortly before, but as they were so sorry they ate very little of the meat, and so the flies came in and ate of the meat. One time the woman was driving the flies off with a broom and one of them said: "Why do you drive me away when I eat your meat? I suck some of this meat and then I shall go and hunt your child." Hereupon the woman desisted and the flies then sucked of the meat. "Yes," the woman then said to the fly, "our boy went to watch the fields and he never came back. If you can, you go and hunt him and find him for me." So the Fly flew away to the corn-field and found very many tracks. Following them all over the field, she finally tracked them to the shelter where the young man had been killed. Flying around here she soon discovered traces of the blood, and opening the hole she found blood in it. She sucked some of this blood and went a little farther north and there found the grave. She then sucked up all the blood from the first opening and injected it into the body and then waited. Soon the heart of the youth began to beat and after a little while he raised up, shaking his head slightly. "Have you woke up?" the Fly said. "Yes," he answered, "but I am very thirsty." "There is some water over there in the ditch," the Fly said, "go there and drink and then

[p. 140]

we shall return to your house." So he went there and quenched his thirst and then they returned to the house of his parents. These were now very happy when they saw the child. The Fly then said to the parents: "The shirt and beads of your boy are at the maiden's house. Let him go over there and then see what she says, whether she will be glad or not, and then let him ask for his shirt and beads, and when she gives him the shirt let him shake it at her, and then when he gets the beads he must shake them, too."

The mother then said to her son: "All right, you go over to the mana's house. But the Fly continued: "She will probably spread food before you, she will offer you piki rolls, but do not eat them." So he went over there. When the mana saw him she exclaimed: "Ih (with a rising inflection), Have you come?" "Yes," he said, "I have come." "Sit down," she said to him, and at once went into another room and got some food, which she placed before him. "I am not hungry; I have come for my shirt and my beads. I think you brought them with you when you came." "Yes, I have them here, and of course I shall give them to you." She hereupon went into a room and when she opened the door the young man looked in and saw that she was very wealthy. She had a great many things there that she had taken from the youths whom she had killed. When she brought out his things he took them and shook them at her and said: "Yes, these are mine, these are the ones." Hereupon he left the house, but the Fly had in the meanwhile told his parents that they should go over to the mana's house also and meet their son there, so they met in front of the house and waited there. While they were standing there they heard a noise in the house, some clapping and shaking. When the young man had shaken his shirt and the beads at the mana, an evil charm had entered her and she was changed into "Tihkuy Wuhti" [*1] (child protruding woman). She entered an inner room and came out dressed in a white owa. Her hair was now tied up like that of a married woman, but her face and clothes were all bloody. While she had put on this costume the noise and rattle in the room where the costumes of the slain youths were had continued, and these costumes, which it seems consisted mostly of buckskins, rabbit skins, etc., had assumed the shape of deer, antelope and rabbits, and these now dashed out of the room and left the house. The mana tried to keep them and was angry, but could not stop them. She grabbed the last one, however, and wiping her hand over her genitalia

[p. 141]

she rubbed this hand over the face of the antelope, twisted his nose, rubbed his horns, etc., and then let him run. She then turned to the people who had assembled outside of the house and said: "After this you shall have great difficulty in hunting these animals. If you had let them alone here they would have remained close by, and you would have had no difficulty in slaying them." She thereupon also left the house and disappeared with the game. Ever after she lived along the Little Colorado River, where also for a long time the deer and antelope abounded. And this is the reason why it is so difficult to approach and kill this game. The Tihkuy Wuhti having rubbed her own odor over the nose and face of that antelope, these antelopes now smell the odor of people from a far distance, and so it is very difficult to approach them. The Tihkuy Wuhti is said to still live at the Little Colorado River, and the Hopi claim to have seen her, still wrapped up in the white robe, and all covered with blood. She controls the game, and hunters make prayer-offerings to her of turquoise and nakwakwosis stained in red ochre like that used in the Snake ceremony. These prayer-offerings, however, are always deposited in the night.

Footnotes

^136:1 Told by Wikvaya (Oraibi).

^139:1 I have found other evidences in the Hopi tradition that point to the probability that human sacrifices existed among the ancestors of the Hopi.

^140:1 This personage occurs in various Hopi tales. Some say that in a migrating party a woman was about to be confined. But as she was in labor a long time, she asked to be left behind. Her request was granted, the child being only partly born, from which fact she received her name. Comp. "The Oraibi Snake Ceremony," by H, R Voth, page 353.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

38. THE MAIDEN WHO STOLE THE YOUTH'S COSTUME. [*1]

Haliksai! A long time ago the people were living in Shupaulavi. In the north-east corner of the village lived a maiden, and in another part of the village lived a grandmother with her grandson. One time this grandson wanted to practice running. His grandmother dressed him up in a kilt, beads, bunch of parrot feathers, and tied a little bell to his back, etc. She told him, that when he had made his circuit and returned to the village he should never pass by the house of that maiden, because she was dangerous, but he should come up another trail. So he ran towards Mishongnovi and descended the mesa southeast of Mishongnovi, then made a large circuit in the valley.

He was thinking why his grandmother had forbidden him to pass by that maiden's house. Early the next morning he again ran, again descending south-east of Mishongnovi. Passing down the trail eastward, he turned in the valley, ran north, turned to the mesa south of Pachkovi, ascended the mesa, and came to the village from the north. When he ascended to the village the maiden was standing on her kiva. "Aha, some one is running there," she said. "Run! run! You are beautifully dressed up," she continued, "let me dress up in your costume and dance for you."

Hereupon the youth ascended to the village and stopped in front

[p. 142]

of the mana's kiva. "You are nicely costumed," she again said. Let me dress up in your costume and dance for you, and when I an, through I shall return your costume to you again." So he was willing, laid off his costume and handed it to her. She dressed up in it, putting on the kilt, beads, ear-pendants, bell, feathers, etc., and then danced for him on top of her kiva, singing the following song:

          Anina yuyuina! anina yuyuina!
   Anina yuyuina! anina yuyuina!
   Anina yuyuina! anina yuyuina!
   Kurzh yangkag Bakataa,
   Nui, nui, nui.

       Aha, costumed! aha, costumed!
   Aha, costumed! aha, costumed!
   Aha, costumed! aha, costumed!
   Now this Bakataa,
   To me, me, me (comes).

     
    

As she was singing the last words she jumped into the kiva through the opening, closing it up quickly, and called out to the young man: "You can go, I shall not give you back your costume." The youth was very sad and went home. When his grandmother saw him she was angry. "There," she said, "I told you not to go there, but you did not believe me, and you went there anyway. That maiden is wicked. She always takes away the things from the young men in that way, but you would not believe me, and you went there. But let us eat now and then you go on the hunt. That maiden is always hungry for meat, and if you bring some game we shall go over with that and offer it to her and see what she has to say. She is hungry after meat."

So when they were through eating he dressed up and went hunting. The youth had a dog that could run very fast. This dog accompanied him. They were hunting east of the village in the valley. Soon they detected a rabbit, followed him, tracked him into a hole and dug him out, killed him, and returned to the village. When he came to his grandmother's house she was very happy. "Thanks, thanks," she said, one time after another. ''With this we shall go over now and find out what she thinks about it." Hereupon they ate. When they were through the grandmother told him to take this rabbit, go over to the maiden, and invite her to dance for him again, offering her the rabbit if she did so. "She will certainly come out then," the grandmother said, "but do not he afraid now; cover that opening with the trapdoor quickly, so that she cannot get back again.''

So he proceeded to the kiva of the maiden. When she saw him she saw the game that he had in his hand. and said, "Oh, where did you get that?" "Yes." he said, "I killed that just now." "Give it to me," she replied. "As soon as you will dance for me again I shall give it to you." he said. "Now, you listen to me," he said, "as

[p. 143]

soon as you get through dancing I shall give it to you." So she came out and performed her dance at the edge of the kiva opening, apparently ready to slip in again when she would be through. She sang the same song that she had been singing before. As she sang the last word the youth threw the game towards her, but quite a distance from the kiva, as he had been instructed by his grandmother. The mana rushed for the game, and while she did so the youth closed the opening. The mana was very quick, but when she saw that she had been defeated she laid off the entire costume, one piece after the other, saving, ."Here is your costume." The youth picked it up and went to his grandmother's house, who was very happy. "Thanks," she said, "that you were not too late, and that you were successful." Hereafter he had his costume again. "Thanks, thanks," the grand in other said, one time after another. "Do not go that way again, that mana is dangerous. She always takes away the things from the youths of the village. I told you so, but you would not believe me. Now since she has given your costume back to us, do not go again,"

Footnotes

^141:1 Told by Sik'ahpik'i (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

39. THE TWO PUEBLO MAIDENS WHO WERE MARRIED TO THE NIGHT. [*1]

Haliksai! In Kawaihkaa, a Pueblo village in New Mexico, the people were living. North of the plaza, at the house where there was a long ladder, lived two maidens. They were sisters, and persistently refused to marry any of the young men in the village. Finally the Night (Tokila) concluded to try to marry the two maidens, and came to the house. He came there in the evening and asked them to marry him. They said they would lay the matter before their parents, and if they were willing they would marry him. The parents were willing, and so the two sisters waited for their suitor. The next evening he came to fetch his two brides.

Leaving the village they went through a narrow passage. Outside of the village they found a large tray (pota), which the Night had left there. "This we shall enter," he said. So they all took a place on the tray, whereupon they were lifted up and carried through the air to Kawaihka Nuwatok'aovi, where they entered a deep canyon or gulch. Here the Night lived. When they came into the house they saw in an inner room a great many human bones. They were the remains of many women whom the Night had stolen in the village, and with whom he had lived a while and then, as soon as they became pregnant, had thrown them into the room to perish. A number of

[p. 144]

women and maidens were still living, and they pitied these two new arrivals, and said: "Alas! that you two have come with him." So the two were very unhappy.

Close by was a lake from which the two sisters used to get water. They stayed with the Night a while, but soon became very unhappy when they saw that they were pregnant. One time the younger sister went to get some water and then somebody spoke to her. It was the Frog. "You poor one," he said, "you must go home this night. Here is a large trail. In the evening you must take your water jars on your head and come after water. You leave them here, and then you follow this road, which leads to your home. This you must tell your sister also." Hereupon the younger sister returned and said to her older sister: "There at the water some one has told me something." "What did he say to you?" she asked. "He told me that we should go home this night.''

So in the evening, after they had eaten, they took their water jars and went after water. When they arrived at the lake the Frog said: "Have you come"' "Yes," they replied. "Very well, you just follow this track, and you trot, and you will arrive at your home." After they had traveled a distance they came upon Spider Woman, who was sitting close to the trail in a stooping position as an old hag. "Have you come?" she said. "Yes," they replied. "Very well, I have heard that you are going home, and so I waited for you here." She then told them that she would go along, and that they should not fear. So they traveled on that night and did not sleep any. The next day, when they had traveled until about noon, Spider Woman looked back and saw some clouds approaching. "They are coming," she said: "and will certainly overtake us."

The three did not tarry, but when they had come nearly to the village the sky was full of clouds; they had overtaken them. When they had arrived close to the village they were struck by lightning and killed. But as they were killed, each one was delivered of a child, the elder sister of a little boy, the younger one of a little girl. The children remained alive and at once began to nurse. During the night their mothers would become alive, but during the day they were always dead. In that way the children were brought up. Finally they began to walk around. Spider Woman had left the two fugitives as soon as they were struck by lightning.

When the children had grown up somewhat, they asked their mothers who their father was. "We certainly have a father, and you tell us who he is, and we will go to him; then he will take care of us and provide for us." The mothers then told them, "Yes, you have

[p. 145]

a father, but from him we have fled, and he will not care for you. East of here is a village, Kawaihkaa, and there is where we used to live. There our father and our mother live. You go there and north of the plaza where the big ladder is you inquire and see what they will say to you. There is where we used to live. But they too are bad. They will undoubtedly ask you to contend with them, and if any one is beaten they usually kill him. On top of the ladder something is hanging, and if any one does not guess that, he is killed; but if they contend with you and beat you, you must guess that. There is a little turtle tied up in it."

Hereupon they slept until morning, then the two children started. Their mothers said to them: "If they contend with you and your grandfather pities you and gives you something, you bring us something too, so that we can dress up, because our clothes are worn out. If they do not say anything to you, we shall go there too." When they arrived at the village they crossed the plaza, saw the ladder, and went up. Their grandparents lived in a kiva there. They entered and sat down. The grandparents had always been sad and sorry and at first did not say anything. Finally the grandfather saw them and asked, "Who are you?" "Why, it is we," they said. "But who are you? Where do you come from?" "From west of here," they replied. "From Akokovi (a village west of Kawaihkaa)?" the grandfather asked. "No," they said, "not from there, but we stayed right west of here." "But who are you?" they asked again.

"A long time ago you had two daughters and somebody fetched them, and we are their children. We have grown up now and have come here." Hereupon they set food before them and fed them. The grandmother was crying. When they had eaten, sure enough, they were asked to playa game with them. "If they are our grandchildren," they said, "they will know something." So the grandfather laid out a flat stone on which was drawn a tu'kwnanawohpi. [*1] The grandfather sat on one side, the boy at the other end, and then they began to play. The boy won the game. "Very well," the grandfather said, "there at the top of the ladder something is wrapped up. You guess what that is. If you guess that you kill me, and if you do not guess it I shall kill you." Hereupon they all went out and looked at the bundle that was hanging at the top of the ladder. "Now, what is in there?" the grandfather said. "Who knows?" the child said. "You guess once," the brother said to his sister. "How do I know what can be in there?" she said; "you guess." "Now, do not hesitate," the grandfather said, "but speak out and say what you

[p. 146]

think." "Why, what can be in there?" the little brother finally said; "it is perhaps a little turtle." "Now, you are surely our grand. children," the grandfather exclaimed.

"Well now, you kill me," the grandfather said. "No, we do not want to kill you," the children replied, "but you pay us something." ''Very well," the grandfather said, "what do you want?" "I want a shirt, a how, and quiver with arrows, and some wrist protectors, and a pair of moccasins," the boy said. The little girl asked for a dress, a blanket, moccasins, and a belt. And thus the grandparents paid them these things. They then also asked for some clothes; for their mothers, whereupon the grandfather gave them four sheep-wool dresses, two pairs of moccasins, and two belts. The children then said, that their mothers had said, if they were willing and would not say anything, then the mothers would also come. "Certainly you must come," the grandparents said; "you shall not remain there," So the children took these things with them and returned to their mothers.

When they arrived there the latter were very happy. The little boy was already shooting his arrow. They all dressed up now and ate their evening meal. Hereupon they proceeded to the village, but all abreast. In this same manner they ascended the ladder, and when they had arrived at the opening the elder woman called down, "Our father, our mother," but received no answer. The younger sister then called down the same words, but received no answer. "They do not care for us," they said. The children had told their grandparents that their mothers would come if the grandparents would not say anything to them. They then descended the ladder and stopped at the elevated portion in the kiva. Again the two called, "Our father, our mother," and again no answer. "They do not care for us," the two women said. They then descended into the deeper portion of the kiva and again one after the other called, "Our father, our mother," whereupon the grandmother responded. "How!" she said, and immediately her two children and two grandchildren fell dead. Had they heeded the injunction a little better, and had been quiet just once more, the fourth time they would all have lived together happily, but this way now they had no children.

Footnotes

^143:1 Told by Lomanomtiwa (Oraibi).

^145:1 A game resembling our checkers.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

40. HOW HIYONATITIWA DEFEATED THE PLAN OF HIS ENEMIES. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi they were living. At the place where now Hongsi and Nakwsu live, lived a maiden who refused all offers of marriage. The young men of the village would frequently go there

[p. 147]

and try to win her affections, but without success. At Achamali (now a shrine a few hundred yards north of the village) lived a youth by the name of Hiyonatitiwa, with his grandmother. They were very poor. The young man always went around with a patched blanket, and his grandmother also did so. One time he said to the latter: "My grandmother!" "Ha!" she said. "I am going to go south to that maiden there and see whether she will not marry me." "O my!" the grandmother said, "you are so poor, she will certainly not want you, and you are thinking of it. But at least go there and try it," she said to him.

So one time he came to the village. On the Snake and Flute and other kivas and on some of the houses the young men were still sitting, as it was twilight. As they saw the youth come they said: "Aha, somebody is coming here." So he stood and waited. They went to their supper and then returned, taking their previous places again. But the young man, not wanting to wait any longer, boldly passed between them to the house of the maiden. There was an open window in the upper story of the house, and to this the youth went up. The young people who saw him smiled. The maiden was grinding corn, but occasionally stopped. The young people watched the proceedings, and as they heard that the maiden occasionally stopped grinding, they concluded and said that the young man must be welcome, and she must be talking with him sometimes, because she stops grinding corn occasionally.

The young man talked to the maiden and asked her to marry him. She said that if her father and mother were willing, she would marry him. "Very well," he said, he would return the next evening, and if they were willing he would fetch her. Hereupon he returned home. The young men of the village were very unhappy. The youth said to his grandmother that to-morrow he would fetch the maiden. She refused to believe it. "Certainly I am going to fetch her," he said. And so the day passed and evening came. When it was dark he again proceeded to the house of the maiden. The young men of the village were again sitting on the roofs of the kivas and houses watching him. He went up to the house, and after a little while brought with him the mana, taking her to his house. The young men said to him as they passed along: "So you are fetching her. What do you want with her? But, of course, you are going to dress her up in patched blankets."

So he brought her to the house of his grandmother and went in. She took charge of the maiden and the latter remained there. The next three days she ground corn, and on the morning of the fourth day the grandmother washed their heads, but there was nobody there

[p. 148]

to participate. There was nobody there to make a bridal costume, for which the maiden was now sorry. Hereupon the bride remained there and prepared the food for them, but no one prepared a bridal costume for her. When she had remained there about the time that brides usually remain at their husband's house before they go home to their mother's house, the old grandmother said: "Now, you have been here about that long, we shall see whether we can find something for you."

That day the young man went hunting and brought home a great deal of meat. They prepared some no'okwiwi, some pikami, etc. Of this they ate in the evening. Early the next morning the grandmother again washed the head of the bride, and hereupon she went into a room on the north side and was hunting around there, knocking things about, but found nothing. Going into another room on the west side she did the same, but had nothing when she came out. She repeated this in a room on the south side, but when she came out of a room on the east side she brought with her a complete bridal costume--two white robes, a pair of moccasins, a white, knotted, fringed belt and a reed receptacle. She dressed up the bride, sprinkled a road of corn-meal for her, and sent her home to her parents. The people were again sitting on their housetops and kiva roofs, and, behold! there the young bride came home, dressed as brides usually are dressed. When she came to her mother's house her mother was very happy.

Her husband went on a hunt the next day and brought back with him a mountain sheep. This he handed to his wife's parents, who were very happy over it. The inhabitants of the Snake and Nashabe kivas were very angry at this young man and were planning how they could kill him. They decided to make a raid on the Navaho. But the father of the young wife was also one of the inhabitants of the Snake kiva, and so he found out how matters stood. He told his son-in-law about it, and the latter informed his grandmother. She said that the next morning he should send his wife's little sister to the Snake kiva to call his father-in-law for breakfast. Hereupon the young man returned.

In the morning the maiden went to the Snake kiva, called her father for the morning meal, and added that in four days there would be war, whereupon she ran back. The people in the kiva were surprised, but laughed. The next day she repeated this, saying that in three days there would be war, and soon. In the evening of the second day the father and his son-in-law went over to the old woman at Achamali, and said: "It is drawing nearer." "Yes," she said, "when

[p. 149]

they will have a race to-morrow you must not race with them, but you both come here first and start from here." Whereupon the two returned home. The next morning the little maiden repeated the same words. The men now began to feel uneasy, saving that that maiden certainly did not say that for nothing. Something must be about to happen.

On the. morning of the third day she repeated the same words, saying: "To-morrow there will be war." That day the men made bows and arrows all day. On the morning of the fourth day the maiden again said: "Let us go and eat, but to-day there will be war," whereupon she ran home. It had been noised abroad that some Navaho were approaching the village and were attacking some men in the fields, The men who were not killed ran towards the village and shouted. The men of the village at once got ready and descended the village to meet the Navaho raiders. Hiyonatitiwa and his father-in-law each got two quivers full of arrows and a bow, and then ran over to Achamali to the old woman's house. "Have you come"' she said. "Yes," they replied. Hereupon she went to the room on the north and called in: "Come out here, your grandchildren have come here." At once somebody came. It was the Puma. She then called into the room on the west side: "Your grandchildren have come, come out here," and a Bear came out. She repeated this, calling into the room on the south side, and a Wildcat came out. Repeating this same act on the east side, a Wolf came out of the room.

While this was going on at Achamali, the Hopi had met the Navaho, and the latter were constantly asking where Hiyonatitiwa was. "He is in the village yet," the Hopi replied. "Go and get him, he is slow," the Navaho said. By this time the young man and his father-in-law, accompanied by the four animals , descended the mesa. The animals at once rushed upon the Navaho, who were nearly all killed, and also the Hopi that had planned this raid in order to get Hiyanatitiwa out of the way, and then steal his wife. When those who remained alive returned to the village there was a great deal of mourning there. "Somebody has certainly brought this about that some of our people have now been killed also," they said. And this way it was prevented that some one should take away the Young man's wife, and he forever afterwards lived with her.

Footnotes

^146:1 Told by Lomanomtiwa (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

  

41. THE SHONGOPAVI MAIDEN WHO TURNED INTO A DOG. [*1]

Haliksai! In Shongopavi they were living, and a youth there was very handsome, and all the maidens were coveting him. And one maiden was young yet, had small hair whorls; she was dirty, and a bad looking maiden. The maidens owned the chiro birds, and one of the maidens ground coarse meal (hakwushkwi) for them and put it into a tray, and when she had put it in she lifted it up, and while she was singing she threw it away. She sang: "Pota, pota, pota, Yoa ini, yoa ini," and then scattered it to the birds. Now the chiros darted towards it and ate of it, and when they had eaten they dispersed again, whistling, and were flying around somewhere in the field. When it was evening they again assembled at the mana's house. In the morning she again made hakwushkwi for them and fed them, and after that the mana always fed them.

Now that youth also made a tray. When he was done with it the maidens assembled. He handed that tray to them, and when he had handed it to them he said: "Now then, who opens this shall get me." Now one when she had loosened it could not untie it. She handed it to another one, who could not untie it, and thus one after the other tried to loosen and untie it, and not one could open it. Now then when it came to that bad looking maiden she also tried it. Now the old grandmother (Spider Woman) informed her, ''When you will sing this you will open it." Thus she informed her. So the maiden, while she was secretly singing, opened it. When she had opened it, singing secretly, she opened it as her song ended. When she had opened it all she owned the youth. Then those pretty maidens were very sad and were angry.

Now the youth took her to his house, where the mother of the youth bathed her entirely, whereupon she became a pretty maiden. She now remained there as a bride. Then they made a bridal costume for her whereupon she went home. When she went home the youth followed her. Now she slept there in their house twice, and when she slept there the second time she did not get up. At last when they were eating they would still not get up, so the mother of the maiden went up to them and looked at them and they were still sleeping, but that maiden had turned into something; she had turned into a dog. Now the mother said to them, "Get up, please." The dog got up at once and rushed out right away and jumped down as a dog, and at once ran away somewhere, and is still going around somewhere.

Footnotes

^150:1 Told by Moho (Oraibi woman).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 151]

  

42. THE BLIND MAN AND THE LAME MAN. [*1]

A long time ago there was an earthquake at Oraibi. It was a very nice day; people had eaten their breakfast as usual, and were happy. Then towards noon the earth and the houses began to move and to tremble, and very soon there was a great noise like thunder, but nothing could be seen and the people did not know where it came from. They ran to their houses and everywhere to see what was the matter. Sometime in the afternoon the earth trembled very much, and a large piece of ground sank down at Skeleton gulch (Masvovee), so called because at one time a great many slain people were thrown there. This is situated about half a mile northeast of Oraibi; the piece that sank down reached nearly to the village of Oraibi. There was also a very large crack right on the public square or plaza of the village.

By this time the people got frightened very much, and all left the village, running toward the north. In the village there lived in one of the houses a blind man, and in another house a cripple who could not walk. When these noticed that some serious disturbance was taking place, they got very much frightened, and the blind man called over to the cripple asking for information. The latter answered that the earth had been trembling and the village had been in motion, and that all the people had left the village. The cripple then asked the blind man to come over to his house. The blind man asked the cripple to come over to his house, but after a while the cripple prevailed, and the blind man, taking a stick and feeling his way before himself, tried to reach the house of the cripple, the latter directing him which way to go. When he had arrived at the house the cripple said: "Let us also flee. You carry me on your back, and I shall show you the way." This they did, the cripple turning the head of the blind man in the direction in which he wanted him to turn and to go. Thus they left the village, also in a northerly direction, following the others.

A short distance north of the village a large elk met them, coming from the north. "O my! what is that?" the cripple said, on the back of the blind man. ''What is it?" the latter asked. "Something very large. It is nearly black, and yet it is not quite black." The blind man, who had been a great hunter in his youth, when he still had his eyesight, at once suspected what it might be, and asked for details, and soon concluded that it must be an elk. Before leaving the village

[p. 152]

the blind man had suggested that they take a bow and arrows along so that, in case they needed some food, they could kill some game. When they had come opposite the elk the cripple suggested that the blind man shoot the elk, as his own hands were also somewhat crippled, and he was unable to handle a bow. He put an arrow on the bow, and the blind man got the bow ready, the cripple doing the aiming for him. The elk was now standing west of them, and at the proper time the cripple told the blind man to shoot. He shot and killed the elk.

They were now very anxious to roast some of the meat, but had nothing to skin the animal or cut the meat with; so they went there and with one of their arrows they dug out the eyes of the elk. The blind man then, being directed by the lame man, gathered some sticks of wood and they built a fire, starting the fire by rubbing wood and fire sticks together. They placed the two eyes on the fire and waited. When the eyes got very hot they burst with a great report. "Hihiya!" the men exclaimed, and both jumped up, the lame man finding that he could walk, and the blind man finding his eyes opened. "Ishuti," the blind man said. "What is it (hinti)?" "My eyes are open." "Yes, and I can walk," the other man replied. By this time it had become evening. "Now let us remain awake all night," the man who had been blind said, "because if we go to sleep my eyes might stick together again." "Yes, if I lie down I might find that I cannot walk again in the morning," the other one replied. So the first one handed the other a small twig of o'cvi (Ephedra), saving to him, "If you see that I go to sleep, you prick my eyes so that I awake." The other one handed the blind man, as we shall call him for brevity's sake, also some prickly weed, saying "If you see me sit down you prick my body so that I remain standing." Thus they remained awake all night watching each other.

Early in the morning they concluded that they would follow the tracks of the inhabitants of the village who had fled. They, finally found them in a timber quite a distance to the north. "What has happened to you?" they said. "Why, you were blind and lame, and now you can see and walk." "Yes, they said , "something has happened to us: and now let us go back again to the village. There is nothing the matter there any more." So the people all returned to the village, these two taking the lead, and that is the reason why Oraibi is again inhabited. If these two had not brought the people back they would never have returned.

Footnotes

^151:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 153]

  

43. BIG HEAD AND GOAT HORN. 

Haliksai! In Oraibi they were living. East of the Kwan kiva a youth lived, by the name of Big Head (Wuyakqoto), Away south are the Hopi Buttes, and on the westernmost butte lived Goat Horn (Chiwakala). These two were friends, but as they lived so far apart they did not visit each other often; but one time Goat Horn visited his friend in Oraibi. After they had eaten and talked together, towards evening Goat Horn wanted to return home. "My friend," he said to Big Head. "What is it?" the latter replied. "You must come and visit me sometime, too," Goat Horn said; whereupon he went home. After a while Big Head visited his friend, and stayed all night there. In the morning Goat Horn killed a goat for his friend, cut it in two, and gave him one-half, which Big Head took with him to the village; and that is the reason why Hopi, when they kill a goat, cut it up.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

44. KAVUSHKAVUWNOM AND SHOVIVIOUNOM

Haliksai! In Oraibi they were living. At Bayavushtuhco lived a woman by the name of Kavushkavuwnom, and at Oanmuru lived a woman by the name of Shoviviounom. These two women were great friends. They usually got water at Spider Spring (Kohkangva). One time Kavushkavuwnom was getting water again, and as she was returning her friend Shoviviounom met her, also getting water. The latter asked her in a half-singing manner: "What now [in order] to cook, you get water?" (Hihta vula kwiwanikae kuyito?) Whereupon Kavushkavuwnom replied: "A dish of young squashes" (Ngamoochona). Shoviviounom hereupon said: "So you are going to feast?" (Aha, halihi kurzh pas um chonni?) "Yes," the other one replied, "you must come this evening and visit me," whereupon they separated, the one going home with her water, and the other one going after water.

When Shoviviounom returned with her water she went to grinding corn and prepared some hurushuki. Of this she put some into a tray and proceeded to the house of her friend, Kavushkavuwnom, who had invited her to come over. The latter had in the meanwhile prepared her dish of young squashes. This she put into a bowl and the two then sat down and ate the squashes and the hurushuki. While they were eating they conversed together, and when they were through and Shoviviounom had visited for a little while, she returned to her home.

[p. 154]

The next morning Shoviviounom went after water first. She looked around several times for her friend, who, however, was not yet coming. She went down to the spring, filled her jug with water, but still her friend was not coming. So she returned to the village, and as she was ascending the incline to the village Kavushkavuwnom descended from the village, also going after water. When they met, Kavushkavuwnom asked her friend: "What now [in order] to cook, you get water?" (Hihta vula kwiwanikae kuyito?) Whereupon Shoviviounom replied: ''Tavochona." .. So you are going to feast?" "(Aha, halihi kurzh pas um chonni?) Kavushkavuwnom said. "Yes," Shoviviounom replied, "you must come and visit me in the evening. "

When they had both returned they prepared their meals, Kavushkavuwnom preparing some hurushuki, and Shoviviounom preparing a dish of rabbit meat. In the evening Kavushkavuwnom proceeded to the house of her friend. The latter put her dish of rabbit meat into a bowl, and Kavushkavuwnom added her hurushuki. The two then ate, enjoying their feast. When they were through, they conversed together until the sun went down, whereupon Kavushkavuwnom returned to her house and both retired for the night.

Footnotes

^153:1 Told by Lomanomtiwa (Oraibi).

2 Told by Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

45. HOW THE CHILDREN OF PIVANHONK'API OBTAINED PERMISSION TO CATCH BIRDS. [*1]

Haliksai! At Hu'kovi they were living, and at Pivanhonk'api they were also living. At both places there were a great many children, and they always went down to Mumushva (a spring named after a certain herb and grass that grows in the spring), where they were setting bird traps. They were often at enmity with one another on account of the birds. One morning they again went to trap birds. They again became very angry at one another on account of the trapping, and the Hu'kovi children said to the children of Pivanhonk'api that they should not trap birds there. But they said if they would give them something they could trap birds there. So the children from Pivanhonk'api ran back to the village and got such things as kutu'ki, piki, and different other articles of food, and gave them to the children of Hu'kovi, so that the latter carried home a great deal of food which they had purchased for the permission given to the Pivanhonkapi children to catch birds there, and after that the children from both villages were always catching birds there, and maybe they are catching birds there still.

Footnotes

^154:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 155]

  

46. THE JUG BOY. [*1]

In the village of Hano the people were living. The Hano know how to make the earthen jugs, and one time a handsome young woman also made an earthen jug. She kneaded the clay and when her hands were tired she trampled it with her feet, so that the wet clay spurted all around. [*2] By and by this woman bore a child, but it was an earthen jug, inside of which was a little boy, who cried when he was born. The women who were present were happy. "Ishuni!" they said, "you have borne a child," whereupon they washed the jug child, and in that way the child grew up. But the mother nursed it, holding her breast over the opening of the jug when the child nursed.

By and by the child grew up and began to talk like the Hano, and from that time on the child refused to take the mother's breast; it asked for some food, and from there on it ate food which the mother put into the jug. Thus the child grew to be a young man. One time it rained and then it snowed, and the young men then went hunting. In the evening they came home carrying the rabbits. That jug youth envied them. He had a grandfather, and said to the grandfather, "My grandfather." "Hay!" the latter replied. "I want to go hunting, too." "Very well," he replied, and then the grandfather made a bow for him and arrows, and tied feathers to the arrows, and when he had made them he tied them to the jug handles. He also tied some food to the jug and a burden band with it. These things he made.

Then the grandfather lifted the jug up, carried it down from the village and left it there. He said to him, "Now go on; there in the field they are hunting, hence when you proceed and find rabbit tracks somewhere you follow them. This kind of tracks they have," whereupon he drew them for him. Now then he (the jug youth) moved forward in a wabbling manner and descended somewhere along the path. When he had descended he went somewhere northward from the village. Then he moved up and down that way, and sure enough somewhere found some tracks. He followed them and there, sure enough, a rabbit was running. Now that jug youth moved very fast, so that the mouth of the jug whistled. He circled around the rabbit once, then the rabbit jumped into the wash. The jug youth also came and jumped down. When he landed on the ground he burst into two and a Hopi came bouncing out of it.

[p. 156]

After that he at once untied the bow and arrows and burden band. He now took the burden band, the bow and arrows, and followed the rabbit. The rabbit became tired and sat down. When the youth found him he shot it. He then followed another one and killed it. Thus he killed four. He now tied them up and carried them on his back and then went home from there. When it was evening he came to his mother carrying the rabbits, and she was truly happy. "Oh my! Thanks that you have killed them, thanks, thanks," she said. The grandfather now also said: "Thanks, thanks, why you have fixed yourself up somewhere, and hence you are now a Hopi and have carried these here to me. Thanks! Why now subsisting on your account I shall live here." When he had thus spoken to him, after that that one lived as a Hopi, and after that he always provided something for his mother, and then subsisting on his account (by his assistance) they lived there.

Footnotes

^155:1 Told by Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

^155:2 A part of it entered her genitalia and she became pregnant from it.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

47. THE CROW AS A SPIRIT OF EVIL. [*1]

A Crow was living on the high mesa southeast of Oraibi where the sun shrines are located. He would be walking up and down on the edge of the mesa watching the people as they were planting their corn in the valley. "Thank you," he would say, "that you are planting for me." Occasionally he would fly over and around the village of Oraibi watching the people. He also would watch well who planted his corn first, and when the corn began to have ears he would say: "This field was planted first, so I am going to eat there," which he did. The Hopi were very unhappy over it. This high Crow also impersonated sickness. Wherever any body in the village was bad he would, in some way or other, secretly and unobserved, influence and charm him and he would get sick; some of them would even die. just how he did it the Hopi do not know. It was done in an invisible way, just the same, the Hopi say, as he would eat their corn after they had left their fields, and did not see him do it. The Crow, or Sickness, would also despoil people in other ways, some into whom he had breathed his bad influence would, for instance, begin to steal. They would be very sorry over it afterwards, and say: "What is it that makes me so bad, I did not use to do it before." Good people, whose heart, however, was not very strong, would thus be turned into bad people by the harmful charm of the Crow. They say that in that condition they would ''kananapunangwa yeshe," that means, be sitting or living with a disobedient heart. But as the

[p. 157]

Crow is constantly trying to influence the Hopi to do bad things, to infuse sickness into their bodies, there is some one else that is trying to counteract the doings of the Crow, but who this unseen being is the Hopi do not know. They do not know where he lives; they have no regular name for him; they speak of him as The-One-that-Does-Good-for-them-All. and wants to make them good, or as the One-with-the-Good-Heart, and so on. The ideas about this being seem to be vague. It is not quite clear whether the Hopi consider it to be a personality or simply a power, or influence, but they believe that whatever this may be, it is not so strong as the Crow, although the two forces constantly wrangle over the individual Hopi, the one trying to exert a bad influence over him and the other one to counteract this bad influence. The Hopi say that sometimes, when they are under the influence of the Crow, this other power will in some mysterious way make itself felt, so that they sometimes feel a sudden shock; so that, as they sometimes put it, they even sometimes hit their foot against an object that may be close by. By this, they say, they realize that that "Good Thing," or Being, is trying to exert its influence over them and to save them from some bad influence of the Crow.

Footnotes

^156:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

48. THE MAIDEN AND THE COYOTE. [*1]

A long time ago a beautiful maiden lived in the northern part of the village of Oraibi. The young men of the village vied with one another to gain her favor, but she treated with contempt all attempts in that direction. The young men would gather flowers, some of them even going long distances to find rare flowers, and offer them to her, but she would persistently refuse to accept any of them. So they finally gave up the attempts in disgust.

The Yellow Cloud chief of the north heard about it and also decided to try to win her. He prepared a beautiful bridal outfit, consisting of two robes, a pair of moccasins, a knotted belt, and a reed mat, the latter to be used as a receptacle for a part of the outfit. In fact, it was the same outfit that is made for brides at the present time, but yellow being the color of the north with the Hopi, this whole outfit was of that color. The chief brought it to the village and presented it to the maiden, but she refused to accept it, so he, too, returned to his home in disgust. The Blue Cloud chief of the west hearing about this, made up his mind that he would try to win the favor of that maiden, so he prepared a blue bridal outfit and offered it to the maiden, but it was promptly refused. Hereupon the Red Cloud

[p. 158]

chief of the south prepared the same outfit in red color, but also without success. The White Cloud chief of the east tried his luck with a white bridal costume, but with no better results. The Black Cloud chief from above failed in the same manner, and finally the Gray Cloud chief from below tried his luck, only to meet with complete failure, as his five companions had. [*1]

After all these attempts and failures, Pavayoyk'ashi, a rain deity in the far south, heard about this story. He painted and dressed up beautifully like the Flute players, Powamuy dancers, and certain Katcinas at the present day, painted a black line over his cheeks and nose, took a bow and arrows, placed the latter in a panther skin quiver and proceeded to Oraibi. He found the maiden already mentioned, in the valley south of Oraibi watching her father's field, He addressed her, saving, that she should speak to her parents and ask them whether they would give her to him and, in case they should give their consent, he would come and get her in four days. She was favorably impressed with him and promised to do so. In the evening, when she arrived in her home, she told her parents about it, saying that somebody had come there, had asked her in marriage provided they, the parents, would give their consent. The parents offered no objections.

The Coyote Old Man at that time lived west of the village at a place called Coyote Gap. He had been thinking of that maiden, but knowing that she had refused all offers, had never had the courage to ask for her. Hearing now that she had accepted Pavayoyk'ashi, he at once determined to win her. So he traveled south to a country where it is warm and where there are parrots and macaws. He captured one of the macaws, returned, and at once proceeded to the house of the maiden, saving: ''I have brought something pretty for you." She asked, "What is it?" He produced the parrot and asked her whether she wanted it. She was at once struck with the beauty of the bird, and, not thinking of any evil intentions that the Coyote might have, accepted the present. The parrot was alive. The Coyote, well pleased with his success, returned to his house. During the night he proceeded to the house of Pavayoyk'ashi, stole his costume and ornaments and all that he usually took with him, and returned. The next morning he dressed and painted up just like Pavayoyk'ashi and proceeded to the house of the maiden. this being the day on which Pavayoyk'ashi had said that he would come

[p. 159]

for her, she mistook Coyote Old Man for her lover and went with him. They proceeded to the house of the Coyote Old Man where she remained. She soon discovered her mistake and was very unhappy over it.

When Pavayoyk'ashi awoke in the morning, he missed his costume. After hunting for it and being unable to find anything, he discovered tracks leading to and from his house. He followed these and tracked them to the house of the maiden, from there back to the house of the Coyote, where to his great sorrow he found her. He did not say anything, however, but returned to his home, being, of course, very angry. In the meanwhile the young men of the village heard that the beautiful maiden, whom to win they had made so many unsuccessful attempts, had been ensnared by the Coyote Old Man. They were very much exasperated over it, went down the mesa, surrounded the Coyote's house and determined to kill the Coyote. When they arrived there he was still sleeping. The maiden, sitting by his side, was very much dejected. When the Coyote heard the noise he awoke, jumped up, ran up the ladder and succeeded in escaping between and through the pursuers without being hurt by the sticks that were hurled at him. Ascending a ridge or mesa some distance west of the village, he turned around and in a defiant way expressed his satisfaction at the victory he had gained over them, by successfully getting their most beautiful maiden away from them, and the village. While he spoke he grasped his genitalia and showed them to his pursuers, Hereupon he descended the mesa upon the other side and disappeared.

Pavayoyk'ashi bided his time and one time brought a strong wind, some very heavy rain and thunder clouds, in which he was hidden, to the village. He took revenge on his enemy, the Coyote, by striking him dead with a ray of lightning. The maiden returned to her home, but realizing that she had cast herself away, she continued to lead a life of lewdness.

Footnotes

^157:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^158:1 With the Hopi yellow is the ceremonial color of the north; green or blue, of the west red, of the south; white, of the east; black, of the above; gray, meaning in this case a mixture of all kinds of colors, of the below.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

49. CHORZHVUK'IQOLO AND THE EAGLES. [*1]

A long time ago there lived a family right north of where now the Nashabe kiva is situated. The family consisted of a father, mother, two daughters, and a son. The latter would always go and hunt eagles as soon as warm weather set ill in spring, and later on take care of them, so that he would never find any time to assist his father in his field work. The two maidens would get angry at their brother

[p. 160]

because he would not assist their father to make a living, and they would tell him that he should go and work in the field. He would say, however, that he had to take care of his eagles, of which he usually caught and kept a great many.

One spring he only captured two young eagles. He was very much depressed, saying: "Why has this happened to me; I usually capture a good many eagles, and now I only found two." Yet he took them home and cared for them. One morning after he had gone out to hunt food for his eagles, the mother and two maidens concluded to go to the field also. The girls got angry at the eagles and beat them. Thereupon they locked up the house, hiding the wooden key of the wooden lock somewhere near the fireplace. The mother had gone to the field early in the morning with her husband. When the girls arrived in the field the father said to them: "So you have come." "Yes," they said, "we have come." "Very well," the father said, whereupon the maidens assisted their parents in weeding and hoeing their field.

When the young man came home some time during the day, he was very thirsty and tried to get into the house. "Well, now," he said, "some one locked this door." "Yes," the Eagles said, "your sisters locked it, and the key is buried near the fireplace under some ashes;" whereupon the young man found the key and opened the door. The Eagles told him that his sisters had beaten them, and told him that he should dress up and that they wanted to go to where the family was. So the young man painted his legs yellow, with sik'ahpiki, tied some bells or rattles round his legs, and some eagle's feathers in his hair, put on a kilt, sash, and belt, and decorated his body in different colors. Over his cheeks and nose he made a black line. He placed a number of strands of beads around his neck and ear pendants around his ears. One of the Eagles said, "I am going to carry you on my back." So he mounted the Eagle, holding himself with both hands to the wings of the Eagle, and the other Eagle taking the lead, they began to ascend. The people in the village observed them and recognized the young man, and said, "Oh! Why is that Eagle carrying Chorzhvuk'iqolo!" [*1]

As they started , the Eagle that carried him said to him, he should sing the following Song:

        Haoo Inguu! Haoo Inaa!
   Itah uuyiyuu kamuktiqoo.
   Shilakwuyata

       Hao, my mother! Hao, my father!
   Our corn grown high.
   Corn husks.

     
  

[p. 161]

        Tutubena tutubena.
   Ayay Tutubena.
   Tutubena, tutubena.
   Yaaa.

       (Are) figured, (are) figured. [*1]
   Aha (are) figured.
   Are figured, (are) figured.
   Yaaa.

     
 While he was singing this they kept soaring upwards above the village, and after flying around in a circle four times they proceeded southward towards the field in which his people were. When they had come near the field the young man sang the same song again. The sisters heard him, and said, "Listen, our brother is coming from somewhere, because we hear him sing." They looked along the path but could see nothing. When the Eagles were close by the sisters discovered them and recognized their brother. "Oh!" they said, "why are you carrying our brother?" but they received no answer. Hereupon the Eagles descended somewhat, and the parents, whom the maidens had told about it, asked them to come down and leave their son with them, but instead of doing that, the Eagles began to rise, again circling around four times, the young man singing the song four times. By this time they had soared up very high, and finally were out of sight. The parents and sisters cried very much, especially the latter. The family immediately went home, mourning as they went along.

The Eagles kept flying higher and higher to their home. Arriving at an opening away up in the sky, they passed through into the world where the Eagles dwell, and from where they come down in response to the prayers of the Hopi and hatch their young for the Hopi here in this world. The two Eagles proceeded somewhat eastward from the opening, onto a very high bluff around which, in the. valley, were many houses that were all perfectly white and in which the Eagles lived. The two Eagles deposited the young man on the top of that bluff, and told him, ''Here you will have to stay, because your sisters were bad to us and beat us," whereupon they left him. He was very despondent over the matter and thought that he would jump down from the bluff. He said, "If I remain here I will die with hunger anyway, so I may just as well jump down and die quickly.'' But soon a little Wren appeared on the bluff, jumping up and down the edge. He spoke to the little Wren, asking whether there was no possibility of him getting down, but he received no answer. Soon the little bird flew away, but came back

[p. 162]

again, acting in the same manner. All at once a black Spider, that had been informed about the matter by the Wren came up the bluff The Spider came close to the man, saying to him: ''Well, now, you poor one, here you are all alone." After thus having pitied him, the Spider continued: "Well, just stay here," and left him. But soon she returned, bringing with her two small, fine, downy turkey feathers, and handed them to the young man, saying: "You sleep or, one of them and cover yourself with the other, so that you do not get cold during the night." She then began pitying him, saying that it was too bad that his animals (meaning the Eagles) had treated him so badly after he had taken such good care of them. Hereupon she again left him and he spent the night on the bluff. Early in the morning the Wren came again. "So you have come again, the young man said, but the Wren did not answer. It went, however, along the edge of the bluff again to the place where the Spider had come up and when the young man looked there, too, he saw a narrow crack in the bluff, reaching away down to the ground. The Wren at once began to pull out one feather after another from its wings, putting them at short intervals into the wall of the crack, while it was holding itself also on the sides of the crack. When the feathers from the wings were all gone it pulled out the feathers from its tail, thrusting them also into the side of the crack. When the tail feathers were all gone it had not yet reached the bottom by far. So it began to pull out the small feathers from all over the body and continued to build its little ladder with these feathers, but the bottom was still not reached, so that finally it had to pull out even the small down all over its body, with which it finished the ladder. It now ascended the bluff again on its improvised ladder, and when it came to the top the young man hardly recognized it. It was entirely naked, having kept only its bill. It now invited the young man to follow it, and climbed down this ladder, assuring him that he would get down safely, and there was no reason for him to be afraid. So they descended and when they had safely reached the ground the Wren told him to wait there for it, whereupon it commenced to ascend again, holding itself to the sides of the crack. As it slowly mounted it pulled off with its bill the feathers from the wall of the crack and replaced them where they had been taken out from its body. When it had reached thc top it had all its feathers again and then flew down. Here it told the young man to go towards the place from where it had come. showing him the direction, and then left him.

The man proceeded as directed, and when he finally stopped at a place he heard a voice saying: "Step back a little, you almost are

[p. 163]

on my house." It was Spider Woman. She invited him into her house, but he said: "The opening is so small, how shall I get in?" She removed the small sticks and pieces of grass that were built up around the opening, thus enlarging the opening so that he could enter. "Now," she said to him, "you must be very hungry. It is too bad that those Eagles which you treated so well should have been so bad to you. You had better stay here and live with me now." Hereupon she gave him a tiny piece of meat, a very small quantity of hurushuki (a kind of doughy mush), and half a nut, and invited him to eat. "Oh!" he thought, "how shall I get satisfied with this small quantity. I shall surely remain hungry," but when he took the hurushuki, and placed it in his mouth, she said to him: "Oh, you must not take it all, you must just take a small quantity, and you must only suck the meat." He did so and when he began to eat it, it increased in his mouth, filling his mouth entirely. The same was true of the nut, and the meat, the latter being white meat of some kind of a fowl, as the old woman explained to him upon his request. After he had eaten, Spider Woman made a ball for him of pitch and hair, the same as the Hopi use to-day in their races in early spring. In the morning he took that ball, left the house and ran southward, kicking the ball before him as the Hopi do at the present day. Arriving at a small lake he saw at its banks some little birds, and having learned that Spider Woman relished that kind of meat very much, he killed one of the birds and took it along. On his way back he again kicked the ball before him, and at the last kick it dropped down into the Spider Woman's house, by which she knew that he had returned. "Thanks, that you have come back." She expressed her satisfaction at him having brought some more meat, and said: "Now, you must put this away and we must not eat very much of it at a time, so that it may last us several months." The young man laughed at her, saying, "Yes, I will be nibbling at it for a long time." She told him that the meat which she had had before, she had found, the bird evidently having been killed by some other bird, and she had lived upon that bird for a long time.

The next day he went out again, bringing home this time two birds that he had killed. She thanked him very much again, saying, that now they could eat all they wanted. She then warned him that he should never go towards the west, as there were some bad people living there that would hurt him. The third day he again went to the lake, taking with him this time a throwing stick. When he arrived there he killed a large number of birds and brought them back with him. On this trip he again kept kicking the ball before

[p. 164]

him. When he brought all these birds into Spider Woman's house and placed them on the floor, she was very happy, and thanked him for it many times. "Now," she said, "we can eat meat and need no longer simply suck it," as they did before. "I am going to live well now, on account of you, (by your help)," she added. On the fourth day he again made the trip in the same manner, to the aforesaid lake, but this time he thought he would turn around to the right, westward, and see at least who it was that was living there and that was reported to be bad. He thought if any danger threatened him he could easily run away. So he traveled westward, kicking before him his ball. All at once the ball disappeared and he found that it had dropped into a kiva. He approached the kiva and waited outside. All at once some one called from within, saying, that he had been seen and that he should come in, as nobody would hurt him, So he went in and found that his ball was lying north of the fireplace. He was again, with the utmost kindness, invited to sit down, with which he complied. He thought that those who lived here could by no means be called dangerous or bad. The man living in the kiva had long eyelids that were hanging down on his breast and that had to be laid back over his head when he wanted to see. His name was Hasohkata, and soon he said: ''Now, let us play totolospi." The young man consented, but Hasohkata beat him twice. "What will you pay me now?" he asked the young man. "I do not know," the latter said, "I have nothing. You may take my ball, however. I do not want that," Hasohkata said, ''but you may lie down outside at the entrance of my kiva and it will not be so cold then," for it had by this time become fall and the weather was getting cold. The young man consented, but Hasohkata said to him: ''I am afraid you will run away then, so I am going to tie your hands and feet," which he did. In a little while the young man began to feel very cold while he was lying outside of the kiva. Spider Woman, in the meanwhile, became uneasy about her young friend, saving, "It is now about half noon and he is not yet here, he undoubtedly did not follow my advice and went westward and fell into the hands of the bad people. She at once went to look him up and found him lying at the kiva's opening, his hands tied on his back and his feet also tied together. "Aha!" she said, "here you are lying just as I thought. You must be hungry; now, that is the reason why I came. Now, you stay here until I return and get something for you." So she returned to her house and got two fuzzy, short turkey feathers. With these she returned and placed one beneath him and with the other one she covered him up. [p. 165] Hereupon she returned to her house and commenced to meditate on the matter. "Why did he take away my friend," she thought, "and how shall I get him back again. That man there in the kiva is a bad man and he will not want to give back to me my grandchild. I am going out to call somebody in here." So she went out and called out to her people, saving: ''All assemble here, but do not tarry, be quick about it," Those that responded at once were specially animals of prey, such as the bear, wildcat, panther, mole, etc. Her house was completely filled. ''Why do you want us in such a hurry?" they asked. "Yes," she said, "that there Hasohkata has hung my grandchild up to smoke (referring to the fact that objects that are smoked are sometimes suspended in the hatch-way over the fireplace). So now, I want you to go and take my grandchild away from Hasohkata." "All right," they said, ''but how shall we do it?" "You must also gamble with him," she said. They then agreed upon certain games that they were going to play, and sticks that they should make, etc., and then left, being led by the old woman. Hasohkata in the meanwhile kept laughing at the young man lying outside of his kiva entrance. "Now, you are cold by this time, are you?" he kept saying to him, and while he was still talking in that manner the rescuers arrived at the kiva. Before they started, however, from Spider Woman's house, she had prepared. a set of backshivu (a cup game). This she had brought with her. While they had proceeded to Hasohkata's house the Mole had proceeded to the same place underground and was waiting under the house of Hasohkata. When the others arrived at the kiva they were invited to come in by Hasohkata. He spoke very kindly to them. North of the fireplace was still the drawing of the totolospi game that he had played with the young man. In reply to his urgent request to come in, Spider Woman said: ''We have come to gamble with you. You are smoking my grandchild here and we have come to beat you at playing, and are going to take him away." "All right," he said, "come right in," whereupon they entered, entirely filling the kiva. "All right," they said, "who will commence?" "You play first," Hasohkata said," because you proposed it." Spider Woman was happy over it, and put up her four gaming cups on the north side of the fireplace. The Mole, still being under the floor, saw it and placed the little ball under one of the cups, pushing it up very bard, however, that it could not drop out in case that cup was chosen and thrown down by the player. Now, they said to Hasohkata, "Guess under which it is, and we will see whether you will win." He pondered a long time, then threw down

[p. 166]

one of the cups, but the ball was not under it. Hereupon he threw down another one, but the ball was not under that one. "Now, that is enough," Spider Woman said, "you have not found it." So she put up her four cups again, the Mole again fastened the ball in one of the cups quickly, closing up the opening in the floor, and then Hasohkata was again challenged to guess. He again threw down two cups without winning one game. "My!" he said, ''Who are you? Why are you trying to keep away your things from me? You have beaten me, so take the young man along." Spider Woman then herself threw down one of her cups and said, "Here under this one is the ball." This made the old man somewhat angry and he refused to let his captive go, but he challenged them to another trial, Outside of his kiva grew very strong kwingwi, which is a brush, the sticks of which are very hard. He told them that if they would break down or pull out a certain amount of that stuff he would consider himself beaten. The Mole hearing this, quickly made its way underground to the brush and soon gnawed off all the biggest roots of a great deal of brush. The others did not know anything about this and so when they came out of the kiva the old woman said to the others: "Now, let us try to pull this out and see whether we can do it." They commenced, and in a short time had pulled out so much, even with parts of the roots, that Hasohkata considered himself beaten even before they had pulled out all that the Mole had loosened. "All right," he said, "you take with you all that I have and you will be rich, you have beaten me." They returned to the kiva, untied the young man and all again entered the kiva of Hasohkata. "Now," Hasohkata said to them, "take with you all of my things here, because you have beaten me twice." There were a great many objects throughout his kiva, such as clothing, bows. quivers, arrows, and other things that he had taken away from visitors with whom he had gambled and whom he had killed, throwing their corpses into a big hole that was full of bones.

After they had taken everything, they said to him: "But what shall we do to you?" He replied: "You have taken all my things, let me alone." To this they did not agree. "We are going to kill you," they said. "So the Bear grabbed him, tore open his breast, and tore out the heart of Hasohkata, which he took with him. The Wolves, Coyotes, Wildcats, etc., hereupon fell upon the corpse, tearing it to pieces and devoured it. These animals still do the same to-day, killing people whenever they have an opportunity to do so, whether these people are good or bad, and that is the reason why the Hopi hunt and kill those animals if they can do so.

[p. 167]

After they had left the kiva, Spider Woman told them all that they could now go to their respective homes. She took her grandchild with her and also returned to her home with him. Here she told him that he should fear nothing after this because nobody would now hurt him, that having been the only one that was bad and dangerous. The Wren had in the meanwhile been down to this earth and had seen the parents of the young man and found out that they were longing for their lost son, and when it returned it told Spider Woman about it. So about four or five days after they had returned from Hasohkata's kiva, she told him that he might go home now, as his father and mother were homesick after him. She did not, however, tell him how she had found it out, and she promised him that the next day she would go with him. So the next day they went to the opening through which the Eagles had brought the young man. They looked down and could see nothing. Everything looked as if we are now looking upward. So Spider Woman placed around the opening sticks and brush of all kinds just the same as around a spider hole. Over this she then spun a great deal of web and before cutting the thread she told the young man to mount her back. Hereupon they began to descend, the thread of spider web unraveling at the opening as they descended farther and farther downward. She advised the young man to keep his eyes closed, which he did. They struck the earth somewhere close to the field of the young man's parents. Here he left Spider Woman and started to his parents' home himself. When he arrived at his home one of the neighbors said to his parents: "Some one has come; your child has come," but they would not believe it. "He will never come, he is gone," the mother said. When he entered the house he said: "I have come." "Who are you?" the father said. "I am Chorzhvuk'iqolo." "No, you are not the one." "Yes, I am," he said; but at last the father recognized him and said, "Yes, you have come." The mother then, too, recognized him and she was very happy. The sisters who had been waiting and longing for their brother, were also very happy that he had returned. So they were all united again and maybe they are still living there.

Footnotes

^159:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^160:1 The name signifies: Bunch of blue-bird wing feathers.

^161:1 This refers to the fact that the Hopi, especially the children, often fold up a strip of corn husk and with their teeth mark different figures in it, which are then shown in different places of the husk when the latter is opened and held against the light. This was probably a song which the boy had been singing with his sisters and by which he wanted to make himself known, in which he was successful.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

50. THE HAWK AND THE CHILD. [*1]

A long time ago some Navaho lived east of Oraibi. They had stolen, as occasionally happened, a little Hopi boy. They were very hard on him, making him work constantly and giving him very little

[p. 168]

to eat, so that he became very much emaciated. Somewhere north of this Navaho camp there was a high bluff on which a large Hawk lived. This Hawk was often flying around and frequently saw this little boy and pitied him. One time the Navaho had a great gathering at one place not far from this camp where the little boy was, leaving the little orphan behind. When the Hawk found this out he flew to the camp, flying around above the little boy. The latter was afraid and begged the Hawk not to hurt him. The Hawk at once sat down beside the boy and said to him: "I am not going to hurt you, but I pity you and we shall go to my house, You come and sit on my back and I shall carry you there." The child at once mounted on the back of the Hawk, holding himself to the wings, and the Hawk then flew away with him.

When passing the place where the Navaho were gathered, the latter noticed that the Hawk was carrying away the boy and were very much astonished at it. They had never thought of such a thing, After the Hawk had deposited the little son on the bluff he said to him, "I am going to borrow some clothes for you. You are naked, and you want to be clothed." Immediately he swooped down upon the Navaho camp, singled out a little son of a wealthy Navaho, grabbed him and flew back to the bluff. While he was flying he tore off all the clothes from the child and then dropped the body to the earth. The assembled Navaho were very much frightened and screamed.

At that time the Navaho still wore long buckskin leggings with yellow buttons on the sides, also buckskin shirts, and such a costume the Hawk brought to the little boy. The Hawk soon after flew down again, grabbed another little Navaho boy and carried him upward, the head of the child banging down, pulled off his moccasins, dropped the body, and brought the moccasins to the little child. The Navaho were very much frightened and dispersed in all directions. This confusion the Hawk made use of and came down several times, taking away from several of the Navaho articles of clothing and ornaments, bringing them back to the little child. The Hawk then said to the little boy: "But you are not used to this raw food that I eating." "No," the little boy said, ''I never ate that before. So the Hawk got him some firewood and even fire, and some rabbit meat, and the boy roasted some meat and ate it. He stayed there four days in the house of the Hawk. At the end of the four days the Hawk said to him: "In the morning I am going to take you to your home in Oraibi." So the boy mounted his back again and the Hawk flew first down to the Navaho camp where he circled

[p. 169]

around a number of times, showing himself to the Navaho, who were very much astonished, and then flew on to the village of Oraibi returning the child to his home, where he lived forever afterwards.

Footnotes

^167:1 Told by Qoyawainia (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

51. MUYINGWA, TWO CHILDREN, AND THE HUMMING-BIRD [*1]

A long time ago the Oraibi had nothing to eat as it did not rain for about four or five years. The first year the corn became large enough so that some corn-ears just began to ripen, then the frost came and killed it. The next year the ears were just forming when the frost again killed the corn. The third year the ears did not even begin to form when the stalks were killed by frost. The fourth year it remained very small. The people by this time had eaten all the corn they had saved from previous years and some began to move away. Some of them, however, still planted some the fifth year, but the drought was so great that the corn withered soon after it had come out of the ground.

They all left then, trying to find something to eat with other people. Only a little boy and his sister were left in the village. One time the little brother made a little bird for his sister from the pith of the sunflower stalk and gave it to her to play with. While he went away to hunt something else for her she played with the little bird, throwing it upwards several times, and all at once it became a living Humming-bird and flew away. When the boy returned he asked her what she had done with her little bird. She told him that it had flown away, at which he was very much surprised. The children had hardly anything to eat. The next morning the little bird came back, flew into the house where the children stayed and entered an opening in one of the walls. "My little bird has come back!" the little girl said. "Where is it?" the boy asked. "Why, it went into that opening there." The boy put his hand into the opening and found that it seemed to be very large. The bird he could not find, but he found a little corn-ear which the bird had apparently placed there. At this the children were very glad. They broke it in two, roasted it, and ate it. Soon the bird came out of the opening and flew away again. The next day it returned with a larger corn-ear which the children ate, and so it returned for four days, always bringing a larger corn-ear for the children. On the fifth day it came back but did not bring any corn with it. When the boy reached into the opening he drew forth the little bird, but in the form in which he had made it. He held it in his hand and said: "You are

[p. 170]

something living. You go and hunt our parents, they have left us here and you will perhaps find them, and you bring us something to eat. You go south here and look for our father and mother. "

Hereupon the boy asked his sister how she had caused the bird to fly. She took the little bird by the wings and said: "This is the way I did it," throwing it upward, whereupon the bird was alive again and flew away. Sitting upon a rock south of the village the little bird looked southward and all at once detected at Tu'wanashabe, [*1] a cactus plant with a single red blossom. The bird at once flew towards this plant and removing it found an opening under it. Entering this opening it found itself in a kiva where some grass and herbs were growing. At the north end of this kiva was another opening. Passing through this one, the little bird found itself in a second kiva. Here it found some corn with some pollen on it, and ate some of it. At the north end of this kiva there was also an opening leading into a third kiva. Entering this kiva the bird found grass, herbs, and corn of all kinds, and here also lived Mu'yingwa, the God of Growth and Germination. [*2]

There were also all kinds of birds in this last kiva, but it was the Humming-birds that first noticed the little intruder and told Mu'yingwa about it. "Somebody has come in," they said. "Who is it?" he asked, "and where is he? Let him come here." So the little bird flew on Mu'yingwa's arm and waited. "Why are you going about here?" Mu'yingwa asked. "Yes," the bird said, "what are you doing here? Why have you listened to the wishes of the bad people who wanted you to retire here to this place and not concern yourself about the people up there? Why have you complied with their wishes? Your fields up there look very bad. It has not rained there and nothing is growing. The people have all left except two poor little children who are the only ones left in Oraibi. You come out here and look after things up there." "All right," Mu'yingwa answered, "I am thinking about the matter. "

Hereupon the bird asked for something to eat and also for something to bring to those children, saying that they had not had anything that day, and that they were hungry. Mu'yingwa told the bird to take just what it wanted and bring it to the children. So the bird broke off a nice roasting corn-ear to take along. Arriving at the house it flew into the same opening again, disposing of the corn-ear there. The boy reached into the opening and drew forth the corn-ear. The children were very happy over it and talked to the

[p. 171]

bird, which was still in the opening, and said: "Thank you that you have pitied us, thank you that you have brought us something to eat again. On your account we live here now. Through you we can satisfy our hunger. We are very happy over it. You must not leave us now." The bird answered: "Yes, I have pity on you and for that reason I have come again. I shall now live close by here, at Tu'wanashabe."

The children then asked the bird to hunt for their parents, and so the bird flew away to hunt for them. Flying over the fields west of Oraibi it proceeded towards the north, and at a place called Toho (from a black shale or paint gotten from there by the Hopi to this day), it found the father and the mother of these children. They were living upon some cactus that was growing there, but were very much emaciated. When the Humming-bird flew by them the man said: "Something is passing by here," but looking around they could not see anything, so the bird came back and was then detected by the man and his wife. The man at once went towards the bird, saying: "Who are you, flying about here?" The bird stopped in its flight, though keeping its wings in motion and listened to what the man had to say. He asked the little bird to pity them and procure them some food. There was no living being in that part of the country at that time, and so from the fact that this bird was flying about there the people concluded that it must know some place where it found something to eat. The bird did not answer anything, but flew away. Arriving at the opening in the children's house, the boy asked: "Did you find our parents?" "Yes," the Humming-bird answered," away up north I found them." "Both of them?" the children asked. "Yes, both of them," the bird replied; "but alas, they have very little to eat. They are hungry and they are very much emaciated."

The children then begged the bird to bring them something to eat, whereupon it flew away. Mu'yingwa had in the meanwhile concluded to go up into the world and look after things there. He first ascended to the first kiva above him, where he staved four days. During this time it rained a little about Oraibi. After four days he ascended into the next kiva above him when it rained again on the earth. He then ascended into the third kiva, whereupon it rained considerably in and around Oraibi, and when he after four more days emerged from the last kiva he found that the grasses and herbs were growing nicely.

The parents of the children had seen from the distance the clouds and rain about Oraibi, and concluded to return to the village, not

[p. 172]

knowing that their children were still living. Others of the inhabitants of Oraibi who had not yet perished, also heard that it was now raining at their village and so they also returned. When these children grew up they, and after them their descendants, became the village chiefs and owners of the village of Oraibi.

(The informant says that this tale is not complete. He says that he knows it is longer, but he has forgotten some of the details about it.)

Footnotes

^169:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^170:1 A place about three miles south of Oraibi.

^170:2 Those who speak of three kivas under the earth consider the kivas in the village as the first kiva, making only four. According to others, there are four kivas besides those in the village.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

52. THE KALATOTO [*1] WHO WISHED TO HAVE HAIR ON HIS HEAD. [*2]

Haliksai! At Kutukwuhschomo (so called after a certain kind of grass, Kutukwuhci, that grew on that hill), used to live a Kalatoto. In' the village of Oraibi lived many people. Kalatoto would often visit the village and try to find something to eat among the refuse near the village. The children of the village, finding the Kalatoto would tease and worry him, snapping their finger nails against his head, so that sometimes he would almost die. He would then retire to his house again. This happened very often and the Kalatoto was thinking how he could get some hair at least on the head, like the Hopi children had, who otherwise were just as nude as the Kalatoto. He had no hair nor any protection of any kind over his entire body. He finally concluded that he would go to the timber and get some pitch, which he did. Taking some of this pitch to his house he went to the village to hunt some hair that had been thrown on the piles of refuse by the Hopi, and finding some, he took it to his house and was very happy.

The next morning he put some of the pitch on his head and pasted some hair on it, so that he now had hair like the Hopi children. He was now. very happy and made a visit to the village again. The children soon discovered him again and said: "Here is somebody," and one of the children soon recognized the Kalatoto, saying, "It seems to be the Kalatoto, but he has now hair." "It smells very much like pitch here," some of the children said, "he has put pitch on his head," and they at once took little sticks and putting one end of them on his head the pitch adhered to the sticks. As the Hopi children are very fond of pitch they began to chew the pitch, scraping all off of his head.

[p. 173]

He was very sorry and returned to his home, gathering up, however, the hairs which the children had pulled out of the pitch and thrown away, and he took them along. He meditated about the matter all night, and in the morning went into the timber north of the village again. Finding some cactus, he took with him some of the juice to his house. In the morning he put some of this on his head and again pasted the hair to the juice, which adhered firmly after the juice had nearly dried.

So he went again to the village. The children seeing him said: "Here he has come again," and once more tried with little sticks to remove his head covering, but they soon found that this time it was not pitch. So he remained there a while, the children again worrying him. Towards evening he went home, and by that time the juice had dried so thoroughly that it began to crack and fall off with the hair. He was now again very unhappy.

At that time it was piki providing day (piktotok'a) in the village, preparatory for a Katcina dance. The Kalatoto was very unhappy, as he had hoped to attend the dance with the hair on his head. The next morning he again repaired to the woods to get some more pitch, which he found quickly. Bringing it to the house, he again felt happy, thinking that now he would have hair to attend the dance the next day. He was very happy and in the evening put some of the pitch on his head again, pasting new hair to it. He then retired and slept well that night. In the morning he heard the Katcinas dance and wanted to go to the village, but the pitch had gotten warm during the night and the hair and pitch adhered closely to the floor on which he had been sleeping. He made repeated efforts to rise, but could not. So he heard the Katcinas dance and sing all day, but could not get up. As he finally became very hungry and no one brought him anything to eat, he perished there.

Footnotes

^172:1 Not fully identified. The Hopi say it looks somewhat like a locust but has short wings and is of a light brown color with darker stripes across its back. It is larger than a cricket, to which also it bears a resemblance in certain respects.

^172:2 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

53. THE CHILD WHO TURNED INTO AN OWL. [*1]

Aliksai! They were living in Shupaulavi, and one time a child was crying bitterly. Its mother did not pity it and beat it. "You are crying," she said: "I am going to throw you out doors. I am going to throw you out to the Owl." Hereupon she dragged the child out of the house. A large Owl had been close by and had heard the moaning of the child. He came to the child and when he saw the latter still crying he put him on his back and carried him off. He lived in a little cave at the side of the bluff on which the village

[p. 174]

of Bayupki was situated. To this cave he took the child. The Owl had little children in the cave that were living there nicely.

When the mother of the child no longer heard the crying, she came out of the house and looked for her child, but it was gone. "Where has that child gone now?" she said. ''It seems somebody came and got it," whereupon she went through the houses and inquired everywhere, but no one had it. In the morning she again went through the houses hunting her child, but could not find it, "Where may that child be?" she said. So she was without children.

Sometime after some men went after wood north of the village, some of them passing the cave where the Owl lived. They heard some one in a moaning voice sing the following song:

Chavayo chavayo,
 Chavayo piva, chavayo piva,
 A hmhm, a hmhm.

Looking up they saw a child in the cave, which had already feathers, and the white spots of the Owl began to appear all over the body. The eyes of the child also began to become yellow. "Oh!" the men said, "whose child may that be?" One of the men then suggested that it might be the child that had disappeared, so when they returned to the village they said: "There in the cave of an owl, at Bayupki, is a child. It already has feathers and spots all over, and its eyes are already yellow. It is turning into an owl. Whose child may that be?" "It must be the child of that woman," the people said right away, so they told them about it. "Now, bestir yourself, bestir yourself, because that child is turning into an owl." So they hurried up and the mother and father and the men who had found the child then proceeded to the place.

When they arrived there the men who had found the child climbed up to the cave. In the back part of the latter was the Owl and his children. The little owl child was sitting alone. The men took it, brought it down and handed it to its father. The mother also took hold of it. The Owl did not come out, but said: "You take the child with you, but when you get to your village you put the child into a room and keep it locked up there for four days. On the fourth day when the sun rises you open the door and let the child come out. It will then be a Hopi again. If you do not do that and open the door before that, the child will remain an Owl and come back again."

So they took the child to the village, put it into a room, placed some food in it and locked the door. The father watched in front of the door, keeping watch there during the four days. He heard his

[p. 175]

child move about in the room. After the first day the mother was anxious to open the door, but the father forbid her, saying that they were not to do that, because the Owl had forbidden it. So she waited and on the third day she was very anxious for her child and could hardly await the third day. During the night also, and it seemed to her as if the morning was very slow coming. Finally when it became light she went to the door, which, like the old Hopi doors, that were not made very well, had cracks. "It is light already," she said, "let us open the door." Hereupon she shaded her eyes and looked through one of the cracks. She saw her child walking up and down, but also noticed that it began to change into an owl again. "Let us open the door," she urged, "it is already light." Her husband protested, saying, that the sun had not yet risen, but she opened the door, and out rushed an Owl which immediately rose up and flew towards Bayupki to the place where it had come from. "Well, now," the man said, "there you looked in before the sun had risen, and yet the Owl had told us not to do so. You have done this, now you have done it and we have no children now. We were just getting our child back again, and now you looked in and it has turned into an Owl, and it will now remain an Owl."

Footnotes

^173:1 Told by Sik'ahpiki (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

54. THE CHILDREN AND THE LIZARDS. [*1]

Aliksai! A long time ago the people lived in Mishongnovi. There was to be a dance in the village of Shongopavi and a man from Walpi was going to attend this dance. He came by way of Mishongnovi, which was then situated half-way down the mesa, where there are still the ruins of the old village. East of the village there was a large rock, and at this rock some children were playing. They were hunting some lizards, the kind that are called ha'kwa (pl. hakwahpu). "What are you doing there?" the Walpi man asked. "We are hunting these ha'kwas." "What are they?" he said. Why these here in the cracks and on the rocks," the children said. So some of the little boys got their bows and arrows ready and, aiming at some of the lizards, sang the following song:

Hakwa, puta ponongaqo
 Lizard that, in the body.
 Wihu qoiotak'ang,
 Fat full of.
 Aaay alihi alihi,
 Nahanak nahanak hanak!

As they sang the last word they shot their arrows at the lizards.

[p. 176]

From here the Walpi man proceeded westward towards Shongopavi. All at once he heard something, and standing still he listened and heard somebody say:

"Halaye, halaye.

He looked around for some time, but could not see anything. All at once he saw some little gray lizards, They were sitting upright and ejecting these peculiar sounds. The man looked down for awhile, and saw how the lizards were running around and playing with on, another. Then, as he had lost so much time at the first place and also at this place, he gave up the visit to Shongopavi and returned. When he arrived at his home he related that he had not been to the dance, but that he had watched some children hunting, and that they had been singing the following song:

Machakwata ponongaqo,
 Horned Lizard in body when
 Wihu qoiotakang
 Fat full of.
 Aaay alihi, alihi,
 Nahanak, nahanak hanak.

This song was forever afterwards spoken of as one of the Mishongnovi songs.

Footnotes

^175:1 Told by Sik'ahpik'i (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

55. THE ROOSTER, THE MOCKING-BIRD AND THE MAIDEN. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi they were living. At the place where now Pongnamana lives, lived a Rooster. Somewhat south of La'nangva, among the peach-trees, lived the Mocking-bird (Yahpa). In the village at Bakvatovi, a place in the extreme north-west part of the village, lived a beautiful maiden with her father and mother, This mana persistently refused all offers of marriage. The young men of the village would bring presents to her, but no one succeeded in winning her affections. The chief of the north, Bamuyaomongwi, heard about it and so he came to the village trying to win the maiden. He brought with him a bundle of presents, which he was carrying over his shoulders. When he came to the house he left his bundle of presents outside.

The mana was grinding corn-meal. Without stopping the grinding she looked up to the visitor and saw a very handsome youth before her. "Why do you not talk to me?" he said. "Yes," she said, "who are you, going around here?" "Yes," he replied, "I came after you and I have left my bundle outside. Go and get it

[p. 177]

and look at it." She stopped her grinding, went out and found a yellow reed receptacle (shongohkaki), which she took into the house. Opening it she found in it two yellow bridal robes (owa), a pair of yellow moccasins, and a yellow big belt (wokokwawa). But she did not want it. Wrapping it all up again, she handed it to the youth, and said: "I do not want it. You go down. Very well," he replied, picked up his bundle and left.

When the Rooster heard about this in the evening he went over to the house of the maiden, and found her drying some coarsely ground meal which she was stirring in a pot over the fire. He went into the house, and the maiden saw before her a very handsome youth, dressed in a red shirt which was figured with short black lines all over. He wore turquoise ear pendants and on top of his head a bunch of red feathers. He acted very kindly and gently. He seated himself by the side of the fireplace and busied himself with picking up and setting down and examining the different objects around the fireplace. The mana was pleased with him and began to converse and chat with him. She told him he should remain with her over night and then return in four days, and then she would go over into his house. "Very well," he replied. The following days the mana kept on grinding corn.

On the third day the Mocking-bird, who had heard about the Rooster having been at the maiden's house, also went over and asked her to marry him. He also appeared as a handsome youth, and the mana was pleased with him. She promised that she would marry him, and spoke to her mother about it, telling her that this youth had come after her. "Very well," the mother said, "do not mistrust him." The Rooster, who had been told to come the next day, had seen the Mocking-bird go upon the mesa, and so, without waiting for the appointed time, also went to the house on the third day, and while the mana was still talking to the Mocking-bird he was at the door and knocked, Hereupon he entered and found the Mocking-bird there. "What are you doing here?" he asked the latter. "I came to fetch this maiden," the Mocking-bird replied. "Not so," the Rooster said, "I shall fetch her to-morrow. You are not worth as much as I. I own all these people here; they are mine. When I crow in the morning they all get up." "I am worth as much as you are," the Mockingbird replied. "When I twitter or sing in the morning it gets light." "Very well," the Rooster replied, "let us contend with each other and see who knows most. In three days we shall have a contest. Until then no one shall get the maiden."

Hereupon they both left the house and went to their homes. The

[p. 178]

Rooster was thinking to whom he should apply for assistance and courage. Early the next morning, after he had had his morning meal, he left the village, descended the mesa, and ran along the trail northwest (the trail that at present leads to Mu'enkapi). Arriving at Bow Mound (Aoatchomo), about thirty-five miles northwest of Oraibi, he was tired and seated himself on a stone that was near by a baho shrine, where he rested. As he moved somewhat on the stone, an opening appeared in the shrine and somebody said to him, "Come in." So he entered and there found a great many maidens, one of whom prepared a seat for him and told him to be seated. Hereupon she entered another chamber and brought a tray with some shelled corn, which she set before the Rooster, inviting him to eat. He picked and ate it like chickens eat, and when he was satisfied the maiden said, "You were tired. Now you will reach your destination." Hereupon he went out and continued his journey. He now had been somewhat revived and ran fast.

Finally he arrived at Mu'enkapi, passed it, and ran on until he came to a steep bluff. There was a ladder standing at the bluff, which he descended. He then proceeded westward and finally came to a large rock where there was an opening. Here he crowed repeatedly, when a door was opened and a voice called out that he should come in. He entered and found a great many men, women, youths, and maidens, who were all Roosters and Hens. They seemed to be happy that he had come. "Thanks," they said, "that you have come." They offered him a seat and again fed him some shelled corn. When he had satisfied his hunger, they asked him what he had come for. "Yes," he said, "there in Oraibi we are contending over a maiden, and we are going to contend about our knowledge of light. and now I have come here to see what you can do for me." "Very well," they said, "very well, we shall at least try. The Mocking-bird is also very something. He understands a great deal and he has the assistance of the Kwatokwuu, but we shall at least try."

When it was evening they assembled and sang all night. When they had sung four long songs the Roosters all crowed. Hereupon they sang four more long songs and then crowed again. After singing three more songs they crowed a third time. The yellow dawn had by this time appeared, and after singing two more songs, the sun was rising. "We have accomplished it right," the chief said, "so you go home now without fear, and think that you will accomplish your end." So the Rooster returned, running very fast. When he arrived at the Bow Mound he was again tired, so that he had not been running very fast for some time. He again entered and was fed there

[p. 179]

as before. "I am very tired," he said to the maidens, "I shall not get home." They laughed at him, saying: "Of course you will get home. We shall dress you up and then you will get home all right." So they took some dry corn-husks, tied them together, and then fastened a number of them to his tail, He then left, and as he was running these corn-husks rattled; he became scared and ran very fast. Arriving at his house he entered and removed the corn-husks. He now felt strong.

So he rested all night, and the next day he was walking through the village. In the evening he went over to the Mocking-bird and notified him that he should come over that night and watch him, whereupon he returned. The Mocking-bird notified the Kwatokwuu, saying that the time had now come, and that he should go with him and assist him. "Very well," the latter said. So in the evening the Mocking-bird went over to the Rooster's house and the Kwatokwuu entered the Mocking-bird's house, where he stayed during the night. The Rooster was singing all night, the Mocking-bird watching him. When the Rooster was nearly done and the dawn was about to appear, the Mocking-bird slipped away and notified the Kwatokwuu. The latter at once left the house and spread his large wings across the eastern sky, completely covering up the dawn. The Rooster crowed after singing the first four songs, the second four songs, the third four songs, and finally after singing the last two songs, but it would not become light; the sun did not hear him and would not rise. So he failed.

The Mocking-bird left his house, flew away, and after awhile the sun rose. The Rooster had been defeated.

During the day the Rooster again went around in the village, and in the evening the Mocking-bird invited him to come over to his house and watch him also. So in the evening the Mocking-bird was singing all night. After he had sung four songs he whistled, which he repeated after having sung another four songs, and after he had sung an additional three songs he again whistled, and the dawn began to appear. He then sang his-last two songs, whereupon the sun rose. "You see, I know much," the Mocking-bird said in a triumphant way. "Yes," the Rooster admitted, "yes, you understand a great deal. You know about making it light. You shall have the maiden, and I shall be behind you."

So the maiden married the Mocking-bird. By and by she bore two children, one a boy and one a girl. The boy was the child of the Rooster, and the little girl the child of the Mocking-bird. So the women of the village are ever since that time said to be the children

[p. 180]

of the Mocking-bird, and that is the reason why they talk and jabber so much, because the Mocking-bird is a great talker. The men of the village have ever since been considered to be the children of the Rooster, and that is the reason why they are so gentle and docile. If all the people had been the children of the Rooster they would all be gentle and kind and not talk so much.

Footnotes

^176:1 Told by Kiwanhongva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

56. THE TOAD AND THE SNOW KATCINAS. [*1]

Haliksai! A long time ago they were living in Oraibi. There was a kiva in the northern part of the village called the Chorzhovi (Bluebird Height). In this kiva one time the Snow Katcinas were practicing for a dance. North of the village at Katcinavala lived the Toad Woman (Machak Wuhti). She had a son. The latter frequently went to the village in the evening to listen to the Katcinas when they were practicing their singing. When he would be lying on the kiva roof looking down, the other young men would pile up on him and thus worry him. So finally he did not do that any more but sat aside and simply listened to the singing of the Katcinas. He usually wore a robe of wildcat skin, as was customary among the young men at that time.

On the eighth day (Totok'a), the women of the village were preparing food for the dance on the next day. The Toad Woman also prepared some pikami and other food. Her son was anxious to see the dance the next day. During the night he did not sleep, but remained awake in the village with the others. Early in the morning the Toad Woman washed his head with suds. When he had dried his hair, his mother got some pikami and they were eating. The sun then rose. He put on his wildcat robe again, and also put on a cap of skin, and then went to the village, as the Katcinas went to the village for the first time.

When he entered the village he put a little paint into a bowl and painted his face. When the children saw him they laughed at him, partly on account of his funny cap. On the plaza the Katcinas were dancing, distributing food among the people at the same time, but nobody gave this youth any food. Soon an old man said to the children who were on the plaza they should take the Toad Boy to some ant hill, because he liked ants very much. There were ants living in different parts of the village. So the children took him to a place and dug out ants so that they were running about in great numbers. The Toad at once commenced to eat them and the children laughed at

[p. 181]

him. When the Toad had eaten a great many of the ants, he went back to the plaza again and stayed with the Katcinas and attended the dance all day, enjoying himself.

Towards evening he went home. When he left the village the children followed him, some of them having red piki that the Katcinas had given them, "Give me some of that red piki, too," he said, "because I envy you." So they gave him a very little, which he took home and gave to his mother. She was happy over the red piki, and they ate it. And they are still living there.

Footnotes

^180:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

57. THE LOCUST THAT CAME TO LIFE WHILE BEING ROASTED. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi they were living. In the summer there were many locusts in the valleys around the village, and the boys and girls used to hunt them. When they would hear one singing somewhere they would approach him and if he did not fly away they would capture him and put him in a sack. In that way they often brought home to the village-a great many locusts. These the women roasted in pots, pouring salt water on them and thus preparing them as a food, which was relished very much by the Hopi. When they were roasted in the salt water they became very white, and the Hopi ate them with piki and hurushuki, etc.

The young men often used to hunt Jack-rabbits and cotton-tail rabbits, which were also relished by the Hopi very much; but as there were so many locusts and the Hopi liked them very much also, they preferred to hunt them. There were especially many locusts at a place called Porcupine Height (Munaovi), and here the young people hunted them, bringing back with them a great many.

One time an old woman, whose little niece had been among the hunters and had brought back a great many locusts, was also roasting them in a pot after having broken them in two. While she was stirring them one of the locusts became alive, and in a moaning manner sang the following little song, slowly crawling up along the stirring stick as he was singing:

Chi, ri, ri, ri, ri, chi, ri, ri, ri, ri,
 Pai, as ima cowihtuhuhuhu,
 Why it used to be these here Jack-rabbits,
 Pai, as ima, tavohtuhuhu,
 Why, it used to be these here cotton-tail rabbits,
 Pai kurzh pas itam nuhtungwup noqkakwangwtuhuhu
 Why now certainly we also are relished much as meat.
 Chi, ri, ri, ri, ri, C-- -- -- -- -- --

[p. 182]

When he had reached the top of the stirring stick, the woman said "Yes, we used to like these jack-rabbits and cotton-tail rabbits very much as meat, but your meat tastes so well too that now we like your meat very much too, and hunt you.'' When she said this the locust flew away with a hissing sound.

Footnotes

^181:1 Told by, Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

58. THE COYOTE AND THE TURTLES. [*1]

A long time ago the Turtles lived in a river called Blue River (Sakwabayu), somewhere south-east of Winslow (Homolovi) . The Coyote was always hunting for something to eat. One time he was also hunting for food near the place where the Turtles lived. The latter would sometimes come out of the water and hunt cactus (yo'ngo) which they relished very much, and from which they have their name, Yongo'sona (pl. Yoyo'ngosontu).

One of the Turtles had a little baby Turtle. One time when they were all going to hunt food again, the Turtle said: "I am not going to take my child with me, because it is sleeping so nicely. I am going to bring a cactus back with me and give it to my child." After they had left, the little Turtle awoke, and when it found nobody there it asked, "Where is my mother?" and began to cry, and at once came out of the water. Looking for the tracks, it found that they led to the bank and then way off somewhere. It followed the tracks for some distance, but could not find any one, and so cried very bitterly. The Coyote, hearing the cries of the little Turtle, at once hunted it up and when he found it he said: "What are you singing? You are singing something very nice. Sing again." "I am not singing," the little Turtle said, "but I am crying." "What are you crying for?" the Coyote asked. ''My mother has gone away and did not take me along," the Turtle replied, and continued to as follows:

Tingaoco, tingaoco,
 Waoo, waoo, h-h-h-h (these h's spoken in quick succession while inhaling, to imitate the sobbing of a child that is sometimes heard in connection with or rather after a cry).

The Coyote again urged the Turtle to sing, as he called the crying, saying: "If you do not sing I am going to devour you." The little Turtle was very much afraid, but refused to comply with the request of the Coyote. The Coyote repeated his threat, saving, "I shall certainly devour you if you do not sing." The little Turtle, thinking of the subterfuge said: "All right, it will not hurt me; I will then simply live in Your body," The Coyote said to himself, "Maybe the Turtle

[p. 183]

will continue to live in my body and move about there." And so he repeated his request, but this time changing his threat. "If you do not sing," he said, "I am going to throw you in that water there." "Don't do that, because if you do I shall drown," The Coyote did not know that the little Turtle lived in the water, and that he was being imposed upon. "All right," he said, "I shall not throw you in the water, but I shall devour you," and thereupon he took hold of the Turtle and ran towards the water. Arriving at the bank he slung the little Turtle away into the midst of the water.

"Aha! My house (Ali, Ikiningwu)," said the Turtle, and then dived into the water, but immediately came out again, saving, "Aha! My house. Thanks that you have brought me here (Ali, Ikiningwu! kwakwa, um nui pak wiki)," and, swimming around on the water, laughed at the Coyote.

The Coyote was very angry and said: "Oh! that I did not devour you; but I am going to hunt your mother now, and if I find her somewhere, I shall certainly devour her," and thereupon ran away. Following the tracks of the Turtles, he met them on their way back to the water, They had been away quite a distance, had eaten there to their hearts' content, and were now returning. When the Coyote met them he said to the first one, "I am going to devour you," and tried to seize it. The Turtle immediately drew its head, feet and tail into the shell, and thus the Coyote, although he was working around it, throwing it over, pushing it backward and forward a long time, could not hurt it. He got very angry and jumped towards another one with the same result; so he tried others, but when he found that he could not hurt them, nor break their shell, he left them in disgust. When the Turtles arrived home, the Turtle mother gave a cactus to her child, saying: "This I brought for you," and the child ate it in great delight. "When did you awake?" the mother asked. "About half-way noon I woke up, and when I found that you were all gone I cried." "Yes," the mother said, "you were sleeping so nicely, and so I did not take you along." The little Turtle then related all about the Coyote, saying that the latter had threatened to devour it, but when he had been told that he could just do so, and that the little Turtle would then live in his body, he desisted. The Turtle mother laughed at it. The child then continued to relate how the Coyote had asked it to sing, and when refused he threatened to throw it into the water, and that he had done so, although the child had said that it would certainly drown; and the child continued, "When he threw me into the water I laughed at him and told him, 'Here I am living'; and so I got back without even getting tired."

[p. 184]

The mother laughed at it and was very happy, saying: "Thanks that he brought you here, and that you got home even without becoming tired." And the Turtles are living there in that water still.

Footnotes

^182:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

59. THE WATER SERPENT AND THE COYOTE. [*1]

Listen! The people were here living (Aliksai! Yao yep yeshiwa). The Water Serpent (Balolookong) was living in Lanva, the Flute Spring, and a short distance towards the south at Ishmovala the Coyote was living. They were strong friends and often visited each other. They were still young, but the Water Serpent was already very long so that when he visited the Coyote and coiled up in his kiva he filled the entire kiva, leaving only a very small place for the Coyote, near the fireplace, where he had to sit in a crouched position. "I am going to be still larger," the Water Serpent said to him one time, "so you must enlarge your kiva." He then invited the Coyote to visit him once too, which the Coyote promised to do.

He meditated how he, too, could fill the kiva of the Water Serpent and said to the Snake: "I am going to become large and my tail will become long some day, too." While he said this the Snake was already slowly leaving the kiva, but he was so long that when the head was out already, a large part of the body was still in the kiva. After he had left, the Coyote said to himself: "Now, let me go and hunt something, too." In the evening he left the kiva and went to a place where a great deal of cedar grew. Here he pulled off a large bundle of cedar bark and carried it home. "How shall I make a tail now?" he said to himself. Soon he began to rub the cedar bark so as to make it pliable, and laying it out on the floor in a long line, wrapped it up with yucca leaves, which he had also brought with him. "But how shall I make this tail so that the Snake will not know, it?" he again asked himself, but soon formed a plan. He pulled out a lot of his hair and pasted it to the cedar bark so that it looked like a tail. This false tail he then fastened to his own tail.

In the morning when he had had his breakfast he went over to his friend, the Water Serpent. The latter had a larger kiva, so that there was sonic vacant space in it. When the Coyote had entered he kept going around the kiva dragging his long tail after him. Then he kept circling around until the kiva also was well filled, and he sat down by the head of the Water Serpent and they talked with one another. The Water Serpent smiled, thinking to himself: "Well. that tail did not used to be this way, how can that be?" After they had

[p. 185]

talked together nearly all forenoon, the Coyote said he was going home to eat his dinner, and, uncoiling his long tail, he went up the ladder, saying to the Snake: "Now, whenever you feel that way, come and visit me too again sometime," which the Snake promised to do. As the Coyote went over to his kiva dragging his long tail after him, he looked around and smilingly said to himself, "Aha, he did not find out, because he did not say anything about my tail," When he came into his kiva he went around coiling up his tail, and then untied it from his natural tail.

By and by the Snake went over to visit his friend, the Coyote, again. The latter, who had been looking for this visit, had been very much concerned about it, fearing that his friend might all at once come when he had his tail detached from his natural tail, and so was always on the lookout. Hence he saw his friend coming, and had time enough to put his tail in order again, and when the Snake arrived at the kiva he was sitting at the fireplace, ready to receive his friend. The latter began to enter, but as he had been growing considerably since his last visit, and a part of the kiva was filled with the Coyote's tail, he did not find room enough for his whole body. "I have been growing since I have been here last, and cannot get into this kiva now." "All right, let me go out," the Coyote said, "and I can talk to you from the outside while you are in the kiva. You might get cold out there." So the Coyote went out, circled around a number of times outside the kiva, coiling up his tail, and then took a seat near the kiva opening, conversing with his friend, the Water Serpent. By and by he got cold and began to wish that his friend would go home, but the latter remained. The Coyote finally got very cold and began to be secretly angry at his friend because he tarried so long. At last the latter said: "Now I must go home and eat my dinner." The Snake had not yet entirely left the kiva when the Coyote, who was very cold, rushed in and warmed himself. He was out of humor about the matter, and made up his mind to try to get even with his friend. "I am going to pay him back," he said to himself. So, after he had eaten his dinner, he thought a great deal about the matter, and in the evening went to the timber again. He brought another armful of dry cedar bark and some yucca, and made another long addition to his tail in the same manner as before, only this time he made it considerably thicker. When it was done it filled his kiva entirely. He had so well covered it with hair and wool from his body that he thought nobody would know that it was not natural.

As the Snake had invited the Coyote at his last visit to visit him. too, sometime again, the Coyote planned to go over to his friend, but

[p. 186]

thought he would wait until there was a cold day. As in about four days it became very cold, he concluded to pay his friend a visit. Coming over to the kiva of the Snake, the two exchanged the usual greeting, the Coyote saying, "How! (is) the friend at home?" (How! kwatch katu?) ''Yes, I (am) at home. Come in." (Owe! Pai nu katu. Paki!) Whereupon the Coyote entered the kiva, and kept circling around and around, filling the entire kiva with his tail. "Well!" the Snake said, "you are going to fill this whole kiva, so let me go outside and talk to you from there." Leaving the kiva, the Water Serpent kept going around outside for some time, coiling up in such a manner that finally the head was close to the entrance so that he could talk with his friend. It was very cold and the Coyote smilingly thought to himself while he was feeling very comfortable in the warm kiva, "Now you can freeze out there, too." The Snake became very cold and wished that his friend might leave, but he tarried. The Snake was shivering and became angry and wished very much that the Coyote might take his leave. Finally the latter said that he must now go home and eat his dinner, and while the Coyote was going up the ladder dragging his tail after him, the Water Serpent went in. Arriving at the fireplace the latter said, "I am going to get even with you. I am going to pay you back;" and grabbing a stick at the fireplace, he shoved the part of the Coyote's tail that was still in the kiva on the fire, so that it caught fire, saying: "You get out of this; you (referring to the Coyote) are always taking other people's things and are always doing something bad; you had better get away from here."

The Coyote had by this time gotten away quite a distance, and, looking around, he admired his long tail. When he had nearly reached his kiva he looked around again and then noticed some smoke and fire behind him, but as there was high grass around there at that time, he thought it was the grass burning. "Oh," he said, "the Hopi have set the grass on fire. They are after me and want to drive me away. Maybe they will kill me. I am not going to my house, but I am going to run away." So he began to run westward. Looking back he again noticed the grass burning at various places and thought he was pursued. He finally reached the timber and when he saw that burning after a while, he concluded that he would run to Little Colorado River (Bayupa) and jump in there. Then he thought the people would not find him. He did not 'yet know at this time that his tail was burning. Arriving at the river, which was very high, he jumped in and tried to swim across, but before he got across he became very tired. The river was drifting him along, and he finally

[p. 187]

sank down and drowned. The Balolookong now lived in peace at the spring forever afterwards.

Footnotes

^184:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

60. THE COYOTE AND THE BALOLOOKONG [*1] (WATER SERPENT).

Aliksai! The Oraibis were living in their village. There were many of them. The Balolookong was living at Flute Spring (Lanangva), west of the village. Somewhat south of this spring, at Ishmovala, the Coyote was living. They were great friends and often visited each other. One time Balolookong came out of his kiva in the spring and went over to his friend's kiva, which he entered, filling it up entirely so that the Coyote had to go out and remain there while they were conversing. After they had conversed a while, Balolookong returned to his kiva.

The Coyote was angry that he had to remain outside and was meditating how he could take revenge on his friend, and finally formed a plan. He went to the woods and brought with him a large armful of cedar bark and also some yucca leaves. He wrapped the bark with leaves, always adding wool to it so that it finally formed a large artificial tail. This he tied to his own tail and then went over to pay his friend a visit. Entering the kiva of the latter, he also kept going around until his tail filled the entire kiva, and Balolookong had to go out and also remain outside while they conversed with each other.

When they were through talking, the Coyote left, and had not yet quite left the kiva when Balolookong rushed into the kiva and shoved the artificial tail of the Coyote on the fireplace and set it on fire. When the Coyote had drawn it out of the kiva entirely, the grass through which he was running was set on fire. He thought that the people of the village were trying to drive him away by setting the grass on fire, and so he ran westward, setting everything on fire that he came in contact with. Finally he reached the Little Colorado River. By this time the fire on his tail had reached his natural tail and he jumped into the river and tried to swim across, but perished.

Footnotes

^187:1 Told by Puhu'nomtiwa (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

61. BALOLOOKONGWUU [*2] AND THE COYOTE. [*3]

Aliksai! In Mishongnovi, where there are now the ruins of old Mishongnovi, they were living. East of there the Lolo'okong also

[p. 188]

lived, and south from there, at Jack-Rabbit House (Coviihkivee), lived the Coyote. He was a friend of the Lolo'okong. "I am going to visit my friend," the Lolo'okong said one day, so in the evening he went over to his friend's kiva. The Lolo'okong was very long. When he arrived at the Coyote's house the latter said, "Come in." "All right," he replied. "Come in," his friend repeated, so he went in and kept coiling up until he filled the entire kiva. So they were sitting and conversing there. "Now let us eat something," the Coyote said. "Very well," his visitor replied. So the Coyote brought forth some juniper berries, which they ate. "Thanks, that I have eaten," the Lolo'okong said.

By this time it had become quite late. "I am going home now," the Lolo'okong said. "All right," his host replied, "it is getting late." And after having invited the Coyote to visit him also, the Lolo'okong left. After his visitor had left the Coyote was thinking: "What shall I do to my friend, as I want to repay him?" The next day he went into the timber and got a big armful of dry cedar bark. This he tied into a long rope, as it were, with yucca leaves, and rolled it up in his kiva. He then fastened it to his tail and went out. After having run around for some time, he went to his friend's house. "Have you come?" the latter said. "Yes, I have come." "All right, come in, come in," the Lolo'okong said. So he went in and kept circling around and around and around, filling the whole kiva with his long tail. On the walls of the kiva of the Lolo'okong were hanging many snake costumes, and the Coyote kept looking and looking at them. "Now let us eat," the host finally said, and getting from a shelf a very small bowl with some corn-pollen, set it before his visitor. "This I am eating; eat of it too," he said to the Coyote. So they talked together until evening. "It is evening," finally the Coyote said. "I am going home now." "Very well," the Lolo'okong replied, "we are through talking, and it is evening."

The Coyote hereupon left the kiva, dragging his long tail after him. When the latter was nearly unwound, the Lolo'okong put a little piece of ember on the tail, which set it on fire, a lid when this was dragged out of the kiva, it set the grass on fire. The Coyote looked around and was wondering who was setting everything on fire after him. When the tail was nearly consumed he had arrived at his kiva, and then he began to think that maybe his friend had done that to him. "Well now," he said, "he is my friend, and that friend has treated me this way," And then he became very angry at the Lolo'okong. He then entered his kiva and continued to live there.

Footnotes

^187:2 Told by Sik'ahpiki (Shupaulavi).

^187:3 Balolookongwuu (the abbreviated term Balolookong being usually used) is a mythical serpent, supposed to control the water and to live in the ocean, springs, etc. Lo1o'okongwuu (abr. Lolo'okong) is really the Bull Snake, but this term is often used for Balolookong, as is seen in this story.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

  

62. THE COYOTE AND THE FROG. 

Aliksai! Along time ago the people were living in Walpi. North of the village lived the Coyote. In the spring called Sun Spring (Tawaba) lived the Frog. They were friends with each other. So one time the Coyote went over to visit his friend, the Frog. He ascended the mesa and passed by the village. The dogs of the village, noticing him, made a raid on him, He ran and jumped down the mesa, but was not killed. Arriving at his friend, the Frog, he first drank a great deal of water. "Thanks that I have had this drink," he said to the Frog. "I was very thirsty." "Now, let us sit down," the Frog said. ,'You sit down there at the edge of the water and dance for me," the Coyote said to the Frog. So the Frog jumped down into the deep water from where he was sitting and passed down to the bottom, but immediately came up again having his mouth wide open. He was pregnant. "Draw me out," he said to the Coyote, so the Coyote grasped him by the arms and forcibly threw him onto the ground close to the water. Hereupon the Frog burst and it was found that he was full of little tadpoles which were swarming around him. But the Frog himself died. "Oh!" the Coyote said, "why did you jump into that water there. I shall run home now."

So he started off, went up the mesa and by Sitcomovi. When the children of Sitcomovi saw him they said: "There a Coyote is running." The people living in Hano now also noticed him. "There is a Coyote! There is a Coyote! There is a Coyote!" they said, whereupon they followed him, trying to capture him. By this time a heavy rain and hail storm came up. The Coyote ran for his hole, but found that it had been filled up with water so that he could not get in. Heavy hail stones were by this time falling upon him and he was running around trying to find some shelter, but the hail stones were so heavy that he was finally killed by them.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

63. THE COYOTE, THE BAT, AND THE HUMMING-BIRD. [*2]

A long time ago the Coyote lived at Ishmovala, west of the village; a Bat at Tovitoala, north-west of the village; and a Humming-bird at Tohchipchookpu, also north-west of the village. They were all three close friends. The Bat and the bird often visited the Coyote, spending their time there in joking, laughing, and eating. The Coyote, being a great hunter, always had plenty of rabbit meat and other

[p. 190]

game, which he would cook and place before them, and which they enjoyed very much. One time the Bat thought that he would invite his two friends to his house, but he was worried as to what he would give them to eat, so his thoughts were directed to the village of Oraibi. He said to himself: "I am going to the village after dark and perhaps some one of the rich people may have forgotten to take their meat in that they are drying, and I am going to get some of it." So ill the evening he proceeded to the village and was flying around, but found no meat; so he went home discouraged. "Now what shall I do?" he thought. "I am going to try it again, and perhaps I shall find an open window through which I can get into some house and find some food inside." This he did, and finding at one place some tallow, he broke off a piece and carried it home. Returning to the same house he got some more. Hereupon he procured some meat in the same manner, making also several trips after meat. He then in the same manner procured some piki, of which he fetched a goodly supply to his house. "Now, my friends will want some salt with this food," he thought, and so he went in search of some salt, which he found and carried to his house. After he had thus laid in a supply of food for his anticipated visitors, he commenced to think what he should say to them when they would inquire as to the source where he obtained the food. He began thinking of some one that was his friend and whose name he could mention, and thought of the Badger, who lived east of Oraibi, at Badger-Ditch (Honancik'a). Hereupon he retired but did not sleep much that night, as he was very busy thinking over the anticipated visit of his two friends. In the morning he proceeded to the house of the Coyote, and from there to that of the Hummingbird, inviting them to visit him that day. They promptly accepted the invitation and paid their friend a visit. At noon the Bat said, "Now let us eat." Whereupon he prepared a meal of the things he had procured. First he fried some of the meat, which he then placed in a bowl in which he had melted some of the tallow. They then ate, enjoying the food very much. While they were eating they were wondering where their friend procured the food, and in the course of their conversation, which was very animated, they asked him about it. He promptly stated that his friend, the Badger, had given it to him, They doubted it, but said nothing, but when they went home, soon after the meal, they talked about the matter and agreed that their friend had probably deceived them. Before they parted, the Coyote invited the bird to visit him in the evening. This the bird did, and their conversation soon again turned upon the subject of the food which they had so much enjoyed at their friend's house. They again

[p. 191]

were wondering where he procured it, but soon agreed that he must have stolen it in Oraibi, and that he had deceived them, 1n order to get even with their friend, they concluded that they would "song-tie" him, that is, they would make a song about their friend. They at once started to compose a song, but did not finish it to their satisfaction. So, after the Humming-bird had left, the Coyote kept thinking over the song, and during the night, while he could not sleep, finished it. The next morning he at once went to the house of the bird, to whom he sang this song, to the satisfaction of both of them:

Sawya, Sawya!
     Bat, Bat!
 Tucivakiota, tucivakiota.
     In the hollow, In the hollow!
 Anawit kwitaat
     Along its excrements
 Tucanmuruta, tucanmuruta
     A ridge (of) dirt, a ridge (of) dirt!
 Kikanqo, kikanqo
     To the village, to the village.

The following is supposed to be the complaint of the party whose food the bat carried off:

Iyumukvi, akwihkwistkae
     From my inner chamber, because fat he got
 Kalatoto matototimaia.
     The Kalatoto are running about.

They practiced the song until they both knew it. Hereupon the Coyote returned to his house, the Humming-bird saying he would invite the Bat to come over in the evening, which he did. When the Bat arrived, the bird went over to the Coyote's house, telling him that their friend was waiting for them. The Coyote at once also proceeded to the house of the bird, where the latter soon proposed to have a song. The Bat consented, saying that they wanted to be happy together. So they stood up in a line and the bird commenced to sing the song which the Coyote had made. The Coyote at once chimed in and the Bat also commenced to sing with them the best he could, but soon found out that a joke was being played on him, and that he was being song-tied by his two friends. As soon as he had found this out he stopped singing and became angry. "You have song-tied me," he said to the others. "The Coyote has made the song; you both have made it. Now this ends our friendship." Whereupon they dispersed and never became friends again.

Footnotes

^189:1 Told by Kuhkiuma (Shupaulavi).

^189:2 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 192]

  

64. THE COYOTE AND THE HUMMING-BIRD. [*1]

Ishyaoi! The Coyote was living at Ishmovala, west of Oraibi, and a Humming-bird was living at Tohchipchook'pu. They both had children and were good friends. One time the Coyote went to visit his friend, and as he also wanted to find some food for his children, he went north of the village to the place where the refuse of the village was thrown, and looked for some pieces of skin, old moccasins, remnants of hides, etc. The bird seeing it, went to a place close by and quickly buried itself so that the bill only was protruding. When the Coyote came to the place where the bird had buried itself, he saw something protruding from the pile of debris and said: "Thanks, I have found a needle. I shall take that home to my mother and will sew a dress for herself." So he took hold of the bill of the Humming-bird and began to pull at it. "Ishana!" the bird said, "that is my bill," and the Coyote saw that he had been fooled by his friend. The latter laughed at him.

They then went to the house of the bird, the latter entering the nest, which was built in the side of the bluff. As the Coyote could not get there, he sat on top of the bluff, and they conversed with each other. When it was nearly evening the Coyote said: "I must go home, it is evening. To-morrow you must visit me too." "All right," the Humming-bird said: "to-morrow I will come."

So they slept that night, and in the morning, after they had eaten, the bird went over to the house of the Coyote; first, however, hunting some worms in fields near by. After having eaten a number of them it went over to the Coyote's house, and saw something protruding from the ground close to the house. "Thanks, I have found a gourd jug. I am going to take this home and when my mother pops corn she will put it in here and I will eat it out of this." Hereupon she commenced pulling at the supposed jug. "Ishana!" the Coyote said, "that is my snout." Hereupon they went to the Coyote's house. That having a large entrance, the bird, of course, could go in too. The Coyote fed his friend juniper berries (lapoci), the Coyote also eating some. After they had talked a while the Humming-bird returned to her home, and the two are probably still living there.

Footnotes

^192:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 193]

  

65. HOW THE COYOTE WAS DECEIVED BY THE WREN. [*1]

Haliksai! A long time ago, when they were living in Oraibi, the Coyote Woman lived at Ishmovala. She had four children. She always went hunting mice and other little animals, which she brought to her children and fed them to the latter. She went to the spring, Flute Spring (La'nva) and Dawn Spring (Talaova), after water for her children, but as she had no water vessel she brought the water in her mouth. When she had given one of the children to drink she would run again and get some more for the other children until they were all satisfied. In that way she was feeding and watering her children.

One time she again went after water to the Dawn Spring, filling her mouth very full. When she returned she saw a Wren sitting on a rock, and when she came near the bird, the latter was jumping up and down from one rock to another singing as follows:

Calapongki, cholo, cholo,
 Calapongki, cholo, cholo,
 Riuw, riuw.

When the Coyote saw it she had to laugh, and spilled the water from her mouth. "Now then, why are you dancing there that way that I had to laugh and spill my water; I shall have to get some more," whereupon she ran back to the spring to get some more water. When she came back with her mouth full she thought that this time she was not going to laugh, but when she arrived at the place where the Tu'chvo was dancing and saw the latter dance and heard him singing in the same manner, she again had to laugh, saying: "Poah," by which she again spilled the water. But this time she was angry and said: "Why are you dancing and singing here that way that I have to spill this water? My children are thirsty and they will die. Now, I am going back to get some more water, and if you are doing that still when I return and I spill the water again, I shall devour you." Hereupon she returned to the spring to fill her mouth again.

While the Coyote was gone the Wren slipped out of its skin and dressed up a stone with the skin so that it looked like a Wren. This artificial bird he put up where he had been sitting and he himself slipped under a rock, waiting for the Coyote. When the latter came along the Wren began singing the same song from under the rock. The Coyote began to laugh, saying: ''Poah" and spilled the water. She was now very angry. "Now then," she said, "you are still singing

[p. 194]

that way here and I am going to devour you," whereupon she grabbed the stone dressed in the bird's skin and crushed it. She broke all her teeth so that the blood was streaming from her mouth. She ran back to the Dawn Spring in order to wash her face, but as she stooped over the water she saw some on-e with a bloody face staring at her. She at once left the spring without having drunk any water, and ran to Spider Spring, where she was scared away in the same manner. From here she ran to Dripping Spring (Shivukva), where she met with the same disappointment. Hereupon she ran to Hotval Spring (Hotvalva). Here again she was scared away by the face staring at her, and without daring to drink she rushed away westward to the Grand Canyon. Arriving at the rim of the Canyon she jumped into the canyon and perished.

Footnotes

^193:1 Told by Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

66. THE AAHTU [*1] AND THE COYOTE. [*2]

A long time ago many Aahtu were playing in the cedar timber north of Oraibi. One time they were near a very pretty cedar-tree and here they sang the following song:

        Hatava, yayhona yayhona,
   Hatava yayhona,
   Hatava yayhona,
   Tuva yayhona!

       The meaning of the words is not known, except "tu'va"   (throw). "Hatava" may be an obsolete word for "eyes."

     
 When they were through with the song they all took out their eyes, throwing them on the tree, where they remained suspended like little balls. They then sang the same song again, whereupon the eyes returned to their sockets. This they did many times. All at once a Coyote appeared upon the scene and asked: "What are you doing here?" "Yes," they said, "we are having a little dance here, and then we play throwing our eyes on the tree and getting them back again. Sometimes when the eyes are not very clear and one throws them away in this manner they become clear again." "All right," the Coyote said, "I shall join you because one of my eyes is not very clear. Some time ago I was chasing a rabbit and ran with my head against a tree and a piece of wood entered my eye, and ever since that eye is very dim, so I shall play with you and maybe my eye will get clear."

So they sang their little song again, the Coyote joining them, and as they sang the last word they all threw their eyes on the tree, the Coyote too. They then sang again, and all the eyes, except those of

[p. 195]

the Coyote, returned. The little Birds all laughed at him saying, "Your eyes will never return; you are bad (unaihu), you are taking other people's things away sometimes, and that is the reason why your eye got hurt with that stick; your eyes will never come back; you are dangerous; and you are going to die somewhere." The Coyote was very angry and left them. As he could not find anything to eat now, he soon died. The place where he died was called Coyote-Death-Place (ishmo'mokpu) ever since.

Footnotes

^194:1 Plural from Ahu, a blue-bird of about the size of a turtle-dove, probably the blue Jay.

^194:2 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

67. THE COYOTE AND THE TURTLE-DOVE. [*1]

Aliksai! The Shongopavi were living in their village, and South of the village there was a hill called Kwakchomo. There was a great deal of this grass called kwakwi there. A Turtle-dove one time was rubbing out the seed from the tassels of this grass, and while doing so cut her hand with the sharp edge of one of the blades of grass. It bled profusely, and the Turtle-dove was moaning as follows:

Hooho, hoo, hooho, hoo, hooho, hoo,
 Ho-ho-ho-

While she was moaning a Coyote came along and heard somebody singing, as he believed. So he approached the place. When he arrived at the place he saw the Turtle-dove sitting and leaning forward in deep distress. "Are you singing?" he asked the Dove. "Are you thus singing?" "No," she said, "I am not singing; I am crying. I have cut myself." "No, you are singing," the Coyote replied. "Now you sing to me." "No," the Dove insisted, "I was crying," thus refusing to confirm the Coyote's statements. "Now, if you are not willing to sing to me, I shall devour you," the Coyote said. The Dove then yielded and sang the above song again. The Coyote then imitating the song of the Dove, left her and ran away.

As he was running he stumbled over a rock and fell down. As he fell he lost the song, so that he was only able to say, "Ho-ho-ho." So the Coyote made up his mind to go back again to the Turtle-dove, and, arriving at the place where she was sitting, he began to urge her to sing. "But I am not singing," she said, "I am crying." But he would not listen, so she again sang her song to him. He again ran back, singing the Turtle-dove's song as he was running. Again he stumbled over a rock and lost the song. He again tried to sing, but could only say, "Ho-ho-ho." So he again returned to the place Where the Turtle-dove had been, but the latter had gone immediately after the Coyote had left her, leaving at the place where she had been

[p. 196]

sitting a stone which very much resembled her form, and was also placed in about the position in which the Dove had been sitting. "I have fallen down again and have forgotten my song, so I came back again," the Coyote said, but he received no reply. "If you do not sing I am going to devour you," and again receiving no reply, he grabbed what he believed to be the Dove, but found that it was a stone. He broke all his teeth, and much blood was streaming from his mouth. He at once ran back and taking his way towards Shupaulavi, came to the spring Toriva, which he approached in order to drink. As he put his mouth to the water he saw a bloody face staring at him from the depth of the water. Not knowing what it was, he did not dare to drink, and ran away. Making his way northward, he ran to another spring by the name of Nankava, which is situated north of Shupaulavi. Here he again saw his reflection in the water, and did not dare to drink. He then ran to a third spring by the name of Ishk'achokpu. Seeing the same reflection in the water again, he was angry and gnarled, or rather belched, at it, from which the spring has derived its name, the Coyote Belching Water. He again was afraid to drink, but was very tired and thirsty by this time. "I am going to run to Oraibi," he said to himself; "there is a place where there is some water, and I believe there is nobody living in that place." So he ran to a place south-east of Oraibi, called Kuritvahchikpu. When he arrived at this place he again put his snout to the water, and was just about to drink when he discovered a skeleton staring at him from the water. This time he was very angry and tore up the rocks around the spring, from which that place has derived its name. He by this time was so thirsty and exhausted that he fell down and died there.

Footnotes

^195:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

68. THE COYOTE AND THE BLUE JAYS. [*1]

Haliksai! A long time ago the people lived in Oraibi. West of the village, at Ishmovala, lived the Coyote and his wife. They had six children and the Coyote used to go and hunt rabbits for his children. One day he went hunting again and found a little cottontail rabbit, which he chased. The rabbit ran into the hole, which the Coyote could not enter. "How shall I get this rabbit out now?" he thought to himself; then somebody came along; it was the Badger. "You get this out for me here," the Coyote said, "I want this rabbit for my children to eat." So the Coyote sat down and waited while the Badger scratched a hole until he reached the rabbit, whereupon he pulled the latter out. The Coyote was very happy. "Thus," he

[p. 197]

said, "on your account my children will have something to eat." Then the Coyote took the rabbit in his mouth and ran home with it, being very happy. When he arrived in his home the little Coyotes wrangled over the rabbit, tore it to pieces and devoured it, some of them getting something, others not, so they remained hungry.

The next morning both the Coyote and his wife went out in search of food again, the latter ascending up to the village, and ran past the village on the west side, then by the north side, turning northward over the mesas. Not finding anything, she finally entered the woods north of the village. All at once she heard something in the trees, and, looking up, she saw some Blue Jays in the tree. The Blue jays were dancing in the tree and she coveted them. They said to the Coyote: "We are having a dance here, you come and be with us and assist us." "I would like to," the Coyote said, "but how shall I get up there?" "Why, we shall lend you some of our wings, tails, and feathers," the Blue jays said. "All right," she said. So they took off some of their wings, tails, and feathers and put them on her legs. They then told her that she must dance and sing just the same as they did, and then they again began to sing.

The Coyote now having wings ascended and danced with them. When they had finished the song they all flew away, the Coyote with them, and alighted on some other tree. This they repeated in all three times. They then flew up high into the air, the Coyote with them, and when they were very high up they all surrounded the Coyote, each one saying: "This is my tail, this is my wing, these are my feathers," and then tore out all the feathers that they had loaned the Coyote. When they had torn out all the feathers the Coyote began to fall downward to the earth. When she reached it she was dead.

Her children still had nothing to eat. When the Coyote father saw that his wife was not coming home he concluded that he would go and hunt her. Following her tracks, he ascended to the village, passed the village on the west side, and when he reached the north side of the village the dogs of the village noticed him and pursued him. He at once left the footprints of his wife and ran back to his children. So after that the little Coyotes had no mother. The Coyote then afterwards hunted food alone for his children, and that is the reason why so many Coyotes have to look out for their food alone.

Footnotes

^196:1 Told by Wikvaya (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 198]

  

69. THE COYOTE AND THE EAGLE. 

Aliksai! North of Shupaulavi is the Katcina House (Katcinki). West of this is a bluff, and on top of this bluff used to live an Eagle. One time the Coyote came along. "What are you wandering around for?" the Eagle asked. "Yes," the Coyote said. The Eagle was standing on one foot, having the other foot hidden in his feathers. The Coyote was wondering, and asked: "Why are you standing on one foot?" "Yes," the Eagle said, "I cut one leg off, and so I am standing on one foot." "Is that so?" the Coyote said, and was thinking. "I am envious at you," he said to the Eagle; "I shall try to stand on one leg too; but how did you cut your leg off, bow is that done?" "Why," the Eagle replied, "you just lay your leg across a stone and strike on it with a sharp stone and then it will be cut off, it does not hurt, and you need not be afraid."

So the Coyote hunted for a sharp stone and there was another sharp stone with a sharp edge. He laid his right hind leg across the latter, raised the small sharp stone and cut off his leg. Hereupon the Eagle lowered his second leg, stretched out his wings, and laughed at the Coyote and said: "I have two legs, see here." "Oh!" the Coyote said, "I, poor one, that I thoughtlessly cut off my leg." And while the Eagle flew away the Coyote was crying, and, limping away, probably perished somewhere.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

70. THE COYOTE AND THE RED EAGLE. [*2]

In Mishongnovi the people were living. North of the village at the bluff Kwana Vuvi lived the Red Eagle, and east of the village at Where-Coyotes'-Heads-are-put-in (Ishqottangat) [*3], lived the Coyote. He had children. During the day it was very hot and he went to hunt something for them, but did not kill anything. So he returned to his children, who were very thirsty. They were living only a very short time. Now he went after water for them to Toriva, but he had no jug, so he got water in his mouth. When he arrived there he drank and drew out his mouth full of water. With his mouth full of water he ran to his children and now he arrived at Kwanavuvi, and there on the bluff sat the Red Eagle. He danced on one leg and sang as follows:

[p. 199]

Tipoki homponcholo
 Yep nu (Here I)
 Cholo, cholo, chololololo. 

The Coyote laughed at the Red Eagle and spilled the water. Now he ran back to the spring again, and again filled his mouth with water. Now he ran again, and again arrived at the Red Eagle, who was still dancing, and because he (the Coyote) laughed again, he again poured out the water. Now the Coyote was angry. "Why do you dance here that way?" he asked the Red Eagle. "Now let me go to the cedar timber and hunt some pitch," and he ran very fast to the timber, and there a pinon-tree had a great deal of pitch. He cut that off and carrying it, went home. Now he again descended to Toriva and drank there, very much, because he was very thirsty. When he had drank he filled his mouth and then pasted up his mouth with the pitch. Now he again came to the Red Eagle, who was again dancing. The Coyote again laughed, but his mouth was closed up tightly and he did not spill the water. Now at last he ran to his children very fast. When he arrived there they were sleeping nicely. When he had taken off the pitch he poured the water into their mouths, but they did not get awake. Why, they had died! Now because he was very angry he wanted to kill the Red Eagle, and went to him, very angry. When he arrived there the Red Eagle flew away. When he flew away he showed him his leg and, behold! he had two legs. The Coyote jumped at him but did not catch him, and thus he did not kill him.

Footnotes

^198:1 Told by Sik'ahpik'i (Shupaulavi)

^198:2 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

^198:3 So called because the Hopi throw the heads of coyotes and other game there.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

71. THE COYOTE AND THE TURKEYS. [*2]

Haliksai! At Ishmovala the Coyote was living, and at Nuvatuk'aovi, a short distance east of Ishmovala, the Turkey lived. They both had children and were great friends, and often visited each other. One time when the Coyote came to the house of the Turkeys they fed him pinon nuts, which he relished very much. The little Turkeys were very nicely figured, and the Coyote enjoyed looking at them. He envied them for their beautiful feathers and was wondering how they were figured so nicely. As he looked at them he stroked their bodies with a forepaw. "Yes," the Turkey mother said, "I baked these, my children. I put them into an oven and baked them, then I ate their meat, but I did not break any bones, nor did I bite into any bones. Them I left entirely unhurt. Early in the morning I

[p. 200]

put them into a tray, waved them up and down, singing the following song over them:

Pipichacha, pipichacha (archaic).
 Talahoya, huwamu, itimu!
 Wake up, please, my children!

Then I threw all the bones outside and there my children got alive again, and since then they are so beautifully figured." She was, of course, deceiving him. "Oh!" the Coyote said; "yes, these are very pretty, and I shall do the same."

In the evening he returned to his house and early the next morning he went after wood. Returning with the wood, he heated his oven. He made the oven very hot, then took one of his children and pitied it, but the little Turkeys had been so pretty and he had so envied them for their pretty figuring, that he threw the little Coyote into the oven. Hereupon another one, and another one, as he had a great many children. He threw them into the oven until the oven was full. He placed a stone over the opening and plastered up the oven. While they were being baked in the oven he ground some corn to make some hurushiki. So in the evening he took them out of the oven and found them thoroughly baked. He took out one after another and then commenced to eat. They tasted very fine. He ate all the meat, but the bones he did not hurt. He did not break any, nor did he crush any with his teeth. Gathering the bones into a basket he went to sleep.

During the night the Turkey mother said to her children: "We had better flee away from here on account of your uncle, the Coyote, because he will be very angry and will certainly come and devour us." Hereupon she sent her children away to the San Francisco Mountains (near Flagstaff). She took the pelts, blankets, etc., in which they had been sleeping, and rolling some of the smaller ones up, placed them on the floor and covered them up so as to make them appear as if they were still sleeping, under the covering. Hereupon she followed her children.

The Coyote in the meanwhile got up once and looked whether the sun was not yet rising, but it was still dark. After a while he looked again and then the sun came out. He at once took the tray (tuchaiya) containing the bones of his children, went out with it, waved it up and down the way the Turkey Woman had shown him, and sang the song which she had told him she had sung over the bones of her children. Hereupon he also threw the bones away. But alas! nothing became alive, and only the bones were lying there. When he saw what had

[p. 201]

happened he cried bitterly and became very angry. "I shall go over to the house of the Turkey," he said, "and shall certainly devour the little Turkeys too." Hereupon he went over to his friend's house, running very fast. When he came to the house he at once entered and thought they were all sleeping nicely. He jumped upon their beds and grabbed what he believed to be the young Turkeys, but found that nobody was there. They had deceived him. "Ah," he said, "they have run away, but I shall certainly overtake them." So he rushed out, hunted up the tracks of the Turkeys and followed them running very fast. While the Coyote was following their tracks, the Turkeys had arrived at the Little Colorado River, but when they had crossed it the little Turkeys were very tired. "I shall leave you here," their mother said, "and run ahead of you." But one of the little ones was crying very bitterly. The Turkey mother ran ahead to the San Francisco mountains and informed the Turkeys living there about what had happened. "You that are strong come quickly and help us; the Coyote is following us and he will kill my children. You go quickly and get them." So two of the Turkey men that were very strong came out and ran towards the place where the Turkey mother had left her children. The latter, however, remained because she was very tired.

The Coyote in the meanwhile found the little Turkeys and chasing them, said: "Aha, I shall devour you" (Ali kurzh nu umui cowani). The little Turkeys were running around and crying very bitterly. just as the Coyote was about to take one of the little Turkeys the two Turkey men came upon him, grabbed the little ones, of which there were two, took them on their backs and ran away with them. "Why do you take them away?" the Coyote cried. "I am hungry and I want to eat them. That is the reason why I followed them." But they did not listen, and as they were strong and the Coyote was very tired, he had to return to his home hungry. But before he got home he died.

Footnotes

^199:1 Referring to the exposed roots of trees, herbs, etc., standing up above the ground.

^199:2 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

72. THE CHIRO AND THE COYOTE. [*1]

In Oraibi the people were living. At Ishmovala the Coyote lived. Away over there at K'ahk'angwovakaavi lived a great many Chiros, and they were always dancing there. One time the Coyote was walking about east of their village. The Chiros saw him as they were dancing. They were singing as follows:

[p. 202]

Ishawu, ishawu, hohoongyanikay colmoki
 Coyote, Coyote, to dance is longing,
 Ishawu, oomii hongina,
 Coyote upward dances,
 Aatk'amii hongina,
 Downward dances,
 Machiwa, machiwa, chirorororo.
 Is called, is called chirorororo.

The Coyote was looking at them and wanted to dance along. "Very well," the Chiros said to him, whereupon each one of them gave him some feathers; one some wing feathers, another some tail feathers, and so on. They made for the Coyote wings and a tail, and put small feathers into his body, whereupon the Coyote was very happy. "Thanks," he said, "that you have made wings for me. I am going to dance with you now." Hereupon they danced, again singing the same song. The Coyote danced with them. Now they were flying upward somewhere, and arrived somewhere away high up. Now they crowded around the Coyote and said: "Why, this is my wing; why, this is my tail; why, these are my feathers;" some of them had given him these things, and now they took everything away from him, and alas! he began to descend. He arrived at the earth and died. The Chiros laughed at him. "Thanks," they said, "that you have died, because you very often do commit depredations on some one's property. That is why you were going about again."

Footnotes

^201:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

73. THE COYOTE AND THE PORCUPINE. [*1]

At some distance southwest of Walpi is a place called Water Killing Hill (Baqoychomo), where there are still some old ruins. A short distance north of this place is a place called Skeleton Hill (Maschomo). At these two places the people from Oraibi, Walpi, and the other villages rested with their captives after they had destroyed Aoatovi, taking with them many men, women, and children. Here at these places, it is said, they extorted from their captives the secrets of their ceremonies and altars, and after they had learned everything from them, they killed a good many of them, probably torturing some of them. Tradition says that in some cases they cut women's breasts off and left them to perish, From this killing of those captives these two places have derived their names.

At the first named place the Porcupine used to live, a long time ago, while the Coyote was living at the last named place. One time

[p. 203]

the Coyote went to visit his friend, the Porcupine. "Sit down," the latter said. "All right," the Coyote said, and so they talked together a long time. When it was noon the Porcupine said: "We are going to eat something. You build a fire;" so the Coyote built a large fire. When the Coyote had built the fire the Porcupine said: "Now we are going to have something to eat." So he drew a small pointed stick from his hair on the top of his head and thrust it into his nose. After he had done this repeatedly, blood and fat dropped out of his nose on the fire, where it was roasted. This he handed to the Coyote to eat. So they were eating. "Aha," the Porcupine said: "thus I am preparing food." "Yes," the Coyote said, "we are happy."

So after they had eaten they conversed until evening; then the Coyote said, "I must go home now." "Very well," the Porcupine replied, "it is evening now," "But you must visit me too, to-morrow," the Coyote said, and thereupon left, the Porcupine saying laughingly, "You will have something good too, since you have seen it here." So the next morning the Porcupine went over to his friend and there sure enough found that the Coyote also had a pointed stick thrust into his hair. When it was noon again the Porcupine also built a fire at his friend's kiva. "We are going to eat something fine," the Coyote said. So the Coyote pulled out his stick, drew close up to the fire, bent over it, and also began to poke his nose with the stick, whereupon also blood, mixed with fat or tallow, began to come out. It covered the fire, and finally began to flow away, and wouldn't stop. The Coyote's nose was bleeding and bleeding, and finally he became exhausted and fell down.

The Porcupine, thinking that his friend had died, laughed, and without having eaten anything, left the kiva and went home. He was angry at his friend because he wanted to imitate him, and now was not successful. By and by the Coyote revived. The blood had stopped flowing, forming large hard pieces of coagulated blood and grease in front of his nose. He was very angry. "That friend of mine," he said, "that friend is the cause that this happened to me; he wanted it this way. I am going to devour him." So after he had become strong again the next morning, he went over to his friend to attack him. When he arrived there he looked down, and his friend looking up noticed the blood on his nose. "Well now, have you not died? I thought you had died, and that is the reason why I went away." "Yes," the Coyote said very roughly, "you have bewitched me. On your account I almost died, and now I have come over here to devour you." "No, no," the Porcupine said, "you are not going to devour me. Why, you are my friend, and a friend will not eat up

[p. 204]

his friend. No, indeed." Then he began to talk kindly to his friend saying: "Well, since you have not died, we will live together again." The Coyote then also quieted down and they conversed together amicably. They then lived there again as friends, the Coyote thinking that he would have a chance sometime to take revenge on the Porcupine.

Footnotes

^202:1 Told by Sik'ahpik'i (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

74. THE COYOTE AND THE BADGER. [*1]

Haliksai! In the village they were living, and south of La'nangva at Coyote Gap (Ishmovala) the Coyote was living. At Badger Gulch (Honancika), about one-eighth of a mile south-east of Oraibi, lived the Badger. These two were great friends with each other, and often visited each other. One time the Oraibi were cleaning out the spring of La'nangva, in which the maidens of the village assisted. They had taken their food along, which they placed near a rock not far from the spring. Towards evening the chief said: "Now get your food and let us eat." So they spread blankets on the ground and placed the food on it and ate. After they were through they went to the village.

The Coyote was sitting a short distance away watching the people as they ate, and envied them. Early the next morning he heard the crier announce another spring cleaning. As soon as the Coyote heard this announcement he ran over to his friend, the Badger. Arriving at the latter's house, he asked: "Is my friend in?" "Yes," the latter replied, "come in!" "Very well," the Coyote said, "but I am in a hurry. These Oraibi are going to clean the spring again and they have something very fine to eat there. Let us go over and take part in the eating, but do not be slow. Follow me soon." "Very well," the Badger said. Hereupon the Coyote left, the Badger soon following him. They entered the Coyote's house, and from there the Badger commenced to dig a hole towards the place where the food was, and after he had gone a little way he turned around, which is the custom, of the badgers. The Coyote noticed it and said: "Oh! you are turning back again." "Yes," the Badger replied, "that is the way I dig. We must not be alone in this." "Yes," the Coyote said, here is some one else close by. He digs straight ahead."

Hereupon the Coyote left his house and ran over to a place a short distance east of his house where the Mole (Mu'yi) lived. he entered the latter's house and said: "The people are cleaning the spring there and they have a great deal of food there, of which we want to get

[p. 205]

some. But the Badger, who has been digging towards it, always turns around, and we shall not get there. You come and scratch a hole for us and we shall give you a great deal of it." The Mole was at once willing and said: "Very well, I shall come," and went along with the Coyote. After entering the Coyote's house the Mole at once commenced to dig a hole underground, which he did very rapidly. The Badger followed him, enlarging the hole. The Coyote followed the Badger and scratched out the loose dirt.

They arrived at a place not far from the rock where the food had been placed the day before. Here the Mole made a small opening and looked out and saw that the people were just arriving, and that the maidens again placed the food near the rock. So the Mole continued his digging to the place where the food was, and while the Hopi were at work he reached all the food to his companions. The Mole handed it to the Badger, the Badger to the Coyote, and the latter carried it to his house. When the Hopi were through with their work the chief again said to the maidens that they should now go and get their food. They would eat and then go home. So the maidens raced towards the rock where they had placed the food, but when they arrived here they found all their food gone. They looked around and found a hole in the ground, but only for a short distance, because the Badger had tightly closed up the hole from the inside. "Well now," the maidens said, "somebody has put our food in here." So the men and the youths brought their hoes and followed the opening in the ground, but they soon found that it was only open a short distance. Hereupon they abandoned it and went home hungry.

In the Coyote's house the three now divided up the food and the Badger and the Mole carried home their portions. On this they lived for some time afterwards. Soon afterwards the Coyote again visited the Badger. The Badger had cut up into small pieces some lolo'okongs and roasted them. They were very fat. This food he set before his friend, the Coyote, and with it some comiviki. The Coyote ate the food with relish. "But that tastes well," he said; "what is it? where did you get it?" "Why, I opened my side," the Honani said. "My intestines are covered with much fat, and I took out some of that fat and prepared this food from it," "Did it not hurt you," the Coyote asked, "when you opened your body?" "No," the Badger replied, "I opened it, took out the fat, and you see there is nothing the matter with my body. With this knife here I opened my body," showing the knife to the Coyote. "Very well," the Coyote said, "I am going to take this knife along and I am going to do the same, so to-morrow you must visit me, too." Hereupon he left and went home.

[p. 206]

The Badger laughed, saying: "That Fool Old Man (Una Wuhtaka) believes that I took that fat out of my body."

The next morning the Coyote took the knife and commenced to cut into his abdomen. It hurt him very much, 'and as he was cutting he moaned, "Ana-na-na," but he kept on cutting and the blood was running out profusely. When he had cut through the abdomen wall he took hold of the fat and commenced to pull at it, but before he got through he became exhausted and fell down and died. When his friend, the Badger, arrived he found the Coyote lying there dead. "That Fool Old Man," he said, "thinking that I extracted that fat from my body!" And thus the Badger killed his friend, the Coyote.

Footnotes

^204:1 Told by Kiwanhongva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

75. THE BADGER AND THE COYOTE. [*1]

Haliksai! North-east of Walpi at Oaktoika lived the Coyote. West of this place at Shiwapba lived the Badger. They were friends. One time the latter visited his friend, the Coyote. "Have you come?" the Coyote said. "Yes," his friend replied. Hereupon they conversed until noon. "Now let us have something to eat," the Coyote said, whereupon he went into a room and got out some juniper berries. "This I am eating," he said to his friend, and set it before him. "Now, eat this," he said. Hereupon they ate. When that was eaten they conversed until towards evening, when the Badger said he had to go home now. "Very well," the Coyote replied. And after having invited his friend to visit him too, the Badger went home. In the evening he went on a hunt and tracking a rabbit into a hole he quickly dug him up and pulled him out. Having killed the rabbit he took him home and put him away until the next morning.

Early in the morning he roasted the rabbit nicely and then waited for his friend, who soon came. "Have you come?" the Badger said. "Yes," the Coyote said. "Very well," the Badger said. So they conversed all forenoon and at noon the Badger said: "Now, we are going to have something to eat, too," whereupon he brought forth the roasted rabbit, which looked very inviting. Cutting the rabbit up, the Badger invited his friend to eat, whereupon they enjoyed their meal very much. When they had eaten they again conversed with each other, and were very happy talking about the good food that they had eaten. Towards evening the Coyote said that he must go home now. "Very well," the Badger replied, whereupon the

[p. 207]

Coyote left, his friend having wished him a happy journey. After that each one continued to live in his house.

Footnotes

^206:1 Told by Sik'ahpik'i (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

76. THE BADGER, THE COYOTE, AND THE KOHONINO MAIDEN. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi the people were living. At Badger Gulch (Honancika), lived the Badger. His friend the Coyote lived at Ishmovala. The two were great friends. One time they were hunting together. They were hunting and had gotten as far as Mowahpi, quite a distance west of Apohnivi, but they had not killed anything. Some time before the Coyote had been hunting alone and had found the place where a Kohonino maiden had died some time previously. So he said to his friend the Badger: "Let us go and hunt the place where the Kohonino maiden has died, and let us revive her. You are a doctor and will certainly know how to do it." So they went to the place and there sure enough found the bones.

They gathered the bones and placed them on a pile. The Badger had on a black kilt (kokomvitkuna). This he spread over the bones. The Coyote was anxious to see what his friend would do, but his friend said he should not stay there, but he should go away, he should hide somewhere. Then the Badger was thinking that the maiden would have to have some flesh and some color, so he sent the Coyote westward to Coho'h-toika to get some dry grass. When the Coyote brought this they put some of the grass with the bones. He then sent the Coyote to a place west of Mowahpi to get some red paint (cuta). Of this he also put a small quantity under the black kilt, He then sent the Coyote to a spring called Hidden Spring (Nauyva), to get some water from there. When he returned they poured a little of the water in a bowl and wet the paint with it.

The Badger now told the Coyote to go away. He went away but soon sneaked back again, crawling towards the place where his friend was working over the bones. The Badger was angry and said to him that if he did not go away, and if he saw that, the maiden would never revive. Hereupon he drove the Coyote off, and the latter went away quite a distance this time. Then the Badger sang as follows:

        Hatataplocho, lochoooo,
   Hatataplocho, lochoooo,
   Payapim, Kohninapim,
   Nowacha' pim waya! waya!
   Momoka, momoka ai, ai.

       Narrator could not give the meaning of these words.

     
  

[p. 208]

Hereupon he poured some of the paint over the bones and grass. He then repeated the song several times, always pouring some of the paint over the material as he concluded the song. All at once the bones began to move under the cover. He waited a little and then removed the cover and, behold I the maiden was alive. She sat up and looked around. "Why do you want me?" she asked. "It is not I that wanted you," he said, "but the Coyote," whereupon he called the latter. The Coyote came running and the Badger said to him: "You wanted me to revive this one, now she is alive again," "Yes," he said, "it was I who wanted it that way." This way they talked together and then they said they wanted to go home, and told the maiden so. She was willing to go with them.

As they went home the Coyote coveted the mana and wanted to marry her, but the Badger was not willing. He said: "That is not the purpose. for which we brought her to life. She was to be our clan sister (tu'mci). We wanted her to build the fire for us." They finally came to Big Hill (Wopachomo), and the Coyote was anxious to have the maiden. He rushed upon her and bit her in the calf of her leg. The Badger was very angry, saying: "Why did you do that? That is not the reason why we brought her. You are bad." As he was saying this the maiden fell down and died again.

They were thinking where they should bury her. So the Badger took the body on his back and took it south-west. The Coyote followed him a short distance then returned to the place where she had died, but he soon again followed, overtaking the Badger. "Why did you follow me?" asked the Badger. "One does not follow the dead." In a little while the Coyote again ran back to the place where the maiden had died. "When he comes back again," the Badger said to himself: ''I shall not say anything to him. But how shall I kill him? He is bad." In a little while he put down the corpse and began to dig a grave. As he was working at it the Coyote returned. So they here buried the maiden and then returned home.

But it was evening when they came to the Coyote's house. Here they both remained over night. In the morning the Badger went to his home, inviting his friend, however, to come and visit him the next day. As he went home he was thinking how he should kill the Coyote. As he went along he killed some bull-snakes (lolo'okongs). When he arrived at his home he had killed four of them. On his fireplace was standing a pot. He cut the lolo'okongs up into short pieces and put the pieces into the drying pot. He stirred then, over a slow fire until they were thoroughly dry. The lolo'okongs were fat. When he was done with this he put on another pot and

[p. 209]

made some hurushuki. As he was done with that his friend came..

"My friend," the Coyote said. "Ha!" the Badger replied. "Are you in?" the Coyote asked. "Yes," he said, "come in, come in." So the Coyote went in and they commenced to eat right away. When they were through eating the Coyote asked the Badger: "What have you here that tasted so good?" "Yes," said the Badger, who had a knife in his hand. "I did not know what to set before you, and so I cut open my abdomen, took my entrails out and roasted them for you, and before I was through, my abdomen was closed up again." The Coyote would not believe him. "Certainly you did not roast that, yet you are saying it," the Coyote said. "Yes," the Badger replied, "I roasted that. You see my abdomen is not quite well yet," whereupon he showed it to him, having made a little scratch on it beforehand. And then the Coyote believed him. "I am going to do that, too," the Coyote said. "You come and visit me tomorrow morning. But I have no knife and roasting pot; you have a knife and a pot, let me have them." "Very well," the Badger said, you take them along." He gave him the knife and the pot, and then the Coyote left the kiva and ran home. After he had left the Badger said: "Get out, old man, you will certainly die, believing me that way."

When the Coyote got home he went to sleep. In the morning he put the pot on the fire and then leaned against the wall. He took the knife and opened his abdomen a little, but it hurt him, and he turned away. "Oh my! I shall not die," he thought, and then made a larger cut. He then laid down the knife and took hold of the edge with his four paws and tore a big opening in his abdomen, whereupon the entrails dropped out. He moaned very much when he opened his abdomen, saving "Ana-na-na-na-na-na-." He then took hold of one of the larger intestines and thereupon fell over and died.

When the Badger came over he looked in and said, "Friend (Kwach)," but receiving no answer he entered. He found that his friend was dead. He said: "Of course, you died here, being deceived that way. Of course, I did not really open my abdomen. You have been deceived." Hereupon he took the fat from the Coyote, and returned to his house. Close to his house was an ant hill. He spread this fat over the ant hill, whereupon the ants moved away, and that is the reason why the ants do not remain when coyote fat is placed where they are, and that is also the reason why coyote fat is used for ant bites.

Footnotes

^207:1 Told by Lomanomtiwa (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 210]

  

77. THE COYOTE AND THE KOKONTU MAIDENS. [*1]

Haliksai! At Munaovi the Kokontu [*2] (Sing. Kona) were living. But they were all maidens and were constantly grinding corn. There was a long row of them, and they were singing as they ground the corn. One time the Coyote came around and was going up and down there. "There," he said, "there is somebody here singing." So he went up and saw a number of maidens grinding corn. When he came to the house he looked through the window where they were grinding corn. They sang the following song:

Talaw no'nonga, Early we go out,
 Nononga, ma! We go out, see!

(Referring to the custom of going out early in the. morning [kuivato] and sprinkling meal towards the east.)

The Coyote listened to them and looked at them. By this time the Kokontu noticed the Coyote. "Come in," they said to him "How shall I get in, you have such a small house," he said. "All right, you talk to us from outside," they said. And then they said to one another: "Let us go out and do something." So they came out and went to a steep bluff south of where they lived, where there was a large pinon-tree growing at the edge of the bluff. The Coyote went with them and here they now played, running up the tree on one side and jumping down the tree and from the bluff on some sand that had piled up at the foot of the bluff. As they could run up steep bluffs they would repeat this constantly, Jumping down, coming up again, jumping down, coming up again, and so on. The Coyote looked on and envied them because they could do this. "You are enjoying yourselves," the Coyote said to them, "I shall join you." "All right," they replied, "you come and play with us." "But when I shall jump down there I shall hurt myself," he said. "No," they replied, "that will not hurt you at all. "

Hereupon he joined them, ran and played with them, and finally climbed up the tree, too. When he saw the Kokontu constantly jump down he also jumped down, but before he had reached the bottom he was circling around in the air and landed forcibly on the ground, and of course was killed. The Kokontu laughed at him, saying: "You fool, that you did as we did. We are not heavy, and nothing happened to us, but you are too heavy for that." So when they had laughed at him they went home again, leaving him there dead.

Footnotes

^210:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

^210:2 Small brownish animal with a short tail, and having white stripes running over its snout and head and along the back, living in rocks.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 211]

  

78. THE COYOTE AND THE GRASSHOPPERS. [*1]

Aliksai! The people were living in Shongopavi. North of the village (about three miles), was a bluff in which a Sparrow-hawk had his house (nest). A short distance (about half a mile), north of Shongopavi was a sand hill in which lived many Grasshoppers. These the Sparrow-hawk relished very much and was constantly watching them. When he would see the little Grasshoppers jumping about, he would swoop down on them and carry them to his children, who would quickly devour them. There were ten Grasshopper children, all of whom the Sparrow-hawk killed, one after another. When they were all gone their parents mourned over the loss of their children.

At this juncture a Coyote came along, saying to the Grasshopper mother: "You are singing nicely. Sing to me, too." "No," she insisted, "I am not singing, I am crying. This Sparrow-hawk killed all my children and I am crying." But the Coyote would not listen, and said: "If you do not sing to me I will devour you." Hereupon the Grasshopper mother repeated her song:

Wala, wala, chochon nacomta,
 Tumaci kele nanakavoo
 Itimuy uuyinglawu
 Uy, uy, h- h- h- (with a rising inflection to represent sobbing).

The Coyote at once ran away singing the song of the Grasshopper. Arriving at a rock he stumbled over it and fell down, losing by that the song. He tried to sing it again but was just able to say the first syllable, Wa, Wa. So he returned to the place where he had left the Grasshopper woman, the latter, however, had also left the place immediately after the departure of the Coyote, leaving in her place a stone that resembled the form of the Grasshopper. Arriving at this stone the Coyote said, "I have forgotten my song, sing it to me again," but received no reply. "If you do not sing I shall devour you," he said, ''but still receiving no reply he grabbed the stone and broke his teeth. The blood was running from his mouth. In this condition he ran about to hunt food, but even when he found some he could not eat it as he had no teeth, and so finally he perished with hunger.

Footnotes

^211:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

  

79. THE COYOTE AND THE GRASSHOPPER. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi the people were living. At Grasshopper Bluff (To'tolchomo), the Grasshopper Old Man (To'tol Wuhtaka) and his wife were living. They had children. At Ishmovala lived the Coyote. It was planting time. The Grasshopper had a big field east of where he lived. The two were great friends. When it was planting time the Grasshopper also wanted to plant but he said to his wife that he was not going to plant alone, others were going to help him, so she should put up a good deal of food. She prepared some muhpiki, [*2] some qo'ma, [*3] and filled a jug with water. All this her husband took on his back, took some seeds, and went to his field. Here he seated himself in the kisi [*4] that he had built in his field and waited, but nobody came. It was nearly noon and still nobody came. So he ate his food all alone. When he had eaten he took the seed, went into the field and planted all alone. In the afternoon it became very hot and he was thirsty, so he returned to the kisi, drank some water and lay down to rest, leaning his feet against the side of the booth.

While he was lying there in that manner he heard somebody come. It was his friend the Coyote. "Well now," the latter said, "why is my friend lying down that way?" "Yes," the Grasshopper replied, "I am lying here because I am tired. I am afraid this kisi will fall down on me, and how shall I run away?" "Now, let me lie down, too," the Coyote said, so he lay down beside his friend, also leaning his hind feet against the booth. The Grasshopper jumped up then, said that his water in the jug was about gone and he would get me more water. Picking up the jug he went to his house where he found his children. As he was planning some mischief against his friend, he told his children to go before him to their uncle, the Deer, who lived at Cotton Field Mount (Pichinvaschomo).

The Coyote was, during this time, lying in the kisi with his hind legs against the timbers of the booth. He waited and waited, and finally became tired. "I guess my friend is not coming," he said, "I guess he lied and it is not true that this kisi will fall down on me. I shall at least try to let. go with my feet and quickly jump out." So he did so, and while the booth was shaking it did not fall. "There," he said, "he just lied to me. I shall go and eat up his children." So

[p. 213]

he went to the house of his friend and found the door closed with a grass mat. This he removed and went in, but found no one in the house. "Aha," he said, "they have run away from me," and coming out of the house he found their tracks leading north-eastward.

He followed the tracks and came to the house of the Deer. "Has the Grasshopper come herewith his family?" he asked. "Yes,'' the Deer replied, "they have come here." "You get them out here," the Coyote said. "No, you come in yourself, the Deer replied. "No, no, bring them out," the Coyote insisted, "I want to devour them." "No, no, you come in yourself," the Deer once more said. So the Coyote went down the ladder two rongs and then jumped out again. "Oh," he exclaimed. "Do not be afraid," the Deer said, "we are not going to hurt you." So he again went down two rongs. but jumped out again, being afraid. "You just go in," the Deer said, "we shall not hurt you." "No, you bring them out here," the Coyote once more requested. But finally he concluded to go down. He stopped at the elevated portion of the kiva, and saw two strong Deer standing one on each side of the fireplace. In another part of the kiva he saw the wife of the Grasshopper and her children. "You hand those to me here," he said to the Deer. "No, you come down yourself, and get them," they replied. So he stepped down into the deeper portion of the kiva, but at once one of the Deer picked him up with the horns and threw him upward towards the hatchway. As soon as he fell down the other Deer picked him up and threw him upwards, and so they kept it up until he was dead, whereupon they threw him out.

Hereupon the Deer said to the Grasshoppers: "Now, you go out wherever you think, nobody will hurt you now." When they had left the kiva their mother said to them: "Now, every one of you go where he wants to go," so they immediately scattered, flying in all directions, and that is the reason why the grasshoppers are now found everywhere. If they had not scattered out at that time they would be just living at one place now.

Footnotes

^212:1 Told by Macahongva (Oraibi).

^212:2 Rolls of thin wafer bread (piki).

^212:3 Meal of sweet corn.

^212:4 Shade, shadow, umbrella, etc., in this case a booth or temporary shelter in the field, built of branches and brush.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

80. THE THREE MAIDENS AND THE COYOTE. [*1]

Haliksai! In Oraibi the people were living. Over there at Howakapchomo somebody, some maidens had a crop. They had a father and a mother; three maidens there were. They were living at Pik'atsva. [*2] From there they went to watch their crop; and now at

[p. 214]

Ishmovala lived the Coyote. He had eaten watermelons, but he was longing for those maidens. Them he wanted. The Coyote had a grandmother and to her he said: "My grandmother!" "Ha!" she said. "Shall I not start south for those maidens?" "O my!" she said, "they certainly will not want you, but if you want to go to them, you go to the village and there somewhere you enter through a window opening, and if there is a bow hanging anywhere, take it; also if there is an arrow quiver, take that, too; also red yarn, and if you find some blue yarn take that, too; also if you find some leggings, take them; and then a blue shirt; and if you go somewhere in the rear of the village and find some red stone ochre, take it. That much you come and bring." Thus she said to him.

Now the Coyote started for the village and arrived there, and sure enough, he found a broken bow somewhere and took it. Also an arrow quiver he found, which he also took; and a shirt, and leggings; some blue yarn, and stone ochre. That much he brought along. Now he went to his grandmother. The grandmother dressed him up in it. He put on the shirt and the leggings, had his hair tied up, put the quiver with arrows behind his loin string. Now the ochre he put on his face like the Hoha' Katcina, and thus he went to the maidens. But the father of the maidens had put up a stone trap east of the Coyote's house, and now the Coyote went to the maidens, but he arrived at that trap, and there at the balance some rabbit meat was tied. When he arrived there he pressed towards it (the meat), but he was fooled. He went into the trap and took hold of the meat with his teeth and pulled at it, and of course, the trap shut and thus he died there.

When it was evening those maidens going home went to the trap of their father and arrived there, and there that (Coyote) was caught and they laughed at him when they saw that some one with an arrow quiver was sticking out there. When they had seen him they went home and when they arrived there they slept during the night, but in the evening they said to their father: "Our father," one said "Hay!" he said. "In your trap there something has been caught." "Very well," he said, "to-morrow I shall also go there." When it had become morning the father went there and arrived at his trap, and sure enough he (Coyote) was caught. He pulled him out and carried him to his field. When he arrived there he skinned him and hung up his skin as a watching flag. And after that it was hanging there as a flag.

Footnotes

^213:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^213:2 A place in the north-west corner of the village.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 215]

  

81. HOW THE COYOTES HAD A KATCINA DANCE. [*1]

At Squash Seed Point (Batangvoc Toika), lived the Ha'aa Katcina. North of there lived the Hototo Katcina. At Putatokaovi lived the Soho'ncomtaka Katcina, north of the village lived the Red Eagle (Palakway) Katcina, and at Katcinvala lived many Katcinas. At Ishmovala lived the Coyote and his wife. The Coyote used to see the Katcinas come and have their dances and processions, and one time said to his wife: "We are going to do that, too. People like to see this."

In the morning the Coyote went out, and standing on the roof of his kiva he called out to his friends, the Coyotes, that they should assemble in his kiva. Soon they came from come from all sides, many of them. When they had all assembled he said to them: "I want to 'overtake' something, too, like these Katcinas do. To-morrow we shall have a Katcina dance. so you go to the village, and if you find something in the rear of the village such as feathers, pieces of skin, etc., bring it here." They all declared themselves willing. The Coyotes thus went out and went around the village hunting for pieces of skin, feathers, pieces of gourds, especially the necks of long necked gourds, and brought all these things to the Coyote's kiva. Here they sewed up kilts, made bunches of feathers for head-dresses, etc., thus working all day. Each one prepared a costume of a Katcina that he had seen. During the night they slept there.

In the morning one of the Coyotes went to the place where the Ha'aa Katcina always dresses up; two others to the place where the Hototo dresses up: one to the place of the Soho'ncomtaka; one dressed up like the Palakwayo at the place where that Katcina lives; and a number of others went to Katcinvala. When all were ready the Ha'aa shouted four times and then went northward where he was joined by the two Hototos, then by the next ones, and these by the Palakway, and finally by the Katcinas at Katcinvala. They all then went to the Coyote's house at Ishmovala. The Coyote and his wife, who lived here had not gone along but had remained with their children. Here the Katcinas now had a dance.

The Oraibi happened to have a Coyote hunt on this day. Some of them went southward, others northward, from the village, forming a large circle, and then proceeding towards the village. But they found no Coyotes because the latter were all assembled at Ishmovala. While they were still dancing, the Oraibi came upon them and at

[p. 216]

once closed in upon them. When the Coyotes saw that they were surrounded they began to run, trying to escape, but as they had masks on they could not see so well, and many of them were killed at once; others threw down their masks, but as they had their Costumes on they could not run fast and so were also killed. Only the family that lived at Ishmovala, and who had not put on costumes or masks, escaped. When the Hopi had killed all the Coyotes they laughed at them and went to the village, being happy over their successful hunt.

Footnotes

^215:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

82. THE COYOTE AND HIS PREY. 

Aliksai! At Hohoyapi the people were living. The Coyote had children somewhere. So he was hunting some food for them and had killed a rabbit and he did not want to eat it alone, so he mounted a bluff and called it out in the way Coyotes bark. So from the north tame a yellow Coyote, from the west a blue one, from the south a red one, from the east a white, from the north east a black, and from the south east a gray one. "This here I killed," he said to, them, "and because I do not want to eat it alone I have called you. We shall eat it together." So they tore it to pieces and devoured it there very quickly, and that is the reason why a coyote never eats any prey that he has found alone, but always calls out when he has found something.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

83. THE BULL-SNAKE AND THE TU'CHVO [*2] (WREN).

A long time ago some Oraibi children were hunting some Tu'chvos. They found a nest high up on a bluff, somewhere east of the village, but as they could not get to it they returned to the village. By and by a Bull-snake (Lolookongwuu), being in search of food had also discovered the nest of the Tu'chvo. While coiled up at the foot of the bluff. the Snake was discovered by the Bird. The latter, feeling secure at its high place, began to joke the Snake, singing as follows:

Lolookongwuu, lolookongwuu!
 Bull-snake, Bull-snake!
 Tcongmomoki, tcongmomoki
 Dying of hunger, dying of hunger,
 Suun pi pak wuptipkaa,
 Never you'll ascend here to my nest.

and then rushed back into its little hole. The Snake at once became angry and said: "I am going to get up to you there. You are talking

[p. 217]

to me that way now, but I am going to devour you." Whereupon he commenced to hunt a place of ascent. Finally having found a place, tried to climb up, but soon got tired and fell back. The little Bird seeing it, triumphantly sang:

Suun pi pak wuptipakaa.
 Never you'll ascend here to my nest.

This made the Snake still more angry and it tried to get up to the nest again and succeeded in climbing up higher than before, but fell back again. The little Bird again sang its little song of triumph. Thus the Serpent made three unsuccessful efforts, but the fourth time it succeeded in reaching the mouth of the opening in which the little bird's nest was, and hooking its mouth over the rim, looked into the hole and saw four young birds in the nest. He said to the Bird: "Now, don't you run away, I am going to devour you," and then entered the hole. The bird escaped, leaving its little ones in the nest. The Snake coiled up in the nest and devoured the four little birds, whereupon it remained in the nest four days. On the fourth day it left the place but crawled up on the bluff where it coiled up. The old Bird kept flying and running about in the neighborhood of the Snake, bewailing the loss of its brood. The Snake then began to exert its charm on the poor Bird, trying to cause it to come nearer. This the Snake did by strong inhalations, and whenever the reptile inhaled the bird would be drawn towards the snake, when it exhaled the bird would try to escape, but would be drawn closer towards the Snake's mouth at the next inhalation.  This game the Snake carried on with its poor victim for quite a while, the poor Bird being entirely under the charm of the reptile. Finally it was drawn by a last strong inhalation on the part of the Snake close to the latter's mouth and then the Snake devoured its victim.

Footnotes

^216:1 Told by Tawiima (Mishongovi).

^216:2 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

84. THE SNAKES AND THE LOCUSTS. [*2]

Aliksai! At Hoyapi the people were living. There they were living. At a little distance to the north of this place is a small bluff,

[p. 218]

and close to the bluff is a place called Tcuakpi. Here the Rattlesnakes were living and had a kiva. During the summer they would run about as rattlesnakes, but in the winter they were in their kivas and were Hopi, their snake skins hanging on pegs on the wall all around the kiva.

One winter it was snowing very heavily, there being about four or five feet of snow on the ground. About midway between Tcuakpi and Shongopavi is Tu'vanashavi where there is a deep opening in the earth. Here the Locusts (Mamahtu, Sing, Mahu) were living. There are two kinds of Locusts one Dumamahu (white earth or kaolin Mahu), the other kind 'being simply called Mahu. Both kinds, however, lived together there. Around the house of the Locust there was no snow, but every-where else there was very deep snow, such as the Hopi had never seen before. As it remained on the ground a long time many of the Hopi froze to death. So the Snake chief thought over the matter and spoke to his people. "Ishiohi!" he said, "this cannot he this way. We are tired and exhausted and our children are dying. It cannot remain this way. Some one go over to our fathers at Tu'vanashavi and see what they have to say about this. It shall not be this way." So he called upon the Sand Rattlesnake (Tuwa-tcua) and said, "You are strong, you go over there." So the Sand Rattlesnake entered the snow and tried to make its way through the snow, but he had not yet reached the place when he became cold and tired and returned.

Hereupon the Bull-snake (Lolo'okong ) was called on. "You are brave," the chief said, "you try it." So the Bull-snake put on his snake costume and made his way through the snow, but he had not nearly reached the place yet when he became very tired and began to shiver with cold; so he returned also. The chief then called upon the Racer (Taho), saying, ''You are not very heavy, you are swift, so you try it. Where there is a bare place, not covered with snow, you rest awhile, and then maybe you can get there." So the Racer put on his snake costume and started. He also made his way through the snow, and whenever he would be cold he would shoot upward to the top and if he saw any wood or trees or grass protruding from the snow he would go there and warm himself in the sunshine. Thus he finally reached the place where he was going and found that for quite a distance around Tu'vanashavi there was no-snow. It was warm there, so that even grass and many flowers grew. Here he could run swiftly and finally came upon the kiva in which the Locusts lived.

The ladder was protruding from the kiva. The Racer at once descended the ladder and entered the kiva. "Sit down, sit down,"

[p. 219]

the Locusts said, showing themselves very kind. They fed the Racer on peaches and watermelon and piki, made of fresh roasting ears. The Locusts sometimes play flutes in a ceremony and that was the reason why it was so nice and warm there. So, while the rest of the people were freezing to death, the Locusts had the finest things to eat. "Now then," the Locust chief said, "you certainly have come here for some reason." "Yes," he said, "yes." "It has snowed very heavily and we are wood-poor, and our children are dying on account of the cold, and we have tried to reach you and they finally sent me to see whether I could not reach you, and now I have got here. You have pity on us and come and assemble with us, but come quickly." So they at once began to prepare to dress and paint up and told the Racer that in four days they would come over and assemble with them. One of the Locusts took a flute, went out of the kiva and blew the flute along the tracks of the Racer, towards the Snake house. Returning to the kiva the Locust said, to the Racer: "Now you can go home and you will not be troubled by the snow. You will find a nice road and you need not be afraid." So the Racer left the kiva and found a nice path back to the Snake house. He now did not get cold, and arrived there in a short time.

When he had entered the kiva, they asked the Racer: "Did you get there?" "Yes," the Racer replied, "I got there and they told me that in four days they would be with us. We should then wait for them." "Thanks, thanks, we are happy." And now they waited for the Locusts. On the fourth day in the evening they came. "Come in, come in," said the Snakes, who, however, had now the form of Hopi, the Locusts having the same form. One after another the Locusts came in with a chirping noise. They were dressed in costumes made of rabbit skin blankets, still used by the Hopi, which were very woolly and warm, and as one after the other of the Locusts entered the kiva it became warmer and warmer in the kiva. The Snake people finally began to perspire because it had become hot in the kiva.

Immediately upon leaving their own kiva the Locusts had begun to chirp through their flutes, and immediately the snow had begun to melt and to disappear. By the time they had reached the Snake kiva it had all disappeared. As soon as they had entered the kiva they lined up and sang the following song, dancing while they were singing and shaking small rattles:

[p. 220]

DOWNWARD.

Haaaaaaaow Inamu, Haaaaaaaow Ingumu!
 Hao, my fathers, hao my mothers!
 Macilanang, Cakwalanang
 Drab Flutes, Blue Flutes.
 Inamu, conwak katcita
 My fathers, beautiful living
 Talaowyahainani itamuhuhui
 (In) summer will begin for us.
 Aaaaahaay aahaahaay aaahahahay.
 Talaow ciwawayina, taalaow ciwaywaytimanii.
 (In) summer blossoms wave, (in) summer blossoms will sway.
 Aaaahaayahay ahaayaaahaaayaay aaahayaaha aaaha.
 Iyihiyihiyihiyi iyihiyihiyihiyi.

UPWARD.

Hapi ma kwangwa-mahu, duma-mahu tiyotu
 New then (the) good locust, (the) white earth locust youths.
 Conwak katcita talaowyahinani itamuhuhui.
 Beautiful living (in) summer for us (they) will begin.
 Aaaaahaayaay ahaay aahaayaay
 Taalaow shiwawayina, taalaow shiwawaytimanii.
 (In) summer blossoms wave, in summer blossoms will sway.
 Aaaaahaayaaay ahaay aaahaaayaay aaaahay aaaha.
 Iyihiyihiyihiyi iyihiyihiyihiyi.

When they were through with their dancing, they immediately left the kiva, the Snakes thanking them profusely. During the same night they went back to their home. It was very hot in the Snake house, so that the people were bathed in perspiration and they slept well that night. In the morning, when the sun rose, they went out and there was no snow, but the ground was covered with water from the melting snow. After that they were not cold any more. They sat in the sunshine and enjoyed seeing the grass coming up. The Locusts bring warm weather, that is the reason why the priests often, when they make bahos in winter, throw pieces of a locust on the fireplace and burn it because the smoke and odor bring warm weather.

Footnotes

^217:1 The Hopi claim that they have repeatedly observed the exerting of such a charm over mice, little rabbits' etc., on the part of bull-snakes. One told me that he had watched a snake charm a large mouse for quite a while. The snake when inhaling and exhaling produced a loud whizzing sound. The mouse would be drawn towards the snake, apparently against its will, and being in great terror when the snake inhaled, but would run to a rock while it was exhaling. When finally the snake had drawn its victim close to itself, it wound itself around the mouse in such a manner that nothing could be seen of the latter.

Others have watched the same procedure between a snake and a rabbit. The Hopi say that sometimes they take pity on the victim, and with a stick or some other object cut through the line of the charm upon which the victim is at once set free and escapes.

^217:2 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

  

85. THE SQUIRREL AND THE CHIPMUNK. [*1]

A long time ago the Squirrel and the Chipmunk lived near the Nose Gulch (Pongoyakvoco), the Squirrel living on the north side and the Chipmunk on the south side. The two were good friends and often visited each other. Near by were some peach orchards, where a certain old man owned a number of trees, There the two would go every day and eat peaches. The Chipmunk relished the peaches, while the Squirrel preferred the kernels from the stone. The Chipmunk would climb the trees, break open the peaches, and eating the flesh of the peaches, throw down the seeds to the Squirrel; or the Chipmunk would also throw down peaches, which the Squirrel would put in its mouth and carry to a certain place on the rock, where the two afterwards would feast on them.

They were careful that the owner of the peach orchard would not find them there, because they knew that the latter made very desperate efforts, to capture and kill them. One time the Squirrel said to the Chipmunk: "We ought to have a little dance some time. When you go ho-.me you try to make a song and then come and sing it to me. and then when we go to eat peaches again we shall have a little dance there and sing the little song." So the Chipmunk went home and thought over the matter and tried very hard to compose a song. Finally he concluded to make a song about his friend, the Squirrel, and when he was done he went over and sang it to the Squirrel. The latter at first was not very much pleased and said: "Why you have song-tied me, you have made a song about me." "Yes," the Chipmunk said, "I did not know what to sing, and as we always go and eat peaches together and have such a good time there and then lie down on the rock together, I thought I would compose a song about that." This satisfied the Squirrel. They then practiced the song together, which was as follows:

Lakana, lakana!
 Squirrel, squirrel!
 Oyu nalaa,
 Satisfied alone.
 Oatu owaka
 (The) rock on top
 Pushickatcii--
 Lying stretched out;
 Hinahina, hinahina.

[p. 222]

You have spoken correctly, the Squirrel said, "we are living in plenty.'' Hereupon they went to the peach orchard again to eat peaches but found the old man in the orchard, so they waited a little while until he had done his work and had gone to sleep under one of the trees. They then carried a great many peaches as usual, to the place on the rock where they generally feasted, and after they had filled themselves they had a little dance, singing their song. They stood on their hind legs holding their front paws upward. The old man awoke from the noise of the singing, and when he saw, them he at once knew that they were the culprits who destroyed and carried away his peaches, so he ran towards them, saying: "Aha, why are you making noise? I have found you. You are naughty, and I am going to kill you," and saying this he tried to climb the rock upon which they were. They jumped down, however, and both rushed into the house of the Squirrel at the foot of the rock. The old man followed them and when he saw where they had gone, he waited. The two were very happy and laughed at their pursuer. The Chipmunk looked up and said: ''Aha, there he is watching us. I am going to get out, pass him, and run to my house. He cannot catch me." "All right," the Squirrel said, "try it." So the Chipmunk, rushed out. The man ran after it furiously, trying to kill it, and had almost overtaken it when the Chipmunk had reached its house and rushed into it,

After that the two did not fear the old man and continued to live off his peach orchard, being careful, however, that he did not catch them. And so ever since the Squirrel and Chipmunk are not very much afraid of the Hopi and destroy and eat their peaches, Had the old man at that time killed the two, such would not be the case now.

Footnotes

^221:1 Told by Qowawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

86. A BET BETWEEN THE COOYOKO AND THE FOX. [*1]

Aliksai! In Shupaulavi, north of the village, is a bluff where there is a place called Cooyoko House (Cooyok-ki). Here the Cooyoko lived. One time a Fox, who was very handsome, came along, and the Cooyoko Uncle (Tahaam) was sitting on the edge of the bluff when the Fox came along. The sun had not yet risen, and the Cooyoko was sitting and waiting to watch the sunrise. "Come here," he said to the Fox, "come to me here." "All right," the Fox said. and came. "Sit down, sit down with me," the Cooyoko said, which the Fox did. ''Now," the Cooyoko continued, "let us have a contest and see upon whose song the sun will rise. The one that loses shall

[p. 223]

be killed with this knife here," which the Cooyoko had, the Fox said. "Yes," the Cooyoko said, "let us have a contest." "All right," the Fox said, "be it so. You sing first." So the Cooyoko sang the following little song:

To -- ishkakolitai to -- ishkakolitai
 Aaaha, iiihi-- 

and then said to the Fox: "Now, you sing, too," whereupon the Fox sang the following song:

Ishka! Ishka!

Hereupon the Cooyoko repeated his song. The sun by this time was just about to loom up. "Now you sing again," he said to the Fox, whereupon the latter repeated his song, and when he was singing, the sun loomed upon the horizon. So he had won the contest. "Alas!" the Cooyoko said, "well now, I have wanted it this way and you have beaten me. Be it so then." The knife was lying by their side, so the Fox took it, approached the Cooyoko, and cut the latter's throat. And so the latter died over a bet.

Footnotes

^222:1 Told by Sik'aletsiwa (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

87. THE LITTLE GRAY MICE AND THE LITTLE BROWN MICE. [*2]

A long time ago the Little Gray Mice (Povo'yamu) lived at Tumble Down Bluff (Tukwishahpukpu), south-east of the village, and the Little Brown Mice (Pavavumshamu) lived at Chirove, west of the village, far down the mesa. The two kinds of mice were on friendly terms at that time. During the night they would come to the village and whenever one would find hidden away in jars or packed away in the rooms, corn, etc., it would invite the others and then they would come and carry away the food to their holes. This they did a long time. The two kinds of mice would often visit each other and dance together. They would usually sing the following song, both parties it seems generally using the same words:

Talawyayna talawyaynaaa
 It begins to dawn, it begins to dawn.
 Ahaha, ihihi. Talawyayna, talawyaynana,
 Yaoohoo, oohia, ahaha ihihi.

One time one of the Gray Mice had found something very good to eat, perhaps peaches, and ran over to the Brown Mice, saving: ''I have found some good food and I have already made a hole in the cover so that we can get at it." Hereupon they all came from both

[p. 224]

places, but when they were carrying their food away to their houses they commenced to quarrel over it and had a great fight. Many were bitten, although none were killed. After a few days the Gray Mice went over to the Brown Mice again, entered their kiva and danced. They changed their song somewhat, however, singing as follows:

Talawyayna, talawyayna.
 It begins to dawn, it begins to dawn.
 Ahaha ihihi,
 Talawyayna, talawyayna, ahaha, ihihi,
 Yaoohoo oohio,
 Pas nu pawupshat wupashurut
 Very I (of) big mice, long tails
 Mamkashi, (afraid), Pi nuu, pi nuu! O! I! O! I!
 Yaoohoo oohia
 Pas nu yan toonumkat mamkashi
 Very I thus whistlers afraid (of)
 Pi! nuu! pi, nuu! Pu yaami! Pu yaami.
 O! I! O! I! Now off! now off!

When they were through singing they rushed out of the kiva back to their home. The Brown Mice laughed at them, saying: "Aha, they are afraid of us." The two kinds of mice have never been on good terms since, and from that time they began to scatter out through the fields and through the houses, and that is the reason why they now may be found everywhere.

Footnotes

^223:1 The words in both of the songs are obsolete and no longer understood.

^223:2 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

88. THE BADGER AND THE SMALL GRAY MICE. [*1]

A long time ago a Badger lived north of the village of Oraibi. He was a doctor and the people used to go to him seeking aid and cure for their various ailments. The place where he lived was called Badger Burrow (Honan Yaha); the Small Gray Mice (Tucanhomihtci) or rather many of them, lived west of Oraibi at a place called Big Hill (Wopachmo).

One time the Hopi were on a hunt west of this place, where those Mice lived, and as ill luck would have it, one of the hunters hit another one with his boomerang and broke his leg. Nobody seemed to take interest enough in the unfortunate man to care for him, so he tried to get home the best he could. Seeing a light at the aforesaid Big Hill, he made for that place and found an underground room similar to the Hopi kivas. In it he observed a number of small people like

[p. 225]

children. They at once noticed him, saying: "Somebody is looking in here," and invited him to come down. "How can I come in?" he said. "What is the matter with you?" they asked, to which he replied: "My thigh bone is broken." So one of the small men went up the ladder and carried the lame man down, placing him on the floor north of the fireplace. Two rabbits, which the man had killed and brought with him from the hunt, he left outside. The people pitied the poor man and said: "So this has happened to you." "Yes," he answered, "could not one of you hunt me up a doctor?" Whereupon one of the small men whispered to another one: "Let's repair the leg for him." "All right," he answered, who was a chief. Hereupon a door was opened on the north side of the kiva which led into another room, and all the small people, who seemed to be children, were sent into that small room. One of the men, who took care of the fire at the fireplace, remained with the sick man. The one who remained, presently called out: "Now come in here," whereupon a very great number of the Mice entered the room, crowded around the patient, covering him completely, and commencing to rub him all over the body and otherwise worked on and about him, and in that way plied their art as doctors upon the patient that had so unexpectedly dropped in upon them. All at once they all ran away, entered another room again, and the man found that his leg had been made well. He was very happy and leaving the two rabbits as a remuneration, he went home to the village. The people knowing that his leg had been broken the previous day, were surprised to see him well and inquired who had cured him. He told them.

The Badger, who lived north of the village, heard about it and became very jealous and angry about the matter. The man whose leg had been healed by the Mice said to the people, that the "Old Man Badger" was somewhat behind. It had been those Mice who had cured him and what was more, they had not asked for any pay, whereas, the Old Man Badger always asked something for his services, meat, cactus bulbs, etc., and he advised people who ever had any ailments, to go to these Mice physicians that lived west of the village, and had cured him. The Old Man Badger did a great deal of thinking over the matter and was angry. Finally he concluded that he was going to test the knowledge of the Mice doctors. "I am going to feign sickness and shall call them over, and if they can tell me my ailment, I shall believe in them." So he feigned sickness; placed some pelts and blankets on the floor and a bowl by his side, and laid down. In order to make it appear that he was very sick he took a little nourishment in the morning only and kept

[p. 226]

expectorating into the bowl. This he did for three days, at the end of which he looked very tired and exhausted. So he called some one who was passing by and said to him: "You go over there to those Mice doctors and fetch them here, because I am very sick." So this man went over and told them that that poor Old Man Badger was very sick and seemed to be dying, and that they should have pity on him and come over there the next day. Having delivered this message to them, he returned to his home. They were willing, and their chief taking the lead, they went to the mesa, passed by the village on the north side, along the edge of the mesa, to the dwelling of the Badger. This dwelling consisted of a kiva like the Hopi kivas of to-day. The Badger was still angry and had hidden a stick under his bed. The mice, however, had brought no medicines with them. Arriving at the kiva, the chief went down the ladder first, passing by the east side of the fireplace to the bed of the patient. He was followed by his companions, of whom there were many, who also crowded around the bed of the sick doctor. The latter was groaning very much, acting as if he was about to die. The chief of the Mice doctors then began to sing the following song in which he was accompanied by all the others:

Cowiskwi naiukwiwiwaa!
 Rabbit meat cook for us!

To which the Badger replied in a faint voice:

Ham pai pi pam himuu shulawu.
 Oh why this something all gone.

The Mice kept slowly moving on in a circle and soon commenced to sing

Aahai! aahai! Ayam hapiii,
 Honanyahay epee
 At the Badger burrow over there.
 Honanwuhatka
 The Badger Old Man
 Tucun Homihtcit
 The Tucan Homcihtci
 Aotuhik unangwyat
 A doctor to be believed
 Aonawotcniekae
 Because he heard
 Naloshwat aknachangkwainitaa Hahahaha
 Four times he fasted
 Hainawa Hainawa (No meaning.)
 Hainawa Hainawa

[p. 227]

Free rendering:

At the Badger burrow the Badger
 Old man heard that the Tusan
 Homihtsi believed himself to be a
 Doctor and hence fasted four days.

The Mouse doctor sang this in order to let the Badger know that he had at once detected the fraud. Being through with the singing, he told the Badger that nothing was the matter with him; as soon as he would eat something he would get well.

While they were singing they had kept slowly going around the bed of the sick doctor and when they were through with their singing they had reached the ladder. The leader, after having given the Badger his opinion as mentioned above, at once ascended the ladder, being followed by all the others. The Badger was very angry by this time, and grabbing the stick which he had hidden under his bed, he began to strike at some of the Mice, but as he had fasted so long, and the Mice jumped around In the kiva and up the ladder very fast, he failed to hit any of them. he tried to follow them, but failed to catch and kill any of them for the same reason. But some of the younger Mice could not keep up with the older ones while they were running to their home, being chased by the Badger, so they scattered out, and not being able to find their way home, they dug holes for themselves, and that is the reason why these mice, "Homihtsi," are now living all over the country. The Badger is the cause of this scattering of these Mice.

But these new settlers had nothing to eat, so they went to hunt food, and wherever they came upon some seed or plant they would appropriate them, and to this day, wherever the Hopi plant something, these Mice will come and eat it. If that Old Man Badger had not scattered them at that time they would not be all over the country now, but would still be living at the one place west of the village, where they had their home at that time. But, on the other hand, if any Hopi works in his field or travels anywhere, or is away from his village for any purpose, and if he becomes sick, or gets hurt, these Mice in all unseen secret way take care of him so that he does not die; but they do not come to the village to take care of any sick.

Footnotes

^224:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 228]

  

89. THE BADGER AND THE SMALL GRAY MICE. [*1]

Long ago the Badger and the Small Gray Mice (Tucan homihtci) were Hopi, but they were very bad and hence became these two animals. They were both doctors. The Badger doctor cured people mostly by herbs, of which he made decoctions and lotions, etc. The Mice effected their cures by singing, rattling, rubbing, and by kneading the bodies, scraping the skins, and by other means of sorcery. These two were rivals, and the Badger doubted whether his rival, the Mouse, really knew anything about diseases and medicine, so he decided to try him. One time he fasted for four days and four nights, and when he had become very weak he sent for his rival, the Mouse. The latter brought with him a rattle, a buckskin, in which he had some medicines wrapped up, and also a small medicine bowl. In the latter he made a mixture containing different medicines. This he placed beside the couch where the Old Man Badger was lying and then sang the following song, accompanying it with his rattle:

Hininiya, hininiya!
 Uma wurz, Tusan-Homihtci,
 You, of course, a small gray mouse,
 Honan Wunhtakat
 Badger Old Man,
 Tucan-Homihtci tuhikunagwyat
 The Tucan Mouse a medicine man heart
 Aaahiin nawotniqo.
 (That) something (in order) to find out,
 Naloshtalat aonachoongkwainiita.
 Four days (you) fasted.
 Aayoooo, ayoayo.
 Aayoooo, ayoayo, ayoayo.

After he was through singing he told his rival, the Old Man Badger, that he should eat well and then he would get well, and then laughingly left. The Old Man Badger was astonished and said to himself: "I did not know that he could look inside of me. He is certainly a great doctor." Hereupon he ordered something to eat and got well.

Footnotes

^228:1 Told by Lomavantiwa (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 229]

  

90. THE MICE, THE OWL, AND THE HAWK. [*1]

A long time ago a little Mouse (Homihtci) lived south of the village of Oraibi at Scent Hill (Hovakapchomo), because a certain herb called hovakpi [*2]--that which has an odor--was growing there in great abundance. Near by, on top of the rocks south of Oraibi, lived a big Owl that seemed to be determined to kill the little Mouse. The Owl would frequently be flying around the hole of the Mouse, sometimes when the latter was outside darting towards it, so that the Mouse often had a narrow escape from death. The latter made various plans to protect itself. Finally it went to get a. number of sticks from a weed called Tave. [*3] These the Mouse pointed at the end and placed in the ground all around the hole, so that the points were protruding from the earth. One night the Owl again swiftly flew down towards the hole trying to catch the little Mouse, which was running about between the stakes. One of the sticks pierced the Owl's breast and killed it. The Mouse at once went to work and pulled out all the Owl's feathers and carried them into its hole, tying some of them into little bunches. "But what shall I do with all these feathers?" it asked itself. "I am going to get my neighbors together and arrange a dance."

So after dark the Mouse went out and called out: "You, my neighbors who live here, come here to my house quickly." So a great many Mice at once assembled in the house of the one who had invited them and asked: "Why do you want us here?" "Yes," the Mouse answered, "I have killed this Owl here and do not know what to do with all the feathers, so I thought we would have a dance and dress up in these feathers, and that is the reason why I called you in." Hereupon it distributed all the feathers and all made little bunches of them and tied them on their heads. They concluded that early in the morning they would have a dance, and one they requested to make a song (ya'waata). The following song was soon prepared, and then all practiced it so that they might be acquainted with it in the dance:

Tuhuckan chohona, tuhuckan chohona;
 Dancing busily, dancing busily;
 Chonanikae,
 To be busy again.
 Aha! ahahaha!

[p. 230]

The meaning is that they dance in order to bring about an opportunity to get at some seeds and kernels again.

By this time it was morning and a number of them were sent after some more sticks, which were again pointed and thrust into the ground in the same manner as the first sticks had been put in, only somewhat farther away from the house (hole) of the Mouse. This was done for protection in case any more Owls should be around while they were dancing. They then tied the larger feathers of the dead Owl in a large bunch and set it in the center of the inclosure. This was to serve to them as a tiponi, around which they were going to perform their dance. They then got ready for the dance, Though they were only small they had large bunches of feathers (nakwas) on their heads. The leader held a little bow with some tiny arrows.

The dance that they were performing was an imitation of the dance of the Momchitu Fraternity. They were very careful to keep within the limits of the sticks that they had put in last. While this dance was going on, a large Hawk was sitting on a rock south of Oraibi. "Aha," he said, "there is something going on somewhere. The Mice are enjoying themselves." He at once swooped down on them, ignoring the pointed sticks, as he was very strong, and killed a great number of Mice, taking one in each talon. These he carried to Ishmovala, a rock west of Oraibi, on the top of which he devoured them.

Those that had not been killed rushed away into their houses.

Footnotes

^229:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^229:2 Artemisia filifolia Torrey.

^229:3 Sarcobatus vermiculatus Torrey.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

91. THE SPARROW-HAWK AND THE HA'KWA. [*1]

A long time ago the people lived in Oraibi and in Shongopavi. A little distance north-east of Oraibi, at a place called Sparrow-Hawk-Catching-Place (Kala'tipka), lived a little Sparrow-Hawk. [*2] Farther down in the rock lived a large Ha'kwa. The Sparrow-Hawk caught many lizards, [*3] for its brood, but would never attempt to catch the Ha'kwa, so that the latter began to think the Sparrow-Hawk was afraid of it, and remarked on it. "Why is that little Sparrow-Hawk afraid of me?" he asked. ''I am so fat, and I am sure the Sparrow-Hawk is very anxious to have me, but he is afraid of me." These thoughts the Ha'kwa soon put into a song and teased the tittle Sparrow-Hawk by singing the following song, dashing into a large crack in the rock as soon as it had sung the last word of the song:

[p. 231]

        I Kalavocnayu,
   Ani wihu qoyiotaka,
   Hay alihi alihi.
   Haay alihi alihi,
   Ahao hanak! [*1]

       My kidney,
   (Having) on fat very much,
   (No special meaning.)
   (No special meaning.)
   Aha! covets (them).

     
 This somewhat irritated the Sparrow-Hawk, who warned the Ha'kwa in the I following words: "Why are you talking there; I am not afraid of you; I could kill you if I wanted to do so, but I do not want you, you are dirty." Soon the Ha'kwa came out and sang the same song again. The Sparrow-Hawk became more angry and repeated its warning. The little bird then began to make plans to kill the Ha'kwa, but did not know just how to go about it, but when the latter had sung the song four times the Sparrow-Hawk was very angry and was determined to kill the Ha'kwa.

By this time the young Sparrow-Hawks in the nest had become large. enough to be able to fly, so the mother told them: "Let us kill that Ha'kwa down there. He has made me very angry and says I am anxious to have him, and am afraid of him. Now, I want to kill him." Hereupon he instructed one of the young Hawks to follow him to the top of the rock. Here he placed the little Hawk on the same stone where he had always been sitting when the Ha'kwa had angered him, and then flew away.

The Ha'kwa again came out of the crack, and mistaking the young Sparrow-Hawk for the old one, he began in a taunting manner to sing his song. The Sparrow-Hawk had in the meanwhile made a large circuit, and just as the Ha'kwa was singing the word "Hanak" the Sparrow-Hawk swooped down on him saving: "What, are you singing again! I am not afraid of you; I am going to kill you now and then we are going to devour you." Hereupon he grabbed him with both talons and killed him, and took him home to his nest. He found that the Ha'kwa was indeed very fat. Then he and his brood lived upon the Ha'kwa until the latter were large enough to leave the nest and take care of themselves.

Footnotes

^230:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^230:2 A species of lizard of a dirty color.

^230:3 Kukutsa, a smaller kind than the Ha'kwa and green.

^231:1 The last word is sung with a quick rising inflection.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

92. THE SPARROW-HAWK AND THE GRASSHOPPERS. [*2]

Haliksai! A long time ago a Sparrow-Hawk lived at Kala'tipka, somewhat northwest of Oraibi. The Sparrow-Hawk had some children, so every day the Sparrow-Hawk mother would go to hunt Some food for her children. Close by were many grasshoppers.

[p. 232]

These the Sparrow-Hawk would capture and take them to her nest for her brood. At other times she would go and hunt some Prayer Beetles (hohoyahtu). The mothers of the Beetles and of the Grasshoppers were very unhappy. They saw that the young Sparrow-Hawks were growing fast but their children were disappearing.

One morning the Grasshopper mother sneaked out of her house and looked up and saw the Sparrow-Hawk mother sitting again near her nest. The Sparrow-Hawk mother saw the Grasshopper and swooped down upon it and caught it. The Grasshopper mother began to moan in the following manner:

Takakalatu Manakalatu
 (The) man Sparrow-Hawks, maiden Sparrow-Hawks,
 Itimui yukumanta
 My children have gotten.
 Oh! Oh!

The Sparrow-Hawk then released the Grasshopper mother and returned to her nest. Soon some Hopi children came along and began to capture the little Grasshoppers. The Grasshopper mother, seeing it, told them they should not take them, but they should go and catch the young Sparrow-Hawks and take them along. So they went to the house of the Sparrow-Hawk and took the young Sparrow-Hawks and took them along to the village.

Footnotes

^231:2 Told by Wikvaya (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

93. THE CROW AND THE HAWK. [*1]

Aliksai! At Macahtoika the Crow was living. She had three children. South of Munaovi lived the Hawk. He had four children. They were always hunting some food for their children, the Hawk hunting rabbits, little squirrels, etc., while the Crow hunted lizards, snakes, mice, etc. One time as they both were hunting some food for their children, they met in the valley east of Oraibi. "Come here," the Crow said. "Very well," the Hawk replied. "What do you want with me?" "What do you think?" the Crow said, "We want to be friends, and that is the reason I have called you." "Very well," the Hawk replied. "You come and visit me to-morrow", the Crow said, and I shall prepare something good to eat for you."

Hereupon they parted and continued their hunt. In the evening they both arrived at their homes. The Hawk brought for his children a rabbit, which he cut up for them and fed them. They enjoyed the prey and then slept well all night. The Hawk was thinking about the visit that he was to make at his friend's house the next day, and he

[p. 233]

was thinking about the good food that the Crow had promised to prepare. Early in the morning, before he had eaten, the Hawk went over to his friend. The latter was cooking some food already, and when it was done he placed it before the Hawk. It was a lolo'okong, cut up into pieces. The lolo'okong had been very fat so that it was very fatty food, but the Hawk did not relish it. It smelled very strong. So, he only pretended to eat, reaching his hand towards the vessel and back to his mouth without taking any food. After he had done that for a while he said to his friend that he was satisfied, as he had eaten much, but he spoke a falsehood.

After they had eaten they conversed together a long time, talking especially about their hunting. The Crow had a great many lizards, snakes, grasshoppers, and beetles in her house, which filled the house with odor. The Hawk, not being used to this odor, did not enjoy his stay there at all, because it smelled so strongly. Towards evening he returned to his house, first inviting his friend, the Crow, to come and visit him the next day, and promising that he would also prepare some good food for her. In the evening, when the rabbits are out, he hunted some rabbits and brought them to his children, who were very happy over them. After they had eaten them, they slept. The Crow was thinking during the night about her visit at her friend's house, and about the good food that she was promised. Early in the morning, without having partaken of any food, she proceeded to her friend's house.

The Hawk, remembering the food that he had received at the Crow's house, and which he had not relished, only cooked the skins and intestines of the rabbits, preparing a food of these for his friend. When the latter arrived she asked: "Is somebody at home?" "Yes," the Hawk replied, "come in. Sit down." Hereupon he set the food which he had prepared before the Crow, and as the Crow likes almost anything, she relished the food very much. The Hawk had thought she would not eat any of the food, but she ate heartily of it. They talked all day together, and then in the evening the Crow returned to her house and she is still living there, hatching her young, while the Hawk is still living at the same place, where he also hatches his broods.

Footnotes

^232:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 234]

  

94. THE RED EAGLE SONG. 

Haliksai! A long time ago, when people lived in all the seven Hopi villages, and also at Sikyatki, Red Eagle and his wife lived on the bluff running westward, north of Sikyatki. He had four children. He lived on a small steep bluff called Kwakatpe. One time, early in the morning, they had a dance and sang the following song:

Pu turzh huvam, umuh totim!
 Now then come here, your youths!
 Kuywaman ayalalwaahahay.
 (To) behold send them!
 Ura conwayningwu
 Why pretty
 Kwakatpe palakwayo titooya
 At Kwakatpe (the) Red Eagle hatches children.
 Ura vungve tutunglainingwu.
 Why when grown up (they) are, ask for them.
 Haooo talti! talti!
 Ah, it has dawned! It has dawned!
 Haooo, talti! talti!
 Ah, it has dawned! It has dawned!
 Kwa--! (Here they all flew upward a little way and alighted again).

One of the men from Sikyatki heard them singing and saw them dance and told his people about it. They soon afterwards went and captured the small Eagles, and forever afterwards they used to get young eagles there, the feathers of which they used for their prayer-offerings, masks, etc.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

95. THE RED EAGLE AND THE OWL. [*2]

Over yonder at Owl Gulch (Mongwupcovo) lived a large Owl with her children, and north of there at a bluff lived a Red Eagle (Palikwyaho), who also had children. The two were great friends. The Eagle always hunted during the day. He often told his friend to go with him on a hunt, but as his friend, the Owl, could not go during the day, they never hunted together. One time the Eagle visited his friend and found the latter sound asleep during the day. He sat down and waited. Finally he scratched the Owl a little with his

[p. 235]

talons, but the Owl did not notice it. He then took hold of his eyebrows and lifted his eyelids, but the Owl did not notice anything, He then took hold of the whiskers of the Owl and pulled out a few hairs, whereupon the Owl got awake, saying, "Ishana! Why do you do that way to me?" "We wanted to go hunting," the Eagle replied, "and now you are sleeping. You get up and we shall go hunting."

The Owl was willing and so the two went out. The Eagle took hold of the Owl so that the latter should not go to sleep again. They went into the valley east of Oraibi to hunt. Here they found a party of Oraibi who were also hunting, and who were following a. rabbit. The Eagle, seeing the rabbit, swooped down on it and carried it to the top of the bluff close by. The Oraibi, seeing it, very were angry. The Eagle then returned and hunted for his friend, the Owl, and after searching for him for some time found him sitting at the edge of a steep bank of the wash, sleeping. He said to the Owl, "Why are you sleeping here again; they will certainly kill you." But the Owl did not hear anything.

Then two Oraibi boys from the hunting party came near and one said to the other, "Listen! somebody is talking to some one here;" whereupon they saw an Eagle flying up and an Owl sitting at the rim of the bank, sleeping. The boys had bows and arrows and one of them put an arrow on his bow, aimed, and shot the Owl through the head, so that the bird tumbled down into the wash. The Eagle, who was flying around above them, was angry and said, "There he was sleeping, and now this happened to him." The two boys carried the Owl home, the other hunters also going home, and the Eagle then lived in his house all alone.

Footnotes

^234:1 Told by Puhunomtiwa (Oraibi).

^234:2 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

96. THE BEE AND THE ASYA. [*1]

Haliksai! At Potatuk'aovi lived the Bee, and at Mongwupcovi lived the Asya (a species of bird). They were both women and both had children. They were great friends with each other. The Asya one time was walking around in the peach orchard north of her house and was eating peaches, which she relished very much. One time she was visiting her friend, the Bee, and the latter fed her honey, of which she ate. After she was through eating they conversed together all day. In the evening the Asya returned to her house, inviting her friend, however, to come and visit her too in the morning, which the Bee promised to do. The next morning the Bee went over to her

[p. 236]

friend's house, but at that time the Bees had no wings. They walked like the hohoyawuu, so that she did not get there very quickly.

The Asya was living in an opening in a rock, which the Bee entered. The Asya gave her a seat and told her to be seated, and then fed her peaches, which the Bee ate. "Do you like these peaches?" the Asya asked. "Yes," she said, "I always eat them. I like them very much; I live on them." "But," the Bee said, "what do you think, shall I make some medicine for the peaches? They are not good," because the peaches at that time were not sweet as they are now; they were sour. "Very well," the Asya replied, "make some medicine then, and I shall have something that tastes well." Hereupon the Bee put some honey on the peaches, and ever since the peaches are sweet and taste better. The Asya was very happy and said to the Bee, "I am glad, and I shall give you something too, because you have made my peaches better."

Hereupon she pulled out some of her feathers, made some wings, and attached them to the Bee, saying to her, "Now fly." But the Bee said, "I do not know how it is done." "You just extend your front legs." The Bee did so and moved them, whereupon she could fly, and flew away. Ever since that time the bees can fly.

Footnotes

^235:1 Told by Kwayeshva, (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

97. THE GRASSHOPPERS AND THE ORAIBI MAIDEN. [*1]

At our village the people were living. At the place where now Shokhungioma and his wife, Singosi, are living somebody lived and had a daughter whose name was Awat Mcana. The father had a field west of the village in the valley and often watched that field. He became tired of watching the field alone, and so one time he said to his daughter she should relieve him once; he would go down early and then after breakfast she should come down and take his place. So after breakfast she went down and took her father's place and the latter returned to the village. She was sitting in the kisi (a temporary booth or bower to give shade); all at once she heard some singing at a distance in the hollow, but she did not go there. In the evening she went home. The father thanked her that she had assisted him. "Yes," she said, "to-morrow I am going down again when it is very early." The father asked her whether their corn had already roasting ears. She said yes, she had gone through the corn and had found that the roasting ears were beginning to come out already.

Her father had seen what the girl had believed to be singing children. They were Grasshoppers. So in the morning she went to

[p. 237]

the field early and stayed there during the day. When the sun was well up it became warm and then she heard the singing again. She thought she would see what it was, and going in a southerly direction she cam; upon a little wash, and away down in the wash in the shadow of the bank she saw many little beings engaged in a dance and in singing. When she saw them she stopped short, but the Grasshoppers also noticed her and said: "Somebody is standing there"; so they stopped their dancing. The maiden said, "Go on, dance some more," but they hesitated for a little while. She urged them to perform another dance, but they refused to do it. She finally said, "If you dance for me once more you can have one division of our corn-field and eat the corn." They then were willing to dance, bending. their front legs like arms, and swinging them lively back and forth, to which they sang the following song: [*1]

Yayaaaaa shaolololo,
 Yayaaaaa shaolololo,
 Hotingawi,
 Yayaaaa shaolololo,
 Yayaaaa shaolololo,
 Hotingawi.
 Halatoni halatoni,
 Halatoni halatoni,
 Yamoshkiki yamoshkiki,
 Ruk, ruk, ruk, ruk.

When they were through they said: "Now, let us go," and, then they began to emerge from the wash and it was found that they had wings, so they flew to the corn-field and began to devour the corn. The maiden ran after them, and when she saw that they were eating away the corn beyond the limit she had allowed them, she told them they should stop as her father would be angry. When she saw that they would not stop she began to cry and took her blanket and began to beat them. When she found that that would not do any good she left them and ran to the village, arriving there nearly at noon, all in perspiration and nearly out of breath. Her father was just spinning cotton for a ceremonial robe (ato'o), for her. "Why did you come home?" her father asked. "Yes," she said, "something is eating our corn," and then she told him all about it. "Ishohi!" he exclaimed, "they are certainly going to eat all of the corn." He at once laid

[p. 238]

down his spindle and hurried to the field and found that the Grasshoppers had eaten up all the corn. He then grabbed a stick and, knowing where he had seen the Grasshoppers before, and also seeing their tracks in the sand, he followed them.

It seems that on returning they had not been flying, but walking. When he came upon them he found that they were resting and sleeping, as they had filled themselves so full with the corn. He jumped into the wash saying: "Ishohi, you have eaten my corn," and began pounding them with his stick. He killed a great many, but others escaped. He destroyed their houses there entirely, and that is the reason why now the grasshoppers do not all live at one place, but may he found almost anywhere. Hereupon he went home, being sad at heart. When he came home he chided his daughter saying: "Why did you tell them about our corn-field? They are bad." But he added: "I have only you alone, and I shall not be angry at you. That corn will sprout and grow again."

Footnotes

^236:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^237:1 The meaning of some of the words only is known. The first word is probably derived from "yayalawa" (damage), referring to the damage done by the Grasshoppers in the corn-field, "yamoshkiki" expresses such ideas as swarming, crowding each other. "ruk" is said to refer to the rubbing of the legs against the wings by the Grasshoppers.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

98. HOW THE BEETLES PRODUCED PAIN. [*1]

In Oraibi they were living, and at the Hohoyaw village lived the Hohoyawtu (certain black Beetles). It was always hot and the wind was blowing, and it did not rain. As these Beetles drink rain-water they became very thirsty. Some became so thirsty that they died. So their chief said one time: "Let us have a dance and perhaps if we dance it will rain, because if it does not rain we shall all die!" "Very well, we shall have a dance," they said, "and maybe it will rain then. and we shall not die." So one evening they assembled to practice for the dance and their chief made a little song for them. This they were practicing. They practiced a while in the evening, and then they went to sleep.

The next day they were going to have their dance. Early in the morning they got up and their chief made four nakwakwosis for them. He deposited the nakwakwosis west of their little village, and spoke to the clouds in the San Francisco mountains saying: "We are thirsty here, so you come quickly this way and bring us some water that we may drink and not die." So he returned to their village and they dressed up for the dance. They painted their bodies black, and then they danced. They were in a hurry because they were thirsty.

Their chief began to pray to the clouds in the San Francisco Mountains. "Come this way quickly and bring us water." So they were formed in a line now and one of them acted as leader. By this

[p. 239]

time a cloud was forming in the mountains. They now sang the following song:

Yoookwaa yoookwahayaha, Rain, rain.
 Ihi, aha, ihi.

As they were singing, the clouds came nearer and it began to rain and thunder, and the water began to fall so that they could now drink. When they had quenched their thirst they were very happy and ran about because they were no longer thirsty.

Footnotes

^238:1 Told by Kwayeshva, (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

99. WHY THE ANTS ARE SO THIN. 

Ishyaoi! East of Tcookavu lived a great many Ants. One time the chief of the Ants said to them that they were going to have a Katcina initiation in four days. On the fourth day two of the Ants dressed themselves up as Hu Katcinas; one as Angwushnacomtaka, just the same as is being done to-day when children are initiated into a Katcina society. They dressed up at Koritvi, a short distance north-west of the village. Some of the Ants also made a sand picture on the floor of the kiva; then the Ants began to bring their children that were to be initiated into the kiva.

When the children had all been put in, the Katcina priest of the Ants related the story in the same manner as the Katcina priest now relates it at the Katcina initiation. Four little Koyemsis then had their performance. One of the Ants was in the meanwhile sitting on a rock outside, and when they were through in the kiva this Ant swung one fore-foot vigorously as a signal for the Katcinas to come. The Katcinas at once came running to the kiva, circled around the kiva several times, and then entered it, taking places opposite the sand picture. They then flogged the little Ant children. They flogged them so hard that they almost cut them through in the middle of their body When they were through all the Katcinas left the kiva and ran away. And that is the reason why the ants are now so thin in the middle of their bodies, because they were almost cut in two on that occasion.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

100. LA'VOVOLVIPIKI AND NO'NVOVOLPIKI. [*2]

Haliksai! In Oraibi the people were living. A short distance south of the village is a rock called La'kokpi, because a long time ago the women here used to rub out the seeds from a certain grass called

[p. 240]

la'hu. At this place lived, La'vovolvipiki so called after a certain food that was prepared of the seed of this grass. The food consisted of small balls (povo'lpiki), which were prepared of the meal of this seed. West of the mesa on which Oraibi is situated, and somewhat southwest of the old ruin of Chirove, used to be a place where a great deal of no'no (Sporobolos Wrightii) used to grow. At this place lived No'nvovolpiki, so called after certain little balls of food prepared of the meal of the no'no seed. These two were great friends. One time No'nvovolpiki visited his friend on the mesa. While they were conversing the two concluded that they wanted to have a dance. West of the mesa, at Howakapchomo, lived the Mice maidens (Homitcmamantu). La'vovolvipiki was to fetch these maidens in order to get them to participate in the dance, while his friend was to go to the Kwan kiva to borrow a drum.

Hereupon they started, the one to get the maidens, the other one to get the drum. They were going to perform a Paiute dance. When No'nvovolpiki came to the Kwan kiva and announced his presence he asked: "Are the Kwakwantus at home?" "Yes," some one replied from the kiva, "come in." Whereupon he entered. "Sit down at the fireplace!" whereupon the visitor seated himself. "I have come to borrow your drum," he said. "Very well," they replied, "take it along." When they had given him the drum he went to his friend at La'kokpi. "Is my friend in?" he asked. "Yes," the latter replied, "come in." So he beat the drum a little and went into the kiva. The Mice maidens were already assembled. So during the night they were all awake practicing their songs and dances.

In the morning they gave to each mana an eagle feather which they tied to their heads as a nakwa, and each mana put a red dot on each cheek. They then went out and performed their dance. While they danced they sang the following song:

Cay! cay! awatcahi--na,
 Cay! cay! awatcahi--na.
 Impu naroo tukava,
 Ao-ao-ao-ao iyahi--na.

While they were dancing the Po'okongs (Pookonghoya and Baloongawhoya) were hunting. They came to the place where these were dancing. "Ah, here are the little Mite," they said, whereupon each one of them shot and killed one of the Mice. Seeing the marks on their cheeks they said, "Ah, they are spotted." Hereupon Pookonghoya saw the No'nvovolpiki and said, "Ah, here is a No'nvovolpiki. Oh (Ah)! I shall devour it," whereupon he devoured the No'nvovolpiki

[p. 241]

His younger brother hereupon saw the La'vovolvipiki and said, "Ah, and here is a La'vovolvipiki, I shall devour it," which he did. That ended the dance.

Footnotes

^239:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

^239:2 Told by Lomanomtiwa (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

101. THE DESTRUCTION OF PIVANHONK'API. [*1]

A long time ago there lived some people north of Oraibi close to the north of the place where the Oraibi at present dry their peaches. They were called Yayaponchatu. There was only one village of them, probably only a small one. The villages of Pivanhonkapi, about four miles northwest of Oraibi, and Hu'ckovi, about two miles northwest of Oraibi, which have been in ruins long ago, were then, too, still inhabited. The people in Pivanhonkapi seemed to have been very much degenerated. The village chief of that village was much worried over it, especially over the fact that the women of that village would even participate in the games of chance, especially that of totolocpi, in the kivas; even the chief's wife was no exception. It is stated that she would even neglect her children when she was gambling in the kivas. Sometimes he would say to her, in order to get her out of the kiva, that she should go and nurse their little child that was crying outside. The chief finally became concerned and angry over the condition of affairs to such a degree that he decided to adopt severe measures. So he went to the village of the Yayaponchatu, who were known to have special influence over and with storms and fire, and who, in fact, were looked upon as being in league with supernatural forces. "I have come to you," he said. "For what purpose?" they asked him. "My people," he said, "are dark hearted; they are bad. They will not listen to me. The women are gambling to such an extent that they are even neglecting their duties and their children. I want you to punish my people." They said that he should choose the element with which they were to exercise judgment, either the fire or the storm. He chose the fire and went home, telling them, however, that in four days they were going to have a dance in his village, and invited them to participate in the celebration. On his way home he stopped at the village of Hu'ckovi, telling his friend, the chief of this village, to come and see him in the evening and to bring his friend, his assistant, whose name is not known, with him. When meeting in the evening, in the house of the chief of Pivanhonkapi, the latter told his two friends all about the matter, also that in four days they were going to have a dance in his village and inviting them also to come and take part in the dance, which they promised to do. So

[p. 242]

these three 'People were the only ones in possession of the secret. On the fourth day they had a series of dances. During the day the different kind of Katcina were dancing at each dance, and leaving the village when they had completed their performances. The Yayaponchatu people performed the last (lance. They were masked like the Hohe Katcina of the present day, their bodies, however, being decorated like certain personages that appear at the Soyal ceremonies at present, taking from the kiva in which the ceremonies were performed certain prayer-offerings, which they deposited at a large spring west of the village. The Yayaponchatu were sprinkled with corn-meal the same as all the other Katcinas, whereupon they performed their dance, and while they were dancing they sang the following ominous song, alluding to the judgment that was to befall them:

Ahaha, Ihihi
 Hiayiayiayhaaa
 Hiayiayiayhaa
 Pai nu'vupi yepee.
 Why, at last here
 Uni uh kiyu
 You your houses
 Palaomawuy akwa
 Red cloud with
 Noomiltiqoo
 When enveloped
 Hakami yang
 Somewhere over there
 Pamoci conako
 The mist through
 Naiikwilmuyionihui
 Carrying one another
 Kiihkiihki nawitaha
 Villages along
 Ahaha, Ihihi.

Some of the spectators, watching the dances from the house-tops, when they heard the song became somewhat alarmed and began to think and talk of the matter. Nobody, of course, fully understood the meaning of the song and of the presence of these strange neighbors. Four of these last named dancers carried certain prayer-offerings the same as are now being deposited during the Soyal ceremony by the aforesaid messengers. These prayer-offerings consisted of sacred meal piled up in small trays. Into these trays are placed a number of little

[p. 243]

husk packets, which are supposed to contain sacred meal mixed with honey. These little packets are fastened to nakwakwosis. But the prayer-offerings carried by the four dancers on that occasion also had a little spark of fire over each one of these packets. At the conclusion of the dance one of these was handed to the village chief of Pivanhonkapi, the other to the village chief of Hu'ckovi, the third to the latter's assistant and friend, and the fourth was retained by the leader of these last named dancers.

Late in the evening the chief from Hu'ckovi and his friend came to the chief of Pivanhonkapi and all three smoked over the prayer-offerings which they had received from the Yayaponchatu. Then the chief from Hu'ckovi sent his friend with one of them to the San Francisco Mountains, which are situated about ninety miles to the south-west, to deposit the same there among the trees and high grass. The other two the two chiefs kept, each one hiding his one away in some lower room in his house. Tradition does not mention what the chief of the Yayaponchatu did with his prayer-offering, beyond the fact that he took it home with him. This was during the night following the dance. The next night the women and some of the men again assembled in the kivas to gamble. Some of the men, however, did not participate. They all at once noticed a light in the San Francisco Mountains and remarked about it, mentioning it also to those in the kiva. The latter ridiculed them, and took no notice of it. The next night the same thing was repeated, only the fire in the mountains appeared to be larger. Those who were outside of the kiva, looking on and watching the gambling, again mentioned the fact to the others, but the latter again showed themselves skeptical. During the day also they had observed smoke at the same place, without, however, taking special notice of it. During the third night the fire became larger, and those who noticed it became somewhat alarmed, but their remarks upon the fact again met deaf ears. On the following day the smoke arising from the San Francisco Mountains seemed to be threatening, and those few that were considered the better class of the people became alarmed. During the fourth night the people again continued their gambling and carousing, those outside watching with great alarm the fire on the San Francisco Mountains, which now began to spread itself towards the Hopi villages. They told the people so and asked them to come out of the kiva and see for themselves. The latter again laughed at them saying: "You only want us to stop our playing. We do not believe what you say." At short intervals their attention was drawn to the approaching fire with more persistence and in more urgent language, but without avail.

[p. 244]

Finally one of the players came out of the kiva to see for himself, and when he saw the air full of smoke and the fire rolling towards the villages, he cried out in despair to those in the kiva that the reports about the approaching disaster were only too true. When the latter also saw the smoke they rushed out of the kiva and to their houses, trying to gather some of their effects before fleeing. But the fire was now upon them and most of those who had procrastinated were either suffocated or burned to death. Only a very few escaped from the two villages. These, it is said, left that part of the country. They lived at certain places for a little while and then moved on. It is said that some of the small ruins in these parts of the country mark the sites of the temporary houses of these former inhabitants of Pivanhonkapi and Hu'ckovi.

The village chief of Oraibi, when becoming aware of the approaching danger, became very much worried. "My children are dear to me," he said, "and I do not want to have them destroyed." So he quickly proceeded to the house of Spider Woman, which is situated South of the village, half-way down the mesa. She advised him to at once make two arrows, using on the shafts the feathers of the bluebird and wurinawuu. This he did. When he was done he sent out a messenger with one arrow, instructing him to thrust it into the ground west of the village at the foot of the mesa. The other one he took to the shrine of Achamali, north of the village, where he thrust it into the ground in front of the shrine. Spider Woman then wove a network of web between the two arrows which she moistened with water. When the fire reached this protecting network of moist spider-web its force was broken and the village of Oraibi saved from destruction.

Footnotes

^241:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

102. THE DESTRUCTION OF SIKYATKI. [*1]

Haliksai! A long time ago the people were living in Walpi, but not on top of the mesa. The village was then west of the mesa where there are now the ruins. The people at Sikyatki were also living. One time the Racer Katcinas from Sikyatki came over to Walpi to have a race. During the race one of the Walpi men cut off the hair knot of the Ho'msontaka Katcina, instead of cutting off just a small portion of the side lock, as is usually done. This made the Katcina very angry. He returned to Sikyatki and then for some time he practiced running. When he had become very strong he made up his mind that he was going to take revenge on the one who had cut

[p. 245]

his hair. One time the Walpi came over also to have a race at Sikyatki. The young man whose hair had been cut was still angry. He took a knife and then went up on the bluff opposite Sikyatki, where he waited.

When the dance was in progress he went down and entered the plaza. He wore the mask of the Ho'msontaka Katcina. Four clowns performed in connection with the Katcina dance. These saw him first and said; "Here a Katcina is coming." "Yes," he said, "I want to race." "Very well," they said. So he raced with them and caught every one of them, cutting a small portion of their side locks off. When they were through with the racing he kept looking through the crowd of people. Soon he detected on top of a house a maiden who had her hair whorls done up nicely. He recognized her as a sister of the one who had cut his hair, and he was determined to take revenge on her. When the clowns noticed it they said: "There he has found a friend."

Hereupon he dashed away and ran up the ladder to the top of the house where the maiden was standing with another maiden. The people dispersed as he came upon the roof. He rushed to the place where the two maidens were standing. They rushed down the ladder and entered a house. He followed them and grabbed the sister of his enemy, taking hold of her hair whorls and, jerking a knife from his belt, he cut off her head. He took hold of one of her hair whorls and rushed out, swinging the head where all the people could see it. Hereupon he ran away. The people followed him but could not overtake him. They rushed up the mesa and the dance broke up immediately.

When the Katcina had reached the top of the mesa he turned back and again waved the head to his pursuers. They were very angry. He turned and went to the village again by another trail, still carrying the head in his hand. The people of the two villages quarreled severely, but the Walpi people withdrew to their village. There was, however, constant wrangling and fighting going on between the two villages after that. The people of Sikyatki, it seems, were very wicked. They were especially wicked towards the women and maidens, and as they did not even spare the chief's wife, he got very angry and was determined to take revenge upon his own people. He agreed with the chief of Walpi that when his people would be planting for the chief in the valley, the Walpi should come to the village and destroy it. So when the Walpi heard the announcement that the Sikyatki people were going to plant the fields of their chief they made ready.

[p. 246]

They went on top of the mesa and watched. Many of them had halls; of pitch with them that they had procured from the woods. When the Sikyatki people were out in the fields they rushed upon the village where they found only some women and children. These they killed, They then rubbed the pitch on the walls of the houses and set the houses on fire, thus destroying the village. When the people who were planting saw the smoke rise from the village, they at once realized what had happened. They rushed to their village but had only their planting sticks with them. The Walpi, before setting fire to the houses, had secured the bows, arrows, and tomahawks so that they were well armed when they met the people of Sikyatki, and in a short time had killed then) all, including the chief who had been the instigator of the revenge. Thus Sikyatki was destroyed and has ever since been in ruins. It came so suddenly that even now charred corn is constantly found in the ruins.

Footnotes

^244:1 Told by Sik'ahpiki (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

103. THE DESTRUCTION OF AOATOVI. [*1]

Haliksai! A long time ago the people were living in Aoatovi. In Shongopavi, Mishongnovi, and Walpi they were then not yet living on top of the mesa, but at the places where there are now the ruins of those villages. In Oraibi they were living where the village now stands. The villages of Sichomovi and Hano were then not existing. They were erected when the Walpi moved on the mesa. The people at Aoatovi had a great many ponies so that the men hunted on ponies. They had strong hearts. When they were hunting they were full of hilarity.

Thus they were living there. They had not any cattle yet, but they lived on game and on sheep, of which they had some at that time at Aoatovi. One time they were going on a hunting expedition again, but this time the maidens of the village participated in the hunt. They were, however, not on horseback as the young men were. At about noon they had gone as far as they wanted to go, and returned. When they had found a rabbit it was placed on the ground and the maidens raced for it, and whoever won the race received the rabbit, which she handed to either her father or her brother who was present, who then tied it up and carried it home in the evening.

The daughter of the village chief, a very pretty maiden, who had big hair whorls, was also among the hunters, and as the hunting party was returning in the afternoon one of the young men in chasing a rabbit on his pony, dashed over this maiden and killed her.

[p. 247] Her father, the village chief, became very angry. His heart became very bad about that, and he was thinking about it very deeply, The men at the village had been bad for some time and the chief determined that he would take revenge. He made up his mind that the village should be rased to the ground so that grass should grow there. This he was thinking in his heart while he was angry.

The chase was broken up and the people went home mourning. The chief said that he was not angry, but he said that with his lips only, and in his heart he was angry and planned a punishment. One night when all were fast asleep he proceeded to Shongopavi and entered the village chief's house, because at that time the people did not lock their doors. The village chief was fast asleep, but the visitor touched his head and waked him up. The village chief of Shongopavi arose and built a fire. They each took a seat opposite the fireplace. The chief of Aoatovi filled his pipe, which he had brought with him, with tobacco that he had also brought, lit the pipe, smoked, and handed it to his friend, the Shongopavi chief, who also smoked. When the pipe was empty, the latter handed it back to the Aoatovi chief who cleaned it out and laid it down. "Now then, why have you come?" the Shongopavi chief asked. "You certainly go about in this way for some reason." "Yes," the visitor replied, "there in my village my children (people) are bad. They have bad hearts. They will not listen to my talk, they will not do what I tell them to do, and when some time ago we had a hunt they rode over my daughter and killed her. I have put her away but I am angry at that. Now then, my village shall be rased to the ground. It shall be turned to sand and grass shall grow there." "So that is why you are going about here," said the Shongopavi chief. "Yes, that is why I have come here. I am very angry and that is why I have come to you here. So you must instruct your strong men to practice their strength in running and racing so that they become strong. In four days I shall return again." Having said this he returned home.

The people in the village had no suspicion of what was going on. The chief kept the matter strictly to himself. In the night of the fourth day he went again to Shongopavi. The chief of Shongopavi, expecting his friend, had retired for the night, but had not gone to sleep, so when he heard his friend come he got up and built a fire. They sat down again, smoked, and he again asked his visitor why he had come. "Yes," he said, ''you remember what I told you and that I requested you to prepare your strong men. Are they willing?" "Yes," the Shongopavi chief replied, "they are willing and are practicing." "Very well," the other one said, "now on the third day

[p. 248]

from now you must dress up and get ready. They must get ready to have a Katcina race with my young men. Four of your men shall dress up as Katcinas." Hereupon he returned to his village.

The young men again practiced for three days and then they prepared for the Katcina race. Their mothers cooked tu'hpavu (steamed sweet corn-ears), and the next morning four of the young men proceeded to Aoatovi, taking the presents with them. One was dressed as Ho'msona, [*1] the second as a Chilitoshmoktaka [*2] the third as an Angwushngontaka, [*3] and the fourth as a Sik'apku. [*4] When the Katcinas carne to Aoatovi they entered the plaza, which was very much like the one in Shongopavi at the present day. In the center was a shrine. They laid down their sweet corn on the ground and waited. The Katcina chief of the village cried out: "Now then, you young men come here. These Katcinas have come here to have a race with you. They have come to you." The men of the village now crowded into the plaza and the race commenced. The presents which the Katcinas had brought were decreasing. Sometimes the Katcinas won the race, at other times the others won. When there was only one bunch of corn ears left, one of the Aoatovi young men placed it aside, saving, that he was going to win it. The Ho'msona Katcina challenged him to a race, so the two raced, but the Katcina remained way behind. When the young man who had outrun the Katcina by far, returned, the Ho'msona grabbed him by the hair, threw him down on his back, sat on his body, jerked out his knife, of which every Ho'msona Katcina carried one to cut the loser's hair, thrust the knife into his throat and cut it. Having done this the Ho'msona ran towards the other Katcinas where also the Katcina chief of the village was standing with his corn meal and nakwakwosis, which he was to hang to the Katcinas prior to their departure. But the Ho'msona, as soon as he had arrived, motioned to the other Katcinas to run, whereupon they left the village without waiting for the prayer-offerings.

When the people saw that the Young man who had raced with the Katcina did not return they were suspicious that something had happened. "Oh!" they said, "that young man is not returning and here these Katcinas are running away. He probably has hurt that young man." Hereupon they rushed to the end of the village where the murder had occurred. Here they found that the young

[p. 249]

man had been killed. "Why, he has been killed," they called back, "let us follow them and let us kill them." Hereupon the men and the youths of the village ran after their bows and arrows, thrust them behind their belts and rushed after the Katcinas. Those who could get some ponies got them and followed the Katcinas on their ponies.

The Katcinas had in the meanwhile descended the mesa and were running westward, one after the other, along the trail. When they were about south of Walpi they were beginning to become tired and ran somewhat slower. At a bluff called Huk'atwi, the Ho'msona fell somewhat behind. By this time those men of Aoatovi who were on horseback had overtaken them and at once surrounded the Ho'msona. They killed the Katcina, shooting him with their bows and arrows. Hereupon they followed the others, and at the foot of the incline they overtook the Chilitoshmoktaka, whom they also surrounded and killed. There were now two left. In the valley south-east of Mishongnovi they overtook the Angwushngontaka, surrounded and killed him. There was only the Sik'apku left now. When he had arrived at the wash he jerked off his mask, looked back and saw that his pursuers were not very far away. He discharmed himself by swinging the mask in front of himself four times. He then placed the mask on top of a brush, jumped into the wash and ran out of it on the other side. The two chiefs had arranged that those of the Katcinas who would go through the wash before the pursuers should overtake them should not be killed, but the Shongopavi chief had agreed, that if they overtook any of his four Katcinas before they had crossed the wash, they might kill them, and the Aoatovi chief had instructed his people to that effect before they left the village to pursue the Katcinas. Hence, when the pursuers came upon the mask that was hanging on the brush, they said: "He has crossed the wash, we shall not follow him, but we shall return." Hereupon they returned.

When the Katcina arrived at Shongopavi the chief said: "Thanks, that you have come back, that you have been left. I shall see you living here. Be it then that way, that the others have been killed." Hereupon the chief of Aoatovi was thinking over this matter, and during the night he again went to Shongopavi, just as the sorcerers (Popwaktu) always go about in the night. The Shongopavi chief was expecting him and, while he had retired, he had not gone to sleep. He at once got up, built a fire, and again asked: "What have you come for?" "Yes," the Aoatovi chief replied, "I have forfeited my people. We have killed your Katcinas so I give you my people, I give you all my people. In four days you come and get my people. The

[p. 250]

women and the maidens you take, but the men and the old women you may kill." The Shongopavi chief hung his head and meditated very seriously. Finally he raised his head and said: "No, I do not want that, I shall not do that. My Katcinas went over there to race .and they killed one of your handsome young men. You followed them and you killed three of my Katcinas. We are even now. I shall not go and kill others, I shall not go and bring any one here to my village. No, I do not want that." The Aoatovi chief then also hung his head and reflected. He finally said: "Very well, Oh! so you do not want to make me glad. You do not want my people. I want my village to be rased to the ground, but you will not. Very well, then, be it that way." Hereupon he got up and left, returning to his village.

When he arrived there he again thought over the matter. In the night he went to Oraibi, entered the chief's house, shook him, and awoke him. The chief got up, and built a fire. They smoked together, and then he related the same story to the Oraibi chief that he had told to the Shongopavi chief. He added that he had requested the Shongopavi chief to destroy his people but he had refused to do so, and hence he had now come to him. "Now, what do you think about it?" he asked. "So that is why you are going about," the Oraibi chief said, "so that is what you have planned. It is with you. If your children (people) are not dear to you, and if you really want your village destroyed, I shall be willing to assist you, and nothing shall then be done to my people. But if your children are dear to you, if you value them, and if your village is dear to you, I shall not want to do that because my people might then be destroyed also. So it remains with you to say about it." "No, my people are not dear to me," the other chief replied, "I want my village to be destroyed and leveled to the ground so that grass shall grow there, and nothing shall happen to your people. That is the reason why I have come here and have told you this."

"Very well," the Oraibi chief said, "then I am willing to do it." "All right," the Aoatovi chief replied, "thanks, thanks, now I am happy that you are willing. Thank you! Here I have brought you these, my people," whereupon he produced two small clay figures, which he held in his hand, one representing the males, the other the females of his village." You select one of these," he said, "whichever you select you shall have, and the others shall be left for the other villages." "Very well," the Oraibi chief said, and selected the figure representing the females. "Thank you, that you have brought these to me and that they are not dear to you. Thank you." "Very

[p. 251]

well," the Aoatovi chief said, "these you shall have, and the others the other villages shall have." When that was decided the Aoatovi chief said, "Now, for four days you must make bows and arrows and get ready, and you invite the people at the other villages, and then on the fifth day you must come and kill us." Hereupon he returned home to his village.

The next day the Oraibi chief called his warrior chiefs and told them what the Aoatovi chief wanted of them, instructing them that he should tell his other people of the village to prepare their bows and arrows. This he did, and so the people made bows and arrows and shields during the four days. Three of his nephews he sent to Walpi, Mishongnovi, and Shongopavi to tell those people about the request of the Aoatovi chief, and that they should get ready to participate in the destruction of that village. Shupaulavi did not at that time exist. The chiefs of the different villages declared themselves willing to take part in the expedition, only the chief of Shongopavi said to his people: "Now, this is the request that has been made upon us. Now, if any of you that are wicked and bad, want to take part in that, be it so, but I do not want that. I do not want to get their people to live with us here. They may spoil us. We want to live here alone. I do not want to take part in it."

So on the fourth day the Oraibi chief said that some of them should go to Walpi, invite them, and then proceed with them towards Aoatovi; some of them would o by way of Shongopavi and Mishongnovi, and then meet the others near Aoatovi. Thus they parted in two parties. The party from Oraibi that went to Shongopavi entered the village and separated, the different clans looking up their clan relatives with whom they ate a meal. They then asked them to join them, saving that they should take part, and they wanted to go to Aoatovi because the chief there wanted them to destroy the village, and no one should remain behind. They all declared themselves willing to take part asking them where they were going first, and when the Oraibi told them that they were going to Mishongnovi yet, they said that they should just go on ahead, and in the meanwhile they would dress up and get ready and follow them.

Hereupon the Oraibi proceeded to Mishongnovi where they again scattered into the different houses, inviting their clan relatives to join them. They were at once willing to do so, and taking their bows and arrows, and wrapping a blanket around them they were ready to start. The Oraibi kept looking towards Shongopavi, but nobody came and they suspected that the Shongopavi had deceived

[p. 252]

them. The party that had gone to Walpi direct had in the meanwhile arrived there and found the Walpi willing to join them. The two parties then met towards evening, south of Huk'atwi, where they conversed together about the matter until the sun went down. They then moved towards Aoatovi where they arrived at the foot of the mesa when it had become quite dark. Here they again rested.

While they were smoking here, the chief of Aoatovi and his wife came down to them, each one carrying a large bundle of piki, which they gave to the people, and which the latter ate. After they had eaten, the Aoatovi chief said to them: ''Thank you that so many of you have come. Thank you that you have done as I want it, and have come to destroy us here. You stay here during the night, and then when it begins to dawn you go up and hide under a bluff," which he pointed out to them, "and when the sun rises my son will sit on top of my house and then you must watch him. When he rises and goes down from my house the men will all have gone into their kivas and then you must rush upon the mesa and separate at the different kivas and kill the men there. The Oraibi chief shall then select those women and maidens that he wants to take along and then the rest of the villages shall take those that they want." Hereupon the chief and his wife left and returned to the village.

The raiders did as they had been told do to. The village chief, who was a powaka, had bewitched his son and probably others, so that while they knew about the plan of the chief they were in harmony with it and willing that the chief's wish should be carried out. For that reason also, almost all the men assembled in the kivas. Those who suspected something were so much under the wicked influence and charm of the chief that they were drawn into the impending danger. When the chief's son had given the raiders the signal agreed upon, the latter rushed into the village, surrounded the kivas, pulled up the ladders, and threw the many bundles of fire-wood that were lying at the different kivas, into the kivas. When the men in the kivas looked up they saw arrows pointed and shot at them, but as they had no weapons with them they were helpless. Some of the men rushed into the houses where they found much Spanish pepper, of which the Aoatovi people, who had plenty of water, raised a great deal. The men then threw firebrands into the kivas, and when the wood and the roofs of the kivas were set on fire they threw the pepper into the fire, the smoke of which caused the men to cough vehemently and many of them smothered to death.

While this was going on the people of Mishongnovi and Walpi rushed into the houses and took all the younger women and maidens.

[p. 253]

and the children that they wanted to take, and moved off with them, not waiting for the Oraibi who were to have the first opportunity to select their prisoners. So the Oraibi only got a very few. The older women were killed. The chief of Aoatovi and his son were both destroyed with the others in the kivas. The village was not destroyed, but as soon as the raiders had taken such prisoners as they wanted to take and had killed the others and probably took some of the spoils of the houses, they returned. At a place between Walpi and Mishongnovi called Skeleton Mound (Maschomo), they halted. The Oraibi now showed their dissatisfaction and said to the others: "This is not the way the chief told us that it should be. We should select our prisoners first. You have taken what belonged to us. This here was to be ours; that there was to be ours; and this was to be ours; and you have taken them. Now you give to us what belongs to us, as the chief of Aoatovi told us." Thus they spoke to them,

But the Mishongnovi and Walpi refused to give up the women and maidens. "We have captured them, we have taken them," they said, "and by that they became ours. We shall not give them to you.'' Hereupon the Oraibi chief said: "Very well, then these are mine. They were given to me," and hereupon he called upon his people to take them." "Let us kill them," he said, "and then they will belong to nobody, and there will be no wrangle about them." Hereupon the Oraibi grabbed a great many of them, whereupon the women and maidens who were thus taken cried and begged to be allowed to go along. "Do not kill us," they implored them, "we shall go with you." Many of the younger and prettier ones about whom the quarrel had taken place were killed. Some, however, pitied their victims and these as well as others about whom there was no contention were taken to the different villages. That is the reason why in Oraibi, Mishongnovi, and Walpi so many of the Aoatovi people may be found to the present day.

In Oraibi the following clans are represented from those people: the Sand clan, the Rabbit clan, the Coyote clan, and the Butterfly clan. Of the latter, however, only one woman is left. There are in Oraibi two different kinds of all of these clans except the Sand clan, all of which are probably the Aoatovi people, while those of the other clans have come from different directions. The Aoatovi people introduced in Oraibi the Oaqol cult, which is the latest cult introduced in Oraibi. The same cult was also introduced by them in Mishongnovi and Walpi. At every Soyal ceremony these clans place their bahos at a separate place at the edge of the mesa for their dead ancestors.

Footnotes

^246:1 Told by Tangakhoyoma (Oraibi).

^248:1 The-One-With-The-Hair-Tied-Up.

^248:2 The-One-With-The-Ground-Spanish-Pepper-Wrapped-Up.

^248:3 The-One-With-The-Crow-Feathers-Around-The-Neck.

^248:4 The-One-With-The-Yellow-Painted-Face.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

104. THE DESTRUCTION OF AOATOVI. [*1]

Aliksai! At Aoatovi they were living. The village chief had some fine nice fields there. North of the village were two springs. The village chief also had a son, but all the maidens of the village were afraid of this youth and refused to marry him. He was a great hunter and always went hunting. So one time he again led a hunting expedition. They went south-west of the village, away off, where they assembled at a certain place. They had built their fire. Some of the maidens of the village took part in the hunt. They then formed two parties, and these spread out to form a circle. There were a great many rabbits and they killed a great many. A large hawk took part in the hunt too. He would swoop down on the rabbits and kill them. This he did for the village chief's son, so that when they went home the village chief had a great deal of game to carry home. When the sun was low they arrived at the spring close to Aoatovi. Here they drank and then they went up to the village. On the way up they ate many peaches and watermelons that were growing close to the mesa. The peaches were just beginning to get ripe.

The village chief's son not having anything to carry, ran ahead to the village, wrapped up in his blanket, and seated himself on top of a house and watched for the hunters to come up. When they assembled in the village he came down and met his father in the house. Here they ate supper. When they were through his sister removed the remnants. The father then smoked on the game, whereupon the son addressed his father and said: "My father, I am unhappy here, and now our children (people) they shall be happy here only this long too. Let us do something to them. You go to Toriva tomorrow morning." "Is that so?" the father said. "Yes," the son replied.

So early in the morning the village chief repaired to the village of Hano, where he met the chief of that village. "Why have you come?" the latter said. "Yes," the visitor replied, "my son spoke to me something not good last night, and I have come to tell you about it. The maidens of our village refuse to marry him. They run away from him and so we want you to come and fetch our people. You notify the other villages and then you come sometime and bring powder of Spanish pepper with you, and then when they are all in their kiva you give them that pepper. "Hereupon the village chief returned to his home. The chief of Hano went to inform the inhabitants

[p. 255]

of Sitchomovi, and of Walpi, both of which villages were then situated north of the mesa where there are now some ruins. He told them that the next night they should get ready for the expedition.

So the next evening the people of the three villages came out, -went down the mesa and repaired to the village of Aoatovi, where they camped at the spring north of the village at the foot of the mesa. There was a great storm raging at that time. So in the evening they ascended the mesa. The men were still in their different kivas eating their evening meals. The enemies drew out the ladders from the kivas so that the men could not come out. They then gathered the women and children, and while some of the raiders drove them off in little bunches and parties, others threw firebrands into the kivas and destroyed the men. The captives were taken to the villages and distributed there where they remained.

Footnotes

^254:1 Told by Kuhkuima (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

105. HOW AN ORAIBI CHIEF PUNISHED HIS PEOPLE. [*1]

A long time ago the people were living in Oraibi. They were also living in Walpi which, however, then was not on top of the mesa, but somewhat farther down towards the north-west. One time the children (people) of the chief in Oraibi were very bad and the chief concluded that he would punish them. So he went over to the warrior chief in Walpi. He sat down and they first smoked, then the warrior chief asked him what his object in coming was. "Yes," he said, "my children are very bad and I have come to see what you think about it. After some days we will come by here to attack Walpi. You must then be ready and come to meet us in the valley, and when my children return and run, you must kill them, but those who pass the rock that is standing south of Ponotoika, they shall remain unmolested.

The warrior chief of Walpi agreed to this, on the condition that the Oraibi chiefs would not ask for any of the lives of the Walpi. To this he agreed. So the Oraibi chief returned and told his people that in four days they would make a raid on Walpi and try especially to steal some maidens. They were willing, and so during the night after the third day proceeded towards Walpi. Early in the morning they approached the village, hut the Walpi were ready. They descended from their village well armed, and, sounding the war yell, rushed upon the Oraibi.

One of the Walpi young men had a very large, fierce dog. This dog rushed ahead and bit a great many of the Oraibi in the leg, thus

[p. 256]

disabling them. The Oraibi had been so thoroughly surprised that they got frightened and fled when the Walpi rushed upon them. The latter now chased the fleeing Oraibi and killed a great many. The big dog also disabled and killed a number of them. Only a few passed the rock mentioned above. On account of this battle, in which that dog killed so many Oraibi, a dog is engraved on that rock and it is called the dog mark (Pokvaita).

This is the way chiefs often punished their children (people) when they became "bewitched." That is one reason why there are so very many ruins all over the country. Many people were killed in that way because their chiefs became angry and invited some chief or inhabitant from other villages to destroy their people.

Footnotes

^255:1 Told by Sik'ahpiki (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

106. A KATCINA RACE CONTEST BETWEEN THE WALPI AND THE ORAIBI. [*1]

Haliksai! In Walpi the people were living, but at the place where the old village stood before the people had moved on the mesa. And in Oraibi the people were also living. The Walpi always had races west of the village in the valley for practice. When they had become strong, they said: ''Let us go to Oraibi and race there, because they are not strong and nimble." One time they had a Katcina race in Walpi again, as they used to have frequently. One of the Oraibi youths who had a friend in Walpi went to visit his friend on that day, though he had not heard about there being a race there. As the Katcinas were coming towards evening his friend said to the Oraibi youth, that he should stay all night and see the Katcinas, and then go home in the morning. So the Oraibi youth remained for the Katcina race.

They did not come until towards evening. When they had arrived on the plaza the Koyemsis challenged the young men of the village to come and race with the Katcinas. The Oraibi youth enjoyed seeing the race, but he was somewhat timid and afraid to participate in the race. When the race was over the young men of the village had long races yet down in the valley, but they said to one another, that no one should tell the Oraibi youth that they intended to go there and race with the Oraibi. In the evening, however, the friend of this young man told him that the Walpi had been practicing and that they intended to come to Oraibi and race with the Oraibi youths. He added that they should also practice in Oraibi for this coming contest, and said that these Walpi were braggarts

[p. 257]

and not so strong as they said they were. When he had told him this they retired for the night.

Early the next morning, before he had eaten a morning meal, the Oraibi youth returned to his village, running very fast. When he arrived there he told the crier to make an announcement. The latter announced that the youths of the village should assemble on the plaza, as a certain youth had something to communicate to them. Hereupon the young men assembled on the plaza and asked the young man what he had to tell them. He said that he had been in Walpi, that they had Katcina races there and practiced running, and that they were going to come over here to race with them, so they should now go and practice running and thus become strong. "Let us race here north of the village," he added. "They were going to come here without informing us, but my friend there told me about it."

So they assembled at Hohoyahki, north of the village, and there had two races. "Let us stop now," they said to each other; "if we race too long one gets tired and does not recover from his fatigue." Thus they practiced for four days. On the fifth day the Walpi came. They did not know, however, that the Oraibi had heard about their coming. When the Walpi arrived at the spring K'eqo'chmovi, east of Oraibi, where there were then no houses, they dressed up at that spring so that the Oraibi should not find out so soon, but the Oraibi had noticed them. When they had dressed up they ran towards the village, following a trail straight up towards the Katcinkihu Kuwawaima. Here they gathered and Stopped for a little while and then ran towards the village.

The people of the village, though they had known of their coming, acted as if they had not seen them. Two of the Katcinas were Koyemsis who carried gifts in the form of comiviki, roasted sweet corn ears, etc. When they had arrived at the plaza one of the older Oraibi went to them and asked: "Have you come? Have you arrived?" "Yes," the Koyemsis replied. "On what account did you come?" they were asked. "Yes," the Koyemsis said, "we have come to contend with your young men in a race." Hereupon the old man asked the Oraibi youths to descend from the houses and race with these Katcinas. Immediately a large number of the young men came down, laid off their clothes, and raced with the Katcinas. As so many entered the race the Katcinas were soon tired. They did not capture one Oraibi racer, did not even get near enough to strike him with their yucca leaf whips.

When they were through racing they had not caught a single

[p. 258]

Oraibi youth, and the Oraibi had won from them all the presents. The Katcinas were very tired. The man who had received them on the plaza gave them at least some prayer-meal, whereupon they returned to the Katcina house south of the village, where they laid off their costumes. They then again met the Oraibi men to race with them west of the village. "You have beaten us," they said to the Oraibi, "if we do not win in this race then we shall indeed be very much dejected." They then descended from the village on the west side, ran towards Mumu'shvavi, from there south-westward, then south around the mesa point, and ascended the mesa from the east side, thus describing a very large circle.

The Walpi again could not overtake the Oraibi and when they got to K'eqo'chmovi, the Walpi were very tired and gave up the race. The two Koyemsis who were a little older than the others and were not quite so tired went up to the Katcina house and got the costumes of the Walpi, whereupon the Walpi all returned, very much in despair. They went very slowly and were very quiet. "The Oraibi," they said among themselves, "are very strong." It was early in the morning when one after the other arrived at Walpi, some of them being so tired that they had fallen far behind. They agreed that they should not go and race with the Oraibi again.

Footnotes

^256:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

107. THE LAST FIGHT WITH THE NAVAHO. [*1]

The Navaho had repeatedly raided the other villages, though the Oraibi had never had a real encounter with that warlike tribe, by which they were surrounded, but they did not allow themselves to be lulled into a false safety. They kept their bows in order, their quivers full of arrows, and did not forget to constantly practice shooting. One day while a number of the men had been practicing with their bows and arrows on the west side of the village, at the foot of the mesa, where they had filled several sand piles with arrows, the news was called down to them from the edge of the mesa that a large cloud of dust was seen in one of the wooded canyons towards the north-east, and that it looked as if a great many people were approaching the village. It was towards evening. The men gathered up their bows and arrows and hastened to the village. Here the roofs were covered with expectant people, whose faces were turned towards the approaching dust cloud about six miles towards the north-east. It soon became clear to all that an expedition was undertaken against the village of Oraibi on the part of the Navaho. Suddenly the Hopi

[p. 259]

noticed that the approaching enemy halted and evidently had struck camp for the night. A great many camp-fires were soon seen at the place where they camped. These were kept up all night. The greatest excitement prevailed in the village. The different clans were invited to assemble in the ancestral homes of their respective clans, where councils were being held during the greater part of the night, as to what was to be done to meet the approaching danger. After these councils were over the village crier invited all the people to the public plaza of the village. Firewood was being brought together and a large fire was kept up in the center of the plaza. The situation was discussed in all its aspects. People encouraged one another. Those who were expected to set out as warriors were especially encouraged; they were told that they should be careful of their lives and that any plunder that might be found on the enemies, such as weapons, clothing, etc., should be owned by whomsoever succeeded in taking it. All narratives about this event agree in this fact, that a number of Hopi, who either were entirely discouraged from the beginning or saw no hope of their gaining the victory, and who perhaps acted as traitors, went to the Navaho during the night. They took with them such presents. as buckskins, blankets, different articles of clothing, etc. Arriving at the Navaho camp each one approached some Navaho warrior and told him: "I want you to kill me to-morrow in the battle." "What will be the price for it?" he was asked by the Navaho warrior. "This," the Hopi answered, and handed him the present that he had brought. Hereupon the Navaho warrior would puncture the foot of the Hopi, near the ankle, over a pot that had been put into the ground, and the blood thus extracted would be allowed to run into the pot. The loss of blood so weakened the Hopi warriors that they could only walk slowly on the next day and were easily singled out by the Navaho. These Hopi hereupon returned to the village, not of course telling their brethren what they had done at the Navaho camp.

The Navaho during the night sang their war songs and performed their war ceremonies. Early in the morning at the so-called white rising--as the Hopi called the early dawn--the Navaho broke camp and made towards the village of Oraibi. At the so-called yellow dawn--as the Hopi called the dawn immediately before sunrise--they had reached a place north of the village where they ascended the mesa and filled the entire space north of the village.

The Hopi had not been idle during the night. After they were through with the councils and had made up their minds that they would have to fight, they began to prepare for the approaching encounter. [p. 260] The Hopi at that time had a great many buckskins Every warrior wrapped two or even more of these around the upper part of his body, taking care that the thick head and neck part of the buckskin covered his chest or abdomen. Arrows and bows were secured wherever they could be gotten. Furthermore, they armed themselves with stone tomahawks, boomerangs, and throwing-sticks of every description. Some put the head-dresses peculiar to their societies on their heads, for instance, those belonging to the Horn Society, two horns; those belonging to the Agave Society, one horn, and so on. Most of them tied some feathers into their hair. When all were ready they lined up north of the village, filling the whole space from the rim of the east side to the edge on the west side of the mesa. The warrior chief of the Burrowing Owl clan performed certain war rites, the same, it is said, that are still performed as a part of the great Soyal ceremony.

A water tray was placed on the ground, many fetishes and amulets, bones, etc., were placed around the medicine bowl, and a number of war songs chanted. At the conclusion of the ceremony the bodies of all the warriors were decorated with certain spots, the material used being a peculiar stone, which is found west of Oraibi. This stone is called pookongnayoo (war god vomisis). The war chief pulverized this stone, mixed it with the water from the medicine bowl, and decorated the bodies of the warriors by rubbing his hand over the outside of the lower and upper leg close to the knee, the outside of the lower and upper arm close to the elbow, and over his heart and back. It is, in fact, the same decoration which may now be seen on the body of the snake dancers.

By this time the Navaho began to come nearer and the Hopi drew up in line ready to meet them. The leader of the Navaho, being mounted on a pony and dressed in a large piece of bayetta (a red European cloth), with not only his but also his pony's body covered, rode up to the Hopi. After saying something to them, which, however, history has failed to record, he shot the first arrow into the crowd of the Hopi, without hitting any of them. Hereupon he swung around his pony and (lashed back to his people, who now rushed towards the Hopi, and the battle was opened, The sun had not yet risen. The battle at once became very fierce; the Agave, Snake, Lizzard, Burrowing Owl, and Squash clans took the lead. They were armed with shields, war clubs, tomahawks, etc. They were followed by those fighting with bows and arrows. While the first line served with their shields as a protection, striking, of course, their assailants with their war clubs wherever they had an opportunity, the archers

[p. 261]

shot into the enemy through the spaces between the warriors in front of them. The Hopi succeeded in driving the Navaho slowly backward to a place a few miles north-east of Oraibi where they drove them off the mesa. One of the Navaho had lived in Oraibi a while, and in fact had been initiated into the Wu'wuchim society. He could speak the Hopi language and called out to one of the Hopi warriors by the name of Chiniwa: "You had better fight us here where we now are and do not follow us, but remain where you are, because you will all be killed. Our people have not yet all arrived; there are many more farther east.'' Chiniwa conveyed this information to his brethren warriors but without avail. The Hopi followed the Navaho, and in the valley both drew up a line of battle ready to again engage in regular battle. While the two lines of warriors were facing each other, a Navaho woman, being mounted on a pony, grabbed a lance from a Navaho warrior, dashed towards the line of the Hopi, followed by her people. They broke through the line of Hopi and thus divided the latter into two parties. These they at once surrounded, which placed the Hopi at a disadvantage.

The sun was by this time just rising and the Hopi saw that the Navaho warriors were simply dressed in their loin cloths, some having on moccasins. Their bodies were decorated with red paint over which they had drawn their fingers when it was still wet, making their bodies full of lines. Their hair was hanging down their backs loose. They were all mounted on ponies. The Hopi, however, had this advantage, that their bodies were well wrapped with heavy buckskins, while those of the Navaho were nude, so that a great many more of the arrows of the Hopi proved fatal to their enemies than vice versa. The Hopi say that many of the Navaho arrows were shot into the buckskins that were wrapped around their bodies and were dangling down on all sides from their bodies. This accounts partly for the fact that the Hopi, though outnumbered by their enemies, were not exterminated.

The battle lasted until late in the afternoon. The Hopi would break through the circles of the warriors surrounding them, but were always surrounded again by new parties, so that the circles surrounding the fighting Hopi became smaller and smaller. The Hopi say that the Navaho were much better provided with shields than they were, so that they could cover themselves completely when encircling the Hopi, but the Hopi say they would not always shoot at the enemies just in front of them but would sometimes threaten them and then turn around quickly and then shoot at somebody else from the side and past their shields. They also say that the

[p. 262]

Navaho in charging them on their ponies would often, after they had shot an arrow, or saw that they were threatened by some special Hopi warrior, turn their ponies around quickly and lower themselves by the side of the pony, while they dashed away, but often the Hopi still succeeded in shooting them even in that position.

The arms of the Navaho also consisted of bows, arrows, shields, and war clubs, and some few had guns and pistols which they had procured from the Spaniards. In the afternoon a small party of Hopi succeeded in climbing the point of the mesa north-east of the battle-field, called Shongohtoika. They were followed by some of the Navaho warriors, but the latter soon had to give up the pursuit on account of the many rocks and boulders that are scattered close to the mesa. The party of Hopi remained at the edge of the mesa looking down upon the battle-field. Here the nephew of Chiniwa had in the meanwhile been shot in the foot so that he could not walk. His uncle Chiniwa said to him: ''You will probably not get away here." "No, perhaps not," the young man answered, ''but I want at least to shoot some one yet." So he laid all his arrows that he still had in his quiver on his lap and shot into the body of the Navaho, when the latter at once surrounded him and killed him with their lances and clubs, and tore from his body his buckskin and clothing, In the meanwhile the men on the edge of the mesa counseled with one another whether they should go down and assist their hard-pressed brethren, but only three were willing. These went down and hid behind rocks, towards which a party of Navaho was driven by a party of Hopi. When the retreating Navaho had come within shooting distance of the three Hopi hidden behind the rocks, the latter killed a number of them from their safe shelter. Hereupon the Navaho scattered, giving the Hopi who were pursuing them an opportunity to also rush behind the rocks where they were greeted by their three valiant brethren. All now ascended the mesa where they proceeded in a north-westerly direction along the edge of the mesa. They were preceded by the party of Navaho who had pursued them to the foot of the mesa, and who had in the meanwhile rounded on their very swift ponies on the point of the mesa and ascended on the point of the opposite side, but it seems that this party of Navaho for some reason or other--because they were afraid, the Hopi say--failed to attack them. All they did was to wave the buckskins, clothing, etc., that they had taken from their slain brethren, and mock them.

The Hopi finally found a place where they could descend the

[p. 263]

mesa, crossed the small valley, which is quite deep, stopped at one place and then reached a small spring by the name of Ohowikba. Here they rested, as they were very thirsty and a number of them were wounded. The latter asked their comrades to dress their wounds the best they could then carry them home the rest of the way, which was done. The Navaho party who had pursued these Hopi had not followed them, they had descended the mesa at some other place, but made for the village of Oraibi. In the valley where the main battle-ground was, the fighting had also ceased by this time. The different groups of fighting Hopi had succeeded in cutting their way through their assailants and were running towards the village, leaving a great many dead and wounded behind. The Navaho had also lost very heavily, but it is said that the Navaho carried their wounded away while the battle was raging, taking them all to a certain place from which they later took them with them, tying them on their ponies. The retreating Hopi were followed by bands of Navaho, while other bands of the latter tried to outflank them and to reach the village first. [*1]

While both parties were drawing closer to the village, the Hopi retreating and the Navaho following them, more or less fighting was going on, about which various details are still mentioned when the events of this important day of Hopi history are related. For instance, when the Hopi had arrived on top of the first mesa south of the battle-field, six of them hid in a stone inclosure. Whether it was a sheep corral or a temporary shelter that some Hopi had built, is not known. Here they were at once attacked by a party of Navaho whom they kept at a respectable distance with their well-directed arrows. The Navaho seeing that they could not overpower these men with their bows and arrows procured from some of their comrades some firearms. With these they kept shooting at the imperfect inclosure until they had killed five out of the six men. The sixth one jumped out of the inclosure, rushed through the attacking party, and jumped down at a steep though not very high place from the

[p. 264]

mesa. Of the various missiles that were fired at him, none proved to be fatal. The Navaho followed him to the edge of the mesa, but had not the courage to jump after him. He hid away under a projecting rock where he stayed all day.

While this happened, one of the Hopi warriors, who had proven himself especially brave, had rounded the point of this mesa and was making his way towards the village of Oraibi. He was followed by several Navaho who hit him several times, but owing to the fact that he was well wrapped with good buckskins, none of the shots took fatal effect. These Navaho, as the Hopi believe, became somewhat superstitious about this man. The latter claim that the pursuing party abandoned pursuit of this one warrior, saving to one another: "Do not follow that man. He is very brave and will surely kill you." Some of the Hopi by this time discovered that among the Navaho warriors there were some Hopi from the village of Walpi. These Walpi had so thoroughly disguised themselves with paint and by combing their hair in the same manner as the Navaho that they had not been recognized before. One of the first to recognize them was the man lying under the rock, who noticed that the short front hair of one of the Walpi dropped from behind his ear. Soon the brave warrior just mentioned also recognized the Walpi, and at once addressed them, saving: "So, you are with them too, we thought there were only Navaho." "Oh!" the Walpi said, "we are being recognized now. Let us kill him. If we do not kill him he will certainly tell on us in Oraibi. But how shall we kill him, shall we attack him and shoot him?" "No," some one said, "let us go and capture him." Hereupon some of them dismounted and they as well as some on horseback formed a ring around the man and then closed in on him, He broke the skull of one of them with his tomahawk, whereupon he was immediately overpowered and thrown upon the ground. One of the Walpi by the name of Shiita knelt on his breast and forced a lance into his throat, killing him. They took all his clothes and buckskins, cut open his breast, tore out his heart, which they took with them. All this was observed and later on reported by the man hidden under the rock not far away. The Walpi then took their victim on a horse and took him with them to Walpi, where they placed him in a small hut or inclosure which a herder had built for a temporary shelter throwing stones upon him.

In the meanwhile troops of Navaho, among whom were many women, had reached the village where the Hopi who had remained behind had assembled their flocks of sheep on the plaza, which the

[p. 265]

Hopi say was crowded with sheep. They had closed up the passages to the plaza with beams, rocks, etc., placing also guards at every opening, watching the sheep. When the Navaho arrived, however, they tore down the barriers in the opening on the north side and drove the sheep out. The Navaho women were busily engaged in shelling the corn north of the village and loading it on their ponies. One Hopi watching one of the approaches was shot in the leg by one of the Navaho. The Navaho seemed to be in a hurry, for they only rifled some of the houses on the north side of the village! The arrival of the Hopi warriors by that time may also have been a cause of their not carrying their depredation farther than they did. When they had loaded a number of ponies with corn they left the village, taking also with them all the sheep that had been assembled in the plaza. Somewhat north-east from the main battle-field they camped. Here they also had, during the battle, taken a great many of their dead and wounded, and they later admitted that there were a great many of them. They tied the dead, as well as the wounded, on their ponies, and then left for their homes. It is also said that a great many of their ponies that they took with them had been wounded in the fight, and later on they told the Hopi that on the way quite a number of them died. These they left behind them. Also a number of the wounded died while they were traveling, and it is said that all that died were buried at a place somewhere west of Ki'shiwuu, a place about sixty miles north-east of Oraibi. It is also said that there was a great deal of mourning among the Navaho as they returned from this expedition. Most of the information on the Navaho side was later on brought to Oraibi by the aforesaid Ma'yalolo and another Navaho by the name of La'totovi, both of whom had been with the Hopi for some time, and had been initiated into their Wu'wuchim society.

After the Navaho had left the village, stragglers of the Hopi warriors kept coming in. Many of these were wounded; some of them had to be carried to the village. These called the ones who carried them Fathers. All the wounded were placed in an ancestral home of the Coyote clan. Here the "Fathers" of the wounded remained with their "Children." During the night and the following day some died. During this time there was a great deal of mourning and weeping. The corpses of those who died were taken out and cared for by those who had cared for them while they were sick. On the fourth day those who still survived were taken to their homes, that is, not where their families were, but to the homes of their parents,

[p. 266]

where they were then taken care of. Some of the wounded Hopi later on also died, while a great many of them recovered. 

Footnotes

^258:1 Told by Qoyawaima (Oraibi).

^263:1 The number killed on both sides will perhaps never be fully ascertained, but the aforementioned Navaho, Ma'yalolo had become a member of one of the Hopi societies, later on came to Oraibi, and he is authority for the statement, which the Oraibi keep reiterating, that a great many more Navaho were killed than Hopi. He also stated, which of course is also substantiated by the Hopi, that a great many Navaho ponies were also killed. It is reasonable to believe that this statement is correct from the fact, already mentioned, that the Navaho were fighting with naked bodies, while the Hopi were well protected by buckskins which they had wound around them. It seems that they were about equally well armed, and the courage of the Hopi was probably as great as that of their assailants. The fact that the Navaho where mounted, of course placed the Hopi at a disadvantage while they were fighting on even ground, but wherever the Hopi could withdraw behind rocks or into other unapproachable places, the Navaho derived but little benefit from their ponies.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

108. A HOPI RAID ON A NAVAHO DANCE. [*2]

Aliksai! At a certain place the Navaho were living. They were going to have a dance at some place towards the north, so they gathered together their ponies and early in the morning they dressed up. The women did not have calico dresses, but wore blue dresses with red borders and silver belts. So when they were all dressed up they mounted their ponies and went to the dance. There were a great many of them. A very heavy dust rose from all their ponies as they traveled on. They went to a place in the large canyon, somewhat north of where Fort Defiance now stands. Towards evening they arrived at the place where the dance was to be. It was in a very deep canyon. They had to go down a steep, dangerous, zigzag trail. The Navaho lived well there; they had good homes and near by some peach orchards. During the night they had their dance. They had prepare-d a great deal of food of different kinds of meat, and thus they were eating, and during the night they had their Katcina dance. There were a great many Katcinas that had masks on. The people were camped in a circle and had camp-fires, and in the center of the circle was the dance. When they were performing the fifth dance a light was seen in the distance and a big star was rising that came down and fell down near the line of dancers, right in front of the head dancer.

The Navaho are very much afraid of something happening, so when his star fell down they all jumped on their ponies and began to scatter. Hereupon a great noise was heard west of the camp. The Oraibi had arrived to make a raid on the Navaho, but not the Oraibi from the present village. They then lived a little farther west, where there are some ruins now (the name of which the narrator cannot give). A great battle then ensued, but the Navaho were driven back out of the canyon, because they tried to protect their wives and children.

[p. 267]

The Hopi followed them, shooting principally with reed arrows, and killing a great many of them. Only a few finally escaped to their homes, and that is the reason why the Navaho, when they have a dance now, always put out some watchers to look out for intruders.

Footnotes

^266:1 The Navaho, it seems, had used poisoned arrows. The Hopi say that the way the Navaho prepared these arrows was as follows: They would suspend a rattlesnake and place a vessel under it, into which the putrid matter from the decaying rattlesnake dropped. They would mix with this matter poison that they had extracted from the fangs of the rattlesnakes, and with this stuff they would poison their arrows. But the Hopi say that in that battle it often happened that the Hopi would procure the bows and arrows of slain Navaho, and thus shoot their enemies with those poisoned arrows, so that the Navaho were paid back in their own coin, and the Hopi repeat in this connection that a great many Navaho died from these poisoned arrows because their bodies were entirely unprotected, while the bodies of the Hopi were well wrapped with buckskins, which furnished a good protection against the arrows.

^266:2 Told by Kuhkuima (Shupaulavi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

109. A RAID ON THE HOPI VILLAGES. [*1]

Haliksai! At the old ruin on top of the hill (about seven miles north-east of Oraibi) used to live some people. Across the valley on another mesa was also a village. The inhabitants of these two villages used to live farther north-east. They were harassed and warred upon by the Utes (Utsia), for which reason they moved to the two places already mentioned. For about five years they were left in peace in those villages after they had settled there. But in the sixth year their enemies found them again, and one evening they were seen approaching the village and were camping at the mesa somewhat eastward. The chiefs said to their young men: "It seems that somebody is camping there. You run there in the evening and find out who they are."

So some of the young men ran there, and sneaking close to the camp found out that, sure enough, they were their old enemies. When the inhabitants of the villages heard that, they were busy all night making bows and arrows and preparing for a fight. Very early in the morning the inhabitants of the village on the west side of the valley all moved over to a small village on the east side of the valley, that was situated on the extreme edge of the mesa. Here they thought they could defend themselves better, as it would be very difficult for their enemies to get up to their village.

When the sun rose the enemies approached the village on the west side of the valley, rushed up the hill and went through the village, but did not find any one, all having fled. But they soon discovered their tracks and followed them. They were on horseback, but when they arrived at the place where these people had assembled they could not get up to the village, and many of them were shot and killed by the people in the village. But finally, towards evening, some of them going around the mesa succeeded in getting into the village from the south side, where they captured some of the women and maidens, rushed off with them, mounted their ponies, and escaped.

The warriors of the village, though they followed them, could not overtake them, as they were afoot. The people who had thus been

[p. 268]

attacked said that they would not stay at their villages, as they would certainly be attacked again by their enemies. So they dressed up and packed up all their things, and forming into line, went to Oraibi, the chief going at the head of the line. They were admitted to the village and are still living there. In that battle not many of them had been killed, as they were well defended from their assailants, and the latter, after having taken some women and children, escaped.

Footnotes

^267:1 Told by Kwayeshva (Oraibi).

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

110. THE EARLY SPANISH MISSIONS AT ORAIBI. [*1]

A long time ago the Oraibi were living in their village. The Spaniards often made inroads upon them and warred against them. Finally they made peace with each other and the Spaniards requested that they be permitted to live in Oraibi. The Hopi consented, so they hunted a place where the Spaniards could build their house, and selected a place north of the village of Oraibi, where the ruins of the old Spanish buildings may still be seen. Here the Hopi assisted them in building their house. They got the stone for them and helped them to build their house, which the old people say was built in a spiral or snail-house shaped form, there being four spirals. In the center of the spiral-shaped construction was the house, or rather kiva, as the Hopi call it in their tales. Here, tradition says, the Spaniards withdrew, especially in winter when it was cold. Coming out of this kiva they had to go around four times through the long winding hallway which ended in the square house with four rooms. From this house the egress or ingress was made through doors, while from the place in the center the Hopi say they came out through the roof.

Soon another house, which tradition calls an "assembly house," was built north-east of this structure. This large house had a tower in which bells were suspended. When this assembly house was finished, the Spaniards called all the people from the village, and when they had assembled at their house, they told them that they should ,all go to the new, large assembly house, and when they had done so the Tutaachi told them that he was going to wash their heads (baptize them). They asked him what that was, what that meant. He told them that that was something very good. So they consented and he poured a little water on the heads of those present'. After this the Tutaachi called another Tutaachi from Basoi, [*2] who came with a number of others and brought clothing and shoes for the Hopi. The shoes

[p. 269]

were made of leather, the clothing of some gray woolen stuff. The things were brought on carts with heavy wooden wheels, but there was no iron on them,

It seemed that this Tutaachi was to be the assistant of the one living in Oraibi, at least the new arrival remained in Oraibi. The Hopi then had to assemble in the assembly house on Sundays, where the Tutaachis, or priests, spoke to them. Soon they asked the Hopi to work for them. The water in the springs around Oraibi not being good, they requested them to get drinking water for them from Mu'enkape, which is far away. The Oraibi soon got tired of this and sometimes, instead of going to Mu'enkape, they went to Tuhciva, a spring south of the mesa on which the sun shrine is situated, about three miles south-east of Oraibi. But the priests soon found out the deception, and were angry. They soon set the inhabitants of Oraibi to work at making cisterns, and the Hopi themselves were pleased with this, as they were now not requested to got water so often from the distance.

The Spaniards also soon brought cattle, and the Oraibi would occasionally buy calves from them for corn. Some of the cattle were very gentle and were used to drag logs to the village, which the Hopi had to get for the Spaniards from Ki'shiwuu, fifty or sixty miles north-east. The deep cuts and ruts in the rocks north-east of Oraibi where many logs were dragged up may still be seen to-day. Some also had to get logs from the San Francisco Mountains (near Flagstaff), but as parts of the road from there were very sandy, not so many were gotten from that place as from Ki'shiwuu.

Thus the Spaniards kept the Hopi at work in various ways, and they were not bad to them at first. For four years everything went along well, and it rained often too, so that there was water in the cisterns; but at the end of four years things began to change. The priests commenced to forbid the Hopi to have Katcina dances and to make bahos. They demanded of them to attend the meetings in the assembly house, and they did not let them concern themselves about the clouds and the rain, and that year (the fifth) it was very warm and very dry. The Hopi began to be very tired and did not plant much that year, so the chiefs called a council and they talked the matter over. "We are not getting along well," they said to each other, "we are not happy. It does not rain. Let us try it with bahos again. The Hopi have always had it that way, and known it that way, to make bahos for the clouds." So they again began to have ceremonies, each fraternity with its own altar, and they made bahos, but did not tell the priests about it. They deposited the prayer-offerings

[p. 270]

in the different directions, but it did not rain. So the chiefs and leaders were very much discouraged. Their "fathers," as they had to call the Spanish priests, demanded food from them, and yet they had very little to eat themselves, only some votaka (corn-meal mush).

So they decided to try the Katcinas again, and they arranged a Katcina dance, but one of the Hopi went and informed the padres that they were going to have a Katcina dance again; then they had the dance, and it rained some, but very little. The padres in the meanwhile continued to oppress the Hopi and made them work very hard, and demanded contributions of food, etc., from them. They would also disregard all the feelings of the Hopi as to their own (the Hopi's) religion. They would trample under foot the chastity of the Hopi women and maidens. So finally the Hopi became angry and began to discuss the advisability of getting rid of their oppressors. One time a number of the latter went away, east somewhere, to get some supplies, clothing, etc., it is said, so that the padre remained at the Mission alone. When the Hopi saw that the priest's assistants had left, they met in council in the Nashebe, the chief's kiva, and talked the matter over. Some were in favor of going and killing the padre, others objected, saying that certainly the Spaniards would then come and punish them. But finally the party that was in favor of getting rid of the oppressors prevailed, and they concluded that they would stand the oppression no longer, but get rid of the priest. The question then came up, Who should go and kill him? Nobody wanted to do it. Finally the Badger clan volunteered to go. "You are not brave," they said, "we shall go."

So they proceeded to the Mission and knocked at the door. The padre was asleep and after they had roused him up he refused to open the door at first, but when they continued to knock he opened the door, whereupon they rushed into the room, grabbed him, dragged him out of the house, threw him on the ground and then cut his throat, one holding his head. Hereupon they carried the corpse eastward down the mesa, where they threw it into a gulch and piled stones upon it. Hereupon they waited for some time to see whether anybody would come, or what would happen.

The killing of the padre in Oraibi the signal for the other villages to get rid of the padres that lived at those mesas also. The Hopi then waited, expecting that Spaniards would come and avenge their brethren, but no one came, so they destroyed the houses of the Spaniards, divided their logs and timbers, and used them for their kivas. Some of the smaller bells are still owned by the Agave Fraternity.

[p. 271]

No one has ever come to punish the Hopi for killing the padres. The places where the latter had their large sheep corrals call still be seen, especially near the spring Nawaivoco, and at a place about four miles south of Oraibi. From that time on the Hopi again had their dances and their sacred altar performances in their kivas.

[p. 273]

  

ABSTRACTS.

Footnotes

^268:1 Told by Wikvaya (Oraibi).

^268:2 This place could not be identified and I doubt whether the name was given correctly.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

1.--ORIGIN MYTH.

When nothing but water, Huruing Wuhti, deity of hard substances, lives in ocean in east. Another Huruing Wuhti lives in ocean in west. Sun also exists, and before rising in cast dresses in skin of gray fox, but soon exchanges it for skin of yellow fox, whereupon morning dawns. Two deities cause dry land to appear in midst of water. Sun sees no living being and tells deities. They consult and make Wren of clay. Wren flies over earth and reports no living being exists. However, Spider Woman is living in southwest. Deity of west makes many other birds to inhabit world. The two deities teach them sounds they should make. Deity of west makes different kinds of animals, which are taught their different languages. Deity of east makes of clay first woman, then man, to live on earth and understand everything. Deity makes two tablets of hard substance and draws characters on them with wooden stick. She rubs with palms of hands palms of woman and man, who then understand writing on tablets. Deities teach them language. Deity of east takes them over rainbow to her home. They stay four days, and then she tells them to go and select place to live. They build small house. Spider Woman makes man and woman of clay. They are Spaniards. She teaches them Spanish language and gives them tablets and imparts knowledge to them by rubbing hands, as deity of east had done with "white man," She creates two burros for them. Spider Woman creates other men and women, giving different language to each pair. She forgets to create woman for certain man, and afterwards fails to create man for certain woman. Tells woman to go and find man and live with him. They meet and live together, but they soon quarrel and separate. They come together again, and separate, and so on. This is why there are so many contentions between men and their wives. Huruing Wuhti of west now creates many people in pairs, husband and wife. They live in west and lead nomadic life, living on game. There are many contentions among people, and deity of west goes to live in ocean in west. Tells people to pray to her there. Deity in east does something. Spanish are angry and two go with guns to abiding-place of Huruing Wuhti. She gets them to lay down their arms and asks them to lift stone. They try and their hands adhere to stone. Deity then rubs guns to powder and disappears through opening in floor of kiva. From there she exerts influence on stone and releases men when they promise to exchange with others good things they have.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

2.--HURUING WUHTI AND THE SUN.

Huruing Wuhti lives on small piece of land in west, and owns moon, stars, and all hard substances. She sends Moon for Sun in east. He goes to her, and they agree to own all things together. The y take skins of all kinds of birds, and Huruing Wuhti places them on floor. She then rubs small scales from her cuticle between palms of hands and places scales on feathers and skins and covers them with native cloth. Sun kindles fire at east side. They

[p. 274]

wave four corners of cloth, Huruing Wuhti singing, four times, and things begin to move and emit sounds as birds do. On removal of cover birds fly out into air, but return. Huruing Wuhti gives them to Sun, who places them in jar of transparent stone. Sun places different kinds of hair on floor with small quantity of his paints. He lets his beard drop upon objects and shakes wings towards them. They cover things up, each holding two corners of covering, and Suit sings song. Antelope and other animals jump up and run around. Sun tells Huruing Wuhti they are hers, and they afterwards consider her as their mother. Sun returns under earth to east and makes land by turning over land of Huruing Wuhti which is under water. He sees beings come out of water whom he calls White People, Spaniards and Mormons. He pours bird-; out of jar and they fly around in air and increase. Sun returns to Huruing Wuhti's house in west. She creates little maiden and little boy from pieces of her cuticle. She sends them away to live on earth, and names youth Muyingwa and maiden Yahoya. With scale matter from her umbilicus Huruing Wuhti makes another maiden. She calls her Sand Clan Member and Lizard Clan Member, and sends her after other two, giving her grain of shelled corn. Huruing Wuhti now rubs her face and inside of nose, and from scales makes child that cries like Hopi child would cry, and another that cries like coyote. She says maiden shall be Burrowing Owl Clan Member and youth Coyote Clan Member. She gives them each grain of shelled corn and tells them to follow others. Again Huruing Wuhti creates as before, and they hear somebody grunt and another one angry. The former is child like Hopi, and she names it Bear-Clan Member. She gives him grain of corn and sends him on. The other, Head-with-the-Hair-Pushed-over-it-Backward, is Navaho. She gives him piece of spoiled meat and sends him on. Sun returns to east, and next day he sees smoke arising at different places and people camping. He sees maiden and youth traveling along very tired. He gives them water to drink and little corn for food. He calls youth Sun Clan Member and maiden Forehead Clan Member and tells them to travel eastward.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

3.--COMING OF THE HOPI FROM THE UNDER-WORLD.

When people were living below they became quarrelsome, and some very depraved. Chiefs decide to find another place to live. They send bird Motsni to find place of exit. He is unsuccessful. They then send Mocking-bird, who finds place of exit. In meanwhile chiefs cause great flood. Many Balolookong-wuus come with water and many people are destroyed. On return of Mocking-bird chiefs announce they will leave in four days. They then plant pine-tree and make it grow fast by singing. It grows to opening, but it is not strong enough for many people to climb on. They plant a stronger kind of pine. This does Hot reach opening, and they plant reed, which is strong and grows through the opening. They also plant sun-flower, but its disk protrudes downward before it reaches opening. Spider Woman, Pookonghoya, his brother Baloongawhoya, and Mocking-bird climb pine through opening, and then Pookonghoya holds firmly to pine and his brother to reed. Mocking-bird sits singing songs still chanted at Wuwuchim ceremony. People begin to climb, and as they emerge, Mocking-bird assigns them places and gives them languages. Language spoken in under-world that of Pueblo Indians. Songs of Mocking-bird are exhausted before all people come out, and others begin to return. Kik-wongi from below is with people around opening. His

[p. 275]

half-grown son dies and is buried. He says some Powaka has come out with them. He makes ball of fine corn-meal and throws it upwards. It comes down on head of chief's nephew. Chief grabs him to throw him back. Nephew tells chief to look down opening. He looks down and sees son walking, so lets nephew remain. There is no sunshine. Light is seen at distance, and chief sends some one to see about it. He finds field where corn, etc., planted, and fire burning all around field to keep ground warm. Then he sees very handsome man, Skeleton, by whose side is standing very ugly mask. Skeleton feeds messenger and invites all people to come to him. They go and remain there. They make fields, and when they have gathered crop they plan to start off again. They still have no sun, and it is cold. They paint disk of buffalo hide white, with picture of woman in black, and place it on large piece of native cloth. Some one stands on moon symbol and chiefs swing cloth and throw it upward. It flies eastward into sky, and moon comes up in cast. The light is dim, and it is still cold, so they try to make something better. They cut round piece of cloth, stretch it over ring, and paint and decorate it, as sun symbol still used, attaching nakwakwosis to it. They place symbol with man on cloth, which they swing into air. It twirls upward toward east and sun rises. It is now warm and light and people think of moving on. They decide to go towards sunrise, but to divide into parties, White People going south, Hopi north, and Pueblos between them. They soon become estranged and attack one another. Castilians are especially bad. They agree that when one of parties reaches place where sun rises, stars will fall from sky, and other parties are to settle down where they are. Woman in one party makes horses from scalps rubbed off from her body, and they arrive first and many stars fall. Those who arrive at sunrise are to help others when they are molested by enemies.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

4.--THE WANDERINGS OF THE HOPI.

While living below, everything at first is good. Chiefs and then people begin to do bad. Sorcerers increase. People become very bad and take away wives of chiefs. Chiefs think of escaping. They hear sounds above and they decide to investigate. They make Pawaok'aya and sing over it. It comes to life, and they tell it to go up and find out. Chief plants lo'oqo tree, but it does not reach up. Then they plant reed that reaches up. Pawaok'aya ascends and finds opening. He goes through and flies around, but does not find anybody. He descends tired out and tells chiefs. They make Tohcha, which ascends and also finds nothing, returning exhausted. The same occurs with Hawk. Chiefs then make Motsni, which flies up through opening and finds place where Oraibi now is, and somebody sitting. it is Skeleton. Motsni tells him why he has come, and Skeleton says he is living in poverty, but they are welcome if they are willing to live with him. Motsni returns and tells chiefs, who determine to go. White Man, Paiute, Pueblo, and all people except Zuni and Kohonino then live down there. Those whose hearts are not very bad, assemble with chiefs. In four days they meet again and commence to climb up reed, led by Village Chief, followed by other chiefs and their people. Village Chief thinks Popwaktu are going to come up and he pulls up reed. He addresses people and says they must live with single heart. Chief's son sickens and dies. Chief says Powaka has come with them and he throws ball of fine meal upward. It alights on head of maiden. Chief accuses her, and says he will throw her down. She tells chief to look down and he will see his

[p. 276]

child running around. He looks, and lets maiden remain, but says she is to stay there for day after they leave. It is dark, and Spider Woman, assisted by Flute Priest, makes drawing on white cloth. They sing songs over it, and Spider Woman takes disk towards east. Soon moon rises, but it is not very light. They then draw sun symbol on circular piece of buckskin and sing over it. Spider Woman takes it away, and something rises again, and it becomes light and very warm. They have rubbed yolks of eggs over sun symbol, and this is why chickens know all about time. Chiefs make different kinds of plants and other things. Hopi language is spoken, but chief asks Mockingbird to give to different people different language. Mocking-bird does so. They sit down to common meal, and chief lays out many corn ears of different lengths and tells people to choose of them before they start. Every one wants longest ears. Small ears are left for Hopi, who only have corn. Chief agrees that elder brother shall go with party ahead towards sunrise. He is to touch sun with forehead and remain where sun rises. An old woman goes with each party. Each party takes stone having marks and figures and that fit together. If Hopi live again way they did in lower world, elder brother to come back and cut off heads of Powakas. Elder brother and party start and become White Men. Chief and party take southern route. Maiden Powaka follows them. People travel eastward in different parties with chief. They stop at certain places, and this is why there are so many ruins. Pueblo passed through while Hopi live. Spider Woman makes horses and burros for White Men and they go along much faster. Parties stay where there are good fields or springs for one or more years. They plant crops and create springs by burying bauypi containing certain herbs, bahos, etc. They can create rain. Contentions arise among parties, and they war on each other. So they build villages on bluffs and mesas. Bear and other clans, whose names are taken from dead bear, arrive at Mu'enkapi. Another Bear Clan arrives at Shongopavi, which is first village started. Skeleton is living where Oraibi now is . gear and two other clans move towards Oraibi. Spider Clan make marks on bluff east of Mu'enkapi, claiming water for Hopi. Snake Clan arrives and afterwards Burrowing Owl clan, and they write something on bluff. Skeleton comes to meet Bear clan, who want him to be chief. Skeleton refuses, but gives them land, and Bear clan builds houses east of Oraibi bluff where now are ruins. Bear clan brings A'ototo and Soyal Katcinas. Different clans arrive, and fields are allotted to them. Bow clan one of first to arrive, and leader arranges Katcina dance. On last day of dance it rains fearfully. Village chief tells them they shall have their ceremony Wuwuchim, first. Other clans bring other cults, and villages are built up slowly. Everything is good yet. When Katcinas dance it rains. They are simple and good Katcinas brought by Hopi from under-world. But Powaka maiden has taught others her evil arts, and Popwaktu have increased at Palatkwapi, which is destroyed by great water produced by Balolookongs. Some of its people are saved and reach Walpi and other villages, where they teach evil arts. They put sickness into people, and make enemies of Utes, Apache, and Navaho, who used to be friends of Hopi. White Men are called by Popwaktu and worry Hopi. But Hopi are still looking towards elder brother who arrived at sunrise first, and he is watching how they are getting along.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 277]

  

5.--THE ORIGIN OF SOME ORAIBI CLANS.

In under-world people live in same manner as here. Chief of Bear clan angry at wife for often dancing in Butterfly dance. Chief sends Po'okong and his brother in search of another world. They find opening above, which Po'okong reaches by means of reed. Chief leaves wife dancing, and accompanied by Po'okong and his brother, Spider clan chief, and many people, they start and go out. Bear chief closes opening. It is dark, and chief sends eagle to hunt for light. Eagle finds it hot, but he makes it lighter. Buzzard then goes and is burned, but makes it lighter. Bear clan and Spider clan go in different directions. Spider clan travels north following chief. They come to cold country where North Old Man lives. They plant corn, etc. Chief has cult and altar of Blue Flutes. When corn grows he puts up altar, sings and flutes. When ears of corn develop cold destroys crop. This occurs four years in succession, and people start south after Bear people. Chief's wife bathes and collects scales rubbed from skin. Chief wraps them in reed receptacle, sings over them, covers them four times, and they become burros. They repeat performance and Spaniards come out. Chief tells them to put their things on burros and follow Bear clan and kill them. Castilians go south. Spider people go southeast, and stop at ten different places. They finally arrive where sun rises and Americans live. They stay three years and then follow Bear clan westward. At Oraibi they join Bear clan, whose chief is Machito, and who have A'ototo and Aholi Katcinas. Bear clan go south with A'ototo Katcina and are joined by Young Coin Ear people who have Aholi Katcina. They stop ten times before arriving at Americans where sun rises. Here they stop four years. Land is scarce and they go west. Americans say if anybody bad they will come and cut their heads off. They finally arrive at Shongopavi and settle down. People accuse chief Machito of greediness, and he leaves them with A'ototo and Aholi. Hunters find them and want them to go back, but they refuse. Machito with stone makes land-mark between Oraibi and Shongopavi. Machito and two Katcinas go up Oraibi mesa. Later Spider people arrive, and Machito asks about their wanderings. He says they may live there, but they are to watch sun for Soyal ceremony and to make his kind of puhtavi. Among Spider clan is Lizard clan, who have Marau cult, They are permitted to stay, but are to co-operate in Soyal ceremony. Other clans that come are Rattle Snake, Badger, Butterfly, and Divided Spring. Divided Spring and Blue Flutes have corn contest, in which latter win.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

6.--THE SNAKE MYTH.

People live north of Grand Canyon. Son of chief wonders where water goes to and tells father he will go to examine it. Makes boat, into which he gets with lot of bahos and some food, and floats until he comes to ocean. He drifts against island. Here is house of Spider Woman, who calls him in. He tells her his story and gives her baho. She points to kiva in water where are beads and corals, but wild animals guard path. She gives him medicine, and seats herself behind his right ear. They cross water on rainbow which young man forms by spurting medicine. As they approach kiva they encounter successively panther, bear, wildcat, gray wolf, and rattlesnake, all of which they appease with bahos and medicine. At entrance of kiva is Bow standard. They descend ladder and find many people dressed in blue kilts. Their faces

[p. 278]

are painted with specular iron and they have beads around their necks. Young man sits down near fireplace. All are silent. Chief fills large pipe with tobacco and smokes four times. He hands pipe to young man and tells him to smoke and swallow smoke. Spider woman tells him to put her behind him. When he swallows smoke she draws it from him and he doc, not get dizzy Men do not see trick, and say he is certainly some one. He gives them nakwakwosis and baho, which make them happy. Chief tells young man to turn away, and then people dress up and turn into snakes. Spider Woman tells him not to be afraid. Chief, who has not turned, tells him to select and take snake. Prettiest maiden has become large snake, which is very angry. Snake Woman gives young man medicine, some of which he chews and spurts on fierce snake. It becomes docile, and he grabs snake and strokes it four times. Chief tells him to look away again, and snakes assume human form again. They now talk to young man, and they consider him initiated. Mana whom he captured lays food before him. Chief asks why he came, and he speaks of running water and that he wants beads from Huruing Wuhti, Young man makes excuse and takes Spider Woman home. On return to kiva chief instructs him about Snake cult. Next morning he goes to Spider Woman, who makes rainbow road to bluff, where Huruing Wuhti lives. They find old hag, but many beads, shells, etc., on walls. At sundown she becomes pretty maiden and invites young man to sleep with her. In morning he finds old hag, who in evening again changes to maiden, and remains so. He remains four days and nights with Huruing Wuhti, who is deity of hard substances. She gives him beads and charges him not to open sack as he goes home. If he does they will be gone; if not they will increase. Young man returns to Snake kiva, where he stays four days and nights. Chief tells him to take mana who will bear him children, and they will hold ceremony. They start and go to Spider Woman's house. He tells voting man not to touch his wife on way home, or she and beads will disappear. On way they sleep separately and beads increase. When nearly one more day's travel, sack has become full and man opens it, while wife remonstrates. During night he takes out finest beads and shells and puts them around his neck. In morning all beads but those given him by Huruing Wuhti have disappeared. They come to village, and soon woman bears many Snake children. They play with Hopi children, but sometimes bite them. Hopi are angry. Husband takes children back to wife's home. Snake man and wife travel southeast ward and come to Walpi. Chief admits them to village, they to assist people in ceremonies. Woman bears human children and their descendants are Snake clan. Snake chief sends nephew to hunt snakes, and first ceremony is celebrated.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

7.--THE SNAKE MYTH.

Old men of Pihk'ash and Kokop clans wonder where Colorado River flows They build box, put provisions and four bahos with young man into box, and send it floating down river. When box will go no further young man gets out. He sees water everywhere. In midst is house. Huruing Wuhti comes out and calls him four times. He goes to her house on road made by corn-meal ball she rolls on water. In evening Huruing Wuhti sends him into side room Sun comes sitting on disk attached to pole. He is dressed like Katcina. He assorts bahos offered him on course around earth and throws those of bad people away. He takes bath and eats food. He then goes into house under

[p. 279]

earth on course again. In east he goes down in house. Hence bahos offered to Sun are carried eastward to Sun shrines. There live Flutes of Sun Clan, who always play and the Sun rises. Hence gray fox-skin is put up at white dawn and yellow fox-skin at yellow dawn.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

8.--THE WANDERINGS OF THE BEAR CLAN.

On leaving sipahpuvi, Bear people separate and go ahead of others. They stay for various periods at different places, and finally come to Little Colorado River. Here they assume clan name. They see dead bear from which they take name. Another party takes skin of bear, from which they cut carrying straps, and is called Piqo'sha; another party is called Mu'yi, after mice which ate hair front bear's hide. These three parties are closely related. Another party comes, and is called after the Blue-birds that ate bear's body, and another that finds it full of spider-web is called Spider. Sixth party takes skull as drinking vessel, and is called jug clan, and seventh party becomes Ant clan, as they find place swarming with ants. These seven clans are thus considered as related. From Little Colorado River Bear clan moves eastward, finally to Mato'vi, where they remain considerable time. Then they move northward to site of Shongopavi, where they are first to arrive. They bring Blue Flute cult, by which they make crops grow quickly, and various Katcinas.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

9.--THE WANDERINGS OF THE SPIDER CLAN.

In under-world people become contentious. They kill son of chief, who sends Motsni to find place to get out. He flies up and finds opening. Pine is planted, and then reed, which reaches opening. Horn people climb up reed first, and hold upper part. Many people follow, Mocking-bird distributes languages to them. Man drops moccasin and has to make another, which is why Hopi have not very nice moccasins. Chief closes opening before all people come out, but one of sorcerers comes out. People start on different routes, white men taking southern route. Others go further north. Hopi bring Mu'yingwu, whose body consists of corn, and he cannot move fast. Hopi were to have horse but cannot ride, but Navaho can. Chief's son takes sick and dies. They think sorcerer has killed him. Sorcerer says he is down below. Chief looks down and sees child walking about in other world. Chief says people who die will go back to lower world. Coyote has stars in hand and throws them into sky. White people take with them Spider, who creates burros from scales rubbed from her skin, So they reach place of sunrise first. Star arises in south as agreed signal to others. Party comes on bear and is called Bear clan. Other parties come and receive names from incidents connected with bear (as in story No. 8, with some variations). They soon separate. and Spider clan wanders about long time. Finally it arrives at Chukuvi, where are Squash and Sand clans. To escape raids people, with those of Mishongnovi, remove to mesa and build present village of Mishongnovi.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

10.--ORIGIN OF THE YAYAATU SOCIETY.

Man has little boy, who is visited by children of village. They are lazy, and steal wood to prepare food they have stolen in village. Priest's son suggests they go and gather their own wood. They steal burden bands and go and gather brush in valley. When ready to start home, Hawk, in form of man, comes and invites them to his kiva. After smoking, they exchange terms of relationship. Hawk-man dresses boys up in costume, gives each eagle feather, stands them in line and tells them to do what they see him do. They jump

[p. 280]

down from kiva, and run about through brush. Hawk-man seizes priest's son, throws him on cloth, and other boys carry him to kiva, where he is thrown through opening. He comes out unhurt, and other boys are treated in the same way without being hurt. They return to kiva and see round oven dug into earth, in which old woman keeps up fire. Hawk-man throws first priest's son and then other boys into ovens, and woman spurts medicine on them. When costumes burned off, Hawk-man takes bodies and covers them with cloth north of fireplace. He sings songs over them and they begin to move and are alive again. Old woman then washes their heads and gives each white corn ear. Hawk-man tells them to go home, take their wood to Blue Flute kiva, and remain there for him. He hands priest's son eagle wing feather, and youths leave. They go to kiva. When it is dark, Hawk enters and takes seat near fireplace. They smoke, and then Hawk makes gruel which he feeds to youths. He says they are not to go home, and that in morning some are to sit in north end of kiva and some in south. The former are to be fire-jumpers and Yayaatu, and the latter singers. He sprinkles meal line between them and selects one for witch-man. They are to sit apart all next day. They remain there four days, Hawk-man coming to feed them every night. In evening of following day he brings costumes and yellow paint. Watcher digs four ovens on plaza and others bury long cotton string and stretch strings along houses. In morning watcher begs wood and heats ovens. Hawk-man dresses up and paints others in kiva. At noon singers come out, throw pinch of meal towards sun, march to plaza, where they line up and sing. Yayaatu then go to plaza, priest's son carrying cloth, and then they rummage through village. People get angry and they return to plaza, where priest's son jumps into oven and is carried into kiva and resuscitated by Hawk-man and old woman. Others are treated in same way. They then dance and perform jugglery, and are discharged by Hawk-man. Next morning youths go home and are no longer dangerous. They form Yayaatu Society.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

11.--THE ORIGIN OF SOME MISHONGNOVI CLANS.

Batki clan and Sand clan come from Palatkwapi. When travelling, Sand clan spreads sand on ground and plants corn. Batki clan causes it to thunder and rain and crops grow in day. They find Bear, Parrot, and Crow clans at Mishongnovi, and are asked what they know about producing rain crops. They show their power, and their leader is made chief of village. Spring Toriva is very small, but Batki-namu puts in it mud, grass, and water from Little Colorado River and flow of water increases. Batki is admitted to Antelope and Blue Flute Fraternities of other clans Young Corn-Ear clan comes from Pueblo and brings larger corn.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

12.--THE DESTRUCTION OF PALATKWAPI.

After coming from under-world, people remain with Skeleton some time. When they travel eastward large party comes to Palatkwapi. Among them is Divided Water clan. Old man belonging to this clan is shamefully mistreated, and he reports to village and other chiefs, complaining of young men. Village chief says they will move away. He tells son to run to Pine Ridge. They are sorcerers. On his return, chief makes four masks which his son puts on, the last being like that of Skeleton. He has fingers cut from old corpses tied to

[p. 281]

wrists as rattler. Chief gives young man long cedar bark fuse and tells him to return to Pine Ridge and set pine on fire. He does so, and on return grinds corn on sister's mealing stone. He now acts as ghost and again goes and sets other timbers on fire. This he does several nights, and watchers are set to catch him. On fourth night he is caught and put into kiva. People assemble, and village chief requests some one to take masks off ghost. Man does so, and they see ghost is chief's son. He tells them to plant bahos in five places and to have four days' feast, and leaves kiva. They have feast and are much relieved when nothing happens. In fourth year afterwards old man who had before complained of young men makes many bahos of hard wood. He makes points very sharp. Village chief sends crier chief to announce four days' feast. People are mistrustful and do not prepare feast. Night following old man tells chiefs to dress him up and put him in katcina shrine on plaza. When all are asleep they dig hole in shrine that will admit man. They place in his arms all his bahos, with Balolookong whistle and little bowl of water to whistle into. They destroy appearance of opening. Then they sing sorcerers' songs. Old man ejects rumbling sounds and says he has been successful. They leave old man who thrusts part of hand through opening. When this is noticed he sings and lowers little finger. Next morning he sings again and lowers next finger, and so on three days. Then water begins to come out where bahos had been planted four years previously. They suspect flood is coming and they have great feast. On fourth day old man in grave sings and lowers fourth finger. Immediately he emerges as large Balolookong, and Balolookongs shoot forth from ground with streams of water in all parts of village. Houses fall and bury many persons. Others fly to large house on high ground. In one house old men climb on tray shelves and turn into turkeys. Chiefs meet in council and make bahos, crush beads and turquoise into powder, of which they make two balls. They then call son of village chief and his sister and dress them up. They are to drive back Balolookongs which are shooting swiftly through water. Old man Balolookong is still standing where he emerged. Young men takes some bahos, and mana tray containing two balls and other bahos and they wade into waters. Young man grasps large Balolookong and presses him into water. Serpent, with young man and sister, disappear and never return. Everything is destroyed in village. Only old men turkeys survive, and two little boys who had been sleeping during flood and were not drowned. Surviving people make food altar and leave village, leaving two children. Turkey takes pity on children and sends them to food altar to eat. Big Balolookong comes and looks after people. He sees children and says he is their grandfather. Tells them where to get food and to find knife. Says they are to follow parents. Makes them cut piece of flesh out of his back, and says if little of meat is rubbed among paint for bahos it will rain. Children start, and on third day are exhausted, and fall asleep. God of Thunder descends to help them. They are frightened until he removes his mask. He gives them food. Third day he returns and promises them lightning and thunder with which to kill their enemies and teaches them war songs and how warrior who brings home scalp is to act. In morning he tells children to follow people, and that they are to pray to him. They go and finally find mother, who thought they had perished. They tell about piece of flesh. Batki people use it with paint and heavy rains come. Children become bad, and when grown up they start off to kill some one. They pray to God of Thunder, who comes and teaches them how to kill

[p. 282]

Apache who are near. In morning they go and are surrounded by Apache. After arrow shooting for some time elder brother shoots lightning and all Apache are slain. They scalp large and fierce warrior, and cut out his heart and, taking moccasins and costumes of slain, return. God of Thunder comes and tells them to throw scalp on man who is to be War Chief. They return home and are discharmed. Scalp is thrown and War Chief made. People leave Homolovi, and after wandering some time Batki clan goes to Aoatovi, and others, who become Forehead Clan, arrive near Shongopavi, and finally settle in Shupaulavi. Chief of Shongopavi informs Spaniards in New Mexico that inhabitants of Shupaulavi wish to be taken away. Spaniards come to Keams Canyon. Chief of Walpi informs chief of Shupaulavi and they go together to see leader of Spaniards. They satisfy leader that he has been deceived, and after trading for clothes they have brought, Spaniards return. They never encroach on Hopi again, but people at Shupaulavi are scared by false news that Spaniards are coming, and many move to Shongopavi.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

13.--THE REVENGE OF THE KATCINAS.

Katcinas assemble in kiva in mountains and come to village in night. They dance on plaza while people sleeping. Not knowing what or who dancers are, people become angry and threaten to kill them. Katcinas run away and jump from bluff into large crack. Katcina Uncle is in lead. People set fire to them and burn them up, except Uncle, who is at bottom. He returns home singing and sobbing. He finds Hehea Katcina hoeing, and tells what has happened. They go home to mountain, and when chief hears he orders Katcinas to assemble. They make it hail for three days. On fourth day they cause cloud to rise over mountains. Clouds spread over sky and Hopi expect good rain. It thunders and lightens and rains great hail stones. All crops are destroyed, and all people except one man and one woman are killed. Clouds then disperse and Katcinas say they are revenged.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

14.--HOW THE CIRCLE (PONGO) KATCINA AND HIS WIFE BECAME STARS.

Maiden who refuses to marry watches maidens playing game. Young man dressed in blue Hopi blanket comes by and talks with her. in evening while she grinds corn, Katcina comes to Village and dances. Next morning maiden goes to same place and again youth joins her. She consents to marry him if parents willing. He is to come and get her next day. He tells her that he is Katcina who dances. In evening Katcina again comes dancing and singing. Mana's parents consent to marriage, and she takes tray of meal to meet him. They proceed together to kiva where are many different Katcinas. Youth is Circle Katcina. Here they remain until mana's bridal costume finished, and then she goes home followed by her husband. Woman bears two children who are Circle Katcinas. Once mother while husband away goes to edge of mesa. Hototo Katcina comes and she goes away with him. Circle Katcina, finding his wife gone, takes children to Katcina house. After awhile father and two children go to find mother. They trace her to Sik'akva , where they find kiva, in which they remain over night and are fed by Hahaii Wuhti, who sings that mother passed by there. In morning they proceed eastward and come to-Owl Spring, where they are entertained by another Hahaii Wuhti. During night she goes to Ki'shiwuu  where Katcinas have dance. [p. 283] She returns, and three Circle Katcinas go and dance. Next morning Hahaii Wuhti goes to another dance. She returns and tells them mother is there. They go and dance on plaza, and on return meet mother, who goes with them. At nightfall father sends children on and then kills wife by thrusting stick into her throat. He follows sons, but skeleton of wife follows and he runs away. He arrives at Hano, and goes into kiva where women who are making jugs hide him under pile of clay. Skeleton comes and finds him and he runs away. He goes into kiva at Walpi, where war dance is being practiced. He is given drum, but Skeleton comes, and he rushes out to Mishongnovi. He rushes into kiva where women are making trays for Lagon ceremony. Woman seats him in her lap and hides him under tray. Skeleton arrives and drives women about. Man rushes out and runs to Shongopavi, where same thing takes place. From here he runs to Mato'vi where Flute Society has ceremony. They tell him to go into spring and hide in top of sunflower stalk. When Skeleton comes, Flute priest tells her husband has gone into spring. She enters and sees sunflower stalk reflected in water and her husband on top of it. Thinking he is in water, she dives in and disappears, Man comes down and joins Flute players. On fourth day woman comes out of water dressed in bridal costume. Priests call two together and place them back to back. They make roads with sacred meal, one south and other north, and tell them to proceed four steps and then turn and meet again. Man returns when he has taken three steps. Priests call on woman to run. She starts and husband after her. They are still running and are two stars.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

15.--THE KOKOSHORI KATCINA AND THE SHONGOPAVI MAIDEN.

Kokoshori  goes about stealing Hopi children. Woman throws stone at child who follows her. Child sits down and cries. Kokoshori pities it and takes it on his back to Kishiwu. Katcinas are glad to see it and provide it with food. Child becomes homesick, and Kokoshori goes to look after parents, who also are homesick. Child is dressed and Katcinas fetch it, all carrying food. When they come to -village it rains very hard. Katcinas walk and sing about child. They come to parents' house and send child up. Katcinas follow, offering food, and distribute food among people. They go home and rain clouds go home. In morning people, are sick on account of maiden. After a while they have no longer meat to eat. Maiden is homesick after Kishiwu, and dies. She is now living at Kishiwu.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

16.--HOW BALL-HEAD (TATCIQTO) WEDDED AN ORAIBI MAIDEN.

Young man thinks he will try to marry maiden who has refused all young men of village. He sees her grinding corn, and tells her to stop. They converse, and when she finds out who he is, she consents if mother willing. Parents say he will be welcome. Next morning young man prepares ten bunches of corn ears and proceeds to village. Maiden asks him to come in and they sit on opposite sides of fireplace. Young man wears mask of Ball-Head. He gives her corn of which she eats and takes to parents. Maiden says she will now save corn meal she is grinding. Maiden grinds blue corn four days, and on fifth day white corn. In evening young man comes for his bride. She goes with him to his grandmother, taking tray of white meal. After being invited by grandmother and young man to come in, she enters. She hands

[p. 284]

tray to grandmother, and after evening meal they retire, mana sleeping with grandmother. In morning, after making prayer-offerings to dawn and sun, mana shells corn. Young man calls chickens, who eat corn. He tells chickens to sit on banquette and then sings to them, accompanying song with drum. Chickens sway bodies from side to side to time of singing, and so grind corn in bodies. They then vomit meal into tray and leave kiva. Maiden thus saved trouble to grind meal. Young man hunts, and they prepare much food. Grandmother calls neighbors to come and eat. They come, each bringing part of bridal costume. In morning grandmother washes mana's head with yucca suds. Afterwards she dresses mana in bridal costume. Grandmother sprinkles road of meal, and children go to bride's house, where they are welcomed by her mother. Young people live in village, which prospers, as young man is Katcina. Wife goes astray and husband leaves village. People then become poor.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

17.--THE AHO'LI AND OTHER WALPI KATCINAS.

In former Walpi village lives Aho'li  Katcina and his little sister. In Sitcomovi lives youth with grandmother. Aho'li and maiden go to field to plant. In field is baho shrine where Aho'li deposits corn meal and nakwakwosis as prayer-offerings. In shrine lives Mu'yingwa and sister, who cries on receiving offering, as they have been neglected. Aho'li places seeds on ground. Two deities arise, and as Mu'yingwa points certain objects to sky, sister forcibly throws squash filled with all kinds of seeds on ground on seeds placed by Aho'li. Mu'yingwa hands objects to Aho'li to produce rain and crops. Aho'li and maiden return to village and hear some one singing on top of bluff. Youth from Sitcomovi enters house and thanks them for what they have done They smoke together, youth blowing smoke in ringlets upon objects four times, praying to them, and they become moist, indicating that they would produce rain. Youth remains, and in morning they dress up in costumes and proceed to baho shrine half-way down mesa. Here they sprinkle meal to sun and on shrine, and again hear voice singing. They look up and see Big-Horn Katcina. They go to look for him, and see A'ototo shaking rattle of bones. While talking Big-Horn comes and after hearing what Aho'li has done, they agree to go down mesa. Part of way down they make baho shrine as mark between Hano and Sitcomovi. Further down they meet Cooyoko, who devours children, coming out of large shrine with twisted stone. They tell him not to trouble them, and descend to house of Aho'li, where they stay singing all night. In morning they go to fields and everything is growing beautifully. Near mesa they meet Big-Skeleton, who tells them to go and live on mesa. They have lived there ever since, and soon after that Walpi commences to move up mesa and build new village.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

18.--THE TWO WAR GODS AND THE TWO MAIDENS.

Pookonghoya and little brother Balo'ngahoya hear of two beautiful maidens, and go to visit them. Maidens think they have gone to marry them, and say they may own them if they will each have arm cut off. They consent, and maidens cut off right arm of young brother and then of elder brother with upper mealing stone. They carry severed arms home and tell grandmother how mischief happened. She asks them to lay down north of fireplace, places arms by their sides, covers them up, and sings. When through singing, they get up healed. Next day they go to house of maidens. Pookonghoya wants

[p. 285]

to choose prettiest, but younger brother objects, as he had his arm cut off first. His brother consents, and they sleep with maidens that night, and then return home.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

19.--THE POOKONGHOYAS AND THE CANNIBAL MONSTER.

Large monster called Shita comes to Oraibi and devours people. Chief asks Pookonghoyas, who live near village, for assistance. They tell him to make arrow for each of them. He brings them arrows and they go in search of monster. They see it and it swallows them. They find themselves on path into stomach, and see many people from different parts of earth. Stomach is little world in itself. They go in search of heart and shoot arrows into it. Monster dies, and they and people get out through nose. People seek old homes, settling down temporarily at different places, which accounts for many small ruins scattered throughout country.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

20.--POOKONGHOYA AND HIS BROTHER AS THIEVES.

Po'okong and his brother live near Shongopavi with grandmother. They play with ball, striking it towards Toriva. They drink at spring and see many bahos. Younger brother swallows baho. Elder brother discovers bowls of paints deposited in recess by Flute priests. He puts some of each paint into ball through holes, and sews them up. They proceed towards Mishongnovi, and beat ball through village. They enter kiva where Flute priests are assembled and grab tray with lightning frame, thunder board, netted water jug, etc. They go to kiva where Snake priests assembled, and grab bull-snake and carry it off in sack. They beat ball to corn-ear bluffs, where they find many bahos and prayer-offerings. Elder brother refuses to take prayer-offerings, but younger one takes corn baho, watermelon, and melon. They start for Shongopavi and shoot lightning frame and twirl bullroarer. Clouds gather and there is thunder storm. They run towards house and again use lightning frame and thunder board. It thunders hard and lightning flashes. They rush into house and put things they have stolen into two pots, which they cover up. It rains, and Hopi have good crops because Pookongyas have those things.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

21.--HOW THE PO'OKONGS DESTROYED COOYOKO AND HIS WIFE.

Many people living in Oraibi. Some who go for wood do not return. Man, while gathering wood, bears Cooyoko singing. Cooyoko says he will feast on man, but man crawls under wood and Cooyoko cannot find him. Cooyoko then finds woman and says he will feast on her. Woman climbs tree and micturates. Cooyoko sees moisture and says there must be clouds somewhere. Cooyoko leaves place. Man and woman go to village and say it is Cooyoko who kills people. Village chief goes to shrine where Po'okongs live with grandmother, Spider Woman. They are playing, but woman makes them stop. Chief tells them that he wants them to take revenge on Cooyoko for killing people. They promise to help him if he will make them some balls. Brothers take bow and lightning arrows. They strike ball before them forward and backward, until they arrive at Cooyoko's house. He and wife have gone, but they follow wife's tracks and find her sitting. They kill her with arrows. They go again to house and wait return of Cooyoko. He comes singing, and throws something down. He enters kiva and hunts for something

[p. 286]

to eat. Po'okongs have hidden themselves behind mealing bin, and kill him with lightning arrows. They scalp him and return home with many beads and other things. Village chief makes two balls out of buckskin and two ball sticks, which he takes to Po'okongs. After that Hopi always return when they go after wood.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

22.--HOW PO'OKONG KILLED THE BEAR.

Bear kills people living at Mishongnovi. Po'okong lives with grandmother at Skeleton Katcina house. Chief makes bow and arrows and also buckskin ball for Po'okong and baho for grandmother. He takes them to house and asks Po'okong to kill bear. Po'okong hunts bear and shoots him in throat and hits him with ball stick. He skins bear and fills skin with dry grass. Then he ties it to himself and drags it very fast, screaming. People see him and tell grandmother bear is following him. He ascends house and throws bear to grandmother, who is scared, and dies. Po'okong wakes her up and she whips him for searing her. Chief happy, as bear stops killing people.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

23.--THE PO'OKONGS ATTEND A DANCE.

Pookongs live with grandmother, Spider Woman, at Achamali. They go to look on at dance at Shongopavi. They throw wheels and shoot arrows at them as they go. They come to sand hill where grass is waving, producing hissing noise. They sit down and look at grass dancing. In evening they return and tell grandmother, who calls them fools. She sends them to see dance at Mishongnovi, and tells them about tray throwing. They get to Mishongnovi and see dance, but they are so filth, no one invites them to eat. They snatch trays from dancers and run home. They give trays to grandmother, who feeds them, but they are angry at not being fed in Mishongnovi. Hopi find salt, but salt belongs to Po'okongs, who remove it far away to give Hopi trouble in getting it.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

24.--HOW PO'OKONG WON A BRIDE.

Pookonghoya and brother Balo'onghoya live with grandmother, Spider Woman. They hear that maiden refuses to marry, and they tell grandmother they will go and try. She tries to dissuade them, as they are small and unsightly. In evening they take squash seeds and some little sticks and go to village. They make stone traps to catch mice near maiden's house. She sees them, and asks what they are doing. She asks them to set traps at her house, as there are many mice. They set traps in house and near mealing bin. They set mealing tray instead of small stone, as in other traps. They kill antelope, and in night place it under piki tray. Next morning maiden finds antelope and tells father. They think it is caught by trap. In evening Po'okongs go again and set traps, and maiden again asks them to set traps in house. While doing so, father comes and tells them about antelope. He says if something is again caught in trap they are to come for daughter. In night Po'okongs kill deer and place it under piki tray trap. Daughter finds it, and father tells her to wait for somebody there at night. Po'okongs quarrel about maiden, and grandmother decides Po'okong must go. In evening he goes, mother fills tray with meal, and Po'okong leads daughter away to house. Grandmother takes meal and tray from maiden, and invites her to eat hurushuki. Maiden is told to put very little in mouth, but it increases. Maiden grinds corn for three days.

[p. 287]

On fourth day grandmother calls for neighbors to come and assist in head-washing. Maiden sits close to kiva entrance, and clouds come and rain upon her. Po'okongs constantly play with ball and stick, and with feathered arrows. Spiders prepare bridal costume. One day Spider Woman washes heads of Po'okong and bride. She give, maiden bridal costume and sends her to mother's house. Po'okong follows with quantity of meat. Spider Woman instructs Po'okong not to talk much, and in evening to sit on floor looking at wrist-bands. After eating at mother's house, Po'okong sits on floor and holds wrist-band before eyes and looks through it. In morning Po'okong goes to visit Spider Woman. When she hears what he has done, she says he is kahopi . In planting time Po'okong goes to Spider Woman and she gives him small parcel of different kinds of corn. He goes with father-in-law to plant, and takes parcel. They plant one grain of corn at time, and it soon grows up. It rains heavily and much grass grows up. Spider Woman tells Po'okong that he should form ant-hills throughout field, meaning that he should diligently hoe it. He goes to field with hoe, but finds ant-hills, and forms small ant-hills throughout field. When he tells grandmother, she calls him fool, and tells him to go and "wiklolantanangwu."  He goes and obtains fat, which he scatters through corn-field. He returns without having hoed. When he tells Spider Woman what he has done, she calls him great fool, and explains that she meant he was to hoe field. Po'okong finds father-in-law very sad about condition of corn. He tells him hoeing shall be done that day. They go to field. Spider Woman asks clouds to hoe field. While men are hoeing, clouds come and water runs through corn-field in streamlets, covering up grass with sand and earth. Po'okong's wife bears son, who grows up and plays with children. Father makes him bows and arrows. Sometimes he shoots children. Oraibi angry and say Po'okongs should go to their own house. Po'okong returns home with son, leaving wife with her parents.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

25.--HOW THE ANTELOPE MAIDEN WAS RECONCILED.

Two sons of village chiefs of Zuni are racing. At bluff they are called by Antelope mana. They approach, and maiden draws up elder brother by deep inhalation. She tells other one that she will not give back his brother even for his beads. When father hears, he sends younger brother to ask assistance of Pookonghoyas, for whom he makes ball tied to stick and arrow. He goes to house of Spider Woman, their grandmother, who calls them. Messenger hands them presents, and they send him to Mole. Mole tells them to go northward to his uncle. They come to house of Storm, who is Hopi. Young man tells his story and they smoke. Young man swallows smoke Then Storm sends him to Snake people at Walpi. He goes and finds Snake people dressed up as warriors. He tells them why he has come, and they smoke. Young man again swallows all smoke, which pleases Snakes. They give him baho, which they say maiden wants, and tell him to make bahos like it. He returns home, and they make good many bahos. Young man, father, two Po'okongs, Spider Woman, and Storm proceed to bluff. Father asks for son and shows maiden bahos. By aid of Storm they get into house, and maiden says she wants bahos, but before she gives up son they must play game. She spreads sand on floor, and Hopi plant seeds and thrust bahos into border of sand. Plants grow up quickly, and maiden then says they shall race, following sun. Young man mounts eagle breath feather and maiden turns into swift snake. Maiden is in

[p. 288]

lead, and Spider Woman, with reed, by strong inhalation, increases young man's speed so that he beats. Mana draws son from inner room where many bones of voting men. Antelope Maiden has been angry because no bahos had been made for her, but she is reconciled when her bahos are revived.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

26.--THE PO'OKONGS AND THE BALOLOOKONG.

While maiden is dipping out water at spring, Balolookong comes out, and by strong inhalations draws her towards him. He embraces her and disappears with her in water. Mother goes to look for her, and finds her tracks descending to water, and jug is standing there and old blanket. She tells father, who at once makes ball and arrow and takes them to house of Po'okonghoya  and his brother. They are romping, but their grand mother, Spider Woman, makes them be quiet. She gives man small ball of hurushiki, which increases as he eats from it. He gives bows to youths and eagle nakwakwosis to Spider Woman, who tells him what to do. He invites friends, and they make many nakwakwosis. Next morning Spider Woman and youths go to village, and brother of lost maiden is dressed up. Spider Woman instructs him, and they go to spring. Po'okongs sing and brother dances. Balolookong comes out holding maiden in left arm. Brother approaches edge of spring and reaches for sister, but he begins to cry, and Balolookong disappears with her. They, try again, and when Balolookong again appears brother grasps maiden and strikes him on head with club. Serpent releases maiden, and only his skin is floating on water like sack. They put other clothes on maiden and lay red feather pu'hu on path. They throw tray with nakwakwosis into spring for price of maiden, and prayer-offerings that nothing further should befall her. Balolookong still seen there by women, who become sick. He is now small.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

27.--HOW THE YELLOW CORN-EAR MAIDEN BECAME A BULL-SNAKE.

Two maidens, friends, fall in love with young man, which leads to quarrels between them. Yellow Corn-Ear maiden has supernatural powers. They go to spring, and on return she suggests, after resting, they shall play. Friend is to go down hill and Yellow Corn-Ear is to throw little colored wheel she has at her and friend is to throw it back again. Yellow Corn-Ear throws wheel, and when friend catches it, it is so heavy it throws her down. When she rises she has turned to coyote. Yellow Corn-Ear laughs at her and returns to village. Coyote maiden tries to carry jug and cannot. She waits, crying, until evening, and then tries to enter village, but dogs drive her away. She goes westward, and being hungry, goes to temporary shelter of people in field and eats two roasted corn-ears she finds. She again tries to enter village, but is driven away She then goes westward again and arrives at hut of two Qo'qoqlom  Katcinas, They are away hunting, and she remains there all day. In evening they return, and one prepares to kill co , vote, when other suggests they shall capture him alive and take him home to grandmother, Spider Woman. On entering hut they hear coyote sob, and see tears trickling down his eyes. They feed him, and loading meat, skins, and coyote on their backs, they return to their home. Spider Woman is pleased with present, but looking closely at it she says it is no coyote, and inquires where they found it. She sends one for some tomoala and other for juniper branches. When former returns she pours water into vessel and puts hook from tomoala pods into neck and another into

[p. 289]

back of coyote, which she places into water, covered with cloth. She twists and turns by hooks and then pulls off skin of coyote. She finds maiden in vessel, with clothes on and hair in curls. When juniper comes, she bathes maiden and then gives her corn to grind. Spider Woman tells maiden her mother is homesick after her. She then calls for Katcinas, and tells them maiden's story. Maiden is dressed up, and after Spider Woman has instructed her as to prayer-offerings for Katcinas and how to get even with Yellow Corn-Ear, she goes to village with Katcinas. Katcinas dance and sing. Parents hear they have brought daughter, but at first refuse to believe news. They go for her, but mana remains with Katcinas until father brings offerings. Maiden returns home, and next day she goes to grind corn and sings about her adventures. Yellow Corn-Ear maiden hears and visits her. She is treated cordially, and they grind corn together as formerly. In evening they go to spring for water. Yellow Corn-Ear maiden notices that friend uses peculiar little vessel (given her by Spider Woman), and that water running into jug shows different colors of rainbow. Friend drinks and says water tastes good. She hands jug to Yellow Corn-Ear maiden, who drinks and turns into bull-snake. Friend tells her to remain so, takes jug, and returns to village, Bull-snake maiden later on goes to village and is killed by her parents, who do not know her. Her soul goes to Skeleton House, and ever since sorcerers occasionally leave their graves in form of bull-snakes.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

28.--JOURNEY TO THE SKELETON HOUSE.

Youth always sits on edge of mesa thinking about graveyard, and whether those buried there are living somewhere. He gets corn meal and prays to sun for information. He prays four days and sun comes and gives him something to eat, when he sleeps in evening. He tells parents, and that when sun is high up they are to work on him that he may wake up. In evening he eats medicine. He dies. and goes to Skeleton house. He sees trail. On north side he descends. He sees somebody whom he recognizes and who asks him to carry him four steps, but he goes on. Woman carrying something asks him to take burden from her, but he says he is in hurry. Man carrying mealing stone asks him to take it. Then he runs fast and comes to man shaking bell very loudly. It is Kwanitaka, who explains what he has seen. He goes on and sees another Kwanitaka ringing. They go on together and see fire in deep place where wicked ones in Oraibi are burned and come out as smoke. They come to very dark, deep place from which those who are thrown in never come out. Youth returns to first Kwanitaka, who directs him to village. Here he finds Kwanitaka, and he sees chiefs he had known in Oraibi living in blossoms. He sees all kinds of grass, plants, and blossoms. Kwanitaka tells him that those not wicked in Oraibi will come there. He is to tell his parents what he has seen, and run fast as they are waiting for him. He runs fast, and passing again all those he had seen before, he arrives at house in Oraibi and enters body. He awakes. When they have eaten, he tells them what he has seen. Young man wants to go back again. He tells parents, and at night takes some of medicine. He sleeps, but when mother brings him food he is dead. Father goes to his field, and Bachro speaks to him and says he is not to be homesick for his son. Both father and mother are to come in four days. They go to field and Bachro comes again and tells them not to be homesick, as he lives well. After that when father is walking in field that comes there.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 290]

  

29.--A JOURNEY TO THE SKELETON HOUSE.

In Shongopavi, son of village chief often sits looking at graveyards and wondering whether dead continue to live somewhere. Father cannot tell him, and speaks about it to other chiefs, and especially to village crier. They say Badger Old Man has medicine for it. They send for Badger Old Man, who says he has medicine, and goes for it. Next day young man is dressed as though dead. Badger Old Man spreads white owa on floor, and tells young man to lie down on it, and places medicine in his mouth, in his ears, and on his heart. Young man eats medicine and "dies." Then he sees path leading westward to Skeleton House, which he follows, and he sees one sitting in inclosure of sticks who will be long time in getting to Skeleton House. He proceeds westward through cactus and agave plants, and arrives at steep bluff., Chief sitting there points out direction of house, which young man cannot see for stroke. Chief places young man's kilt on ground, places him on it, and throws it over precipice. Young man slowly descends on kilt as if flying with wings. On arriving on ground he proceeds and comes upon Skeleton Woman. She tells hurt that smoke is from where wicked people are thrown in and destroyed. He goes on to Skeleton House, where Skeleton people assemble to look at him. They ask who he is, and then take him to Bear Clan. There is ladder up to house. He tries to ascend, but rungs are made of sunflower stems and first one breaks as he steps on it. He stays down and Skeletons bring him food. They laugh when he eats, as they eat only odor and steam of food. That is why they are not heavy, and why clouds into which dead are transformed can float in air. They ask what he has come for; they say he must go back, his flesh is still too strong. He is to make nakwakwosis for them at Soyal Ceremony, and they give him directions for wrapping up women when they die, that raindrops may fall when Skeleton moves through sky as clouds. Young man sees Skeletons carrying mealing stones on backs, and others bundles of cactus, as punishment. At another place he sees chiefs who had been good in this world. Young man returns. At bluff he mounts kilt and breeze lifts him up. He sees chief again, who says no one should desire to come there, it is not good or light. He meets no one on return home, and as he enters body he comes to life again. Badger Old Man washes and discharms him. He is fed, and then tells what he has seen in much same language as before. He adds that no one should desire to go to that place, because people are living in light here.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

30.--SKELETON WOMAN AND THE HUNTER.

Poor youth does not go with young men to hunt when snow on ground. Older men in kiva ask why he has not gone on hunt. He says he has no moccasins. They make him pair Of moccasins and some leggings, and give him old blanket, also bow and arrows and some throwing sticks. They then explain difference between rabbit tracks and those of other animals. He leaves village and finds rabbit tracks, which he follows for long distance. Comes upon tired jack-rabbit, which he kills. On returning it becomes dark and youth sees light in kiva, where is pretty woman, She invites him in. He sits near fire, and she gives him brain of corpses and flies, which he pretends to eat. She is Skeleton Woman. He gives her rabbit. She says she is going to dance, and when she is through they will sleep together. She goes to another room,

[p. 291]

leaving him to attend to fire. He sees opening of kiva closed with threads stretched in every direction. Woman comes again dancing and singing, and is skeleton. As she turns around youth jumps up, runs up ladder and cuts strings closing opening, and runs away. He again sees light, and finds another kiva where dancing is going on. He enters and asks dancers to hide him. They are crickets. They rub clay over his body and he dances along. Skeleton Woman comes and asks for her husband. They pretend not to hear her, but she enters and examines dancers. Youth rushes out and runs towards village pursued by Skeleton Woman, who fails to overtake him.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

31.--MASAUWUU MARRIES A MAIDEN.

Beautiful maiden who refuses to marry is visited by Masauwuu as handsome young man. She asks who he is, and after conversing all evening, she promises to marry him. Next morning she sends tray of muhpiki  to his grandmother. She gives Masauwuu quantity of rabbit meat for maiden. Next morning he comes and takes her to his grandmother's house.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

32.--MASAUWUU AND THE HANO HUNTERS.

Hano go hunting rabbits in winter towards Sun shrine. They kill many, and return still hunting. Masauwuu hunts during night and sleeps all day, Hano follows cotton-tail, which jumps down just where Masauwuu is sleeping. They follow, making great noise. Masauwuu jumps up quickly and runs. Runs against rock several times and perforates his head and blood streams down. He used to have white head, but now has bloody head. He has much game, which Hano distribute, and proceed home.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

33.--THE TWO YAYAPONCHATU TRADE IN ORAIBI.

Long ago Yayaponchatu live near Oraibi. They are like skeletons, white with disheveled hair, and wear kilts of black and white striped cloth. They understand fire. Oraibi barter by putting things on pile in kiva and sending round to different kivas to trade things off. Yayaponchatu send two to trade for native tobacco. They go to kiva and let down bundles of broom grass. They make Hopi understand what they want, and one of them gets tobacco. They go to another kiva, and other one trades broom grass for tobacco. They are happy. and in village smoke tobacco.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

34.--THE KOHONINO HUNTER.

Kohonino goes hunting. Shoots mountain sheep and follows it all day. Shoots it again, and animal tumbles partly down bluff and dies. Hunter climbs down, but foot slips, and he rolls over ledge where animal lying. Both his eyes fall out, and he lies unconscious. Kohonino in village keep up fire all night and wait for return of young man. In night he revives, but as Skeleton. He goes to village, pitying himself. People see and hear him. They see skeleton, and all flee with things and children. Skeleton takes possession of houses, and has lived there ever since. Kohonino go westward, and settle in valley near Green Bluff.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

35.--THE WHITE CORN-EAR MAIDEN AND THE SORCERERS.

White Corn-Ear Maiden refuses all offers of marriage. Inhabitants of kiva, who are sorcerers, decide to destroy her. They make wheel of feathered

[p. 292]

arrows. one of which is poisoned. Into wheel they wrap breath of maiden. Young men play with wheel and arrows in front of maiden's house, and one of them wounds her foot with poisoned arrow. She dies at night. Sorcerers change themselves into coyotes and other animals, and after burial of maiden approach graveyard imitating sounds of animals. Brother of maiden is watching her grave, and sees animals approaching. He is about to shoot at them, when he hears them speak. They have old wrappings which they tear to pieces, that people may think coyotes have eaten corpse. Body is then disinterred and carried off on back of gray wolf. Young man follows them to place of meeting. He hears one of them say they should hurry up, and he immediately runs back to village for help. He goes to war chief, who promises assistance. After putting on war costumes, chief goes outside and whistles upwards. Star and cloud deity comes and promises assistance. Chief whistles again, and Hawk comes and promises to go with them. He again whistles, and many skeleton flies come and drink his spittle, and he closes his hand upon them. They all go to sorcerers' kiva and find them resuscitating maiden. Old man takes breath wrapped up in wheel, puts it into body, and mana revives. When she sees herself among sorcerers, she cries bitterly. All have their Hopi forms. Old woman washes and dresses maiden, who is told to retire and lie down on bed. She seats herself on couch and old man approaches her. Old warrior just then releases skeleton fly. Its humming attracts attention, and old man sees it. Hawk rushes into kiva, grabs maiden, and carries her out of kiva on his back. Brother of maiden speaks, and when old man sees enemies in kiva he challenges them to contest of strength. Fire is extinguished, and sorcerers shoot small dangerous arrows which strike warriors' shields. Fire is rekindled, and when warriors are seen not dead they are challenged to show their skill. Fire is extinguished again, and war chief liberates bees from little sack, and they sting sorcerers and their wives and children. Old man begs warriors to desist, and then star and cloud deity throws lightning which tears them to pieces. Warriors return to village and deity ascends to sky, where he finds maiden taken there by Hawk. Maiden remains there for some time grinding corn-meal, and then Hawk takes her to earth and deposits her near Oraibi. She tells parents she will go back again, but when she dies they are not to wrap her up and tie her body. She disappears several times, and at last she fails to awake one morning. They treat her body as eagles are treated when they are buried. Her brother watches grave for four days, but it is not disturbed. In meantime star and cloud deity has restored his victims to life, but as punishment has mixed up parts of different bodies, that they should be ridiculed by people. Old man has one leg of woman, and so on. They come to village and are laughing stock of people. Old man falls down ladder of kiva and is killed. All victims meet with some accident, and soon all are dead. When last one dead, maiden descends from sky to village and lives long while. She finally dies and goes to sky to live with war chiefs.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

36.--WATERMELON-RIND WOMAN ( WUHTI).

Pretty maiden refuses all offers of marriage. Grandmother of young man called Piwitamni, because he patches her wrappers and blankets, tells him to ask hand of maiden in marriage. He refuses because he is poor, and his blanket much patched. Grandmother gives him two fawns and tells him to take them to maiden at certain rock. In evening he goes and finds maiden pulverizing

[p. 293]

some rock. She sees fawns and asks for them. He gives her fawns and she takes them home. When grandmother hears, she tells young man to go to maiden's house, and if parents talk good to bring her in evening he goes and maiden's parents recognize him. Father tells daughter to fill tray with meal and go along with young man. She goes with him, and is greeted by grandmother, who after they have eaten, shows her small room with very poor-looking couch on which to sleep. Maiden grinds corn for four days, but there is no one to prepare her bridal costume. Grandmother tells grandchild to go and cry out for relatives to come and eat. They come and have good feast, after which they give bundle containing costumes. In morning bride goes home, and people are surprised to see her dressed up in owa. She carries second owa and belt in front of her, and goes home to parents. Afterwards Piwitamni lives with wife, and is always poor. He proves to be lazy. His wife has to live partly on watermelon rinds thrown away by others, from which she derives her name. Young man has place in kiva. but he has little to eat. Only one old man sits by him when he eats. Others laugh at him. He tells grandmother that one man says he will feed wife with good food, and then take her away from him. Next day old man who sits near him tells him to wait until others have done. He does so, and he goes to grandmother's house and brings great many watermelons. He goes again and brings great deal of meat. He and old man eat together, and when done others come and take what is left. One man does not come, and then says they will bring their wealth to-morrow, and whoever is richest shall live with young man's wife. Next day they go for their possessions and fill kiva. Then Piwitamni goes to grandmother's house, and she gives him great many sashes. He returns and grandmother gives him buckskins in great quantities. Next time she gives him bundle of large buckskins, so that he is very rich. Old man takes all Piwitamni's things to his wife, Men want another test, and next day go around -village and examine corn piles, They find Piwitamni's house filled with corn, watermelons, and squashes, so he is ahead of them, and no one dares to take his wife from him. She is no longer called Watermelon-Rind Woman.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

37.--THE YOUTH AND MAIDEN WHO PLAYED HIDE AND SEEK FOR THEIR LIFE.

Oraibi youth going to watch father's fields, passes house of maiden. She asks if she may go with him. He consents, and she follows him, taking piki rolls. After eating, they play hide and seek. Mana hides first under some uyi , and youth cannot find her. Youth then hides under bush of pawihchoki, Where mana finds him. Mana pulls out tassel of cornstalk and crawls into opening, replacing tassel. Youth hunts through corn-field but cannot find her. He has to hide, and going through field hears Sun calling him. Sun throws down rainbow and youth climbs to Sun, who hides him behind his back. Mana follows his tracks and is puzzled. Finally she presses drops of milk out of breast, examines drops in her hand, and sees reflection of Sun with boy behind him. Youth next time watches which way mana goes and traces her to watermelon patch, but he cannot find her. She bursts open watermelon and comes out, Youth now becomes unhappy and goes to hide. He hears voice and sees small hole by side of small cornstalk. It is house of Spider Woman. He enters and she spins web across opening. Mana tracks him to

[p. 294]

edge of corn-field, but cannot find him. She takes mirror from bosom and sees opening of Spider's hole reflected. She tells youth to come out, and he does so very dejected. Mana goes to hide fourth time. She crosses watermelon patch. goes into ditch, and turns into tadpole. Youth hunts for her and being tired, drinks from ditch, but cannot find her, and tells her to come out. Mana emerges from water and tells him she saw him drink. Youth again goes to hide, and Spider Woman tells him to go to his uncle Ahu' who lives in temporary shelter. He goes, and Ahu' pulls out loose knot from corner pole, into which he puts youth, closing up opening. Mana hunts for him, and reaches shelter, but cannot find him. She wets tips of fingers, and presses point of forefinger into right ear. She hears youth in hiding-place, and tells him to come out. They go to their place again, but then they return to shelter. Mana digs hole close to corner post, and saying she has beaten him, she tells youth to take off his shirt and his beads. Then she grabs him by hair, bends him over hole, and cuts his throat with knife, letting blood run into hole. She closes hole, digs another to north, and dragging body, buries it in grave. She takes shirt and beads with her home. Parents of young man inquire of maiden if she knows where he is. She says she does not, as he drove her away. Parents have killed sheep, but eat little, and flies come to meat. Woman drives flies off. Fly objects, and says she will go and hunt child when she has sucked meat. Woman tells Fly where boy went, and Fly goes to field. She discovers traces of blood, and opens hole. She finds grave, and sticking all blood from first opening, ejects it into body. Heart begins to beat, and soon youth rises up. He complains of thirst, and Fly tells him to go to ditch and drink. Afterwards they return to house of parents. Fly tells them that maiden has youth's shirt and beads, and that he is to go for them, and when she gives him shirt he is to shake it at her, and so also with beads. Fly tells youth not to eat piki rolls maiden will offer him. He goes, and mana brings food which he declines. She gives him shirt and beads, and he shakes them at her. Fly tells parents to go to mana's house. They hear noise in house. Maiden is changed into Child-Protruding Woman and dresses in white owa and has hair tied, but face and clothes are bloody. Noise continues, and deer, antelope, and rabbits, which are costumes of slain youths, dash out. Mana tries to stop them, and grabs last one. She wipes hands over her person and rubs it over face of antelope, etc. She tells people that they will now have difficulty in hunting animals and disappears with game. Ever since she has lived at Little Colorado River. She controls game and hunters make prayer-offerings to her.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

38.--THE MAIDEN WHO STOLE THE YOUTH'S COSTUME.

Youth wants, to practice running and grandmother dresses him up. She tells him that on returning to village he is not to pass house of dangerous maiden. Next day he again runs, and when he ascends to village, maiden is standing on kiva. She says he is beautifully dressed up and asks him t let her dress in costume and dance for him. He lays off costume and hands it to her. She dresses up, dances and sings. At last words she jumps into through opening, closing it quickly, and tells him to go. Youth goes home and grandmother is angry, but she says maiden is hungry for meat and he must go and hunt. After eating he goes hunting and kills rabbit. Grandmother tells hint to take rabbit and offer it to maiden if she will dance for him again. He is then to cover opening with trap door quickly, so that she

[p. 295]

cannot get back. Youth goes and maiden dances at edge of kiva opening, ready to slip in again. She sings and at last word youth throws game quite distance  from kiva. Maiden rushes for it and youth closes opening. Mana sees he is defeated and lays off entire costume. Youth takes it to grandmother, who is very happy.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

39.--THE TWO PUEBLO MAIDENS WHO WERE MARRIED TO THE NIGHT.

Two sisters refuse to marry. Night goes and asks them to marry him. They consent if parents are willing. Parents are willing and Night comes next evening for brides. Outside of village is large tray. They take place on tray and are carried through air to gulch where Night lives. They see room with bones of women stolen by Night in village. and whom he has thrown there as soon as they become pregnant. Women become pregnant, Younger sister goes to lake to get water and Frog speaks to her. He tells her they must go home that night by trail which leads to their home. In evening sisters go after water and Frog again tells them to go home by trail. They travel and see Spider Woman, who goes with them. Next day Spider Woman sees clouds and says they will overtake them. When three come nearly to village, clouds overtake them and women are killed by lightning. Elder sister is delivered of little boy and younger one of little girl. Children live and nurse. Mothers are alive during night. but are dead during day. When children are grown they ask about father. Mothers tell them that grandparents live in village near, but that they are bad. They contend and kill any one who is beaten, and who cannot guess what is in something hanging on top of ladder, which is little turtle. Children start and mothers ask them to bring them clothes: and say that if grandparents do not say anything they also will go. Children arrive at village, enter kiva, and sit down. When asked they tell who they are. When they have eaten they have to play game and boy wins. They are then asked to guess what is wrapped up at top of ladder. They equivocate and then brother says little turtle, Grandfather admits they are his grandchildren and tells them to kill him. They refuse, but ask for something. They obtain bow and arrows and clothes and then clothes for mothers They say mothers will come, if nothing is said to them. Children return to mothers. After evening meal all dress up and proceed to village, all abreast. They ascend ladder and women call out and receive no answer. They descend into kiva and again call. They do this three times and grandmother responds. Immediately two children and two grandchildren fall dead. If they had been quiet once more, all would have lived together happily.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

40.--HOW HIYONATITIWA DEFEATED THE PLAN OF HIS ENEMY.

Young men try to win affections of maiden of Oraibi without success. Poor youth with patched blanket living at Achamali tells grandmother he will try. He goes, and young men sitting on Snake and other kivas see him and smile. Youth talks with maiden and asks her to marry him. She promises if parents are willing and he says he will fetch her to-morrow. Grandmother will not believe him, but next evening he goes and brings mana to grandmother's house. She grinds corn four days, but there is no one to make her bridal costume. Young man goes hunting and brings home much meat. Next morning grandmother washes head of bride and then goes hunting around. She

[p. 296]

finds nothing in rooms on north, west, and South sides, but on coming out of room on east side she brings complete bridal costume. She dresses up bride, sprinkles road of corn meal, and sends her home to her parents. Inhabitants of Snake and Nashabe kivas are angry at young man and plan how to kill him. They decide to make raid on Navaho. Grandmother hears of it through father of young wife, who is inhabitant of Snake kiva. She tells young man to send his wife's little sister to Snake kiva to call father to breakfast. In morning she goes to kiva for father and adds that in four days there will be war. Next day she repeats this, saying there will be war in three days. On third day she says to-morrow there will be war. 'Men make bows and arrows all day. Next morning she says there will be war that day. Navaho approach village and attack men in fields. Men of village descend to meet them. Hiyonatitiwa and father-in-law, well armed, go to old woman's house. She goes into different rooms and calls for Puma, Bear, Wild Cat and Wolf. Hopi meet Navaho, who ask where Hiyonatitiwa is. While talking young man and father-in-law descend mesa, accompanied by four animals. Animals rush on Navaho, who are nearly all killed, and also Hopi who have planned raid to get youth out of way and steal his wife.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

41.--THE SHONGOPAVI MAIDEN WHO TURNED INTO A DOG.

In Shongopavi lives a handsome youth whom all maidens ask for. Bad-looking maiden grinds coarse meal, puts it into tray and sings while throwing it to chiro birds. In evening birds assemble at mana's house and after that mana always feeds them. Youth also makes tray and hands it to maidens saying that Who opens it shall get him. No one can open it. Tray comes to bad-looking maiden and Spider Woman tells her to sing. So, secretly singing, maiden opens it and owns youth. Pretty maidens are sad and angry. Youth takes maiden to his house. His mother bathes her and she becomes pretty. They make her bridal costume and she goes home, youth following. They sleep there twice, and second time she does not get up. Mother of maiden goes and tells them to get up, Maiden has turned into dog, which jumps down and runs away.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

42.--THE BLIND MAN AND THE LAME MAN.

Earthquake at Oraibi frightens people and all run north. Blind man asks cripple for information. They call to each other to come over and finally blind man takes stick and feels his way to cripple's house. Cripple suggests that they also flee, blind man to carry cripple on his back and cripple to show way. Thus they follow others. Elk meets them and cripple wonders what it is. From his description blind man concludes, it is elk. They have bow and arrow, and cripple suggests that blind man shall shoot it, cripple to aim for him. Blind man shoots and kills elk. They have nothing with which to skin animal or cut meat, but they dig eyes out with arrow. They make fire and place eyes on it. Eyes get hot and burst with great report. They jump. and lame man can wall, and blind man can see. They remain awake all night lest they should become lame and blind again. In morning they follow tracks of people and find them in timber. People return to Oraibi, those two taking lead.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 297]

  

43.--BIG HEAD AND GOAT HORN.

Big Head and Goat Horn are friends, but live so far apart in Oraibi they do Hot often visit each other. Once Goat Horn visits friend and, after eating, he goes home, telling friend he must visit him sometime. Big Head goes and stays night with friend. In morning he kills goat, cuts it in two, and gives friend half. Big Head takes it with him, and that is reason why Hopi when they kill goat cut it up.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

44.--KAVUSHKAVUWNOM AND SHOVIVIOUNOM.

Two Oraibi women are great friends. They meet returning from getting water and Shoviviounom asks Kavushkavuwnom what she is getting water to cook Latter says dish of young squashes, and asks friend to visit her. Shoviviounom goes home, prepares some hurushuki and takes it to house of friend, who has prepared young squashes. While eating they converse, and, after visiting awhile, Shoviviounom returns home. Next day when returning from spring she meets friend, who asks her what she is getting water to cook. Shoviviounom says Tavochona, and asks, friend to visit her. On return Kavushkavuwnom prepares some hurushuki and proceeds to house of friend, Who prepares rabbit meat. They eat and converse until sun goes down. Then Kavushkavuwnom returns home.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

45.--HOW THE CHILDREN OF PIVANHONK'API OBTAINED PERMISSION TO CATCH BIRDS.

Children living at Hukovi  and at Pivanhonk'api go to spring to trap birds. They are angry with each other. Hukovi children tell others they will not trap birds there, but that they can if they give them something. Children from Pivanhonk'api go and get food, which they give to children from Hukovi. After that, children from both villages always catch birds there.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

46.--THE JUG BOY.

In Hano handsome woman makes earthen jug. She tramples clay so that it spurts all around. She bears child which is earthen jug having little boy inside. Child grows to be young man. Tells grandfather he wants to go hunting. Grandfather makes him bow and arrows and ties them to jug handles. He also ties food and burden band to jug. Grandfather carries jug from village and leaves it, after telling him about rabbit tracks. jug youth finds tracks and follows them. Chases rabbit, which jumps down into wash. jug youth also jumps and bursts in two, and Hopi comes out. He takes burden band and how and arrows and follows rabbit, which he shoots. He kills four rabbits, which he carries home. Mother and grandfather are happy, and with his assistance live there.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

47.--THE CROW AS A SPIRIT OF EVIL.

Crow lives on mesa where sun shrines are located near Oraibi. He watches people plant corn in valley and sees who plants com first. When corn begins to have cars, Crow goes first there. Crow also impersonates sickness. He influences bad people so that they get sick and some die. He despoils people in other ways, some beginning to steal. Good people, Whose heart is not strong

[p. 298]

are thus turned into bad people. Some one else tries to counteract doings of Crow, but Hopi do not know who he is or where he lives. He is not so strong as Crow. When Hopi are under influence of Crow, other power makes itself felt by sudden shock.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

48.--THE MAIDEN AND THE COYOTE.

Young men bring flowers to beautiful maiden of Oraibi, but she refuses them. Yellow Cloud chief of north hears about it, takes yellow bridal outfit and offers it to maiden, but she refuses it. Then Blue Cloud chief of west takes blue bridal outfit and offers it to maiden without success. White Cloud chief of east, Black Cloud chief from above, and Gray Cloud chief from below each tries his luck, but all fail. Rain Deity in far south hears story. He paints and dresses up like Katcina and proceeds to Oraibi. Maiden is favorably impressed with him and promises to ask her parents to give her to him in four days. Parents offer no objection. Coyote Old Man, hearing maiden has accepted Rain Deity, determines to win her. He travels south and captures Macaw, which maiden accepts 'as present. During night he goes to house of Rain Deity and steals his costume and ornaments. Next morning he dresses up and paints like Rain Deity and proceeds to house of maiden, who, thinking it is her lover, goes with Coyote Old Man to his house. Site soon discovers mistake and is very unhappy. When Rain Deity awakes he misses costume. He follows tracks to house of maiden and then to house of Coyote, where he finds her. He returns home very angry. Young men of village hear and go to kill Coyote. He manages to escape unhurt and from distance makes defiant gesture at pursuers. Rain Deity afterwards strikes Coyote dead with lightning. Maiden returns to her home, but leads life of lewdness.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

49.--CHORZHVUK'IQOLO AND THE EAGLES.

There is family consisting of father, mother, two daughters and son. Son always hunts eagles and takes care of them and does not assist father in field work. He captures two eagles and goes to find food for them. Girls angry and beat eagles and then go with mother to field. The They lock up house and hide key. Young man returns and eagles, tell him what sisters have done. They tell him to dress up and that they want to go where family is. So he decorates himself and mounts on eagles' back. Eagles ascend and young man sings song. They come near field and sisters recognize brother. Eagles descend and parents ask them to leave son, but they soar out of sight after circling four times. Family at once go home mourning. Eagles fly to their home, through opening in sky, whence they come down in response to prayers of Hopi and hatch their young in this world. Eagles deposit young man on high bluff and leave him there because his sisters had beaten them. Wren appears jumping up and down edge of bluff. He speaks to Wren, but receives no answer. Black Spider comes, having been informed by Wren, and pities him. Spider goes and brings him two small downy Turkey feathers to keep him from getting cold. In morning Wren comes again and makes ladder down narrow crack to ground with its feathers, which it pulls out, leaving itself entirely naked, having kept only its bill. Young man follows Wren ladder and reaches ground. Wren replaces feathers in body, and. after directing young man where to go, leaves him. He comes to place and hears voice of

[p. 299]

Spider Woman, who invites him in. She enlarges opening and he enters. She asks him to live with her and gives him small piece of doughy mush and half a nut. She tells him to take small quantity. As he eats it increases in his mouth. After eating, Spider Woman makes him hall of pitch and hair. In morning young man runs southward kicking ball. He comes to small lake and kills little bird for Spider Woman. She is pleased and says bird will last them several months. Next day he brings home two birds and on third day large number of birds, and Spider Woman says they can now eat meat and no longer suck it. On fourth day he goes westward from lake to see who it is Spider Woman has told him is dangerous. he kicks ball before him and all at once it disappears. It has dropped into kiva. Some one from within tells him to come in. He sees ball lying north of fireplace. Man in kiva is Hasohkata and has eyelids hanging down on breast. They play totolospi and Hasohkata beats twice. He tells young man to lie down outside of entrance of kiva and ties his hands and feet. Spider Woman goes to look for him and finds him tied. She goes home to bring him two fuzzy turkey feathers. On return she calls her people, and animals of prey come. she tells them she wants them to go and take grandchildren from Hasohkata and gamble with him. While Hasohkata is laughing at young man. rescuers arrive at kiva. Spider Woman takes cup game. Mole proceeds under ground. Spider Woman tells Hasohkata they have come to gamble with him. She puts four gaming cups on north side of fireplace. By aid of mole, who is under floor and pushes little ball under cup, they beat Hasohkata, who tells them to take young man along. Spider Woman finds ball, which disgusts Hasohkata, and he challenges them to another trial. If they can pull out a certain amount of brush, he will consider himself beaten. Mole hears and gnaws off biggest roots of brush. They pull out so much that Hasohkata considers himself beaten. He tells them to take all he has. There are many objects in kiva It(, has taken away from his victims. They take everything, and then Bear grabs him and tears out his heart. Wolves tear his corpse to pieces and devour it. Animals do so still, and this is why Hopi hunt and kill them. Spider Woman sends animals away and takes grandchild home with her. Wren finds out that young man's parents are longing for him and tells Spider Woman. She says that next day she will go with him. They go to opening through which eagles brought him. Spider Woman places sticks around it and spins much web. Young man mounts her back and they descend. They strike earth close to field of his parents. He starts to parents' home. They recognize him at last, and all are united once more.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

50.--HAWK AND THE CHILD.

Navaho living east of Oraibi steal Hopi boy. They make him work and give him little to eat, so that he becomes emaciated. Navaho have great gathering and leave boy behind. Hawk pities him and carries him on his back to bluff. Hawk then swoops down on Navaho camp and grabs little boy of wealthy Navaho, tears clothes from him, and then drops him. He takes costume to little boy and then grabs another Navaho boy and takes his moccasins. Navaho are much frightened and disperse in all directions. Hawk gets boy firewood and fire and some rabbit meat, which boy roasts and eats. He stays four days in Hawk's house Then Hawk takes him on his back, and, after circling round Navaho camp number of times, flies with child to village of Oraibi.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 300]

  

51.--MU'YINGWA, TWO CHILDREN, AND THE HUMMING-BIRD.

Oraibi people have nothing to eat, as it does not rain for five years. All go away, leaving little boy and girl in village. Brother makes for sister little bird from pith of sunflower stalk. She plays with it, and, throwing it upwards, it becomes Humming-bird and flies away. Next morning bird flies into house and enters opening in wall. Boy puts hand into opening and finds little corn ear placed there by bird. They roast and eat it. Next day bird returns with larger corn ear, and so it does for four days. On fifth day it does not bring any corn and boy draws bird forth from opening in form in which he had made it. Little girl throws it upwards and bird flies away. It sits upon rock, looks southward, and detects cactus plant with single red blossom. Bird flies towards plant and removing it finds opening under it. Entering opening it is in kiva, where grass and herbs are growing. At north end is another opening through which bird passes to second kiva, where is corn with pollen. Bird finds opening into third kiva, where are grass, herbs and corn of all kinds. Here lives Mu'yingwa, god of Growth and Germination. Mu'yingwa asks why he is going about. Bird flies on his arm and tells him condition of things at Oraibi, and asks him to come out and look after things. He says children are hungry. Mu'yingwa tells him to take what he wants. Bird takes roasting corn ear and carries it to opening. Children are thankful to bird and ask it to hunt their parents. It flies north and finds father and mother of children. They are much emaciated. Man asks bird to procure them some food. It flies away and tells children about parents. They ask it to bring them something to eat, and bird flies away. Mu'yingwa ascends to first kiva, and it rains little about Oraibi. In four days he ascends to next kiva, and it again rains. He ascends to third kiva an d it rains considerably around Oraibi. After four days more he emerges from last kiva and finds grasses and herbs growing. Parents of children and others return. Children grow up and become village chiefs and owners of Oraibi.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

52.--THE KALATOTO WHO WISHED TO HAVE HAIR ON HIS HEAD.

Kalatoto often visits Oraibi to find something to eat among refuse. Children tease him and snap their fingers against his head so that he nearly dies. He then retires to house. He wonders how he can get hair on his head like children, and goes to timber and gets some pitch. He goes to village to hunt for hair and finds some on piles of refuse. Next morning he puts pitch on his head and hair on it. He visits village again and children recognize him. They notice smell of pitch and take little sticks, with which they scrape it off his head and chew it. He gathers up hairs which they had thrown away and returns home. Next day he goes to timber and finds cactus, juice of which he puts on his head and pastes hair to juice when nearly dried. He goes again to village and children again try to remove head covering, but they find it is not pitch. Towards evening he goes home and then dried juice cracks and falls off with hair. He tries pitch again and puts it on evening before dance in village, pasting new hair to it. He sleeps well, but pitch has become -warm during night and adheres to floor on which he has been sleeping. He tries to rise, but cannot, and dies of hunger.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 301]

  

53.--THE CHILD WHO TURNED INTO AN OWL.

In Shupaulavi  child cries bitterly and mother beats it. She tells it she will throw it out to the owl and drags child out of house. Large Owl comes and carries child off on his back. He takes child to cave, where his children are living nicely. Then mother no longer hears crying. She comes and looks for child, but it has gone. In morning she hunts for it, but cannot find it. Men going after wood, on passing Owl's cave, hear singing. They look up and in cave see child which has feathers and white spots of owl appearing all over body, and eyes becoming yellow. On return to village they tell what they have seen. Parents of child proceed with men to place. Men climb up to cave and take child. Owl tells them to keep child locked in room four days and let it out on fourth day when sun rises. It will then be Hopi. If door is opened sooner, child will remain Owl and go back. They take child to village and lock it up in room. Father watches. After first day mother is anxious to open door, but father forbids. When it begins to be light after third night, she open,, door and out rushes Owl, which rises up and flies to place it has come from.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

54.--THE CHILDREN AND THE LIZARDS.

Man from Walpi goes to attend dance at Shongopavi. He sees children hunting lizards and shooting arrows at them. Proceeding, he hears voice and sees little lizards sitting and making peculiar sounds. He watches them running around and playing with each other. Man has lost so much time he returns and relates that he has not seen dance, but has watched children hunting and singing song, which is forever afterwards called Mishongnovi Song.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

55.--THE ROOSTER, THE MOCKING-BIRD, AND THE MAIDEN.

Beautiful maiden persistently refuses all offers of marriage. Chief of north brings her bundle of presents, which she looks at, but returns bundle, saying she does not want it. Rooster goes as handsome youth to maiden who is pleased with him. Tells him to remain over night and return in four days, and then she will go to his house. On third day Mocking-bird, who has heard about Rooster, goes and asks maiden to marry him. She promises to marry him and speaks to mother about it. Rooster has seen Mocking-bird going upon mesa, and he also goes same day to house. They have altercation and agree to have contest in three days to see who knows most about making light. Rooster goes in search of assistance. While resting near baho shrine, somebody tells him to come in. He enters and finds many maidens. He is seated and given shelled corn to eat. He goes on his journey until he comes to large rock with opening. He crows repeatedly and door opens. He enters and finds many roosters and chicken, men, women, youths and maidens. After he has been fed, they ask what he has come for. He tells them about maiden and of his contention about light. They promise to try and do something for him, but that Mocking-bird understands something and has assistance of Kwatokwuu. In evening they sing and crow all night. After third crow, yellow dawn appears, and after singing two more songs sun rises. Chief says they have accomplished it right and that rooster can go home without fear. He returns running very fast. He is again fed by maidens. [p. 302] They tie dry corn-husks to his tail. As he runs they rattle, and as he is scared he runs very fast. Next day he walks through village and then notifies Mocking-bird to come that night and watch him. In evening Mocking-bird goes to Rooster's house, and Kwatokwuu goes to his house. Rooster sings all night, and when he has nearly done Mocking-bird slips away and notifies Kwatokwuu, who spreads his large wings across eastern sky, completely covering up dawn, Rooster crows after singing last two songs, but it does not become light, so he has failed. Mocking-bird flies away and sun soon comes up. In evening Mocking-bird invites Rooster to come and watch him. He sings and whistles all night, and after last two songs suit rises. Maiden marries Mocking-bird. She hears two children, boy and girl. Boy is child of Rooster and girl of Mocking-bird. Women since then said to be children of Mocking-bird, and that is why they talk and jabber so much. Men are considered children of Rooster and that is why they are so gentle and docile.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

56.--THE TOAD AND THE SNOW KATCINAS.

Son of Toad Woman goes to village to listen to Snow Katcinas practice their singing. He wears robe of wildcat skin, as is customary among young men. On eighth day Toad Woman washes his head with suds. When suit rises, he puts on robe and cap of skin and goes to village. He paints his face. Children laugh at his funny cap. Nobody gives him food, but old man tells children to take him to ant hill. When he has eaten many ants, he goes back to plaza and attends dance all day, enjoying himself. As he leaves village in evening, children follow, having red piki. He asks for some. They give him very little, which he takes to his mother, and she is happy.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

57.--THE LOCUST THAT CAME TO LIFE WHILE BEING ROASTED.

Many locusts live in valleys around Oraibi. Children capture many, which women roast in pots with salt water. Voting men used to hunt jack rabbits, and cotton-tail rabbits, but prefer to hunt locusts. While old woman is stirring locusts in pot, one of them becomes alive, sings song about locusts being meat instead of rabbits, while slowly crawling up stirring stick. Woman replies to it and locust flies away with hissing sound.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

58.--THE COYOTE AND THE TURTLES.

Coyote hunts near place where turtles live in river, Turtle has little baby, whom it leaves asleep when others go hunting food. Little turtle awakes and, nobody being there, it cries and comes out of water. It finds tracks and follows them for some distance, but cannot find any one and cries bitterly. Coyote hears, hunts it up, and asks what it is singing. Little turtle says he is not singing, he is crying. Coyote asks why he is crying. Little turtle tells him, and he then threatens to eat turtle if he does not sing again. Little turtle refuses and says if Coyote eats him he will live in his body. Coyote then threatens to throw him in water and little turtle asks him not to, as he would drown. Coyote takes little turtle and slings him into water. Little turtle then swims around and laughs at him. Coyote threatens to kill turtle's mother. He meets turtles on way back to water and tries to seize one. It draws its head, feet, and tail into shell and Coyote cannot hurt it. He jumps

[p. 303]

toward others with same result, and then leaves them in disgust. Turtle mother finds cactus, which child eats. He then tells mother of his adventure with Coyote. Mother laughs and is very happy.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

59.--THE WATER SERPENT AND THE COYOTE.

Water Serpent and Coyote are great friends. Water Serpent is still young, but he is so long that when he visits Coyote and coils up he fills kiva. He invites Coyote to visit him. Coyote meditates how he can fill kiva of Water Serpent and tells him tail will become long. He gets large bundle of cedar bark, makes bark pliable and wraps it with yucca leaves. He then pulls out wool and pastes it to cedar bark, so that it looks like tail. He then fastens false tail to his own. In morning he goes to Water Serpent's kiva, which is well filled with his tail. When he leaves he asks Snake to visit him again. When he comes to his kiva he unfastens tail. He puts it on again when he sees friend coming. Snake arrives and has grown so much he cannot get into kiva with Coyote's tail. Coyote goes out and sits near kiva opening conversing with Snake inside. Coyote becomes very cold and angry with Snake for staying so long. He determines to get even with friend and makes another long addition to tail. On very cold day he goes again to visit his friend. He enters kiva and fills entire kiva with tail. Snake goes outside and becomes very cold and then very angry Coyote stays so long. Finally Coyote says he must go, and while he is dragging his tail after him up-ladder Snake goes in and shoves end of Coyote's tail into fire. When Coyote is near his kiva he looks around and sees smoke and fire. He thinks Hopi have set grass on fire to drive him away. He runs away and reaches timber, but, seeing this burning after awhile, he runs to Little Colorado River and jumps in. He is drowned.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

60.--THE COYOTE AND THE BALOLOOKONG (WATER SERPENT).

Balolookong goes to Coyote's kiva, which he fills entirely, so that Coyote has to go outside. Coyote is angry and makes large artificial tail, which he fastens to his own. He visits Balolookong and tail fills kiva. Balolookong has to go outside and when Coyote leaves sets artificial tail on fire. Grain is set on fire and Coyote runs away and finally reaches Little Colorado River, in which he is drowned, as in No. 59, but here he jumps into river because fire on tail reaches his natural tail.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

61.--BALOLOOKONGWUU AND THE COYOTE.

Lolo'okong goes to visit his friend Coyote and is so long he fills kiva. Coyote gives him juniper berries to eat. He invites Coyote to visit him and leaves. Coyote thinks he will pay off his friend and makes artificial tail of cedar bark and yucca leaves, which he fastens to his own tail. He goes to his friend's house and fills whole kiva with his long tail. They eat corn-pollen. They talk together until evening and then Coyote goes home. When his tail is nearly unwound, Lolo'okong sets fire to it. Tail sets grass on fire. When tail is nearly consumed, Coyote reaches kiva and begins to think that his friend has so treated him and becomes very angry with Lolo'okong .

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

62.--THE COYOTE AND THE FROG.

Coyote goes to see his friend Frog. He is raided by dogs and jumps down mesa, but is not killed. After he has drank much water, Frog suggests that

[p. 304]

they sit down. Coyote asks Frog to dance for him and Frog jumps into deep water. He comes up with mouth wide open. He is pregnant. He tells Coyote to draw him out. Coyote grasps him by arms and throws him on ground. Frog bursts and tadpoles swarm around him. Frog dies. Coyote starts off home. People see him and try to capture him. Rain and hail storm comes up and Coyote's hole is filled with water. He tries to find shelter, but hail stones are so heavy they kill him.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

63.--THE COYOTE, THE BAT, AND THE HUMMING-BIRD.

Coyote, Bat, and Humming-bird are friends. Bat and bird visit Coyote, who always has plenty of meat, which they enjoy. Rat thinks he will invite his two friends, but is worried as to what he will give them to eat. He goes in evening to Oraibi, thinking some one may have forgotten to take in meat that is drying, but finds none. He returns home discouraged, but goes again and finds open window, through which he gets into house, and carries home piece of tallow. He afterwards gets more tallow and some meat and some salt. He determines if his friends ask where he got food to say from Badger. In morning he invites bird and Coyote to visit him. They go and at noon Bat prepares meal. His friends enjoy food and ask him where he got it. He says Badger gave him it. They say nothing, but on way home talk matters over and agree that Bat is deceiving them. Bird visits Coyote in evening. They talk about food and agree that Bat must have stolen it in Oraibi. They conclude they will song-tie him and start to make song. During night Coyote finishes song and in morning he goes to bird's house and. sings song. They practice it until they both know it, Bird invites Bat in evening and fetches Coyote. Bird proposes to have song and they all. stand in line. Bird begins song, Coyote chimes in and Bat sings best he can, but soon finds out that joke is being played on him. He stops singing, tells them they have song-tied him and that it ends their friendship. They disperse and never become friends again.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

64.--THE COYOTE AND THE HUMMING-BIRD.

Coyote and Humming-bird both have children and are good friends. Coyote goes to place where is refuse of village to look for pieces of skin, and bird goes to place close by and buries himself, his bill only protruding. Coyote comes and thinks bill is needle and pulls at it. Bird says it is his bill and laughs at Coyote. They go to bird's house and converse. In evening Coyote goes home, inviting bird to visit him to-morrow. Next morning bird goes to Coyote's house, first hunting worms. Near house she sees something protruding from ground and thinks it is gourd jug. She pulls at it and Coyote says it is his snout. Coyote feeds friend on juniper berries, Coyote eating some. After talking awhile bird returns home.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

65.--HOW THE COYOTE WAS DECEIVED BY THE WREN.

Coyote Woman has four children for whom she hunts mice and other little animals. She goes to spring after water for children, which she brings in her mouth. Once when she returns from spring with mouth full of water, she sees Wren jumping from one rock to another, singing. Coyote laughs and spills water. She goes again to spring and on return again laughs at Wren and

[p. 305]

spills water. She tells Wren that she is going again for water and that if Wren is still doing that on her return she will devour him. While Coyote is gone Wren slips out of his skin and dresses up stone with it so that it looks like Wren. Wren himself slips under rock and when Coyote returns begins to sing. Coyote laughs and spills water. He is very angry and grabs stone dressed as bird and crushes it. She breaks all her teeth so that blood streams from her mouth. She runs back to spring to wash her face and sees bloody face staring at her. She runs to another spring and is scared away in same manner. She visits several other springs with same result, and then rushes westward to Grand Canon. She jumps into canon and perishes.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

66.--THE AAHTU AND THE COYOTE.

Aahtu are playing in cedar timber and singing. When through with song they throw their eyes on tree and on again singing song eyes return to their sockets. Coyote comes and asks what they are doing. They tell him that when eyes are not clear and they are thrown away in that manner they become clear again. Coyote says one of his eyes is not clear and he will join them. He throws his eyes on tree with others at last word of song. They sing again and all eyes except those of Coyote return. Little birds all laugh at him and say eyes will not return as he is bad. Coyote is angry and leaves them. He can find nothing to eat and soon dies.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

67.--THE COYOTE AND THE TURTLE-DOVE.

Turtle-dove cuts her hand while rubbing out seed from tassels of kwikwi grass. It bleeds profusely, and while she moans Coyote approaches. He asks if she is singing and, when she says she is crying, he tells her to sing again or he will devour her. Dove sings again and Coyote imitates her and runs away. He stumbles over rock and falls down. He loses song and goes back to Turtledove. He makes her sing song again. He runs back singing, but again stumbles and falls, and again returns. Turtle-dove goes away and leaves stone resembling her in place where she has been sitting. Coyote says he has again fallen and forgotten song. He threatens to devour Turtle-dove if she does not sing. Receiving no reply he grabs what he believes to be Dove, but finds it is stone. He breaks all his teeth and blood streams from his mouth. He runs back and comes to spring Toriva. As he puts mouth to water he sees bloody face staring at him and runs away. He goes to several other springs, in which he sees same reflection and dares not drink. Finally he runs to Oraibi, where is place where no one lives. He puts his snout into water and is just about to drink when he discovers skeleton staring at him from water. He is very angry and tears up rocks about spring, but is so exhausted he falls down and dies.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

68.--THE COYOTE AND THE BLUE JAYS.

Coyote has wife and five children, for whom he hunts rabbits. He chases little cotton-tail rabbit, which runs into hole which he cannot enter. Badger comes along and Coyote asks him to get rabbit out for him. Badger does and Coyote runs home with it. Little Coyotes wrangle over rabbit, tear it to pieces, some getting nothing and remaining hungry. Next morning Coyote and wife go in search of food. Wife enters woods and hears Blue Jays in tree. They

[p. 306]

are dancing and ask her to join them. She says she would like to, but cannot get up there. Blue Jays put some of their wings, tails and feathers on her legs. She ascends and dances with them. Then they fly away, Coyote with them, and alight On another tree. This they repeat three times. They then fly up into air, and when very high they surround Coyote and tear out all feathers they have loaned him. Coyote falls to earth and dies. Coyote hunts for his wife, but dogs pursue him and he goes back to children, who now have no mother. Coyote afterwards hunts food alone for children, and this is why so many coyotes look out for food alone.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

69.--THE COYOTE AND THE EAGLE.

Coyote seeing Eagle stand on one foot, asks him why he does so. Eagle says he has cut one leg off. Coyote inquires how Eagle did it. Eagle tells him to lay leg across stone and strike on it with sharp stone and it will come off, adding that it does not hurt. Coyote does as told. Eagle lowers second leg, stretches out his wings, laughs at Coyote, and then flies away. Coyote limps away, crying.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

70.--THE COYOTE AND THE RED EAGLE.

On Coyote's returning from hunt one hot day, he finds his children very thirsty. They are still very young. He goes to Toriva for water, which he gets in his mouth. On returning he sees Eagle dancing on one leg. Coyote laughs and spills water. He runs back to spring and again fills mouth with water, which he again spills through laughing at dancing Eagle. He is angry and goes to cedar timber to get some pitch. He goes again to Toriva and, after drinking, fills his mouth and pastes it up with pitch. He again sees Eagle dancing and again laughs, but he does not spill water. He finds his children sleeping nicely and pours water into their mouths, but they do not awaken. They are dead. He is angry and goes to kill Eagle, who flies away, and shows that he has two legs.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

71.--THE COYOTE AND THE TURKEYS.

Coyote and Turkey are great friends and both have children. Coyote goes to Turkey's house and admires figures on little turkey's feathers. Turkey mother says she baked children and ate their meat, but did not break any bones, which she put into tray and waved up and down, singing song, and then threw bones outside and children got alive again beautifully figured. In morning Coyote gets wood and makes oven very hot. Then he throws all little Coyotes in and plasters oven up. In evening he takes them out thoroughly baked, eats meat, but does not hurt bones, which he gathers into basket. During night Turkey mother sends her children away to San Francisco Mountains. She rolls up small blankets and places them on floor to make them appear as sleeping. Then she follows children. When sun comes out Coyote takes tray containing children's bones, waves it up and down, singing song, and throws bones away. Nothing comes alive and only bones are there. He is very angry and runs very fast to friend's house. He jumps on beds and grabs at young turkeys, but nobody is there. He hunts tracks of turkeys, who have arrived at Little Colorado River. They cross it and little turkeys are very tired and mother leaves them and runs ahead to San Francisco Mountains.

[p. 307]

She tells turkeys that Coyote is following them and two very strong Turkey men run towards place where mother has left children. Coyote is chasing little turkeys and is just about to take one when Turkey men come, grab little Ones and run away with them on their backs. Coyote says he is hungry and wants to cat them, but they do not listen to him. He returns home hungry, but dies before he gets there.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

72.--THE CHIRO AND THE COYOTE.

Coyote walking about sees Chiros dancing and singing. He wants to dance and Chiros give him feathers, making him wings and tail and putting small feathers into his body. They dance and sing again, Coyote with them, and then they fly upward very high. Now they crowd around Coyote and take away their feathers. Coyote falls to earth and dies. Chiros laugh at him and are pleased that he is dead.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

73.--THE COYOTE AND THE PORCUPINE.

Coyote goes to visit his friend Porcupine. After talking long time Porcupine tells Coyote to build fire. He makes large fire and then Porcupine draws small pointed stick from his hair, and thrusts it into his nose. Blood and fat drops out on fire and is roasted. He hands it to Coyote to eat. They converse until evening, and as Coyote leaves, he invites Porcupine to visit him next day. Porcupine goes next morning to his friend. Coyote has pointed stick thrust into his hair. At noon Porcupine lights fire. Coyote pulls out stick, bends over fire and pokes nose with stick. Blood mixed with fat comes out, covers fire and won't stop. Finally Coyote becomes exhausted and falls down. Porcupine, thinking Coyote dead, laughs and goes home. Coyote revives and next morning he goes to attack friend. Porcupine sees blood on his nose and tells him he thought he had died. Coyote accuses him of having bewitched him and says he is going to devour him. Porcupine expostulates with Coyote, who finally quiets down. They live together again as friends, Coyote thinking he will have chance to take revenge on Porcupine.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

74.--THE COYOTE AND THE BADGER.

Coyote and Badger are great friends. Oraibi are cleaning out spring and maidens take food and place it near rock. Coyote watches people as they eat and envies them. Next day Coyote bears criers announce another spring cleaning. He goes to Badger's house and tells him. He suggests that they take part in eating. Badger follows Coyote to his house, from which Badger begins to dig hole towards where food is. After Badger has gone little way he turns round. Coyote thinks he is turning back and goes for mole. Mole returns with Coyote and rapidly digs hole underground. Badger follows enlarging hole, and Coyote scratches out loose dirt. Mole continues hole to rock and while Hopi are at work he reaches food and hands it to Badger and Badger to Coyote, who carries it to his house. When Hopi are through with work, chief sends maidens for food. They go to rock and find food gone. Coyote, Badger and Mole divide food, on which they live for some time. Afterwards Coyote visits Badger, who has cut into small pieces some lolo'okyongs  and roasted them. Coyote eats food with relish and asks Badger where he got it. He replies that he opened his side and took fat from his intestines. He shows

[p. 308]

Coyote knife with which he opened body, and says it does not hurt. Coyote takes knife and invites Badger to visit him to-morrow. When he has gone, Badger laughs and calls him Fool Old Man. Next morning Coyote cuts into his abdomen with knife and blood runs out profusely. He takes hold of fat and pulls at it, but becomes exhausted, falls over and dies. When Badger arrives he finds Coyote dead.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

75.--THE BADGER AND THE COYOTE.

Coyote and Badger are friends. Badger goes to visit Coyote, who gives him juniper berries to eat. They converse until evening, when Badger goes home, inviting Coyote. He catches rabbit and in morning roasts it. Coyote comes and, after conversing, Badger brings forth roasted rabbit, cuts it up and invites friend to eat. They enjoy meal and again converse. In evening Coyote goes home, friend wishing him happy journey.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

76.--THE BADGER, THE COYOTE, AND THE KOHONINO MAIDEN.

Badger and Coyote are great friends. Coyote has found place where Kohonino maiden has died and when hunting together one day Coyote suggests that they shall revive her. They find maiden's bones, which they place in heap, and Badger covers with his black kilt. That maiden may have flesh and color he sends Coyote to get grass and red paint, which he wets with water Coyote gets from spring. Badger then makes Coyote go away, as otherwise maiden will not revive. Badger sings and passes paint over bones and grass several times and maiden is alive. She asks what he wants, and he calls Coyote. She is willing to go home with them. On the way Coyote covets mana, but Badger is not willing and says she is to be their clan sister. Coyote is still anxious to have maiden and bites her in calf of leg. Badger expostulates with him and maiden falls down and dies again. Badger takes body on his back to bury her and Coyote follows. Badger asks why he follows and Coyote goes. He comes again while Badger is digging grave and they bury maiden and return home. They stay at Coyote's house that night. In morning Badger goes home, inviting friend to visit him next day. As he goes home he thinks how he shall kill Coyote. He kills four bull-snakes, which he cuts into short pieces and puts pieces in drying pot. The snakes are fat. He then makes hurushuki. Coyote comes and they commence to eat right away. Coyote asks what it is that tastes so good. Badger says he did not know what to set before him, so he opened his abdomen, took his entrails out and roasted them, and his abdomen closed up again. In proof he shows abdomen with little scratch he has made on it. Coyote believes him and says he will do that, too. He asks Badger to visit him in morning and borrows knife and pot. In morning Coyote puts pot on fire, opens abdomen with knife and paws and entrails drop out. He takes hold of large intestine and drops dead. Badger comes and finds friend dead. He takes fat from Coyote and returns to his house. He spreads fat on ant hill near and ants move away. This is why ants do not remain where coyote fat is placed and that Coyote fat is used for ant bites.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 309]

  

77.--THE COYOTE AND THE KOKONTU-MAIDENS.

Coyote sees Kokontu grinding corn and singing. They talk with him and then come out and go to steep bluff. Here they play, running up and jumping down large tree and bluff. Coyote joins them and climbs tree. He jumps down and lands forcibly on ground, killing himself. Kokontu laugh at him and go home leaving him dead.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

78.--THE COYOTE AND THE GRASSHOPPERS.

Sparrow-hawk eats all grasshopper children. Their parents mourn loss. Coyote comes along and tells Grasshopper mother she is singing nicely and asks her to sing to him. She says she is crying for her children, but Coyote threatens to devour her if she does not sing to him. She sings and Coyote runs away singing song. He stumbles over rock and loses song. He returns to place where he left Grasshopper woman, and, seeing stone resembling her which she had put in her place, he tells it to sing again. Receiving no reply, he grabs stone and breaks teeth. He hunts for food, but cannot eat it, as he has no teeth, and finally perishes with hunger.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

79.--THE COYOTE AND THE GRASSHOPPER.

Grasshopper and Coyote are great friends. Grasshopper has children and big field. At planting time he tells wife others are going too help him and she is to put up good deal of food. She prepares food and jug of water. These, with seeds, Grasshopper takes on back and goes to field. He waits in kisi he has built until nearly noon, but nobody comes. Then he eats food and goes to field and plants all alone. Afternoon is very hot. He returns to kisi, drinks, and lays down to rest, leaning feet against side. Coyote comes and asks why he is lying that way. Grasshopper says he is tired and he is afraid kisi will fall on him. Coyote lays down beside friend, also leaning his hind feet against booth. Grasshopper Jumps up and says he will get more water. He picks up jug and goes home, and, as he is planning mischief against his friend, he tells children to go to their uncle Deer. Coyote waits until he is tired. He jumps up without booth falling. Says Grasshopper has lied and that he will go and eat up his children. He goes to house of friend and finds it closed. He follows tracks to house of Deer and asks if grasshopper has come with his family. He wants Deer to get them out, but Deer tells Coyote to come in himself. He hesitates, but at last goes down ladder and sees two strong Deer standing. As he steps down into deeper portion of kiva, one Deer picks him up with horns and throws him towards hatchway. As he falls, other Deer does same, and so they keep it up until he is dead. Grasshoppers then go and scatter over country.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

80.--THE THREE MAIDENS AND THE COYOTE.

Three maidens live with father and mother in Oraibi. Coyote longs for maidens and tells grandmother. She tells him to go to village and if he sees bow, arrow quiver, red yarn, blue yarn, leggings, blue shirt and red stone ochre, to bring them. He goes, finds things and takes them to grandmother. She dresses him up and puts ochre on his face. He goes to maidens, whose father has put stone trap east of Coyote's house. At balance is some rabbit meat. Coyote presses towards meat, pulls at it, trap shuts and he dies there. Maidens

[p. 310]

going home in evening see him caught and laugh when they see arrow quiver They go home and tell father, who says he will go there to-morrow. In morning he goes and finds Coyote caught. He carries him to field, skins him, and hang,, up his skin as watching flag.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

81.--HOW THE COYOTES HAD A KATCINA DANCE.

Coyote sees Katcinas, have dances and processions. Coyote calls to friends, Coyotes, and they come from all sides. He says they will have Katcina dance and tells them to go to village and bring feathers, and they go and hunt things. which they bring to Coyote's kiva. They prepare Katcina costumes, In morning Coyotes go to places where Katcinas dress up and all go to Coyote's house, where Katcinas have dance. That day Oraibi have Coyote hunt. While Coyotes are still dancing, Oraibi close in upon them. Their costumes prevent their running fast and all are killed, but Coyote and family, who have not put on costume or mask. Hopi laugh and return to village.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

82.--THE COYOTE AND HIS PREY.

Coyote has children somewhere. He hunts for food and kills rabbit. He does not want to eat alone, and calls it out from bluff. From different quarters come different colored Coyotes, and he tells them they will eat together. They tear rabbit to pieces and devour it quickly. That is why Coyote never eats prey alone.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

83.--THE BULL-SNAKE AND THE TU'CHVO (WREN).

Children find nest of Tu'chvos on bluff. Bull-snake has also discovered nest. Snake is discovered by bird, who feels secure and sings jokingly at snake. Snake is angry and tries to climb up. He falls back three times, but fourth .time he reaches mouth of opening in which is nest. He enters, coils up in nest, and devours four little ones. He remains in nest four days and then crawls on bluff and coils up. Old bird flies about bewailing loss of brood. Snake begins to exert charm on bird by strong inhalations. Bird is drawn nearer and nearer towards snake on each inhalation, although when it exhales bird tries to escape. Finally it is drawn by strong inhalation close to Snake's mouth and then snake devours its victim.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

84.--THE SNAKES AND THE LOCUSTS.

Rattlesnakes have kiva. During summer they run about as rattle-snakes, but in winter they are Hopi, their snake skins hanging on pegs on wall of kiva. One winter it snows very heavily. Around house of locusts, who live at Tu'vanashavi, where is deep opening in earth, there is no snow, but elsewhere it is very deep. It remains so long many Hopi freeze to death. Snake chief sends Sand Rattlesnake to see what their fathers at Tu'vanashavi have to say about it. He becomes tired and cold, so he returns. Bull-snake goes, and he also returns. Racer then goes, and finally reaches place, and finds no snow quite distance around. It is warm and grass and many flowers grow. He enters kiva and locusts give him food. They play flutes in ceremony, and that is why it is so warm there. Locust chief asks why he has come. He tells them children are dying of cold, and asks them to come and assemble with them They dress and paint up and tell Racer that in four days they will come over. [p. 311] Locust takes flute and blows path back to snake house, so that Racer arrives there in short time. Locusts come in evening of fourth day. Snakes and locusts have form of Hopi. Locusts are dressed in rabbit skins, and as they enter kiva it becomes warmer and warmer. Snake people soon begin to perspire. On leaving their own kivas, locusts have chirped through their flutes and snow began to melt, and when they reach Snake kiva it has disappeared. They sing song and dance, and when through with dancing they go home. Snakes are bathed in perspiration and sleep well that night. In morning ground is covered with water from melting snow.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

85.--THE SQUIRREL AND THE CHIPMUNK.

Squirrel and Chipmunk are good friends and go together to old man's orchard to eat peaches. Chipmunk relishes peaches and Squirrel prefers kernels. Squirrel says they ought to dance sometimes, and asks Chipmunk to make song. He makes song about Squirrel, who at first is not pleased, but afterwards is satisfied, and they practice song together. They go to orchard and find old man there, so they wait until he is asleep and then, they carry off many peaches. After feasting they dance and sing. Noise awakens old man, who runs towards them and says he will kilt them. They jump down and run into house of Squirrel at foot of rock. Old man follows and waits for them. Chipmunk runs out and escapes to his house. After this they do not fear old man, and live off his orchard. As he did not kill them they are now not much afraid of Hopi and destroy their peaches.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

86.--A BET BETWEEN THE COOYOKO AND THE FOX.

Fox comes along as Cooyoko uncle is sitting on bluff. He is waiting to watch sun rise. He tells Fox to come and sit near him. Says they will have contest to see on whose song sun will rise, looser to be killed with knife. Cooyoko sings song first. Fox follows. Cooyoko sings again and sun is just about to loom up. Fox repeats his song and while singing sun looms up. Fox wins contest and he cuts Cooyoko's throat with knife.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

87.--THE LITTLE GRAY MICE AND THE LITTLE BROWN MICE.

Little Gray Mice and Little Brown Mice are on very friendly terms. They go to village at night and whenever one finds corn, it invites others to come. They often visit and dance together and sing song about dawn. Gray Mouse finds something good to eat and tells Brown Mice. They all come from both places, but quarrel over food and there is great fight. Gray Mice go to Brown Mice again and sing different song. Then they rush back to their home. Brown Mice laugh and say others are afraid of them. Two kinds of mice have not been on good terms since.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

88.--THE BADGER AND THE SMALL GRAY MICE.

Badger is doctor and people go to him when sick. Hopi hunter has leg broken and tries to get home alone. He sees small people like children in underground room, who invite him to come down. He cannot, and they carry him down. They pity him and decide to repair his leg. They crowd around him and rub him all over body and all at once run away. Man finds his leg in normal condition and goes home. Badger hears about it and is jealous. He

[p. 312]

feigns sickness, lying down, taking no nourishment and expectorating in bowl for three days. He sends to Mice doctors, asking them to have pity on him. They go to dwelling of Badger, who has hidden stick under his bed. Mice gather round bed of Badger, who groans as if he were going to die Mice while moving in circle, sing song about Badger and then chief tells him that nothing is matter with him. Chief then ascends ladder, followed by other Mice. Badger grabs stick and begins to strike at Mice, but hits none of them, and all escape. Some of the younger Mice being chased by Badger cannot find their way home and dig holes for themselves. This is Why they are living all over country. Hopi workers in field, if sick or hurt, are in some unseen way taken care of by Mice.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

89.--THE BADGER AND THE SMALL GRAY MICE.

Badger and small Gray Mice are Hopi, but were very bad and became animals. They are rival doctors, Badger curing by herbs and Gray Mice by sorcery. Badger doubts whether Mouse knows anything about diseases and decides to try him. He fasts four days and when he becomes very weak sends for Mouse. Mouse brings rattle, medicines, and medicine bowl, in which he makes mixture. He places it beside Badger's couch and sings song about Badger fasting. He tells him to eat and he will get well. Badger is astonished and thinks Mouse great doctor.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

90.--THE MICE, THE OWL, AND THE HAWK.

Owl determines to kill Mouse and flies about hole. Mole places pointed sticks around hole. Owl in trying to catch Mouse is pierced by stick and is killed. Mouse pulls out all Owl's feathers and ties them into little bunches. He calls neighbors and distributes feathers, which they tie on their heads. They decide to have dance and request one to make song. They thrust more sticks into ground in case more Owls should be around while dancing. They put up large feathers in center of inclosure as tiponi around which to dance. Leader has little bow with tiny arrows. While dance is going on Hawk swoops down and kills many Mice. Others rush into their house.

92.--THE SPARROW HAWK AND THE HAKWA.

Sparrow Hawk catches many lizards, but does not attempt to catch Hakwa. Hakwa thinks Sparrow Hawk is afraid and sings taunting song. Sparrow Hawk is irritated and tells Hakwa he does not want to kill him, he is too dirty. Hakwa repeats his song four times. Hawk determines to kill Hakwa and takes little Hawk- to stone where he had sat and flies away. Hakwa again comes out and mistaking young Sparrow Hawk for old one, begins song again. Sparrow Hawk has made large circuit and swoops down on Hakwa, kills him, and carries him home. Hakwa is very fat, and Sparrow Hawk and brood live on him until latter can leave nest.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

92.--THE SPARROW HAWK AND THE GRASSHOPPERS.

Sparrow Hawk has children and hunts Grasshoppers and Prayer Beetles. Their mothers are very unhappy. Grasshopper mother sneaks (tit of house and is caught by Sparrow Hawk. She moans about her children and Sparrow Hawk releases her. Hopi children come and catch little Grasshoppers. Grass hopper mother tells them to go and catch young Sparrow Hawks. They go and take young Sparrow Hawks to village.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 313]

  

93.--THE CROW AND THE HAWK.

Crow and Hawk, while hunting, meet, and Crow invites Hawk to visit him. Hawk takes, rabbits for his children and thinks of good food Crow has promised to prepare. In morning Hawk goes over to friend who is cooking lolo'okong cut into pieces. It is fat and smells strong. Hawk does not relish it and only pretends to eat. They converse long time about hunting. Crow has many lizards, etc., which fill his house with odor, and Hawk does not enjoy his stay. On returning home he invites Crow to visit him next day and, promises him good food. Crow thinks about good food it is to have and goes to friend's house in morning. Hawk cooks only skins and intestines of rabbits, which he sets before Crow. Crow relishes food very much, though Hawk thought he would not eat any of it. They talk all day together and in evening Crow returns home.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

94.--THE RED EAGLE'S SONG.

Red Eagle has wife and four children. They dance and sing about his children. Hopi from Sikyatki hears them singing and sees dance. He tells people, who go and capture young Eagles. Ever afterwards they get young Eagles there and use their feathers for prayer-offerings, masks, etc.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

95.--THE RED EAGLE AND THE OWL.

Owl and Red Eagle are great friends. Eagle hunts during day and as Owl cannot go out during day they do not hunt together. Eagle visits friend and finds him sound asleep. He tries to waken him and finally succeeds by pulling out few hairs. They go out to hunt, Eagle holding Owl so that he shall not go to sleep again. Party of Oraibi are following rabbit. Eagle swoops down and carries it off. He returns for Owl and finds him sleeping. He speaks to Owl, who does not hear. Oraibi boys returning from hunting shoot Owl through head and carry him home. Eagle is angry and then lives in house all alone.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

96.--THE BEE AND THE ASYA.

Bee and Asya are both women and have children. They are great friends. Asya has peach orchard and relishes peaches very much. She visits Bee, who feeds her honey. They converse all day and Asya asks Bee to visit her in morning. Bee has no wings and walks to friend's house. Asya gives her seat and feeds her peaches. She asks Bee if she likes peaches. Bee suggests she shall make some medicine for peaches, as they are sour. Asya consents and Bee puts honey on them, making them sweet. Asya is happy and pulls out some feathers for Wings, which she attaches to Bee. She teaches Bee how to fly and ever since bees can fly.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

97.--THE GRASSHOPPERS AND THE ORAIBI MAIDEN.

Father often watches field, and being tired tells daughter to come and take his; place. She goes and father returns to village. She hears singing in hollow, but does not go there. She tells father roasting ears of corn are coming out. In morning girl goes to field early. She hears singing again. She goes and sees little beings engaged in dance. Grasshoppers notice her and stop. She asks them to go on, but they refuse until she offers them one division of corn-field. They then dance and sing. When through they fly to corn-field

[p. 314]

and devour corn. They eat beyond limit and maiden tries to drive them away, but cannot. She runs home and tells father. He hurries to field and finds Grasshoppers have eaten up all corn. He follows them and finding them asleep, kills many of them with stick and destroys their houses. Others escape and now Grasshoppers live anywhere.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

98.--HOW THE BEETLES PRODUCED RAIN.

It is hot and there is no rain. Beetles are very thirsty and some die, Chief proposes dance to bring rain and makes little song for them. They practice song and go to sleep. In morning chief makes four nakwakwosis and deposits them west of little village. He asks clouds in San Francisco Mountains to come quickly and bring some water. They dress up for dance and paint bodies black. Chief prays to clouds and Beetles are formed in line. They sing song and as they are singing clouds come and water falls, so that they can drink. When they have quenched thirst they are very happy and run about.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

99.--WHY THE ANTS ARE SO THIN.

Chief of Ants says that in four days they are going to have Katcina initiation. On fourth day three ants dress up as Katcinas. Some make sand picture in kiva and Ants bring in children to be initiated. Katcina priest relates story and four little Koyemsis have performance. At signal Katcinas come running and after circling kiva several times, enter it. They flog little Ant children so hard that they almost cut through middle of body. When through, all Katcinas run away. That is why ants are now so thin in middle of bodies.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

100.--LA'VOVOLVIPIKI AND NO'NVOVOLPIKI.

La'vovolvipiki and No'nvovolpiki are great friends. Latter visits friend and they conclude to have dance. La'vovolvipiki is to fetch mice maidens and No'nvovolpiki to borrow drum to have Paiute dance. Latter goes to Kwan kiva and borrows drum. He returns to friend's kiva and finds maidens already assembled. They practice songs and dances during night. In morning each mana has eagle feather tied to her head and red (lot on each cheek. While dancing Po'okongs come hunting. Each shoots mouse and one of them eats No'nvovolpiki and other La'vovolvipiki.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

101.--THE DESTRUCTION OF PIVANHONK'API.

North of Oraibi are living Yayaponchatu. Village chief of Pivanhonk'api is worried over degeneration of people, women even participating in games of chance. Chief's wife neglects children when she gambles in kiva. Chief goes to Yayaponchatu, who are in league with supernatural forces, to ask them to punish his people. They tell him to choose fire or storm and he chooses fire. He invites them to dance in his village. He tells chief of Hu'ckovi and his assistant to come in evening. They come and chief tells them all about matter. On fourth day there are seven of Katcina dances. Yayaponchatu perform last dance. They sing ominous song. Prayer-offerings carried by four of their dancers have spark of fire over each husk packet. At conclusion of dance they hand three of these prayer-offerings to village chief and to chief of Hu'ckovi and his friend, fourth being retained by leader of Yayaponchatu

[p. 315]

dancers. In evening two chiefs and friend smoke over prayer-offerings and friend takes one to San Francisco Mountains to deposit among trees and high grass. Next night light is noticed in San Francisco Mountains. Each night it is seen to be larger. Those watching become alarmed, but their remarks are not listened to. During fourth night people continue gambling and carousing, while fire begins to spread towards Hopi village. People in kiva are asked to come out of kiva and see, but they laugh. Finally one comes out and cries out to others. They rush out and try to gather effects before fleeing, but most of them are suffocated or burned to death. Only few escape from two villages.

Village chief of Oraibi goes to house of Spider Woman. She tells him to make two arrows, using on shafts feathers of certain birds. They are thrust in ground west and north of village, and Spider Woman weaves network of web between them, which she moistens with water. This breaks force of fire and Oraibi is saved.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

102.--THE DESTRUCTION OF SIKYATKI.

Racer Katcinas come to Walpi from Sikyatki to race. Walpi man cuts off hair knot of Katcina instead of small portion of side lock. Katcina is angry. He returns to Sikyatki and practices running. Walpi come to have race at Sikyatki. Young man is still angry, and, taking knife, goes on bluff opposite Sikyatki. During dance he comes down and enters plaza. He races with clowns and catches them all, cutting off small portion of side locks. He detects on top of house sister of man who had cut his hair. He dashes to top of house, follows her and cuts off her head. Holding it by hair whorl, he swings head and dashes away. People follow him, but he escapes and returns to village by another trail. People of villages quarrel, but Walpi withdraw. People of Sikyatki are very wicked, especially towards women. As they do not spare chief's wife, he determines to take revenge. He agrees with chief of Walpi that when people are planting in valley, Walpi shall come to village and destroy it. Walpi have balls of pitch and when Sikyatki people are in fields they rush upon village and kill women and children. Then they set houses on fire destroying village. People planting see smoke and rush to village, but only have planting sticks. Walpi are well armed and kill all people, including chief who instigated revenge.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

103.--THE DESTRUCTION OF AOATOVI.

People of Aoatovi go on hunting expedition and maidens accompany them. Maidens run for rabbits. As party is returning, young man in chasing rabbit dashes over and kills daughter of village chief, He is very angry and determines that in revenge village shall be razed to ground. One night he goes to Shongopavi and wakens, village chief. After smoking he tells chief what has occurred. He asks him to instruct his young men to practice their strength and says he will return in four days. On night of fourth day chief again goes to Shongopavi to see friend and tells him to get ready for Katcina race. In four days four young men dressed as Katcinas go to Aoatovi taking presents of corn ears. They go to plaza, where young men of village come and race commences. Sometimes Katcinas win and then others win. The last bunch of corn ears is raced for by young men of village and Ho'msona Katcina. Young man outruns Katcina and on his return Ho'msona throws him down and cuts his throat. Ho'msona goes and motions to other Katcinas to

[p. 316]

run. People are suspicious, as young man does not return. They go and find him killed. They follow Katcinas, some on ponies. They overtake and kill Ho'msona and two other Katcinas. Remaining one crosses wash, after taking off mask, which he hangs on brush. People, seeing mask, return. During night chief of Aoatovi goes again to Shongopavi and asks chief to come and get his people. Chief meditates and then refuses. Aoatovi chief returns home. In night he goes to Oraibi and arranges with chief to destroy his people. He then produces two clay figures, one representing males and other females of his village, and tells him to select. Oraibi chief selects female. Next day he tells his warrior chiefs, and that people are to make bows and arrows. He sends three nephews to other Hopi villages to ask them to participate in destruction of Aoatovi. Chief of Shongopavi says the wicked may do so, but he refuses. On fourth day Oraibi set off in two parties for Aoatovi, going first to other villages. They meet towards evening and at sundown move towards Aoatovi. At foot of mesa chief and his wife come down to them with bundles of piki. Chief arranges signal for them to rush upon mesa and kill men in kivas. Oraibi chief is to select women and maidens he wants and then rest of villages shall take others. Chief's son gives signal and raiders rush into village, remove ladders of kivas, and throw firewood down. They throw firebrand into kivas and then Spanish pepper on fire. Meanwhile people of Walpi and Mishongnovi take younger women, maidens and children and move off with them. Older women are killed. Chief of Aoatovi and his son are both destroyed with others in kiva. Village is not destroyed. Raiders return and halt at Skeleton Mound. Oraibi claim right to select prisoners first. Others refuse to give up women and maidens, and many younger and prettier ones are killed. Others are taken to different villages, and that is why so many Aoatovi people are now found there.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

104.--THE DESTRUCTION OF AOATOVI.

Maidens are afraid of son of village chief at Aoatovi and refuse to marry him. He gets up great hunt and many rabbits are killed. Hawk kills rabbit for chief's son, so chief has much game to carry home. After eating, father smokes on game. Son tells father he is unhappy and suggests they shall do something to people. In morning village chief goes to Hano, tells chief that maidens refuse to marry his son, and asks him to come and fetch people. He tells him to bring Spanish pepper. Hano chief informs people of Sitchomovi and Walpi, and says they are to get ready for expedition next night. Next evening people of three villages go to Aoatovi. Great storm is raging and they ascend mesa. Men are in kivas eating evening meal. Enemies draw ladders from kivas, so that men cannot come out. They gather women and children, and, while some drive them off, others throw firebrands into kivas and destroy men. Captives are taken to villages and distributed.

101.--HOW AN ORAIBI CHIEF PUNISHED HIS PEOPLE.

People of Oraibi are very bad. Chief goes to Warrior chief of Walpi and tells him, They arrange that Oraibi people shall come to attack Walpi and Walpi people shall meet and kill them. Those who pass certain rock are not to be molested. Oraibi chief tells people that they will make raid on Walpi and try to steal maidens. Early one morning they approach Walpi, but people are ready and rush down upon Oraibi. Large dog disables and kills

[p. 317]

many Oraibi. Oraibi flee and many are killed. Only few pass rock mentioned. On rock dog is engraved on account of what dog did in this battle.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

106.--A KATCINA RACE CONTEST BETWEEN THE WALPI AND THE ORAIBI.

Walpi always have races and become strong. They propose to go to Oraibi and race them, because they are not strong. Oraibi youth visits friend in Walpi and remains to see Katcina race. Friend tells him of intention of Walpi. Early next morning youth returns to Oraibi and tells what he has heard. Young men practice running for four days. On fifth day Walpi come and dress up. Two Katcinas carry gifts and go to plaza. Oraibi youths descend and race with Katcinas, Katcinas are soon tired and Oraibi youths win all presents. Katcinas remove costumes and after receiving prayer meal go to west of village and again race. They are very tired and give up race. Walpi return in despair. They agree not to go and race with Oraibi again:

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

107.--THE LAST FIGHT WITH THE NAVAHO.

While Oraibi are practicing with bows and arrows at foot of mesa, news is brought them that Navaho expedition is corning. Men hasten to village where councils are held. Situation is discussed and warriors encouraged during night, but many Hopi go to Navaho with presents. These are weakened by blood-letting near ankle so that they may be recognized by Navaho next day through walking slowly. Immediately before sunrise Navaho ascend mesa and fill space north of village. Hopi warriors protect their bodies with buck-skins and some have head-dresses of societies. War rites are celebrated and warriors are decorated with powdered war god vomisis stone. Leading Navaho rides up to Hopi, says something and shoots arrow without hitting any one. Battle begins and Hopi drive Navaho off mesa. Navaho who has lived in Oraibi and speaks Hopi calls out that Hopi had better not follow them, as many more Navaho further east. But Hopi follow and while lines of warriors are facing each other, Navaho woman on pony grabs lance from warrior and dashes towards Hopi, followed by her people. They break line and divide Hopi into two parties, which are surrounded. Navaho are mounted, but are dressed only in loin cloths, while Hopi are wrapped with heavy buckskins. Hopi break through, but are surrounded again, so that circles become smaller and smaller. In afternoon small party of Hopi break through and climb point of mesa. Three of them afterwards go down and hide behind rocks, from which they kill number of Navaho who are fleeing from party of Hopi, who then join others. All then ascend mesa, from which they descend in another place and rest at spring. Navaho who had at first pursued them male for village. Meanwhile different groups of Hopi have succeeded in cutting way through assailants and run towards village. Both sides have lost heavily. Hopi are followed by bands of Navaho and others try to outflank them and reach village first. Six Hopi hide in stone inclosure, who keep Navaho at distance until latter procure firearms from comrades. Then five of Hopi are killed and sixth, rushing through Navaho, jumps down steep place and hides under rock. Brave Hopi warrior is hit several times by Navaho, but is protected by buckskins, and they abandon pursuit of him. Hopi discover that among Navaho are Hopi from Walpi disguised as Navaho. Brave warrior addresses them and they surround him. He is overpowered and killed and his heart

[p. 318]

torn out. This is seen by man hidden under rock. Walpi take victim on horse to Walpi and place him in small hut and throw stones upon him. Navaho reach village and drive out sheep that have been assembled on plaza behind barriers. Navaho women shell corn and load it on ponies. Navaho then leave village, taking with them all sheep. They tie dead and wounded on horses. Many wounded die while they are traveling and all are buried at place sixty miles northeast of Oraibi. After Navaho have left village, straggling Hopi come in bearing wounded. Some have to be carried into village and are placed in home of Coyote Clan. Here they are attended by their "fathers," those who had carried them. On fourth day survivors are taken to their homes.

      
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

108.--A HOPI RAID ON A NAVAHO DANCE.

Many Navaho go to deep canyon to have Katcina dance. During fifth dance star falls down in front of head dancer. Navaho are much afraid, jump on ponies and begin to scatter. Great noise is heard and Oraibi arrive to make raid. Great battle ensues. Navaho are driven back out of canyon and few escape to their homes. This is why Navaho when they dance always have watchers,

     
The Traditions of the Hopi, by H.R. Voth, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

109.--A RAID ON THE HOPI VILLAGES.

Inhabitants of two villages used to lie further northeast, where they were harassed by Utes. For five years they are left in peace. In sixth year their enemies find them out and camp eastward of mesa. Young men are sent to find out who they are. Inhabitants of one village move to the other village, where they can better defend themselves. Enemies go to empty village and follow their tracks on horseback, but they cannot get up. Many of them are shot by people in village. Afterwards by going around mesa they get into village and capture some women and maidens. Warriors follow them, but they escape. People pack up all their things and go in line to Oraibi, where they are admitted and still live.

110.--THE EARLY SPANISH MISSIONS AT ORAIBI.

Long ago Spaniards make inroads on Oraibi. They make peace and Spaniards ask to be permitted to live in Oraibi. Hopi consent and assist Spaniards in building house. It is in spiral form and in center is house. Meeting house with bell tower is afterwards built, Hopi are baptised by Tutaachi who is joined by another Tutaachi, who brings them clothing and shoes in carts on heavy wooden wheels. Hopi assemble on Sundays and priests speak to them. Soon they ask Hopi to work for them. They send them to springs to get water and they then set them to make cisterns. Spaniards bring cattle and Hopi buy calves for corn. Some cattle drag logs to village. For four years everything goes well and it rains often. Then priests forbid Hopi to have Katcina dances and make bahos. It is very warm and very dry. Hopi begin to have ceremonials again and deposit prayer-offerings, but it does not rain. Padres continue to oppress Hopi and demand food. They disregard Hopi's feeling as to their religion and trample under foot chastity of women and maidens. Number of oppressors go away, leaving padre alone. Hopi meet in council and finally decide to get rid of priest. Nobody will go, but finally Badger clan volunteers. They proceed to Mission and knock at door. Padre

[p. 319]

refuses to open it at first. When he does so they rush into room, drag him out of house, and cut his throat. They throw his body into gulch and pile stones upon it. They then wait to see what will happen. Other villagers follow example and get rid of their padres. They expect Spaniards will come to revenge brethren, but no one comes and they destroy houses of Spaniards, divide logs and timbers, and use them for kivas. Some of smaller bells still owned by Agave fraternity.

    


===== BOOK: tsg.txt =====


     
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
Cover

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece.
 THE SYRIAN GODDESS, ON COINS OF HIERAPOLIS.

Cf. Figs. 5, 7. (Scale 3:4.) See p. <page 21>.

[p. i]

THE SYRIAN GODDESS

[p. iii]

  

THE

  

SYRIAN GODDESS

  

BEING A TRANSLATION OF

  

LUCIAN'S "DE DEA SYRIA," WITH

  

A LIFE OF LUCIAN

  

BY

  

PROFESSOR HERBERT A. STRONG, M.A. LL.D.

  

EDITED

  

WITH NOTES AND AN INTRODUCTION

  

BY

  

JOHN GARSTANG, M.A. D.Sc.

  

AUTHOR OF "THE LAND OF THE HITTITES"

  

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS

  

LONDON

  

CONSTABLE & COMPANY LTD

  

10 ORANGE STREET LEICESTER SQUARE WC

  

[1913]

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, March, 2006, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

[p. v]

Click to enlarge
Verso

TO

THE REV. PROFESSOR A. H. SAYCE,

Magistro Discipulus.

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

EDITOR'S PREFACE

To the student of oriental religions the Dea Syria is brimful of interest. It describes the cult and worship of the goddess of Northern Syria, Atargatis, at her sacred city, Hierapolis, now Mumbij. The time when Lucian wrote would be the middle of the second century B.C. We do not see any reason to reject the traditional authorship of the treatise: on the contrary, the work seems to reveal the famous satirist at home, taking a natural interest in local memories and institutions, while making, doubtless, mental notes that were to prove of use in the works for which he is best known.

Of the many writers who refer to the Dea Syria, no one dwells upon the fundamental character of the cult at Hierapolis, nor deals with the problem of its historical origins. It is this aspect of inquiry, therefore, with which we chiefly deal in the Introduction and the foot notes. Lucian's description, amplified by the later account of Macrobius, and further illustrated by the local coinage of Hierapolis, reveals the central cult as that of a divine pair. The male god, a form of Hadad, is symbolised by the bull, and is hence both "Lord of Heaven" and "Creator." The female deity is shown by her very name, "Atargatis," to be a form of Ishtar or

[p. viii]

[paragraph continues] Astarte. Being mated with the god, whom Lucian calls "Zeus," she is called by him "Hera": but she wears a mural crown, and is symbolised by the lion; and Lucian recognises in her traces of Kybele, Aphrodite, Artemis, and other aspects of the Mother Goddess. An examination of the materials which modern research has made available, shows this cult to be attributable historically to the Hittites, the earliest known masters of the soil. The argument is developed in our Introduction.

If some of our notes to Lucian's narrative appear elementary and superfluous--they were originally prepared for lecture purposes--it may be urged as an excuse for retaining them, that the eastern horizon of many of the classical students in our universities is still bounded, like that of Homer, by the Halys River. The life-work of Ramsay, Sayce, Winckler and others, in developing our knowledge of the interior of Asia Minor, is passed over in a casual or cursory fashion; and their results are relegated with vague mistrust and misgiving to the orientalist. If anyone should be tempted, however, to pursue his studies in this wider field, he will find in these notes many references to the writings and discussions of authorities like the late Robertson-Smith, Ed. Meyer, Professor Frazer, Mr. Farnell, Messieurs Cumont, Dussaud and others, that will at once introduce him to a fuller bibliography of the various aspects of Anthropology and Comparative Religions towards which this treatise naturally leads. He would do well, however, to prepare for such a study, by making himself familiar

[p. ix]

with the broad principles of these subjects, explained in Tylor's Primitive Culture and his Anthropology, and Jevon's Introduction to the History of Religion. Otherwise he will be likely to have his mind perplexed by seemingly irreconcilable differences of opinion and interpretation.

We are indebted for assistance, suggestion and facilities, freely and generously given, to Mr. Hill and Mr. King, of the British Museum; Mr. Hogarth, Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum; M. Babelon, of the Bibliotheque Nationale; Professor Kubilschek, of Vienna; and to our colleagues, Professor Lehmann-Haupt, Professor Bosanquet, Professor Newberry and Dr. Pinches.

J. G.

INSTITUTE OF ARCHAeOLOGY,
     UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL,
        November, 1912.

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

  

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS

          PAGE EDITOR'S   PREFACE

       <page vii>-<page ix>

     
      LIST OF   ILLUSTRATIONS

       <page xiii>

     
      INTRODUCTION--THE   SYRIAN GODDESS IN HISTORY AND ART, BY PROFESSOR GARSTANG

       <page 1>

     
      LIFE OF LUCIAN,   BY PROFESSOR STRONG.

       <page 29>

     
      LUCIAN'S TEXT:   ANALYSIS OF SUBJECT-MATTER

       <page 39>

     
      TRANSLATION BY   PROFESSOR STRONG, WITH NOTES BY PROFESSOR GARSTANG

       <page 41>

     
      APPENDIX-DESCRIPTIONS   OF THE SITE OF HIERAPOLIS SYRIAe, THE SACRED CITY, BY MAUNDRELL, POCOCK,   AND CHESNEY

       <page 91>

     
      BIBLIOGRAPHY

       <page 99>

     
      INDEX

       <page 103>

     
   
      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

          Plate.

       THE SYRIAN   GODDESS, ETC., ON COINS OF HIERAPOLIS

       Frontispiece

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
      FIG. 1.

       THE HITTITE   "HADAD" AT MALATIA

       5

     
       "    2.

       THE CHIEF   HITTITE GOD AND GODDESS AT BOGHAZ-KEUI

       6

     
       "    3.

       THE HITTITE   BULL-GOD AT EYUK

       9

     
       "    4.

       THE HITTITE   DRAPED ALTAR-PEDESTAL AT FRAKTIN

       24

     
       "    5.

       ATARGATIS AND   HER PRIEST, B.C. 332. (From a Coin)

       27

     
       "    6.

       TEMPLE OF   BYBLOS. (From a Coin)

       45

     
       "    7.

       THE GOD AND   GODDESS OF HIERAPOLIS. (From a Coin)

       70

     
       "    8.

       THE PHRYGIAN   GODDESS (KYBELE) IN THE WEST. (From a Roman Lamp)

       72

     
    

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

INTRODUCTION.

  

THE SYRIAN GODDESS IN HISTORY AND ART.

THE dawn of history in all parts of Western Asia discloses the established worship of a nature-goddess in whom the productive powers of the earth were personified. [*1] She is our Mother Earth, known otherwise as the Mother Goddess or Great Mother. Among the Babylonians [*2] and northern Semites she was called Ishtar: she is the Ashtoreth of the Bible, and the Astarte of Phoenicia. In Syria her name was 'Athar, and in Cilicia it had the form of 'Ate ('Atheh). At Hierapolis, with which we are primarily concerned, it appears in later Aramaic as Atargatis, a compound of the Syrian and Cilician forms. [*3] In Asia Minor, where the influence of the Semitic language did not prevail, her various names have not survived, though it is recorded by a later Greek writer as "Ma" at one of her mountain shrines, and as Agdistis amongst one tribe of the Phrygians [*4] and probably at Pessinus. These differences, however, are partly

[p. 2]

questions of local tongue; for in one way and another there was still a prevailing similarity between the essential attributes and worship of the nature-goddess throughout Western Asia. [*5]

The "origins" of this worship and its ultimate development are not directly relevant to our present enquiry; but we must make passing allusion to a point of special interest and wide significance. As regards Asia Minor, at least, a theory that explains certain abnormal tendencies in worship and in legend would attribute to the goddess, in the primitive conception of her, the power of self-reproduction, complete in herself, a hypothesis justified by the analogy of beliefs current among certain states of primitive society. [*6] However that may be, a male companion is none the less generally associated with her in mythology, even from the earliest historical vision of Ishtar in Babylonia, [*7] where he was known as Tammuz. While evidence is wanting to define clearly the original position of this deity in relation to the goddess, [*8] the general tendency of myth and legend in the lands of Syria and Asia Minor, with which we are

[p. 3]

specially concerned, reveals him as her offspring, [*9] the fruits of the earth. The basis of the myth was human experience of nature, particularly the death of plant life with the approach of winter and its revival with the spring. In one version accordingly "Adonis" descends for the six winter months to the underworld, until brought back to life through the divine influence of the goddess. The idea that the youth was the favoured lover of the goddess belongs to a different strain of thought, if indeed it was current in these lands at all in early times. In Asia Minor at any rate the sanctity of the goddess's traditional powers was safeguarded in popular legend by the emasculation of "Attis," and in worship by the actual emasculation of her priesthood, [*10] perhaps the most striking feature of her cult. The abnormal and impassioned tendencies of her developed worship

[p. 4]

would be derived, according to this theory, from the efforts of her worshippers to assist her to bring forth notwithstanding her singleness. However that may be, the mourning for the death of the youthful god, and rejoicing at his return, were invariable features of this worship of nature. It is reasonable to believe that long before the curtain of history was raised over Asia Minor the worship of this goddess and her son had become deep-rooted.

There then appeared the Hittites. In relation with Babylonia and Egypt, these peoples had already become known at the close of the third millennium B.C.; [*11] and, to judge from the Biblical accounts, numbers of them had settled here and there throughout Syria and Palestine as early as the days of the patriarchs. [*12] Nothing is known of their constitution and organization in these days, however; it is not until their own archives speak that we find them in the fourteenth century B.C. an already established constitutional power, with their capital at Boghaz-Keui. [*13] Their sway extended southward into Syria as far as the Lebanon, eastward to the Euphrates, and at times into Mesopotamia, westward as far as Lydia, and probably to the sea coast. [*14]

[p. 5]

Their chief deity was a God omnipotent, the "Lord of Heaven," [*15] with lightning in his hand, the controller of storms ruling in the skies, and, hence identified with the sun. At Senjerli, in the north of

Click to enlarge
FIG. 1.--THE HITTITE 

 (See <page 6>.)

[paragraph continues] Syria, he was represented simply with trident and hammer, [*16] the emblems of the lightning and the

[p. 6]

thunder. But a sculpture at Malatia, on their eastern frontier, shows him standing on the back of a bull, the emblem of creative powers, [*17] and bearing upon his shoulder a bow, identifying him with a God of Arms,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 2.--THE CHIEF HITTITE GOD AND GODDESS AT BOGHAZ-KEUI.

as was natural amongst warlike tribes, His enshrined image is found carved upon a rocky peak of the Kizil Dagh, [*18] a ridge that rises from the southern

[p. 7]

plains on the central plateau of Asia Minor. In the sanctuary near Boghaz-Keui, clad like their other deities in the Hittite warrior garb, he has assumed a conventional and majestic appearance, bearded, with the lightning emblem in one hand and his sceptre in the other, [*19] a prototype of Zeus. The scene of which this sculpture is a part represents the ceremonial marriage of the god with the Great Mother, [*20] with the rites and festivities that accompanied the celebration, so far as mural decoration permits of treatment of such a theme. From these sculptures we learn that which is fundamental in the Hittite

[p. 8]

religion, namely, the recognition of a chief god and goddess, and though doubtless the outcome of the political conditions, the mating of these two deities at the proper season would seem to have been peculiarly natural and appropriate to the old established religion of the land. In this union, moreover, each god preserved its dignity and individuality, each cult maintained its proper ceremonies, yet the pair could be worshipped in common as the divine Father and Mother, the source of all life, human, animal, and vegetable.

With the goddess there is in these sculptures the image of the youth [*21] who, in the original tradition, was her necessary companion, representing clearly, in this instance, her offspring, the fruits of the earth. [*22] Indeed a later sculpture at Ivriz seems to show this god, changed in form but still recognizable, [*23] as the patron of agriculture, with bunches of grapes in one hand and ears of corn in the other. Even at Boghaz-Keui, this youthful deity is already accorded a smaller adjacent sanctuary, [*24] devoted to his cult alone. Following the great deities are many

[p. 9]

other figures, forming, as it were, two groups. Accompanying the god are the minor gods of the Hittite States, who, for the most part, are similar to himself in general appearance. [*25] They are followed by priests and men who are taking part in the celebration, in which it would appear revelry and dancing

Click to enlarge
FIG. 3.--THE HITTITE BULL-GOD AT EYUK.

were not omitted. In the train of the goddess, who like her son stands upon the back of a lioness, there follow two other goddesses of smaller size, but similar to herself in appearance, grouped together on a double-headed eagle. [*26] These are followed by a number of figures of priestesses clad like the goddess;

[p. 10]

and, surveying all, the noble figure of the King-Priest clad in a toga-like garment, and holding a curving lituus, the emblem of his sacred office. [*27]

That which seems to us in our present enquiry the chief feature of these sculptures is that the worship is clearly common to the god and the goddess, who occupy the leading positions in equal prominence. [*28] This interpretation is supported substantially by sculptures which decorate the main entrance of the neighbouring Hittite city of Eyuk. The corner stone on the right represents the goddess seated, [*29] receiving the worship of her priests; while the corresponding corner stone on the left shows a Bull-God on a pedestal, [*30] with the High

[p. 11]

[paragraph continues] Priest and Priestess ministering at his altar. The Bull we have seen to be identified with the chief Hittite deity, which he seems here to replace.

This conclusion is of importance in our present subject, for Lucian (in  section [*31]) describes the chief sanctuary of the great Syrian temple at Hierapolis as containing the common shrine of "Zeus" and "Hera." His very use of these names suggests the wedded character of the deities. Had the shrine been that of the Great Mother alone, the god would not have been accorded an equal prominence near the common altar; he would have been an "Attis," not a "Zeus." The goddess herself would have been in the Greek mind a Rhea or Aphrodite, not a Hera; and Lucian was sufficiently familiar with his subject to be able to discriminate. As it is, he is perplexed in his identification of the goddess by her very comprehensive attributes, which included the many virtues and powers to which the Greek mind assigned separate personifications, known by different names.  Speaking generally," he says, "she is undoubtedly Hera, but she has something of the attributes of Athene and of Aphrodite, and of Selene and of Rhea and of Artemis and of Nemesis and of the Fates."

To sum up this stage of our argument, the chief Hittite deity is a god of the skies, identified with the sun; he is all powerful, and in symbolism is identified with the Bull. In formal sculpture he resembles Zeus. The chief Hittite goddess is of

[p. 12]

comprehensive character: the emblems in her hand and her youthful companion reveal the nature-goddess; while the mural crown, the lion, and double axe are special symbols of the Great Mother surviving with the Phrygian Kybele (or Rhea). [*31] The central Hittite cult is that of this mated pair, the Bull-god Zeus and the Lion nature-goddess. The central cult-images of Hierapolis, as described by Lucian, are exactly similar. There are the mated pair of deities: the god is indistinguishable from Zeus, [*32] and he is seated on bulls; while the goddess, who is called for brevity "Hera," as the consort of "Zeus," embodies attributes of the nature-goddess or Great Mother, and she is seated on lions.

The central cult at Hierapolis is thus apparently identical with that which the Hittites had established in the land 1500 years before Lucian wrote. It remains to examine such independent evidences as are available from literary and archaeological sources, to see whether they bear out the argument. We shall find our main conclusion remarkably substantiated. But before passing from the evidence of the Hittite monuments, inasmuch as Lucian's narrative is chiefly descriptive of the developed cult of the nature-goddess (with the god submerged), it is of special interest to notice how widespread are the evidences of her worship in the Hittite period. We

[p. 13]

have spoken of two of her shrines in the interior, at Boghaz-Keui and Eyuk. There is a third at Fraktin, in the mountainous country south of Caesarea. Here the sculptures are carved on the living rock overlooking a stream. [*33] The goddess is represented seated behind an altar on which appears her bird. She seems in this case uniquely to wear the Hittite hat, but the carving is not carried out in detail. Before the altar her priestess is pouring an oblation. The counterpart to this group is a Hittite god and worshipper, while between them is a draped altar of special character.  [*34] One of the earliest of her images, according to Pausanias, [*35] is that which may still be seen on Mount Sipylus, near to Smyrna on the western coast a gigantic figure of the goddess seated, carved in the living rock, and distinguished as Hittite handiwork by certain hieroglyphs carved in the niche. [*36] Further east, in Phrygia, one of different character has been found at Yarre. [*37] In this sculpture, which is on a movable stone, we have one of a series of representations in which the goddess, seated as always, is worshipped in a ceremonial feast or communion. The funerary character of this class of monument is attested by a similar sculpture from Karaburshlu, [*38] near Senjerli, in the north of Syria, and other illustrations are found

[p. 14]

at Marash, where the cup, mirror, and girdle are instructive details of the scene. [*39] The conception of the Great Mother as goddess of the dead is by no means strained or unnatural, for the resurrection and future life is a dominant theme in the universal myth associated with her. And just as the dead year revived in springtime through her mediation, so she may have been entreated on behalf of the dead for their well-being or their return to life. [*40] Thus a second class of similar monument represents the goddess enshrined, with a votary in the act of worship or adoration. Such are the two sculptures at Eyuk, one from Sakje-Geuzi, and three from Marash, in the north of Syria. In one of these, from the last-named place, the goddess is distinguished by the child upon her knee, and a mirror and bird accompany the group, which is further remarkable for the lyre before her upon the altar. In others from this place, a bow appears, held in one case in the hand of the worshipper, who proffers it towards her above the altar as though dedicating it to her service and entreating her blessing. A further sculpture in which the goddess plays a part has been found at Carchemish, but details of the scene are not yet available. Other sculptures, resembling these in

[p. 15]

general appearance, at Senjerli, [*41] Malatia, and possibly at Boghaz-Keui itself, in which the personages taking part in this ceremonial feast are male and female, may possibly be modifications representing the local king and queen as High Priest and Priestess, or impersonating the god and goddess in the communion rite.

In Glyptic art [*42] two varieties of goddess are apparent; the one is robed and seated, and for the most part resembles the deity in her distinctively Hittite character [*43]; the other is naked, and she has been supposed to have had her origin in this aspect in Syria, whence she penetrated further east. [*44] This latter form of goddess has its counterpart in numerous small clay and bronze images, of votive character, which may be found in many places of Northern Syria. [*45] In these the goddess is represented as naked, with her hands proffering her breasts. A similar deity, though winged, is represented on a sculptured but undated monument from Carchemish. [*46] This is not, however, the Hittite goddess as she is

[p. 16]

known in Asia Minor, where she is uniformly represented as seated and robed, and commonly wearing a veil which is thrown back from the face. Nor is she the Dea Syria described by Lucian, [*47] though commonly identified with her by modern writers. The reason for this identification is probably to be found in the general tendency towards the development of human passions in connection with the Syrian cults, and emphasized in the special characteristics of Astarte of Phoenicia as the goddess presiding over human birth. [*48]

The Hittites came and went; their dominion over Asia Minor was subject to repeated onslaughts on every side, from the Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Vannic tribes, the Cimmerians, the Muski and the Phrygians. Their empire, moreover, was held together only insecurely by a system of confederation and alliance which was not apparently of mutual seeking, but imposed by the Hatti during the period of their supremacy at Boghaz-Keui; and from the 12th century B.C. it began rapidly to disintegrate. There is little record of the subsequent events: the Assyrian annals reveal only a series of sporadic coalitions in Syria, to resist their oncoming,

[p. 17]

and a temporary revival of the Hittite States in that region during the 10th and 9th centuries B.C. Before 700 B.C. the fall of Carchemish, followed by the submission of the region of Taurus and Marash, brought all semblance of Hittite power to an end. What had happened meanwhile in Asia Minor in the struggles between the Phrygians and the Hittites can only be imagined, but in any case by the year 550 B.C., when Croesus of Lydia crossed the Halys and took possession of Pteria (Boghaz-Keui), he found it still in the hands of a Syro-Cappadocian population: thereafter the political history of Asia Minor becomes largely that of Persia and Macedonia, of Greece and Rome.

With the Hittites fell their chief god from his predominant place in the religion of the interior. Whether, indeed, he did not survive elsewhere than at Hierapolis, in various local guises or legends, noticeably at Doliche, [*49] is a problem into which it would be irrelevant to enter. But the Great

[p. 18]

[paragraph continues] Mother lived on, being the goddess of the land. Her cult, modified, in some cases profoundly, by time and changed political circumstances, was found surviving at the dawn of Greek history in several places in the interior. Prominent among these sites is Pessinus in Phrygia, a sacred city, with which the legend of Kybele and Attis is chiefly associated. Other districts developed remarkable and even abnormal tendencies in myth and worship. At Comana, in the Taurus, where the Assyrian armies were resisted to the last, and the ancient martial spirit still survives, she became, like Isthar, a goddess of war, identified by the Romans with Bellona: [*50] In Syria, again, a different temper and climate emphasized the sensuous tendency of human passions. In all these cases, however, there survived some uniformity of ceremonial and custom. At each shrine numerous priests, called Galli, numbering at Comana as many as 5,000, took part in the

[p. 19]

worship. Women dedicated their persons as an honourable custom, which in some cases was not even optional, to the service of the goddess. The great festivals were celebrated at regular seasons with revelry, music, and dancing, as they had been of old, coupled with customs which tended to become, in the course of time, more and more orgiastic. These are, however, matters of common knowledge and may be studied in the classical writings. Lucian himself adds considerably to our understanding of these institutions; indeed his tract has been long one of the standard sources of information, supplying details which have been applied, perhaps too freely, to the character of the general cult. Religion in the East is a real part of life, not tending so much as in the West to become stereotyped or conventionalized, but changing with changes of conditions, adapted to the circumstances and needs of the community. [*51] So, wherever the goddess was worshipped there would be variety of detail. It is, however, remarkable in this case, that throughout the Hittite period, though wedded and in a sense subordinate to a dominant male deity, and subsequently down to the age at which Lucian wrote, she maintained, none the less, her individuality and comprehensive character. Thus, while Lucian is concerned in his treatise with the cult of an apparently local goddess of northern Syria, we recognize her as a localised aspect of the Mother-goddess, whose

[p. 20]

worship in remoter times had already been spread wide, and so explain at once the points of clear resemblance in character and in worship to other nature-goddesses of Syria and Asia Minor.

 

From this general enquiry among the most ancient monuments of the country into the historical origins of the dual cult at Hierapolis, and the character of the goddess, we pass in conclusion to the particular local evidences, more nearly of Lucian's age, that serve to illustrate and amplify his descriptions. There are two chief sources: firstly, the local coins, [*52] ranging in date from the time of Alexander down to the 3rd century A.D.; and secondly, the literary allusions of Macrobius, who lived and wrote about A.D. 400. The feature of these branches of evidence that first strikes the enquirer is their obvious reference to a cult and worship which did not change in its essential features throughout the seven centuries of political turmoil which they cover. This enables us to realize how the cult might have been originally established during the remoter days of Hittite supremacy in the land.

[p. 21]

The coins are not numerous, but they are profoundly instructive: in particular, one of these, which we shall presently describe, furnishes a direct illustration of Lucian's description of the sanctuary; while two others, which are among the earliest, corroborate in certain details the main point of our argument. In general also, these coins, even those of the later dates, uniformly reveal the goddess as a lion deity; for wherever her full form is shown, she is seated on a lion [*53] or on a lion-borne throne. [*54] Commonly, however, only her head or bust is given, e.g., in one case, the full face [*55] with dishevelled or possibly "radiate" hair; in another, the profile, [*56] showing upon her head a mural crown with her veil thrown back. Her name, Atargatis, is recognizable on these coins, though it takes several forms. [*57] On this point, therefore, the local evidence confirms the records of Strabo, Pliny, and Macrobius. [*58] The

[p. 22]

male deity has almost disappeared in the later coins, surviving chiefly in his symbol, the bull, which in some cases occurs singly as a counterpart to the lion or lion-goddess on the opposite side of the coin, [*59] and in other cases is shown in the grip of the lion as though reminiscent of the ultimate triumph of the cult of the goddess over that of the god. [*60] In similar fashion, the coins of the Roman Empire show an imperial eagle triumphing above the lion [*61] in several examples.

In two cases, however, the figure of the god does survive. One of these coins of the period of Alexander, [*62] shows upon the obverse the figure of the god seated upon a throne, holding in his left hand a long sceptre, and in the right hand something which is not distinct. On the reverse side of the coin, the goddess is represented clad in long robes, with girdle, seated upon a lion; she holds in her left hand, it would seem, the lightning trident. [*63]

Instructive as this coin is, it yields in interest to

[p. 23]

another of the 3rd century A.D., in which the two deities are shown seated on their thrones, [*64] on either side of a central object, surmounted by a bird, exactly like the picture of the sanctuary, which Lucian describes in  section [*32]. The reverse of the coin bears the legend ThEUI CURIAC (IEROP)OLITUN. The object in the centre is an aedicula, surmounted by a dove, and enclosing apparently a Roman standard. [*65] To the right is the god, bearded, clad in a long tunic, with a tall calathos on his head, a sceptre in his right hand; he is seated, as it were, upon bulls, but actually upon a throne to which the head and forepart of bulls form the side-piece. On the right-hand side, Atargatis, the Syrian Goddess, is seated similarly upon a throne which two lions support; she is clothed and girdled, and wears a broad calathos or crown upon her head. In the field of the coin, below these representations, there appears a lion. The subject of this coin, is, as we have said, an actual illustration of Lucian's description of the sanctuary: his words are as follows:--"In this shrine are placed the statues, one of which is Hera, the other Zeus, though they call him by another name. Both are sitting; Hera is supported by lions, Zeus is sitting on bulls. . . . Between the two there stands another image of gold, no part of it resembling the others: this possesses no special form of its own, but recalls the characteristics of the other gods. The Syrians

[p. 24]

speak of it as Semeion [semeion], [*66] its summit is crowned by a golden pigeon." It is only in reference to this central object that the description fails, though, in both cases, a bird is perched upon the top; and doubtless therefore, the design upon the coin is intended to illustrate something similar to that which Lucian describes. The object upon he coin is formal, architectural, and Roman in character;

Click to enlarge
FIG. 4.--HITTITE DRAPED ALTAR-PEDESTAL: FRAKTIN.

while Lucian tells us particularly that the object between the deities "recalled characteristics of the other gods." We are reminded by this reference of a feature in Hittite sculptures, notably those at Fraktin. Here the pillars of the altars of the goddess and of the god take the form of a human body from the waist downwards, swathed in many folds of a fringed garment or robe; and upon the altar of the goddess appears a bird, doubtless a pigeon

[p. 25]

or dove, which was in all tradition her peculiar emblem. [*67] Lucian's description is more aptly explained by this symbolism: the object as seen upon the coin had clearly become conventionalized in Roman times. However that may be, the dual character of the cult, the god identified with the bull, the goddess with the lion, is remarkably substantiated.

Further instructive details with regard to these deities are given by Macrobius, and we may appropriately quote from him the following significant passage [*68]:--"The Syrians give the name Adad to the god, which they revere as first and greatest of all; his name signifies The One.' They honour this god as all powerful, but they associate with him the goddess named Adargatis, and assign to these two divinities supreme power over everything, recognizing in them the sun and the earth. Without expressing by numerous names the different aspects of their power, their predominance is implied by the different attributes assigned to the two divinities. For the statue of Adad is encircled by descending rays, which indicate that the force of heaven resides in the rays which the sun sends down to earth: the rays of the statue of Adargatis rise upwards, a sign that the power of the ascending rays brings to life everything which the earth produces. Below this statue are the figures of lions, emblematic of the earth; for the same reason that the Phrygians so represent the Mother of the gods, that is to say, the earth, borne

[p. 26]

by lions." The character, then, of the god and goddess in the sanctuary of the temple, the heart of the cult, remained still the same in the fourth century A.D. as it had been in the beginning. The words which Macrobius uses would be equally descriptive of the special attributes of the Hittite Sun-God and the Hittite Earth-Goddess, which we have described, and the reference to Cybele of Phrygia is also significant. [*69] There is indeed a faint memory in tradition of a son to Atargatis, [*70] corresponding to the youthful companion of the Hittite goddess at Boghaz-Keui, and hence doubtless to the "Tammuz" and "Attis" of the various legends; and in one of the effigies at Hierapolis it is possible to see a later aspect of this deity corresponding to the Hittite Sandan-Hercules of Ivriz. [*71]

[p. 27]

If any doubt remained as to the historical origins of the cult at Hierapolis, it would be dispelled by another coin, one of the earliest of the site, on the face of which is the picture and name of the goddess, Atargatis. [*72] On the reverse of the coin is seen the priest-dynast of the age (about 332 B.C.): his name is Abd-Hadad, the "servant of Hadad." He is represented at full length, but owing to the wearing of the coin, some of the details are lost. The robe

Click to enlarge

 Atargatis, the Syrian Goddess.      Abd-Hadad, the Priest-King.

FIG. 5.--COIN OF HIERAPOLIS, DATE B. C. 332. (Note IN THE BIBL. NATIONALE, PARIS.) Scale 3: 2.

upon him, however, recalls that of the Hittite priest; and the hat which he wears is unmistakably the time-honoured conical hat distinctive of the Hittite peoples. Except in such local religious survival as is here illustrated, this hat must have long fallen into disuse.

In short, the words of Macrobius, which corroborate and amplify Lucian's description of the central cult

[p. 28]

at Hierapolis, are strictly apposite to the chief Hittite god and goddess. The coins of the site illustrate the same motive; and on one of the earliest of them, features of Hittite costume are found still surviving four hundred years after the final overthrow of the Hittite States in Northern Syria.

J. G.

Footnotes

^1:1 We do not wish to imply a necessarily common "origin" or real identity in the various local aspects of this divinity.

^1:2 Among the pre-Semitic population she appears as Nanai. Cf. Ed. Meyer in Roscher's Lexikon--ASTARTE.

^1:3 See n. [*57], <page 21>, and n. [*25], <page 9>. Cf. Frazer, Adonis, Attis, and Osiris, p. 130, n. 1; Ed. Meyer, Gesch. des Alth., i. (1st edn.), p. 247,  section 205.

^1:4 Strabo, x. iii. 12; xii. ii. 3.

The probable mention of "Astarte of the Land of the Hittites," as the leading Hittite goddess among the witnesses to the treaty with Egypt (c. B.C. 1271), must be assumed at present to refer [p. 2] to Northern Syria. The allusion is none the less significant, implying an identification of the Hittite deity with Ishtar. This rendering of the Egyptian text is due to an emendation suggested by Muller (Vorderas. Ges. VII., 5), and accepted as probable by Breasted, Ancient Records of Egypt, III., 386, n. a.

^2:5 Cf. Inter alia, De Vogue, Melanges d'archeologie orientale, pp. 45, 46, and Hauvette-Besnault, "Fouilles de Delos," Bull. Corr. Hell. (1882), p. 484. ff.

^2:6 Cf. Frazer, Adonis, Attis, and Osiris, pp. 80, 220; Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, ii., p. 628, iii., p. 305; Ed. Meyer, Die Androgyne Astarte, Z. D. M. G. (1875), p. 730.

^2:7 Cf. Pinches, on the Cult of Ishtar and Tammuz, Proc. S. B. A., xxxi. 1909, p. 21.

^2:8 Cf. the words, "My son, the fair one" (Pinches, Proc. S. B. A. 1895, p. 65, col. 1, l. 9, of the Lamentation). On the [p. 3] other hand, in W. Asia Inscr., ii. pl. 59, 1, 9, Tammuz is said to have been the son of Sirdu. In the epic of Gilgamesh (Ed. Unguad, Das Gilgamesch-Epos, 1911, l. 46, 47) Tammuz is described as the Beloved of [Ishtar's] Youth (cf. King, Babylonian Relig., p. r60). Cheyne, Encyc. Bib., col. 4,893, pointed out that one interpretation of this name refers to Tammuz as a son of life--true divine child.

^3:9 By some ancient writers Attis was definitely regarded as the son of Kybele, e.g., Schol. on Lucian, Jupiter Tragaedus, 8 (p. 60, Ed. Rabe); Hippolytus, Refutatio omn. Haeresium, v. 9, cited by Frazer, op. cit., p. 219, q.v.: cf. also Farnell, Greece and Babylon, p. 254, and Cults, ii., p. 644, iii. 300, etc. The legends appear in Ovid (Fast. iv. 295 ff.), Pausanias (vii. 17, ix. 10). Though commonly regarded as of shepherd origin (cf. Diod. iii., iv., Theocr. xx. 40; Tertul. de Nat. i.), he was deified and worshipped in common with Kybele in the Phrygian temples (Paus. vii. xx. 2). It is, of course, to his character or fundamental attributes that we allude in our narrative.

^3:10 This is not, however, the explanation suggested by Frazer (op. cit., p. 224-237); or by Farnell (Cults, iii., pp. 300-301; Greece and Babylon, p. 257, and n. 1). On the custom itself, see the stirring poem by Catullus, "The Atys," No. LXIII.

^4:11 King, Chronicles i., pp. 168, 169; Garstang, Land of the Hittites (hereafter cited as L. H.), p. 323, notes 2, 3; L. H. p. 77, p. 1, p. 323, n. 4.

^4:12 Genesis xxiii., xxv. 9, xxvi. 34, xlix. 29, 32. Cf. Ezekiel, xvi. 3, 45; L. H., p. 324, n. 2.

^4:13 Winckler, Mitt. d. Deut. Orient. Ges., 1907, No. 35, pp. I, 75. The texts are translated in chronological order by Williams, Liv. Ann. Arch., iv. 1911, pp. 90, 98.

^4:14 L. H., p. 326. The sculptures of Sipylus and Karabel (ibid., pp. 167-173) are evidence of the extension of the Hittites to near the western coast.

^5:15 Egyptian treaty. Cf. L. H., p. 348. The name of the god in Hittite is not known. Among the Vannic tribes it appears as TESHUB; in Syria, etc., as HADAD; indeed the latter is the general Semitic name, for Lehmann-Haupt has shown that the name of the Assyrian storm-god, as ideographically written, should be read 'Adad rather than Ramman. (Sitz. Berl. Ak. Wis., 1899, p. 119.) On points of resemblance to YAHWEH see the suggestive paper by Hayes Ward, Am. Jour. Sem. Lang. and Lit., xxv., p. 175.

^5:16 L. H., pl. lxxvii., p. 291. Ausgr. in Sendschirli, pl. xli. (i). On the hammer or axe as an emblem of the thunder, etc., cf. Montelius, "The Sun-god's Axe and Thor's Hammer," in Folk-lore, xxi., 1910, p. 60.

^6:17 Our Fig. 1, L. H., pl. xliv., Liv. Annals Arch., ii. (1909), pl. xli (4). Cf. the familiar representation in glyptic art of Hadad leading a bull, e.g., Ward, Seal Cyl. of West Asia, Ch. xxx., figs. 456, 459, 461, etc.

^6:18 Proc. S. B. A., 1909 (March), pl. vii.; L. H., p. 180, n. 2. The god is identified by an ideogram in the inscription.

^7:19 See our Fig. 2, drawn from casts exhibited in the Liverpool Public Museums. Cf. L. H., pl. lxv.

^7:20 L. H., p. 239. That this is a divine marriage scene is generally accepted (Frazer, op. cit., p. 108; Farnell, Greece and Babylon, p. 264; cf. Perrot and Chipiez, Histoire de l'Art, iv., p. 630), but it is the recognition that the chief god concerned is not a Tammuz or Attis (as supposed by Frazer, op. cit. p. 105; Ramsay, Journ. Roy. A. S., 1885, pp. 113-120, and others), but the Hittite "Zeus," a form of Teshub or Hadad, that is new in our interpretation and important for our present subject. On the general question of the Hieros Gamos, cf. Daremberg, Saglio and Pottier, Dictionnaire des Antiquites, 1904, p. 177; Farnell, Cults, i., p. 184 ff; Pausanias, ix., 3; and Frazer, The Golden Bough (1890), pp. 102-103. An oriental version of the rite is suggested in the legend recorded by Aelian (Nat. Animalium, xii. 30) that Hera bathed in the Chaboras, a tributary of the Euphrates, after her marriage with Zeus. Cf. the marriage of Nin-gir-su and Bau in Babylonian mythology (Thu. Dangin, Vorderas Bibl., i., p. 77; cf. Jastrow, Relig. of Bab. and Assyr., 1898, p. 59). The details of the scene seem to indicate that the shrine is essentially that of the goddess (cf. Kybele as a goddess of caves, Farnell, Cults, iii., p. 299, and Ramsay, Relig. of Anatolia, in Hastings' Dict. Bibl., extra vol., p. 120), and that the image of the god was carried thereto for this ceremony. (Cf. our note , <page 77>, also Farnell, Greece and Babylon, p. 268). It is of interest to recall Miss Harrison's arguments, Classical Rev. (1893), p. 24, that Hera had a husband previous to Zeus; also the association of Dodonian Zeus (Homer, Il., xvi. 233; Od., xiv. 327, xvi. 403; Hesiod ap. Strabo, p. 328) with the Earth-Mother in Greece (cf. Farnell, Cults, i., p. 39).

^8:21 L. H., pl. lxv. Representations of the youthful god are rare (cf. Farnell, Greece and Babylon, p. 252); the alternative interpretation would be to see in this image an Attis-priest, clad like the god; similarly the second of the two female forms on the double eagle would be the priestess of the goddess in front. This would seem to be made possible by the analogy of a sculpture from Carchemish (Hogarth, Liv. Annals. Arch., pl. xxxv., i.); but the symbols defining all the figures indicate equally their divine rank. This view is accepted by Frazer, op. cit., p. 106.

^8:22 For the tradition of a son to Atargatis, completing the analogy of a divine triad, see below, n. [*70].

^8:23 L. H., pl. lvii. and p. 195. Frazer, op. cit., pp. 98, 100.

^8:24 L. H., pl. lxxi. and p. 241.

^9:25 The first two may be varied aspects of the great god; the seventh is, however, identical with the local deity of Malatia. L. H. pl. xliv. (ii.).

^9:26 L. H., lxv. The double eagle is found at Eyuk: we may see in this group the nature-goddess in a local dual aspect.

^10:27 L. H., pl. lxviii. On his head a cap (cf. Lucian,  section 42). His kingly rank is denoted by the winged disc surmounting his emblems.

^10:28 That the male god was really dominant would appear from the fact that his name takes first place in the list of Hittite deities in the Egyptian treaty. L. H., p. 348. This agrees with Macrobius' allusion to Hadad of Hierapolis (see below, <page 25>). The general prevalence of his worship among the Hittite and kindred peoples is seen in the Hittite archives, the Tell el Amarna tablets, and the Vannic inscriptions. The dual character of the cult is suggested by the seals of the treaty in question, by some of the T. A. letters (e.g., Winckler, Nos. 16, 20, from which the name of the chief goddess among the Mitanni would seem to be accepted as Ishtar), and possibly by the Hittite-Mitanni treaty.

^10:29 L. H., pl. lxxiii.

^10:30 See our Fig. 3. The bull freely replaces the god on coins of Hierapolis, Tarsus, etc. (B. M. Cat., Galatia, etc. Cf. also Babelon, Les Penses Achemenides, pl. li., vol. 8, pl. xxiv., pp. 20, 22). So also in glyptic art (cf. Hayes Ward, Seal Cyl. of West Asia, ch. lii.). Both at Eyuk and at Malatia, in the sculpture described above, rams and goats are seen led to the altar as for sacrifice, and the goat accompanies the leading god at Boghaz-Keui. It is interesting to recall the term aigofagos applied to Zeus (Farnell, Cults, pp. 96, 750, n. 48), and the boyfonia, a chief rite in the Athenian Diipoleia in the festival of Zeus Polieus. So also in the Cult of Zeus of Attica, a god of agriculture, eating the ox was regarded as a sacrament, the ox [p. 11] being regarded as of kin to the worshippers of the god. On Dionysus as a bull and a goat, see Frazer, The Golden Bough, V. (1912), ch. ix. Cf. also our n. [*60], <page 22>.

^12:31 See note [*69] below.

^12:32 Cf.  section [*31], <page 70>. "The effigy of Zeus recalls Zeus in all its details--his head, his robes, his throne, nor even if you wished it could you take him for another deity." The term ZEUS-HADAD would aptly describe the Hittite deity: it is suggested by the fact that the god of Hierapolis identified with "Zeus" by Lucian is called "Hadad" by Macrobius. Cf. below, <page 25>.

^13:33 L. H., pp. 150, 151 and pl. xlvii.

^13:34 See Fig. 4, and below, <page 24>.

^13:35 Paus. iii., xxii. 4.

^13:36 L. H., pp. 168-170 and pl. liii.

^13:37 Jour. Hell. Stud., xix., pp. 40-45 and Fig. 4; L. H., pp. 164-165.

^13:38 Corp. Inscr. Hit. (Messerschmidt) (1900), p. 20 and p. xxvi. L. H., pp. 99100, Cf. ibid., p. 100, n. 2.

^14:39 Humann and Puchstein, Reisen, Atlas, pl. xlvii-xlix.; L. H., pp. III-112, 119.

^14:40 The power of Ishtar to raise the dead is implied in her threat to do so, should the door of Hades not be opened to her. Cf. Pinches, Proc. S. B. A., xxxi. (1909), p. 26. On Kybele (Matar Kubile) as Goddess of the Dead in Phrygian art, see Ramsay, Jour. Hell. Stud., v., p. 245.

^15:41 L. H., pl. lxxv., No. 1, etc.

^15:42 Cf. Hayes-Ward, The Seal Cylinders of Western Asia, esply. Chs. xlix., 1.

^15:43 E.g., ibid., No. 898, where she wears the Hittite hat, and the feet of her throne suggest lion's paws. The lion appears definitely below the throne in No. 908. In No. 907, curiously, she stands on a bull. She is accompanied by a bird in these, as in Nos. 904, 908, 943.

^15:44 Ibid., p. 162. The myth of Ishtar's Descent to Hades, however, reveals the goddess naked at one stage of her yearly journey. Ed. Meyer is of opinion (Roscher's Lexikon--ASTARTE) that some of the Babylonian clay figures of the naked goddess are archaic and local.

^15:45 Specimens are exhibited in the Hittite gallery of the Liverpool Public Museums.

^15:46 Hogarth, Liv. Ann. Arch., ii. (1909), p. 170, Fig. 1.

^16:47 Atargatis of Hierapolis is always represented as robed on coins of the site, see below, <page 21>, and Figs. 5 and 7, also the frontispiece. There is a small bronze figure in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford (Aleppo, 1889, No. 794), which possibly represents the goddess. The head-dress is debased; but the other features--hair, necklace, dress, and facial expression--are' characteristic and instructive. On the character and relations of the goddess in general, cf. Cumont, "Dea Syria," Real Encyc. (Wissowa), iv., col. 2237.

^16:48 Prof. Lehmann-Haupt reminds me that the name Mylitta or Mullitta applied to the goddess by Herodotus (I., 131, 199) is derived from mu'allidatu: The Giver (or Helper) of Birth.

^17:49 Doliche is near Aintab, not far north-west from Hierapolis. The worship of Jupiter Dolichenus was introduced to the Roman army by Syrian soldiers (cf. Cumont, Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, pp. 113, 117, 147 and 263, n. 23; also in Wissowa's Real Encyc. iv., DEA SYRIA, col. 2243). The god stands on a bull holding the lightning and the double axe. (See the illustration in Roscher's Lexikon, DOLICHENUS, and especially the fine sculpture at Wiesbaden, published in the Bonner Jahrbucher, 1901, pl. viii., and compare with the Hittite Hadad of Malatia, our Fig. 1). His consort is a lion goddess. She is described on inscriptions (C. I. L., vi. 367, 413) by the name "Hera Sancta," which is parallel to the references to the Syrian goddess on inscriptions found at Delos, where the cult had been established by colonists during the second century B.C. ("Fouilles a Delos," Bull. Corr. Hell., 1882, p. 487); thus (in No. 15), Agnei Afroditei Atargati kai Adadoy; (No. 18) Atargatei agnei theui; (No. 19) agneii theui Atargatei. (Cf. Cumont, DEA SYRIA, loc. cit. col. 2240; also the "Zeus Hagios" of a Phoenician coin, [p. 18] Hill. Jour. Hell. Stud., xxxi., p. 62). The Anatolian character of the god is recognised by Kan, De Jovis Dolicheni cultu (1901), p. 3 ff. Cf. also, F. C. Andreas (in Sarre's D. Oriental. Feldzeichen), in KLIO III. (1903), pp. 342-343. So, too, the god and goddess of Heliopolis (Baalbek), identified with the bull and lion respectively, resemble the Hadad and Atargatis of Hierapolis and the original Hittite pair of divinities (cf. Dussaud in Rev. Arch., 1904, pt. ii., p. 246, etc.). Cf. also, the "Jupiter" of the Venasii, Strabo, xii., ii. 6. The subject of the Phoenician and Cilician analogous mated divinities is more complex, but both regions were at one time or another within the Hittite political sphere of influence. An instructive cubical seal from near Tarsus, now in the Ashm. Mus., Oxford (publ. Sayce, Jour. Arch. Inst., 5887, pl. xliv., Messerschmidt, Corpus Inscr. Hit., pl. xliii., i.), shows upon its chief face the two Hittite divinities in characteristic aspect, but the other faces are devoted to the cult of the goddess.

^18:50 An emblem of the priesthood of Bellona was the double axe. Cf. Guigniant, Nouv. Gall. Mythol., p. 120; also Montelius, in Folk Lore, xxi. (1910), i. p. 60 ff.

^19:51 Cf. the pertinent remarks by Robertson-Smith, Relig. Sem., especially p. 58, on the change of the Mother Goddess from an unmarried to a married state.

^20:52 Our chief sources in this regard have been the coins in the Num. Dept. of the Brit. Mus. and in the Bib. Nationale, Paris; Wroth, Cat. of Coins of Galatia, Cappadocia, and Syria (1899); Waddington, in Revue Numismatique, (1861). Six, in Num. Chron. (1878). Babelon, Les Perses Achemenides (1890); Luynes, Satrapies et Phenicie, (1846); Neumann, (Pop. et Regum) Numi Veteres inediti (1783). Hill, on some "Graeco-Phoen. Shrines" (Jour. Hell. Stud., xxxi. 9, 11), and "Some Palestinian Cults" (Proc. Brit. Acad., v, 1912). To Mr. Hill we are specially indebted for suggestions and help in this enquiry.

^21:53 See our frontispiece, No. 8; Num. Chron., loc. cit.; also B. M. bronzes, No. 51 (date, Caracalla; cf. Wroth, Cat., pl. xvii., No. 16).

^21:54 See frontispiece, No. 4, also Fig. 7; Num. Vet., loc. cit.; also B. M. bronzes, Nos. 47, 48, 49 (date, Caracalla, 198-217 A.D.).

^21:55 Num. Chron., loc. cit., pl. vi., No. 3.

^21:56 Our frontispiece, No. 5 (ibid., No. 4).

^21:57 The familiar reading is `thr`thh (see frontispiece, No. 2, and Fig. 5, <page 27>), which is separable without difficulty into `thr ('Atar), the Aramaic form of `shthrth (Astarte) and `thh ('Ate or 'Atheh); reading thus 'Atar-'ate. See note , <page 52>; and cf. Dussaud, "Notes mythol. Syriees," in Rev. Arch. (1904), p. 226. The legend ykwn`thh, Yekun-'ate (Six, loc. cit., No. 3), indicates the separability of 'Ate (Atheh) as a distinct name. The legend on our No. 8, `thht, is possibly a contraction of `thh and (wbh)t, Cf. Six, op. cit., p. 107; cf. also Movers, Phoen., i., pp. 307, 600. But see Ed. Meyer, Gesch. des Alth., i., pp. 307-308.

^21:58 See <page 25>.

^22:59 E.g., Brit. Mus. silver coin of Ant. Pius (Wroth, Cat., Gal., Cap. and Syria, pl. xvii., No. 2, also No. 8).

^22:60 E.g., Babelon, op. cit., pl. li., No. 18; Num. Chron. (1861), p. 103, rev. Coins of other sites, e.g., Aradus, Byblos, Tarsus, etc., freely illustrate the same themes. Cf. the epithet applied to the Lions of Kybele by Sophocles, Philoktetes, i. 401 (iu makaira tayroktonun leontun efedre). On this point, see Crowfoot, J. H. S., 1900, p. 118, who argues the theme to be symbolical of the death of the god, whether Attis or Dionysus. So Ishtar, in the epic of Gilgamesh, is accused of being the cause of the death of Tammuz, and of her lion (Ungnad, Das Gilgamesch Epos, p. 31, ll. 52 f).

^22:61 Cf. Wroth, op. cit., pl. xvii., etc.

^22:62 Frontispiece, No. 8; published by Six, Num. Chr. (1878), pl. vi., p. 104, No. 2.

^22:63 We have discussed the legend of this coin in n. [*57]. M. Six (loc. cit.), following Movers, accepts the theoretical reading "Baal-Kevan" as the name of the god.

^23:64 See our Fig. 7, <page 70>. Publ. Numi vet., pt. ii., tab. iii., 2.

^23:65 Six (Num. Chron., loc. cit., p. 119) describes the object as a legionary eagle; but this is somewhat misleading.

^24:66 Professor Bosanquet suggests that the Greek word was possibly used in the sense of the Latin Signum.

^25:67 See pp. <page 14>, <page 15>, and n. , pp. <page 85>, <page 86>.

^25:68 "Saturnalia": end of Ch. xxiii.

^26:69 In general aspect the Phrygian goddess is indeed hardly distinguishable from the Hierapolitan goddess as described by Lucian. Compare our illustration of Rhea or Kybele, from a Roman lamp (Fig. 8, <page 72>), with the representation in Fig. 7, <page 70>. This resemblance is further seen in a relief in the Vatican (Vatican Kat., i., Plates, Gall.-Lapidara, Tf. 30, No. 152), described in C. I. L., vi., No. 423: "Superne figura Rheae cornu copiae, timone, modio ornatae, stans inter duos leones"--which, however, Drexler (in Roscher's Lexikon, I., col. 1991) proposes to identify with Atargatis rather than Rhea.

^26:70 Xanthos the Lydian relates that "Atargatis" was taken prisoner by the Lydian Mopsus and thrown into the lake at Ascalon (sacred to Derceto; see n. , <page 52>), with her son Ixthus (Athen. viii. 37). On the proposed identification of the son with Simios, the lover of Atargatis (Diod. ii. 4), etc., see Dussaud, Rev. Arch. (1904), ii., p. 257, who indicates the analogy of the "Hierapolitan triad, Hadad, Atargatis and Simios," with the Heliopolitan, Jupiter, Venus and Mercury. He believes (p. 259) the triad of Hadad to have been of Babylonian origins, implanted at Hierapolis, to reign there through Syria, Palestine and Phoenicia. "Il ne nous appartient pas de rechercher ses migrations et ses influences en Asie Mineure." There is an interesting representation of a Syrian triad in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford (1912, 83).

^26:71 See n. , <page 76>.

^27:72 See our Fig. 5, and frontispiece, No. 2. Publ. Num. Chron., p. 105, No. 5. Choix de Mon. Grecq, pl. xi. 24; Rev. Arch. (1904), ii., pl. 240, Fig. 24 (photo).

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

LIFE OF LUCIAN

THERE is no ancient biography of Lucian extant excepting an unsatisfactory sketch by Suidas; but we can gather many facts as to his life from his own writings. He expressly tells us that he was a Syrian or Assyrian, and that Samosata was his native place, the capital of Commagene, situated on the right or western bank of the Euphrates. He was probably born about the year 125 A.D., and his career extends over the greater part of the second century after the Christian era. He was of humble extraction; he tells us that his mother's family were hereditary sculptors (lithoxooi). This fact is interesting as enabling us to suppose that he would examine with an accurate and critical eye the different statues which he saw and described in his various travels, and especially those in the great temple at Hierapolis. He tells us, however, that he proved but a sorry sculptor, and nothing was left him but to apply himself to the study of literature and to adopt the profession of a sophist. He could not even, according to his own account, speak pure Greek, and with the view of purifying his language he visited successively the rhetorical schools of Ionia and Greece proper, where he made the acquaintance of the Platonic philosopher Nigrinus,

[p. 30]

and no doubt contracted much of the admiration for Plato which reveals itself in his writings. We see him next at Antioch practising as a lawyer in the Courts; he enjoyed in this capacity such a reputation for oratory that he felt entitled to gratify his spirit of restlessness and intellectual curiosity by travel, and adopting the career of a travelling sophist. In this capacity he visited Syria, Phoenicia and Egypt, probably in the years 148 and 149 A.D. He tells us in the De Dea Syria that he had been at Hierapolis, Byblus, Libanus, and Sidon; and we know from his own description how carefully he inspected these great seats of Oriental beliefs.

He likewise tells us that he visited Egypt, but that he went to no other part of Libya. He arrived at Rome about 150 A.D., suffering from bad eyesight and anxious to consult a good oculist. After a sojourn of two years in Italy he passed into Gaul, where he had heard that there was a good opening for a public lecturer, and here he stayed for some ten years. He learned so much while among the Gauls that he was able to retire from the profession of lecturer and to devote himself to the study of philosophy. He returned to the East .through Macedonia, staying to lecture at Thessalonica, and travelling through Asia Minor reached Samosata in 164 A.D. There he found his father still living, and removed him and his family to Greece, whither he followed them in the following year. On his way he visited Abonoteichos, afterwards Ionopolis, in Cappadocia, where he visited the false prophet Alexander, and nearly met his end owing to a trick

[p. 31]

played upon him by that impostor. He passed by Aegialos and proceeded to Amastris, whence he travelled into Greece with Peregrinus Proteus, and he says that he was present when that most marvellous of charlatans burnt himself alive at Olympia. He then settled down at Athens, devoting himself to the study of philosophy, and he seems to have passed a happy and prosperous life of learned leisure. At the end of the century he found his resources failing and once more betook himself to the employment of his youth; and he was glad to be relieved from this drudgery by a good and lucrative appointment conferred on him by the Emperor Severus in connexion with the Law Courts of Alexandria. Of the date of his death we know nothing.

The tract on "The Syrian Goddess" is thought to have been one of his earliest works, written when he was fresh from the East, as appears among other things from his calling Deucalion by his Syrian name, Skuthes, meaning Sikudes, i.e., Xisuthrus. [*1] It has been doubted by some scholars whether this tract was really by Lucian, on the ground that it is written in the Ionic dialect, the employment of which Lucian derides in Quomodo Historiam,  section 18. But the scholiast on the Nubes of Aristophanes certainly ascribes it to Lucian, and it is quite in keeping with the versatility of his genius to adopt a style at an early period of his literary career, and, at a later period to mock at the affectations of his early productions. In

[p. 32]

any case, whether the tract is by Lucian or not, it gives a singular picture of the beliefs and practices in Hierapolis, and is worthy of the attention of archaeologists and students of comparative religions.

"Lucian was at one time secretary to the prefect of Egypt, and he boasts that he had a large share in writing the laws and ordering the justice of that province. Here this laughing philosopher found a broad mark for his humour in the religion of the Egyptians, their worship of animals and water-jars, their love of magic, the general mourning through the land on the death of the bull Apis, their funeral ceremonies, their placing their mummies round the dinner table as so many guests, and pawning a father or a brother when in want of money."--Sharpe's History of Egypt, Chap. xv.,  section 51.

It is especially noteworthy that he wrote this treatise in the Ionic dialect in imitation of Herodotus, who adopted that form of Greek for his great work, and it speaks much for the powers of Lucian as a linguist and as a stylist that he was able to pass from the Ionic dialect to the pure Attic Greek in which the rest of his works are composed.

It is no part of our aim to criticise Lucian fully  an author; it will be plain from the short sketch of his life that he was singularly attracted by the spirit of curiosity to obtain all possible information about the strange Oriental cults among which he had been brought up. He gives us information at first hand on the religion of the Assyrians, and much of this is of extreme interest as tallying with what we read in the Old Testament. The flood

[p. 33]

which destroyed all mankind for their wickedness; the salvation of one man and his family; the animals which went into the ark in pairs; the special sanctity ascribed to pigeons among the Syrians, all recall memories of Jewish traditions. Stratonice's guilty love for Combabus and his rejection of her advances recall other passages of the Old Testament; and the consecration of their first beard and their locks by the young men and maidens respectively recalls passages in Catullus and Vergil, and seems to show that this custom was an importation from the East. The tract on the Dea Syria differs from Lucian's other works by its simplicity and freedom from persiflage. It is the work of an intelligent traveller conversant with architecture and with the technique of statuary, and anxious to record the facts that he had been able to ascertain as to the strange Oriental cults practised in his native country. His attitude is that of an interested sceptic, but he confesses himself unable to explain all the miracles which he witnessed at Hierapolis, though he probably deemed that they owed their existence to some tricks of the priests such as he had seen performed on other occasions.

The following passage from one of a series of lectures to clergy at Cambridge [*1] may be added to this brief account:--

"It is the peculiar distinction of Lucian in the history of letters that he was the first to employ the form of dialogue, not on grave themes, but as a

[p. 34]

vehicle of comedy and satire. He intimates this claim in the piece entitled The Twice Accused, which is so called because Lucian is there arraigned by personified Rhetoric on the one part and by Dialogue on the other. Rhetoric upbraids him with having forsaken her for the bearded Dialogus, the henchman of philosophy: while Dialogus complained that the Syrian has dragged him from his philosophical heaven to earth, and given him a comic instead of a tragic mask. Lucian's dialogues blend an irony in which Plato had been his master with an Aristophanic mirth and fancy. His satire ranges over the whole life of his time, and he has been an originating source in literature. His true history is the prototype of such works as Gulliver's Travels: his Dialogues of the Dead were the precursors of Landor's Imaginary Conversations."

Muller and Donaldson quote Sir Walter Scott as affirming that "from the True History of Lucian Cyrano de Bergerac took his idea of a Journey to the Moon, and Rabelais derived his yet more famous Voyage of Pantagruel."

As the tract De Dea Syria is mainly descriptive it is unnecessary here to enter fully into Lucian's views of religion and philosophy. It may, however, be remarked that the belief in religion, whether as represented by the ancient and national gods of Rome and Greece, or by the Oriental deities, had lost its hold on both the educated and uneducated classes. The disappearance of religion was succeeded by superstition in various forms, which was exploited to their own advantage by such charlatans and

[p. 35]

adventurers as Alexander and Peregrinus Proteus. Lucian's attitude is that of a detached and scornful observer, who, however, in spite of his contempt for the silliness of his fellow men, sees the pathos of human affairs, and would fain make them regard conduct as the standard of life. Professor Dill [*1] has remarked that the worldly age in which Lucian's lot was cast was ennobled by a powerful protest against worldliness. This protest was none other than the lives of the best of the philosophers who waged unceasing war against selfishness and superstition in a selfish and superstitious age. Lucian mocks indeed at these philosophers without, however, apparently having thought it worth his while to study any system of philosophy very deeply. "Yet the man who was utterly sceptical as to the value of all philosophic effort, in the last resort approaches very nearly to the view of human life which was preached by the men whom he derides. . . . There are many indications in the dialogues that if Lucian had turned Cynic preacher he would have waged the same war on the pleasures and illusory ambitions of man, he would have outdone the Cynics in brutal frankness of exposure and denunciation, as he would have surpassed them in rhetorical and imaginative charm of style."

Lucian has heard of Christianity, but seems to have regarded it as an ordinary Oriental cult. He refers to it twice; the first passage is in the memoirs of Alexander, in which the false prophet is alleged to

[p. 36]

have proclaimed: "If any atheist, Christian, or Epicurean has come to spy out the sacred rites, let him flee"; and in the same tract ( section 25) he couples Christians and atheists. The second passage is in the treatise on the death of Peregrinus the impostor, who, according to Lucian, was a renegade from Christianity and indeed had occupied an important post among that community. The translation is Sir Richard Jebb's.

"He had thoroughly learnt," says Lucian, "the wondrous philosophy of the Christians, having consorted in Palestine with their priests and scribes. What would you expect? He speedily showed that they were mere children in his hands: he was their prophet, the chief of their religious fraternity (thiasiarxes), the convener of their meetings (synagugeus) --in short, everything to them. Some of their books he interpreted and elucidated; many of them he wrote himself. They regarded him as a god, made him their law-giver, and adopted him as their champion (prostaten epegrafonto)."

Concerning their tenets he says, "They still reverence that great one (ton megan ekeinon), the man who was crucified in Palestine because he brought this new mystery into the world. The poor creatures have persuaded themselves that they will be altogether immortal and live for ever; wherefore they despise death and in many cases give themselves to it voluntarily. Then their first Law-giver (i.e., Christ) persuaded them that they were all brethren, when they should have taken the step of renouncing all the Hellenic gods, and worshipping that crucified

[p. 37]

one, their sophist, and living after his laws. So they despise all things alike (i.e., all dangers and sufferings) and hold their goods in common: though they have received such traditions without any certain warrant. If then an artful impostor comes among them, an adroit man of the world, he very soon enriches himself by making these simple folk his dupes."

It is fair to say that by some writers of repute [*1] Peregrinus is regarded as a conscientious mystic, and Lucian as unqualified to understand mysticism and religious enthusiasm. In any case it is clear that Lucian for all the scorn with which he regards the various religions and philosophies of his age, showed considerable interest in collecting facts about them, and those which he gives us in the tract on The Syrian Goddess are as instructive as any.

The tract on The Syrian Goddess has been translated at the instance of the Liverpool Institute of Archaeology. The text followed is that of Dindorf (Paris, 1884). The memoir on Lucian is mainly based upon the History of the Literature of Ancient Greece (Muller and Donaldson), Sir Richard Jebb's "Lucian" in his Essays and Addresses (Cambridge University Press), Sir Samuel Dill's Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius, and Glover's Conflict of Religions in the Early Roman Empire.

H. A. S.

Footnotes

^31:1 See the references in Muller and Donaldson, Vol. III., p. 223, from whose work most of these facts have been taken.

^33:1 Essays and Addresses (Cambridge University Press, 1907).

^35:1 See Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius (Macmillan, 1905), p. 339.

^37:1 E.g., Mr. T. R. Glover in The Conflict of Religions in the Early Roman Empire, p. 212.

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38] [p. 39]

  

LUCIAN'S "DE DEA SYRIA."

  

ANALYSIS OF THE SUBJECT-MATTER.

           

        

       PAGE

     
       

            INTRODUCTORY

        

     
       section [*1].

       The Sacred City

       <page 41>

     
        [*2].

       Origins of   Temples and Shrines

       <page 42>

     
       

       THE OLDEST   SHRINES AND CULTS OF SYRIA.

        

     
        [*3].

       Hercules of   Tyre

       <page 43>

     
        [*4].

       The Phoenician   Astarte at Sidon. Legend of Europa

       <page 44>

     
        [*6].

       Aphrodite of   Byblos and the Legend of Adonis

       <page 45>

     
        [*7].

       Legend of   Osiris at Byblos

       <page 47>

     
        [*8].

       The Adonis   River; its red colour

       <page 47>

     
        [*9].

       Cult of   Aphrodite in the Lebanon at Aphaca

       <page 48>

     
        [*10].

       Hierapolis: The   greatest Sanctuary. Its Pilgrims

       <page 49>

     
       

            LEGENDS   OF FOUNDATION.

        

     
        [*12].

       Ascribed by   some to Deukalion. Story of the Deluge

       <page 50>

     
        [*13].

       Story of the   Chasm

       <page 51>

     
        [*14].

       Assigned by   others to Semiramis. Derceto, the Fish-Goddess

       <page 52>

     
        [*15].

       By others again   to the Lydian Attis

       <page 55>

     
        [*16].

       Lucian shares the   View that it was founded by Dionysus

       <page 57>

     
        [*17].

       Re-built by   Stratonice

       <page 58>

     
        [*19].

       Story of   Stratonice and Combabus

       <page 60>

     
        

            DESCRIPTION   OF THE TEMPLE AND SHRINES.

        

     
        [*31].

       The Inner Sanctuary.   The Effigies

       <page 69>

     
        [*32].

       Comprehensive   Character of the Goddess

       <page 71>

     
        [*33].

       Object between   the God and Goddess

       <page 73>

     
        [*34].

       The Sun God

       <page 74>

     
        [*35].

       A Bearded   Apollo

       <page 74>

     
        [*36].

       Image of the   God borne by the Priests in Divination

       <page 75>

     
        

       [p. 40]

        

     
       section [*38].

       Atlas and other   Images

       <page 77>

     
        [*41].

       Sacred Animals

       <page 78>

     
        [*42].

       The Priests and   Temple Attendants

       <page 79>

     
       

            RITES   AND CEREMONIES.

        

     
        [*44].

       The Sacrifices

       <page 80>

     
        [*45].

       Sacred Lake and   Fishes

       <page 81>

     
        [*47].

       Ceremony at the   Lake

       <page 81>

     
        [*48].

       Ceremony at the   Euphrates ("The Sea")

       <page 82>

     
        [*49].

       Festival of the   Pyre

       <page 83>

     
       

            CUSTOMS   AND INSTITUTIONS.

        

     
        [*50].

       The Galli

       <page 84>

     
        [*51].

       Their   Initiation Ceremonies

        <page 84>

     
        [*52].

       Their Burial

       <page 85>

     
        [*54].

       Animals used in   Sacrifice. Sanctity of the Dove

       <page 85>, <page 86>

     
        [*55].

       Tonsure and   other Customs of Pilgrims

       <page 87>

     
        [*57].

       Method of   Sacrifice. The Libation

       <page 87>, <page 88>

     
        [*58].

       Human Sacrifice

       <page 88>

     
        [*59].

       Tattoo

       <page 89>

     
        [*60].

       Sacrifice of   Hair

       <page 89>

     
    

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

TRANSLATION AND NOTES.

[1]1. There is in Syria a city not far from the river Euphrates [*1]: it is called "the Sacred City," and is sacred to the Assyrian Hera. [*2] As far as I can judge this name was not conferred upon the city when it was first settled, but originally it bore another name. [*3] In course of time

[p. 42]

the great sacrifices were held therein, and then this title was bestowed upon it. I will speak of this city, and of what it contains. I will speak also of the laws which govern its holy rites, of its popular assemblies and of the sacrifices offered by its citizens. I will speak also of all the traditions attaching to the founders of this holy place: and of the manner of the founding of its temple. I write as an Assyrian born [*4] who have witnessed with mine own eyes some of the facts which I am about to narrate: some, again, I learnt from the priests: they occurred before my time, but I narrate them as they were told to me.

[2]2. The first men on earth to receive knowledge of the gods, and to build temples and shrines and to summon meetings for religious observances are said to have been the Egyptians. [*5] They were the first, too, to take cognizance

[p. 43]

of holy names, and to repeat sacred traditions. Not long after them the Assyrians heard from the Egyptians their doctrines as to the gods, and they reared temples and shrines: in these they placed statues and images.

[3]3. Originally the temples of the Egyptians possessed no images. And there exist in Syria temples of a date not much later than those of Egypt, many of which I have seen myself, for instance, the temple of Hercules in Tyre. [*6] This is not the Hercules of Greek legend; but a Tyrian hero of much greater antiquity than he.

[4]4. There is likewise in Phoenicia a temple of great size owned by the Sidonians. They call it the temple of Astarte. [*7] I hold this Astarte to be no other than the

[p. 44]

moon-goddess. But according to the story of one of the priests this temple is sacred to Europa, the sister of Cadmus. She was the daughter of Agenor, and on her disappearance from Earth the Phoenicians honoured her with a temple and told a sacred legend about her; how that Zeus was enamoured of her for her beauty, and changing his form into that of a bull carried her off into Crete. [*8] This legend I heard from other Phoenicians as well; and the coinage current among the Sidonians bears upon it the effigy of Europa sitting upon a bull, none other than Zeus. [*9] Thus they do not agree that the temple in question is sacred to Europa.

[5]5. The Phoenicians have also another sacred custom, derived from Egypt, not from Assyria: it came, they say, from Heliopolis into Phoenicia. I never witnessed this myself, but it is important, and of great antiquity.

[p. 45]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 6.--TEMPLE AT BYBLOS.

 B. M. Cat. Coins, Phoen. Byb. 32.
 Date A.D. 217-8.

 

[6]6. I saw too at Byblos a large temple, [*10] sacred to the Byblian Aphrodite [*11]: this is the scene of the secret rites of Adonis: I mastered these. They assert that the legend about Adonis and the wild boar is true, [*12] and that

[p. 46]

the facts occurred in their country, and in memory of this calamity they beat their breasts and wail every year, and perform their secret ritual amid signs of mourning through the whole countryside. When they have finished their mourning and wailing, they sacrifice in the first place to Adonis, as to one who has departed this life: after this they allege that he is alive again, and exhibit his effigy to the sky. They proceed to shave their heads, [*13] too, like the Egyptians on the loss of their Apis. The women who refuse to be shaved have to submit to the following penalty, viz., to stand for the space of an entire day in readiness to expose their persons for hire. The place of hire is open to none but foreigners, and out of the proceeds of the traffic of these women a sacrifice to Aphrodite is paid. [*14]

[p. 47]

[7]7. Some of the inhabitants of Byblos maintain that the Egyptian Osiris is buried in their town, and that the public mourning and secret rites are performed in memory not of Adonis, but of Osiris. [*15] I will tell you why this story seems worthy of credence. A human head comes every year from Egypt to Byblos, [*16] floating on its seven days' journey thence: the winds, by some divine instinct, waft it on its way: it never varies from its course but goes straight to Byblos. The whole occurrence is miraculous. It occurs every year, and it came to pass while I was myself in Byblos, and I saw the head in that city.

[8]8. There is, too, another marvellous portent in the region of the Byblians. A river, flowing from Mount Libanus, discharges itself into the sea: this river bears the name of Adonis. [*17] Every year regularly it is tinged

[p. 48]

with blood, and loses its proper colour before it falls into the sea: it dyes the sea, to a large space, red: [*18] and thus announces their time of mourning to the Byblians. Their story is that during these days Adonis is wounded, and that the river's nature is changed by the blood which flows into its waters; and that it takes its name from this blood. Such is the legend vulgarly accepted: but a man of Byblos, who seemed to me to be telling the truth, told me another reason for this marvellous change. He spoke as follows: "This river, my friend and guest, passes through the Libanus: now this Libanus abounds in red earth. The violent winds which blow regularly on those days bring down into the river a quantity of earth resembling vermilion. It is this earth that turns the river to red. And thus the change in the river's colour is due, not to blood as they affirm, but to the nature of the soil." [*19] This was the story of the Byblian. But even assuming that he spoke the truth, yet there certainly seems to me something supernatural in the regular coincidence of the wind and the colouring of the river.

[9]9. I went up also from Byblos into the Libanus, a single day's journey, as I had heard that there was an ancient temple of Aphrodite there founded by Cinyras.

[p. 49]

[paragraph continues] I saw the temple, [*20] and it was indeed old. These then are the ancient great temples of Syria.

[10]10. Of all these temples, and they are numerous indeed, none seems to me greater than those found in the sacred city; no shrine seems to me more holy, no region more hallowed. They possess some splendid masterpieces, some venerable offerings, many rare sights, many striking statues, and the gods make their presence felt in no doubtful way. The statues sweat, and move, and utter oracles, and a shout has often been raised when the temple was closed; it has been heard by many. And more: this temple is the principal source of their wealth, as I can vouch. For much money comes to them from Arabia, and from the Phoenicians and the Babylonians: the Cilicians, too, and the Assyrians bring their tribute. [*21] And I saw with my own eyes treasures stored away privately in the temple; many garments, and other valuables, which are exchanged for silver or gold. Nowhere among mankind are so many festivals and sacred assemblies instituted as among them.

[p. 50]

[11]11. On enquiring the number of years since the temple was founded, and whom they deemed the goddess to be, many tales were told to me, some of which were sacred, and some public property; some, again, were absolutely fabulous; others were mere barbarians' tales; others again tallied with the Greek accounts. All these I am ready to narrate, though I withhold my acceptance of some.

[12]12. The people, then, allege that it was Deukalion or Sisythus who founded the temple; I mean the Deukalion in whose time the great flood occurred. I have heard the story about Deukalion as the Greeks narrate it from the Greeks themselves. The story runs as follows: The present race of men was not the first to be created. The first generation perished to a man; the present is a second creation. This generation became a vast multitude, owing to Deukalion. Of the men of the original creation they tell this tale: they were rebellious, and wilful, and performed unholy deeds, disregarding the sanctity of oaths and hospitality, and behaving cruelly to suppliants; and it was for these misdeeds that the great destruction fell upon them. Straightway the earth discharged a vast volume of water, and the rivers of heaven came down in streams and the sea mounted high. Thus everything became water, and all men perished; Deukalion alone was saved for another generation, on the score of his wisdom and piety. The manner of his salvation was as follows: He placed his children and his wives in an ark of vast size, and he himself also entered in. Now, when he had embarked, there came to him wild boars and horses, and generations of lions and serpents, and all the other beasts which roam the earth, all in couples. He welcomed them all. Nor did they harm him; and friendship remained amongst them as

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] Zeus himself ordained. These, one and all, floated in this ark as long as the flood remained. This is the legend of Deukalion as told by the Greeks. [*22]

[13]13. But a further story is told by the men of Hierapolis, and a wonderful one it is; they say that in their country a mighty chasm appeared which received all the water, and that Deukalion on this occurrence reared altars and founded a temple to Juno above this chasm. I have actually seen this chasm, it lies beneath the temple and is of very small dimensions. If it was once of large size, and was afterwards reduced to its present small dimensions, I know not: but the chasm which I saw is certainly very small. They maintain that their tale is proved by the following occurrence; twice in every year the water comes from the sea to the temple. This water is brought by the priests; but besides them, all Syria and Arabia and many from beyond the Euphrates

[p. 52]

go down to the sea; one and all bring its water which they first pour out in the temple; [*23] then this water passes down into the chasm which, small though it be, holds a vast quantity of water. Thus then they act, and they declare that the following law was passed by Deukalion in that temple, in order that it might be an everlasting remembrance at once of the visitation and of its alleviation.

[14]14. Others again maintain that Semiramis [*24] of Babylon, who has left many mighty works in Asia, founded this edifice as well; nor did she dedicate it to Hera, but to her own mother, whose name was Derceto. [*25] Now,

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] I have seen the semblance of Derceto in Phoenicia, and a wonderful sight it is; one half is a woman, but

[p. 54]

the part which extends from the thighs to the feet ends in a fish's tail. [*26] The effigy, however, which is at Hierapolis is a complete woman. [*27] The reasons for this story are plain to understand; they deem fishes holy objects, [*28] and never touch them, while of birds they use

[p. 55]

all but pigeons for food; the pigeon is in their eyes sacred. [*29] It appears to them then that what we have described was done in honour of Derceto and Semiramis. The former, because Derceto has the form of a fish; the latter, because the lower half of Semiramis takes the form of a pigeon. I, however, should probably conclude that the temple in question belongs to Semiramis; that the shrine is Derceto's I can in no wise believe, since even amongst the Egyptians there are some who will not touch fish as food, and they certainly do not observe this restriction in favour of Derceto.

[15]15. There is, however, another sacred story which I had from the lips of a wise man--that the goddess was Rhea, and the shrine the work of Attes. Now this Attes was by nation a Lydian, and he first taught the sacred mysteries of Rhea. [*30] The ritual of the Phrygians and the Lydians and the Samothracians was entirely learnt from Attes. For when Rhea deprived him of his powers, he put off his manly garb and assumed the

[p. 56]

appearance of a woman and her dress, [*31] and roaming over the whole earth he performed his mysterious rites, narrating his sufferings and chanting the praises of Rhea. In the course of his wanderings he passed also into Syria. Now, when the men from beyond Euphrates would neither receive him nor his mysteries, [*32] he reared a temple to himself on this very spot. The tokens of this fact are as follows: She is drawn by lions, she holds a drum in her hand and carries a tower on her head, just as the Lydians make Rhea to do. [*33] He also affirmed that the Galli who are in the temple in no case castrate themselves in honour of Juno, but of Rhea, and this in imitation of Attes. All this seems to me more

[p. 57]

specious than true, for I have heard a different and more credible reason given for their castration.

[16]16. I approve of the remarks about the temple made by those who in the main accept the theories of the Greeks: according to these the goddess is Hera, but the work was carried out by Dionysus, [*34] the son of Semele: Dionysus visited Syria on his journey to Aethiopia. There are in the temple many tokens that Dionysus was its actual founder: for instance, barbaric raiment, Indian precious stones, and elephants' tusks brought by Dionysus from the Aethiopians. Further, a pair of phalli of great size are seen standing in the vestibule, bearing the inscription, "I, Dionysus, dedicated these phalli to Hera my stepmother." This proof satisfies me. And I will describe another curiosity to be found in this temple, a sacred symbol of Dionysus. The Greeks erect phalli in honour of Dionysus, and on these they carry, singular to say, mannikins made of wood, with enormous pudenda; they call these puppets. There is this further curiosity in the temple: as you enter, on the right hand, a small brazen statue meets your eye of a man in a sitting posture, with parts of monstrous size.

[p. 58]

[17]17. These are the legends concerning the founders of the temple. I will proceed to speak of the edifice itself and its position: how it was built and who built it. They affirm that the temple as it exists now is not that which was built originally: the primitive temple fell to pieces in the course of time: the present one they say was the work of Stratonice, the wife of the king of the Assyrians. [*35] This I take to be the Stratonice of whom her stepson was enamoured, and the skill of a doctor detected the intrigue: for the lover, overpowered by the malady of his passion, bewildered by the thought of his shameful caprice, lay sick in silence. He lay sick, and though no ache was in any limb, yet his colour was gone, and his frame was growing frailer day by day. The doctor, seeing that he was suffering from no definite disease, perceived that his malady was none other than love. Many are the symptoms of secret love: languor of vision, change in the voice and complexion, and frequent tears.

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] The doctor, aware of this, acted as follows: he laid his hand on the heart of the young man, and summoned all the domestics in the household. The patient remained tranquil and unmoved on the entrance of the rest, but when his stepmother carne in he grew pale and fell to sweating and trembling, and his heart beat violently. These symptoms betrayed his passion to the doctor.

[18]18. The doctor proceeded to adopt the following cure: Summoning the young man's father, who was racked by anxiety, he explained to him that the young man's malady was no normal malady, but a wrongful action: "he has no painful symptoms; he is possessed by love and madness. He longs to possess what he will never obtain; he loves my wife, whom I will never give up." This was the trick of the wise physician. The father straightway begged the doctor by his prudence and professional skill not to let his son perish. "His malady depended not on his will; it was involuntary. Pray then do not you let your jealousy bring grief on the whole realm, and do not, dear doctor, draw unpopularity on your profession." Such was the unwitting father's request. The doctor replied: "Your request is scandalous. You would deprive me of my wife and outrage the honour of a medical man. I put it to you, what would be your conduct, since you are deprecating mine, if your wife were the object of his guilty love?" He replied that he would not spare his own wife nor would he begrudge his son his life, even though that son were enamoured of his own stepmother: losing one's wife was a less misfortune than losing one's son. The doctor on hearing this said: "Why then offer me these entreaties? In good truth, your wife is the object of his love. What I said to you was all a made-up story." The father

[p. 60]

followed this advice, and handed over his wife and his kingdom to his son, and he himself departed into the region of Babylonia and founded a city on the Euphrates which bore his name: and there he died. Thus it was that our wise doctor detected and cured the malady.

[19]19. Now this Stratonice, when still married to her former husband, saw in a vision Hera exhorting her to rear a temple to this goddess at Hierapolis. Should she neglect to obey, she was menaced by the goddess with manifold evils. The queen began by disregarding the dream, but later, when seized by a dangerous illness, she told the vision to her husband, and appeased Hera, and undertook to raise the temple. Hardly had she recovered when she was despatched by her husband to Hierapolis, and a large sum of money with her, and a large army too, partly to aid in the building operations and partly to ensure her safety. He summoned one of her friends called Combabus, a young man of handsome presence, and said, "Combabus, I know thee for an honest man, and of all my friends I love thee best, and I commend thee greatly alike for thy wisdom and for thy goodwill which thou hast shown to us. At the present moment I have need of all thy confidence, and thus I wish thee to accompany my wife, and to carry out my work, and to perform the sacrifices due, and to command my army. On my return great honour shall fall to thee. Combabus begged and prayed not to be despatched, and not to be entrusted with matters far above his powers--moneys, the lady, the holy work: not merely so, but he feared lest in the future some jealousy might make itself felt as to his relations with Stratonice, as he was unaccompanied should he consent to escort her.

[20]20. The king, however, refused to be moved; so Combabus prayed as an alternative that a respite of

[p. 61]

seven days might be granted him: after that interval he was willing to be despatched after attending to his immediate needs. On obtaining this respite, which was willingly granted, he departed to his house, and throwing himself on the ground, he thus deplored his lot: "Unhappy me! Why this confidence in myself? To what end is this journey, whose results I already see? I am young and the lady whom I escort is fair. This will prove a great and mighty disaster, unless I remove entirely the cause of the evil. Thus I must even perform a mighty deed which will heal all my fears." Saying this he unmanned himself, and he stowed away the mutilated pudenda in a little vessel together with myrrh and honey and spices of various sorts. He sealed this vessel up with a ring which lie wore; and finally he proceeded to dress his wound. As soon as he deemed himself fit to travel he made his way to the king, and before a large company reached the vessel forth and spoke as follows: "Master! This my most precious treasure was stored up in my house, and I loved it well: but now that I am entering on a long journey, I will set it in thy keeping. Do thou keep it well: for it is dearer to me than gold and more precious to me than life. On my return I shall receive it again." The king was pleased to receive the vessel, and after sealing it with another seal he entrusted it to his treasurers to keep.

[21]21. So Combabus from this time forth continued his journey in peace. Arrived at Hierapolis they built the temple with all diligence, and three years passed while they were at their task. Meantime the event came to pass which Combabus had feared. Stratonice began to love him who had been her companion for so long a time: her love passed into an overpowering passion. Those of

[p. 62]

[paragraph continues] Hierapolis affirm that Hera was the willing cause of this trouble: she knew full well that Combabus was an upright man, but she wished to wreak her wrath on Stratonice for her unwillingness to undertake the building of the temple.

22. The queen was at first coy and tried to hide her passion, but when her trouble left her no longer any repose, she openly displayed her irritation and wept the whole day long, and called out repeatedly for Combabus: Combabus was everything to her. At last, in despair at her impotency to master her passion, she sought a suitable occasion for supplicating his love. She was too cautious to admit her passion to a stranger, but her modesty prevented her from facing the situation. Finally she hits on this plan; that she should confront him after she should have drunk deeply of wine; for courage rises after drinking and a repulse seems then less degrading, and actions performed under the influence of wine are set down to ignorance. Thus she acted as she thought best. After supper she entered the chamber in which Combabus dwelt, and besought him, embracing his knees, and she avowed her guilty love. He heard her words with disgust and rejected her advances, reproaching her with drunkenness. She, however, threatened that she would bring on him a great calamity; on which he trembled, and he told her all his story and narrated all that he had done and finally disclosed to her the manifest proofs of his statement. When the queen witnessed this unexpected proof her passion indeed was quenched, but she never forgot her love, but in all her intercourse she cherished the solace of her unavailing affection. The memory of this love is still alive at Hierapolis and is maintained in this way; the women still are enamoured of the Galli, and the Galli again love the women with

[p. 63]

passion; but there is no jealousy at all, and this love passes among them for a holy passion.

[23]23. The king was well informed by Stratonice as to her doings at Hierapolis, for many who came thence brought the tale of her doings. The monarch was deeply moved by the tidings, and before the work was finished summoned Combabus to his presence. Others narrate with respect to this a circumstance wholly untrue; that Stratonice finding her prayers repulsed wrote with her own hand to her husband and accused Combabus of making an attempt upon her modesty; and what the Greeks allege about their Stheneboea and about Phaedra the Cnosian the Assyrians tell in the same way about Stratonice. For my part I do not believe that either Stheneboea nor Phaedra acted thus if Phaedra really loved Hippolytus. However, let the old version remain for what it is worth.

[24]24. When, however, the news was brought to Hierapolis, Combabus took count of the charge and departed in a spirit of full confidence, conscious that the visible proof necessary for his defence had been left in the city his home. On his arrival the king immediately put him in prison under strict guard. Then in the presence of the friends of the accused who had been present when Combabus was commissioned to depart, the king summoned him into open court and began to accuse him of adultery and evil lust; and deeply moved, recounting the confidence he had reposed in his favourite and his long friendship, he arraigned Combabus on three distinct charges: first, that he was an adulterer, secondly, that he had broken his trust, finally, that he had blasphemed the goddess by acting thus while engaged in her service. Many of the bystanders bore witness against him, saying that they had seen the guilty pair embracing.

[p. 64]

[paragraph continues] It was finally agreed that Combabus was worthy of death as his evil deeds had merited.

[25]25. He had stood up to this point in silence, but as he was being led to his fate, he spoke out, and demanded the restoration of his pledge, affirming that he was to be killed not for rebellious conduct against his king, nor for any violation of the king's married life, but solely because of the king's eagerness to possess what he had deposited at the royal court at his departure. The king thereon summoned his treasurer and bade him bring forth what he had committed to his custody. On its production, Combabus removed the seal and displayed the contents of the vessel, and showed how he himself had suffered thereby; adding, "This is just what I feared, O King, when thou didst send me on that errand: I left with a heavy heart, and I did my duty, constrained by sheer necessity. I obeyed my lord and master to mine own undoing. Such as I am, I stand accused of a crime which none but a man in every sense could have committed. The king cried out in amazement at these words, embraced Combabus and said with tears, "What great ruin, Combabus, hast thou wrought upon thyself? What monstrous deed of ill hast thou, alone of men, wrought to thy sorrow? I cannot praise thee, rash spirit, for enduring to suffer this outrage; would that thou hadst never borne it; would that I had never seen its proofs! I needed not this thy defence. But since the deity bath willed it thus, I will grant thee, first and foremost, as thy revenge, the death of the informers: and next there shall follow a mighty gift, a store of silver and countless gold, and raiment of Assyria, and steeds from the royal stud. Thou shalt enter freely to us unannounced and none shall withstand thee: none shall keep thee from my sight, even

[p. 65]

were I by my wife's side." Thus he spake, and thus he acted; the informers were led off straightway to their execution; Combabus was laden with gifts, and the king's attachment to him was increased. No one 6f the Assyrians was deemed equal in wisdom and in fortune to Combabus.

[26]26. On his request that he might complete what was unfinished in the construction of the temple--for he had left it unfinished--he was despatched anew; and he completed the temple, and there he abode. To mark his sense of the virtue and good deeds of his architect, the king granted him a brazen statue of himself to stand in the temple of his construction. And even to the present day this brazen statue is seen standing in the temple, the work of Hermocles of Rhodes. Its form is that of a woman, but the garments are those of a man. [*36] It is said, too, that his most intimate friends, as a proof of their sympathy, castrated themselves like him, and chose the same manner of life. Others there are who bring gods into the story and affirm that Combabus was beloved by Hera; and that it was she who inspired many with the idea of castrating themselves, so that her lover should not be the only one to lament the loss of his virility.

[27]27. Meantime the custom once adopted remains even to-day, and many persons every year castrate themselves and lose their virile powers: whether it be out of sympathy with Combabus, or to find favour with Hera. They certainly castrate themselves, and then cease to wear man's garb; they don women's raiment and perform

[p. 66]

women's tasks. [*37] I have heard the origin of this ascribed to Combabus as well, for the following event occurred to him. A certain foreign woman who had joined a sacred assembly, beholding a human form of extreme beauty and dressed in man's attire, became violently enamoured of him: after discovering that he was unsexed, she took away her life. Combabus accordingly in despair at his incapacity for love, donned woman's attire, that no woman in future might be deceived in the same way. This is the reason of the female attire of the Galli. Enough of Combabus and his story: in the course of my story I shall make mention of the Galli, and of their castration, and of the methods employed to effect it, and of the burial rites wherewith they are buried, and the reasons why they have no ingress to the temple; but before this I am inclined to speak of the site of the temple and of its size: and so I will even speak.

[28]28. The place whereon the temple is placed is a hill: [*38] it lies nearly in the centre of the city, and is surrounded by a double wall. [*39] Of the two walls the one is ancient;

[p. 67]

the other is not much older than our own times. The entrance to the temple faces the north; its size is about a hundred fathoms. [*40] In this entrance those phalli stand which Dionysus erected: [*41] they stand thirty fathoms high.

[p. 68]

[paragraph continues] Into one of these a man mounts twice every year, and he abides on the summit of the phallus for the space of seven days. The reason of this ascent is given as follows: The people believe that the man who is aloft holds converse with the gods, and prays for good fortune for the whole of Syria, and that the gods from their neighbourhood hear his prayers. Others allege that this takes place in memory of the great calamity of Deukalion's time, when men climbed up to mountain tops and to the highest trees, in terror of the mass of waters. To me all this seems highly improbable, and I think that they observe this custom in honour of Dionysus, and I conjecture this from the following fact, that all those who rear phalli to Dionysus take care to place mannikins of wood on the phalli; the reason of this I cannot say, but it seems to me that the ascent is made in imitation of the wooden mannikin.

[29]29. To proceed, the ascent is made in this way; the man throws round himself and the phallus a small chain; afterwards he climbs up by means of pieces of wood attached to the phallus large enough to admit the end of his foot. As he mounts he jerks the chain up his own length, as a driver his reins. Those who have not seen this process, but who have seen those who have to climb palm trees in Arabia, or in Egypt, or any other place, will understand what I mean. When he has climbed to the top, he lets down a different chain, a long one, and drags up anything that he wants, such as wood, clothing, and vases; he binds these together and sits upon them, as it were, on a nest, and he remains there for the space of time that I have mentioned. Many

[p. 69]

visitors bring him gold and silver, and some bring brass; then those who have brought these offerings leave them and depart, and each visitor gives his name. A bystander shouts the name up; and he on hearing the name utters a prayer for each donor; between the prayers he raises a sound on a brazen instrument which, on being shaken, gives forth a loud and grating noise. He never sleeps; for if at any time sleep surprises him, a scorpion creeps up and wakes him, and stings him severely; this is the penalty for wrongfully sleeping. This story about the scorpion is a sacred one, and one of the mysteries of religion; whether it is true I cannot say, but, as it seems to me, his wakefulness is in no small degree due to his fear of falling. So much then for the climbers of the phalli. As for the temple, it looks to the rising sun. [*42]

[30]30. In appearance, and in workmanship, it is like the temples which they build in Ionia, the foundation rises from the earth to the space of two fathoms, and on this rests the temple. The ascent to the temple is built of wood and not particularly wide; as you mount, even the great hall exhibits a wonderful spectacle and it is ornamented with golden doors. The temple within is ablaze with gold and the ceiling in its entirety is golden. There falls upon you also a divine fragrance such as is attributed to the region of Arabia, which breathes on you with a refreshing influence as you mount the long steps, and even when you have departed this fragrance clings to you; nay, your very raiment retains long that sweet odour, and it will ever remain in your memory.

[31]31. But the temple within is not uniform. A special

[p. 70]

sacred shrine is reared within it; the ascent to this likewise is not steep, nor is it fitted with doors, but is entirely open as you approach it. The great temple is open to all; the sacred shrine to the priests alone and not to all even of these, but only to those who are deemed nearest to the gods and who have the charge of the entire administration of the sacred rites. In this shrine are placed the statues, one of which is Hera, the other Zeus, though they call him by another name. Both of these are golden, both are sitting; Hera is supported by lions, Zeus is sitting on bulls. The effigy of Zeus recalls Zeus in all its details--his head, his robes, his throne; nor even if you wished it could you take him for another deity. [*43]

Click to enlarge
FIG. 7.--THE GOD AND GODDESS OF HIERAPOLIS.
 (From a Coin of the 3rd cent. A.D.). Scale 2:1.

[p. 71]

[32]32. Hera, however, as you look at her will recall to you a variety of forms. Speaking generally she is undoubtedly Hera, but she has something of the attributes of Athene, and of Aphrodite, and of Selene, and of Rhea, and of Artemis, and of Nemesis, and of The Fates. In one of her hands she holds a sceptre, in the other a distaff; on her head she bears rays and a tower and she has a girdle wherewith they adorn none but Aphrodite of the sky. [*44] And without she is gilt with gold, and gems of

[p. 72]

great price adorn her, some white, some sea-green, others wine-dark, others flashing like fire. Besides these there are many onyxes from Sardinia and the jacinth and emeralds, the offerings of the Egyptians and of the Indians, Ethiopians, Medes, Armenians, and Babylonians. But the greatest wonder of all I will proceed to tell: she bears a gem on her head called a Lychnis; it takes its name from its attribute. From this stone flashes a great light in the night-time, so that the whole temple gleams brightly as by the light of myriads of candles, but in the day-time the brightness grows faint; the gem has the likeness of a bright fire. There is also another

Click to enlarge
FIG. 8.--THE PHRYGIAN GODDESS (KYBELE) IN THE WEST.
 (From a Roman Lamp.)

[p. 73]

marvel in this image: if you stand over against it, it looks you in the face, and as you pass it the gaze still follows you, and if another approaching from a different quarter looks at it, he is similarly affected.

[33]33. Between the two there stands another image of gold, no part of it resembling the others. This possesses no special form of its own, but recalls the characteristics of other gods. The Assyrians themselves speak of it  a symbol, but they have assigned to it no definite name. They have nothing to tell us about its origin, nor its form: some refer it to Dionysus; others to Deukalion; others to Semiramis; for its summit is crowned by a golden pigeon, [*45] and this is why they allege that it is the effigy of Semiramis. It is taken down to the sea twice in every year to bring up the water of which I have spoken. [*46]

[p. 74]

[34]34. In the body of the temple, as you enter, there stands on the left hand side, a throne for the Sun god; but there is no image upon it, for the effigies of the Sun and Moon are not exhibited. I have learnt, however, the reasons of this practice. They say that religion does not forbid making effigies of the other deities, for the outward form of these deities is known to all; but the Sun and Moon are plain for all to see, and all men behold them. What boots it, therefore, to make effigies of those deities who offer themselves for all to gaze on?

[35]35. Behind this throne stands an effigy of Apollo of an unusual character. All other sculptors think of Apollo as a youth, and represent him in the flower of his age. These artificers alone exhibit the Apollo of their statuary as bearded. They justify their action, and criticise the Greeks and others who set up Apollo as a boy, and appease him in that guise. Their reason is that it is a mark of ignorance to assign imperfect forms to the gods, and they look on youth as imperfection. They have also introduced another strange novelty in sculpture: they, and they alone, represent Apollo as robed. [*47]

[p. 75]

[36]36. I have much to say about his works, and I will tell what is most worthy of admiration. First I will

[p. 76]

speak of the oracle. There are many oracles among the Greeks, and many, too, among the Egyptians, and again in Libya and in Asia there are many too. But these speak not, save by the mouth of priests and prophets: this one is moved by its own impulse, and carries out the divining process to the very end. The manner of his divination is the following: When he is desirous of uttering an oracle, he first stirs in his seat, and the priests straightway raise him up. Should they fail to raise him up, he sweats, and moves more violently than ever.

[p. 77]

[paragraph continues] When they approach him and bear him up, [*48] he drives them round in a circle, and leaps on one after another. At last the high priest confronts him, and questions him on every subject. The god, if he disapproves of any action proposed, retreats into the background; if, however, he happens to approve it, he drives his bearers forward as if they were horses. It is thus that they gather the oracles, and they undertake nothing public or private without this preliminary. This god, too, speaks about the symbol, and points out when it is the due season for the expedition of which I spoke in connexion therewith.

[37]37. I will speak of another wonder, too, which he performed in my presence. The priests were raising him aloft, but he left them on the ground, and was born aloft himself alone.

[38]38. Behind Apollo is the statue of Atlas; [*49] behind that, the statue of Hermes and Eilithyia.

[39]39. Such, then, are the interior decorations of the temple; outside of it there stands a great altar of brass.

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] It contains also countless other brazen effigies of kings and priests. I will mention those which seem most worthy of remembrance. To the left of the temple stands the image of Semiramis, pointing with her right hand to the temple. That image was erected to commemorate the following occurrence: The queen had issued a decree that all the Syrians should worship her as a deity, adding that they were to take no count of the others, not excepting even Hera; and they obeyed her decree. Afterwards, however, when disease and misfortune and grief were inflicted on her, she calmed down from her frenzied infatuation, and avowed herself a mere mortal, and ordered her subjects to turn again to Hera. This is why she stands to-day in this posture, pointing out Hera as the goddess whose grace is to be won, and confessing that she is not a goddess, but that Hera is indeed such.

[40]40. I saw also the effigy of Helen, and of Hecuba, and of Andromache, and of Paris, and of Achilles. I saw also the statue of Nireus, the son of Aglaia, and of Philomela and Procne while yet women, and Tereus changed into a bird; and another effigy of Semiramis and one of Combabus and one of Stratonice of special beauty, and one of Alexander like to this. Sardanapalus stands by his side in a different form and in a different garb.

[41]41. In the great court oxen of great size browsed horses, too, are there, and eagles and bears and lions, who never hurt mankind but are all sacred and all tame. [*50]

[p. 79]

[42]42. Many priests also are in attendance, some of whom sacrifice the victims, others bring libations, others are called fire-bearers, and others altar attendants. In my presence more than 300 of these were present at a sacrifice; all had vestments of white and wore caps on their heads. Every year a new high priest is appointed. [*51] He, and he alone, is clad in purple and crowned with a golden tiara.

[43]43. Besides this there is another multitude of holy men, pipers, flute players, [*52] and Galli; and women frenzied and fanatic. [*53]

[p. 80]

[44]44. A sacrifice is offered up twice every day, and they are all present at this: To Zeus they sacrifice in silence, neither chanting nor playing, but when they sacrifice to Hera they sing, they pipe, and shake rattles. About this ceremony they could tell me nothing certain. [*54]

[45]45. There is too a lake [*55] in the same place, not far

[p. 81]

from the temple in which many sacred fishes of different kinds are reared. [*56] Some of these grow to a great size; they are called by names, and approach when called. I saw one of these ornamented with gold, and on its back fin a golden design was dedicated to the temple. I have often seen this fish, and he certainly carried this design.

[46]46. The depth of the lake is immense. I never tested it myself, but they say that it is in depth more than 200 fathoms. In the midst of this lake stands an altar of stone. You would think at first sight that it was floating and moving in the water, and many deem that it is so. The truth seems to me that it is supported by a column of great size, based on the bottom of the lake. It is always decked with ribbons, and spices are therein, and many every day swim in the lake with crowns on their heads performing their acts of adoration.

[47]47. At this lake great assemblies meet, and these are called descents into the lake because all their deities go down into this lake, amongst whom Hera [*57] first advances

[p. 82]

so that Zeus may not see the fish first, for if this were to happen they say that one and all would perish. And Zeus comes indeed intending to see these fish, but she, standing before him, keeps hint at bay, and with many supplications holds him off.

[48]48. But the greatest of these sacred assemblies are those held on the sea coast. [*58] About these, however, I have nothing certain to say. I was never present at their celebrations, nor did I undertake the journey thither; but I did see what they do on their return, and I will at once tell you. Each member of the assembly carries a vessel full of water. The vessels are sealed with wax; those who carry the water do not unseal the vessels and then pour out the water; but there is a certain holy cock [*59] who dwells hard by the lake. This bird, on

[p. 83]

receiving the vessels from the bearers, inspects the seal, and after receiving a reward for this action he breaks the thread and picks away the wax, and many minae are collected by the cock by this operation. After this the bearers carry the water into the temple and pour it forth, and they depart when the sacrifice is finished.

[49]49. The greatest of the festivals that they celebrate is that held in the opening of spring; some call this the Pyre, others the Lamp. On this occasion the sacrifice is performed in this way. They cut down tall trees and set them up in the court; then they bring goats and sheep and cattle and hang them living to the trees; they add to these birds and garments and gold and silver work. After all is finished, they carry the gods around the trees and set fire under; [*60] in a moment all is in a blaze. To

[p. 84]

this solemn rite a great multitude flocks from Syria and all the regions around. Each brings his own god and the statues which each has of his own gods.

[50]50. On certain days a multitude flocks into the temple, and the Galli in great numbers, sacred as they are, perform the ceremonies of the men and gash their arms and turn their backs to be lashed. [*61] Many bystanders play on the pipes the while many beat drums; others sing divine and sacred songs. All this performance takes place outside the temple, and those engaged in the ceremony enter not into the temple.

[51]51. During these days they are made Galli. As the Galli sing and celebrate their orgies, frenzy falls on many of them and many who had come as mere spectators afterwards are found to have committed the great act. I will narrate what they do. Any young man who has resolved on this action, strips off his clothes, and with a loud shout bursts into the midst of the crowd, and picks up a sword from a number of swords which I suppose have been kept ready for many years for this purpose. He takes it and castrates himself [*62] and then runs wild through the city, bearing in his hands what he has cut off. He casts it into any house at will, and from

[p. 85]

this house he receives women's raiment and ornaments. [*63] Thus they act during their ceremonies of castration.

[52]52. The Galli, when dead, are not buried like other men, but when a Gallus dies his companions carry him out into the suburbs, and laying him out on the bier on which they had carried him they cover him with stones, and after this return home. They wait then for seven days, after which they enter the temple. Should they enter before this they would be guilty of blasphemy.

[53]53. The laws which they observe are the following: Anyone who has seen a corpse may not enter the temple the same day; but afterwards, when he has purified himself, he enters. But those who are of the family of the corpse wait for thirty days, and after shaving their heads they enter the temple, but before they have done this it is forbidden.

[54]54. They sacrifice bulls and cows alike and goats and sheep; [*64] pigs alone, which they abominate, are neither sacrificed nor eaten. Others look on swine without disgust, but as holy animals. [*65] Of birds the dove seems

[p. 86]

the most holy to them, [*66] nor do they think it right to harm these birds, and if anyone have harmed them

[p. 87]

unknowingly they are unholy for that day, and so when the pigeons dwell with the men they enter their rooms and commonly feed on the ground.

[55]55. I will speak, too, about those who come to these sacred meetings and of what they do. As soon as a man comes to Hierapolis he shaves his head and his eyebrows; [*67] afterwards he sacrifices a sheep [*68] and cuts up its flesh and eats it; he then lays the fleece on the ground, places his knee on it, but puts the feet and head of the animal on his own head and at the same time he prays that the gods may vouchsafe to receive him, and he promises a greater victim hereafter. When this is performed he crowns his head with a garland and the heads of all those engaged in the same procession. Starting from his house he passes into the road, previously bathing himself and drinking cold water. He always sleeps on the ground, for he may not enter his bed till the completion of his journey.

[56]56. In the city of Hierapolis a public host receives him, suspecting nothing, for there are special hosts attached to each city, and these receive each guest according to his country. These are called by the Assyrians teachers, because they teach them all the solemn rites.

[p. 88]

[57]57. They sacrifice victims not in the temple itself, but when the sacrificer has placed his victim at the altar and poured a libation [*69] he brings the animal home alive, and returning to his own house he slays his victim and utters prayers.

[58]58. There is also another method of sacrifice, as follows: They adorn live victims with ribbons and throw them headlong down from the temple's entrance, and these naturally die after their fall. Some actually throw their own children down, not as they do the cattle, but they sew them into a sack and toss them down, visiting them with curses and declaring that they are not their children, but are cows. [*70]

[59]59. They all tattoo themselves--some on the hands

[p. 89]

and some on the neck--and so it comes that all the Assyrians bear stigmata. [*71]

[60]60. They have another curious custom, in which they agree with the Troezenians alone of the Greeks. I will explain this too. The Troezenians have made a law for their maidens and youths alike never to marry till they have dedicated their locks to Hippolytus; and this they do. It is the same at Hierapolis. The young men dedicate the first growth on their chin, then they let down the locks of the maidens, which have been sacred from their birth; they then cut these off [*72] in the temple and place them in vessels, some in silver vessels, some in gold, and after placing these in the temple and inscribing the name on the vessel they depart. I performed this act myself when a youth, and my hair remains still in the temple, with my name on the vessel.

Footnotes

^41:1 Identified with the ruins of modern Mumbidj, on a route from Aleppo to the junction of the Sajur River with the Euphrates, from which point it is distant 14 1/2 miles (23 kilometres). Cf. Smith's Dict. of Greek and Roman Geog.--HIERAPOLIS. The distance accords with that given by a fifth century pilgrim, ? Etheria [Silvia]; cf. Corp. Script. Eccl. Lat., xxxix. p. 61, cited by Hogarth, Jour. Hell. Stud., xiv. (1907-8), p. 183. Strabo (xvi. i. 28) gives the distance as four schoeni from the river. For early explorers' descriptions of the site, see quotations in the Appendix, pp. <page 92>-<page 95>. Many of the fine remains of Roman, Saracenic, Seljukian and Moslem times are now in ruins, but the sacred lake and other features are still to be seen (see note [*55]).

^41:2 Cf.  section [*31]. By the words "Assyrian Hera" Lucian tersely identifies the goddess and distinguishes her attributes:--"Hera," because mated ( section 31) to a "Zeus ", "Assyrian," because she is to be distinguished from the classical conception of the deity. For this use of the term Assyrian in the sense of North Syrian (or Aramaean), cf. Rob.-Smith, Eng. Hist. Rev., 1887, pp. 312, 313; and note Lucian's reference to himself below as an "Assyrian born." On the name of the goddess, Atargatis, which appears on local coins and is mentioned by Strabo, Pliny, Macrobius, etc., see Introduction, pp. <page 1>, <page 21>; and note [*25] below.

^41:3 Its name in Hittite and subsequent Assyrian period has not been recognised. "Bambyce" seems to be the earliest name substantiated, and it came to be called "Hierapolis" ("the sacred city") by the Greeks. Strabo (xvi. i. 28) mentions another name, Edessa, but this is an obvious error. Pliny states that the local Syrian name was Mabog, Nat. Hist. v. 23 (19),  section 81 (Ed. Detlefsen).

^42:4 "An Assyrian born"--actually born about A.D. 125 at Samsat, on the Euphrates. The place in Hittite times, of which there are traces [cf. Land of the Hittites (hereafter cited L. H.), pp. 130, 131; Corp. Inscr. Hit. (1900), p. 14, pl. xvii.; Humann and Puchstein, Reisen, Atlas, pl. xlix. 1-3], was on the Mitannian and later the Assyrian frontier, and by the Assyrians several times attacked, as in 1120 B.C. and again about 885 B.C. About 750 B.C. it was in possession of the Vannic kings, and it was finally annexed to the Assyrian empire about 743 B.C. Nineveh fell to the Medes in 606. After the period of Persian domination it became first capital of the province of Commagene in the Greek kingdom of Syria. The district was later ruled by independent princes of Seleucid extraction. Subsequently the seat of government was transferred to Hierapolis.

^42:5 Archaeological research hardly bears out this statement. Cf. inter alia Hilprecht, Exploration in Bible Lands (1903); King and Hall, Egypt and Western Asia in the Light of Recent Discoveries (1907). Cf. Herodotus, ii. 2 et seq.

^43:6 Hercules of Tyre. Cf. Herodotus, ii. 44, who records the local tradition that the temple was 2,300 years old, and convinced himself that this Hercules was a god of very great antiquity. Rawlinson (Hist. of Phoenicia, p. 330) points out his identity with Melkarth, who originally represented one aspect of Baal. Similarly the Hittite god represented in the rock sculpture at Ivriz in Asia Minor (L. H., pl. lvii. and pp. 192-195) was identified by the Greeks with Hercules; and is recognised by Frazer (Adonis, Attis and Osiris, p. 97) as identical with the Baal of Tarsus. Cf. also Ramsay, Luke the Physician, pp. 171-179, and a note in his Pauline and other Studies, pp. 172-173, and note [*47] below.

^43:7 The Phoenician Astarte ['Astart], the goddess of productivity in Nature, particularly in the animal world, and hence the guardian of births. Like the Dea Syria, she is differentiated only by local custom or tradition from other aspects of the Mother-goddess. As the natural consort and counterpart of Baal, who embodied the generative principle, "bringing all things to life everywhere," and thus regarded as the sun-god, she was queen of heaven, and hence the moon-goddess. Another symbolism connected with the [p. 44] legend which follows makes her the Cow-goddess in relation to the Bull-god. Cf. Robertson-Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 477. These purely feminine attributions reflect a patriarchal state of society, with the male god dominant. (Cf. the interesting remarks by Rob. Smith in the Eng. Hist. Rev., 1887, p. 316.) Among the Greeks and Romans, who recognised in Baal their Zeus or Jupiter, the goddess appeared most like to Aphrodite or Venus, whose prototype she was. She is the Ashtoreth for whom Solomon erected a shrine (2 Kings, ii. 5, 33), which was defiled by Josiah (2 Kings, xxiii. 13), who "brake in pieces the images and cut down the groves." In cult and in name she is the local form of the Babylonian Ishtar, see Introduction, pp. <page 1>, <page 16>.

^44:8 Cf. Herodotus, i. 4, iv. 45; Pausanias, vii. 4, i.; ix. 19, i., etc.

^44:9 Zeus, as a bull-god; see also the allusion in  section [*31], where the "Zeus" of Hierapolis is represented sitting on bulls, as a counterpart to the goddess who is seated on lions. For the identification of the Hittite "Zeus" with the bull, see Introduction, pp. <page 5>, <page 10>; and Figs. 2, 3; cf. Fig. 7.

^45:10 Cf. "The city stood on a height a little distance from the sea" (Strabo, xvi. ii. 18). The temple is figured on coins from the site (see our illustration, Fig. 6; and cf. Hill on "Some Graeco-Phoenician Shrines," in Jour. Hell. Stud., xxxi., 1911, pl. iii., No. 16, etc.). The outer court was approached by steps, and its interior was screened to view from without. It had a facade of columns, and was enclosed by a pilastered wall or cloister. It was open to the sky and a conical obelisk rising from the interior symbolised the cult. The sanctuary was raised by a further flight of steps; its approach was ornamented with pilasters, cornice and pediment, and a roof protected the altar and shrine within (cf. Perrot and Chipiez, Histoire, iii. 60, Engl. transl. Phoen., p. 61; Rawlinson, Phoenicia, p. 146; Evans, Mykenaean Tree and Pillar Cult, p. 40; Frazer, Adonis, p. 11, note 1, with bibl.). The temples at Hierapolis and at Carchemish were similarly approached by steps.

^45:11 Differing, if at all, only by local attributes from the Sidonian Astarte. Cf. Cicero, De natura deorum, iii. 23, 59; also see, for a useful summary of the argument, Bennett, Relig. Cults associated with the Amazons (New York, 1912), p. 50.

^45:12 For the myth of Adonis, with bibl., see Frazer, Adonis, Attis, and Osiris, Ch. i. [p. 46] The legend of the wild boar does not survive in the story of Tammuz, but it appears in one version of the death of Attis. It suggests a totemistic origin.

^46:13 Cf.  section section [*55] and [*60] below. On the custom of hair-offering among the Semites, cf. Robertson-Smith, Relig. Semites, p. 325 ff.; also Frazer, Adonis, etc., p. 34.

^46:14 A custom of similar character commonly attached itself to the worship of the Great Mother in her various forms (cf. Herod. i. 199; Strabo, xv. i. 20), being regarded as an honourable devotion to her service (Strabo, xi. xiv. 16); it was obligatory in Lydia (Herodotus, i. 93). Cf., inter alia, Ramsay, Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia, i. 94, 115; Cumont, in Pauly's Real-Encyclopadie (Wissowa), 1901, iv., DEA SYRIA, col. 2242; Frazer, Fortnightly Review, Dec., 1904, p. 985. For the survival of the custom on old Hittite sites, cf. Strabo, xii. iii. 32, 34, 36; ibid. ii. 3, etc.). Belin de Ballu, Oeuvres de Lucien, v. p. 141, n. 1, cites a similar custom obligatory before marriage (Chez les Angiles, peuples d'Afrique, dont parla Pomponius Mela, liv. I, ch. 8). Cf. also [p. 46] the comprehensive review of the question by Farnell, Greece and Babylon, p. 269 ff, and the valuable resume by Cumont in his Religions Orientales, p. 319, n. 41. The significance of the connection with a stranger as a relic of exogamy is discussed by Perrot and Chipiez, Histoire de l'Art, Phenicie, pp. 258-261, and developed by S. Reinach, Myth. Cultes, I. (1905), p. 79. But cf. Frazer, Adonis, etc., p. 50 ff.

^47:15 The apparent identity is discussed by Frazer, Adonis, Attis, and Osiris, pp. 357, etc. Prof. Newberry tells us that there are instructive points of relationship traceable in the early evidences of the Cult of Osiris in Egypt. The familiar conception of Osiris, however, as King of the Dead, is, in our opinion, traceable to ancestor- and king-worship.

^47:16 Cf. Plutarch, Isis et Osiris, pp. 12-20 et seq. The legend is rendered by Frazer, op. cit., pp. 270-273.

^47:17 The Adonis, or Nahr Ibrahim, is a short river flowing down from the Lebanon through precipitous gorges rich in foliage, and entering the sea just south of Gebal (Byblos), a [p. 48] short distance only northwards from Beyrout. All visitors are impressed by the grandeur and beauty of its valley, particularly in the higher reaches.

^48:18 Cf. Maundrell, Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem, (1699, 6th edit., p. 35), March 17: "The water was stained to a surprising redness, and as we observed in travelling, had discoloured the sea a great way into a reddish hue, occasioned doubtless by a sort of minium, or red earth, washed into the river by the violence of the rain."

^48:19 This is the correct explanation.

^49:20 Probably at Aphaca, now Afka, near the source of the Nahr Ibrahim, where the cult was maintained until the time of Constantine, who destroyed the shrine owing to the licentious nature of the orgies in vogue (Eusebius, Vita Constantina, iii. 55). At the present day little survives of the ancient buildings except some Roman ruins.

^49:21 This widespread tribute to the shrine of Hierapolis at once reveals the Dea Syria as an aspect of the Great Mother, who under various names was worshipped in the several countries mentioned by Lucian, namely, in Arabia as 'Athtar [a male equivalent, vide Robertson-Smith, Relig. Semites, p. 58], in Phoenicia as 'Astart (Ashtoreth), in Babylonia and Assyria (in varying characters) as Ishtar. Hierapolis, with its hordes of pilgrims, its living worship and frenzied ceremonies, must have been like the Mecca of to-day.

^51:22 This version of the deluge, though associated by Lucian's Greek informants with Deucalion, is clearly of eastern origin, having little resemblance to the Greek legend, and much in common with the Babylonian versions, viz., the story of Xisuthros, recorded by Berosus, and partly preserved; the legend of Tsit-napishtim in the epic of Gilgamesh, preserved on seventh century tablets from the library of Assurbanipal (and independently appearing on tablets of a king of the first dynasty of Babylon, dating from about 2I00 B.C.); and lastly with the Biblical story of Noah in Genesis. A fundamental difference is that in the Greek legend only Deucalion and Pyrrha were saved, and mankind was subsequently renewed miraculously in response to the oracle of Themis. Lucian's account of the animals coming in couples has its parallel in the Babylonian text: "With all living seed of every kind I filled it, . . . the cattle of the field, and the beasts of the field, . . . all of them I brought in" (transl. by King, Babylonian Religion, p. 132. q.v.).

^52:23 For a further reference to this custom, see  section [*48]. "The Sea" in this regard is to be interpreted as the Euphrates River, as explained by Philostratus, Vita Apol., i. 20; of. Rob. Smith, Engl. Hist. Rev., 1887, p. 312.

^52:24 Semiramis, mythical founder with Ninus of Nineveh; daughter of the fish goddess Derceto; confused in myth or identified with Ishtar (Astarte). The legends of Semiramis are given by Diodorus (ap. Ctesias), II. i. The historical character of Semiramis and her identity with Sammu###7769###amat, wife of Samsi-Adad (c. B.C. 820)--son of the Assyrian king Shalmeneser II.--mother of Adad-nirari III., and the development of the myth from historical origins, have been recently demonstrated by Lehmann-Haupt, "Die Hist. Semiramis and ihre Zeit" (D. O. G., Publ. Tubingen, 1910), on the basis of a new inscription of hers found at Assur, together with that from Nimroud, in which her name appears. The student will find early but instructive contributions on the subject by Rob.-Smith and Sayce in the Engl. Hist. Rev., 1887, p. 303, and 1888, p. 504.

^52:25 Derceto, identified with Atargatis by Pliny, Nat. Hist. v. 19; indeed, the two names are linguistically similar. That Atargatis was the name of the goddess worshipped at Hierapolis is stated by Strabo (xvi. i. 27), and confirmed by the local coins and other sources (see Introduction, <page 21>, and note ). Atargatis, according to the [p. 53] scholiast on Germanicus' "Aratus," was of local origins, being born in the Euphrates, like Aphrodite from the foam of the sea. (Cf. Rob.-Smith, Relig. Semites, p. 175, and notes on  section [*45] below.) The name Atargatis is a compound of ATHAR (Phoen. 'Astart, Heb. 'Ashtoreth) with 'ATTI or 'ATTAH (vide Koenig in Hasting's Abrig. Dict., p. 70 b); or in Aramaic 'ATHAR and 'ATHE (cf. Ed. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, i., 1st ed., p. 246,  section 205 ff). Frazer (Adonis, etc., pp. 529, 130) points out that the compound according to this derivation includes the name of the Cilician goddess 'Atheh, consort of Baal, as well as that of Astarte or Ishtar, amounting thus to Ishtar-Atheh, the latter being presumably a Cilician aspect of the former. Thus far there is no difficulty; but Pliny further describes the goddess as "monstrous" (prodigiosa), and his identification with Derceto suggests the familiar fish goddess of Askalon. Moreover, travellers have seen local representations of the characteristic "mermaid" form (see note [*26]). Yet in what follows Lucian is careful to distinguish Derceto from the "Hera" of Hierapolis, who is seated on a lion-throne ( section [*31]), and never assumes any fish-like or other monstrous aspect on the local coins. (Cf. also Dussaud, in Rev. Archeologique, 5904, ii. p. 258.) Assuming the identity of Atargatis with Derceto to be correct, it is more consistent with Lucian's observations ( section section I, [*14]-[*16], [*31], [*32]), and with the argument developed in our Introduction, to see embodied in Atargatis that local aspect of the great Nature-goddess that typified the productive powers of waters (in generating fishes, etc.), and that in this capacity she was accorded at Hierapolis a separate shrine and rites, which none the less formed a part of the general worship of the Universal Mother. It is interesting to speculate how all strains of evidence would be reconciled and explained if it could be shown that "Atheh" was really a local fish-goddess. On the whole question, see further Cumont, "Dea Syria," in Pauly's Real-Encyclopadie (Wissowa), 1901, iv., col. 2236, ff.

^54:26 Cf. Maundrell, Journey from Aleppo to the Euphrates (1699), relates that he saw "on the side of a large well a stone with three figures carved on it, in Basso Relievo. They were two Syrens, which, twining their fishy tails together, made a seat, on which was placed sitting a naked woman, her arms and the Syrens on each side mutually entwined" (Appendix, <page 91>). This sculpture was apparently seen also by Pocock, who describes it as a stone about four feet long and three wide, on which there was a relief of two winged persons holding a sheet behind a woman, a little over her head; they seem to carry her on their fishy tails which join together, and were probably designed to represent the Zephyrs, carrying Venus to the sea (quoted in the Appendix, <page 93>).

Other famous Syrian shrines of Derceto were at Carnion and Askelon, and at the latter also her effigy represented a mermaid (Hastings, Abr. Dict., p. 70). On the general subject, see Cumont, in Pauly's Real-Ency., "Dea Syria," iv., col. 2237; Robertson-Smith, Religion of the Semites, pp. 174-5; also Dussaud, op. cit., p. 243.

^54:27 We take this to refer to the effigy of the Dea Syria (vide  section [*31], etc.). We must not forget, however, the small figure of the naked goddess supported by "mermaids" noticed by Maundrell and Pocock.

^54:28 Cf.  section [*45], and see note [*56]. The origins of this custom are interestingly discussed by Cumont, Les Religions Orientales, p. 357, note 36, where he quotes Ramsay in support of his contention that the poor quality of the fish was the underlying cause of this apparent "totemic prohibition." But see Dussaud, Rev. Arch., 1904, ii. 247. See also Belin de Ballu, in his Oeuvres de Lucien (Paris, 1789), p. 149, note 2. Ancient superstitions and uses are recited by Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxxii. 16.

^55:29 See  section [*54] and note [*65].

^55:30 RHEA.--Not the Cretan goddess (Diod. v. 66), but Kybele, with whom the Greeks settled in Asia Minor identified her (Strabo, x. iii. 15; Farnell, Cults, iii. vi.). For the Minoan goddess, see especially Evans, The Palace of Knossos, Annual British School at Athens (1900-1901), pp. 29, 30; and his Mykenaean Tree and Pillar Cult,  section 22. On the cult of the goddess in Asia Minor, see especially Ramsay, in numerous works (Bibl. L. H., pp. 393-4), e.g., Jour. R. Asiatic Soc., 1883, and in Hastings' Dict. Bib., extra vol., p. 122 ff. The points of resemblance to Atargatis, and the relationship of both with the Hittite goddess, are discussed in our Introduction, pp. <page 20>, <page 26>, and note [*69]. (Cf. also Farnell, Greece and Babylon, pp. 62-63.) On the cult transferred to Italy, see Cumont, Oriental Relig. in Rom. Pag., 1911, p. 46 ff., and our Illustration, Fig. 8, <page 72>.

^56:31 See also  section section 27, 51. Cf. the legends that Dionysus received woman's clothes from Rhea at Cybela (Apollod. iii. v. 1); and that Hercules, having yielded up his weapons, including his axe, received woman's dress from Omphale (Ovid, Fasti, ii. 305 ff; Diodorus, iv. ii.; etc.).

^56:32 It is instructive to note that the Mitannians, who occupied the eastern side of the Euphrates in the fifteenth and fourteenth centuries B.C., though in some way related to the Hittites, embraced ethnic elements whose deities were radically different, including the Vedic cycle, Mithras, Varuna, etc. Cf. Winckler, Milted. d. Deut. Orient. Ges., No. 35 (Dec., 1907), p. 51 (transl. Williams, Liv. Ann. Arch., iv. p. 93, Extract xxiv.). In post-Hittite times the increasing tendency to local development must have emphasised the distinction between the Assyrian and the Phrygian conceptions of the goddess.

^56:33 Cf.  section [*32], etc., where Lucian states that she holds a sceptre in one hand and a distaff in the other, and illustration, <page 70>. The "tower on her head," i.e., mural crown, emblematic of the goddess as protectress of her cities, is an invariable feature on all but the latest coins, where it sometimes degenerates (see Frontispiece, Nos. r, 8). Compare the chief Hittite goddess (see Fig. 1), and Kybele or Rhea (Fig. 8, <page 72>), who is described as turrita by Lucretius.

^57:34 Cf. Diod., iv. (i.). On the cult of Dionysus, cf. Farnell, Cults, v. His legends, rites and mysteries largely borrowed from Asia Minor (Furtwangler in Roscher's Lexikon). Identified with Attis and Adonis by Socrates and Plutarch; and with Osiris also by Herodotus (cf. Frazer, op. cit., p. 357). Macrobius recognises all four as sun-gods.

On the further reference to mannikins, see Hartmann, "Ein Phallobates," in Jahrbuch d. K. Deut. Archa. Inst., xxvii., 1912 (i.), p. 54. For this reference we are indebted to Professor Bosanquet. Dragendorff seems to us to rightly doubt this writer's chief inference (loc. cit. in an editorial note at the end).

^58:35 The stories of Stratonice and of Combabus which follow,  section section [*17]-[*25], are not of special interest. They seem to include garbled local details from the legends of Istar and Tammuz, and to be introduced as the fulfilment of Lucian's wish to explain the origin of emasculation and other customs among the Galli (see end of  section [*15]). None the less, Stratonice is a recognisable historical character, wife of Seleucus Nicator (of Antioch), at the close of the third century B.C., and Movers (i., p. 687) has urged the identity of Combabus with the god of Hierapolis. On the resemblance of the name to the Elamite Khumbaba, cf. Ungnad, D. Gilgamesch-Epos, p. 77, n. For this reference we are indebted to Professor Lehmann-Haupt. Six (Num. Chron., 1878, p. 117) explains the main feature of Lucian's story in these words: ". . . la reine se fit initier aux actes religieux; et prit part aux ceremonies que celebraient les Syriens en l'honneur de leur deesse."

^65:36 It would be inconsistent with what Lucian says in  section [*27] and elsewhere on the dress of the Galli to believe that this brazen statue really represented Combabus. His description suggests rather the figure of an Amazon.

^66:37 Cf.  section [*15] and, especially,  section [*51] below.

^66:38 The exact position is now a matter of doubt (see the extracts in the Appendix (<page 94>) and Hogarth in Jour. Hell. Stud., xiv. p. 189). Pocock says: "About two hundred paces within the east gate there is raised ground, on which probably stood a temple of the Syrian goddess Atargatis. . . . I conjectured it to be about 200 feet in front. . . . I observed a low wall running from it to the gate . . . (cf. note [*42],  section [*29]). It is probable that all the space north of the temple belonged to it."

^66:39 So the wall surrounding the royal Syro-Hittite city of Senjerli was doubled (Von Luschan and others, Ausgr. in Sendschirli, Berlin, 1893, etc.); likewise that of the Hittite township on Songrus Eyuk at Sakje Geuzi (Liv. Annals of Arch. v. 65). No traces of the original walls of Hierapolis [p. 67] remain: those described by our earliest travellers seem to be of Byzantine type. [See Appendix, pp. <page 91>, <page 93>, <page 96>.]

^67:40 The orgyia = 4 pexeis, i.e., 6 feet 1 inch. There is some general correspondence between the details supplied by Lucian and by Pocock. If the latter rightly judged the position we may infer that the temple was 600 feet in length, with a frontage of about 200 feet.

^67:41 Above,  section [*16]. Similarly twin pillars were erected in the temple of Hercules at Tyre (Herodotus, ii. 44), and in the temple of Solomon at Jerusalem (1 Kings, vii. 15, 21), "eighteen cubits high apiece right and left of the porch." At Paphos it would appear from the coins that single pillars stood in the side chapels as well as the twin pillars and cone in the sanctuary. Gold models from Mykenae show pairs of horns at the base and top of such pillars (Schuchhardt, Schliemann's Excavations, p. 199, fig. 183), suggesting emblems of generative power, and hence in this sense a phallic motive. On top of the horns is the dove, the emblem of the Goddess Mother. The question of original motive, however, is controversial. Cf. Evans, "Mykenaean Tree and Pillar Cult" (Jour. Hell. Stud., 1907, pp. 99-203); Ramsay, "Relig. of Asia Minor," in Hastings' Dict. Bible, extra vol., p. 111; and the phallic character is disputed by Rob.-Smith, Relig. Sem., p. 457. For the pillar cult in Asia Minor, see Ramsay, loc. cit. The pillar does not appear on Hittite mural decoration; but there is a remarkable monument at Fassiler, in Asia Minor, nearly 8 yards high, the width narrowing from 8 yards at the bottom to 1 yard at the top. Upon the base is carved a group showing a great figure upon two lions, with a smaller figure between the latter. The design has obvious Hittite characteristics, but the execution is crude (Ramsay, Cities of St. Paul, p. 134, fig. 7; L. H. pp. 175-176).

This class of emblem is to be distinguished from the sacred [p. 68] cones of the goddess in Syria and Asia Minor, such as are found at Mallus, Perga, Byblus, etc., cf. Fig. 6, <page 45>.

^69:42 cf.  section [*28], where Lucian says that the entrance faced the north.

^70:43 See the design upon the remarkably instructive coin [p. 71] now at Vienna, reproduced in Fig. 7. On the identification of "Hera," the lion goddess, and "Zeus," the bull-god, in the Hittite pantheon, see Introduction, pp. <page 8> ff., and Figs. 2, 3, 4. Macrobius speaks of them as "Hadad" and "Atargatis," names confirmed by inscriptions found at Delos (see <page 25>). Lucian's description of the sanctuary, with its common shrine of "Hera" and "Zeus," and the details by which he distinguishes these deities, form the basis of our argument in the Introduction (pp. <page 11>, <page 23>, <page 27>), that this god and goddess are identical with the chief Hittite male and female deities, who are "mated" in the sculptures at Yasily Kaya. The historical inference is that the origins of the temple date from the period of Hittite supremacy; and this conclusion is in seeming agreement with what Lucian says in  section [*17] of the antiquity of the original temple. Subsequently, as the Hittite power declined, their god lost predominance, and the cult of the Mother Goddess developed its local tendencies. The rites and institutions in the worship at Hierapolis which Lucian now proceeds to describe are naturally those of his own time, but here and there (as in  section section [*44], [*47]) traces of the original dual nature of the cult may be detected.

^71:44 This description of the effigy distinguishes the original goddess from the naked or partly clad goddess, with hands to her breasts, with which she is commonly identified in later symbolism and modern interpretation. It accords, moreover, well with the pictures of the goddess upon coins, on which she is always fully clothed and usually girdled. [p. 72] (See Introduction, <page 15>; also Frontispiece and Figs. 5, 7.) For a familiar aspect of Rhea (Kybele) see our illustration, Fig. 8, taken from a Roman lamp, published in Smith's Small. Class. Dict.--RHEA. A similar design appears on several lamps in the British Museum. For the girdle in Hittite art, see L. H., p. 112 (Marash), p. 527 (Carchemish), etc.

^73:45 This object, "with characteristics of the other gods," etc., is hardly explained by the later structure of Roman character which appears upon the coin of the third century A.D. (cf. Fig.7, and <page 23>); but in sculptures at Fraktin in Southern Asia Minor (L. H., xlvii.) there are two groups. In the one there is a shrine and image of a god, whom a warrior-priest seems to be worshipping. In the other the Great Mother is enthroned, with a priestess pouring out an oblation before her. In each case between the deity and the worshipper there rises a special form of altar, with pedestal and flat round top (see Fig. 4, <page 24>). The pedestal takes the form of a human body, from waist downwards, being swathed by many cross folds of a fringed cloth or garment. Upon the top is perched a dove or pigeon. The bird appears similarly placed on a similar altar at Yarre (Crowfoot, Jour. Hell. Stud. xix., 1899, fig. 4, pp. 40-45). The altar is shown conventionally at Eyuk (see Fig. 3). For the dove in Hittite symbolism, see note [*65], and Introduction, pp. <page 14>, <page 15>.

^73:46 See above,  section [*13], and below,  section [*48].

^74:47 It may reasonably be suspected that the empty throne for the sun-god ( section [*34]) was in reality an altar to this "bearded and robed Apollo." It is also clear that Lucian regards this form of the god as native; and it is of interest to consider what Oriental or Syrian deity is indicated, and for what reasons he became identified in the Greek mind with Apollo.

In the first place it is important to recall a passage from Macrobius, which amplifies Lucian's account and seems to confirm our surmise. In the Saturnalia (I. xvii.  section section 66, 67) he says: "The Hierapolitans, a Syrian people, assign all the powers and attributes of the sun to a bearded image which they call Apollo. His face is represented with a long [p. 75] pointed beard, and he wears a calathos on his head. His body is protected with a breastplate. In his right hand he holds upright a spear, on the top of which is a small image of Victory; in his left is something like a flower. From the top of his shoulders there hangs down behind a cloak bordered with serpents. . . . Near him are eagles, represented as in flight: at his feet is the image of a woman, with two other female forms right and left; a dragon enfolds them with his coils." With the last sentence of this extract we are not concerned: it possibly refers to features of the shrine added since Lucian's days. We are left then with the conception of a native solar divinity, bearded and robed, and identified on general grounds with Apollo. Why, then, with Apollo?

The beard presents no difficulty, for in early art the Greek Apollo was frequently represented with this feature (e.g., see Farnell, Cults, figs. xvii. and xxiii. and p. 329). In myth Apollo was twin-brother of Artemis; and in the Iliad he was definitely allied with the Trojans. Further, the attribute lukios or lukeios suggests to some scholars an origin in Lycia; while others derive him from the East or from Egypt. However that may be, most scholars are agreed that some aspects of the god are associated with primitive Nature-worship, and there is a general suspicion of an Oriental or Asiatic element in his cult. (See especially the Oxford lectures of Wilamowitz, 1908, "Apollo," p. 30 ff.) This conclusion seems to be supported by the character and seasons of his festivals in Greece. In particular, the Theophania at Delphi, celebrating the return of the sun at springtime, and the pyanepsia at Athens, the harvest-thanksgiving, while natural to any pastoral country, are particularly apposite to the worship of the Great Mother. (For similar festivals in Hittite rites, cf. L. H., pp. 239, 359) Indeed, in  section [*49], Lucian describes a great festival of the springtime, at which noticeably goats, sheep and cattle were sacrificed; and horses are included in the list of sacred animals in  section [*41].

[p. 76]There are, then, elements in the Cult of Apollo that had long been familiar to the nature-worshippers of Northern Syria and Asia Minor. The object suggesting a flower (floris species) in the hand of this god indicates, as Macrobius says, a god of vegetation; and possibly it replaced something more definitive, like ears of corn. The calathos we have seen already (note [*33]) to reflect the ancient conical hat of the Hittite age, and the spear is found in the hand of the warrior-god of Karabel, and in other examples of Hittite art (L. H., pl. lxxv.). Now the local deity who most nearly combined these various attributes would be Sandan (or Sandes), who is figured on the Hittite sculpture of Ivriz (L. H., pl. lvii.) as a god of agriculture, with corn and grapes; he is bearded and wears the Hittite dress and hat. There he was identified by the Greeks with Hercules. Professor Frazer has shown (op. cit., pp. 110, 151 ff.) that Sandan bore to Baal much the same relation as the Hittite "Atys" to their "Zeus." But the youthful god, after the fall of the Hatti and their chief god, seems to have filled in the popular mind the place of the father god also, and to have become more and more identified with him (cf. Frazer, op. cit., p. 236; L. H., p. 360), like Atys with Zeus (Farnell, Cults, i., pp. 36, 37). In this way our Sandan-Atys might come to be regarded quite naturally as a sun-god (like Hadad-Zeus); and hence we should obtain a reasonable explanation for the identification of this deity with Apollo.

^77:48 The image of the god is borne aloft on the shoulders of his priests in the Hittite sanctuary near Boghaz-Keui (L. H., pl. lxv. and p. 239). Strabo (xii. iii. 32) relates a similar custom at Comana (Pontus) at the Exodi of the Goddess, also (xv. iii. 15) in the worship by the Persian settlers of Omanus at Zela in Cappadocia. So, too, the statue of Hadad in Assyria is shown borne by his priests on a representation from Nineveh (Layard, Nineveh, ii., 1849, pl. f. p. 451); and Macrobius (Sat. i. 17) tells us that the image of the analogous god of Heliopolis (cf. n. 26, p. 70) was carried about in a similar manner on a bier.

^77:49 Incidentally it is noteworthy that the group of emblems which distinguishes the king-priest at Boghaz-Keui (L. H., pls. lxviii., lxxi.) is enclosed by columns which separate the celestial emblem, the winged disc, from the terrestrial, the boot. (Cf. Hom., Odyssey, i. 52.)

^78:50 The ox and lion have been already noticed as sacred to the Hittite chief god and goddess, with whom they arc associated in religious art. (Cf. L. H., pls. xliv., lxv.) The eagle appears (a) at Boghaz-Keui and at Eyuk as a double eagle identified with twin goddesses (L. H., pl. lxv. [p. 79] and p. 269); and (b) in the gigantic carving near Yamoola (L. H., pl. xlix.), where it is triumphing, it would seem, over lions. An inscription of Boghaz-Keui refers to a "house" or "temple of the eagle" (Jour. R. A. S., 1909, p. 971). This bird would naturally seem to be an appropriate emblem of Zeus-Hadad, but there is nothing to substantiate this probability. The horse appears on Hittite sculptures only in an ordinary capacity; but in Anatolia in general developed sacred attributes. (Cf. Ramsay, "Relig. of Asia Minor," in Hastings' Dict. Bibl., extra vol., p. 115 b.)

^79:51 The cap and "toga" of the priesthood on the Hittite sculptures distinguish them always from the deities and the people who are familiarly represented as wearing the tall conical hat, e.g., the chief priests of Boghaz-Keui (L. H., pls. lxviii., lxxi.), the king-priest at Eyuk (ibid., pl. lxxii.), and at Sakje Geuzi, in Syria (pl. lxxxi.). On the election of the High Priest by the local worshippers compare the similar custom in vogue at the temple of Hadad and Atargatis at Delos (Bull. Corr. Hell., 1882, p. 486).

^79:52 Cf. the sculptures of Eyuk (L. H., pl. lxxiii.), where three musicians are represented, with trumpet, bag-pipe and guitar. A lyre is figured in a sculpture from Marash (Humann and Puckstein, Reisen--Atlas, pl. xlvii. No. 2), and a guitar-player in the mural decorations of Senjerli (Ausgrab. III., pl. xxxviii.).

^79:53 Cf. the accounts of Strabo concerning the temples at [p. 80] Comana of Cappadocia (bk. xii. ii. 3), where he states that it contained great multitudes of worshippers and temple servants, of the latter at the time he was there at least 6,000. So, too, at Venasa, in the "temple of Zeus" (Strabo, xii. ii. 6). Cf. the sculptures of Eyuk (L. H., pl. lxxii.), where a number of priest-servants are represented in different avocations. On the rock-walls of the sanctuary near Boghaz-Keui numerous women as well as men are represented in the train of the male and female goddesses respectively; and in the small shrine of the youthful god which adjoins it there is a further group of men who, like those without, seem to be taking part in a ceremonial dance in rapid movement, with their sickles held aloft (L. H., pl. lxix. and pp. 220, 227).

^80:54 Notwithstanding the differences of ritual, the association of "Zeus" and "Hera" together in this paragraph is again significant of the original dual character of the cult.

^80:55 The sacred lake is still conspicuous. Cf. Maundrell, op. cit. p. 154: "On the west side is a deep pit, of about 100 yards diameter; it . . . seemed to have had great buildings all round it, with the pillars and ruins of which it is now almost filled up, . . . but . . . there was still water in it." Chesney, Exped. Euphrat. i. 516: "a rocky hollow." Hogarth (Jour. Hell. Stud. xiv. p. 187) describes also "the scanty remains of a stepped quay wall or revetment, with water stairs at intervals."

The Hittite river-gods are invoked in witness of their treaty with Egypt (c. 1271 B.C.). Cf. also Ramsay, Luke the Physician, pp. 171 et seq.; Pauline and other Studies, pp. 172, 173. On the general question of sacred waters in Syria, see Robertson-Smith, op. cit. pp. 170-172; Frazer, op. cit. pp. 22-23.

^81:56 See also  section [*14], n. [*28]. No local tradition of this seems to survive, but Xenophon (Anabasis, I. iv. 9) records a parallel case of "tame fish looked upon as gods" in the Chalus, near Aleppo. Modern instances near Doliche, just north of Aintab, and elsewhere in Syria, are described by Cumont (Oriental Relig., p. 245, note 36) and Hogarth (op. cit., p. 188). So also near the mosque of Edessa (Sachau, Reise, p. 196); and in Asia Minor, at Tavshanli, on the Rhyndacus, sacred fish are still preserved in a large cistern (Cumont, loc. cit., ap. Munro).

Atargatis, according to the form of the legend given by the scholiast on Germanicus' "Aratus" was born of an egg which the sacred fishes found in the Euphrates and pushed ashore. On the general subject, see Robertson-Smith, op. cit. p. 292, also pp. 174-175 and 219.

^81:57 Cf. the legend that Hera bathed in the Chaboras, a [p. 82] Mesopotamian tributary of the Euphrates, after her marriage with Zeus (Aelian, Nat. Animalium, xii. 30). The further reference to fishes implies their sanctity to the goddess, and to this extent reveals Atargatis as a fish-goddess (see note [*25]). This is, however, clearly not her chief character at Hierapolis.

^82:58 On the local use of the word "sea," meaning thereby the Euphrates, see note [*23]. On the further subject of the narrative, cf.  section section [*13], [*36]. It is of interest to notice that Pliny (Nat. Hist. xxxi. 37) describes a method of filtering sea water into empty sealed vessels.

^82:59 Alektryun ipos. The narrative is unintelligible unless we suppose that the words by allusion or textual change signify some special priestly office. Thus Blunt (Works of Lucian, London: Briscoe, 1711, p. 267) translates "a sacred cock, or priest, called Alectryo." Is it possible that the word in this sense was in common vogue, on the analogy of the Latin Gallus, a cock? (Cf. an inscription on an urn in the Lateran Museum at Rome, cited by Frazer, op. cit. p. 233, on which the cock is used as [p. 83] emblem of the Attis-priest, with a punning reference to the word.) Belin de Ballu, in his translation (Paris, 1789), v. 178, following Paulmier de Grentrueuil, unhesitatingly substitutes Gallos, and translates accordingly.

^83:60 In this festival of the Pyre at Heliopolis one or two details may profitably be noticed. The "tall trees" suggest the pine, sacred to Attis. (Cf., inter alia, Farnell, Cults, p. 645, and Frazer, op. cit., p. 222.) It is possible that in the sculptures of Boghaz-Keui the objects on which the high priest stands (L. H., pl. lxviii.) are indeed fir-cones. Goats and sheep we have seen led to sacrifice at Eyuk; the former animal is frequently represented in association with the Hittite chief god, and was no doubt sacred to him. "Cattle" indicate the bull, the emblem of the great god, and the cow with which his consort might be reciprocally identified. Cf. Pausanias (XI., iii. 7), where the bull and cow are seen to be sacred to Zeus and Hera respectively; and compare especially the details of the Daedala with this holocaust. The hanging of garments or shreds of them on trees near sacred places, or trees themselves, is a common practice in the East and in Egypt to-day. (Cf. also Rob.-Smith, op. cit., p. 335.) [p. 84] In the last words of the paragraph it is significant that no special mention is made of a goddess in connection with this rite.

^84:61 Cf. the rites surviving in the worship of Kybele and Attis in Rome. For a description and bibliog., see Cumont, op. cit., ch. iii., Asia Minor, p. 46 ff., and Frazer, op. cit., p. 233.

^84:62 On this custom, which is specially characteristic of the worship of the goddess, see, inter alia, Frazer, op. cit., p. 224; Farnell, Greece and Babylon, pp. 256, 257; also our Introduction, <page 3>, n. 

^85:63 Cf.  section [*15], above, n. . On the general aspect of this custom, see, especially, Frazer, op. cit., Appendix iv. p. 428.

^85:64 No actual act of sacrifice is represented in Hittite art, though at Eyuk and Malatia goats and rams are seen led to the altar of the god. The general subject of burnt sacrifice and holocausts among the Semites is discussed fully by Rob.-Smith, op. cit., x. xi., and numerous special rites of extreme interest are described by Frazer, op. cit. On the sacred animals of Asia Minor, see also Ramsay, Relig. of Asia Minor, op. cit., pp. 114, etc.

^85:65 On the sanctity and abhorrence of the pig, see especially, Ramsay, op. cit. p. 115 b, and Hist. Geog. of Asia Minor, p. 32, where he points out that the Halys River divided these two points of view. See also Robertson-Smith, op. cit. pp. 153, 392, n., 448; and the discussion of his theory of [p. 86] Adonis as a swine-god by Farnell, Cults, p. 645. For the swine in connection with the Cult of Set in Egypt, cf. Newberry, in Klio, xii. (1912), p. 397 ff.

^86:66 Cf. also  section [*16]. This statement is confirmed by Xenophon, Anabasis, I. iv. 9. According to Aelian (Nat. Ann. iv. 2), the dove was an especially sacred companion to Astarte, and this is borne out by archaic clay figurines of the goddess from Phoenicia, Asia Minor, Rhodes, Delos, Athens and Etruria. These are ascribed to "Aphrodite" by Furtwangler (Roscher's Lexikon f. Griech. u. Rom. Mythologie, p. 410, q.v.); but are indistinguishable as to character and provenance from the original deity. (Cf. also Ed. Meyer, in the same, art. Astarte.) In Babylonian and Assyrian art and mythology the bird does not seem to appear in the same inseparable association with Ishtar, though we have the suggestive passage: "Like a lonely dove, I rest" (Pinches, op. cit., col. iii. ll. 1, 2). On this point Mr. L. W. King writes: "In the earlier periods there is no evidence that a bird was associated with Ishtar, and I have little doubt that the association was a comparatively late addition to her cult. Of course the myth of the Allatu bird is early, but can hardly be connected with the symbolic or votive bird under her Phoenician form" (Letter dated Sept. 7, 1912). Diodorus relates how the child Semiramis was fed by doves, and how eventually she took flight to heaven in the appearance of this bird.

In Hittite art of Asia Minor, however, the bird appears in association with the enshrined Goddess-mother, at Yarre (Jour. Hell. Stud. xix. fig. 4), at Fraktin (Fig. 7), and in two carvings from Marash (L. H., pp. 119, 151, 164).

In glyptic art the evidence of association is confirmatory (see Hayes Ward, Seal Cylinders of Western Asia, pp. 293, etc., especially Nos. 898, 904, 908, 943). With the naked goddess, who may be of Syrian origins (ibid. p. 162), and is found represented on a sculpture of Carchemish [p. 87] (L. H., p. 128), but not elsewhere on Hittite monuments, the bird appears only sporadically.

Among the Semites the pigeon was peculiarly sacred (Robertson-Smith, op. cit. p. 294), and sacrificed only on special occasions (ibid. p. 219; cf. also Leviticus xix. 4, 49 Numbers, vi. 10). The sacred character of the bird does not seem to survive in any form.

^87:67 Cf.  section [*60].

^87:68 Cf. especially Rob.-Smith, op. cit. p. 477 ff.

^88:69 The libation is a feature of Hittite worship represented on several sculptures, e.g., at Fraktin and at Malatia (see Fig. 1, <page 5>). At the latter place live animals (rams) are shown in the sculpture (L. H., pl. xliv.) behind the priest, being led by an attendant. This is not shown in our illustration, in which also the Hittite hieroglyphics are omitted from the field for the sake of clearness. These sculptures have been lately removed, it is reported, to Constantinople.

^88:70 The special character of this sacrifice is strongly suggestive of a totemistic influence. On the general aspect of human sacrifice among the Semites, cf. Rob.-Smith, op. cit., pp. 371, 464. On human sacrifice in the Cult of Dionysus, cf. Frazer, op. cit., p. 332. Children were sacrificed to Moloch, who was identified with Cronos, an original deity of vegetation (cf. Farnell, Culls, p. 28, n.). Attempts have been made (cf. Dussaud, Rev. Arch., loc. cit., ap. Movers; Six, Rev. Num., loc. cit.) to identify the god of Hierapolis with Cronos. While we cannot accept the theory, this field of enquiry is attractive; and the suggested identity might arise in myth by grouping the god as father of the goddess's son in a natural triad.

^89:71 Cf. Pliny, Nat. Hist., vi. 4, and xxii. 2. On this subject, cf. Rob.-Smith, op. cit., p. 334, note 1. In the Sudan, according to Bruce, some of the tribes tattooed their stomachs, sides and backs, as with fish-scales. Professor Strong reminds us that there have been found a number of bodies of Nubians of the time of the Middle Empire (c. 2000 B.C.) with definite tattooing; and the patterns pricked upon the skin of these desiccated bodies were identical with those painted on the dolls buried with them. Cf. Dr. Elliot Smith, The Ancient Egyptians, p. 56.

^89:72 See also  section [*55], where a first act of the pilgrim is to shave his head; and  section [*6], where it appears that at Byblos the female locks could be sacrificed as an alternative to offering their own persons. At Troezene, according to Pausanias (xxxii.), the custom was to sacrifice the hair before marriage. In Catullus, Ode lxvi., Berenice dedicates her hair to Venus. On the general question, see Robertson-Smith, op. cit., p. 329.

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 90] [p. 91]

  

APPENDIX.

  

EXTRACT I.

From Maundrell's Travels. Page 153 (6th ed. 1749).

AN ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR'S JOURNEY TO THE BANKS OF THE EUPHRATES, ETC., IN HIS "JOURNEY FROM ALEPPO TO JERUSALEM." 1697.

Wednesday, April 19th.

WE went east and by north, and in four hours arrived at Bambych. This place has no remnants of its ancient greatness, but its walls, which may be traced all round, and cannot be less than three miles in compass. Several fragments of them remain on the east side, especially at the east gate; and another piece of eighty yards long, with towers of large square stone extremely well built. On the north side I found a stone with the busts of a man and woman, large as life; and under, two Eagles carved on it. Not far from it, on the side of a large well, was fixed a stone with three figures carved on it, in Basso Relievo. They were two Syrens, which twining their fishy tails together, made a seat, on which was placed sitting a naked woman, her arms and the Syrens on each side mutually entwined.

On the west side is a deep pit of about 100 yards diameter. It was low, and had now water in it, and seemed to have had great buildings all round it; with the pillars and ruins of which, it is now in part filled up; but not so much, but that there was still water in it.

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] Here are a multitude of subterraneous aqueducts brought to the city; the people attested no fewer than fifty. You can ride nowhere about the city, without seeing them. We pitched by one about a quarter of a mile east of the city, which yields a fine stream; and emptying itself into a valley, waters it, and makes it extremely fruitful. Here perhaps were the pastures of the beasts designed for sacrifices. Here are now only a few poor inhabitants, tho' anciently all the north side was well inhabited by Saracens; as may be seen by the remains of a noble Mosque and a Bagnio a little without the walls.

  

EXTRACT II.

POCOCK'S DESCRIPTION OF THE EAST. Vol. II., Pt. I. (1745); pp. 166 and 167..

. . . Bambouch, commonly called by the Franks Bambych, and by the ancients Hierapolis, which was the Greek name that was given it by Seleucus; it was called also Bambyce, which seems to be the Syrian name still retained; and it is very remarkable that Hierapolis in Asia Minor has much the same name, being called Pambouk Calasi (the cotton castle). The Tables make it twenty-four miles distant from Zeuma on the Euphrates and from Ceciliana: They place it also seventy-two miles from Berya, though this is not above fifty from Aleppo. One of the Syrian names of this place was Magog; [*1] which was a city of the Cyrrhestica, and is situated at the south end of a long vale, which is about a quarter of a mile broad, watered

[p. 93]

with a stream that is approached by the aqueducts of Bambych; and, to preserve the water from being wasted, it passes through this vale in an artificial channel or aqueduct which is built of stone on a level with the ground. The form of this site was irregular; some parts of the walls which remain entire, are nine feet thick, and above thirty feet high; they are cased with hewn stone both inside and out, and are about two miles in circumference; there was a walk all round on top of the walls, to which there is an ascent by a flight of stairs, which are built on arches; the wall is defined by towers on five sides, at the distance of fifty paces from each other, and there is a low fosse without the walls. The four gates of the city are about fifteen feet wide, and defended by a semi-circular tower on each side; the water that supplied the town, as I was informed, comes from a hill about twelve miles to the south, and the city being on the advanced ground, the water runs in a channel, which is near twenty feet below the surface of the earth, and in several parts of the city there are holes down to the water about five feet wide, and fifteen long, with two stones across, one about five feet, the other about ten feet from the top, in order, as may be supposed, to facilitate the descent of the water; it is probable that they had some machines to draw up the water at these holes. In the side of one of them I saw a stone about four feet long, and three wide, on which there was a relief of two winged persons holding a sheet behind a woman a little over her head; they seem to carry her on their fishy tails which join together, and were probably designed to represent the Zephyrs, carrying Venus to the sea.

At the west part of the town there is a dry bason, which seemed to have been triangular; it is close to the

[p. 94]

town wall; at one corner of it there is a round building which seems to have extended into a bason, and probably was designed in order to behold with greater conveniency some religious ceremonies or public sports. This may be the lake where they had sacred fishes that were tame.

About two hundred paces within the east gate there is a raised ground, on which probably stood a temple of the Syrian goddess Atargatis, thought to be the same as Ashteroth of the Sidonians, and Cybele of the Romans, for whose worship this place was so famous. I conjectured it to be about two hundred feet in front. It is probable that this is the high ground from which they threw people headlong in their religious ceremonies, and sometimes even their own children, though they must inevitably perish. I observed a low wall running from it to the gate, so that probably it had such a grand avenue as the temple at Gerrhae; and the enclosure of the city is irregular in this part, as if some ground had been taken in after the building of the walls to make that grand entrance; it is probable that all the space north of the temple belonged to it. A court is mentioned to the north of the temple, and a tower likewise before the temple, which was built on a terrace twelve feet high. If this tower was on the high ground I mentioned, the temple must have been west of it, of which I could see no remains; it possibly might have been where there are now some ruins of a large building, which seems to have been a church with a tower; to the west of which there are some ruinous arches, which might be part of a portico. It is said that not only Syria, Cilicia, and Cappadocia, contributed to the support of this temple, but even Arabia, and the territories of Babylon: To the west of the town there is a high ground, and some burial places; and so there are also to the north-east, where

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] I saw inscriptions in the oriental languages, and several crosses. At a little distance from the north-east corner of the town there is a building like a church, but within it there is some Gothic work, such as is seen in antient mosques; and there is a room on each side of the south end; the whole is ruinous, but very strongly built, and they call it the house of Phila.

  

EXTRACT III.

THE EXPEDITION TO THE EUPHRATES AND TIGRIS.

By COLONEL CHESNEY. London, 1850. Vol. I., Ch. XVIII., pp. 420 and 421.

.       .       .       .       .       .       .       .

[Nine miles below the mouth of the Sajur, the fine Saracenic structure of Kal-at-en-Nejm commands the remains of the great Zeugma leading to Seroug, Haran, etc., and 11 miles directly south by west from thence on four hills, are the extensive remains of the castle and town of Kara Bambuche, or Buyuk Munbedj, [*1] which contains some fine excavations near the river, and also a Zeugma, but in a more dilapidated state, being without the slopes which, when passing at Kal-at-en-Nejm, served for landing places at different heights of the river.]

Sixteen miles west by south of the latter, and 11 1/2 miles south-west of the former passage, at about 600 feet above the river Euphrates, the ruins of the Magog of the Syrians occupy the centre of a rocky plain, where, by its isolated position, the city must not only have been deprived of running water, but likewise

[p. 96]

of every other advantage which was likely to create and preserve a place of importance. Yet we know that the Syrian city of Ninus Vetus  [*1] flourished under the name of Bambyce  [*2] and subsequently of Hierapolis, [*3] or the Sacred City of the Greeks, [*4] and that it contained the rich temple which was plundered by Crassus; [*5] finally it bore the name of Munbedj  [*6] or Bambuche, and had a succession of sovereigns in the 5th century of the Hijrah [*7]. The ancient city was near the eastern extremity of Commagene, or Euphratensis, which had Samosat at the opposite extremity. [*8]

Some ruined mosques and square Saracenic towers, with the remains of its surrounding walls and ditch, marked the limits of the Muslim city; within which are four large cisterns, a fine sarcophagus, and, among other ancient remains the sculptured ruins of an acropolis, and those of two temples. Of the smaller, the enclosure and portions of seven columns remain; but it seems to possess little interest compared with the larger, which may have been that of the Assyrian and Phoenician Astarte, [*9] or Astroarche (queen of stars), which afterwards

[p. 97]

became the Syrian Atargatis, [*1] or Venus Decerto. [*2] Amongst the remains of the latter are some fragments of massive architecture, not unlike the Egyptian, and 11 arches from one side of a square paved court, over which are scattered the shafts of columns and capitals displaying the lotus.

A little way westward of the walls there is an extensive necropolis, which contains many Turkish, with some Pagan, Seljukian, and Syriac tombs; the last having some almost illegible inscriptions in the ancient character.

Footnotes

^92:1 Caele habet--Bambycen, quae alio nomine Hierapolis vocatur, Syris vero Magog. Ibi prodigiosa Atargatis, Graecis autem Derceto dicta, colitur. Plin. Nat. Hist. V. 19.

^95:1 Jisr Munbedj, two days from Haran. Jaubert's Edrisi, p. 155, tome VI.; Recueil dc Voyages, etc. Paris, 1840.

^96:1 Ammian. Mar., XIV., c. viii.

^96:2 The Syrian name of the city, which the Greeks afterwards called Hierapolis. Strabo, XVI., p. 747.

^96:3 Ammian. Mar., XIV., c. viii.

^96:4 Hierapolis, or Magog, in Syriac. Plin. lib. V., c. xxiii.

^96:5 Plutarch in Crassus.

^96:6 It was first built by the Persians, who had a fine temple there. Muhammed Ibn Sepahi's Clear Knowledge of Cities and Kingdoms.

^96:7 Des Guignes, His. des Huns, tome II., p. 275.

^96:8 Amm. Mar. XIV., c. viii.

^96:9 There were temples of this goddess in Palestine. Jos. Ant., lib. V., c. xiv. 8; at Tyre, ibid.; against Apion, lib. I., s. 19; and at Sidon, 1. Kings, c. v., and v. 33.

^97:1 Strabo, XVI., p. 748.

^97:2 Herod., lib. I., c. cv., mentions the temple of Venus at Askalon, which, in Diod. Sic., lib. II., is called that of Decerto. There was another temple of Venus, or Atargatis, at Joppa. Plin., lib. V., c. xiii. and xxiii.

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98] [p. 99]

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[We have to thank Dr. Barnett, of the British Museum, for his courtesy in presenting us with the Bibliography of the translations and editions of Lucian.]

  

GREEK AND LATIN.

Luciani omnia quae extant, cum latina interpretatione (of J. Micyllus, M. Bolerus, D. Erasmus, etc.). Paris, 1615. Fol.

Luciani opera omnia, J. Benedictus emendavit. Salmurii, 1619. 8vo.

Luciani Samosatensis opera, ex versione J. Benedicti. Cum notis J. Bourdelotii, etc. Amstelodami, 1687. 8vo.

Luciani opera, cum nova versione T. Hemsterhusii et J. M. Gesneri, etc. Amstelodami, Trajecti ad Rhenum, 1743-6. 4to.

Luciani opera, cum notis selectis. Curavit J. P. Schmidius. Leipzig, 1776-80. 8vo.

Luciani opera ad editionem T. Hemsterhusii et J. F. Reitzii accurate expressa cum annotationibus. Biponti, 1789-93. 8vo.

Luciani opera, castigata, edidit J. T. Lehmann. Lipsiae, 1822-31. 8vo.

Luciani opera ex recensione G. Dindorfii. Parisiis, 1840. 8vo.

Luciani opera ex recensione G. Dindorfii. Editio altera emendators. Parisiis, 1867. 8vo.

  

LATIN.

Luciani opera, in latinum, partim diversis autoribus, partim per J. Micyllum, translata. Francofurti, 1543. Fol.

[p. 100]

  

ENGLISH.

Lucian's works, translated from the Greek. By F. Spence. London, 1684-5. 8vo.

The works of Lucian, translated from the Greek, by several eminent hands (T. Ferne, W. Moyle, Sir H. Sheere, A. Baden, C. Blount, T. Brown, J. Drake, S. Cobb, Gildon, Cashen, Vernon, Sprag, Hill, S. Atkinson, H. Blount, Ayloffe, J. Philips, L. Eachard, C. Eachard, Savage, J. Digby, H. Hare, J. Washington, N. Tate, and Sir J. Tyrell). With the life of Lucian, a discourse on his writings, and a character of some of the present translators, by J. Dryden. London, 1711. 8vo.

The works of Lucian, from the Greek, by T. Francklin. London, 1780. 4to.

Lucian, from the Greek, with the comments and illustrations of Wieland and others. By W. Tooke. London, 1820. 4to.

The Works of Lucian of Samosata. Translated by H. W. Fowler and F. G. Fowler. Oxford, 1905.

  

FRENCH.

Les oeuvres de Lucien, traduites du grec, par F. Bretin. Paris, 1583. Fol.

Lucian, de la traduction de N. Perrot, Sr. d'Ablancourt. Paris, 1654. 4to.

Lucian, de la traduction de N. Perrot, Sr. d'Ablancourt. Paris, 1674. 8vo.

Lucian, de la traduction de N. Perrot, Sr. d'Ablancourt. Amsterdam, 1709. 8vo.

Oeuvres de Lucian, traduites du grec, avec des remarques, sur le texte, et la collation de six manuscrits de la Bibliotheque du Roi (by J. N. Belin de Ballu). Paris, 1789. 8vo.

Oeuvres completes. Traduction de Belin de Ballu, revue corrigee et completee, par Louis Humbert. Paris, 1896.

  

GERMAN.

Lucians von Samosata samtliche Werke. Aus dem Griechischen ubersetzt und mit Anmerkungen versehen von C. M. Wieland. Leipzig, 1788-9. 8vo.

[p. 101]

  

ITALIAN.

Le opere di Luciano, volgarizzate da G. Manzi. Losanna, 1819. 8vo.

  

SPANISH.

Obras completas, traducidas, por D. C. Vidal y F. Delgado. Madrid, 1882, etc. 8vo.

  

GREEK AND ENGLISH.

Lucian. Literally and completely translated, from the Greek text of C. Jacobitz. (Athenian Society's Publications). London, 1895.

      
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102] [p. 103]

  

INDEX

  

A.

ABD-HADAD, Priest-King of Hierapolis, <page 27>

Achilles, effigy of, <page 78>

'Adad (see also Hadad), name of the god of Hierapolis, <page 25>

Adargatis, name of the goddess according to Macrobius, <page 25>

Adonis, myth of, <page 3>; river, <page 47>; sacrifice to, <page 46>; wounded, the legend of, <page 48>

Agdistis, goddess of the Phrygians, <page 1>

Agenor, <page 44>

Agriculture, Hittite god of, <page 8>

Alexandria, Lucian at, <page 31>; statue of, <page 78>; the false prophet, <page 30>

Aleppo, bronze figure of goddess from, <page 16>

Altar, draped, <page 13>; of brass, <page 77>; pedestal, draped, <page 24>, <page 73>

Andromache, effigy of, <page 78>

Animals, sacred, <page 78>

Antioch, Lucian at, <page 30>

Aphaca, temple of Aphrodite at, <page 49>

Aphrodite, sacrifice to, <page 46>; Syrian goddess embodies attributes of, <page 71>; temple of, at Aphaca, <page 48>

Apollo, a bearded, <page 74>; oriental aspects of, <page 75>

Archives of the Hittites, <page 4>

Arms, the Hittite god of, <page 6>

Artemis, Syrian goddess embodies attributes of, <page 71>

Ashtoreth, <page 44>; the goddess, <page 1>

Asia Minor, attributes of the goddess in, <page 2>

Askalon, connection with Atargatis, <page 26>

Assemblies, sacred, <page 82>

Assyria, used for Syria, <page 41>, <page 42>

Astarte, as a Hittite goddess, <page 1>; of Phoenicia, <page 1>, <page 16>; the Phoenician, <page 43>

Atargatis, <page 41>; goddess of Hierapolis, <page 1> (see also Goddess); identified with Derceto, <page 52>; resemblance to Kybele, <page 55>; son of, <page 8>; spelling and composition of the name, <page 21>; the priest of, <page 27>

'Athar, name of Ishtar in Syria, <page 1>

Atheh, goddess of Cilicia, <page 53>; name of Cilician goddess, <page 1>

Athene, Syrian goddess embodies attributes of, <page 71>

[p. 104]

Atlas, statue of, <page 77>

Attes, traditional founder of the shrine at Hierapolis, <page 55>

Attis, in legend and religion, <page 3>; priest, possibly represented in Hittite art, <page 8>

Axe, the double, emblem of Bellona, <page 18>; the, emblem of thunder, <page 5>

  

B.

BAAL, of Tarsus, <page 43>; Kevan, suggested name of the god, <page 23>

Bambyce, earliest name of Hierapolis, <page 41>

Bellona, Roman goddess, identified with goddess of Comana, <page 18>

Bird, consecration of, <page 33>; in Hittite art, <page 14>; symbol of the goddess, <page 13>

Birth, goddess of, <page 16>

Boar, wild, legend of, <page 46>

Boghaz-Keui, Hittite god and goddess at, <page 7>; sanctuary of youthful deity, <page 8>

Bow, borne by Hittite deity, <page 6>; in Hittite art, <page 14>

Brazen statue at Hierapolis, <page 65>

Bull, as counterpart of goddess on coins, <page 22>; Europa sitting upon, <page 44>; god, the Hittite, <page 10>; Hadad leading a, <page 6>; Hittite deity identified with, <page 6>; replaces god in art, <page 10>

Bulls, god seated on, <page 70>

Byblos, Aphrodite of, <page 45>; legend of Osiris at, <page 47>; temple at, <page 45>

  

C.

CAPITAL, the, of the Hittites, <page 4>

Carchemish, fall of, <page 17>; sculpture from, <page 8>; sculptures of the goddess at, <page 14>

Castration, <page 3>, <page 57>, <page 65>

Caves, the goddess of, <page 7>

Child, on knee of goddess, in Hittite art, <page 14> Christianity, in the time of Lucian, <page 35>

Coast of Asia Minor, Hittites advance towards the, <page 4> Cock (sacred), <page 82>

Coins of Hierapolis, <page 20>

Comana, the goddess of war at, <page 18>

Combabus, legends of, <page 58>, <page 60>; statue of, <page 78>

Commagene, <page 42>

Communion scene in Hittite art, <page 13>

Cones, sacred, of the goddess, <page 68>

Conical obelisk, <page 45>

Constantine destroys the shrine at Aphaca, <page 49>

Corpses, unlucky to see, <page 85>

Croesus, of Lydia, <page 17>

[p. 105]

  

D.

DEA SYRIA, the local goddess of Hierapolis, identified with Atargatis, q.v. (see Goddess), <page 16>; seated and robed, <page 16>

Dead, the goddess of the, <page 14>

Deluge, legend of, <page 51>

Derceto, image of, <page 53>; in form of a fish, <page 55>; the fish goddess, <page 52>

Deukalion, the story of, <page 50>

Distaff, carried by the Syrian goddess, <page 71>

Dionysus, <page 73>; assumes woman's dress, <page 56>; legendary founder of the temple at Hierapolis, <page 57>

Divination, <page 76>

Divine, father and mother, <page 8>; marriage, <page 7>; Triad, <page 8>

Dodona, Zeus of, <page 7>

Doliche, survival of Hittite cult at, <page 17>

Dove, in Hittite art, <page 24>; symbol of goddess, <page 23>; the, <page 73>

Doves, in Babylonian art, <page 86>

Draped, altar, <page 13>; altar pedestal, <page 73>

Drum, carried by Atargatis, <page 56>

Dual cult, at Hierapolis, <page 12>; of Hittite origins, to; substantiated on coins, <page 25>

  

E.

EAGLE, double-headed, <page 9>; temple of the, <page 79>; triumphing over lion on coins, <page 22>

Earth, the fruits of, personified, <page 8>

Earth-goddess in Greece, <page 7>

Earth-Mother (see Earth-goddess), <page 7>

Effigies of "Zeus" and "Hera" at Hierapolis, <page 70>

Effigy of Apollo, bearded, <page 74>; of fish-goddess, <page 54>

Egyptian temples, <page 42>

Eilithyia, statue of, <page 77>

Empire, extent of Hittite, <page 4>

Europa, <page 44>

Exogamy, <page 47>

Eyuk, double-headed eagle at, <page 9>; goddess worshipped at, <page 14>; Hittite sculptures at, <page 10>

  

F.

FASSILER, Hittite monument at, <page 67>

Fates, the, Syrian goddess embodies attributes of, <page 71>

Feast, the ceremonial feast in Hittite sculptures, <page 15>; the Ceremonial, <page 13>

Festival of the Pyre, <page 83>

Fish goddess, <page 53>

[p. 106]

Fishes, holy, <page 54>

Flood, the, legend of, <page 33>, <page 50>

Fraktin, Hittite sculptures of, <page 73>; Hittite sculptures at, <page 13>

  

G.

GALLI, the, <page 19>, <page 63>, <page 79>, <page 84>; customs of the, <page 66>

Garments on trees, <page 83>

Girdle, the, <page 71>, <page 72>

Goats sacrificed to Hittite god, io

God of Hierapolis, identical with Hittite chief deity, i i; on coins, <page 22>

God on bull throne, <page 23>

God, the chief Hittite, <page 5>; resembles Zeus, <page 7>; dominant, to; fall of, <page 17>

God, the youthful Hittite, <page 8>

Goddess of Hierapolis, identified, <page 12>; described by Lucian, <page 11>; recognisable, <page 20>; seated on lion, <page 21>

    "     on lion throne, <page 23>; two varieties of, <page 15>; of War at Comana, identified with Bellona, <page 18>

    "     the chief Hittite, resembles the Great Mother, <page 7>; the leading Hittite, i

    "     the Hittite, seated, <page 10>; seated and robed, <page 16>; wedded, <page 19>

    "     the Mother, survival of cult, <page 18>; as goddess of the dead, <page 14>

    "     the Nature, explanation of abnormal tendencies, <page 3>; in Asia Minor, <page 2>; in Babylonia, <page 1>; worship long established in Asia Minor, <page 4>

Gods, the minor Hittite, <page 9>

Great Mother, the (see Goddess).

  

H.

HADAD, name of Syrian deity, <page 5>; of Hierapolis, <page 10>; statue of, carried, <page 77>

Hadad-Zeus, term describing the Hittite deity, <page 12>

Hair, dedicated, <page 89>; locks of, consecrated, <page 33>

Hammer, emblem of thunder, <page 5>

Heaven, Lord of, title of Hittite god, <page 5>

Hecuba, effigy of, <page 78>

Helen, effigy of, <page 78>

Heliopolitan Triad, <page 26>

Hera, goddess of Hierapolis called, <page 70>; name given by Lucian to the goddess of Hierapolis, <page 11>; offerings, <page 46>; previously married, <page 7>; Sancta, consort of Jupiter Dolichenus, <page 17>; seen in a vision by Stratonice, <page 60>; the Assyrian, <page 41>

[p. 107]

Hercules, of Tyre, <page 43>; assumes woman's dress, <page 56>

Hermes, statue of, <page 77>

Hermocles, statue ascribed to, <page 65>

Hierapolis, <page 42>; bull-god on coins of, <page 10>; central cult of Hittite origins, <page 12>; coins of Atargatis at, <page 16>; images in the sanctuary of, <page 11>; name of the goddess at, <page 1>; site of, <page 41>; the shrine at, <page 49>

Hierapolitan Triad, <page 26>

High-priest, <page 79>; the Hittite, to

Hippolytus, <page 63>

Hittite, Chief Deity, <page 5>; goddess, <page 1>; dress, survival on coin, <page 27>

Hittites, the, in history, <page 4>; end of their domination, i<page 6>

  

I.

IMAGE, of the god carried, <page 7>, <page 76>; of the Mother-goddess, <page 13> Images, votive, of the naked goddess, <page 15>

Ionic dialect, <page 31>, <page 32>

Ishtar, the goddess, i; as goddess of the dead, <page 14>; among the Mitanni, <page 10>

Ivriz, Hittite sculpture at, <page 8>, <page 43>, <page 76>

  

J.

JUPITER Dolichenus, <page 17>

  

K.

KARA-BURSHLU, sculptures of the Hittite goddess at, <page 13> King-Priest, the Hittite, <page 10>

Kizil-Dagh, Hittite deity carved on, <page 6>

Kubile (Kybele) in Phrygian art, <page 14>

Kybele (or Rhea), resemblance to goddess of Hierapolis, <page 26>; in the West, <page 72>; and Attis, cult of, <page 18>; legends of, at Hierapolis, <page 55>; Attis as a son of, <page 3>

  

L.

LAKE, sacred, at Hierapolis, <page 80>

Libation, <page 79>; in Hittite worship, <page 88>

Lion, devouring bull, on coins, <page 22>; emblematic of earth, <page 25>; goddess seated on, <page 21>; throne, on coins, <page 21>

Lioness, goddess on, <page 9>

Lions, draw effigy of Atargatis, <page 56>; goddess seated on, <page 70>

Lituus, emblem of Hittite priesthood, <page 10>

[p. 108]

Lord of Heaven, title of Hittite god, <page 5>

Loss of Hierapolis, <page 41>

Lucian returns to Samosata, <page 30>

Lyre, in Hittite art, <page 14>

  

M.

MA, goddess of Comana, I

Mabog, Syrian name of Hierapolis, <page 41>

Macrobius, describes the cult of the Syrian goddess, <page 20>; describes the Syrian god and goddess, <page 25>; quoted, <page 74>

Malatia, Hittite sculptures at, <page 6>; local deity of, identified, <page 9>

Mannikins of wood, <page 57>, <page 68>

Marash, sculptures of the Hittite goddess at, <page 14>

Marriage scene at Boghaz-Keui, <page 7>

Mated divinities in Cilicia and Phoenicia, <page 18>

Mermaid, effigy like a, <page 54>

Mirror in Hittite art, <page 14>

Mitanni, treaty of Hittites with, <page 10>

Mother-earth (see Earth-goddess).

   "   -goddess (see Goddess).

   "   of the gods, <page 25>

Mount Lebanus, <page 47>

Mumbidj, identified with Hierapolis, <page 41>

Musicians, <page 79>

Mylitta, name of Ishtar in Herodotus, <page 16>

Myth of Ishtar and Tammuz, <page 3>

  

N.

NAKED goddess, <page 15>

Nanai, goddess of Pre-semitic Babylonia, <page 1>

Nature-goddess (see Goddess of Nature).

Nemesis, Syrian goddess embodies attributes of, <page 71>

Nigrinus, the philosopher, <page 29>

Nireus, statue of, <page 78>

  

O.

OBLATION scene in Hittite art, <page 13>

Oracles, <page 76>; at Hierapolis, <page 49>

Osiris, legend of, at Byblos, <page 47>

  

P.

PAPHOS, pillars at, <page 67>

Paris, effigy of, <page 78>

Peregrinus, the impostor, <page 36>

Phalli, ascent of the, <page 69>; dedicated by Dionysus, <page 57>

[p. 109]

Philomela, statue of, <page 78>

Phrygian goddess, <page 25>

Phrygians in Asia Minor, <page 17>

Pigeon, a golden, <page 73>; emblem of Semiramis, <page 55>

Pilgrimages to Hierapolis, <page 49>

Pillar of altar, draped, <page 24>

Pillars, pairs of, <page 67>

Poem by Catullus, <page 3>

Priestess, the high, <page 11>

Priestesses, Hittite representations of, <page 9>

Priesthood of Attis, <page 3>

Priest-King, the Hittite, so Priests, <page 79>; of the goddess, <page 18>

Procne, statue of, <page 78>

Prostitution, sacred, <page 19>, <page 46>

Pteria, fall of, <page 17>

  

R.

RAMMAN, incorrect rendering of name 'Adad, <page 5>

Rams, sacrificed to Hittite god, <page 10>

Red colour of Adonis River, <page 48>

Religion in the East, <page 19>

Rhea (or Kybele), resemblance to goddess of Hierapolis, <page 26>; legends of, <page 55>; Syrian goddess embodies attributes of, <page 71>

Robed goddess, <page 55>

Rome, Lucian at, <page 30>

  

S.

SACRIFICES, <page 80>

Sakje-Geuzi, goddess worshipped at, <page 14>; Hittite walls at, <page 66>

Sammu###7769###amat, identified with Semiramis, <page 52>

Samosata, birthplace of Lucian, <page 29>

Samsat, birthplace of Lucian, <page 42>; Hittite remains at, <page 42>

Sanctuary of Hierapolis, described, <page 70>; represented on coin, <page 23>

Sandan, possible effigy of, at Hierapolis, <page 76>

Sandan-Hercules of Ivriz, <page 26>

Sardanapalus, statue of, <page 78>

Sceptre, carried by the Syrian goddess, <page 71>

Selene, Syrian goddess embodies attributes of, <page 71>

Semiramis, <page 52>, <page 73>; effigy of, <page 55>; image of, <page 78>

Senjerli, Hittite storm god at, <page 5>; the Syro-Hittite city at, <page 66>

Shaving of heads, <page 46>

Shepherd origin of Attis, <page 3>

Shrines, Graeco-Phoenician, <page 45>

Simios, lover of Atargatis, <page 26>

Sipylus, Mount, image of the goddess on, <page 13>

[p. 110]

Sisythus (see Xisuthros), <page 50>

Solomon, temple of, at Jerusalem, <page 67>

Son of Atargatis, <page 26>

Statue, brazen, at Hierapolis, <page 65>; of the goddess carried, <page 76>, <page 77>

Statues, of the god and goddess of Hierapolis, <page 70>; of gods, moved, at Hierapolis, <page 49>

Stheneboea, <page 63>

Storms, controller of, attribute of Hittite god, <page 5>

Stratonice, legendary builder of temple at Hierapolis, <page 58>

Subject-matter of the "De Dea Syria," <page 39>

Suidas' life of Lucian, <page 29>

Sun, Hittite god identified with, <page 5>

Sun-god, a throne for the, <page 74>

Survival of Hittite dress at Hierapolis, <page 27>; of cult, <page 20>

Swine, abhorrence of, <page 85>; god, <page 86>

Syria, coalition of the Hittites in, <page 16>

Syrian cults impassioned, <page 16>

Syro-Cappodocians, <page 17>

  

T.

TAMMUZ, relation to Ishtar, <page 2>

Tarsus, bull-god on coins of, <page 10>

Tattooing, <page 89>

Taurus Region, submission of, <page 17>

Temple at Hierapolis, described, <page 69>; its sizes, <page 67>; legends about the, <page 61>; position of the, <page 66>

Temples in Syria, <page 43>

Teshub, identical with chief Hittite deity, <page 5>

Text of the "De Dea Syria," <page 37>

Thor's hammer, <page 5>

Tower, head-dress of Atargatis, <page 56>

Treaty with Egypt, <page 1>

Triad, of Hierapolis, <page 26>; the divine, <page 8>

Tyre, Hercules of, <page 43>

  

U.

UNION of two deities, <page 8>

  

V.

VEDIC deities, <page 56> Vegetation, the god of, <page 76>

W. 

WALLS, double, in North Syria, <page 66>

Water, brought to the temple, <page 52>

[p. 111]

Wedded deities at Hierapolis, <page 11>

Winged deity from Carchemish, <page 15>

Woman in service of the goddess, <page 19>

Woman's dress, Attes in, <page 56>

Women in Hittite art, <page 81>; in the temple service, <page 79>

Women's dress, men assume, <page 66>

  

X.

XANTHOS, legend of Atargatis and her son, <page 26>

Xisuthros, story of the flood, <page 51>

  

Y.

YAHWEH, resemblance of Hittite deity to, <page 5>

Yarre in Phrygia, image of the goddess at, <page 13>

  

Z.

ZEUS and Europa, <page 44>; as a god of agriculture, etc., in Greece, Io; as a bull-god, <page 44>; god of Hierapolis called, <page 70>; Hagios, <page 17>; the Dodonian, <page 7>; the name given by Lucian to the god of Hierapolis, <page 11>

Zeus-Hadad, term describing the Hittite deity, <page 12>

 

 

BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO. LD., PRINTERS, LONDON AND TONBRIDGE.

 

 

     
The Syrian Goddess, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John Garstang, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112] [p. 113]

The following advertisement appeared at the end of The Syrian Goddess. It is included for completeness.--JBH

  

The Land of the Hittites.

BY PROFESSOR J. GARSTANG, D.Sc.

With Photographs, Maps, Plans and a Bibliography.

(12/6 net.)

[This] "work will be the standard authority on the subject for a long while to come."--Prof. Sayce, in the Introduction.

"Professor Garstang's book will be of great value to students of Near Eastern antiquity, and must supersede all predecessors written with a like purpose. . . With great skill, acuteness, and patience, the author has laid not only the Boghaz-Keui tablets, the records of Tell-el-Amarna, and others longer known, in hieroglyphic and cuneiform under contribution, but also the archaeological evidence from various sites, many of which he has himself visited and studied with the eyes of a trained excavator."--The Times (Literacy Supplement).

"It is a great book. For the subject is a greater one than some have realised yet, and Professor Garstang rises to the height of it."--Expository Times.

"The book is the work of a scholar, quietly written, the fruit of thought, study and personal exploration. It stands as a contribution to learning."--Cambridge Review.

"The last 75 pages contain a valuable attempt to piece together the history of the Hittite States from the scanty and often perplexing data now available in Egyptian and cuneiform documents."--Manchester Guardian.

"It is no small achievement to have recovered some pages from the history of three thousand years ago, and this valuable and interesting piece of synthetical work will take its place among the growing store of books which are giving us an insight into the realities of that distant past, and slowly but inevitably forcing a reconsideration of the usual ideas of the Bible lands."--Guardian.

"The book is a noteworthy work of British archaeological scholarship."--The Scotsman.

"The scheme which Professor Garstang has followed in these pages resembles the method he has adopted in his work of research; everything is carefully recorded and classified in such a way as to bring it clearly and in its proper order before the reader, while the Bibliography and Appendices help to consolidate and buttress the whole."--Glasgow Herald.

[p. 114]

"Its references are many and excellent; it is well written, and is packed with photographs and maps. An Appendix, among other things, contains a Hittite bibliography, of very great use to every student."--Bookman.

"Nowhere will the reader be able to find a more careful and trustworthy account of the successive stages in the history of this famous and forgotten people than in Professor Garstang's pages."--New York City.

"Professor Garstang, who has conducted two expeditions from Liverpool, has done yeoman's service in presenting in popular form a historical, descriptive and critical account of the recovered monuments and their significance."--Educational Times.

"An able and informing hook on recent archaeological exploration and discoveries in Asia Minor."--Nature.

"The book is admirably illustrated, not only with reproductions of the monuments of the Hittite race, but also, in fulfilment of the promise of the title, with views of Anatolia and North Syria which bring before the reader the land which was their home. . . . A valuable contribution to Biblical archaeology."--Churchman.

"A notable feature of the book is the numerous illustrations, which, apart from views of purely Hittite monuments, give an excellent idea of the country and its present population."--Illustrated London News.

"The story of the resurrection of the Hittite race and empire from the ghostly realm of legend to which they had been consigned by many hasty historians is part of the romance of history."--Liverpool Courier.

"Illustrated with maps and plans, and just upon too photographs, the work will, as we have said, prove fascinating to all readers possessed of any taste for learning of the distant, misty past which history is patiently clearing."--Daily Telegraph.

"Students of history and Scripture are deeply indebted to Professor Garstang for this well written, well illustrated and well indexed volume."--Christian World.

"Very much in advance of any hitherto published account of the Hittite greatness."--The Spectator.

"A learned, interesting, and beautifully illustrated volume."--Catholic Times.

"In learning the history of this most interesting people under his guidance we have the advantage of receiving our information from one whose deductions and judgments have hitherto been singularly justified."--Liverpool Post.

    


===== BOOK: tsoa.txt =====


    
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[]

The Secret of the Ages
 In Seven Volumes
 VOLUME ONE

[]

  

The

  

SECRET

  

of

  

THE AGES



  

ROBERT COLLIER

  

VOLUME ONE

  

ROBERT COLLIER, Publisher
 599 Fifth Avenue
 New York

  

No connection with
 P. F. Collier & Son Co., Inc.

  

[1926]


Click to enlarge
The Secret of the Ages



Click to enlarge
Title Page: Volume 1



Click to enlarge
Verso: Volume 1



Click to enlarge
End Papers


Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 4] [p. 5]

  

Contents

  

VOLUME ONE

         	I

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGE

     
     	The World's Greatest Discovery

      	<page 13>

     
     	   In the Beginning

      	<page 15>

     
     	   The Purpose of Existence

      	<page 19>

     
     	   The "Open Sesame!" of Life

      	<page 24>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	II

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	The Genie-of-Your-Mind

      	<page 29>

     
     	   The Conscious Mind

      	<page 36>

     
     	   The Subconscious Mind

      	<page 39>

     
     	   The Universal Mind

      	<page 64>

     
   
     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 6] [p. 7]

         	"A fire-mist and a planet,
    A crystal and a cell,
    A jelly-fish and a saurian,
    cave where the cave-men dwell;
    Then a sense of law and order,
    A face upturned from the clod;
    Some call it Evolution, And others call it God."

--Reprinted from        
   The New England Journal.

     
   [p. 8] [p. 9]

  

Foreword

	
IF you had more money than time, more millions than you knew how to spend, what would be your pet philanthropy? Libraries? Hospitals? Churches? Homes for the Blind, Crippled or Aged?

Mine would be "Homes"--but not for the aged or infirm. For young married couples!

I have often thought that, if ever I got into the "Philanthropic Billionaire" class, I'd like to start an Endowment Fund for helping young married couples over the rough spots in those first and second years of married life--especially the second year, when the real troubles come.

[p. 10]

Take a boy and a girl and a cozy little nest--add a cunning, healthy baby--and there's nothing happier on God's green footstool.

But instead of a healthy babe, fill in a fretful, sickly baby--a wan, tired, worn-out little mother--a worried, dejected, heart-sick father--and there's nothing more pitiful.

A nurse for a month, a few weeks at the shore or mountains, a "lift" on that heavy Doctor's bill--any one of these things would spell H-E-A-V-E-N to that tiny family. But do they get it? Not often! And the reason? Because they are not poor enough for charity. They are not rich enough to afford it themselves. They belong to that great "Middle Class" which has to bear the burdens of both the poor and the rich--and take what is left for itself.

[p. 11]

It is to them that I should like to dedicate this book. If I cannot endow Libraries or Colleges for them, perhaps I can point the way to get all good gifts for themselves.

For men and women like them do not need "charity"--nor even sympathy. What they do need is Inspiration--and Opportunity--the kind of Inspiration that makes a man go out and create his own Opportunity.

And that, after all, is the greatest good one can do anyone. Few people appreciate free gifts. They are like the man whom an admiring townsfolk presented with a watch. He looked it over critically for a minute. Then--"Where's the chain?" he asked.

But a way to win for themselves the full measure of success they've dreamed of but almost stopped hoping for--that 

[p. 12]

is something every young couple would welcome with open arms. And it is something that, if I can do it justice, will make the "Eternal Triangle" as rare as it is today common, for it will enable husband and wife to work together--not merely for domestic happiness, but for business success as well.

ROBERT COLLIER.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 13]

  

I

  

The World's Greatest Discovery

"You can do as much as you think you can,
    But you'll never accomplish more;
  If you're afraid of yourself, young man,
    There's little for you in store.
  For failure comes from the inside first,
    It's there if we only knew it,
  And you can win, though you face the worst,
    If you feel that you're going to do it."
                       --EDGAR A. GUEST. [**]

	
WHAT, in your opinion, is the most significant discovery of this modern age?

The finding of Dinosaur eggs on the plains of Mongolia, laid--so scientists assert--some 10,000,000 years ago?

The unearthing of the Tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen, with its matchless specimens of a bygone civilization?



[p. 14]

The radio-active time clock by which Professor Lane of Tufts College estimates the age of the earth at 1,250,000,000 years?

Wireless? The Aeroplane? Man-made thunderbolts?

No--not any of these. The really significant thing about them is that from all this vast research, from the study of all these bygone ages, men are for the first time beginning to get an understanding of that "Life Principle" which--somehow, some way--was brought to this earth thousands or millions of years ago. They are beginning to get an inkling of the infinite power it puts in their hands--to glimpse the untold possibilities it opens up.

This is the greatest discovery of modern times--that every man can call upon this "Life Principle" at will, that it is as

[p. 15]

much the servant of his mind as was ever Aladdin's fabled "Genie-of-the-lamp" of old; that he has but to understand it and work in harmony with it to get from it anything he may need--health or happiness, riches or success.

To realize the truth of this, you have but to go back for a moment to the beginning of things.

In the Beginning--

It matters not whether you believe that mankind dates back to the primitive Ape-man of 500,000 years ago, or sprang full-grown from the mind of the Creator. In either event, there had to be a First Cause--a Creator. Some Power had to bring to this earth the first germ of Life, and the creation is no less wonderful if it started with the lowliest form of plant life and worked up through countless

[p. 16]

ages into the highest product of today's civilization, than if the whole were created in six days.

In the beginning, this earth was just a fire mist--six thousand or a billion years ago--what does it matter which?

The one thing that does matter is that some time, some way, there came to this planet the germ of Life--the Life Principle which animates all Nature--plant, animal, man. If we accept the scientists' version of it, the first form in which Life appeared upon earth was the humble Algae--a jelly-like mass which floated upon the waters. This, according to the scientists, was the beginning, the dawn of life upon the earth.

Next came the first bit of animal life-the lowly Amoeba, a sort of jelly fish, consisting of a single cell, without vertebrae, and with very little else to distinguish

[p. 17]

it from the water round about. But it had life--the first bit of animal life--and from that life, according to the scientists, we can trace everything we have and are today.

All the millions of forms and shapes and varieties of plants and animals that have since appeared are but different manifestations of life--formed to meet differing conditions. For millions of years this "Life Germ" was threatened by every kind of danger--from floods, from earthquakes, from droughts, from desert heat, from glacial cold, from volcanic eruptions--but to it each new danger was merely an incentive to finding a new resource, to putting forth Life in some new shape.

To meet one set of needs, it formed the Dinosaur--to meet another, the Butterfly. Long before it worked up to man,

[p. 18]

we see its unlimited resourcefulness shown in a thousand ways. To escape danger in the water, it sought land. Pursued on land, it took to the air. To breathe in the sea, it developed gills. Stranded on land, it perfected lungs. To meet one kind of danger it grew a shell. For another, a sting. To protect itself from glacial cold, it grew fur. In temperate climes, hair. Subject to alternate heat and cold, it produced feathers. But ever, from the beginning, it showed its power to meet every changing condition, to answer every creature need.

Had it been possible to kill this "Life Idea," it would have perished ages ago, when fire and flood, drought and famine followed each other in quick succession. But obstacles, misfortunes, cataclysms, were to it merely new opportunities to assert its power. In fact, it required obstacles

[p. 19]

to awaken it, to show its energy and resource.

The great reptiles, the monster beasts of antiquity, passed on. But the "Life Principle" stayed, changing as each age changed, always developing, always improving.

Whatever Power it was that brought this "Life Idea" to the earth, it came endowed with unlimited resource, unlimited energy, unlimited LIFE! No other force can defeat it. No obstacle can hold it back. All through the history of life and mankind you can see its directing intelligence--call it Nature, call it Providence, call it what you will--rising to meet every need of life.

The Purpose of Existence

No one can follow it down through the ages without realizing that the whole

[p. 20]

purpose of existence is GROWTH. Life is dynamic--not static. It is ever moving forward--not standing still. The one unpardonable sin of nature is to stand still, to stagnate. The , that was over a hundred feet long and as big as a house; the Tyrannosaurus, that had the strength of a locomotive and was the last word in frightfulness; the Pterodactyl or Flying Dragon--all the giant monsters of Prehistoric Ages--are gone. They ceased to serve a useful purpose. They did not know how to meet the changing conditions. They stood still--stagnated--while the life around them passed them by.

Egypt and Persia, Greece and Rome, all the great Empires of antiquity, perished when they ceased to grow. China built a wall about herself and stood still for a thousand years. Today she is the

[p. 21]

football of the Powers. In all Nature, to cease to grow is to perish.

It is for men and women who are not ready to stand still, who refuse to cease to grow, that this book is written. It will give you a clearer understanding of your own potentialities, show you how to work with and take advantage of the infinite energy all about you.

The terror of the man at the crossways, not knowing which road to take, will be no terror to you. Your future is of your own making. For the only law of Infinite Energy is the law of supply. The "Life Principle" is your principle. To survive, to win through, to triumphantly surmount all obstacles has been its everyday practice since the beginning of time. It is no less resourceful now than ever it was. You have but to supply the urge,

[p. 22]

to work in harmony with it, to get from it anything you may need.

For if this "Life Principle" is so strong in the lowest forms of animal life that it can develop a shell or a poison to meet a need; if it can teach the bird to circle and dart, to balance and fly; if it can grow a new limb on a spider to replace a lost one, how much more can it do for you--a reasoning, rational being, with a mind able to work with this "Life Principle," with an energy and an initiative to urge it on!

The evidence of this is all about you. Take up some violent form of exercise--rowing, tennis, swimming, riding. In the beginning your muscles are weak, easily tired. But keep on for a few days. The "Life Principle" promptly strengthens them, toughens them, to meet their new need. Do rough manual labor--and

[p. 23]

what happens? The skin of your hands becomes tender, blisters, hurts. Keep it up, and does the skin all wear off? On the contrary, the "Life Principle" provides extra thicknesses, extra toughness--, we call them--to meet your need.

All through your daily life you will find this "Life Principle" steadily at work. Embrace it, work with it, take it to yourself, and there is nothing you cannot do. The mere fact that you have obstacles to overcome is in your favor, for when there is nothing to be done, when things run along too smoothly, this "Life Principle" seems to sleep. It is when you need it, when you call upon it urgently, that it is most on the job.

It differs from "Luck" in this, that fortune is a fickle jade who smiles most often on those who need her least. Stake

[p. 24]

your last penny on the turn of a card--have nothing between you and ruin but the spin of a wheel or the speed of a horse--and it's a thousand to one "Luck" will desert you! But it is just the opposite with the "Life Principle." As long as things run smoothly, as long as life flows along like a song, this "Life Principle" seems to slumber, secure in the knowledge that your affairs can take care of themselves.

But let things start going wrong, let ruin and disgrace stare you in the face--then is the time this "Life Principle" will assert itself if you but give it a chance.

The "Open, Sesame!" of Life

There is a Napoleonic feeling of power that insures success in the knowledge that this invincible "Life Principle" is behind your every act. Knowing that you have

[p. 25]

working with you a force which never yet has failed in anything it has undertaken, you can go ahead in the confident knowledge that it will not fail in your case, either. The ingenuity which overcame every obstacle in making you what you are, is not likely to fall short when you have immediate need for it. It is the reserve strength of the athlete, the "second wind" of the runner, the power that, in moments of great stress or excitement, you unconsciously call upon to do the deeds which you ever after look upon as superhuman.

But they are in no wise superhuman. They are merely beyond the capacity of your conscious self. Ally your conscious self with that sleeping giant within you, rouse him daily to the task, and those "superhuman" deeds will become your ordinary, everyday accomplishments.

[p. 26]

W. L. Cain, of Oakland, Oregon, writes: "I know that there is such a power, for I once saw two boys, 16 and 18 years of age, lift a great log off their brother, who had been caught under it. The next day, the same two boys, with another man and myself, tried to lift the end of the log, but could not even budge it."

How was it that the two boys could do at need what the four were unable to do later on, when the need had passed? Because they never stopped to question whether or not it could be done. They saw only the urgent need. They concentrated all their thought, all their energy on that one thing--never doubting, never fearing--and the Genie which is in all of us waiting only for such a call, answered their summons and gave them the strength--not of two men, but of ten!

[p. 27]

It matters not whether you are Banker or Lawyer, Business Man or Clerk. Whether you are the custodian of millions, or have to struggle for your daily bread. This "Life Principle" makes no distinction between rich and poor, high and low. The greater your need, the more readily will it respond to your call. Wherever there is an unusual task, wherever there is poverty or hardship or sickness or despair, there is this Servant of your Mind, ready and willing to help, asking only that you call upon him.

And not only is it ready and willing, but it is always ABLE to help. Its ingenuity and resource are without limit. It is Mind. It is Thought. It is the Telepathy that carries messages without the spoken or written word. It is the Sixth Sense that warns you of unseen dangers. No matter how stupendous and

[p. 28]

complicated, nor how simple your problem may be--the solution of it is somewhere in Mind, in Thought. And since the solution does exist, this Mental Giant can find it for you. It can KNOW, and it can DO, every right thing. Whatever it is necessary for you to know, whatever it is necessary for you to do, you can know and you can do if you will but seek the help of this Genie-of-your-Mind and work with it in the right way.



Footnotes

^13:* From "A Heap o' Livin'." The Reilly & Lee Co.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 29]

  

II

  

The Genie-of-Your-Mind

"It matters not how strait the gate,
 How charged with punishment the scroll,
 I am the Master of my Fate;
 I am the Captain of my Soul."
                                 --HENLEY.

	
FIRST came the Stone Age, when life was for the strong of arm or the fleet of foot. Then there was the Iron Age--and while life was more precious, still the strong lorded it over the weak. Later came the Golden Age, and riches took the place of strength--but the poor found little choice between the slave drivers' whips of olden days and the grim weapons of poverty and starvation.

Now we are entering a new age--the

[p. 30]

[paragraph continues] Mental Age--when every man can be his own master, when poverty and circumstance no longer hold power and the lowliest creature in the land can win a place side by side with the highest.

To those who do not know the resources of mind these will sound like rash statements; but science proves beyond question that in the well springs of every man's mind are unplumbed depths--undiscovered deposits of energy, wisdom and ability. Sound these depths--bring these treasures to the surface--and you gain an astounding wealth of new power.

From the rude catamaran of the savages to the giant liners of today, carrying their thousands from continent to continent, is but a step in the development of Mind. From the lowly cave man, cowering in his burrow in fear of lightning or fire or water, to the engineer of today,

[p. 31]

making servants of all the forces of Nature, is but a measure of difference in mental development.

Man, without reasoning mind, would be as the monkeys are--prey of any creature fast enough and strong enough to pull him to pieces. At the mercy of wind and weather. A poor, timid creature, living for the moment only, fearful of every shadow.

Through his superior mind, he learned to make fire to keep himself warm; weapons with which to defend himself from the savage creatures round about; habitations to protect himself from the elements. Through mind he conquered the forces of Nature. Through mind he has made machinery do the work of millions of horses and billions of hands. What he will do next, no man knows, for man is just beginning to awaken to his own

[p. 32]

powers. He is just getting an inkling of the unfathomed riches buried deep in his own mind. Like the gold seekers of '49, he has panned the surface gravel for the gold swept down by the streams. Now he is starting to dig deeper to the pure vein beneath.

We bemoan the loss of our forests. We worry over our dwindling resources of coal and oil. We decry the waste in our factories. But the greatest waste of all, we pay no attention to--the waste of our own potential mind power. Professor Wm. James, the world-famous Harvard psychologist, estimated that the average man uses only 10% of his mental power. He has unlimited power--yet he uses but a tithe of it. Unlimited wealth all about him--and he doesn't know how to take hold of it. With God-like powers slumbering within him, he is content to

[p. 33]

continue in his daily grind--eating, sleeping, working--plodding through an existence little more eventful than the animals', while all of Nature, all of life, calls upon him to awaken, to bestir himself.

The power to be what you want to be, to get what you desire, to accomplish whatever you are striving for, abides within you. It rests with you only to bring it forth and put it to work. Of course you must know how to do that, but before you can learn how to use it, you must realize that you possess this power. So our first objective is to get acquainted with this power.

For Psychologists and Metaphysicians the world over are agreed in this--that Mind is all that counts. You can be whatever you make up your mind to be. You need not be sick. You need not be

[p. 34]

unhappy. You need not be poor. You need not be unsuccessful. You are not a mere clod. You are not a beast of burden, doomed to spend your days in unremitting labor in return for food and housing. You are one of the Lords of the Earth, with unlimited potentialities. Within you is a power which, properly grasped and directed, can lift you out of the rut of mediocrity and place you among the Elect of the earth--the lawyers, the writers, the statesmen, the big business men--the DOERS and the THINKERS. It rests with you only to learn to use this power which is yours--this Mind which can do all things.

Your body is for all practical purposes merely a machine which the mind uses. This mind is usually thought of as consciousness; but the conscious part of your mind is in fact the very smallest part of 

[p. 35]

it. Ninety per cent of your mental life is subconscious, so when you make active use of only the conscious part of your mind you are using but a fraction of your real ability; you are running on low gear. And the reason why more people do not achieve success in life is because so many of them are content to run on low gear all their lives--on SURFACE ENERGY. If these same people would only throw into the fight the resistless force of their subconscious minds they would be, amazed at their undreamed of capacity for winning success.

Conscious and subconscious are, of course, integral parts of the one mind. But for convenience sake let us divide your mind into three parts--the conscious mind, the subconscious mind, and the Infinite, Subliminal or Universal Mind.

[p. 36]

The Conscious Mind

When you say "I see--I hear--I smell--I touch," it is your conscious mind that is saying this, for it is the force governing the five physical senses. It is the phase of mind with which you feel and reason--the phase of mind with which everyone is familiar. It is the mind with which you do business. It controls, to a great extent, all your voluntary muscles. It discriminates between right and wrong, wise and foolish. It is the generalissimo, in charge of all your mental forces. It can plan ahead--and get things done as it plans. Or it can drift along haphazardly, a creature of impulse, at the mercy of events--a mere bit of flotsam in the current of life.

For it is only through your conscious mind that you can reach the subconscious

[p. 37]

and the Universal Mind. Your conscious mind is the porter at the door, the watchman at the gate. It is to the conscious mind that the subconscious looks for all its impressions. It is on it that the subconscious mind must depend for the teamwork necessary to get successful results. You wouldn't expect much from an army, no matter how fine its soldiers, whose general never planned ahead, who distrusted his own ability and that of his men, and who spent all his time worrying about the enemy instead of planning how he might conquer them. You wouldn't look for good scores from a ball team whose pitcher was at odds with the catcher. In the same way, you can't expect results from the subconscious when your conscious mind is full of fear or worry, or when it does not know what it wants.

[p. 38]

The one most important province of your conscious mind is to center your thoughts on the thing you want, and to shut the door on every suggestion of fear or worry or disease.

If you once gain the ability to do that, nothing else is impossible to you.

For the subconscious mind does not reason inductively. It takes the thoughts you send in to it and works them out to their logical conclusion. Send to it thoughts of health and strength, and it will work out health and strength in your body. Let suggestions of disease, fear of sickness or accident, penetrate to it, either through your own thoughts or the talk of those around you, and you are very likely to see the manifestation of disease working out in yourself.

Your mind is master of your body. It directs and controls every function of

[p. 39]

your body. Your body is in effect a little universe in itself, and mind is its radiating center--the sun which gives light and life to all your system, and around which the whole revolves. And your conscious thought is master of this sun center. As Emile Coue puts it--"The conscious can put the subconscious mind over the hurdles."

The Subconscious Mind

Can you tell me how much water, how much salt, how much of each different element there should be in your blood to maintain its proper specific gravity if you are leading an ordinary sedentary life? How much and how quickly these proportions must be changed if you play a fast game of tennis, or run for your car, or chop wood, or indulge in any other violent exercise?

[p. 40]

Do you know how much water you should drink to neutralize the excess salt in salt fish? How much you lose through perspiration? Do you know how much water, how much salt, how much of each different element in your food should be absorbed into your blood each day to maintain perfect health?

No? Well, it need not worry you. Neither does any one else. Not even the greatest physicists and chemists and mathematicians. But your subconscious mind knows.

And it doesn't have to stop to figure it out. It does it almost automatically. It is one of those "Lightning Calculators." And this is but one of thousands of such jobs it performs every hour of the day. The greatest mathematicians in the land, the most renowned chemists, could never do in a year's time the abstruse

[p. 41]

problems which your subconscious mind solves every minute.

And it doesn't matter whether you've ever studied mathematics or chemistry or any other of the sciences. From the moment of your birth your subconscious mind solves all these problems for you. While you are struggling along with the three R's, it is doing problems that would leave your teachers aghast. It supervises all the intricate processes of digestion, of assimilation, of elimination, and all the glandular secretions that would tax the knowledge of all the chemists and all the laboratories in the land. It planned and built your body from infancy on up. It repairs it. It operates it. It has almost unlimited power, not merely for putting you and keeping you in perfect health but for acquiring all the good things of life. Ignorance of this power is the

[p. 42]

sole reason for all the failures in this world. If you would intelligently turn over to this wonderful power all your business and personal affairs in the same way that you turn over to it the mechanism of your body, no goal would be too great for you to strive for.

Dr. Geo. C. Pitzer sums up the power of the subconscious mind very well in the following:

"The subconscious mind is a distinct entity. It occupies the whole human body, and, when not opposed in any way, it has absolute control over all the functions, conditions, and sensations of the body. While the objective (conscious) mind has control over all of our voluntary functions and motions, the subconscious mind controls all of the silent, involuntary, and vegetative functions. Nutrition, waste, all secretions and excretions,

[p. 43]

the action of the heart in the circulation of the blood, the lungs in respiration or breathing, and all cell life, cell changes and development, are positively under the complete control of the subconscious mind. This was the only mind animals had before the evolution of the brain; and it could not, nor can it yet, reason inductively, but its power of deductive reasoning is perfect. And more, it can see without the use of physical eyes. It perceives by intuition. It has the power to communicate with others without the aid of ordinary physical means. It can read the thoughts of others. It receives intelligence and transmits it to people at a distance. Distance offers no resistance against the successful missions of the subconscious mind. It never dies. We call this the 'soul mind.' It is the living soul."

[p. 44]

In "Practical Psychology and Sex Life," by David Bush, Dr. Winbigler is quoted as going even further. To quote him:

"It is this mind that carries on the work of assimilation and upbuilding whilst we sleep....

"It reveals to us things that the conscious mind has no conception of until the consummations have occurred.

"It can communicate with other minds without the ordinary physical means.

"It gets glimpses of things that ordinary sight does not behold.

"It makes God's presence an actual, realizable fact, and keeps the personality in peace and quietness.

"It warns of approaching danger.

"It approves or disapproves of a course of conduct and conversation.

"It carries out all the best things which

[p. 45]

are given to it, providing the conscious mind does not intercept and change the course of its manifestation.

"It heals the body and keeps it in health, if it is at all encouraged."

It is, in short, the most powerful force in life, and when properly directed, the most beneficent. But, like a live electric wire, its destructive force is equally great. It can be either your servant or your master. It can bring to you evil or good.

The Rev. William T. Walsh, in a new book just published, explains the idea very clearly:

"The subconscious part in us is called the subjective mind, because it does not decide and command. It is a subject rather than a ruler. Its nature is to do what it is told, or what really in your heart of hearts you desire.

"The subconscious mind directs all the

[p. 46]

vital processes of your body. You do not think consciously about breathing. Every time you take a breath you do not have to reason, decide, command. The subconscious mind sees to that. You have not been at all conscious that you have been breathing while you have been reading this page. So it is with the mind and the circulation of blood. The heart is a muscle like the muscle of your arm. It has no power to move itself or to direct its action. Only mind, only something that can think, can direct our muscles, including the heart. You are not conscious that you are commanding your heart to beat. The subconscious mind attends to that. And so it is with the assimilation of food, the building and repairing of the body. In fact, all the vital processes are looked after by the subconscious mind."

[p. 47]

"Man lives and moves and has his being" in this great subconscious mind. It supplies the "intuition" that so often carries a woman straight to a point that may require hours of cumbersome reasoning for a man to reach. Even in ordinary, every-day affairs, you often draw upon its wonderful wisdom.

But you do it in an accidental sort of way without realizing what you are doing.

Consider the case of "Blind Tom." Probably you've heard or read of him. You know that he could listen to a piece of music for the first time and go immediately to a piano and reproduce it. People call that abnormal. But as a matter of fact he was in this respect more normal than any of us. We are abnormal because we cannot do it.

Or consider the case of these "lightning

[p. 48]

calculators" of whom one reads now and then. It may be a boy seven or eight years old; but you can ask him to divide 7,649.437 by 326.2568 and he'll give you the result in less time than it would take you to put the numbers down on a piece of paper. You call him phenomenal. Yet you ought to be able to do the same yourself. Your subconscious mind can.

Dr. Hudson, in his book "The Law of Psychic Phenomena," tells of numerous such prodigies. Here are just a few instances:

"Of mathematical prodigies there have been upwards of a score whose calculations have surpassed, in rapidity and accuracy, those of the greatest educated mathematicians. These prodigies have done their greatest feats while but children from three to ten years old. In no case had these boys any idea how they

[p. 49]

performed their calculations, and some of them would converse upon other subjects while doing the sum. Two of these boys became men of eminence, while some of them showed but a low degree of objective intelligence.

"Whateley spoke of his own gift in the following terms:

"'There was certainly something peculiar in my calculating faculty. It began to show itself at between five and six, and lasted about three years. I soon got to do the most difficult sums, always in my head, for I knew nothing of figures beyond numeration. I did these sums much quicker than anyone could upon paper, and I never remember committing the smallest error. When I went to school, at which time the passion wore off, I was a perfect dunce at cyphering, and have continued so ever since.'

[p. 50]

"Professor Safford became an astronomer. At the age of ten he worked correctly a multiplication sum whose answer consisted of thirty-six figures. Later in life he could perform no such feats.

"Benjamin Hall Blyth, at the age of six, asked his father at what hour he was born. He was told that he was born at four o'clock. Looking at the clock to see the present time, he informed his father of the number of seconds he had lived. His father made the calculation and said to Benjamin, 'You are wrong 172,000 seconds.' The boy answered, 'Oh, papa, you have left out two days for the leap years 1820 and 1824,' which was the case.

"Then there is the celebrated case of Zerah Colburn, of whom Dr. Schofield writes:

"'Zerah Colburn could instantaneously tell the square root of 106,929 as 327, and

[p. 51]

the cube root of 268,336,125 as 645. Be fore the question of the number of minutes in forty-eight years could be written he said 25,228,810. He immediately gave the factors of 247,483 as 941 and 263, which are the only two; and being asked then for those of 36,083, answered none; it is a prime number. He could not tell how the answer came into his mind. He could not, on paper, do simple multiplication or division.'"

The time will come when, as H. G. Wells visioned in his "Men Like Gods," schools and teachers will no longer be necessary except to show us how to get in touch with the infinite knowledge our subconscious minds possess from infancy.

"The smartest man in the world," says Dr. Frank Crane in a recent article in Liberty, "is the Man Inside. By the Man Inside I mean that Other Man

[p. 52]

within each one of us that does most of the things we give ourselves credit for doing. You may refer to him as Nature or the Subconscious Self or think of him merely as a Force or a Natural Law, or, if you are religiously inclined, you may use the term God.

"I say he is the smartest man in the world. I know he is infinitely more clever and resourceful than I am or than any other man is that I ever heard of. When I cut my finger it is he that calls up the little phagocytes to come and kill the septic germs that might get into the wound and cause blood poisoning. It is he that coagulates the blood, stops the gash, and weaves the new skin.

"I could not do that. I do not even know how he does it. He even does it for babies that know nothing at all; in fact, does it better for them than for me.

[p. 53]

"No living man knows enough to make toenails grow, but the Man Inside thinks nothing of growing nails and teeth and thousands of hairs all over my body; long hairs on my head and little fuzzy ones over the rest of the surface of the skin.

"When I practice on the piano I am simply getting the business of piano playing over from my conscious mind to my subconscious mind: in other words, I am handing the business over to the Man Inside.

"Most of our happiness, as well as our struggles and misery, comes from this Man Inside. If we train him in ways of contentment, adjustment, and decision he will go ahead of us like a well trained servant and do for us easily most of the difficult tasks we have to perform."

Dr. Jung, celebrated Viennese specialist,

[p. 54]

claims that the subconscious mind contains not only all the knowledge that it has gathered during the life of the individual, but that in addition it contains all the wisdom of past ages. That by drawing upon its wisdom and power the individual may possess any good thing of life, from health and happiness to riches and success.

You see, the subconscious mind is the connecting link between the Creator and ourselves, between Universal Mind and our conscious mind. It is the means by which we can appropriate to ourselves all the good gifts, all the riches and abundance which Universal Mind has created in such profusion.

Berthelot, the great French founder of modern synthetic chemistry, once stated in a letter to a close friend that the final experiments which led to his most wonderful

[p. 55]

discoveries had never been the result of carefully followed and reasoned trains of thought, but that, on the contrary, "they came of themselves, so to speak, from the clear sky."

Charles M. Barrows, in "Suggestion Instead of Medicine," tells us that:

"If man requires another than his ordinary consciousness to take care of him while asleep, not less useful is this same psychical provision when he is awake. Many persons are able to obtain knowledge which does not come to them through their senses, in the usual way, but arrives in the mind by direct communication from another conscious intelligence, which apparently knows more of what concerns their welfare than their ordinary reason does. I have known a number of persons who, like myself, could tell the contents of letters in their

[p. 56]

mail before opening them. Several years ago a friend of mine came to Boston for the first time, arriving at what was then the Providence railroad station in Park Square. He wished to walk to the Lowell station on the opposite side of the city. Being utterly ignorant of the streets as well as the general direction to take he confidently set forth without asking the way, and reached his destination by the most direct path. In doing this he trusted solely to 'instinctive guidance,' as he called it, and not to any hints or clews obtained through the senses."

The geniuses of literature, of art, commerce, government, politics and invention are, according to the scientists, but ordinary men like you and me who have learned somehow, some way, to draw upon their subconscious minds.

Sir Isaac Newton is reported to have

[p. 57]

acquired his marvelous knowledge of mathematics and physics with no conscious effort. Mozart said of his beautiful symphonies that "they just came to him." Descartes had no ordinary regular education. To quote Dr. Hudson:

"This is a power which transcends reason, and is independent of induction. Instances of its development might be multiplied indefinitely. Enough is known to warrant the conclusion that when the soul is released from its objective environment it will be enabled to perceive all the laws of its being, to 'see God as He is,' by the perception of the laws which He has instituted. It is the knowledge of this power which demonstrates our true relationship to God, which confers the warranty of our right to the title of 'sons of God,' and confirms our inheritance of our rightful share of his attributes

[p. 58]

and powers--our heirship of God, joint heirship with Jesus Christ."

Our subconscious minds are vast magnets, with the power to draw from Universal Mind unlimited knowledge, unlimited power, unlimited riches.

"Considered from the standpoint of its activities," says Warren Hilton in "Applied Psychology," "the subconscious is that department of mind, which on the one hand directs the vital operations of the body, and on the other conserves, subject to the call of interest and attention, all ideas and complexes not at the moment active in consciousness.

"Observe, then, the possibility that lies before you. On the one hand, if you can control your mind in its subconscious activities, you can regulate the operation of your bodily functions, and can thus assure yourself of bodily efficiency

[p. 59]

and free yourself of functional disease. On the other hand, if you can determine just what ideas shall be brought forth from subconsciousness into consciousness, you can thus select the materials out of which will be woven your conscious judgments, your decisions and your emotional attitudes.

"To achieve control of your mind is, then, to attain (a) health, (b) success, and (c) happiness."

Few understand or appreciate, however, that the vast storehouse of knowledge and power of the subconscious mind can be drawn upon at will. Now and then through intense concentration or very active desire we do accidentally penetrate to the realm of the subconscious and register our thought upon it. Such thoughts are almost invariably realized. The trouble is that as often as not it is

[p. 60]

our negative thoughts--our fears--that penetrate. And these are realized just as surely as the positive thoughts. What you must manage to do is learn to communicate only such thoughts as you wish to see realized to your subconscious mind, for it is exceedingly amenable to suggestion. You have heard of the man who was always bragging of his fine health and upon whom some of his friends decided to play a trick. The first one he met one morning commented upon how badly he looked and asked if he weren't feeling well. Then all the others as they saw him made similar remarks. By noon time the man had come to believe them, and before the end of the day he was really ill.

That was a rather glaring example. But similar things are going on every day with all of us. We eat something

[p. 61]

that someone else tells us isn't good for us and in a little while we think we feel a pain. Before we know it we have indigestion, when the chances are that if we knew nothing about the supposed indigestible properties of the food we could eat it the rest of our days and never feel any ill effects.

Let some new disease be discovered and the symptoms described in the daily paper. Hundreds will come down with it at once. They are like the man who read a medical encyclopedia and ended up by concluding he had everything but "housemaid's knee." Patent medicine advertisers realize this power of suggestion and cash in upon it. Read one of their ads. If you don't think you have everything the matter with you that thei r nostrums are supposed to cure, you are the exception and not the rule.

[p. 62]

That is the negative side of it. Emile Coue based his system on the positive side--that you suggest to your subconscious mind that whatever ills it thinks you have are getting better. And it is good psychology at that. Properly carried out it will work wonders. But there are better methods. And I hope to be able to show them to you before we reach the end of this book.

Suffice it now to say that your subconscious mind is exceedingly wise and powerful. That it knows many things that are not in books. That when properly used it has infallible judgment, unfailing power. That it never sleeps, never tires.

Your conscious mind may slumber. It may be rendered impotent by anaesthetics or a sudden blow. But your subconscious mind works on, keeping your

[p. 63]

heart and lungs, your arteries and glands ever on the job.

Under ordinary conditions, it attends faithfully to its duties, and leaves your conscious mind to direct the outer life of the body. But let the conscious mind meet some situation with which it is unable to cope, and, if it will only call upon the subconscious, that powerful Genie will respond immediately to its need.

You have heard of people who had been through great danger tell how, when death stared them in the face and there seemed nothing they could do, things went black before them and, when they came to, the danger was past. In the moment of need, their subconscious mind pushed the conscious out of the way, the while it met and overcame the danger. Impelled by the subconscious

[p. 64]

mind, their bodies could do things absolutely impossible to their ordinary conscious selves.

For the power of the subconscious mind is unlimited. Whatever it is necessary for you to do in any right cause, it can give you the strength and the ability to do.

Whatever of good you may desire, it can bring to you. "The Kingdom of Heaven is within you."

The Universal Mind

Have you ever dug up a potato vine and seen the potatoes clustering underneath? How much of intelligence do you suppose one of these potatoes has? Do you think it knows anything about chemistry or geology? Can it figure out how to gather carbon gas from the atmosphere, water and all the necessary

[p. 65]

kinds of nutriment from the earth round about to manufacture into sugar and starch and alcohol? No chemist can do it. How do you suppose the potato knows? Of course it doesn't. It has no sense. Yet it does all these things. It builds the starch into cells, the cells into roots and vines and leaves--and into more potatoes.

"Just old Mother Nature," you'll say. But old Mother Nature must have a remarkable intelligence if she can figure out all these things that no human scientist has ever been able to figure. There must be an all-pervading Intelligence behind Mother Nature--the Intelligence that first brought life to this planet--the Intelligence that evolved every form of plant and animal--that holds the winds in its grasp--that is all-wise, all-powerful. The potato is but one small manifestation

[p. 66]

of this Intelligence. The various forms of plant life, of animals, of man--all are mere cogs in the great scheme of things.

But with this difference--that man is an active part of this Universal Mind. That he partakes of its creative wisdom and power and that by working in harmony with Universal Mind he can do anything, have anything, be anything.

There is within you--within everyone--this mighty resistless force with which you can perform undertakings that will dazzle your reason, stagger your imagination. There constantly resides within you a Mind that is all-wise, all-powerful, a Mind that is entirely apart from the mind which you consciously use in your everyday affairs yet which is one with it.

Your subconscious mind partakes of

[p. 67]

this wisdom and power, and it is through your subconscious mind that you can draw upon it in the attainment of anything you may desire. When you can intelligently reach your subconscious mind, you can be in communication with the Universal Mind.

Remember this: the Universal Mind is omnipotent. And since the subconscious mind is part of the Universal Mind, there is no limit to the things which it can do when it is given the power to act. Given any desire that is in harmony with the Universal Mind and you have but to hold that desire in your thought to attract from the invisible domain the things you need to satisfy it.

For mind does its building solely by the power of thought. Its creations take form according to its thought. Its first requisite is a mental image, and your

[p. 68]

desire held with unswerving purpose will form that mental image.

An understanding of this principle explains the power of prayer. The results of prayer are not brought about by some special dispensation of Providence. God is not a finite being to be cajoled or flattered into doing as you desire. But when you pray earnestly you form a mental image of the thing that you desire and you hold it strongly in your thought., Then the Universal Intelligence which is your intelligence--Omnipotent Mind--begins to work with and for you, and this is what brings about the manifestation that you desire.

The Universal Mind is all around you. It is as all-pervading as the air you breathe. It encompasses you with as little trouble as the water in the sea encompasses the fish. Yet it is just as

[p. 69]

thoroughly conscious of you as the water would be, were it intelligent, of every creature within it. "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not, therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows."

It seems hard to believe that a Mind busied with the immensities of the universe can consider such trivial affairs as our own when we are but one of the billions of forms of life which come into existence. Yet consider again the fish in the sea. It is no trouble for the sea to encompass them. It is no more trouble for the Universal Mind to encompass us. Its power, Its thought, are as much at OUT disposal as the sunshine and the win and the rain. Few of us take advantage

[p. 70]

to the full of these great forces. Fewer still take advantage of the power of the Universal Mind. If you have any lack, if you are prey to poverty or disease, it is because you do not believe or do not understand the power that is yours. It is not a question of the Universal giving to you. It offers everything to everyone--there is no partiality. "Ho, everyone that thirsteth, come ye to the waters." You have only to take. "Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely."

"With all thy getting, get understanding," said Solomon. And if you will but get understanding, everything else will added unto you.

To bring you to a realization of your indwelling and unused power, to teach you simple, direct methods of drawing upon it, is the beginning and the end of this course.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. i]

  

INDEX

In the following index the first figure after each line refers to the volume and the second to the page.

  

A

"A craven hung--," 5-<page 399>

"A fire-mist and a planet," 1-<page 7>

"Abundance everywhere," 3-<page 227>

   feel, 3-<page 234>

   law of, 3-<page 226>

   think, 4-<page 349>, 6-<page 483>

Accidents, 7-<page 613>

   denied, 5-<page 382>

Accomplish a definite thing, 2-<page 140>

Acres of Diamonds, 5-<page 403>

Advancement, rule of, 4-<page 320>

Affirmations for happiness, 2-<page 150>

   for money troubles, 2-<page 149>

   for thinking, 2-<page 150>

   for writing, 2-<page 150>

Age, at 30, 6-<page 532>

   fallacy of, 6-<page 505>

   great, 6-<page 507>

   is state of mind, 6-<page 507>

   no biological reason for, 6-<page 509>

   old, defined, 5-<page 422>, 6-<page 524>

   old unnecessary, 6-<page 511>

   why grow old, 6-<page 505>

   your, 6-<page 530>

   your present, 6-<page 516>

"Ah, Love! Could Thou," 2-<page 127>

Aim high, 3-<page 200>

   of this work, 1-<page 11>

Aladdin & , 1-<page 15>, 3-<page 165>

Allen, James, 2-<page 83>

Ambition drives, 2-<page 131>

American Bankers Association, 5-<page 399>

Ambition, demon of, 2-<page 133>

Amoeba, 1-<page 16>

Analyze your work, 5-<page 450>

"Arise, O Soul," 5-<page 373>

Ark of the Covenant, 5-<page 381>

"As a man thinketh," 3-<page 207>

"Ask and ye shall receive," 3-<page 173>, 3-<page 206>, 6-<page 476>

Assurance of success, 3-<page 198>, 4-<page 361>

Athlete, second wind of, 1-<page 25>

Attack, method of, 3-<page 203>

Attraction, law of, 4-<page 305>

Average of successes, 5-<page 400>

  

B

Baker, Geo. F., at 85, 6-<page 521>

Barrows, Chas. M., 1-<page 55>

Bars of Fate, 4-<page 353>

Barton, Bruce, 5-<page 428>

Baudouin, 2-<page 97>

"Be not afraid," 3-<page 243>

"Be Still," 4-<page 350>

Beaupre, de, St. Anne, 7-<page 573>

Begin your work, 3-<page 241>

Belief vs. drugs, 7-<page 604>

Believe abundance, 2-<page 102>, 3-<page 234>

   in yourself, 4-<page 276>

   now, 3-<page 248>

   ye receive, 2-<page 110>, 2-<page 139>, 5-<page 384>, 6-<page 469>, 7-<page 574>

   you are safe, 7-<page 571>

   you have it, 2-<page 156>, 4-<page 284>, 4-<page 365>, 6-<page 487>

Berthelot, 1.54

Blind Tom, 1-<page 47>

Blyth, Benj. Hall, 1-<page 50>

Birthdays harmful, 6-<page 529>

Birthright, your, 6-<page 492>

Body like clay, 4-<page 344>

   rebuilds in 11 months, 2-<page 140>

[p. ii]

Brains, use them, 5-<page 430>

Braley, Berton, 3-<page 240>, 3-<page 254>

Bridges, Madeline, 4-<page 305>

Brisbane, Arthur, 2-<page 131>

Browning, 6-<page 459>

Bush, David V., 5-<page 411>

Business demands much, 5-<page 448>

"But the feeble hands--" 3-<page 165>

Byrne, Dr. Joseph, 7-<page 555>

  

C

Cabot, Dr. Richard C., 7-<page 552>

Calamity brings good, 5-<page 385>

Can't, 6-<page 459>

Carnegie's education, 6-<page 471>

Carrel, Dr. Alexis, 6-<page 509>

Catarrh, cause of, 4-<page 342>

Cato at 81, 6-<page 530>

Cause, first, 1-<page 15>, 2-<page 77>

Cells live indefinitely, 6-<page 510>

Chamberlain, C. W., 3-<page 197>

Chasm, the narrow, 4-<page 337>

Check, your blank, 4-<page 326>

Children's ailments, 7-<page 624>

   cure of, 7-<page 629>

Circumstance does not drive, 5-<page 408>

Clark, Glenn, 2-<page 149>

Cleanliness, 7-<page 559>

Clerk or executive, 5-<page 431>

Cain, W. L., 1-<page 26>

Colburn, Zerah, 1-<page 50>

Colds, cause of, 4-<page 298>, 4-<page 342>

   cure of, 4-<page 299>, 4-<page 342>

   how started, 7-<page 569>

Conceive something, 6-<page 465>

Concentrate, 3-<page 196>

   on desires, 2-<page 136>, 6-<page 482>

   on one thing, 4-<page 365>, 5-<page 436>

   upon good, 4-<page 349>

Concentration, practice, 2-<page 137>

Conditions are effects, 3-<page 211>

Confidence, absolute, in leaders 6-<page 460>

   attracts, 5-<page 40>

   cultivate, 4-<page 337>

Conscious Mind a feeder, 2-<page 104>

   defined, 1-<page 36>

   its work, 1-<page 36>

   the one duty of, 1-<page 38>

Control of matter, 3-<page 214>

   your thought, 1-<page 60>, 2-<page 119>, 3-<page 202>

"Come ye," 2-<page 145>

Command your mind, 3-<page 186>

Common , law of, 4-<page 323>

Coue, Emile, 1-<page 62>

Courage to start things, 4-<page 328>

Crane, Dr. Frank, 1-<page 51>

Create, 6-<page 471>

Creator, 1-<page 15>

Cripple, sudden cure of, 7-<page 572>

Cure by desire, 7-<page 573>

   by faith, 7-<page 573>

   by how to, 7-<page 586>

   by spiritual, 7-<page 554>

   by time for, 7-<page 552>

Cured, when, 7-<page 611>

Cures, proof, 7-<page 549>

   what, 7-<page 551>

  

D

Davis, Richard Harding, 3-<page 185>

Dayton, Alice, 6-<page 489>

Death, no reason for, 6-<page 522>

   only in higher animals, 6-<page 513>

Delirium tremens, 4-<page 348>

Demand, 3-<page 228>

   much, 3-<page 174>, 3-<page 201>

   youth, 6-<page 526>

Demon of Ambition, 2-<page 133>

Descartes, 1-<page 57>

Desire, 2-<page 127>

   focus, 2-<page 136>

[p. iii]

Desire, hold in mind, 1-<page 67>

   rules world, 2-<page 135>

   satisfied, 4-<page 338>

   understanding, 4-<page 293>

Desires met, 5-<page 388>

Determined soul, wins, 5-<page 405>

Develop your ideas, 3-<page 251>

Development of Life, 1-<page 16>

Didama, Dr., 7-<page 566>

Diet, 4-<page 300>

   alone valueless, 7-<page 615>

   does not bring health, 6-<page 495>

Difficulties, benefit of, 5-<page 378>

   thrive on, 5-<page 424>

Discipline thoughts, 3-<page 203>

Discouragement dangerous, 4-<page 335>

   devil's weapon, 4-<page 336>

Discover yourself, 4-<page 332>

   your capacity, 4-<page 332>

Discovery, world's greatest, 1-<page 13>, 2-<page 83>

Disease, cause of, 4-<page 300>

   cure of, 5-<page 397>

   defined, 7-<page 592>

   how to overcome, 7-<page 618>

   not sent by God, 4-<page 297>

   prevention of, 7-<page 560>

   treatment of (see Gift of Magi), 7-<page 563>

   unnecessary, 7-<page 614>

   where started, 4-<page 295>

Diseases, all alike, 7-<page 601>

Disorders, cause of, 4-<page 301>

Divine Principle, 5-<page 390>

   unrest, 5-<page 420>

Drive yourself, 6-<page 465>

Do something, 4-<page 310>

Don't be satisfied, 4-<page 272>

   doubt, 3-<page 235>

   interfere, 2-<page 155>, 3-<page 235>

   stand still, 4-<page 272>

   struggle, 3-<page 165>

   worry, 3-<page 235>

Dream or reality, 2-<page 84>

"Dream Success," 2-<page 84>

Drugs, advance in, 7-<page 553>

   cannot cure, 7-<page 546>

   future of, 7-<page 557>

   harmful, 7-<page 555>

   value of, 7-<page 548>

Dumont, 3-<page 178>, 3-<page 232>

Dyspepsia, cause of, 4-<page 301>

  

E

Eddy, Mary Baker, 7-<page 606>

Effort, the only price, 4-<page 329>

Electrons, 7-<page 587>

Eleven months, your age, 6-<page 517>

Emerson, 2-<page 106>

Employee's opportunity, 4-<page 321>

Energy, infinite, 1-<page 21>

   surface, 1-<page 35>

Eternal life, meaning of, 5-<page 390>

"Eternal Mind the potter is," 6-<page 489>

"Everyone that thirsteth," 1-<page 70>

Evolution, 1-<page 16>, 7-<page 580>

Executive or clerk, 5-<page 431>

Exercise, 4-<page 362>

   alone valueless, 7-<page 616>

   centers thoughts, 6-<page 499>

   does not bring health, 6-<page 495>

   rests mind, 6-<page 500>

   unnecessary, 4-<page 302>

Existence, purpose of, 6-<page 479>

Expect good, 4-<page 271>

   wealth, 2-<page 97>

Experience unnecessary, 5-<page 446>

Eyes, healthy, 7-<page 599>

  

F

Failure impossible, 4-<page 281>

Failures mental defects, 5-<page 404>

Faith, according to your, 3-<page 243>

   begins action, 2-<page 123>

[p. iv]

Faith controls matter, 2-<page 87>

   defined, 7-<page 632>

   fortunes from, 3-<page 243>

   heals, 7-<page 578>

   in self, 4-<page 266>

   removes obstacles, 2-<page 97>

   satisfies desire, 2-<page 97>

   the first step, 4-<page 282>

   to go ahead, 4-<page 329>

   without works, 7-<page 584>

Farnsworth, 2-<page 135>

Fate, man his own, 3-<page 212>

Fatigue, cause of, 4-<page 274>

Fear, a primary cause, 4-<page 349>

   brings age, 4-<page 342>

   causes death, 7-<page 570>

   causes sickness, 4-<page 342>

   creates, 4-<page 340>

   defined, 4-<page 341>

   filth of mind, 4-<page 349>

   forget your, 3-<page 236>

   halts digestion, 4-<page 342>

    how it works, 4-<page 345>

    is unreasoning, 4-<page 341> not, 4-<page 348>

   remedy for, 4-<page 346>

   starts disease, 4-<page 296>

Fears conquered, 7-<page 631>

Feel abundance, 3-<page 234>

   prosperous, 6-<page 485>

Fever, cause of, 4-<page 298>, 4-<page 342>

Finish one thing, 5-<page 438>

Firestone, Harvey S., 2-<page 114>

"For life is the mirror," 4-<page 305>

"For the best verse," 3-<page 240>

Force yourself, 6-<page 465>

Ford uses subconscious, 5-<page 415>

Forget your fears, 3-<page 236>

Formula of success, 4-<page 263>

Fortunes from faith, 3-<page 243>

Fountain of youth, 6-<page 516>

Functions controlled by mind, 6-<page 531>

Future, your control of, 5-<page 410>

  

G

Gain, first law of, 2-<page 127>

Gale, Dr. H. G., 7-<page 588>

Genie of the Lamp, 1-<page 15>

   of your mind, 1.29, 3-<page 188>, 4-<page 330>

"Gift of the Magi," 7-<page 563>

Give and receive, 4-<page 324>

   thanks, 2-<page 156>, 4-<page 365>

   thanks in advance, 3-<page 188>

   to everyone, 4-<page 325> to get, 4-<page 322>, 5-<page 440>

   service, 4-<page 318>

God gives abundantly, 3-<page 174>

   not finite, 1-<page 68>

Good, expect, 4-<page 271>

Great are servants, 4-<page 312>

   men are healthy, 6-<page 490>

   were once as you, 5-<page 427>

Greeley, Horace, 3.252

Growth, 1-<page 20>

   comes from practice, 2-<page 120>

   from within, 2-<page 113>

   mystery of, 1-<page 65>

Guarantee of success, 3-<page 198>

Guest, Edgar A., 1-<page 13>, 4-<page 339>, 5-<page 419>, 5-<page 427>, 5-<page 435>

  

H

Hammond, Dr., 6-<page 522>

Happiness, think, 4-<page 349>

"Happy is the man," 3-<page 175>

Healing helps churches, 7-<page 607>

   through mind, 7-<page 557>

Health, a state of mind, 6-<page 500>

   defined, 7-<page 591>

   formula for, 4-<page 303>

   from mind, 6-<page 498>

   from thought, 3-<page 215>

   method for, 5-<page 397>

[p. v]

Health, not from exercise, 6-<page 493>

   register, 2-<page 146>

   think, 4-<page 349>

Heart, palpitation of, 4-<page 301>

Heart's desire, 5-<page 402>

Heaven, Kingdom of, 2-<page 134>

Henley, 1-<page 29>

Herald-Tribune, 2-<page 86>

Hilton, Warren, 1-<page 58>, 2-<page 89>, 7-<page 564>

"How do you tackle your work," 4-<page 339>, 5-<page 435>

Houdini's test, 7-<page 570>

Hudson, Dr., 1-<page 48>, 1-<page 57>

Humboldt, at 90, 6-<page 530>

Hunting, Gardner, 4-<page 316>

Hutchinson, Dr. Woods, 6-<page 496>, 7-<page 543>

  

I

"I bargained with life," 3-<page 200>

"I knew his face the moment," 5-<page 416>

"'I read the papers every day," 6-<page 473>

Ideas, develop your, 3-<page 251>

spring from unconscious, 5-<page 451>

"If you think you are beaten," 4-<page 275>

"If you want a thing," 3-<page 254>

Illness, how to cure, 7-<page 607>

Image desire, 2-<page 119>, 6-<page 468>

   health, 7-<page 594>

   success, 6-<page 468>

Imagination brings success, 6-<page 471>

   Divine gift, 6-<page 466>

Immortality a fundamental property, 6-<page 511>

in lower animals, 6-<page 514>

Impressions are pictures, 2-<page 103>

Improvements in your body, 6-<page 535>

In the beginning, 1-<page 15>

Independence, at what age, 5-<page 399>

Indigestion, 4-<page 347>

   cause of, 4-<page 342>

   cure of, 4-<page 348>, 7-<page 602>

Infusorium immortal, 6-<page 514>

Initiative, 4-<page 328>, 5-<page 441>

   plus imagination, 6-<page 466>

Injury, deny, 7-<page 612>

Instinctive guidance, 1-<page 56>

Intelligence, Universal, 1-<page 66>

"It couldn't be done," 4-<page 275>

"It is not the guns," 3-<page 204>

"It matters not how strait," 1-<page 29>

  

J

James, Prof. Wm., 1-<page 32>, 1-<page 83>, 2-<page 90>, 3-<page 198>

Jesus, His method, 7-<page 632>

   His miracles, 7-<page 633>

Joan of Arc, 6-<page 470>

Joy revitalizes, 6-<page 501>

Jung, Dr. C. G., 1-<page 53>

  

K

Karma, law of, 4-<page 323>

Keep going ahead, 3-<page 246>, 5-<page 450>

Kenyon, 5-<page 373>

Kellerman, Annette, 6-<page 521>

King, Basil, 3-<page 213>

Kingdom of God, 3-<page 230>

   of Heaven, 2-<page 101>

Kipling, 4-<page 360>

Know the Truth, 7-<page 575>

   what you want, 2-<page 122>, 5-<page 449>

   your power, 4-<page 328>

Knowledge, unstudied, 1-<page 56>

Knox, J. Mason, 3-<page 204>

  

L

L'Envoi, 7-<page 630>

Lane, Sir Arbuthnot, 1-<page 14>, 7-<page 544>

Lack is unbelief, 1-<page 70>

Law of Abundance, 3-<page 226>

   of Attraction, 4-<page 305>

   of Being, 7-<page 630>

   of Causation, 6-<page 463>

[p. vi]

Law of Common Sense, 4-<page 323>

   of Gain, 2-<page 127>

   of Karma, 4-<page 323>

   of Love, 4-<page 323>

   of Nature, 6-<page 480>

   of Service, 4-<page 323>

   of Supply, 1-<page 21>, 3-<page 225>, 6-<page 481>

   of Visualization, 3-<page 195>

Leaders are few, 2-<page 121>

   in demand, 6-<page 460>

   of mental science, 7-<page 567>

Learn your powers, 1-<page 34>

"Letters of self-made merchant," 5-<page 447>

Letters, unopened, contents of, 1-<page 56>

Life begins, where, 3-<page 220>

   development of, 1-<page 18>

   dynamic, 1-<page 20>

   eternal, meaning of, 5-<page 390>

   germ, 1-<page 17>

   idea, 1-<page 18>

   not measured in years, 6-<page 528>

Life Principle, 1-<page 14>, 1-<page 27>

   ability of, 1-<page 22>

   animates all nature, 1-<page 18>

   in extremity, 1-<page 24>

   is Mind, 1-<page 27>

   is thought, 1-<page 27>

   meets needs, 1-<page 18>

   responds to call, 1-<page 27>

   works steadily, 1-<page 23>

Lightning calculators, 1-<page 48>

Limitation, no law of, 3-<page 199>

   the only, 3-<page 238>

Live prosperity, 6-<page 484>

Loeb, Dr. Jacques, 5-<page 374>

Longings satisfied, 5-<page 388>

Look prosperous, 6-<page 485>

   successful, 5-<page 411>

Love, law of, 4-<page 323>

Lourdes, cures of, 7-<page 573>

Luck, bad, 4-<page 339>

  

M

Magi, gift of, 7-<page 563>

Magic secret, 2-<page 136>

Malone, Walter, 3-<page 225>

Man his own fate, 3-<page 212>

   his own master, 1-<page 30>

   inside, 1-<page 51>

   inside, happiness from, 1-<page 52>

   inside, misery from, 1-<page 5>

   resourceful, 1-<page 52>

   inside, struggles from, 1-<page 53>

   is eternal, 3-<page 221>

   is supreme, 3-<page 221>

Man's ascendancy, 3-<page 219>

   freedom, 3-<page 217>

Marden, Orison Swett, 5-<page 404>

Mason, Walt, 6-<page 473>

Master Mind, 6-<page 459>

   of my fate, 5-<page 400>

Mastery, self, attracts, 5-<page 406>

Materialist, or Idealist, 2-<page 77>

Matter a thought product, 2-<page 84>

   controlled by Mind, 2-<page 88>

   is electricity, 2-<page 87>

   not permanent, 7-<page 609>

   unintelligent, 2-<page 115>

   unreal, 2-<page 84>

Mastery is rare, 3-<page 219>

"Men like gods," 1-<page 51>

Mears, Chas. W., 2-<page 135>

Meat healthful, 6-<page 496>

Medicine delusion, 7-<page 543>

Melancholia, cause of, 4-<page 301>

Men created equal, 6-<page 464>

   should not die, 6-<page 522>

Mental age, 1-<page 30>

   attitude determines power, 6-<page 461>

   Brownies, 3-<page 176>, 3-<page 181>

   giant, 1-<page 28>

   image, 3-<page 209>

Method of thinking, 3-<page 203>

Methods for health, 5-<page 397>

[p. vii]

Millions, unappropriated, 5-<page 419>

Mind as curative force. 7-<page 568>

   command you, 3-<page 186>

   controls functions, 4-<page 342>

   decides, 7-<page 589>

   is all, 7-<page 593>

   is all wise, 2-<page 124>

   is healer, 7-<page 555>

   its capacity, 4-<page 274>

   makes your world, 6-<page 464>

   master, 6-<page 459>

   meets every need, 6-<page 476>

   open your, 4-<page 270>

   over things, 3-<page 206>

   primal cause, 2-<page 79>

   rules world, 3-<page 176>

   see (Conscious Mind) the only cause, 4-<page 295>

   the only creator, 6-<page 503>

   three divisions, 1-<page 35>

Miracles everyday, 5-<page 375>

Model making, 3-<page 249>

   your, 6-<page 504>

Money an idea, 2-<page 107>

   if needed, 5-<page 413>

   in marriage, 3-<page 247>

   needs you, 3-<page 251>

   or brains, 3-<page 247>

Mother Nature, 1-<page 65>

Move, 3-<page 246>

Mozart, 1-<page 57>

Mystery of youth, 1-<page 64>

  

N

Napoleon denounces religion, 6-<page 474>

   his faith, 2-<page 100>

   talisman of, 4-<page 267>

   was poor, 6-<page 471>

Nature is bountiful, 6-<page 480>

   lavish, 3-<page 226>

   profuse, 2-<page 106>

   law of, 6-<page 480>

Needs are met, 1-<page 18>, 1-<page 22>, 5-<page 377>

Nervous trouble, cure of, 7-<page 564>

Newton, Sir Isaac, 1-<page 56>

Nurse, aim of, 7-<page 565>

  

O

Omar Khayyam, 2-<page 127>

One thing I do, 5-<page 435>

"One ship drives east," 4-<page 263>

"One who never turned," 6-<page 459>

"Open Sesame" of Life, 1-<page 24>

Open your mind, 4-<page 270>

Opportunity, 3-<page 240>

   door of open, 2-<page 145>

   is infinite, 3-<page 240>

Origin of riches, 3-<page 230>

  

P

Palpitation of heart, 4.301

Paralysis, cured, 7-<page 617>

Paramecium immortal, 6-<page 516>

Paralytic suddenly cured, 7-<page 572>

Past, the, is available, 4-<page 331>

Patience is needed, 5-<page 445>

Patten, Dr. Wm. S., 4-<page 295>

Perfection, an ideal of, 7-<page 613>

Perseverance, Ford's, 4-<page 336>

Philip of Macedon, 3-<page 203>

Philosopher's charm, 2-<page 94>

Physique, a perfect, 6-<page 536>

Physician, ideal, 7-<page 566>

Pierce, Frederick, 5-<page 450>

Pitzer, Dr. Geo. C., 1-<page 42>, 7-<page 591>

Plan ahead, 5-<page 450>

Plato at 80, 6-<page 530>

Pneumonia, cause of, 4-<page 298>

Position, if new is desired, 5-<page 413>

Possibilities, 4-<page 358>

Poverty an effect, 4-<page 307>

   is lack, 2-<page 134>

   is wrong, 6-<page 477>

   unnatural, 6-<page 481>

[p. viii]

Power available, 4-<page 291>

   from within, 2-<page 109>

   invisible, 2-<page 94>, 5-<page 402>

   realize your, 2-<page 122>

   the only, 4-<page 295>

   think, 4-<page 349>

   understand secret of, 5-<page 428>

   vast, available, 1-<page 59>

   your, 5-<page 390>

Powers, your, 1-<page 33>

Practice expecting, 3-<page 224>

   is necessary, 3-<page 224>

Prayer a realization, 2-<page 99>

   heals, 7-<page 578>

   in sports, 2-<page 151>

   is belief, 2-<page 147>

   is effective, 2-<page 151>

   power of, 1-<page 68>

   soul's desire, 2-<page 146>

Prenatal influence, 7-<page 628>

Primal cause, 2-<page 79>, 2-<page 77>

"Prince and Statute," 6-<page 532>

Problem, bring your, 5-<page 395>

Problems can be solved, 3-<page 190>

Prodigies, 1-<page 48>

Profits from service, 4-<page 317>

Progress, 3-<page 246>

   study to, 4-<page 314>

Prosperity, think, 6-<page 483>

Protons, 7-<page 587>

Purpose of existence, 1-<page 19>

   singleness of, 2-<page 122>

Pygmalion, 6-<page 491>

  

R

Rae, Dr. Burnett, 7-<page 556>

Realize your need, 3-<page 170>

   your power, 2-<page 122>

Relax, 4-<page 362>

Religion satisfies mediocrity, 6-<page 475>

   teaches resignation, 6-<page 474>

Results are sure, 3-<page 188>

Rheumatism, 6-<page 496>

Riches, origin of, 3-<page 230>

Righteousness immortal, 6-<page 527>

Rittenhouse, Jessie B., 3-<page 199>

Royden, A. Maude, 2-<page 152>

Roosevelt once weak, 6-<page 521>

  

S

Safford, Prof., 1-<page 50>

Schofield, Dr., 1-<page 50>

"Science and Health," 4-<page 334>

Science of thought, 5-<page 390>

Sculptors and the clay, 6-<page 489>

Secret, magic, 2-<page 136>

   defined, 5-<page 428>

   of power, 5-<page 427>

See abundance, 3-<page 234>

   yourself doing it, 3-<page 191>, 4-<page 275>, 4-<page 36>

Self confidence attracts, 5-<page 406>

   mastery attracts, 5-<page 406>

Service attracts, 4-<page 306>

   brings advancement, 4-<page 316>

   law of, 4-<page 323>

   pays, 4-<page 313>

Seven wonders, 2-<page 81>

Shakespeare, 4-<page 345>

Shaw, Bernard, 7-<page 546>

Sickness, cause of, 4-<page 342>

   defined, 4-<page 289>, 7-<page 589>

   how to cure, 7-<page 593>, 7-<page 608>

   unnecessary, 6-<page 490>

Sill, Edward R., 5-<page 399>

Sixth sense, 1-<page 27>

Slosson, Dr. Edwin, 2-<page 105>

Solomon, 1-<page 70>

"Somebody said that it," 5-<page 419>

Something within, 2-<page 131>

Sorrow depresses, 6-<page 502>

Start something, 4-<page 280>, 6-<page 465>

Stevenson, Robert Louis, 3-<page 177>

Strength, superhuman, 1-<page 26>

Struggles healthful, 4-<page 349>

[p. ix]

Study to progress, 4-<page 314>

Subconscious mind,

   above reason, 1-<page 57>

   brings ideas, 1-<page 55>

   connects with Universal Mind, 1-<page 67>

   control of brings health, 1-<page 59>

   directs, 1-<page 46>

   has infallible judgment, 1-<page 62>

   how it works, 5-<page 612>

   its work, 1-<page 40>

   knows all, 1-<page 55>

   makes geniuses, 1-<page 56>

   never sleeps, 1-<page 62>

   part of Universal Mind, 1-<page 67>

   power of, 1-<page 42>

   power unlimited, 1-<page 40>, 1-<page 64>

   rises to emergency, 1-<page 63>

   sees God as He is, 1-<page 57>

   solves problems, 5-<page 452>

   source of wealth, 1-<page 54>

   wonders of, 1-<page 43>

   work of, l-<page 44>

Subjective Mind, 1-<page 45>

Success, assurance of, 3-<page 198>, 4-<page 361>

   dream, 2-<page 84>

   imagination brings, 6-<page 471>

   secret of, 5-<page 433>

   two requisites, 4-<page 284>

"Suffer little children," 7-<page 624>

Suggestion for illness, 7-<page 623>

   for indigestion, 7-<page 623>

   for others, 7-<page 625>

   mass, 7-<page 626>

   negative brings sickness, 1-<page 61>

   positive brings health, 1-<page 61>

   power of, 5-<page 398>

   vs. medicine, 1-<page 55>

Suggestions, 6-<page 503>

   when to make, 4-<page 284>

Supply, law of, 6-<page 481>

Surface energy, 1-<page 35>

"Sweep up the debris," 7-<page 563>

  

T

Talents, use them, 4-<page 310>

Talisman of Napoleon, 4.267

Tennyson at 80, 6-<page 530>

"The great were once," 5-<page 427>

"There is no sense," 4-<page 360>

"They do me wrong," 3-<page 225>

Think abundance, 3-<page 234>, 5-<page 412>, 6-<page 482>

   as you, 6-<page 463>

   big thoughts, 5-<page 442>

   great thoughts, 6-<page 471>

   health, 3-<page 119>, 4-<page 349>

   strong thoughts, 3-<page 412>

   success, 2-<page 119>, 5-<page 408>

   you can, 4-<page 276>

Thinking brings success, 2-<page 83>

   makes it so, 4-<page 345>

   method of, 3-<page 203>

"This city with all," 2-<page 77>

"This freedom," 4-<page 287>

This one thing I do, 5-<page 435>

Thought, business capital, 2-<page 114>

   controls body, 2-<page 84>

   creates, l-<page 67>

   externalizes itself, 2-<page 109>

   is energy, 2-<page 119>, 5-<page 420>, 6-<page 482>

   recreates, 3-<page 172>

   see Control

   the only force, 3-<page 210>, 6-<page 503>

Thoughts are a mold, 2-<page 104>

   are causes, 3-<page 211>

   are things, 5-<page 413>, 6-<page 482>

   discipline, 3-<page 203>

   supply energy, 2-<page 104>

Three requisites, 4-<page 327>

Trials, remedy for, 5-<page 382>

Trouble, refuse to see, 5-<page 383>

Trust implicitly, 5-<page 396>

"Trust in the Lord," 4-<page 366>

[p. x]

"To every man there openeth," 5-<page 408>

Truth is power, 4-<page 290>

"To him that hath," 2-<page 107>

Tuberculosis, future of, 7-<page 559>

Typhus, prevention of, 7-<page 558>

  

U

Understand secret of power, 5-<page 428>

   your power, 5-<page 390>

Understanding, get, 1-<page 70>

Universal Mind, 1-<page 64>

   encompasses you, 1-<page 68>

   has no favorites, 5-<page 415>

   infinite, 5-<page 389>

   is omnipotent, 1-<page 67>, 5-<page 378>

   our relation to, 2-<page 112>

   the source, 6-<page 462>

  

V

Vanderlip, Frank A., 5-<page 411>

Victorious attitude attracts, 4-<page 406>

Viewpoint, your, 2-<page 90>

Vinci, da, Leonardo, 4-<page 329>

Vizualize, 4-<page 365>

   desire, 2-<page 142>

   your desires, 6-<page 536>

   your needs, 3-<page 171>

  

W

Walsh, Rev. Wm. T., 1-<page 45>, 7-<page 568>

Walter, Dr. Terry, 2-<page 103>

Wanted, 3-<page 244>

Wants, picture supplied, 3-<page 248>

"Waste no tears," 4-<page 327>

Wattles, W. D., 3-<page 171>

Weakness defined, 4-<page 289>

Wealth, expect, 2-<page 97>

   from thinking, 2-<page 83>

   secret of, 2-<page 83>

Wells, H. G., 1-<page 51>

Wesley, John, at 82, 6-<page 530>

Wharton, Dr. Charles M., 6-<page 494>

What do you lack, 6-<page 472>

do you want, 2-<page 110>

"What eye never saw," 3-<page 206>

"Whatsoever ye desire," 2-<page 110>

Whitman, Walt, 3-<page 210>

Whitney, Dr. Willis, 3-<page 210>

White, Dr. Douglas, 7-<page 554>

Whittier, 4-<page 330>

Why grow old? 6-<page 505>

Wilcox, Ella Wheeler, 4-<page 263>, 4-<page 327> 7-<page 563>

Win, you can, 3-<page 190>

Winbigler, Dr., 1-<page 44>, 5-<page 396>

Wisdom of ages, 4-<page 360>

   is yours, 6-<page 461>

Whateley, 1-<page 49>

Work, analyze your, 5-<page 450>

   begin your, 3-<page 241>

   if out of, 5-<page 413>

   with desire, 3-<page 166>

World a reflection, 2-<page 102>

   outer, reflects inner, 3-<page 209>

   your estate, 3-<page 228>

Worries, forget, 5-<page 384>

Worry disappears, 3-<page 176>

   is catching, 7-<page 627>

   refuse to, 6-<page 483>

   retards, 4-<page 358>

Y

"Ye shall know the truth," 4-<page 287>

"You can do," 1-<page 13>, 3-<page 254>

   can do whatever you desire, 2-<page 135>

"You say big corporations," 3-<page 191>

Your needs are met, 5-<page 373>

Youth at 90, 6-<page 532>

   is perfect health, 6-<page 506>

   not years, 6-<page 506>

   vs. age, 6-<page 518>




     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[]

The Secret of the Ages
 In Seven Volumes
 VOLUME TWO

[]

  

The

  

SECRET

  

of

  

THE AGES



  

ROBERT COLLIER

  

VOLUME TWO

  

ROBERT COLLIER, Publisher
 599 Fifth Avenue
 New York

  

No connection with
 P. F. Collier & Son Co., Inc.

  

[1926]


Click to enlarge
Title Page: Volume 2



Click to enlarge
Verso: Volume 2


Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



  

Contents

  

VOLUME TWO

         	III

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGE

     
     	The Primal Cause

      	<page 77>

     
     	Matter--Dream or Reality?

      	<page 84>

     
     	The Philosopher's Charm

      	<page 94>

     
     	The Kingdom of Heaven

      	<page 101>

     
     	"To Him That Hath"--

      	<page 107>

     
     	"To the Manner Born"

      	<page 117>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	IV

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Desire--The First Law of Gain

      	<page 127>

     
     	The Magic Secret

      	<page 136>

     
     	"The Soul's Sincere Desire"

      	<page 146>

     
   
     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 76]

"And the earth was
  Without form and void;
  And darkness was upon
  The face of the deep.
  And the Spirit of God moved
  Upon the face of the waters."

         GENESIS 1:2.

[p. 77]

  

III

  

The Primal Cause

This city, with all its houses, palaces, steam engines, cathedrals and huge, immeasurable traffic and tumult, what is it but a Thought, but millions of Thoughts made into one--a huge immeasurable Spirit of a Thought, embodied in brick, in iron, smoke, dust, Palaces, Parliaments, coaches, docks and the rest of it! Not a brick was made but some man had to think of the making of that brick.
                                  --CARLYLE.

	
FOR thousands of years the riddle of the universe has been the question of causation. Did the egg come first, or the chicken? "The globe," says an Eastern proverb, "rests upon the howdah of an elephant. The elephant stands upon a tortoise, swimming in a sea of milk." But then what?

[p. 78]

And what is life? As the Persian poet puts it--

"What without asking, hither hurried whence,
  And without asking whither hurried hence?"

It has been said that every man, consciously or unconsciously, is either a materialist or an idealist. Certainly throughout the ages the schools of philosophy as well as individuals have argued and quarrelled, but always human thought through one or the other of these channels "has rolled down the hill of speculation into the ocean of doubt."

The materialist, roughly speaking, declares that nothing exists but matter and the forces inherent therein.

The idealist declares that all is mind or energy, and that matter is necessarily unreal.

The time has come when people have

[p. 79]

become dissatisfied with these unceasing theories which get them nowhere. And today, as the appreciation of a Primal Cause becomes more clearly defined, the spiritual instinct asserts itself determinedly.

"Give me a base of support," said Archimedes, "and with a lever I will move the world."

And the base of support is that all started with mind. In the beginning was nothing--a fire mist. Before anything could come of it there had to be an idea, a model on which to build. Universal Mind supplied that idea, that model. Therefore the primal cause is mind. Everything must start with an idea. Every event, every condition, every thing is first an idea in the mind of someone.

Before you start to build a house, you

[p. 80]

draw up a plan of it. You make an exact blue-print of that plan, and your house takes shape in accordance with your blue-print. Every material object takes form in the same way. Mind draws the plan. Thought forms the blueprint, well drawn or badly done as your thoughts are clear or vague. It all goes back to the one cause. The creative principle of the universe is mind, and thought is the eternal energy.

But just as the effect you get from electricity depends upon the mechanism to which the power is attached, so the effects you get from mind depend upon the way you use it. We are all of us dynamos. The power is there--unlimited power. But we've got to connect it up to something--set it some task--give it work to do--else are we no better off then the animals.

[p. 81]

The "Seven Wonders of the World" were built by men with few of the opportunities or facilities that are available to you. They conceived these gigantic projects first in their own minds, pictured them so vividly that their subconscious minds came to their aid and enabled them to overcome obstacles that most of us would regard as insurmountable. Imagine building the Pyramids of Gizeh, enormous stone upon enormous stone, with nothing but bare hands. Imagine the labor, the sweat, the heartbreaking toil of erecting the Colossus of Rhodes, between whose legs a ship could pass! Yet men built these wonders, in a day when tools were of the crudest and machinery was undreamed of, by using the unlimited power of Mind.

Mind is creative, but it must have a

[p. 82]

model on which to work. It must have thoughts to supply the power.

There are in Universal Mind ideas for millions of wonders greater far than the "Seven Wonders of the World." And those ideas are just as available to you as they were to the artisans of old, as they were to Michael Angelo when he built St. Peter's in Rome, as they were to the architect who conceived the Woolworth Building, or the engineer who planned the Hell Gate bridge.

Every condition, every experience of life is the result of our mental attitude. We can do only what we think we can do. We can be only what we think we can be. We can have only what we think we can have. What we do, what we are, what we have, all depend upon what we think. We can never express anything that we do not first have in

[p. 83]

mind. The secret of all power, all success, all riches, is in first thinking powerful thoughts, successful thoughts, thoughts of wealth, of supply. We must build them in our own mind first.

William James, the famous psychologist, said that the greatest discovery in a hundred years was the discovery of the power of the sub-conscious mind. It is the greatest discovery of all time. It is the discovery that man has within himself the power to control his surroundings, that he is not at the mercy of chance or luck, that he is the arbiter of his own fortunes, that he can carve out his own destiny. He is the master of all the forces round about him. As James Allen puts it:

"Dream lofty dreams, and as you dream, so shall you become. Your vision is the promise of what you shall one

[p. 84]

day be; your Ideal is the prophecy of what you shall at last unveil."

For matter is in the ultimate but a product of thought. Even the most material scientists admit that matter is not what it appears to be. According to physics, matter (be it the human body or a log of wood--it makes no difference which) is made up of an aggregation of distinct minute particles called atoms. Considered individually, these atoms are so small that they can be seen only with the aid of a powerful microscope, if at all.

MATTER--
 Dream or Reality?

Until recently these atoms were supposed to be the ultimate theory regarding matter. We ourselves--and all the material world around us--were supposed

[p. 85]

to consist of these infinitesimal particles of matter, so small that they could not be seen or weighed or smelled or touched individually--but still particles of matter and indestructible.

Now, however, these atoms have been further analyzed, and physics tells us that they are not indestructible at all--that they are mere positive and negative buttons of force or energy called protons and electrons, without hardness, without density, without solidity, without even positive actuality. In short, they are vortices in the ether--whirling bits of energy--dynamic, never static, pulsating with life, but the life is spiritual! As one eminent British scientist put it--"Science now explains matter by explaining it away!"

And that, mind you, is what the solid table in front of you is made of, is what

[p. 86]

your house, your body, the whole world is made of--whirling bits of energy!

To quote the New York Herald-Tribune of March 11, 1926: "We used to believe that the universe was composed of an unknown number of different kinds of matter, one kind for each chemical element. The discovery of a new element had all the interest of the unexpected. It might turn out to be anything, to have any imaginable set of properties.

"That romantic prospect no longer exists. We know now that instead of many ultimate kinds of matter there are only two kinds. Both of these are really kinds of electricity. One is negative electricity, being, in fact, the tiny particle called the electron, familiar to radio fans as one of the particles vast swarms of which operate radio vacuum tubes.

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] The other kind of electricity is positive electricity. Its ultimate particles are called protons. From these protons and electrons all of the chemical elements are built up. Iron and lead and oxygen and gold and all the others differ from one another merely in the number and arrangement of the electrons and protons which they contain. That is the modern idea of the nature of matter. Matter is really nothing but electricity."

Can you wonder then that scientists believe the time will come when mankind through mind can control all this energy, can be absolute master of the winds and the waves, can literally follow the Master's precept--"If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you."

[p. 88]

For Modern Science is coming more and more to the belief that what we call matter is a force subject wholly to the control of mind.

How tenuous matter really is, is perhaps best illustrated by the fact that a single violin string, tuned to the proper pitch, could start a vibration that would shake down the Brooklyn Bridge! Oceans and mountains, rocks and iron, all can be reduced to a point little short of the purely spiritual. Your body is 85 per cent water, 15 per cent ash and phosphorus! And they in turn can be dissipated into gas and vapor. Where do we go from there?

Is not the answer that, to a great degree at least, and perhaps altogether, this world round about us is one of our mind's own creating? And that we can put into it, and get from it, pretty much

[p. 89]

what we wish? You see this illustrated every day. A panorama is spread before you. To you it is a beautiful picture; to another it appears a mere collection of rocks and trees. A girl comes out to meet you. To you she is the embodiment of loveliness; to another all that grace and beauty may look drab and homely. A moonlit garden, with its fragrant odors and dew-drenched grass, may mean all that is charming to you, while to another it brings only thoughts of asthma or fever or rheumatism. A color may be green to you that to another is red. A prospect may be inviting for you that to another is rugged and hard.

To quote "Applied Psychology," by Warren Hilton:

"The same stimulus acting on different organs of sense will produce different sensations. A blow upon the eye will

[p. 90]

cause you to 'see stars'; a similar blow upon the ear will cause you to hear an explosive sound. In other words, the vibratory effect of a touch on eye or ear is the same as that of light or sound vibrations.

"The notion you may form of any object in the outer world depends solely upon what part of your brain happens to be connected with that particular nerve-end that receives an impression from the object.

"You see the sun without being able to hear it because the only nerve-ends tuned to vibrate in harmony with the ether-waves set in action by the sun are nerve-ends that are connected with the brain center devoted to sight. 'If,' says Professor James, 'we could splice the outer extremities of our optic nerves to our ears, and those of our auditory

[p. 91]

nerves to our eyes, we should hear the lightning and see the thunder, see the symphony and hear the conductor's movements.'

"In other words, the kind of impressions we receive from the world about us, the sort of mental pictures we form concerning it, in fact, the character of the outer world, the nature of the environment in which our lives are cast--all these things depend for each one of us simply upon how he happens to be put together, upon his individual mental make-up."

In short, it all comes back to the old fable of the three blind men and the elephant. To the one who caught hold of his leg, the elephant was like a tree. To the one who felt of his side, the elephant was like a wall. To the one who seized his tail, the elephant was like a

[p. 92]

rope. The world is to each one of us the world of his individual perceptions.

You are like a radio receiving station. Every moment thousands of impressions are reaching you. You can tune in on whatever ones you like--on joy or sorrow, on success or failure, on optimism or fear. You can select the particular impressions that will best serve you, you can hear only what you want to hear, you can shut out all disagreeable thoughts and sounds and experiences, or you can tune in on discouragement and failure and despair.

Yours is the choice. You have within you a force against which the whole world is powerless. By using it, you can make what you will of life and of your surroundings.

"But," you will say, "objects themselves do not change. It is merely the

[p. 93]

difference in the way you look at them." Perhaps. But to a great extent, at least, we find what we look for; just as, when we turn the dial on the radio, we tune in on whatever kind of entertainment or instruction we may wish to hear. And who can say that it is not our thoughts that put it there? Who, for the matter of that, can prove that our surroundings in waking hours are not as much the creature of our minds as are our dreams? You've had dreams many a time where every object seemed just as real as when you were awake. You've felt of the objects, you've pinched yourself, yet still you were convinced that you were actually living those dreams. May not your waking existence be largely the creation of your own mind, just as your dream pictures are?

Many scientists believe that it is, and

[p. 94]

that in proportion as you try to put into your surroundings the good things you desire, rather than the evil ones you fear, you will find those good things. Certain it is that you can do this with your own body. Just as certain that many people are doing it with the good things of life. They have risen above the conception of life in which matter is the master.

Just as the most powerful forces in nature are the invisible ones--heat, light, air, electricity--so the most powerful forces of man are his invisible forces, his thought forces. And just as electricity can fuse stone and iron, so can your thought forces control your body, so can they make or mar your destiny.

The Philosopher's Charm

There was once a shrewd necromancer who told a king that he had discovered

[p. 95]

a way to make gold out of sand. Naturally the king was interested and offered him great rewards for his secret. The necromancer explained his process. It seemed quite easy, except for one thing. Not once during the operation must the king think of the word Abracadabra. If he did, the charm was broken and the gold would not come. The king tried and tried to follow the directions, but he could not keep that word Abracadabra out of his mind. And he never made the gold.

Dr. Winbigler puts the same idea in another way: "Inspiration, genius, power, are often interfered with by the conscious mind's interposing, by man's failing to recognize his power, afraid to assist himself, lacking the faith in himself necessary to stimulate the subconscious so as to arouse the genius asleep in each."

[p. 96]

From childhood on we are assured on every hand--by scientists, by philosophers, by our religious teachers, that "ours is the earth and the fullness thereof." Beginning with the first chapter of Genesis, we are told that "God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth--and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." All through the Old and the New Testament, we are repeatedly adjured to use these God-given powers. "He that believeth on me," said Jesus, "the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do." "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you." "For verily I say

[p. 97]

unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith." "The kingdom of God is within you."

We hear all this, perhaps we even think we believe, but always, when the time comes to use these God-given talents, there is the "doubt in our heart."

Baudouin expressed it clearly: "To be ambitious for wealth and yet always expecting to be poor; to be always doubting your ability to get what you long for, is like trying to reach east by travelling west. There is no philosophy which will help a man to succeed when he is always doubting his ability to do so, and thus attracting failure.

[p. 98]

"You will go in the direction in which you face....

"There is a saying that every time the sheep bleats, it loses a mouthful of hay. Every time you allow yourself to complain of your lot, to say, 'I am poor; I can never do what others do; I shall never be rich; I have not the ability that others have; I am a failure; luck is against me;' you are laying up so much trouble for yourself.

"No matter how hard you may work for success, if your thought is saturated with the fear of failure, it will kill your efforts, neutralize your endeavors, and make success impossible."

And that is responsible for all our failures. We are like the old lady who decided she wanted the hill behind her house removed. So she got down on her knees and prayed the good Lord to

[p. 99]

remove it. The next morning she got up and hurried to the window. The hill was still in its same old place. "I knew it!" she snapped. "I gave Him his chance. But I knew all the time there was nothing to this prayer business."

Neither is there, as it is ordinarily done. Prayer is not a mere asking of favors. Prayer is not a paean of praise. Rather prayer is a realization of the God-power within you--of your right of dominion over your own body, your environment, your business, your health, your prosperity. It is an understanding that you are "heir of God and co-heir with Christ." And that as such, no evil has power over you, whereas you have all power for good. And "good" means not merely holiness. Good means happiness--the happiness of everyday people. Good means everything that is good in

[p. 100]

this world of ours--comforts and pleasures and prosperity for ourselves, health and happiness for those dependent upon us. There are no limits to "Good" except those we put upon it ourselves.

What was it made Napoleon the greatest conqueror of his day? Primarily his magnificent faith in Napoleon. He had a sublime belief in his destiny, an absolute confidence that the obstacle was not made which Napoleon could not find a way through, or over, or around. It was only when he lost that confidence, when he hesitated and vacillated for weeks between retreat and advance, that winter caught him in Moscow and ended his dreams of world empire. Fate gave him every chance first. The winter snows were a full month late in coming. But Napoleon hesitated--and was lost. It was not the snows that defeated him. It

[p. 101]

was not the Russians. It was his loss of faith in himself.

The Kingdom of Heaven

"The Kingdom of Heaven is within you." Heaven is not some far-away state--the reward of years of tribulation here. Heaven is right here--here and now! When Christ said that Heaven was within us, He meant just what He said--that the power for happiness, for good, for everything we need of life, is within each one of us.

That most of us fail to realize this Heaven--that many are sickly and suffering, that more are ground down by poverty and worry--is no fault of His. He gave us the power to overcome these evils; He stands ready and waiting to help us use it. If we fail to find the way, the fault is ours. To enjoy the Heaven

[p. 102]

that is within us, to begin here and now to live the life eternal, takes only a fuller understanding of the Power-that-is-within-us.

Even now, with the limited knowledge at our command, we can control circumstances to the point of making the world without an expression of our own world within, where the real thoughts, the real power, resides. Through this world within you can find the solution of every problem, the cause for every effect. Discover it--and all power, all possession is within your control.

For the world without is but a reflection of that world within. Your thought creates the conditions your mind images. Keep before your mind's eye the image of all you want to be and you will see it reflected in the world without. Think abundance, feel abundance, BELIEVE

[p. 103]

abundance, and you will find that as you think and feel and believe, abundance will manifest itself in your daily life. But let fear and worry be your mental companions, thoughts of poverty and limitation dwell in your mind, and worry and fear, limitation and poverty will be your constant companions day and night.

Your mental concept is all that matters. Its relation to matter is that of idea and form. There has got to be an idea before it can take form. As Dr. Terry Walter says:

"The impressions that enter the subconscious form indelible pictures, which are never forgotten, and whose power can change the body, mind, manner, and morals; can, in fact, revolutionize a personality.

"All during our waking hours the conscious mind, through the five senses, acts

[p. 104]

as constant feeder to the subconscious; the senses are the temporal source of supply for the content of the soul mind; therefore it is most important that we know and realize definitely and explicitly that every time we think a thought or feel an emotion, we are adding to the content of this powerful mind, good or bad, as the case may be. Life will be richer or poorer for the thoughts and deeds of today."

Your thoughts supply you with limitless energy which will take whatever form your mind demands. The thoughts are the mold which crystalizes this energy into good or ill according to the form you impress upon it. You are free to choose which. But whichever you choose, the result is sure. Thoughts of wealth, of power, of success, can bring only results commensurate with your

[p. 105]

idea of them. Thoughts of poverty and lack can bring only limitation and trouble.

"A radical doctrine," you'll say, and think me wildly optimistic. Because the world has been taught for so long to think that some must be rich and some poor, that trials and tribulations are our lot. That this is at best a vale of tears.

The history of the race shows that what is considered to be the learning of one age is ignorance to the next age.

Dr. Edwin E. Slosson, Editor of Science Service, speaking of the popular tendency to fight against new ideas merely because they were new, said: "All through the history of science, we find that new ideas have to force their way into the common mind in disguise, as though they were burglars instead of benefactors of the race."

[p. 106]

And Emerson wrote: "The virtue in most request is conformity. Self-reliance is its aversion. It loves not realities and creators, but names and customs."

In the ages to come man will look back upon the poverty and wretchedness of so many millions today, and think how foolish we were not to take advantage of the abundance all about us. Look at Nature; how profuse she is in everything. Do you suppose the Mind that imaged that profuseness ever intended you to be limited, to have to scrimp and save in order to eke out a bare existence?

There are hundreds of millions of stars in the heavens. Do you suppose the Mind which could bring into being worlds without number in such prodigality intended to stint you of the few things necessary to your happiness?

What is money but a mere idea of

[p. 107]

mind, a token of exchange? The paper money you have in your pockets is supposed to represent so much gold or silver currency. There are billions upon billions of this paper money in circulation, yet all the gold in the world amounts to only about $8,000,000,000. Wealth is in ideas, not in money or property. You can control those ideas through mind.

Reduced to the ultimate--to the atom or to the electron--everything in this world is an idea of mind. All of it has been brought together through mind. If we can change the things we want back into mental images, we can multiply them as often as we like, possess all that we like.

"To Him That Hath"--

Take as an example the science of numbers. Suppose all numbers were of

[p. 108]

metal--that it was against the law to write figures for ourselves. Every time you wanted to do a sum in arithmetic you'd have to provide yourself with a supply of numbers, arrange them in their proper order, work out your problems with them. If your problems were too abstruse you might run out of numbers, have to borrow some from your neighbor or from the bank.

"How ridiculous," you say. "Figures are not things; they are mere ideas, and we can add them or divide them or multiply them or subtract them as often as we like. Anybody can have all the figures he wants."

To be sure he can. And when you get to look upon money in the same way, you will have all the money you want.

"To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be taken

[p. 109]

away even that which he hath." To him that hath the right idea everything shall be given, and from him who hath not that right idea shall be taken away everything he hath.

Thought externalizes itself. What we are depends entirely upon the images we hold before our mind's eye. Every time we think, we start a chain of causes which will create conditions similar to the thoughts which originated it. Every thought we hold in our consciousness for any length of time becomes impressed upon our subconscious mind and creates a pattern which the mind weaves into our life or environment.

All power is from within and is therefore under our own control. When you can direct your thought processes, you can consciously apply them to any condition, for all that comes to us from the

[p. 110]

world without is what we've already imaged in the world within.

Do you want more money? Sit you down now quietly and realize that money is merely an idea. That your mind is possessed of unlimited ideas. That being part of Universal Mind, there is no such thing as limitation or lack. That somewhere, somehow, the ideas that shall bring you all the money you need for any right purpose are available for you. That you have but to put it up to your subconscious mind to find these ideas.

Realize that--believe it--and your need will be met. "What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive it and ye shall have it." Don't forget that "believe that ye receive it." This it is that images the thing you want on your subconscious mind. And this it is that brings it to you. Once you can

[p. 111]

image the belief clearly on your subconscious mind, "whatsoever it is that ye ask for...ye shall have it."

For the source of all good, of everything you wish for, is the Universal Mind, and you can reach it only through the subconscious.

And Universal Mind will be to you whatever you believe it to be--the kind and loving Father whom Jesus pictured, always looking out for the well-being of his children--or the dread Judge that so many dogmatists would have us think.

When a man realizes that his mind is part of Universal Mind, when he realizes that he has only to take any right aspiration to this Universal Mind to see it realized, he loses all sense of worry and fear. He learns to dominate instead of to cringe. He rises to meet every situation, secure in the knowledge that

[p. 112]

everything necessary to the solution of any problem is in Mind, and that he has but to take his problem to Universal Mind to have it correctly answered.

For if you take a drop of water from the ocean, you know that it has the same properties as all the rest of the water in the ocean, the same percentage of sodium chloride. The only difference between it and the ocean is in volume. If you take a spark of electricity, you know that it has the same properties as the thunderbolt, the same power that moves trains or runs giant machines in factories. Again the only difference is in volume. It is the same with your mind and Universal Mind. The only difference between them is in volume. Your mind has the same properties as the Universal Mind, the same creative genius, the same power over all the earth, the same access to all

[p. 113]

knowledge. Know this, believe it, use it, and "yours is the earth and the fulness thereof." In the exact proportion that you believe yourself to be part of Universal Mind, sharing in Its all-power, in that proportion can you demonstrate the mastery over your own body and over the world about you.

All growth, all supply is from the world-within. If you would have power, if you would have wealth, you have but to image it on this world within, on your subconscious mind, through belief and understanding.

If you would remove discord, you have but to remove the wrong images--images of ill health, of worry and trouble from within. The trouble with most of us is that we live entirely in the world without. We have no knowledge of that inner world which is responsible for all

[p. 114]

the conditions we meet and all the experiences we have. We have no conception of "the Father that is within us."

The inner world promises us life and health, prosperity and happiness--dominion over all the earth. It promises peace and perfection for all its offspring. It gives you the right way and the adequate way to accomplish any normal purpose. Business, labor, professions, exist primarily in thought. And the outcome of your labors in them is regulated by thought. Consider the difference, then, in this outcome if you have at your command only the limited capacity of your conscious mind, compared with the boundless energy of the subconscious and the Universal Mind. "Thought, not money, is the real business capital," says Harvey S. Firestone, "and if you know absolutely that what you are doing is

[p. 115]

right, then you are bound to accomplish it in due season."

Thought is a dynamic energy with the .power to bring its object out from the invisible substance all about us. Matter is inert, unintelligent. Thought can shape and control. Every form in which matter is today is but the expression of some thought, some desire, some idea.

You have a mind. You can originate thought. And thoughts are creative. Therefore you can create for yourself that which you desire. Once you realize this you are taking a long step toward success in whatever undertaking you have in mind.

More than half the prophecies in the Scriptures refer to the time when man shall possess the earth, when tears and sorrow shall be unknown, and peace and plenty shall be everywhere. That time

[p. 116]

will come. It is nearer than most people think possible. You are helping it along. Every man who is honestly trying to use the power of mind in the right way is doing his part in the great cause. For it is only through Mind that peace and plenty can be gained. The earth is laden with treasures as yet undiscovered. But they are every one of them known to Universal Mind, for it was Universal Mind that first imaged them there. And as part of Universal Mind, they can be known to you.

How else did the Prophets of old foretell, thousands of years ago, the aeroplane, the cannon, the radio? What was the genius that enabled Ezekiel to argue from his potter's wheel, his water wheel and the stroke of the lightning to an airplane, with its wheels within wheels, driven by electricity and guided

[p. 117]

by man? How are we to explain the descriptions of artillery in the Apocalypse and the astonishing declaration in the Gospels that the utterances of the chamber would be broadcast from the housetops?

"To the Manner Born"

Few of us have any idea of our mental powers. The old idea was that man must take this world as he found it. He'd been born into a certain position in life, and to try to rise above his fellows was not only the height of bad taste, but sacrilegious as well. An All wise Providence had decreed by birth the position a child should occupy in the web of organized society. For him to be discontented with his lot, for him to attempt to raise himself to a higher level, was tantamount to tempting Providence. The gates of Hell

[p. 118]

yawned wide for such scatterbrains, who were lucky if in this life they incurred nothing worse than the ribald scorn of their associates.

That is the system that produced aristocracy and feudalism. That is the system that feudalism and aristocracy strove to perpetuate.

The new idea--the basis of all democracies--is that man is not bound by any system, that he need not accept the world as he finds it. He can remake the world to his own ideas. It is merely the raw material. He can make what he wills of it.

It is this new idea that is responsible for all our inventions, all our progress. Man is satisfied with nothing. He is constantly remaking his world. And now more than ever will this be true, for psychology teaches us that each one has

[p. 119]

within himself the power to become what he wills.

Learn to control your thought. Learn to image upon your mind only the things you want to see reflected there.

You will never improve yourself by dwelling upon the drawbacks of your neighbors. You will never attain perfect health and strength by thinking of weakness or disease. No man ever made a perfect score by watching his rival's target. You have got to think strength, think health, think riches. To paraphrase Pascal--"Our achievements today are but the sum of our thoughts of yesterday."

For thought is energy. Mental images are concentrated energy. And energy concentrated on any definite purpose becomes power. To those who perceive the nature and transcendency of this

[p. 120]

force, all physical power sinks into insignificance.

What is imagination but a form of thought? Yet it is the instrument by which all the inventors and discoverers have opened the way to new worlds. Those who grasp this force, be their state ever so humble, their natural gifts ever so insignificant, become our leading men. They are our governors and supreme law-givers, the guides of the drifting host which follows them as by an irrevocable decree. To quote Glenn Clark in the Atlantic Monthly, "Whatever we have of civilization is their work, theirs alone. If progress was made they made it. If spiritual facts were discerned, they discerned them. If justice and order were put in place of insolence and chaos, they wrought the change. Never is progress achieved by

[p. 121]

the masses. Creation ever remains the task of the individual."

Our railroads, our telephones, our automobiles, our libraries, our newspapers, our thousands of other conveniences, comforts and necessities are due to the creative genius of but two per cent of our population.

And the same two per cent own a great percentage of the wealth of the country.

The question arises, Who are they? What are they? The sons of the rich? College men? No--few of them had any early advantages. Many of them have never seen the inside of a college. It was grim necessity that drove them, and somehow, some way, they found a method of drawing upon their Genie-of-the-Mind, and through that inner force they have reached success.

[p. 122]

You don't need to stumble and grope. You can call upon your inner forces at will. There are three steps necessary:

First, to realize that you have the power;

Second, to know what you want.

Third, to center your thought upon it with singleness of purpose.

To accomplish these steps takes only a fuller understanding of the Power-that-is-within-you.

But what is this power? Where should you go to locate it? Is it a thing, a place, an object? Has it bounds, form or material shape? No! Then how shall you go about finding it?

If you have begun to realize that there is a power within you, if you have begun to arouse in your conscious mind the ambition and desire to use this power--you have started in the pathway of Wisdom.

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] If you are willing to go forward, to endure the mental discipline of mastering this method, nothing in the world can hinder you or keep you from overcoming every obstacle.

Begin at once, today, to use what you have learned. All growth comes from practice. All the forces of life are active--peace--joy--power. The unused talent decays. Open the door

"Behold I stand at the door and knock; if ANY MAN hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him and he with me."

So let us make use of this dynamo, which is you. What is going to start it working? Your Faith, the faith that is begotten of understanding. Faith is the impulsion, the propulsion of this power within. Faith is the confidence, the assurance,

[p. 124]

the enforcing truth, the knowing that the right idea of life will bring you into the reality of existence and the manifestation of the All power.

All cause is in Mind--and Mind is everywhere. All the knowledge there is, all the wisdom there is, all the power there is, is all about you--no matter where you may be. Your Mind is part of it. You have access to it. If you fail to avail yourself of it, you have no one to blame but yourself. For, as the drop of water in the ocean shares in all the properties of the rest of the ocean water so you share in that all-power, all-wisdom of Mind. If you have been sick and ailing, if poverty and hardship have been your lot, don't blame it on "fate." Blame yourself. "Yours is the earth and everything that's in it." But you've got to take it. The power is there--but you 

[p. 125]

must use it. It is round about you like the air you breathe. You don't expect others to do your breathing for you. Neither can you expect them to use your Mind for you. Universal Intelligence is not only the mind of the Creator of the universe, but it is also the mind of MAN, your intelligence, your mind. "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus!"

So start today by KNOWING that you can do anything you wish to do, have anything you wish to have, be anything you wish to be. The rest will follow.

"Ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be done unto you."


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 126] [p. 127]

  

Desire--The First Law of Gain

"Ah, Love! Could Thou and I with Fate conspire
    To grasp this sorry Scheme of Things entire,
  Would we not shatter it to bits--and then
    Re-mold it nearer to the Heart's Desire!"
                --The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.

	
IF YOU had a fairy wishing ring, what one thing would you wish for? Wealth? Honor? Fame? Love? What one thing do you desire above everything else in life?

Whatever it is, you can have it. Whatever you desire, wholeheartedly, with singleness of purpose--you can have. But the first and all-important essential is to know what this one thing is. Before you can win your heart's desire, you've got to get clearly fixed in your mind's eye what it is that you want.

[p. 128]

It may sound paradoxical, but few people do know what they want. Most of them struggle along in a vague sort of way, hoping--like Micawber--for something to turn up. They are so taken up with the struggle that they have forgotten--if they ever knew--what it is they are struggling for. They are like a drowning man--they use up many times the energy it would take to get them somewhere, but they fritter it away in aimless struggles--without thought, without direction, exhausting themselves, while getting nowhere.

You've got to know what you want before you stand much chance of getting it. You have an unfailing "Messenger to Garcia" in that Genie-of-your-Mind--but YOU have got to formulate the message. Aladdin would have stood a poor chance of getting anything from

[p. 129]

his Genie if he had not had clearly in mind the things he wanted the Genie to get.

In the realm of mind, the realm in which is all practical power, you can possess what you want at once. You have but to claim it, to visualize it, to bring it into actuality--and it is yours for the taking. For the Genie-of-your-Mind can give you power over circumstances. Health, happiness and prosperity. And all you need to put it to work is an earnest, intense desire.

Sounds too good to be true? Well, let us go back for a moment to the start. You are infected with that "divine dissatisfaction with things as they are" which has been responsible for all the great accomplishments of this world--else you would not have gotten thus far in this book. Your heart is hungering

[p. 130]

for something better. "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness (right-wiseness) for they shall be filled." You are tired of the worry and grind, tired of the deadly dull routine and daily tasks that lead nowhere. Tired of all the petty little ills and ailments that have come to seem the lot of man here on earth.

Always there is something within you urging you on to bigger things, giving you no peace, no rest, no chance to be lazy. It is the same "something" that drove Columbus across the ocean; that drove Hannibal across the Alps; that drove Edison onward and upward from a train boy to the inventive wizard of the century; that drove Henry Ford from a poor mechanic at forty to probably the richest man in the world at sixty.

[p. 131]

This "something" within you keeps telling you that you can do anything you want to do, be anything you want to be, have anything you want to have--and you have a sneaking suspicion that it may be right.

That "something" within you is your 'subconscious self, your part of Universal Mind, your Genie-of-the-brain. Men call it ambition, and "Lucky is the man," says Arthur Brisbane, "whom the Demon of Ambition harnesses and drives through life. This wonderful little coachman is the champion driver of all the world and of all history.

"Lucky you, if he is your driver.

"He will keep you going until you do something worth while--working, running and moving ahead.

"And that is how a real man ought to be driven.

[p. 132]

"This is the little Demon that works in men's brains, that makes the blood tingle at the thought of achievement and that makes the face flush and grow white at the thought of failure.

"Every one of us has this Demon for a driver, IN YOUTH AT LEAST.

"Unfortunately the majority of us he gives up as very poor, hopeless things, not worth driving, by the time we reach twenty-five or thirty.

"How many men look back to their teens, when they were harnessed to the wagon of life with Ambition for a driver? When they could not wait for the years to pass and for opportunity to come?

"It is the duty of ambition to drive, and it is your duty to keep Ambition alive and driving.

"If you are doing nothing, if there is

[p. 133]

no driving, no hurrying, no working, you may count upon it that there will be no results. Nothing much worth while in the years to come.

"Those that are destined to be the big men twenty years from now, when the majority of us will be nobodies, are those whom this demon is driving relentlessly, remorselessly, through the hot weather and the cold weather, through early hours and late hours.

"Lucky YOU if you are in harness and driven by the Demon of Ambition."

Suppose you have had disappointments, disillusionments along the way. Suppose the fine point of your ambition has become blunted. Remember, there is no obstacle that there is not some way around, or over, or through--and if you will depend less upon the 10 per cent of your abilities that reside in your conscious

[p. 134]

mind, and leave more to the 90 per cent that constitute your subconscious, you can overcome all obstacles. Remember this--there is no condition so hopeless, no life so far gone, that mind cannot redeem it.

Every untoward condition is merely a lack of something. Darkness, you know, is not real. It is merely a lack of light. Turn on the light and the darkness will be seen to be nothing. It vanishes instantly. In the same way poverty is simply a lack of necessary supply. Find the avenue of supply and your poverty vanishes. Sickness is merely the absence of health. If you are in perfect health, sickness cannot hurt you. Doctors and nurses go about at will among the sick without fear--and suffer as a rule far less from sickness than does the average man or woman.

[p. 135]

So there is nothing you have to overcome. You merely have to acquire something. And always Mind can show you the way. You can obtain from Mind anything you want, if you will learn how to do it. "I think we can rest assured that one can do and be practically what he desires to be," says Farnsworth in "Practical Psychology." And psychologists all over the world have put the same thought in a thousand different ways.

"It is not will, but desire," says Charles W. Mears, "that rules the world." "But," you will say, "I have had plenty of desires all my life. I've always wanted to be rich. How do you account for the difference between my wealth and position and power and that of the rich men all around me?"

[p. 136]

The Magic Secret

The answer is simply that you have never focused your desires into one great dominating desire. You have a host of mild desires. You mildly wish you were rich, you wish you had a position of responsibility and influence, you wish you could travel at will. The wishes are so many and varied that they conflict with each other and you get nowhere in particular. You lack one intense desire, to the accomplishment of which you are willing to subordinate everything else.

Do you know how Napoleon so frequently won battles in the face of a numerically superior foe? By concentrating his men at the actual point of contact! His artillery was often greatly outnumbered, but it accomplished far

[p. 137]

more than the enemy's because instead of scattering his fire, he concentrated it all on the point of attack!

The time you put in aimlessly dreaming and wishing would accomplish marvels if it were concentrated on one definite object. If you have ever taken a magnifying glass and let the sun's rays play through it on some object, you know that as long as the rays were scattered they accomplished nothing. But focus them on one tiny spot and see. how quickly they start something.

It is the same way with your mind. You've got to concentrate on one idea at a time.

"But how can I learn to concentrate?" many people write me. Concentration is not a thing to be learned. It is merely a thing to do. You concentrate whenever you become sufficiently interested in

[p. 138]

anything. Get so interested in a ball game that you jump up and down on your hat, slap a man you have never seen before on the back, embrace your nearest neighbor--that is concentration. Become so absorbed in a thrilling play or movie that you no longer realize the orchestra is playing or there are people around you--that is concentration.

And that is all concentration ever is--getting so interested in some one thing that you pay no attention to anything else that is going on around you.

If you want a thing badly enough, you need have no worry about your ability to concentrate on it. Your thoughts will just naturally center on it like bees on honey.

Hold in your mind the thing you most desire. Affirm it. Believe it to be an existing fact. Let me quote again the

[p. 139]

words of the Master, because there's nothing more important to remember in this whole book. "Therefore I say unto you, what things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them."

And again I say, the most important part is the "believe that ye receive them." Your subconscious mind is exceedingly amenable to suggestion. If you can truly believe that you have received something, can impress that belief upon your subconscious mind, depend upon it, it will see that you have it. For being a part of Universal Mind, it shares that Universal Mind's all-power. "The Father that is within me, He doeth the works." Your mind will respond to your desire in the exact proportion in which you believe. "As thy faith is, so be it unto thee."

[p. 140]

The people who live in beautiful homes, who have plenty to spend, who travel about in yachts and fine cars, are for the most part people who started out to accomplish some one definite thing. They had one clear goal in mind, and everything they did centered on that goal.

Most men just jog along in a rut, going through the same old routine day after day, ekeing out a bare livelihood, with no definite desire other than the vague hope that fortune will some day drop in their lap. Fortune doesn't often play such pranks. And a rut, you know, differs from a grave only in depth. A life such as that is no better than the animals live. Work all day for money to buy bread, to give you strength to work all the next day to buy more bread. There is nothing to it but the daily search

[p. 141]

for food and sustenance. No time for aught but worry and struggle. No hope of anything but the surcease of sorrow in death.

You can have anything you want--if you want it badly enough. You can be anything you want to be, have anything you desire, accomplish anything you set out to accomplish--if you will hold to that desire with singleness of purpose; if you will understand and BELIEVE in your own powers to accomplish.

What is it that you wish in life? Is it health? In the chapter on health I will show you that you can be radiantly well--without drugs, without tedious exercises. It matters not if you are crippled or bedridden or infirm. Your body rebuilds itself entirely every eleven months. You can start now rebuilding along perfect lines.

[p. 142]

Is it wealth you wish? In the chapter on success I will show you how you can increase your income, how you can forge rapidly ahead in your chosen business or profession.

Is it happiness you ask for? Follow the rules herein laid down and you will change your whole outlook on life. Doubts and uncertainty will vanish, to be followed by calm assurance and abiding peace. You will possess the things your heart desires. You will have love and companionship. You will win to contentment and happiness.

But desire must be impressed upon the subconscious before it can be accomplished. Merely conscious desire seldom gets you anything. It is like the day-dreams that pass through your mind. Your desire must be visualized, must be persisted in, must be concentrated

[p. 143]

upon, must be impressed upon your subconscious mind. Don't bother about the means for accomplishing your desire--you can safely leave that to your subconscious mind. It knows how to do a great many things besides building and repairing your body. If you can visualize the thing you want, if you can impress upon your subconscious mind the belief that you have it, you can safely leave to it the finding of the means of getting it. Trust the Universal Mind to show the way. The mind that provided everything in such profusion must joy in seeing us take advantage of that profusion. "For herein is the Father glorified--that ye bear much fruit."

You do not have to wait until tomorrow, or next year, or the next world, for happiness. You do not have to die

[p. 144]

to be saved. "The Kingdom of Heaven is within you." That does not mean that it is up in the heavens or on some star or in the next world. It means here and now! All the possibilities of happiness are always here and always available. At the open door of every man's life there lies this pearl of great price--the understanding of man's dominion over the earth. With that understanding and conviction you can do everything which lies before you to do and you can do it to the satisfaction of everyone and the well-being of yourself. God and good are synonymous. And God--good--is absent only to those who believe He is absent.

Find your desire, impress it upon your thought, and you have opened the door for opportunity. And remember, in this new heaven and new earth which

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] I am trying to show you, the door of opportunity is never closed. As a matter of fact, you constantly have all that you will take. So keep yourself in a state of receptivity. It is your business to receive abundantly and perpetually. The law of opportunity enforces its continuance and availability. "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above and cometh down from the Father of light, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning."

Infinite Mind saith to every man, "Come ye to the open fountain." The understanding of the law of life will remedy every discord, giving "Beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness."

Believe that you share in that goodness and bounty. Act the part you wish

[p. 146]

to play in this life. Act healthy, act prosperous, act happy. Make such a showing with what you have that you will carry the conviction to your subconscious mind that all good and perfect gifts ARE yours. Register health, prosperity and happiness on your inner mind and some fine morning soon you will wake to find that you are healthy, prosperous and happy, that you have your dearest wish in life.

"The Soul's Sincere Desire"

Do you know what prayer is? Just an earnest desire that we take to God--to Universal Mind--for fulfillment. As Montgomery puts it--"Prayer is the soul's sincere desire, uttered or unexpressed." It is our Heart's Desire. At least, the only prayer that is worth anything is the prayer that asks for our real

[p. 147]

desires. That kind of prayer is heard. That kind of prayer is answered.

Mere lip prayers get you nowhere. It doesn't matter what your lips may say. The thing that counts is what your heart desires, what your mind images on your subconscious thought, and through it on Universal Mind. "Thou, when thou prayest, be not as the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the synagogue and at the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward."

What was it these hypocrites that Jesus speaks of really wanted? "To be seen of men." And their prayers were answered. Their sincere desire was granted. They were seen of men. "They have their reward." But as for what their lips were saying, neither

[p. 148]

[paragraph continues] God nor they paid any attention to it.

"Thou, when thou prayest enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut the door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly." Go where you can be alone, where you can concentrate your thoughts on your one innermost sincere desire, where you can impress that desire upon your subconscious mind without distraction, and so reach the Universal Mind (the Father of all things) .

But even sincere desire is not enough by itself. There must be BELIEF, too. "What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them." You must realize God's ability to give you every good thing. You must believe in his readiness to do it. Model your thoughts after

[p. 149]

the Psalmists of old. They first asked for that which they wanted, then killed all doubts and fears by affirming God's power and His willingness to grant their prayers. Read any of the Psalms and you will see what I mean. So when you pray, ask for the things that you want. Then affirm God's readiness and His Power to grant your prayer.

Glenn Frank, in "The Soul's Sincere Desire," gives some wonderfully helpful suggestions along these lines. To quote him:

"For money troubles, realize: There is no want in Heaven, and affirm:

"Our Heavenly Father, we know that thy Love is as infinite as the sky is infinite, and Thy Ways of manifesting that love are as unaccountable as the stars of the heavens.

"Thy Power is greater than man's horizon, and Thy Ways of manifesting that Power are more numerous than the sands of the sea.

[p. 150]

"As Thou keepest the stars in their courses, so shalt Thou guide our steps in perfect harmony, without clash or discord of any kind, if we keep our trust in Thee. For we know Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee, because he trusteth in Thee. We know that, if we acknowledge Thee in all our ways, Thou wilt direct our paths. For Thou art the God of Love, Giver of every good and perfect gift, and there is none beside Thee. Thou art omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent, in all, through all, and over all, the only God. And Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, forever, Amen.

"For aid in thinking or writing, realize: There is no lack of ideas, and affirm:

"Thy wisdom is greater than all hidden treasures, and yet as instantly available for our needs as the very ground beneath our feet."

"For happiness: There is no unhappiness in Heaven, so affirm:

"Thy joy is brighter than the sun at noonday and Thy Ways of expressing that Joy as countless as the sunbeams that shine upon our path."

[p. 151]

This is the kind of prayer the Psalmists of old had recourse to in their hours of trouble--this is the kind of prayer that will bring you every good and perfect gift.

Make no mistake about this--prayer is effective. It can do anything. It doesn't matter how trivial your desires may be--if it is RIGHT for you to have them, it is RIGHT for you to pray for them.

According to a United Press dispatch of May 3, 1926:

"Prayer belongs to the football field as much as to the pulpit, and a praying team stands a good chance of 'getting there,' Tim Lowry, Northwestern University football star, told a large church audience here.

"'Just before the Indiana-Northwestern game last year,' Tim said. 'we worried

[p. 152]

a great deal about the outcome. Then we saw that bunch of big husky Indiana players coming toward us and we knew something had to be done quick.

"'Fellows,' I said, 'I believe in prayer and we better pray.' We did and won a great victory.

"When the next game came, every fellow prayed again.

"You don't need to think that churches have a copyright on prayer."

In "Prayer as a Force," A. Maude Royden compares the man who trusts his desires to prayer with the swimmer who trusts himself to the water:

"Let me give you a very simple figure which I think may perhaps convey my meaning. If you are trying to swim you must believe that the sea is going to keep you afloat. You must give yourself

[p. 153]

to the sea. There is the ocean and there are you in it, and I say to you, 'According to your faith you will be able to swim!' I know perfectly well that it is literally according to your faith. A person who has just enough confidence in the sea and in himself to give one little hop from the ground will certainly find that the water will lift him but not very much; he will come down again. Persons who have enough confidence really to start swimming but no more, will not swim very far, because their confidence is so very small and they swim with such rapid strokes, and they hold their breath to such an extent, that by and by they collapse; they swim five or six, or twelve or fourteen strokes, but they do not get very far, through lack of confidence.

"Persons who know with assurance

[p. 154]

that the sea will carry them if they do certain things, will swim quite calmly, serenely, happily, and will not mind if the water goes right over them. 'Oh,' you say, 'that person is doing the whole thing!' He can't do it without the sea! You might hypnotize people into faith; you might say, 'You are now in the ocean; swim off the edge of this precipice' (which is really a cliff). You might make them do it, they might have implicit faith in you, you might hypnotize them into thinking they were swimming; but if they swam off the edge of the cliff they would fall. You can't swim without the sea! I might say to you, 'It lies with you whether you swim or not, according to your faith be it unto you'; but if the sea is not there you can't swim. That is exactly what I feel about God. 'According to your faith

[p. 155]

be it unto you.' Yes, certainly, if you try to swim in that ocean which is the love of God your faith will be rewarded, and according to your faith it will be to you. In exact proportion to your faith you will find the answer, like a scientific law. There is not one atom of faith you put in God that will not receive its answer."

But remember: you would not plant a valuable seed in your garden, and then, a day or a week later, go out and dig it up to see if it were sprouting. On the contrary, you would nourish it each morning with water. It is the same with your prayers. Don't plant the seed of your desire in your subconscious mind and then go out the next morning and tear it up with doubts and fears. Nourish it by holding in thought the thing you desire, by believing in it, visualizing

[p. 156]

it, SEEING it as an accomplished fact.

If you ask for my own formula for successful prayer, I would say--

1st. Center your thoughts on the thing that you want. Visualize it. Make a mental image of it. You are planting the seed of Desire. But don't be content with that. Planting alone will not make a seed of corn grow. It has to be warmed by sunshine, nurtured by rain. So with the seed of your Desire. It must be warmed by Faith, nurtured by constant Belief. So--

2nd. Read the 91st and the 23rd Psalms, just as a reminder of God's power and His readiness to help you in all your needs.

3rd. Don't forget to be thankful, not merely for past favors, but for the granting of this favor you are now asking! 

[p. 157]

[paragraph continues] To be able to thank God for it sincerely, in advance of its actual material manifestation, is the finest evidence of belief.

4th. BELIEVE! Picture the thing that you want so clearly, see it in your imagination so vividly, that for the moment, at least, you will actually BELIEVE THAT YOU HAVE IT!

It is this sincere conviction, registered upon your subconscious mind, and through it upon Universal Mind, that brings the answer to your prayers. Once convince your subconscious mind that you HAVE the thing you want, and you can forget it and go on to your next problem. Mind will attend to the bringing of it into being.




     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[]

The Secret of the Ages
 In Seven Volumes
 VOLUME THREE

[]

  

The

  

SECRET

  

of

  

THE AGES



  

ROBERT COLLIER

  

VOLUME THREE

  

ROBERT COLLIER, Publisher
 599 Fifth Avenue
 New York

  

No connection with
 P. F. Collier & Son Co., Inc.

  

[1926]


Click to enlarge
Title Page: Volume 3



Click to enlarge
Verso: Volume 3


Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 162] [p. 163]

  

Contents

  

VOLUME THREE

         	V

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGE

     
     	Aladdin & Company

      	<page 165>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	VI

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	See Yourself Doing It

      	<page 191>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	VII

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	"As a Man Thinketh"

      	<page 207>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	VIII

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	The Law of Supply

      	<page 225>

     
     	   The World Belongs to You

      	<page 228>

     
     	   "Wanted"

      	<page 244>

     
   
     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 164] [p. 165]

  

V

  

Aladdin & Company

"But the feeble hands and helpless,
  Groping blindly in the darkness,
  Touch God's right hand in that darkness,
  And are lifted up and strengthened."
                           --LONGFELLOW.

	
IT is not always the man who struggles hardest who gets on in the world. It is the direction as well as the energy of struggle that counts in making progress. To get ahead--you must swim with the tide. Men prosper and succeed who work in accord with natural forces. A given amount of effort with these forces carries a man faster and farther than much more effort used against the current. Those who work blindly, regardless of these forces, make

[p. 166]

life difficult for themselves and rarely prosper.

It has been estimated by wise observers that on the average something like 90 per cent of the factors producing success or failure lie outside a man's conscious efforts--separate from his daily round of details. To the extent that he cooperates with the wisdom and power of Universal Mind he is successful, well and happy. To the extent that he fails to cooperate, he is unsuccessful, sick and miserable.

All down the ages some have been enabled to "taste and see that the Lord is good." Prophets and Seers being blessed with the loving kindness of God, have proclaimed a God of universal goodness, saying: "The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord"; "Thou wilt show me the path of life; in Thy presence is fullness of joy."

[p. 167]

Now we know that this Infinite Good is not more available to one than it is to all. We know that the only limit to it is in our capacity to receive. If you had a problem in mathematics to work out, you would hardly gather together the necessary figures and leave them to arrange themselves in their proper sequence. You would know that while the method for solving every problem has been figured out, you have got to work it. The principles are there, but you have got to apply them.

The first essential is to understand the principle--to learn how it works--how to use it. The second--and even more important part--is to APPLY that understanding to the problem in hand.

In the same way, the Principle of Infinite Energy, Infinite Supply, is ever available. But that Energy, that Supply,

[p. 168]

is static. You've got to make it dynamic. You've got to understand the law. You've got to apply your understanding in order to solve your problems of poverty, discord, disease.

Science shows that it is possible to accomplish any good thing. But distrust of your ability to reach the goal desired often holds you back and failure is the inevitable result.

Only by understanding that there is but one power--and that this power is Mind, not circumstances or environment--is it possible to bring your real abilities to the surface and put them to work.

Few deny that intelligence governs the universe. It matters not whether you call this intelligence Universal Mind or Providence or God or merely Nature. All admit Its directing power. All admit that It is a force for good, for progress.

[p. 169]

[paragraph continues] But few realize that our own minds are a part of this Universal Mind in just the same way that the rays of the sun are part of the sun.

If we will work in harmony with It, we can draw upon Universal Mind for all power, all intelligence, in the same way that the sun's rays draw upon their source for the heat and light they bring the earth.

It is not enough to know that you have this power. You must put it into practice--not once, or twice, but every hour and every day. Don't be discouraged if at first it doesn't always work. When you first studied arithmetic, your problems did not always work out correctly, did they? Yet you did not on that account doubt the principle of mathematics. You knew that the fault was with your methods, not with the principle. It is the

[p. 170]

same in this. The power is there. Correctly used, it can do anything.

All will agree that the Mind which first brought the Life Principle to this earth--which imaged the earth itself and the trees and the plants and the animals--is all-powerful. All will agree that to solve any problem, to meet any need, Mind has but to realize the need and it will be met. What most of us do not understand or realize is that we ourselves, being part of Universal Mind, have this same power. Just as the drop of water from the ocean has all the properties of the great bulk of the water in the ocean. Just as the spark of electricity has all the properties of the thunderbolt. And having that power, we have only to realize it and use it to get from life any good we may desire.

In the beginning all was void--space--nothingness. How did Universal Mind

[p. 171]

construct the planets, the firmaments, the earth and all things on and in it from this formless void? By first making a mental image on which to build.

That is what you, too, must do. You control your destiny, your fortune, your happiness to the exact extent to which you can think them out, VIZUALIZE them, SEE them, and allow no vagrant thought of fear or worry to mar their completion and beauty. The quality of your thought is the measure of your power. Clear, forceful thought has the power of attracting to itself everything it may need for the fruition of those thoughts. As W. D. Wattles puts it in his "Science of Getting Rich":

"There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made and which, in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe. A thought

[p. 172]

in this substance produces the thing that is imagined by the thought. Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be created."

The connecting link between your conscious mind and the Universal is thought, and every thought that is in harmony with progress and good, every thought that is freighted with the right idea, can penetrate to Universal Mind. And penetrating to it, it comes back with the power of Universal Mind to accomplish it. You don't need to originate the ways and means. The Universal Mind knows how to bring about any necessary results. There is but one right way to solve any given problem. When your human judgment is unable to decide what that one right way is, turn to Universal Mind for guidance.

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] You need never fear the outcome, for if you heed its advice you cannot go wrong.

Always remember--your mind is but a conductor--good or poor as you make it--for the power of Universal Mind. And thought is the connecting energy. Use that conductor, and you will improve its conductivity. Demand much, and you will receive the more. The Universal is not a niggard in any of its gifts. "Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you."

That is the law of life. And the destiny of man lies not in poverty and hardship, but in living up to his high estate in unity with Universal Mind, with the power that governs the universe.

To look upon poverty and sickness as sent by God and therefore inevitable, is the way of the weakling. God never sent

[p. 174]

us anything but good. What is more, He has never yet failed to give to those who would use them the means to overcome any condition not of His making. Sickness and poverty are not of His making. They are not evidences of virtue, but of weakness. God gave us everything in abundance, and he expects us to manifest that abundance. If you had a son you loved very much, and you surrounded him with good things which he had only to exert himself in order to reach, you wouldn't like it if he showed himself to the world half-starved, ill-kempt and clothed in rags, merely because he was unwilling to exert himself enough to reach for the good things you had provided. No more, in my humble opinion, does God.

Man's principal business in life, as I see it, is to establish a contact with Universal

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] Mind. It is to acquire an understanding of this power that is in him. "With all thy getting, get understanding," said Solomon.

"Happy is the man that findeth ,
  And the man that getteth understanding.
  For the gaining of it is better than the gaining of silver.
  And the profit thereof than fine gold.
  She is more precious than rubies:
  And none of the things thou canst desire are to be compared unto her.
  Length of days is in her right hand:
  In her left hand are riches and honor.
  Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
  And all her paths are peace.
  She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her.
  And happy is every one that retaineth her."
                                         --Proverbs.

When you become conscious, even to a limited degree, of your one-ness with Universal Mind, your ability to call upon It at will for anything you may need, it

[p. 176]

makes a different man of you. Gone are the fears, gone are the worries. You know that your success, your health, your happiness will be measured only by the degree to which you can impress, the fruition of your desires upon mind.

The toil and worry, the wearisome grind and the back-breaking work, will go in the future as in the past to those who will not use their minds. The less they use them, the more they will sweat. And the more they work only from the neck down, the less they will be paid and the more hopeless their lot will become. It is Mind that rules the world.

But to use your mind to the best advantage doesn't mean to toil along with the mere conscious part of it. It means hitching up your conscious mind with the Man Inside You, with the little "Mental Brownies," as Robert Louis Stevenson

[p. 177]

called them, and then working together or a definite end. "My Brownies! God bless them!" said Stevenson, "Who do one-half of my work for me when I am fast asleep, and in all human likelihood do the rest for me as well when I am wide awake and foolishly suppose that I do it myself. I had long been wanting to write a book on man's double being. For two days I went about racking my brains for a plot of any sort, and on the second night I dreamt the scene in Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde at the window; and a scene, afterward split in two, in which Hyde, pursued, took the powder and underwent the change in the presence of his pursuer."

Many another famous writer has spoken in similar strain, and every man who has problems to solve has had like experiences. You know how, after you

[p. 178]

have studied a problem from all angles, it sometimes seems worse jumbled than when you started on it. Leave it then for a while--forget it--and when you go back to it, you find your thoughts clarified, the line of reasoning worked out, your problem solved for you. It is your little "Mental Brownies" who have done the work for you!

The flash of genius does not originate in your own brain. Through intense concentration you've established a circuit through your subconscious mind with the Universal, and it is from It that the inspiration comes. All genius, all progress, is from the same source. It lies with you merely to learn how to establish this circuit at will so that you can call upon It at need. It can be done.

"In the Inner Consciousness of each of us," quotes Dumont in "The Master

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] Mind," "there are forces which act much the same as would countless tiny mental brownies or helpers who are anxious and willing to assist us in our mental work, if we will but have confidence and trust in them. This is a psychological truth expressed in the terms of the old fairy tales. The process of calling into service these Inner Consciousness helpers is similar to that which we constantly employ to recall some forgotten fact or name. We find that we cannot recollect some desired fact, date, or name, and instead of racking our brains with an increased effort, we (if we have learned the secret) pass on the matter to the Inner Consciousness with a silent command, 'Recollect this name for me,' and then go on with our ordinary work. After a few minutes--or it may be hours--all of a sudden, pop! will come the missing name or fact before us--

[p. 180]

flashed from the planes of the Inner Consciousness, by the help of the kindly workers or 'brownies' of those planes. The experience is so common that we have ceased to wonder at it, and yet it is a wonderful manifestation of the Inner Consciousness' workings of the mind. Stop and think a moment, and you will see that the missing word does not present itself accidentally, or 'just because.' There are mental processes at work for your benefit, and when they have worked out the problem for you they gleefully push it up from their plane on to the plane of the outer consciousness where you may use it.

"We know of no better way of illustrating the matter than by this fanciful figure of the 'mental brownies,' in, connection with the illustration of the 'subconscious storehouse.' If you would learn to take advantage of the work of these Subconscious

[p. 181]

Brownies, we advise you to form a mental picture of the Subconscious Storehouse in which is stored all sorts of knowledge that you have placed there during your lifetime, as well as the impressions that you have acquired by race inheritance--racial memory, in fact. The information stored away has often been placed in the storage rooms without any regard for systematic storing, or arrangement, and when you wish to find something that has been stored away there a long time ago, the exact place being forgotten, you are compelled to call to your assistance the little brownies of the mind, which perform faithfully your mental command, 'Recollect this for me!' These brownies are the same little chaps that you charge with the task of waking you at four o'clock tomorrow morning when you wish to catch an early train--and they obey

[p. 182]

you well in this work of the mental alarm-clock. These same little chaps will also flash into your consciousness the report, 'I have an engagement at two o'clock with Jones'--when looking at your watch you will see that it is just a quarter before the hour of two, the time of your engagement.

"Well then, if you will examine carefully into a subject which you wish to master, and will pass along the results of your observations to these Subconscious Brownies, you will find that they will work the raw materials of thought into shape for you in a comparatively short time. They will analyze, systematize, collate, and arrange in consecutive order the various details of information which you have passed on to them, and will add thereto the articles of similar information that they will find stored away in the recesses of your memory. In this way

[p. 183]

they will group together various scattered bits of knowledge that you have forgotten. And, right here, let us say to you that you never absolutely forget anything that you have placed in your mind. You may be unable to recollect certain things, but they are not lost--sometime later some associative connection will be made with some other fact, and lo I the missing idea will be found fitted nicely into its place in the larger idea--the work of our little brownies. Remember Thompson's statement: 'In view of having to wait for the results of these unconscious processes, I have proved the habit of getting together material in advance, and then leaving the mass to digest itself until I am ready to write about it.' This subconscious 'digestion' is really the work of our little mental brownies.

[p. 184]

"There are many ways of setting the brownies to work. Nearly everyone has had some experience, more or less, in the matter, although often it is produced almost unconsciously, and without purpose and intent. Perhaps the best way for the average person--or rather the majority of persons--to get the desired results is for one to get as clear an idea of what one really wants to know--as clear an idea or mental image of the question you wish answered. Then after rolling it around in your mind--mentally chewing it, as it were--giving it a high degree of voluntary attention, you can pass it on to your Subconscious Mentality with the mental command: 'Attend to this for me--work out the answer!' or some similar order. This command may be given silently, or else spoken aloud--either will do. Speak to the Subconscious

[p. 185]

[paragraph continues] Mentality--or its little workers--just as you would speak to persons in your employ, kindly but firmly. Talk to the little workers, and firmly command them to do your work. And then forget all about the matter--throw it off your conscious mind, and attend to your other tasks. Then in due time will come your answer--flashed into your consciousness--perhaps not until the very minute that you must decide upon the matter, or need the information. You may give your brownies orders to report at such and such a time--just as you do when you tell them to awaken you at a certain time in the morning so as to catch the early train, or just as they remind you of the hour of your appointment, if you have them all well trained."

Have you ever read the story by Richard Harding Davis of "The Man

[p. 186]

Who Could Not Lose?" In it the hero is intensely interested in racing. He has studied records and "dope" sheets until he knows the history of every horse back-ward and forward.

The day before the big race he is reclining in an easy chair, thinking of the morrow's race, and he drops off to sleep with that thought on his mind. Naturally, his subconscious mind takes it up, with the result that he dreams the exact outcome of the race.

That was mere fiction, of course, but if races were run solely on the speed and stamina of the horses, it would be entirely possible to work out the results in just that way. Unfortunately, other factors frequently enter into every betting game.

But the idea behind Davis' story is entirely right. The way to contact with your subconscious mind, the way to get

[p. 187]

the help of the "Man Inside You" in working out any problem is:

First, fill your mind with every bit of information regarding that problem that you can lay your hands on.

Second, pick out a chair or lounge or bed where you can recline in perfect comfort, where you can forget your body entirely.

Third, let your mind dwell upon the problem for a moment, not worrying, not fretting, but placidly, and then turn it over to the "Man Inside You." Say to him--"This is your problem. You can do anything. You know the answer to everything. Work this out for me!" And utterly relax. Drop off to sleep, if you can. At least, drop into one of those half-sleepy, half-wakeful reveries that keep other thoughts from obtruding upon your consciousness. Do as Aladdin did

[p. 188]

[paragraph continues] --summon your , give him your Orders, then forget the matter, secure in the knowledge that he will attend to it for you. When you waken, you will have the answer!

For whatever thought, whatever problem you can get across to your subconscious mind at the moment of dropping off to sleep, that "Man Inside You," that Genie-of-your-Mind will work out for you.

Of course, not everyone can succeed in getting the right thought across to the subconscious at the first or the second attempt. It requires understanding and faith, just as the working out of problems in mathematics requires an understanding of and faith in the principles of mathematics. But keep on trying, and you WILL do it. And when you do, the results are sure.

[p. 189]

If it is something that you want, VISUALIZE it first in your mind's eye, see it in every possible detail, see yourself going through every move it will be necessary for you to go through when your wish comes into being. Build up a complete story, step by step, just as though you were acting it all out. Get from it every ounce of pleasure and satisfaction that you can. Be thankful for this gift that has come to you. Then relax; go on to sleep if you can; give the "Man Inside You" a chance to work out the consummation of your wish without interference.

When you waken, hold it all pleasurably in thought again for a few moments. Don't let doubts and fears creep in, but go ahead, confidently, knowing that your wish is working itself out. Know this, believe it--and if there is nothing

[p. 190]

harmful in it, IT WILL WORK OUT!

For somewhere in Universal Mind there exists the correct solution of every problem. It matters not how stupendous and complicated, nor how simple a problem may appear to be. There always exists the right solution in Universal Mind. And because this solution does exist, there also exists the ability to ascertain and to prove what that solution is. You can know, and you can do, every right thing. Whatever it is necessary for you to know, whatever it is necessary for you to do, you can know and you can do, if you will but seek the help of Universal Mind and be governed by its suggestions.

Try this method every night for a little while, and the problem does not exist that you cannot solve.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 191]

  

VI

  

See Yourself Doing It

You say big corporations scheme
 To keep a fellow down;
 They drive him, shame him, starve him, too,
 If he so much as frown.
 God knows I hold no brief for them;
 Still, come with me to-day
 And watch those fat directors meet,
 For this is what they say:
    "In all our force not one to take
    The new work that we plan!
    In all the thousand men we've hired
    Where shall we find a man?"
                        --ST. CLAIR ADAMS. [**]

	
YOU'VE often heard it said that a man is worth $2 a day from the neck down. How much he's worth from the neck up depends upon how much he is able to SEE.

"Without vision the people perish" did not refer to good eyesight. It was



[p. 192]

the eyes of the mind that counted in days of old just as they do today. Without them you are just so much power "on the hoof," to be driven as a horse or an ox is driven. And you are worth only a little more than they.

But given vision--imagination--the ability to visualize conditions and things a month or a year ahead; given the eyes of the mind--there's no limit to your value or to your capabilities.

The locomotive, the steamboat, the automobile, the aeroplane--all existed complete in the imagination of some man before ever they became facts. The wealthy men, the big men, the successful men, visioned their successes in their minds' eyes before ever they won them from the world.

From the beginning of time, nothing has ever taken on material shape without

[p. 193]

first being visualized in mind. The only difference between the sculptor and the mason is in the mental image behind their work. Rodin employed masons to hew his blocks of marble into the general shape of the figure he was about to form. That was mere mechanical labor. Then Rodin took it in hand and from that rough hewn piece of stone there sprang the wondrous figure of "The Thinker." That was art!

The difference was all in the imagination behind the hands that wielded mallet and chisel. After Rodin had formed his masterpiece, ordinary workmen copied it by the thousands. Rodin's work brought fabulous sums. The copies brought day wages. Conceiving ideas--creating something--is what pays, in sculpture as in all else. Mere hand-work is worth only hand wages.

[p. 194]

"The imagination," says Glenn Clark in "The Soul's Sincere Desire," "is of all qualities in man the most God-like--that which associates him most closely with God. The first mention we read of man in the Bible is where he is spoken of as an 'image.' 'Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.' The only place where an image can be conceived is in the imagination. Thus man, the highest creation of God, was a creation of God's imagination.

"The source and center of all man's creative power--the power that above all others lifts him above the level of brute creation, and that gives him dominion, is his power of making images, or the power of the imagination. There are some who have always thought that the imagination was something which makes-believe that which is not. This is fancy

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] --not imagination. Fancy would convert that which is real into pretense and sham; imagination enables one to see through the appearance of a thing to what it really is."

There is a very real law of cause and effect which makes the dream of the dreamer come true. It is the law of visualization--the law that calls into being in this outer material world everything that is real in the inner world. Imagination pictures the thing you desire. VISION idealizes it. It reaches beyond the thing that is, into the conception of what can be. Imagination gives you the picture. Vision gives you the impulse to make the picture your own.

Make your mental image clear enough, picture it vividly in every detail, and the Genie-of-your-Mind will speedily bring it into being as an everyday reality.

[p. 196]

That law holds true of everything in life. There is nothing you can rightfully desire that cannot be brought into being through visualization.

Suppose there's a position you want the general managership of your Company. See yourself--just as you are now--sitting in the general manager's chair. See your name on his door. See yourself handling his affairs as you would handle them. Get that picture impressed upon your subconscious mind. See it! Believe it! The Genie-of-your-Mind will find the way to make it come true.

The keynote of successful visualization is this: See things as you would have them be instead of as they are. Close your eyes and make clear mental pictures. Make them look and act just as they would in real life. In short, day dream--but day dream with a purpose. Concentrate

[p. 197]

on the one idea to the exclusion of all others, and continue to concentrate on that one idea until it has been accomplished.

Do you want an automobile? A home? A factory? They can all be won in the same way. They are in their essence all of them ideas of mind, and if you will but build them up in your own mind first, stone by stone, complete in every detail, you will find that the Genie-of-your-Mind can build them up similarly in the material world.

"The building of a trans-continental railroad from a mental picture," says C. W. Chamberlain in "The Uncommon Sense of Applied Psychology," "gives the average individual an idea that it is a big job. The fact of the matter is, the achievement, as well as the perfect mental picture, is made up of millions of little

[p. 198]

jobs, each fitting in its proper place and helping to make up the whole.

"A skyscraper is built from individual bricks, the laying of each brick being a single job which must be completed before the next brick can be laid."

It is the same with any work, any study. To quote Professor James:

"As we become permanent drunkards by so many separate drinks, so we become saints in the moral, and authorities and experts in the practical and scientific spheres, by so many separate acts and hours of working. Let no youth have any anxiety about the upshot of his education whatever the line of it may be. If he keep faithfully busy each hour of the working day he may safely leave the final result to itself. He can with perfect certainty count on waking some fine morning, to find himself one of the competent

[p. 199]

ones of his generation, in whatever pursuit he may have singled out....Young people should know this truth in advance. The ignorance of it has probably engendered more discouragement and faintheartedness in youths embarking on arduous careers than all other causes taken together."

Remember that the only limit to your capabilities is the one you place upon them. There is no law of limitation. The only law is of supply. Through your subconscious mind you can draw upon universal supply for anything you wish. The ideas of Universal Mind are as countless as the sands on the seashore. Use them. And use them lavishly, just as they are given. There is a little poem by Jessie B. Rittenhouse [**] that so well describes



[p. 200]

the limitations that most of us put upon ourselves that I quote it here:

"I bargained with Life for a penny,
  And Life would pay no more,
  However I begged at evening
  When I counted my scanty store.

   .      .      .      .      .      .

"For Life is a just employer;
  He gives you what you ask,
  But once you have set the wages,
  Why, you must bear the task.

"I worked for a menial's hire,
  Only to learn, dismayed,
  That any wage I had asked of Life,
  Life would have paid."

Aim high! If you miss the moon, you may hit a star. Everyone admits that this world and all the vast firmament must have been thought into shape from the formless void by some Universal Mind. That same Universal Mind rules today, and it has given to each form of life power

[p. 201]

to attract to itself whatever it needs for its perfect growth. The tree, the plant, the animal--each one finds its need.

You are an intelligent, reasoning creature. Your mind is part of Universal Mind. And you have power to say what you require for perfect growth. Don't be a niggard with yourself. Don't sell yourself for a penny. Whatever price you set upon yourself, life will give. So aim high. Demand much! Make a clear, distinct mental image of what it is you want. Hold it in your thought. Visualize it, see it, believe it! The ways and means of satisfying that desire will follow. For supply always comes on the heels of demand.

It is by doing this that you take your fate out of the hands of chance. It is in this way that you control the experiences you are to have in life. But be sure to

[p. 202]

visualize only what you want. The law works both ways. If you visualize your worries and your fears, you will make them real. Control your thought and you will control circumstances. Conditions will be what you make them.

Most of us are like factories where two-thirds of the machines are idle, where the workmen move around in a listless, dispirited sort of way, doing only the tenth part of what they could do if the head of the plant were watching and directing them. Instead of that, he is off idly dreaming or waiting for something to turn up. What he needs is someone to point out to him his listless workmen and idle machines, and show him how to put each one to working full time and overtime.

And that is what YOU need, too. You are working at only a tenth of your 

[p. 203]

capacity. You are doing only a tenth of what you are capable of. The time you spend idly wishing or worrying can be used in so directing your subconscious mind that it will bring you anything of good you may desire.

Philip of Macedon, Alexander's father, perfected the "phalanx"--a triangular formation which enabled him to center the whole weight of his attack on one point in the opposing line. It drove through everything opposed to it. In that day and age it was invincible. And the idea is just as invincible today.

Keep the one thought in mind, SEE it being carried out step by step, and you can knit any group of workers into one homogeneous whole, all centered on the one idea. You can accomplish any one thing. You can put across any definite idea. Keep that mental picture ever in

[p. 204]

mind and you will make it as invincible as was Alexander's phalanx of old.

"It is not the guns or armament
  Or the money they can pay,
  It's the close cooperation
  That makes them win the day.
  It is not the individual
  Or the army as a whole
  But the everlasting team work
       of every bloomin' soul."
                      --J. MASON KNOX.

The error of the ages is the tendency mankind has always shown to limit the power of Mind, or its willingness to help in time of need.

"Know ye not," said Paul, "that ye are the temples of the Living God?"

No--most of us do not know it. Or at least, if we do, we are like the Indian family out on the Cherokee reservation. Oil had been found on their land and money poured in upon them. More money

[p. 205]

than they had ever known was in the world. Someone persuaded them to build a great house, to have it beautifully furnished, richly decorated. The house when finished was one of the show places of that locality. But the Indians, while very proud of their showy house, continued to live in their old sod shack!

So it is with many of us. We may know that we are "temples of the Living God." We may even be proud of that fact. But we never take advantage of it to dwell in that temple, to proclaim our dominion over things and conditions. We never avail ourselves of the power that is ours.

The great Prophets of old had the forward look. Theirs was the era of hope and expectation. They looked for the time when the revelation should come that was to make men "sons of God."

[p. 206]

[paragraph continues] "They shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away."

Jesus came to fulfill that revelation. "Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full."

The world has turned in vain to matter and materialistic philosophy for deliverance from its woes. In the future the only march of actual progress will be in the mental realm, and this progress will not be in the way of human speculation and theorizing, but in the actual demonstration of the Universal, Infinite Mind.

The world stands today within the vestibule of the vast realm of divine intelligence, wherein is found the transcendent, practical power of Mind over all things.

"What eye never saw, nor ear ever heard,
  What never entered the mind of man--
  Even all that God has prepared for those who love Him."



Footnotes

^191:* From "It Can Be Done." Copyright 1921, George Sully & Company.

^199:* From "The Door of Dreams," Houghten, Mifflin & Co., Boston.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 207]

  

VII

  

"As A Man Thinketh"

"Our remedies in ourselves do lie
  Which we ascribe to heaven."
                           --SHAKESPEARE.

	
IN our great-grandfather's day, when witches flew around by night and cast their spell upon all unlucky enough to cross them, men thought that the power of sickness or health, of good fortune or ill, resided outside themselves.

We laugh today at such benighted superstition. But even in this day and age there are few who realize that the things they see are but effects. Fewer still who have any idea of the causes by which those effects are brought about.

Every human experience is an effect.

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] You laugh, you weep, you joy, you sorrow, you suffer or you are happy. Each of these is an effect, the cause of which can be easily traced.

But all the experiences of life are not so easily traceable to their primary causes. We save money for our old age. We put it into a bank or into safe bonds--and the bank breaks or the railroad or corporation goes into a receivership. We stay at home on a holiday to avoid risk of accident, and fall off a stepladder or down the stairs and break a limb. We drive slowly for fear of danger, and a speeding car comes from behind and knocks us into a ditch. A man goes over Niagara Falls in a barrel without harm, and then slips on a banana peel, breaks his leg, and dies of it.

What is the cause back of it all? If we can find it and control it, we can control

[p. 209]

the effect. We shall no longer then be the football of fate. We shall be able to rise above the conception of life in which matter is our master.

There is but one answer. The world without is a reflection of the world within. We image thoughts of disaster upon our subconscious minds and the Genie-of-our-Mind finds ways of bringing them into effect--even though we stay at home, even though we take every possible precaution. The mental image is what counts, be it for good or ill. It is a devastating or a beneficent force, just as we choose to make it. To paraphrase Thackeray--"The world is a looking-glass, and gives back to every man the reflection of his own thought."

For matter is not real substance. Material science today shows that matter has no natural eternal existence. Dr. Willis

[p. 210]

[paragraph continues] R. Whitney, in an address before the American Chemical Society on August 8th, 1925, discussing "Matter--Is There Anything In It?" stated that "the most we know about matter is that it is almost entirely space. It is as empty as the sky. It is almost as empty as a perfect vacuum, although it usually contains a lot of energy." Thought is the only force. Just as polarity controls the electron, gravitation the planets, tropism the plants and lower animals--just so thought controls the action and the environment of man. And thought is subject wholly to the control of mind. Its direction rests with us.

Walt Whitman had the right of it when he said--"Nothing external to me has any power over me."

The happenings that occur in the material world are in themselves neither cheerful nor sorrowful, just as outside of

[p. 211]

the eye that observes them colors are neither green nor red. It is our thoughts that make them so. And we can color those thoughts according to our own fancy. We can make the world without but a reflection of the world within. We can make matter a force subject entirely to the control of our mind. For matter is merely our wrong view of what Universal Mind sees rightly.

We cannot change the past experience, but we can determine what the new ones shall be like. We can make the coming day just what we want it to be. We can be tomorrow what we think today. For the thoughts are causes and the conditions are the effects.

What is the reason for most failures in life? The fact that they first thought failure. They allowed competition, hard times, fear and worry to undermine their

[p. 212]

confidence. Instead of working aggressively ahead, spending money to make more money, they stopped every possible outlay, tried to "play safe," but expected others to continue spending with them. War is not the only place where "The best defensive is a strong offensive."

The law of compensation is always at work. Man is not at the caprice of fate. He is his own fate. "As a man thinketh in This heart, so is he." We are our own past thoughts, with the things that these thoughts have attracted to us added on.

The successful man has no time to think of failure. He is too busy thinking up new ways to succeed. You can't pour water into a vessel already full.

All about you is energy--electronic energy, exactly like that which makes up the solid objects you possess. The only difference is that the Loose energy round

[p. 213]

about is unappropriated. It is still virgin gold--undiscovered, unclaimed. You can think it into anything you wish--into gold or dross, into health or sickness, into strength or weakness, into success or failure. Which shall it be? "There is nothing either good or bad," said Shakespeare, "but thinking makes it so." The understanding of that law will enable you to control every other law that exists. In it is to be found the panacea for all ills, the satisfaction of all want, all desire. It is Creative Mind's own provision for man's freedom.

Have you ever read Basil King's "Conquest of Fear"? If you haven't, do so by all means. Here is the way he visions the future:

"Taking Him ( Jesus) as our standard we shall work out, I venture to think, to the following points of progress:

[p. 214]

"a. The control of matter in furnishing ourselves with food and drink by means more direct than at present employed, as He turned water into wine and fed the multitudes with the loaves and fishes.

"b. The control of matter by putting away from ourselves, by methods more sure and less roundabout than those of today, sickness, blindness, infirmity, and deformity.

"c. The control of matter by regulating our atmospheric conditions as He stilled the tempest.

"d. The control of matter by restoring to this phase of existence those who have passed out of it before their time, or who can ill be spared from it, as He 'raised' three young people from 'the dead' and Peter and Paul followed His example.

"e. The control of matter in putting it

[p. 215]

off and on at will, as He in His death and resurrection.

"f. The control of matter in passing altogether out of it, as He in what we call His Ascension into Heaven."

Mortals are healthy or unhealthy, happy or unhappy, strong or weak, alive or dead, in the proportion that they think thoughts of health or illness, strength or weakness. Your body, like all other material things, manifests only what your mind entertains in belief. In a general way you have often noticed this yourself. A man with an ugly disposition (which is a mental state) will have harsh, unlovely features. One with a gentle disposition will have a smiling and serene countenance. All the other organs of the human body are equally responsive to thought. Who has not seen the face become red with rage or white with fear?

[p. 216]

[paragraph continues] Who has not known of people who became desperately ill following an outburst of temper? Physicians declare that just as fear, irritability and hate distort the features, they likewise distort the heart, stomach and liver.

Experiments conducted on a cat shortly after a meal showed that when it was purring contentedly, its digestive organs functioned perfectly. But when a dog was brought into the room and the cat drew back in fear and anger, the X-ray showed that its digestive organs were so contorted as to be almost tied up in a knot!

Each of us makes his own world--and he makes it through mind. It is a commonplace fact that no two people see the same thing alike. "A primrose by a river's brim, a yellow primrose was to him, and it was nothing more."

[p. 217]

Thoughts are the causes. Conditions are merely effects. We can mould ourselves and our surroundings by resolutely directing our thoughts towards the goal we have in mind.

Ordinary animal life is very definitely controlled by temperature, by climate, by seasonal conditions. Man alone can ad-just himself to any reasonable temperature or condition. Man alone has been able to free himself to a great extent from the control of natural forces through his understanding of the relation of cause and effect. And now man is beginning to get a glimpse of the final freedom that shall be his from all material causes when he shall acquire the complete understanding that mind is the only cause and that effects are what he sees.

"We moderns are unaccustomed," says one talented writer, "to the mastery over

[p. 218]

our own inner thoughts and feelings. That a man should be a prey to any thought that chances to take possession of his mind, is commonly among us assumed as unavoidable. It may be a matter of regret that he should be kept awake all night from anxiety as to the issue of a lawsuit on the morrow, but that he should have the power of determining whether he be kept awake or not seems an extravagant demand. The image of an impending calamity is no doubt odious, but its very odiousness (we say) makes it haunt the mind all the more pertinaciously, and it is useless to expel it. Yet this is an absurd position for man, the heir of all the ages, to be in: Hag-ridden by the flimsy creatures of his own brain. If a pebble in our boot torments us, we expel it. We take off the boot and shake it out. And once the matter is fairly understood, it is just

[p. 219]

as easy to expel an intruding and obnoxious thought from the mind. About this there ought to be no mistake, no two opinions. The thing is obvious, clear and unmistakable. It should be as easy to expel an obnoxious thought from the mind as to shake a stone out of your shoe; and until a man can do that, it is just nonsense to talk about his ascendency over nature, and all the rest of it. He is a mere slave, and a prey to the bat-winged phantoms that flit through the corridors of his own brain. Yet the weary and careworn faces that we meet by thousands, even among the affluent classes of civilization, testify only too clearly how seldom this mastery is obtained. How rare indeed to find a man! How common rather to discover a creature hounded on by tyrant thoughts (or cares, or desires), cowering, wincing under the lash.

[p. 220]

"It is one of the prominent doctrines of some of the oriental schools of practical psychology that the power of expelling thoughts, or if need be, killing them dead on the spot, must be attained. Naturally the art requires practice, but like other arts, when once acquired there is no mystery or difficulty about it. It is worth practice. It may be fairly said that life only begins when this art has been acquired. For obviously when, instead of being ruled by individual thoughts, the whole flock of them in their immense multitude and variety and capacity is ours to direct and despatch and employ where we list, life becomes a thing so vast and grand, compared to what it was before, that its former condition may well appear almost ante-natal. If you can kill a thought dead, for the time being, you can do anything else with it that you

[p. 221]

please. And therefore it is that this power is so valuable. And it not only frees a man from mental torment (which is nine-tenths at least of the torment of life), but it gives him a concentrated power of handling mental work absolutely unknown to him before. The two are  to each other."

There is no intelligence in matter--whether that matter be electronic energy made up in the form of stone, or iron, or wood, or flesh. It all consists of Energy, the universal substance from which Mind forms all material things. Mind is the only intelligence. It alone is eternal. It alone is supreme in the universe.

When we reach that understanding, we will no longer have cause for fear, because we will realize that Universal Mind is the creator of life only; that death is not an actuality--it is merely the absence 

[p. 222]

of life--and life will be ever-present. Remember the old fairy story of how the Sun was listening to a lot of earthly creatures talking of a very dark place they had found? A place of Stygian blackness. Each told how terrifically dark it had seemed. The Sun went and looked for it. He went to the exact spot they had described. He searched everywhere. But he could find not even a tiny dark spot. And he came back and told the earth-creatures he did not believe there was any dark place.

When the sun of understanding shines on all the dark spots in our lives, we will realize that there is no cause, no creator, no power, except good; evil is not an entity--it is merely the absence of good.

And there can be no ill effects without an evil cause. Since there is no evil cause, only good can have reality or power.

[p. 223]

[paragraph continues] There is no beginning or end to good. From it there can be nothing but blessing for the whole race. In it is found no trouble. If God (or Good--the two are synonymous) is the only cause, then the only effect must be like the cause. "All things were made by Him; and without Him was not anything made that was made."

Don't be content with passively reading this. Use it! Practice it! Exercise is far more necessary to mental development that it is to physical. Practice the. "daily dozen" of right thinking. Stretch your mind to realize how infinitely far it can reach out, what boundless vision it can have. Breathe out all the old thoughts of sickness, discouragement, failure, worry and fear. Breathe in deep, long breaths (thoughts) of unlimited health and strength, unlimited happiness

[p. 224]

and success. Practice looking forward--always looking forward to something better--better health, finer physique, greater happiness, bigger success. Take these mental breathing exercises every day. See how easily you will control your thoughts. How quickly you will see the good effects. You've got to think all the time. Your mind will do that anyway. And the thoughts are constantly building--for good or ill. So be sure to exhale all the thoughts of fear and worry and disease and lack that have been troubling you, and inhale only those you want to see realized.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 225]

  

VIII

  

The Law of Supply

"They do me wrong who say I come no more
    When once I knock and fail to find you in;
  For every day I stand outside your door,
    And bid you wake, and rise to fight and win.

"Wail not for precious chances passed away,
    Weep not for golden ages on the wane!
  Each night I burn the records of the day--
    At sunrise every soul is born again!"
                           --WALTER MALONE. [**]

	
HAVE you ever run a race, or worked at utmost capacity for a protracted period, or swum a great distance? Remember how, soon after starting, you began to feel tired? Remember how, before you had gone any great distance, you thought you had reached your limit? But remember, too,



[p. 226]

how, when you kept on going, you got your second wind, your tiredness vanished, your muscles throbbed with energy, you felt literally charged with speed and endurance?

Stored in every human being are great reserves of energy of which the average individual knows nothing. Most people are like a man who drives a car in low gear, not knowing that by the simple shift of a lever he can set it in high and not merely speed up the car, but do it with far less expenditure of power.

The law of the universe is the law of supply. You see it on every hand. Nature is lavish in everything she does.

Look at the heavens at night. There are millions of stars there--millions of worlds--millions of suns among them. Surely there is no lack of wealth or profusion in the Mind that could image all

[p. 227]

of these; no place for limitation there! Look at the vegetation in the country round about you. Nature supplies all that the shrubs or trees may need for their growth and sustenance! Look at the lower forms of animal life--the birds and the wild animals, the reptiles and the insects, the fish in the sea. Nature supplies them bountifully with everything they need. They have but to help themselves to what she holds out to them with such lavish hand. Look at all the natural resources of the world--coal and iron and oil and all metals. There is plenty for everyone. We hear a lot about the exhaustion of our resources of coal and oil, but there is available coal enough to last mankind for thousands of years. There are vast oil fields practically untouched, probably others bigger still yet w be discovered, and when all these are

[p. 228]

exhausted, the extraction of oil from shales will keep the world supplied for countless more years.

There is abundance for everyone. But just as you must strain and labor to reach the resources of your "second wind," just so you must strive before you can make manifest the law of supply in nature.

The World Belongs to You

It is your estate. It owes you not merely a living, but everything of good you may desire. You've got to demand these things of it, though. You've got to fear naught, dread naught, stop at naught. You've got to have the faith of a Columbus, crossing an unknown sea, holding a mutinous crew to the task long after they had ceased to believe in themselves or in him--and giving to the world a new hemisphere. You've got

[p. 229]

to have the faith of a Washington--defeated, discredited, almost wholly deserted by his followers, yet holding steadfast in spite of all--and giving to America a new liberty. You've got to dominate--not to cringe. You've got to make the application of the law of supply.

"Consider the lilies how they grow." The flowers, the birds, all of creation, are incessantly active. The trees and flowers in their growth, the birds and wild creatures in building their nests and finding sustenance, are always working--but never worrying. "Your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things." "And all these things shall be added unto you."

If all would agree to give up worrying--to be industrious, but never anxious about the outcome--it would mean the beginning of a new era in human progress, an age of liberty, of freedom from

[p. 230]

bondage. Jesus set forth the universal law of supply when he said--"Therefore I say unto you, be not anxious for the morrow, what ye shall eat, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed--but seek first the kingdom of God, and all those things shall be added unto you."

What is this "Kingdom of God?"

Jesus tells us--"The Kingdom of God is within you." It is the "Father within you" to which He so frequently referred. It is Mind--your part of Universal Mind. "Seek first the Kingdom of God." Seek first an understanding of this Power within you--learn to contact with it--to use it--"and all those things shall be added unto you."

All riches have their origin in Mind. Wealth is in ideas--not money. Money is merely the material medium of ex-change for ideas. The paper money in

[p. 231]

your pockets is in itself worth no more than so many Russian rubles. It is the idea behind it that gives it value. Factory buildings, machinery, materials, are in themselves worthless without a manufacturing or a selling idea behind them. How often you see a factory fall to pieces, the machinery rust away, after the idea behind them gave out. Factories, machines, are simply the tools of trade. It is the idea behind them that makes them go.

So don't go out a-seeking of wealth. Look within you for ideas! "The Kingdom of God is within you." Use it--purposefully! Use it to THINK constructively. Don't say you are thinking when all you are doing is exercising your faculty of memory. As Dumont says in "The Master Mind"--"They are simply allowing the stream of memory to flow

[p. 232]

through their field of consciousness, while the Ego stands on the banks and idly watches the passing waters of memory flow by. They call this 'thinking', while in reality there is no process of Thought under way."

They are like the old mountaineer sitting in the shade alongside his cabin. Asked what he did to pass the long hours away, he said--"Waal, sometimes I set and think; and sometimes I just set."

Dumont goes on to say, in quoting another writer: "When I use the word 'thinking,' I mean thinking with a purpose, with an end in view, thinking to solve a problem. I mean the kind of thinking that is forced on us when we are deciding on a course to pursue, on a life work to take up perhaps; the kind of thinking that was forced upon us in our younger days when we had to find a solution

[p. 233]

to a problem in mathematics; or when we tackled psychology in college. I do not mean 'thinking' in snatches, or holding petty opinions on this subject and on that. I mean thought on significant questions which lie outside the bounds of your narrow personal welfare. This is the kind of thinking which is now so rare--so sadly needed!"

The Kingdom of God is the Kingdom of Thought, of Achievement, of Health, of Happiness and Prosperity. "I came that ye might have life and have it more abundantly."

But you have got to seek it. You have got to do more than ponder. You have got to think--to think constructively--to seek how you may discover new worlds, new methods, new needs. The greatest discoveries, you know, have arisen out of things which everybody had seen, but

[p. 234]

only one man had NOTICED. The biggest fortunes have been made out of the opportunities which many men had, but only one man GRASPED.

Why is it that so many millions of men and women go through life in poverty and misery, in sickness and despair? Why? Primarily because they make a reality of poverty through their fear of it. They visualize poverty, misery and disease, and thus bring them into being. And secondly, they cannot demonstrate the law of supply for the same reason that so many millions cannot solve the first problem in algebra. The solution is simple--but they have never been shown the method. They do not understand the law.

The essence of this law is that you must think abundance, see abundance, feel abundance, believe abundance. Let no

[p. 235]

thought of limitation enter your mind. There is no lawful desire of yours for which, as far as mind is concerned, there is not abundant satisfaction. And if you can visualize it in mind, you can realize it in your daily world.

"Blessed is the man whose delight is in the law of the Lord: And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season: his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper."

Don't worry. Don't doubt. Don't dig up the seeds of prosperity and success to see whether they have sprouted. Have faith! Nourish your seeds with renewed desire. Keep before your mind's eye the picture of the thing you want. BELIEVE IN IT! No matter if you seem to be in the clutch of misfortune, no matter if the future looks black and dreary--

[p. 236]

[paragraph continues] FORGET YOUR FEARS! Realize that the future is of your own making. There is no power that can keep you down but yourself. Set your goal. Forget the obstacles between. Forget the difficulties in the way. Keep only the goal before your mind's eye--and you'll win it!

Judge Troward, in his Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science, shows the way:

"The initial step, then, consists in determining to picture the Universal Mind as the ideal of all we could wish it to be, both to ourselves and to others, together with the endeavor to reproduce this ideal, however imperfectly, in our own life; and this step having been taken, we can then cheerfully look upon it as our ever-present Friend, providing all good, guarding from all danger, and guiding us with all counsel. Similarly if we think of it as a

[p. 237]

great power devoted to supplying all our needs, we shall impress this character also upon it, and by the law of subjective mind, it will proceed to enact the part of that special providence which we have credited it with being; and if, beyond general care of our concerns, we would draw to ourselves some particular benefit, the same rule holds good of impressing our desire upon the universal subjective mind. And thus the deepest problems of philosophy bring us back to the old statement of the law: 'Ask and ye shall receive; seek and ye shall find; knock and it shall be opened unto you.' This is the summing-up of the natural law of the relation between us and the Divine Mind. It is thus no vain boast that mental science can enable us to makes our lives what we will. And to this law there is no limit. What it can do for us today

[p. 238]

it can do tomorrow, and through all that procession of tomorrows that loses itself in the dim vistas of eternity. Belief in limitation is the one and only thing that causes limitation, because we thus impress limitation upon the creative principle; and in proportion as we lay that belief aside, our boundaries will expand, and increasing life and more abundant blessing will be ours."

You are not working for some firm merely for the pittance they pay you. You are part of the great scheme of things. And what you do has its bearing on the ultimate result. That being the case, you are working for Universal Mind, and Universal Mind is the most generous paymaster there is. Just remember that you can look to it for all good things. Supply is where you are and what you need.

[p. 239]

Do you want a situation? Close your eyes and realize that somewhere is the position for which you of all people are best fitted, and which is best fitted to your ability. The position where you can do the utmost of good, and where life, in turn, offers the most to you. Realize that Universal Mind knows exactly where this position is, and that through your subconscious mind you, too, can know it. Realize that this is YOUR position, that it NEEDS you, that it belongs to you, that it is right for you to have it, that you are entitled to it. Hold this thought in mind every night for just a moment, then go to sleep knowing that your subconscious mind HAS the necessary information as to where this position is and how to get in touch with it. Mind you--not WILL have, but HAS. The earnest realization of this will bring that

[p. 240]

position to you, and you to it, as surely as the morrow will bring the sun. Make the law of supply operative and you find that the things you seek are seeking you.

Get firmly fixed in your own mind the definite conviction that you can do anything you greatly want to do. There is no such thing as lack of opportunity. There is no such thing as only one opportunity. You are subject w a law of boundless and perpetual opportunity, and you can enforce that law in your behalf just as widely as you need. Opportunity is infinite and ever present.

Berton Braley has it well expressed in his poem on "Opportunity" [**]:

"For the best verse hasn't been rhymed yet,
    The best house hasn't been planned,
  The highest peak hasn't been climbed yet,
    The mightiest rivers aren't spanned;



[p. 241]

 Don't worry and fret, faint hearted,
    The chances have just begun,
  For the Best jobs haven't been started,
    The Best work hasn't been done."

Nothing stands in the way of a will which wants--an intelligence which knows. The great thing is to start. "Begin your work," says Ausonius. "To begin is to complete the first half. The second half remains. Begin again and the work is done." It matters not how small or unimportant your task may seem to be. It may loom bigger in Universal Mind than that of your neighbor, whose position is so much greater in the eyes of the world. Do it well--and Universal Mind will work with you.

But don't feel limited to any one job or any one line of work. Man was given dominion over all the earth. "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after

[p. 242]

our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth."

All of energy, all of power, all that can exercise any influence over your life, is in your hands through the power of thought. God--good--is the only power there is. Your mind is part of His mind. He is "the Father that is within you that doeth the works."

So don't put any limit upon His power by trying to limit your capabilities. You are not in bondage to anything. All your hopes and dreams can come true. Were you not given dominion over all the earth? And can anyone else take this dominion from you?

All the mysterious psychic powers

[p. 243]

about which you hear so much today are perfectly natural. I have them. You have them. They only await the time when they shall be allowed to assert their vigor and prove themselves your faithful servitors.

"Be not afraid!" Claim your inheritance. The Universal Mind that supplies all wisdom and power is your mind. And to the extent that you are governed by your understanding of its infinite law of supply you will be able to demonstrate plenty. "According to your faith, be it unto you."

"Analyze most of the great American fortunes of the past generation," says Advertising and Selling Fortnightly, "and you will find that they were founded on great faiths. One man's faith was in oil, another's in land, another's in minerals.

[p. 244]

"The fortunes that are being built today are just as surely being built on great faiths, but there is this difference: the emphasis of the faith has been shifted. Today it takes faith in a product or an opportunity, as it always did, but it takes faith in the public, in addition. Those who have the greatest faith in the public--the kind of faith possessed by Henry Ford and H. J. Heinz--and make that faith articulate--build the biggest fortunes."

"Wanted"

There is one question that bothers many a man. Should he stick to the job he has, or cast about at once for a better one. The answer depends entirely upon what you are striving for. The first thing is to set your goal. What is it you want? A profession? A political appointment?

[p. 245]

An important executive position? A business of your own?

Every position should yield you three things:

1. Reasonable pay for the present.

2. Knowledge, training, or experience that will be worth money to you in the future.

3. Prestige or acquaintances that will be of assistance to you in attaining your goal.

Judge every opening by those three standards. But don't overlook chances for valuable training, merely because the pay is small. Though it is a pretty safe rule that the concern with up-to-the-minute methods that it would profit you to learn, also pays up-to-the-minute salaries.

Hold each job long enough to get from

[p. 246]

it every speck of information there is in it. Hold it long enough to learn the job ahead. Then if there seems no likelihood of a vacancy soon in that job ahead, find one that corresponds to it somewhere else.

Progress! Keep going ahead! Don't be satisfied merely because your salary is being boosted occasionally. Learn something every day. When you reach the point in your work that you are no longer adding to your store of knowledge or abilities, you are going backward, and it's time for you to move. Move upward in the organization you are with if you can--but MOVE!

Your actual salary is of slight importance compared with the knowledge and ability you add to your mind. Given a full storehouse there, the salary or the riches will speedily follow. But the biggest

[p. 247]

salary won't do you much good for long unless you've got the knowledge inside you to back it up.

It's like a girl picking her husband. She can pick one with a lot of money and no brains, or she can pick one with no money but a lot of ability. In the former case, she'll have a high time for a little while, ending in a divorce court or in her having a worthless young "rounder" on her hands and no money to pay the bills. In the other, the start will be hard, but she is likely to end up with a happy home she has helped to build, an earnest, hardworking husband who has "arrived"--and happiness.

Money ought to be a consideration in marriage--but never the consideration. Of course it's an easy matter to pick a man h with neither money nor brains. But when it's a choice of money or brains--take the

[p. 248]

brains every time. Possessions are of slight importance compared to mind. Given the inquiring, alert type of mindyou can get any amount of possessions. But the possessions without the mind are nothing. Nine times out of ten the best thing that can happen to any young couple is to have to start out with little or nothing and work out their salvation together.

What is it you want most from life? Is it riches?

Picture yourself with all the riches you could use, with all the abundance that Nature holds out with such lavish hand everywhere. What would you do with it?

Day-dream for a while. Believe that you have that abundance now. Practice being rich in your own mind. See yourself driving that expensive car you have

[p. 249]

always longed for, living in the sort of house you have often pictured, well-dressed, surrounded by everything to make life worth while. Picture yourself spending this money that is yours, lavishly, without a worry as to where more is coming from, knowing that there is no limit to the riches of Mind. Picture yourself doing all those things you would like to do, living the life you would like to live, providing for your loved ones as you would like to see them provided for. See all this in your mind's eye. Believe it to be true for the moment. Know that it will all be true in the not-very-distant future. Get from it all the pleasure and enjoyment you can.

It is the first step in making your dreams come true. You are creating the model in mind. And if you don't allow fear or worry to tear it down, Mind will

[p. 250]

re-create that model for you in your every-day life.

"All that the Father hath is yours," said Jesus. And a single glance at the heavens and the earth will show you that He has all riches in abundance. Reach out mentally and appropriate to yourself some of these good gifts. You've got to do it mentally before you can enjoy it physically. "'Tis mind that makes the body rich," as Shakespeare tells us.

See the things that you want as already yours. Know that they will come to you at need. Then LET them come. Don't fret and worry about them. Don't think about your LACK of them. Think of them as YOURS, as belonging to you, as already in your possession.

Look upon money as water that runs the mill of your mind. You are constantly grinding out ideas that the world needs.

[p. 251]

[paragraph continues] Your thoughts, your plans, are necessary to the great scheme of things. Money provides the power. But it needs YOU, it needs your ideas, before it can be of any use to the world. The Falls of Niagara would be of no use without the power plants that line the banks. The Falls need these plants to turn their power to account. In the same way, money needs your ideas to become of use to the world.

So instead of thinking that you need money, realize that money needs YOU. Money is just so much wasted energy without work to do. Your ideas provide the outlet for it, the means by which money can do things. Develop your ideas, secure in the knowledge that money is always looking for such an outlet. When the ideas are perfected, money will gravitate your way without conscious effort on

[p. 252]

your part, if only you don't dam up the channels with doubts and fears.

"First have something good--then advertise!" said Horace Greeley. First have something that the world needs, even if it be only faithful, interested service--then open up your channels of desire, and dollars will flow to you.

And remember that the more you have to offer--the more of riches will flow to you. Dollars are of no value except as they are used.

You have seen the rich attacked time and again in newspapers and magazines. You have read numberless articles and editorials against them. You have heard agitators declaim against them by the hour. But have you ever heard one of them say a single word against the richest man of them all--Henry Ford? I haven't. And why? Because Henry

[p. 253]

[paragraph continues] Ford's idea of money is that it is something to be used--something to provide more jobs, something to bring more comfort, more enjoyment, into an increasingly greater number of lives.

That is why money flows to him so freely. That is why he gets so much out of life. And that is how you, too, can get in touch with Infinite Supply. Realize that it is not money you have to seek, but a way to use money for the world's advantage. Find the need! Look at everything with the question--How could that be improved? To what new uses could this be put? Then set about supplying that need, in the absolute confidence that when you have found the way, money will flow freely to and through you. Do your part--and you can confidently look to Universal Mind to provide the means.

[p. 254]

Get firmly in mind the definite conviction that YOU CAN DO ANYTHING RIGHT THAT YOU MAY WISH TO DO. Then set your goal and let everything you do, all your work, all your study, all your associations, be a step towards that goal. To quote Berton Braley [**] again--

"If you want a thing bad enough
  To go out and fight for it,
  Work day and night for it,
  Give up your time and your peace and your sleep for it,
  If only desire of it
  Makes you quite mad enough
  Never to tire of it,
  Makes you hold all other things tawdry and cheap for it,
  If life seems all empty and useless without it
  And all that you scheme and you dream is about it,
  If gladly you'll sweat for it,
  Fret for it,



[p. 255]

 Plan for it,
  Lose all your terror of God or man for it,
  If you'll simply go after that thing that you want,
  With all your capacity,
  Strength and sagacity,
  Faith, hope and confidence, stern pertinacity,
  If neither cold poverty, famished and gaunt,
  Nor sickness nor pain
  Of body or brain
  Can turn you away from the thing that you want,
  If dogged and grim you besiege and beset it,
                    You'll get it!"





Footnotes

^225:* Courtesy of Mrs. Ella Malone Watson.

^240:* From "A Banjo at Armageddon." Copyright 1917, George H. Doran Company.

^254:* From "Things As They Are." Copyright 1916, George H. Doran Company, New York.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[]

The Secret of the Ages
 In Seven Volumes
 VOLUME FOUR

[]

  

The

  

SECRET

  

of

  

THE AGES



  

ROBERT COLLIER

  

VOLUME FOUR

  

ROBERT COLLIER, Publisher
 599 Fifth Avenue
 New York

  

No connection with
 P. F. Collier & Son Co., Inc.

  

[1926]


Click to enlarge
Title Page: Volume 4



Click to enlarge
Verso: Volume 4


Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



  

Contents

  

VOLUME FOUR

         	IX

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGE

     
     	The Formula of Success

      	<page 263>

     
     	   The Talisman of Napoleon

      	<page 267>

     
     	   "It Couldn't Be Done"

      	<page 275>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	X

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	"This Freedom"

      	<page 287>

     
     	   The Only Power

      	<page 295>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XI

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	The Law of Attraction

      	<page 305>

     
     	   A Blank Check

      	<page 316>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XII

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	The Three Requisites

      	<page 327>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XIII

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	That Old Witch--Bad Luck

      	<page 339>

     
     	   He Whom a Dream Hath Possessed

      	<page 346>

     
     	   The Bars of Fate

      	<page 353>

     
     	   Exercise

      	<page 362>

     
   
     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 262] [p. 263]

  

IX

  

The Formula of Success

"One ship drives east, and another drives west,
    With the self-same winds that blow.
  'Tis the set of the sails, and not the gales
    Which tells us the way they go.

"Like the waves of the sea are the ways of fate
    As we voyage along thru life.
  'Tis the set of the soul which decides its goal
    And not the calm or the strife."
                 --ELLA WHEELER WILCOX.

	
WHAT is the eternal question which stands up and looks you and every sincere man squarely in the eye every morning?

"How can I better my condition?" That is the real life question which con-fronts you, and will haunt you every day till you solve it.

[p. 264]

Read this chapter carefully and I think you will find the answer to this important life question which you and every man must solve if he expects ever to have more each Monday morning, after pay day, than he had the week before.

To begin with, all wealth depends upon a clear understanding of the fact that mind--thought--is the only creator. The great business of life is thinking. Control your thoughts and you control circumstance.

Just as the first law of gain is desire, so the formula of success is BELIEF. Believe that you have it--see it as an existent fact--and anything you can rightly wish for is yours. Belief is "the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen."

You have seen men, inwardly no more capable than yourself, accomplish the

[p. 265]

seemingly impossible. You. have seen others, after years of hopeless struggle, suddenly win their most cherished dreams. And you've often wondered, "What is the power that gives new life to their dying ambitions, that supplies new impetus to their jaded desires, that gives them a new Start on the road to success?"

That power is belief--faith. Someone, something, gave them a new belief in themselves and a new faith in their power to win--and they leaped ahead and wrested success from seemingly certain defeat.

Do you remember the picture Harold Lloyd was in two or three years ago, showing a country boy who was afraid of his shadow? Every boy in the countryside bedeviled him. Until one day his grandmother gave him a talisman

[p. 266]

that she assured him his grandfather had carried through the Civil War and which, so she said, had the property of making its owner invincible. Nothing could hurt him, she told him, while he wore this talisman. Nothing could stand up against him. He believed her. And the next time the bully of the town started to cuff him around, he wiped up the earth with him. And that was only the start. Before the year was out he had made a reputation as the most daring soul in the community.

Then, when his grandmother felt that he was thoroughly cured, she told him the truth--that the "talisman" was merely a piece of old junk she'd picked up by the roadside--that she knew all he needed was faith in himself, belief that he could do these things.

[p. 267]

The Talisman of Napoleon

Stories like that are common. It is such a well-established truth that you can do only what you think you can, that the theme is a favorite one with authors. I remember reading a story years ago of an artist--a mediocre sort of artist--who was visiting the field of Waterloo and happened upon a curious lump of metal half buried in the dirt, which so attracted him that he picked it up and put it in his pocket. Soon thereafter he noticed a sudden increase in confidence, an absolute faith in himself, not only as to his own Chosen line of work, but in his ability to handle any situation that might present itself. He painted a great picture--just to show that he could do it. Not content with that, he visioned an empire with Mexico as its basis, actually

[p. 268]

led a revolt that carried all before it--until one day he lost his talisman. And immediately his bubble burst.

I instance this just to illustrate the point that it is your own belief in yourself that counts. It is the consciousness of dominant power within you that makes all things attainable. You can do anything you think you can. This knowledge is literally the gift of the gods, for through it you can solve every human problem. It should make of you an incurable optimist. It is the open door to welfare. Keep it open--by expecting to gain everything that is right.

You are entitled to every good thing. Therefore expect nothing but good. Defeat does not need to follow victory. You don't have to "knock wood" every time you congratulate yourself that things have been going well with you.

[p. 269]

[paragraph continues] Victory should follow victory--and it will if you "let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus." It is the mind that means health and life and boundless opportunity and recompense. No limitation rests upon you. So don't let any enter your life. Remember that Mind will do every good thing for you. It will remove mountains for you.

"Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it."

Bring all your thoughts, your desires, your aims, your talents, into the Storehouse--the Consciousness of Good, the Law of Infinite supply--and prove these blessings. There is every reason to know that you are entitled to adequate provision.

[p. 270]

[paragraph continues] Everything that is involved in supply is a thing of thought. Now reach out, stretch your mind, try to comprehend unlimited thought, unlimited supply.

Do not think that supply must come through one or two channels. It is not for you to dictate to Universal Mind the means through which It shall send Its gifts to you. There are millions of channels through which It can reach you. Your part is to impress upon Mind your need, your earnest desire, your boundless belief in the resources and the willingness of Universal Mind to help you. Plant the seed of desire. Nourish it with a clear visualization of the ripened fruit. Water it with sincere faith. But leave the means to Universal Mind.

Open up your mind. Clear out the channels of thought. Keep yourself in

[p. 271]

a state of receptivity. Gain a mental attitude in which you are constantly expecting good. You have the fundamental right to all good, you know. "According to your faith, be it unto you."

The trouble with most of us is that we are mentally lazy. It is so much easier to go along with the crowd than to break trail for ourselves. But the great discoverers, the great inventors, the great geniuses in all lines have been men who dared to break with tradition, who defied precedent, who believed that there is no limit to what Mind can do--and who stuck to that belief until their goal was won, in spite. of all the sneers and ridicule of the wiseacres and the "It-can't-be-done'rs."

Not only that, but they were never satisfied with achieving just one success. They knew that the first success is like

[p. 272]

the first olive out of the bottle. All the others come out the more easily for it. They realized that they were a part of the Creative Intelligence of the Universe, and that the part shares all the properties of the whole. And that realization gave them the faith to strive for any right thing, the knowledge that the only limit upon their capabilities was the limit of their desires. Knowing that, they couldn't be satisfied with any ordinary success. They had to keep on and on and on.

Edison didn't sit down and fold his hands when he gave us the talking machine. Or the electric light. These great achievements merely opened the way to new fields of accomplishment.

Open up the channels between your mind and Universal Mind, and there is no limit to the riches that will come

[p. 273]

pouring in. Concentrate your thoughts on the particular thing you are most interested in, and ideas in abundance will come flooding down, opening up a dozen ways of winning the goal you are striving for.

But don't let one success--no matter how great--satisfy you. The Law of Creation, you know, is the Law of Growth. You can't stand still. You must go forward--or be passed by. Complacency--self-satisfaction--is the greatest enemy of achievement. You must keep looking forward. Like Alexander, you must be constantly seeking new worlds to conquer. Depend upon it, the power will come to meet the need. There is no such thing as failing powers, if we look to Mind for our source of supply. The only failure of mind comes from worry and fear--or from disuse.

[p. 274]

William James, the famous psychologist, taught that "The more mind does, the more it can do." For ideas release energy. You can do more and better work than you have ever done. You can know more than you know now. You know from your own experience that under proper mental conditions of joy or enthusiasm, you can do three or four times the work without fatigue that you can ordinarily. Tiredness is more boredom than actual physical fatigue. You can work almost indefinitely when the work is a pleasure.

You've seen sickly persons, frail persons, who couldn't do an hour's light work without exhaustion, suddenly buckle down when heavy responsibilities were thrown upon them, and grow strong and rugged under the load. Crises not only draw upon the reserve

[p. 275]

power you have, but they help to create new power:

"It Couldn't Be Done"

It may be that you have been deluded by the thought of incompetence. It may be that you have been told so often that you cannot do certain things that you've come to believe you can't. Remember that success or failure is merely a state of mind. Believe you cannot do a thing--and you can't. Know that you can do it--and you will. You must see yourself doing it.

"If you think you are beaten, you are;
    If you think you dare not, you don't;
  If you'd like to win, but you think you can't,
    It's almost a cinch you won't;
  If you think you'll lose, you've lost,
    For out in the world you'll find
  Success begins with a fellow's will--
    It's all in the state of mind.

[p. 276]

"Full many a race is lost
    Ere even a race is run,
  And many a coward fails
    Ere even his work's begun.
  Think big, and your deeds will grow,
    Think small and you fall behind,
  Think that you can, and you will;
    It's all in the state of mind.

 "If you think you are outclassed, you are;
    You've got to think high to rise;
  You've got to be sure of yourself before
    You can ever win a prize.
  Life's battle doesn't always go
    To the stronger or faster man;
  But sooner or later, the man who wins
    Is the fellow who thinks he can."

There's a vast difference between a proper understanding of one's own ability and a determination to make the best of it--and offensive egotism. It is absolutely necessary for every man to believe in himself, before he can make the most of himself. All of us have something

[p. 277]

to sell. It may be our goods, it may be our abilities, it may be our services. You've got to believe in yourself to make your buyer take stock in you at par and accrued interest. You've got to feel the same personal solicitude over a customer lost, as a revivalist over a backslider, and hold special services to bring him back into the fold. You've got to get up every morning with determination, if you're going to go to bed that night with satisfaction.

There's mighty sound sense in the saying that all the world loves a booster. The one and only thing you have to win success with is MIND. For your mind to function at its highest capacity, you've got to be charged with good cheer and optimism. No one ever did a good piece of work while in a negative frame of mind. Your best work is always done

[p. 278]

when you are feeling happy and optimistic.

And a happy disposition is the result--not the cause--of happy, cheery thinking. Health and prosperity are the results primarily of optimistic thoughts. You make the pattern. If the impress you have left on the world about you seems faint and weak, don't blame fate--blame your pattern! You will never cultivate a brave, courageous demeanor by thinking cowardly thoughts. You cannot gather figs from thistles. You will never make your dreams come true by choking them with doubts and fears. You've got to put foundations under your air castles, foundations of UNDERSTANDING and BELIEF. Your chances of success in any undertaking can always be measured by your BELIEF in yourself.

[p. 279]

Are your surroundings discouraging? Do you feel that if you were in  place success would be easier? Just bear in mind that your real environment is within you. All the factors of success or failure are in your inner world. You make that own inner world--and through it your outer world. You can choose the material from which to build it. If you've not Chosen wisely in the past, you can choose again now the material you want to rebuild it. The richness of life is within you. No one has failed so long as he can begin again.

Start right in and do all those things you feel you have it in you to do. Ask permission of no man. Concentrating your thought upon any proper undertaking will make its achievement possible. Your belief that you can do the thing gives your thought forces their

[p. 280]

power. Fortune waits upon you. Seize her boldly, hold her--and she is yours. She belongs rightfully to you. But if you cringe to her, if you go up to her doubtfully, timidly, she will pass you by in scorn. For she is a fickle jade who must be mastered, who loves boldness, who admires confidence.

A Roman boasted that it was sufficient for him to strike the ground with his foot and legions would spring up. And his very boldness cowed his opponents. It is the same with your mind. Take the first step, and your mind will mobilize all its forces to your aid. But the first essential is that you begin. Once the battle is started, all that is within and without you will come to your assistance, if you attack in earnest and meet each obstacle with resolution. But you have got to start things.

[p. 281]

"The Lord helps them that help themselves" is a truth as old as man. It is, in fact, plain common sense. Your subconscious mind has all power, but your conscious mind is the watchman at the gate. It has got to open the door. It has got to press the spring that releases the infinite energy. No failure is possible in the accomplishment of any right object you may have in life, if you but understand your power and will perseveringly try to use it in the proper way.

The men who have made their mark in this world all had one trait in common--they believed in themselves! "But," you may say, "how can I believe in myself when I have never yet done anything worth while, when everything I put my hand to seems to fail?" You can't, of course. That is, you couldn't

[p. 282]

if you had to depend upon your conscious mind alone. But just remember what one far greater than you said--"I can of mine own self do nothing. The Father that is within me--He doeth the works."

That same "Father" is within you. And it is by knowing that He is in you, and that through Him you can do anything that is right, that you can acquire that belief in yourself which is so necessary. Certainly the Mind that imaged the heavens and the earth and all that they contain has all wisdom, all power, all abundance. With this Mind to call upon, you know there is no problem too difficult for you to undertake. The knowing of this is the first step. Faith. But St. James tells us--"Faith without works is dead." So go on to the next step. Decide on the one thing you want

[p. 283]

most from life. No matter what it may be. There is no limit, you know, to Mind. Visualize this thing that you want. See it, feel it, BELIEVE in it. Make your mental blue-print, and begin to build!

Suppose some people DO laugh at your idea. Suppose Reason does say--"It can't be done!" People laughed at Galileo. They laughed at Henry Ford. Reason contended for countless ages that the earth was flat. Reason said--or so numerous automotive engineers argued--that the Ford motor wouldn't run. But the earth is round--and the twelfth or fifteenth million Ford is on the road.

Let us start right now putting into practice some of these truths that you have learned. What do you want most of life right now? Take that one desire,

[p. 284]

concentrate on it, impress it upon your subconscious mind.

Psychologists have discovered that the best time to make suggestions to your subconscious mind is just before going to sleep, when the senses are quiet and the attention is lax. So let us take your desire and suggest it to your subconscious mind tonight. The two prerequisites are the earnest DESIRE, and an intelligent, understanding BELIEF. Someone has said, you know, that education is three-fourths encouragement, and the encouragement is the suggestion that the thing can be done.

You know that you can have what you want, if you want it badly enough and can believe in it earnestly enough. So tonight, just before you drop off to sleep, concentrate your thought on this thing that you most desire from life.

[p. 285]

[paragraph continues] BELIEVE that you have it. SEE YOURSELF possessing it. FEEL yourself using it.

Do that every night until you ACTUALLY DO BELIEVE that you have the thing you want. When you reach that point, YOU WILL HAVE IT!   


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 286] [p. 287]

  

X

  

"This Freedom"

"Ye shall know the truth
  And the Truth shall make you free."

	
I HAVE heard that quotation ever since I was a little child. Most of us have. But to me it was never anything much but a quotation--until a few years ago. It is only in the past several years that I have begun to get an inkling of the real meaning of it--an understanding of the comfort back of it. Perhaps to you, too, it has been no more than a sonorous phrase. If so, you will be interested in what I have since gotten from it.

To begin with, what is the "truth"

[p. 288]

that is so often referred to in all our religious teaching? The truth about what? And what is it going to free us from?

The truth as I see it now is the underlying reality in everything we meet in life. There is, for instance, one right way to solve any given problem in mathematics. That one right way is the truth as far as that problem is concerned. To know it is to free yourself from all doubt and vain imagining and error. It is to free yourself from any trouble that might arise through solving the problem incorrectly.

In the same way, there is but one BEST way of solving every situation that confronts you. That BEST way is the truth. To know it is to make you free from all worry or trouble in connection with that situation. For if it is

[p. 289]

met in the RIGHT way, only good can come of it.

Then there is your body. There is only one RIGHT idea of every organism in your body. One CORRECT method of functioning for each of them. And Universal Mind holds that RIGHT idea, that CORRECT method. The functioning of your body, the rebuilding of each cell and tissue, is the work of your subconscious mind. If you will constantly hold before it the thought that its model is perfection, that weakness or sickness or deformity is merely ABSENCE of perfection--not a reality in itself--in short, if you will realize the Truth concerning your body, your subconscious mind will speedily make you free and keep you free from every ill.

It matters not what is troubling you today. If you will KNOW that whatever

[p. 290]

it may seem to be is merely the absence of the true idea, if you will realize that the only thing that counts is the truth that Universal Mind knows about your body, you can make that truth manifest.

Affirm the good, the true--and the evil will vanish. It is like turning on the light--the darkness immediately disappears. For there is no actual substance in darkness--it is merely absence of light. Nor is there any substance in sickness or evil--it is merely the absence of health or good.

That is the truth that was the mentality of Jesus--what Paul describes as "the mind which was also in Christ Jesus."

Jesus declared that "we should know the truth, and the truth would make us free." That truth was the power which

[p. 291]

[paragraph continues] He exercised. He had so perfect an understanding of truth that it gave Him absolute dominion over evil, enabled Him to heal diseases of every nature, even to raise the dead. The power that He exercised then was not confined to His time, nor limited to His own immediate followers. "Lo, I am with you always," He said, "even unto the end of the world." And He is just as available to us now as He was to His own disciples 1900 years ago.

"I have given you power to tread serpents and scorpions under foot and to trample on all the power of the enemy; and in no case shall anything do you harm."

That gift was never meant to be confined to His own disciples or to any other one group. God has never dealt in special or temporary gifts. He gives

[p. 292]

to all--to all who will accept--to all who have an understanding heart.

All sickness, all poverty, all sorrow, is the result of the incorrect use of some gift of God, which in itself is inherently good. It is just as though we took the numbers that were given us to work out a problem, and put them in the wrong places. The result would be incorrect, inharmonious. We would not be ex-pressing the truth. The moment we rearrange those numbers properly, we get the correct answer--harmony--the truth! There was nothing wrong with the principle of mathematics before--the fault was all with us, with our incorrect arrangement of the figures.

What is true of the principle of mathematics is true of every principle. The principle is changeless, undying. It is only our expression of the principle

[p. 293]

that changes as our understanding of it becomes more thorough. Lightning held only terror for man until he made of electricity his servant. Steam was only so much waste until man learned to harness it. Fire and water are the most destructive forces known--until properly used, then they are man's greatest helpers. There is nothing wrong with any gift of God--once we find the way to use it. The truth is always there if we can find the principle behind it. The figures in mathematics are never bad. It is merely our incorrect arrangement of them.

The great need is an open mind and the desire for understanding. How far in the science of mathematics would you get if you approached the study of it with the preconceived notion that two plus two makes five, and nothing you

[p. 294]

heard to the contrary was going to change that belief? "Except ye turn, and become as little children, ye shell not enter into the kingdom of heaven." You must drop all your preconceived ideas, all your prejudices. You must never say--"Oh, that sounds like so-and-so. I don't want any of it." Just remember that any great movement must have at least a grain of truth back of it, else it could never grow to any size. Seek that grain of truth. Be open-minded. Keep your eyes and ears open for the truth. If you can do this, you will find that new wordings, different interpretations, are but the outer shell. You can still see the Truth beneath, the Christ that "before Abraham was, I am."

[p. 295]

The Only Power

He who is looking for wisdom, power, or permanent success, will find it only within. Mind is the only cause. Your body is healthy or sick according to the images of thought you impress upon your subconscious mind. Ii you will hold thoughts of health instead of sickness, if you will banish all thoughts of disease and decay, you can build up a perfect body. Dr. William S. Patten of New York says, "To know and to understand the organization of mind and to recognize the action of mind is the first and the only requisite of a sound body."

For all disease starts in mind. It may be in your own conscious mind, from reading of an epidemic or from meeting with circumstances which education has taught you will bring about disease.

[p. 296]

[paragraph continues] It may be suggested to your subconscious mind, as so frequently happens with young children, by the fears and worries and thoughts of contagion of those around you.

But whichever it is, it is FEAR that starts it. You visualize, consciously or unconsciously, the disease that you fear, and because that is the image held before your thought, your body proceeds to build in accordance with that model. You believe that disease is necessary, that you have got to expect a certain amount of it. You hear of it every day, and subconsciously at least you are constantly in fear of it. And through that very fear you create it, when if you would spend that same amount of time thinking and believing in the necessity of HEALTH, you would never need to know disease.

[p. 297]

Disease is not sent by God. It is not a visitation of Providence. If it were, what would be the use of doctoring it? You couldn't fight against the power of God!

God never sent us anything but good. He never gave us disease. When we allow disease to take hold of us, it is because we have lost touch with God--lost the perfect model of us that He holds in mind. And what we have got to strive for is to get back the belief in that perfect model--to forget the diseased image we are holding in our thought.

Remember the story of Alexander and his famous horse, Bucephalus? No one could ride the horse because it was afraid of its shadow. But Alexander faced it towards the sun--and rode it without trouble. Face towards the sun and the

[p. 298]

shadows will fall behind you, too. Face towards the perfect image of every organ, and the shadows of disease will never touch you.

There is no germ in a draft capable of giving you a cold. There is no bacteria in exposure to the weather that can give you a fever or pneumonia. It is you that gives them to yourself. The draft doesn't reason this out. Neither does your body. They are both of them merely phases of matter. They are not intelligent. It is your conscious mind that has been educated to think that a cold must follow exposure to a draft. This it is that suggests it to your subconscious mind and brings the cold into being.

Before you decide again that you have a cold, ask yourself, Who is it that is taking this cold? It cannot be my nose,

[p. 299]

for it has no intelligence. It does only what my subconscious mind directs. And anyway, how could my pose know that a draft of air has been playing on the back of my neck? If it wasn't my nose that decided it, what was it? The only thing it can have been is my mind. Well, if mind can tell me to have a cold, surely it can stop that cold, too. So let's reverse the process, and instead of holding before the subconscious mind images of colds and fevers, think only of health and life and strength. Instead of trying to think back to discover how we "caught" cold, and thus strengthening the conviction that we have one, let us deny its existence and so knock the props out from under the creative faculties that are originating the cold. Let us hold before our subconscious mind only the perfect idea of nose and head

[p. 300]

and throat that is in Universal Mind. Let us make it use the Truth for its pattern, instead of the illusory ideas of conscious mind.

Every form of disease or sickness is solely the result of wrong thinking. The primary law of being is the law of health and life. When you recognize this, when you hold before your mind's eye only a perfect body, perfect organisms functioning perfectly, you will "realize the truth that makes you free."

Farnsworth in his "Practical Psychology" tells of a physician who has lived on a very restricted diet for years while at home. But about once a year he comes to New York for a week. While here, he eats anything and everything that his fancy dictates, and never suffers the least inconvenience. As soon as he gets home he has to return to his

[p. 301]

diet. Unless he sticks to his diet, he expects to be ill--and he is ill. "As a man thinketh, so is he." What one expects to get he is apt to get, especially where health is concerned. For matter has no sensation of its own. The conscious mind is what produces pain, is what feels, acts or impedes action.

Functional disorders are caused by certain suggestions getting into the subconsciousness and remaining there. They are not due to physical, but to mental causes--due to wrong thinking. The oasis of all functional disorders is in the mind, though the manifestation be dyspepsia, melancholia, palpitation of the heart, or any one of a hundred others. There is nothing organically wrong with the body. It is your mental image that is out of adjustment. Change the one and you cure the other.

[p. 302]

In this day of the gymnasium and the daily dozen, it may sound impractical to suggest that it is the mind, not the body, which needs the care. But I am far from being the first to suggest it.

There is a very successful physician in London whose teaching is that gymnastic exercise does more harm than good. He contends that the only exercise necessary for the perfect development of the body is yawning and stretching.

I would go farther than that. I would say that no physical exercise is essential to the perfect development of the body. That since the only cause is mind, the principal good of exercise is that when we go through the motions we are impressing upon our subconscious mind the picture of the perfect figure that we

[p. 303]

would have. And that mental visualization is what brings the results.

You can get the same results without the physical exercise by visualizing in your mind's eye the figure of the man you want to be, by intensely desiring it, by BELIEVING that you have it.

You can win to perfect health by knowing that there is but one right idea in Universal Mind for every organism in your body--that this right idea is perfect and undying--that you have only to hold it before you subconscious mind to see it realized in your body. This is the truth that makes you free.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 304] [p. 305]

  

XI

  

The Law of Attraction

For life is the mirror of king and slave.
   'Tis just what you are and do;
 Then give to the world the best you have,
   And the best will come back to you.
                 --MADELINE BRIDGES.

	
THE old adage that "He profits most who serves best" is no mere altruism.

Look around you. What businesses are going ahead? What men are making the big successes? Are they the ones who grab the passing dollar, careless of what they offer in return? Or are they those who are striving always to give a little greater value, a little more work than they are paid for?

[p. 306]

When scales are balanced evenly, a trifle of extra weight thrown into either side overbalances the other as effectively as a ton.

In the same way, a little better value, a little extra effort, makes the man or the business stand out from the great mass of mediocrity like a tall man among pigmies, and brings results out of all proportion to the additional effort involved.

It pays--not merely altruistically, but in good, hard, round dollars--to give a little more value than seems necessary, to work a bit harder than you are paid for. It's that extra ounce of value that counts.

For the law of attraction is service. We receive in proportion as we give out. In fact, we usually receive in far greater proportion. "Cast thy bread upon the

[p. 307]

waters and it will return to you an hundred-fold."

Back of (everything is the immutable law of the Universe--that what you are is but the effect. Your thoughts are the causes. The only way you can change the effect is by first changing the cause.

People live in poverty and want because they are so wrapped up in their sufferings that they give out thoughts only of lack and sorrow. They expect want. They open the door of their mind only to hardship and sickness and poverty. True--they hope for something better--but their hopes are so drowned by their fears that they never have a chance.

You cannot receive good while expecting evil. You cannot demonstrate plenty while looking for poverty. "Blessed is he that expecteth much, for verily his

[p. 308]

soul shall be filled." Solomon outlined the law when he said:

"There is that scattereth, and increaseth yet more;
  And there is that withholdeth more than is meet,
     but it tendeth only to want.
  The liberal soul shall be made fat;
  And he that watereth shall be watered also himself."

The Universal Mind expresses itself largely through the individual. It is continually seeking an outlet. It is like a vast reservoir of water, constantly replenished by mountain sp rings. Cut a channel to it and the water will flow in ever-increasing volume. In the same way, if you once open up a channel of service by which the Universal Mind can express itself through you, its gifts will flow in ever-increasing volume and YOU will be enriched in the process.

This is the idea through which great

[p. 309]

bankers are made. A foreign country needs millions for development. Its people are hard-working, but lack the necessary implements to make their work productive. How are they to find the money?

They go to a banker--put their problem up to him. He has not the money himself, but he knows how and where to raise it. He sells the promise to pay of the foreign country (their bonds, in other words) to people who have money to invest. His is merely a service. But it is such an invaluable service that both sides are glad to pay him liberally for it.

In the same way, by opening up a channel between universal supply and human needs--by doing your neighbors or your friends or your customers service--you are bound to profit yourself. And the wider you open your channel-

[p. 310]

the greater service you give or the better values you offer--the more things are bound to flow through your channel, the more you are going to profit thereby.

But you've got to use your talent if you want to profit from it. It matters not how small your service--using it will make it greater. You don't have to retire to a cell and pray. That is a selfish method--selfish concern for your own soul to the exclusion of all others. Mere self-denial or asceticism as such does no one good. You've got to DO something, to USE the talents God has given you to make the world better for your having been in it.

Remember the parable of the talents. You know what happened to the man who went off and hid his talent, whereas those who made use of theirs were given charge over many things.

[p. 311]

That parable, it has always seemed to me, expresses the whole law of life. The only right is to use all the forces of good. The only wrong is to neglect or to abuse them.

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God. This is the first and the greatest Commandment." Thou shalt show thy love by using to the best possible advantage the good things (the "talents" of the par-able) that He has placed in your hands. "And the second is like unto it. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Thou shalt not abuse the good things that have been provided you in such prodigality, by using them against your neighbor. Instead, thou shalt treat him (love him) as you would be treated by him. Thou shalt use the good about you for the advantage of all.

If you are a banker, you've got to use

[p. 312]

the money you have in order to make more money. If you are a merchant, you've got to sell the goods you have in order to buy more goods. If you are a doctor, you must help the patient you have in order to get more practice. If you are a clerk, you must do your work a little better than those around you if you want to earn more money than they. And if you want more of the universal supply, you must use that which you have in such a way as to make yourself of greater service to those around you.

"Whosoever shall be great among you," said Jesus, "shall be your minister, and whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all." In other words, if you would be great, you must serve. And he who serves most shall be greatest of all.

[p. 313]

If you want to make more money, instead of seeking it for yourself, see how you can make more for others. In the process you will inevitably make more for yourself, too. We get as we give--but we must give first.

It matters not where 'you Start you may be a day laborer. But still you can give--give a bit more of energy, of work, of thought, than you are paid for. "Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile," said Jesus, "go with him twain." Try to put a little extra skill into your work. Use your mind to find some better way of doing whatever task may be set for you. It won't be long before you are out of the common labor class.

There is no kind of work than can-not be bettered by thought. There is no method that cannot be improved by

[p. 314]

thought. So give generously of your thought to your work. Think every minute you are at it--"Isn't there some way in which this could be done easier, quicker, better?" Read in your spare time everything that relates to your own work or to the job ahead of you. In these days of magazines and books and libraries, few are the occupations that are not thoroughly covered in some good work.

Remember in Lorimer's "Letters of a Self-Made Merchant to His Son," the young fellow that old Gorgan Graham hired against his better judgment and put in the "barrel gang" just to get rid of him quickly? Before the month was out the young fellow had thought himself out of that job by persuading the boss to get a machine that did the work at half the cost and with a third of the

[p. 315]

gang. Graham just had to raise his pay and put him higher up. But he wouldn't stay put. No matter what the job, he always found some way it could be done better and with fewer people. Until he reached the top of the ladder.

There are plenty of men like that in actual life. They won't stay down. They are as full of bounce as a cat with a small boy and a dog after it. Thrown to the dog from an upper window, it is using the time of falling to get set for the next jump. By the time the dog leaps for where it hit, the cat is up the tree across the street.

The true spirit of business is the spirit of that plucky old Danish sea captain, Peter Tordenskjold. Attacked by a Swedish frigate, after all his crew but one had been killed and his supply of cannon balls was exhausted, Peter boldly

[p. 316]

kept up the fight, firing pewter dinner-plates and mugs from his one remaining gun.

One of the pewter mugs hit the Swedish captain and killed him, and Peter sailed off triumphant!

Look around YOU now. How can YOU give greater value for what you get? How can you SERVE better? How can you make more money for your employers or save more for your customers. Keep that thought ever in the forefront of your mind and you'll never need to worry about making more for yourself!

A Blank Check

There was an article by Gardner Hunting in a recent issue of "Christian Business," that was so good that I reprint it here entire:

[p. 317]

"All my life I have known in a vague way that getting money is the result of earning it; but I have never had a perfect vision of that truth till recently. Summed up now, the result of all my experience, pleasant and unpleasant, is that a man gets back exactly what he gives out, only multiplied.

"If I give to anybody service of a kind that he wants I shall get back the benefit myself. If I give more service I shall get more benefit. If I give a great deal more, I shall get a great deal more. But I shall get back more than I give. Exactly as when I plant a bushel of potatoes, I get back thirty or forty bushels, and more in proportion to the attention I give the growing crop. If I give more to my employer than he expects of me, he will give me a raise--and on no other condition. What is

[p. 318]

more, his giving me a raise does not depend on his fair-mindedness--he has to give it to me or lose me, because if he does not appreciate me somebody else will.

"But this is only part of it. If I give help to the man whose desk is next to mine, it will come back to me multiplied, even if he apparently is a rival. What I give to him, I give to the firm, and the firm will value it, because it is team-work in the organization that the firm primarily wants, not brilliant individual performance. If I have an enemy in the organization, the same rule holds; if I give him, with the purpose of helping him, something that will genuinely help him, I am giving service to the organization. Great corporations appreciate the peace-maker, for a prime requisite in their success is harmony

[p. 319]

among employees. If my boss is unappreciative, the same rule holds; if I give him more, in advance of appreciation, he cannot withhold his appreciation and keep his own job.

"The more you think about this law, the deeper you will see it goes. It literally hands you a blank check, signed by the Maker of Universal Law, and leaves you to fill in the amount--and the kind--of payment you want! Mediocre successes are those that obey this law a little way--that fill in the check with a small amount--but that stop short of big vision in it. If every employee would only get the idea of this law firmly fixed in him as a principle, not subject to wavering with fluctuating moods, the success of the organization would be miraculous. One of my fears is apt to be that, by promoting the other fellow's

[p. 320]

success, I am side-tracking my own; but the exact opposite is the truth.

"Suppose every employee would look at his own case as an exact parallel to that of his firm. What does his firm give for the money it gets from the public? Service! Service in advance! The better the service that is given out, the more money comes back. What does the firm do to bring public attention w its service? It advertises; that is part of the service. Now, suppose that I, as an employee, begin giving my service to the firm in advance of all hoped for payment. Suppose I advertise my service. How do I do either? I cannot do anything constructive in that firm's office or store or plant or premises that is not service, from filing a letter correctly to mending the fence or pleasing a customer; from looking up a word for the

[p. 321]

stenographer, to encouraging her to look it up herself; demonstrating a machine to a customer or encouraging him to demonstrate it himself; from helping my immediate apparent rival to get a raise, to selling the whole season's output. As for advertising myself, I begin advertising myself the moment I walk into the office or the store or the shop in the morning; I cannot help it. Everybody who looks at me sees my advertisement. Everybody around me has my advertisement before his eyes all day long. So has the boss--my immediate chief and the head of the firm, no matter where they are. And if I live up to my advertising, nobody can stop me from selling my goods--my services! The more a man knocks me, the more he advertises me; because he calls attention to me; and if I am delivering

[p. 322]

something better than he says I am, the interested parties--my employers--will see it, and will not be otherwise influenced by what he says.

"More than that, I must give to every human being I come in contact with, from my wife to the bootblack who shines my shoes; from my brother to my sworn foe. Sometimes people will tell you to smile; but the smile I give has got to be a real smile that lives up to its advertising. If I go around grinning like a Cheshire cat, the Cheshire-cat grin will be what I get back--multiplied! If I give the real thing, I'll get back the real thing--multiplied! If anybody objects that this is a selfish view to take, I answer him that any law of salvation from anything by anybody that has ever been offered for any purpose, is a selfish view to take. The only

[p. 323]

unselfishness that has ever been truly taught is that of giving a lesser thing in hope of receiving a greater.

"Now, why am I so sure of this law? How can you be sure? I have watched it work; it works everywhere. You have only to try it, and keep on trying it and it will prove true for you. It is not true because I say so, nor because anybody else says so; it is just true. Theosophists call it the law of Karma; humanitarians call it the law of Service; business men call it the law of common sense; Jesus Christ called it the law of Love. It rules whether I know it or not, whether I believe it or not, whether I defy it or not. I can't break it! Jesus of Nazareth, without reference to any religious idea you may have about Him, without consideration as to whether He was or was not divine, was the greatest business Man

[p. 324]

that ever lived, and he said: 'Give and ye shall receive--good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over!' And this happens to be so--not because He said it--but because it is the Truth, which we all, whether we admit it or not, worship as God. No man can honestly say that he does not put the truth supreme.

"It is the truth--the principle of giving and receiving--only there are few men who go the limit on it. But going the limit is the way to unlimited returns!

"What shall I give? What I have, of course. Suppose you believe in this idea--and suppose you should start giving it out, the idea itself, tactfully, wisely, and living it yourself in your organization. How long do you think it will be before you are a power in that organization, recognized as such and getting pay as

[p. 325]

such? It is more valuable than all the cleverness and special information you can possibly possess without it. What you have, give--to everybody. If you have an idea, do not save it for your own use only; give it. It is the best thing you have to give and therefore the thing best to give--and therefore the thing that will bring the best back to you. I believe that if a man would follow this principle, even to his trade-secrets, he would profit steadily more and more; and more certainly than he will by holding on to anything for himself. He would never have to worry about his own affairs--because he would be working on fundamental Law. Law never fails--and it will be easy for you to discover what is or is not law. And if law is worth using part of the time, it is worth using all the time.

[p. 326]

"Look around you first, with an eye to seeing the truth, and then put the thing to the test. Through both methods of investigation you will find a blank check waiting for you to fill in with 'whatsoever you desire,' and a new way to pray and to get what you pray for."


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 327]

  

XII

  

The Three Requisites

                                   "Waste no tears
  Upon the blotted record of lost years,
  But turn the leaf, and smile, oh smile, to see
  The fair white pages that remain for thee.

"Prate not of thy repentance. But believe
  The spark divine dwells in thee: let it grow.
  That which the upreaching spirit can achieve
  The grand and all creative forces know;
  They will assist and strengthen as the light
  Lifts up the acorn to the oak-tree's height.
  Thou hast but to resolve, and lo! God's whole
  Great universe shall fortify thy soul."
                      --ELLA WHEELER WILCOX.

	
SOMETIME today or tomorrow or next month, in practically every commercial office and manufacturing plant in the United States, an important executive will sit back in his chair and study a list of

[p. 328]

names on a sheet of white paper before him.

Your name may be on it.

A position of responsibility is open and he is face to face with the old, old problem--"Where can I find the man?"

The faces, the words, the work, the impressions of various men will pass through his mind in quick review. What is the first question he will ask concerning each?

"Which man is strongest on initiative, which one can best assume responsibility?"

Other things being equal, THAT is the man who will get the job. For the first requisite in business as in social life is confidence in yourself--knowledge of your power. Given that, the second is easy--initiative or the courage to start things. Lots of men have ideas, but few

[p. 329]

have the confidence in themselves or the courage to Start anything.

With belief and initiative, the third requisite follows almost as a matter of course--the faith to go ahead and do things in the face of all obstacles.

"Oh, God," said Leonardo da Vinci, "you sell us everything for the price of an effort."

Certainly no one had a better chance to know than he. An illegitimate son, brought up in the family of his father, the misfortune of his birth made him the source of constant derision. He had to do something to lift himself far above the crowd. And he did. "For the price of an effort" he became the greatest artist in Italy--probably the greatest in the world--in a day when Italy was famous for her artists. Kings and princes felt honored at being associated

[p. 330]

with this illegitimate boy. He made the name he had no right to famous for his work alone.

"Work out your own salvation," said Paul. And the first requisite in working it out is a knowledge of your power. "Every man of us has all the centuries in him."--Morley. All the ages behind you have bequeathed you stores of abilities which you are allowing to lie latent. Those abilities are stored up in your subconscious mind. Call upon them. Use them. As Whittier put it--

"All the good the past has had
  Remains to make our own time glad."

Are you an artist? The cunning of a da Vinci, the skill of a Rembrandt, the vision of a Reynolds, is behind those fingers of yours. Use the Genie-of-your-mind to call upon them.

[p. 331]

Are you a surgeon, a lawyer, a minister, an engineer, a business man? Keep before your mind's eye the biggest men who have ever done the things you now are doing. Use them as your model. And not as your model simply, but as your inspiration. Start in where they left off. Call upon the innermost recesses of your subconscious mind, for their skill, their judgment, their initiative. Realize that you have it in you to be as great as they. Realize that all that they did, all that they learned, all the skill they acquired is stored safely away in Universal Mind and that through your subconscious mind you have ready access to it.

The mind in you is the same mind that animated all the great  of the past, all the great inventors, all the great artists, statesmen, leaders, business men.

[p. 332]

[paragraph continues] What they have done is but a tithe of what still remains to do--of what men in your day and your children's day will do. You can have a part in it. Stored away within you is every power that any man or woman ever possessed. It awaits only your call.

In "Thoughts on Business," we read: "It is a great day in a man's life when he truly begins to discover himself. The latent capacities of every man are greater than he realizes, and he may find them if he diligently seeks for them. A man may own a tract of land for many years without knowing its value. He may think of it as merely a pasture. But one day he discovers evidences of coal and finds a rich vein beneath his land. While mining and prospecting for coal he discovers deposits of granite. In boring for water he strikes oil. Later he discovers a vein

[p. 333]

of copper ore, and after that silver and gold. These things were there all the time--even when he thought of his land merely as a pasture. But they have a value only when they are discovered and utilized.

"Not every pasture contains deposits of silver and gold, neither oil nor granite, nor even coal. But beneath the surface of every man there must be, in the nature of things, a latent capacity greater than has yet been discovered. And one discovery must lead to another until the man finds the deep wealth of his own possibilities. History is full of the acts of men who discovered somewhat of their own capacity; but history has yet to record the man who fully discovered all that he might have been."

Everything that has been done, thought, gained, or been is in Universal Mind.

[p. 334]

[paragraph continues] And you are a part of Universal Mind. You have access to it. You can call upon it for all you need in the same way you can go to your files or to a library for information. If you can realize this fact, you will find in it the key to the control of every circumstance, the solution of every problem, the satisfaction of every right desire.

But to use that key, you've got to bear in mind the three requisites of faith in your powers, initiative, and courage to start. "Who would stand before a blackboard," says "Science and Health," "and pray the principle of mathematics to solve the problem? The rule is already established, and it is our task to work out the solution." In the same way, all knowledge you can need is in Universal Mind, but it is up to you to tap that mind.

[p. 335]

And without the three requisites you will never do it.

Never let discouragement hold you back. Discouragement is the most dangerous feeling there is, because it is the most insidious. Generally it is looked upon as harmless, and for that very reason it is the more sinister. For failure and success are oftentimes separated by only the distance of that one word--Discouragement.

There is an old-time fable that the devil once held a sale and offered all the tools of his trade to anyone who would pay their price. They were spread out on the table, each one labeled--hatred, and malice, and envy, and despair, and sickness, and sensuality--all the weapons that everyone knows so well.

But off on one side, apart from the rest, lay a harmless looking, wedge-shaped

[p. 336]

instrument marked "Discouragement." It was old and worn looking, but it was priced far above all the rest. When asked the reason why, the devil replied:

"Because I can use this one so much more easily than the others. No one knows that it belongs to me, so with it I can open doors that are tight bolted against the others. Once I get inside I can use any tool that suits me best."

No one ever knows how small is the margin between failure and success. Frequently the two are separated only by the width of that one word--discouragement. Ask Ford, ask Edison, ask any successful man and he will tell you how narrow is the chasm that separates failure from success, how surely it can be bridged by perseverance and faith.

[p. 337]

Cultivate confidence in yourself. Cultivate the feeling that you ARE succeeding. Know that you have unlimited power to do every right thing. Know that with Universal Mind to draw upon, no position is too difficult, and no problem too hard. "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do." When you put limitations upon yourself, when you doubt your ability to meet any situation, you are placing a limit upon Universal Mind, for "The Father that is within me, He doeth the works."

With that knowledge of your power, with that confidence in the unlimited resources of Universal Mind, it is easy enough to show initiative, it is easy enough to find the courage to start things.

You have a right to dominion over all

[p. 338]

things--over your body, your environment, your business, your health. Develop these three requisites and you will gain that dominion.

Remember that you are a part of Universal Mind, and that the part shares every property of the whole. Remember that, as the spark of electricity is to the thunderbolt, so is your mind to Universal Mind. Whatever of good you may desire of life, whatever qualification, whatever position, you have only to work for it whole heartedly, confidently, with singleness of purpose--and you can get it.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 339]

  

XIII

  

That Old Witch--Bad Luck

"How do you tackle your work each day?
  Are you scared of the job you find?
  Do you grapple the task that comes your way
  With a confident, easy mind?
  Do you stand right up to the work ahead
  Or fearfully pause to view it?
  Do you start to toil with a sense of dread
  Or feel that you're going to do it?

"What is the thought that is in your mind?
  Is fear ever running through it?
  If so, just tackle the next you find
  By thinking you're going to do it."
                            --EDGAR A. GUEST. [**]

	
HAS that old witch--bad luck--ever camped on your doorstep? Have ill health, misfortune and worry ever seemed to dog your footsteps?

If so, you will be interested in knowing that YOU were the procuring cause



[p. 340]

of all that trouble. For fear is merely creative thought in negative form.

Remember back in 1920 how fine the business outlook seemed, how everything looked rosy and life flowed along like a song? We had crops worth ten billions of dollars. We had splendid utilities, great railways, almost unlimited factory capacity. Everyone was busy. The government had a billion dollars in actual money. The banks were sound. The people were well employed. Wages were good. Prosperity was general. Then something happened. A wave of fear swept over the country. The prosperity could not last. People wouldn't pay such high prices. There was too much inflation. What was the result?

As Job put it in the long ago, "The thing that I greatly feared has come upon me."

[p. 341]

The prosperity vanished almost over night. Failures became general. Hundreds of thousands were thrown out of work. And all because of panic, fear.

'Tis true that readjustments were necessary. 'Tis true that prices were too high, that inventories were too big, that values generally were inflated. But it wasn't necessary to burst the balloon to let out the gas. There are orderly natural processes of readjustment that bring things to their proper level with the least harm to anyone.

But fear--panic--knows no reason. It brings into being overnight the things that it fears. It is the greatest torment of humanity. It is about all there is to Hell. Fear is, in short, the devil. It causes most of the sin, disaster, disease and misery of the world. It is the only thing you can put into business which

[p. 342]

won't draw dividends in either fun or dollars. If you guess right, you don't get any satisfaction out of it.

The real cause of all sickness is fear. You image some disease in your thought, and your body proceeds to build upon this model that you hold before it. You have seen how fear makes the face pallid, how it first stops the beating of the heart, then sets it going at trip-hammer pace. Fear changes the secretions. Fear halts the digestion. Fear puts lines and wrinkles into the face. Fear turns the hair gray.

Mind controls every function of the human body. If the thought you hold before your subconscious mind is the fear of disease, of colds or catarrh, of fever or indigestion, those are the images your subconscious mind will work out in your body. For your body itself

[p. 343]

is merely so much matter--an aggregation of protons and electrons, just as the table in front of you is an aggregation of these same buttons of force, but with a different density. Take away your mind, and your body is just as inert, just as lifeless, just as senseless, as the table. Every function of your body, from the beating of your heart to the secretions in your glands, is controlled by mind. The digestion of your food is just as much a function of your mind as the moving of your finger. So the all-important thing is not what food you put into your stomach, but what your mind decides shall be done with it. If your mind feels that certain food should make you sick, it will make you sick. If, on the other hand, your mind decides that though the food has no nutritive value, there is no reason why unintelligent matter should make

[p. 344]

you sick, mind will eliminate that food without harm or discomfort to you.

Your body is just like clay in the hands of a potter. Your mind can make of it what it will. The clay has nothing to say about what form it shall take. Neither have your head, your heart, your lungs, your digestive organs anything to say about how conditions shall affect them. They do not decide whether they shall be dizzy or diseased or lame. It is mind that makes this decision. They merely conform to it AFTER mind has decided it. Matter has undergone any and every condition without harm, when properly sustained by mind. And what it has done once, it can do again.

When you understand that your muscles, your nerves, your bones have no feeling or intelligence of their own, when you learn that they react to conditions

[p. 345]

only as mind directs that they shall react, you will never again think or speak of any organ as imperfect, as weak or ailing. You will never again complain of tired bodies, aching muscles, or frayed nerves. On the contrary, you will hold steadfast to thoughts of exhaustless strength, of super-abundant vitality, knowing that, as Shakespeare said--"There is nothing, either good or bad, but thinking makes it so."

Never fear disaster, for the fear of it is an invitation to disaster to come upon you. Fear being vivid, easily im-presses itself upon the sub-conscious mind. And by so impressing itself, it brings into being the thing that is feared. It is the Frankenstein monster that we all create at times, and which, created, turns to rend its creator. Fear that something you greatly prize will

[p. 346]

be lost and the fear you feel with create the very means whereby you will lose it.

Fear is the Devil. It is the ravening lion roaming the earth seeking whom it may devour. The only safety from it is to deny it. The only refuge is in the knowledge that it has no power other than the power you give to it.

He Whom a Dream Hath Possessed

You fear debt. So your mind concentrates upon it and brings about greater debts. You fear loss. And by visualizing that loss you bring it about.

The only remedy for fear is to know that evil has no power--that it is a nonentity--merely a lack of something. You fear ill health, when if you would concentrate that same amount of thought upon good health you would insure the very condition you fear to lose. Functional

[p. 347]

disturbances are caused solely by the mind through wrong thinking. The remedy for them is not drugs, but right thinking, for the trouble is not in the organs but in the mind. Farnsworth in his "Practical Psychology" tells of a man who had conceived the idea when a boy that the eating of cherries and milk together had made him sick. He was very fond of both, but always had to be careful not to eat them together, for whenever he did he had been ill. Mr. Farnsworth explained to him that there was no reason for such illness, because all milk sours anyway just as soon as it reaches the stomach. As a matter of fact it cannot be digested until it does sour. He then treated the man mentally for this wrong association of ideas, and after the one treatment the man was never troubled in this way again, though

[p. 348]

he had been suffering from it for forty-five years.

If you had delirium tremens, and thought you saw pink elephants and green alligators and yellow snakes all about you, it would be a foolish physician that would try to cure you of snakes. Or that would prescribe glasses to improve your eyesight, when he knew that the animals round about you were merely distorted visions of your mind.

The indigestion that you suffer from, the colds that bother you--in short, each and every one of your ailments--is just as much a distorted idea of your mind as would be the snakes of delirium tremens. Banish the idea and you banish the manifestation.

The Bible contains one continuous entreaty to cast out fear. From beginning to end, the admonition "Fear not" is

[p. 349]

insistent. Fear is the primary cause of all bodily impairment. Jesus understood this and He knew that it could be abolished. Hence His frequent entreaty, "Fear not, be not afraid."

Struggle there is. And struggle there will always be. But struggle is merely wrestling with trial. We need difficulties to overcome. But there is nothing to be afraid of. Everything is an effect of mind. Your thought forces, concentrated upon anything, will bring that thing into manifestation. Therefore concentrate them only upon good things, only upon those conditions you wish to see manifested. Think health, power, abundance, happiness. Drive all thoughts of poverty and disease, of fear and worry, as far from your mind as you drive filth from your homes. For fear and worry is the filth of the mind that causes all

[p. 350]

trouble, that brings about all disease. Banish it! Banish from among your associates any man with a negative outlook on life. Shun him as you would the plague. Can you imagine a knocker winning anything? He is doomed before he starts. Don't let him pull you down with him. "Fret not thyself," says the Psalmist, "else shalt thou be moved to do evil."

That wise old Psalmist might have been writing for us today. For there is no surer way of doing the wrong thing in business or in social life than to fret yourself, to worry, to fume, to want action of some kind, regardless of what it may be. Remember the Lord's admonition to the Israelites, "Be still--and know that I am God."

Have you ever stood on the shore of a calm, peaceful lake and watched the

[p. 351]

reflections in it? The trees, the mountains, the clouds, the sky, all were mirrored there--just as perfectly, as beautifully, as the objects themselves. But try to get such a reflection from the ocean! It cannot be done, because the ocean is always restless, always stirred up by winds or waves or tides.

So it is with your mind. You cannot reflect the richness and plenty of Universal Mind, you cannot mirror peace and health and happiness, if you are constantly worried, continually stirred by waves of fear, winds of anger, tides of toil and striving. You must relax at times. You must give mind a chance. You must realize that, when you have done your best, you can confidently lean back and leave the outcome to Universal Mind.

Just as wrong thinking produces discord

[p. 352]

in the body, so it also brings on a diseased condition in the realm of commerce. Experience teaches that we need to be protected more from our fears and wrong thoughts, than from so-called evil influences external to ourselves. We need not suffer for another man's wrong, for another's greed, dishonesty, avarice or selfish ambition. But if we hug to ourselves the fear that we do have to so suffer, take it into our thought, allow it to disturb us, then we sentence ourselves. We are free to reject every suggestion of discord, and to be governed harmoniously, in spite of what anything or anybody may try to do to us.

Do you know why old army men would rather have soldiers of 18 or 20 than mature men of 30 or 40? Not because they can march farther. They can't! Not because they can carry more.

[p. 353]

[paragraph continues] They can't! But because when they go to sleep at night, they really sleep. They wipe the slate clean! When they awaken in the morning, they are ready for a new day and a new world.

But an older man carries the nervous strain of one day over to the next. He worries! With the result that at the end of a couple of months' hard campaigning, the older man is a nervous wreck.

And that is the trouble with most men in business. They never wipe the slate clean! They worry! And they carry each day's worries over to the next, with the result that some day the burden becomes more than they can carry.

The Bars of Fate

Fear results from a belief that there are really two powers in this world--

[p. 354]

[paragraph continues] Good and Evil. Like light and darkness. When the fact is that Evil is no more real than darkness. True, we lose contact with Good at times. We let the clouds of fear and, worry come between us and the sunlight of Good and then all seems dark. But the sun is still shining on the other side of those clouds, and when we drive them away, we again see its light.

Realizing this, realizing that Good is ever available if we will but turn to it confidently in our need, what is there to fear? "Fear not, little flock," Said Jesus, "for it is the Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." And again--"Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine."

If this means anything, it means that the Father is ever available to all of us, that we have but to call upon Him in

[p. 355]

the right way and our needs will be met. It doesn't matter what those needs may be.

If Universal Mind is the Creator of all, and if everything in the Universe belongs to It, then your business, your work, isn't really yours--but the "Father's." And He is just as much interested in its success, as long as you are working in accordance with His plan, as you can be.

Everyone will admit that Universal Mind can do anything good. Everyone will admit that It can bring to a successful conclusion any undertaking It may be interested in. If Mind created your business, if It inspired your work, then It is interested in its successful conclusion.

Why not, then, call upon Mind when you have done all you know how to do

[p. 356]

and yet success seems beyond your efforts. Why not put your problem up to Mind, secure in the belief that It CAN and WILL give you any right thing you may desire? I know that many people hesitate to pray for material things, but if Universal Mind made them, they must have been made for some good purpose, and as long as you intend to use them for good, by all means ask for them.

If you can feel that your business, your work, is a good work, if you can be sure that it is advancing the great Scheme of Things by ever so little, you will never again fear debt or lack or limitation. For "The earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof." Universal Mind is never going to lack for means to carry on Its work. When Jesus needed fish and bread, fish and bread

[p. 357]

were provided in such abundance that a whole multitude was fed. When He needed gold, the gold coin appeared in the fish's mouth. Where you are, Mind is, and where Mind is, there is all the power, all the supply of the universe.

You are like the owner of a power house that supplies electricity for light and heat and power to the homes and the factories around you. There is unlimited electricity everywhere about you, but you have got to set your dynamo going to draw the electricity out of the air and into your power lines, before it can be put to practical account.

Just so, there are unlimited riches all about you, but you have got to set the dynamo of your mind to work to bring them into such form as will make them of use to yourself and the world.

So don't worry about any present

[p. 358]

lack of money or other material things. Don't try to win from others what they have. Go where the money is! The material wealth that is in evidence is so small compared with the possible wealth available through the right use of mind, that it is negligible by comparison. The great rewards are for the pioneers. Look at Carnegie; at Woolworth; at Ford! Every year some new field of development is opened, some new world discovered. Steam, gas, electricity, telegraphy, wireless, the automobile, the aeroplane--each opens up possibilities of new worlds yet to come.

A hundred years ago, people probably felt that everything had been discovered that could be discovered. That everything was already known that was likely ever to be known. Just as you may feel about things now. Yet look at the tremendous

[p. 359]

strides mankind has taken in the past hundred years. And they are as nothing to what the future holds for us, once man has learned to harness the truly unlimited powers of his subconscious mind.

There are billions of dollars worth of treasure under every square mile of the earth's surface. There are millions of ways in which this old world of ours can be made a better place to live. Set your mind to work locating some of this treasure, finding some of those ways. Don't wait for someone else to blaze the trail.

No one remembers who else was on the Santa Maria, but Columbus' name will be known forever! Carnegie is said to have made a hundred millionaires, but he alone became almost a billionaire! 

[p. 360]

Have you ever read Kipling's "Explorer?"

"'There's no sense in going further--it's the edge of cultivation,'
    So they said, and I believed it--broke my land and sowed my crop--
  Built my barns and strung my fences in the little border station
    Tucked away below the foothills where the trails run out and stop.

"Till a voice, as bad as Conscience, rang interminable changes
    On one everlasting Whisper day and night repeated--so:
  'Something hidden. Go and find it. Go and look behind the Ranges--
    Something lost behind the Ranges. Lost and waiting for you. Go!'"

Your mind is part and parcel of Universal Mind. You have the wisdom of all the ages to draw upon. Use it! Use it to do your work in a way it was never done before. Use it to find new outlets

[p. 361]

for your business, new methods of reaching people, new and better ways of serving them. Use it to uncover new riches, to learn ways to make the world a better place to live in.

Concentrate your thought upon these things, knowing that back of you is the vast reservoir of Universal Mind, that all these things are already known to It, and that you have but to make your contact for them to be known to you.

Optimism based on such a realization is never overconfidence. It is the joyous assurance of absolute faith. It is the assurance that made Wilson for a time the outstanding leader of the world. It is the assurance that heartened Lincoln during the black days of the Civil War. It is the assurance that carried Hannibal and Napoleon over the Alps, that left Alexander sighing for more worlds to

[p. 362]

conquer, that enabled Cortez and his little band to conquer a nation.

Grasp this idea of the availability of Universal Mind for your daily needs, and your vision will become enlarged, your capacity increased. You will realize that the only limits upon you are those you put upon yourself. There will be no such thing then as difficulties and opposition barring your way.

Exercise

You feed and nourish the body daily. But few people give any thought to nourishing that far more important part--the Mind. So let us try, each day, to set apart a few minutes time to give the Mind a repast.

To begin with, relax! Stretch out comfortably on a lounge or in an easy chair and let go of 'every muscle, loosen

[p. 363]

every bit of tension, forget every thought of fear or worry. Relax mentally and physically.

Few people know how to relax entirely. Most of us are on a continual strain, and it is this strain that brings on physical disturbances--not any real work we may do. Here is a little exercise that will help you to thoroughly relax:

Recline comfortably on a lounge or bed. Stretch luxuriously first. Then when you are settled at your ease again, lift the right leg a foot or two. Let it drop limply. Repeat slowly twice. Do the same with the left leg. With the right arm. With the left arm. You will find then that all your muscles are relaxed. You can forget them and turn your thoughts to other things.

Try to realize the unlimited power that is yours. Think back to the dawn

[p. 364]

of time, when Mind first imaged from nothingness the heavens and the earth and all that in them is. Remember that, although your mind is to Universal Mind only as a drop of water to the ocean, this drop has all the properties of the great ocean; one in quality although not in quantity; your mind has all the creative power of Universal Mind.

"And God made man in His image, after His likeness." Certainly God never manifested anything but infinite abundance, infinite supply. If you are made in His image, there is no reason why you should ever lack for anything of good. You can manifest abundance, too.

Round about you is the same electronic energy from which Universal Mind formed the heavens and the earth.

[p. 365]

[paragraph continues] What do you wish to form from it? What do you want most from life? Hold it in your thought, visualize it, SEE it! Make your model clear-cut and distinct.

1. Remember, the first thing necessary is a sincere desire, concentrating your thought on one thing with singleness of purpose.

2. The second is visualization--SEEING YOURSELF DOING IT--imaging the object in the same way that Universal Mind imaged all of creation.

3. Next is faith--BELIEVING that you HAVE this thing that you want. Not that you are GOING to have it, mind you--but that you HAVE it.

4. And the last is gratitude--gratitude for this thing that you have received, gratitude for the power that enabled you to create it, gratitude for

[p. 366]

all the gifts that Mind has laid at your feet.

"Trust in the Lord ... and verily thou shalt be fed.
 "Delight thyself also in the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of thy heart.
 "Commit thy way unto the Lord, and He shall bring it to pass."





Footnotes

^339:* From "A Heap o' Livin'." The Reilly & Lee Co.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[]

The Secret of the Ages
 In Seven Volumes
 VOLUME FIVE

[]

  

The

  

SECRET

  

of

  

THE AGES



  

ROBERT COLLIER

  

VOLUME FIVE

  

ROBERT COLLIER, Publisher
 599 Fifth Avenue
 New York

  

No connection with
 P. F. Collier & Son Co., Inc.

  

[1926]


Click to enlarge
Title Page: Volume 5



Click to enlarge
Verso: Volume 5


Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



  

Contents

  

VOLUME FIVE

         	XIV

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGE

     
     	Your Needs Are Met

      	<page 373>

     
     	   The Ark of the Covenant

      	<page 381>

     
     	   The Science of Thought

      	<page 390>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XV

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	The Master of Your Fate

      	<page 399>

     
     	   The Acre of Diamonds

      	<page 403>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XVI

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Unappropriated Millions

      	<page 419>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XVII

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	The Secret of Power

      	<page 427>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XVIII

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	This One Thing I Do

      	<page 435>

     
   
     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 373]

  

XIV

  

Your Needs Are Met

"Arise, O Soul, and gird thee up anew,
  Though the black camel Death kneel at this gate;
  No beggar thou that thou for alms shouldst sue:
  Be the proud captain still of thine own fate."
                                     --KENYON.

	
YOU'VE heard the story of the old man who called his children to his bedside to give them a few parting words of advice. And this was the burden of it.

"My children," he said, "I have had a great deal of trouble in my life--a great deal of trouble--but most of it never happened."

We are all of us like that old man. Our troubles weigh us down--in prospect--but we usually find that when the

[p. 374]

actual need arrives, Providence has devised some way of meeting it.

Dr. Jacques Loeb, a member of the Rockefeller Institute, conducted a series of tests with parasites found on plants, which show that even the lowest order of creatures have the power to call upon Universal Supply for the resources to meet any unusual need.

"In order to obtain the material," reads the report of the tests, "potted rose bushes are brought into a room and placed in front of a closed window. If the plants are allowed to dry out, the aphides (parasites), previously wingless, change to winged insects. After the metamorphosis, the animals leave the plants, fly to the window and then creep upward on the glass.

"It is evident that these tiny insects found that the plants on which they had

[p. 375]

been thriving were dead, and that they could therefore secure nothing more to eat and drink from this source. The only method by which they could save themselves from starvation was to grow temporary wings and fly, which they did."

In short, when their source of sustenance was shut off and they had to find the means of migrating or perish, Universal Supply furnished the means for migration.

If Universal Mind can thus provide for the meanest of its creatures, is it not logical to suppose that It will do even more for us--the highest product of creation--if we will but call upon It, if we will but have a little faith? Viewed in the light of Mind's response to the need of those tiny parasites, does it seem so unbelievable that a sea should roll back

[p. 376]

while a people marched across it dry-shod? That a pillar of fire should lead them through the wilderness by night? That manna should fall from heaven, or water gush forth from a rock?

In moments of great peril, in times of extremity, when the brave soul has staked its all--those are the times when miracles are wrought, if we will but have faith.

That doesn't mean that you should rest supinely at your Base and let the Lord provide. When you have done all that is in you to do--when you have given of your best--don't worry or fret as to the outcome. Know that if more is needed, your need will be met. You can sit back with the confident assurance that having done your part, you can depend upon the Genie-of-your-Mind to do the rest.

[p. 377]

When the little state of Palestine was in danger of being overrun by Egypt on the one hand, or gobbled up by Assyria on the other, its people were frantically trying to decide which horn of the dilemma to embrace, with which enemy they should ally themselves to stave off the other. "With neither," the Prophet Isaiah told them, "in calmly resting your safety lieth; in quiet trust shall be your strength."

So it is with most of the great calamities that afflict us. If we would only "calmly rest, quietly trust," how much better off we should be. But no--we must fret and worry, and nine times out of ten do the wrong thing. And the more we worry and fret, the more likely we are to go wrong.

All of Universal Mind that is necessary to solve any given problem, to meet

[p. 378]

any need, is wherever that need may be. Supply is always where you are and what you need. It matters not whether it be sickness or trouble, poverty or danger, the remedy is there, waiting for your call. Go at your difficulty boldly, knowing that you have infinite resources behind you, and you will find these forces closing around you and coming to your aid.

It's like an author writing a book. For a long time he works in a kind of mental fog, but let him persevere, and there flashes suddenly a light that clarifies his ideas and shows him the way to shape them logically. At the moment of despair, you Peel a source of unknown energy arising in your soul.

That doesn't mean that you will never have difficulties. Difficulties are good for you. They are the exercise of your

[p. 379]

mind. You are the stronger for having overcome them. But look upon them as mere exercise. As "stunts" that are given you in order that you may the better learn how to use your mind, how to draw upon Universal Supply. Like Jacob wrestling with the Angel, don't let them go until they have blessed you--until, in other words, you have learned something from having encountered them.

Remember this: No matter how great a catastrophe may befall mankind, no matter how general the loss, you and yours can be free from it. There is always a way of safety. There is always an "ark" by which the understanding few can be saved from the flood. The name of that ark is Understanding--understanding of your inner powers.

When the children of Israel were being

[p. 380]

led into the promised land, and Joshua had given them their directions, they answered him: "All that thou commandest us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go....Only the Lord thy God be with thee, as He was with Moses."

They came to the river Jordan, and it seemed an insurmountable barrier in their path, but Joshua commanded them to take the Ark of the Covenant, representing God's understanding with them, before them into the Jordan. They did it, and "the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap....And the priests that bare the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over Jordan."

[p. 381]

The Ark of the Covenant

All through the Old Testament, when war and pestilence, fire and flood, were the common lot of mankind, there is constant assurance of safety for those who have this understanding, this "Covenant" with the Lord. "Because thou hast made the Lord which is my refuge--even the Most High--thy habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For He shall give His angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways."

That is His agreement with us--an agreement which gives us the superiority to circumstances which men have sought from time immemorial. All that is necessary on our side of the agreement is for us to remember the infinite powers that reside within us, to remember that

[p. 382]

our mind is part of Universal Mind and as such it can foresee, it can guard against and it can protect us from harm of any kind. We need not run away from trials or try to become stoical towards them. All we need is to bring our understanding to bear upon them--to know that no situation has ever yet arisen with which Universal Mind--and through it our own mind--was not fully competent to deal. To know that the right solution of every problem is in Universal Mind. That we have but to seek that solution and our trial is overcome.

"But where shall Wisdom be found? And where is the place of understanding? Acquaint now thyself with God, and be at peace."

If evil threatens us, if failure, sickness or accident seems imminent, we have

[p. 383]

only to decide that these evils do not come from Universal Mind, therefore they are unreal and have no power over us. They are, simply the absence of the right condition which Universal Mind knows. Refuse, therefore, to see them, to acknowledge them--and seek through Mind for the right condition which shall nullify them.

If you will do this, you will find that you can appropriate from Mind whatever you require for your needs, when you require it. The greater your need, the more surely it will be met, if you can but realize this truth. "Fear not, little flock," said Jesus, "for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom."

Remember that your thought is all-powerful. That it is creative. That there is no limitation upon it of time or space. And that it is ever-available.

[p. 384]

Forget your worries. Forget your fears. In place of them, visualize the conditions you would like to see. Realize their availability. Declare to yourself that you already have all these things that you desire, that your needs have been met. Say to yourself: "How thankful I am that Mind has made all these good things available to me. I have everything that heart could desire to be grateful for."

Every time you do this, you are impressing the thought upon your subconscious mind. And the moment you can convince your subconscious mind of the truth of it--that moment your mind will proceed to make it true. This is the way to put into practice the Master's advice--"Believe that ye RECEIVE it, and ye SHALL HAVE it."

There is no condition so hopeless, no

[p. 385]

cause so far gone, that this truth will not save it. Time and again patients given over by their doctors as doomed have made miraculous recoveries through the faith of some loved one.

"I hope that everyone who reads this Book may gain as much from their first reading as I did," writes a happy subscriber from New York City. "I got such a clear understanding from that one reading that I was able to break the mental chain holding a friend to a hospital bed, and she left the hospital in three days, to the very great astonishment of the doctors handling the case."

In the same way, there are innumerable instances where threatened calamity has been warded off and good come instead. The great trouble with most of us is, we do not believe. We insist upon looking for trouble. We

[p. 386]

feel that the "rainy day" is bound to come, and we do our utmost to make it a surety by keeping it in our thoughts, preparing for it, fearing it. "Cowards die many times before their deaths; the valiant never taste of death but once." We cross our bridges a dozen times before we come to them. We doubt ourselves, we doubt our ability, we doubt everyone and everything around us. And our doubts sap our energy; kill our enthusiasm; rob us of success. We are like the old lady who "enjoys poor health." We always place that little word "but" after our wishes and desires, feeling deep down that there are some things too good to be true. We think there is a power apart from Good which can withhold blessings that should be ours. We doubt, because we cannot see the way by which our desires can be fulfilled. We put a

[p. 387]

limit upon the good that can come to us.

"Prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts," cried the Prophet Malachi, "if I will not open you the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it... And all nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a delightsome land."

Your mind is part of Universal Mind. And Universal Mind has all supply. You are entitled to, and you can have, just as much of that supply as you are able to appropriate. To expect less is to get less, for it dwarfs your power of receiving.

It doesn't matter what your longings may be, provided they are right longings. If your little son has his heart set on a train and you feel perfectly able to

[p. 388]

get him a train, you are not going to hand him a picture book instead. It may be that the picture book would have greater educational value, but the love you have for your son is going to make you try to satisfy his longings as long as those longings are not harmful ones.

In the same way, Universal Mind will satisfy your longings, no matter how trivial they may seem, as long as they are not harmful ones. "Delight thyself also in the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart."

If we would only try to realize that God is not some far-off Deity, not some stern Judge, but the beneficent force that we recognize as Nature--the life Principle that makes the flowers bud, and the plants grow, that spreads abundance about us with lavish hand. If we could realize that He is the Universal Mind

[p. 389]

that holds all supply, that will give us the toy of our childhood or the needs of maturity, that all we need to obtain from Him our Heart's Desire is a right understanding of His availability--then we would lose all our fears, all our worries, all our sense of limitation.

For Universal Mind is an infinite, unlimited source of good. Not only the source of general good, but the specific good things you desire of life. To It there is no big or little problem. The removal of mountains is no more difficult than the feeding of a sparrow.

And to one--like the Master--with a perfect understanding, the "miracle" of raising Lazarus from the dead required no more effort than the turning of the water into wine. He knew that Universal Mind is all power--and there can-not be more than ALL. He knew that

[p. 390]

[paragraph continues] "To know God aright is life eternal." And Jesus knew God aright, so was able to demonstrate this knowledge of life eternal in overcoming sin, disease and death. For it is one and the same law that heals sin, sickness, poverty, heartaches, or death itself. That law is the right understanding of Divine Principle.

But what does this ability to perform "miracles" consist of? What is the power or force by which we can prove this ability? Perhaps the simplest way is to begin with the realization that Universal Mind is man's working power.

The Science of Thought

Can you stretch your mind a bit and try to comprehend this wonderful fact--that the ALL POWERFUL, ALL-KNOWING, EVERLASTING CREATOR and Governor of the infinite universe,

[p. 391]

"Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains, in scales, and the hills in a balance," is your working power? In proportion as we understand this fact, and make use of it, in that same proportion are we able to per-form our miracles.

Your work is inspired to the extent that you realize the presence of Universal Mind in your work. When you rely entirely on your own conscious mind, your work suffers accordingly. "I can of mine own self do nothing; for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of me." The miracles of Jesus bear witness of the complete recognition of God the Father as his working power.

[p. 392]

And mind you, this inspiration, this working of Universal Mind with you, is available for all of your undertakings. Mind could not show Itself in one part of your life and withhold Itself from another, since It is all in all. Every rightly directed task, no matter how insignificant or menial it may appear to you, carries with it the inspiration of Universal Mind, since by the very nature of omnipotence, Its love and bestowals must be universal and impartial, "and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord."

Too many of us are like the maiden in the old Eastern legend. A  sent her into a field of grain, promising her a rare gift if she would pick for him the largest and ripest ear she could find. His gift to be in proportion to the size and perfection of the ear.

But he made this condition--she must

[p. 393]

pluck but one ear, and she must walk straight through the field without stopping, going back or wandering hither and thither.

Joyously she started. As she walked through the grain, she saw many large ears, many perfect ones. She passed them by in scorn, thinking to find an extra-large, super-perfect one farther along. Presently, however, the soil became less fertile, the ears small and sparse. She couldn't pick one of these! Would now that she had been content with an ordinary-sized ear farther back. But it was too late for that. Surely they would grow better again farther on!

She walked on--and on--and always they became worse--'till presently she found herself at the end of the field--empty handed as when she set out!

So it is with life. Every day has its

[p. 394]

worth-while rewards for work well done. Every day offers its chance for happiness. But those rewards seem so small, those chances so petty, compared with the big things we see ahead. So we pass them by, never recognizing that the great position we look forward to, the shining prize we see in the distance, is just the sum of all the little tasks, the heaped up result of all the little prizes that we must win as we go along.

You are not commanded to pick out certain occupations as being more entitled to the Lord's consideration than others, but "Whatsoever ye do." Whether it be in the exalted and idealistic realms of poetry, music and art, whether in the cause of religion or philanthropy, whether in government, in business, in science, or simply in household cares, "whatsoever ye do" you are entitled to, and have

[p. 395]

all of inspiration at your beck and call. If you seem to have less than all, it is because you do not utilize your gift.

"Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one; and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour. For we are labourers together with God." "All things are yours; and ye are Christ's and Christ's is God's."

How shall you take advantage of this Universal Supply? When next any need confronts you, when next you are in difficulties, close your eyes for a moment and realize that Universal Mind knows how that need can best be met, knows the solution of your difficulties. And that your sub-conscious mind, being part of the Universal Mind, can know this, too. So put your problem up to your subconscious mind with the sublime confidence

[p. 396]

that it will find the solution. Then forget it for a while. When the time comes, the need will be met.

Dr. Winbigler corroborates the working out of this idea in the following:

"Suggestions lodged in the mind can effect a complete change, morally and physically. If mankind would become in spirit 'as a little child,' trusting in God implicitly, the greatest power would utilized in the establishment of health and equilibrium, and the results would be untold in comfort, sanity, and blessing. For instance, here is one who is suffering from worry, fear, and the vexations of life. How can he get rid of these things and relieve this suffering? Let him go to a quiet room or place, twice a day, lie down and relax every muscle, assume complete indifference to those things which worry him and the functions of

[p. 397]

the body, and quietly accept what God, through this law of demand and supply, can give. In a few days he will find a great change in his feelings, and the sufferings will pass away and life will look bright and promising. Infinite wisdom has established that law; and its utilization by those who are worried and fearful will secure amazing results in a short time.

"The real reason for the change is found in the possibility of recovery by using the laws that God has placed within our reach, and thus securing the coveted health and power for all that we want and ought to do. The subliminal life is the connecting link between man and God, and by obeying His laws, one's life is put in contact with infinite resources and all that God is able and willing to give. Here is the secret of all

[p. 398]

the cures of disease, and the foundation for the possibility of a joyful existence, happiness and eternal life. Suggestion is the method of securing what God gives, and the mind is the agent through which these gifts are received. This is not a matter of theory, but a fact. If any one who is sick or who desires to be kept well will have stated periods of relaxation, openmindedness, and faith, he can prove the beneficial and unvarying result of this method."


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 399]

  

XV

  

The Master of Your Fate

"A craven hung along the battle's edge,
  And thought, 'Had I a sword of keener steel
  That blue blade that the king's son bears,--but this blunt thing--!'
  And lowering crept away and left the field.
  Then came the king's son, wounded, sore bestead
  And weaponless, and saw the broken sword,
  And ran and snatched it, and with battle-shout
  Lifted afresh he hewed his enemy down,
  And saved a great cause that heroic day."
                      --EDWARD ROWLAND SILL. [**]

	
WHERE will you be at 65? Five men in six at the age of 65 are living on charity. Just one in twenty is able to live without working at 65.

That is what the American Bankers Association found when it took one hundred



[p. 400]

healthy men at 25 and traced them to 65.

These hundred were healthy to start with. They all had the same chance for success. The difference lay in the way they used their MINDS. Ninety-five out of one hundred just do the tasks that are set them. They have no faith in themselves--no initiative--none of the courage that starts things. They are always directed or controlled by someone else.

At 65, where will you be? Dependent or independent? Struggling for a living--accepting charity from someone else--or at the top of the heap?

"I am the Master of my fate."

Until you have learned that, you will never attain life's full success. Your fate is in your own hands. You have the making of it. What you are going to be

[p. 401]

six months or a year from now depends upon what you think today.

So make your choice now:

Are you going to bow down to matter as the only power? Are you going to look upon your environment as something that has been wished upon you and for which you are in no way responsible? Or are you going to try to realize in your daily life that matter is merely an aggregation of protons and electrons subject entirely to the control of Mind, that your environment, your success, your happiness, are all of your own making, and that if you are not satisfied with conditions as they are, you have but to visualize them as you would have them be in order to change them?

The former is the easier way right now--the easy way that leads to the hell of poverty and fear and old age.

[p. 402]

But the latter is the way that brings you to your Heart's Desire.

And merely because this Power of Universal Mind is invisible, is that any reason to doubt it? The greatest powers of Nature are invisible. Love is invisible, but what greater power is there in life? Joy is invisible, happiness, peace, contentment. The radio is invisibles yet you hear it. It is a product of the law governing sound waves. Law is invisible, yet you see the manifestation of different laws every day. To run a locomotive, you study the law of applying power, and you apply that law when you make the locomotive go.

These things are not the result of invention. The law has existed from the beginning. It merely waited for man to learn how to apply it. If man had known how to call upon Universal Mind

[p. 403]

to the right extent, he could have applied the law of sound waves, the law of steam, ages ago. Invention is merely a revelation and an unfoldment of Universal Wisdom.

That same Universal Wisdom knows millions of other laws of which man has not even a glimmering. You can call upon It. You can use that Wisdom as your own. By thinking of things as they might be instead of as they are, you will eventually find some great Need. And to find a need is the first step towards finding the supply to satisfy that need. You've got to know what you are after, before you can send the Genie-of-your-Mind a-seeking of it in Universal Mind.

The Acre of Diamonds

You remember the story of the poor Boer farmer who struggled for years to

[p. 404]

glean a livelihood out of his rocky soil, only to give it up in despair and go off to seek his fortune elsewhere. Years later, coming back to his old farm, he found it swarming with machinery and life--more wealth being dug out of it every day than he had ever dreamed existed. It was the great Kimberley Diamond Mine!

Most of us are like that poor Boer farmer. We struggle along under our surface power, never dreaming of the giant power that could be ours if we would but dig a little deeper--rouse that great Inner Self who can give us more even than any acre of diamonds.

As Orison Swett Marden put it:

"The majority of failures in life are simply the victims of their mental defeats. Their conviction that they cannot succeed as others do robs them of that vigor

[p. 405]

and determination which self-confidence imparts, and they don't even half try to succeed.

"There is no philosophy by which a man can do a thing when he thinks he can't. The reason why millions of men are plodding along in mediocrity today, many of them barely making a living, when they have the ability to do something infinitely bigger, is because they lack confidence in themselves. They don't believe they can do the bigger thing that would lift them out of their rut of mediocrity and poverty; they are not winners mentally.

"The way always opens for the determined soul, the man of faith and courage.

"It is the victorious mental attitude, the consciousness of power, the sense of mastership, that does the big things in

[p. 406]

this world. If you haven't this attitude, if you lack self-confidence, begin now to cultivate it.

"A highly magnetized piece of steel will attract and lift a piece of unmagnetized steel ten times its own weight. Demagnetize that same piece of steel and it will be powerless to attract or lift even a feather's weight.

"Now, my friends, there is the same difference between the man who is highly magnetized by a sublime faith in himself, and the man who is de-magnetized by his lack of faith, his doubts, his fears, that there is between the magnetized and the de-magnetized pieces of steel. If two men of equal ability, one magnetized by a divine self-confidence, the other demagnetized by fear and doubt, are given similar tasks, one will succeed and the other will fail. The self-confidence of

[p. 407]

the one multiplies his powers a hundred-fold; the lack of it subtracts a hundred-fold from the power of the other."

Have you ever thought how much of your time is spent in choosing what you shall do, which task you will try, which way you shall go? Every day is a day of decision. We are constantly at crossroads, in our business dealings, our social relations, in our homes, there is always the necessity of a choice. How important then that we have faith in ourselves and in that Infinite intelligence within. "Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established." "In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths."

In this ever-changing material age, with seemingly complex forces all about us, we sometimes cry out that we are driven by force of circumstances. Yet

[p. 408]

the fact remains that we do those things which we choose to do. For even though we may not wish to go a certain way, we allow ourselves to pursue it because it offers the least resistance.

"To every man there openeth
  A way, and ways, and a way.
  And the high soul climbs the high way,
  And the low soul gropes the low:
  And in between, on the misty flats,
  The rest drift to and fro.
  But to every man there openeth
  A high way and a low, And every man decideth
  The way his soul shall go."
                       --JOHN OXENHAM.

Now, how about you? Are you taking active control of your own thought? Are you imaging upon your  mind only such things as you want to see realized? Are you thinking healthy thoughts, happy thoughts, successful thoughts?

[p. 409]

The difference between the successful man and the unsuccessful one is not so much a matter of training or equipment. It is not a question of opportunity or luck. It is just in the way they each of them look at things.

The successful man sees an opportunity, seizes upon it, and moves upward another rung on the ladder of success. It never occurs to him that he may fail. He sees only the opportunity, he visions what he can do with it, and all the forces within and without him combine to help him win.

The unsuccessful man sees the same opportunity, he wishes that he could take advantage of it, but he is fearful that his ability or his money or his credit may not be equal to the task. He is like a timid bather, putting in one foot and then drawing it swiftly back again--and

[p. 410]

while he hesitates some bolder spirit dashes in and beats him to the goal.

Nearly every man can look back--and not so far back either with must of us--and say, "If I had taken that chance, I would be much better off now."

You will never need to say it again, once you realize that the future is entirely within your own control. It is not subject to the whims of fortune or the capriciousness of luck. There is but one Universal Mind and that mind contains naught but good. In it are no images of Evil. From it comes no lack of supply. Its ideas are as numberless as the grains of sand on the seashore. And those ideas comprise all wealth, all power, all happiness.

You have only to image vividly enough on your subconscious mind the thing you wish, to draw from Universal

[p. 411]

[paragraph continues] Mind the necessary ideas to bring it into being. You have only to keep in mind the experiences you wish to meet, in order to control your own future.

When Frank A. Vanderlip, former President of the National City Bank, was a struggling youngster, he asked a successful friend what one thing he would urge a young man to do who was anxious to make his way in the world. "Look as though you have already succeeded," his friend told him. Shakespeare expresses the same thought in another way--"Assume a virtue if you have it not." Look the part. Dress the part. Act the part. Be successful in your own thought first. It won't be long before you will be successful before the world as well.

David V. Bush, in his book "Applied Psychology and Scientific Living," says:

[p. 412]

"Man is like the wireless operator. Man is subject to miscellaneous wrong thought currents if his mind is not in tune with the Infinite, or if he is not keyed up to higher vibrations than those of negation.

"A man who thinks courageous thoughts sends these courageous thought waves through the universal ether until they lodge in the consciousness of someone who is tuned to the same courageous key. Think a strong thought, a courageous thought, a prosperity thought, and these thoughts will be received by someone who is strong, courageous and prosperous.

"It is just as easy to think in terms of abundance as to think in terms of poverty. If we think poverty thoughts we become the sending and receiving stations for poverty thoughts. We send out

[p. 413]

a 'poverty' mental wireless and it reaches the consciousness of some poverty-stricken 'receiver.' We get what we think.

"It is just as easy to think in terms of abundance, opulence and prosperity as it is to think in terms of lack. limitation and poverty.

"If a man will raise his rate of vibration by faith currents or hope currents, these vibrations go through the Universal Mind and lodge in the consciousness of people who are keyed to the same tune. Whatever you think is sometime, somewhere, received by a person who is tuned to your thought key.

"If a man is out of work and he thinks thoughts of success, prosperity, harmony, position and growth, just as surely as his thoughts are things--as Shakespeare says--someone will receive

[p. 414]

his vibrations of success, prosperity, harmony, position and growth.

"If we are going to be timid, selfish, penurious and picayunish in our thinking, these thought waves which we have started in the universal ether will go forth until they come to a mental receiving station of the same caliber. 'Birds of a feather flock together,' and minds of like thinking are attracted one to the other.

"If you need money, all you have to do is to send up your vibrations to a strong, courageous receiving station, and someone who can meet your needs will be attracted to you or you to him."

When you learn that you are entitled to win--in any right undertaking in which you may be engaged--you will win. When you learn that you have a right to a legitimate dominion over your

[p. 415]

own affairs, you will have dominion over them. The promise is that we can do all things through the Mind that was in Christ.

Universal Mind plays no favorites. No one human being has any more power than any other. It is simply that few of us use the power that is in our hands. The great men of the world are in no wise SUPER Beings. They are ordinary creatures like you and me, who have stumbled upon the way of drawing upon their subconscious mind---and. through it upon the Universal Mind. Speaking of Henry Ford's phenomenal success, his friend Thomas A. Edison said of him--"He draws upon his subconscious mind."

The secret of being what you have it n you to be is simply this: Decide now what it is you want of life, exactly what

[p. 416]

you wish your future to be. Plan it out in detail. Vision it from start to finish. See yourself as you are now, Being those things you have always wanted to do. Make them REAL in your mind's eye--feel them, live them, believe them, especially at the moment of going to sleep, when it is easiest to reach your subconscious mind--and you will soon be seeing them in real life.

It matters not whether you are young or old, rich or poor. The time to begin is NOW. It is never too late. Remember those lines of Appleton's: [**]



"I knew his face the moment that he passed
  Triumphant in the thoughtless, cruel throng--
  I gently touched his arm--he smiled at me--
  He was the Man that Once I Meant to Be!

"Where I had failed, he'd won from life, Success;
 Where I had stumbled, with sure feet he stood; [p. 417]
  Alike--yet unalike--we faced the world,
  And through the stress he found that life was good.
  And I? The bitter wormwood in the glass,
  The shadowed way along which failures pass!
  Yet as I saw him thus, joy came to me--
  He was the Man that Once I Meant to Be!

"We did not speak. But in his sapient eyes
  I saw the spirit that had urged him on,
  The courage that had held him through the fight
  Had once been mine. I thought, 'Can it be gone?'
  He felt that unasked question--felt it so
  His pale lips formed the one-word answer, 'No!'
        .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
  "Too late to win? No! Not too late for me--
  He is the Man that Still I Mean to Be!"



Footnotes

^399:* From "Poems," Houghton, Mifflin Co.

^416:* From "The Quiet Courage." D. Appleton & Co., New York.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 418] [p. 419]

  

XVI

  

Unappropriated Millions

"Somebody said that it couldn't be done,
    But he with a chuckle replied
  That 'maybe it couldn't,' but he would be one
    Who wouldn't say so till he'd tried.
  So he buckled right in with the trace of a grin
    On his face. If he worried he hid it.
  He started to sing as he tackled the thing
    That couldn't be done, and he did it."
                          --EDGAR A. GUEST. [**]

	
THE main difference between the mind of today and that of our great-great-grandfathers was that in their day conditions were comparatively static, whereas today they are dynamic. Civilization ran along for centuries with comparatively little change. Most people lived and died in the places where they were born. They followed



[p. 420]

their fathers' avocations. Seldom, indeed, did one of them break out of the class into which he had been born. Almost as seldom did they even think of trying to. No wonder, then, that civilization made little progress.

Today we are in the presence of continual change. Men are imbued with that divine unrest which is never satisfied with conditions as they are, which is always striving for improvement. And thought is the vital force behind all this change.

Your ability to think is your connecting link with Universal Mind, that enables you to draw upon It for inspiration, for energy, for power. Mind is the energy in static form. Thought is the energy in dynamic form.

And because life is dynamic--not static; because it is ever moving forward

[p. 421]

[paragraph continues] --not standing still; your success or failure depends entirely upon the quality of your thought.

For thought is creative energy. It brings into being the things that you think. Think the things you would see manifested, see them, believe them, and you can leave it to your subconscious mind to bring them into being.

Your mind is a marvelous storage battery of power on which you can draw for whatever things you need to make your life what you would have it be. It has within it all power, all resource, all energy--but YOU are the one that must use it. All that power is static unless you make it dynamic. In the moment of creative thinking your conscious mind becomes a Creator--it partakes of the power of Universal Mind. And there is nothing static about one who

[p. 422]

shares that All-power. The resistless Life Energy within him pushes him on to new growth, new aspirations. Just as the sap flowing through the branches of the trees pushes off the old dead leaves to make way for the new life, just so you must push away the old dead thoughts of poverty and lack and disease, before you can bring on the new life of health and happiness and unlimited supply.

This life is in all of us, constantly struggling for an outlet. Repress it--and you die. Doctors will tell you that the only reason people grow old is because their systems get clogged. The tiny pores in your arteries get stopped up. You don't throw off the old. You don't struggle hard enough, and the result is you fall an easy victim to failure and sickness and death.

[p. 423]

Remember the story of Sinbad the Sailor, and the Old Man of the Sea? The Old Man's weight was as nothing when Sinbad first took him on his shoulders, but he clung there and clung there, slowly but surely sapping Sinbad's strength, and he would finally have killed him as he had killed so many others if Sinbad, by calling to his aid all his mental as well as his physical resources, had not succeeded in shaking him off.

Most of us have some Old Man of the Sea riding us, and because he clings tightly and refuses to be easily shaken off, we let him stay there, sapping our energies, using up our vitality, when to rid us of him it is only necessary to call to our aid ALL our resources, mental as well as physical, for one supreme effort.

When a storm arises, the hardy mariner doesn't turn off steam and drift helplessly

[p. 424]

before the wind. That might be the easy way, but that way danger lies. He turns on more steam and fights against the gale. And so should you. There is a something within you that thrives on difficulties. You prize that more which costs an effort to win. You need to blaze new trails, to encounter unusual hardships, in order to reach your hidden mental resources, just as the athlete needs to exert himself to the utmost to reach his "second wind."

Have you ever seen a turtle thrown on its back? For a while it threshes around wildly, reaching for something outside to take hold of that shell put it on its feet. Just as we humans always look for help outside ourselves first. But presently he draws all his forces within his shell, rests a bit to regain his strength, and then throws his whole

[p. 425]

force to one side--legs, head, tail, and all--and over he goes!

So it is with us. When we realize that the power to meet any emergency is within ourselves, when we stop looking outside for help and intelligently call upon Mind in our need, we shall find that we are tapping Infinite Resource. We shall find that we have but to center all those resources on the one thing we want most--to get anything from life that it has.

As Emerson put it, when we once find the way to get in touch with Universal Mind we are--

". . . owner of the sphere,
  Of the seven stars and the solar year,
  Of Caesar's hand and Plato's brain,
  Of the Lord Christ's heart and Shakespeare's strain."



Footnotes

^419:* From "The Path to Home." The Reilly & Lee Co.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 426] [p. 427]

  

XVII

  

The Secret of Power

"The great were once as you.
  They whom men magnify today
  Once groped and blundered on life's way
  Were fearful of themselves, and thought
  By magic was men's greatness wrought.
  They feared to try what they could do;
  Yet Fame hath crowned with her success
  The selfsame gifts that you possess."
                         --EDGAR A. GUEST. [**]

	
THERE is a woman in one of the big Eastern cities whose husband died a year or two ago and left her nearly $100,000,000. She has unlimited power in her hands--yet she uses none of it. She has unlimited wealth--yet she gets no more from it



[p. 428]

than if it were in the thousands instead of millions. She knows nothing of her power, of her wealth. She is insane.

You have just as great power in your hands--without this poor woman's excuse for not using it.

You have access to unlimited ideas, unlimited energy, unlimited wealth. The "Open, Sesame!" is through your subconscious mind.

So long as you limit yourself to superficial conditions, so long as you are a mere "hewer of wood or carrier of water" for those around you who do use their minds, you are in no better position than the beasts of burden.

The secret of power is in understanding the infinite resources of your own mind. When you begin to realize that the power to do anything, to be anything, to have anything, is within

[p. 429]

yourself, then and then only will you take your proper place in the world.

As Bruce Barton has it in "The Man Whom Nobody Knows"--

"Somewhere, at some  hour, the daring filled His (Jesus) heart. He knew that He was bigger than Nazareth."

Again in speaking of Abraham Lincoln, Barton says--"Inside himself he felt his power, but where and when would opportunity come?" And later in the book--

"But to every man of vision the clear voice speaks. Nothing splendid has ever been achieved except by those who dared believe that something inside them was superior to circumstance."

No doubt Jesus' friends and neighbors all ridiculed the idea of any such power within Him. Just as most people

[p. 430]

today laugh at the thought of a power such as that within themselves.

So they go on with their daily grind, with the gaunt spectres of sickness and need ever by their side, until death comes as a welcome relief. Are you going to be one of those? Or will you listen to that inner consciousness of power and find .the "Kingdom of Heaven that is within you." For whatever you become conscious of, will be quickly brought forth into tangible form.

Don't judge your ability by what you have done in the past. Your work heretofore has been done with the help of your conscious mind alone. Add to that the infinite knowledge at the disposal of your subconscious mind, and what you have done is as nothing to what you will do in the future.

For knowledge does not apply itself.

[p. 431]

[paragraph continues] It is merely so much static energy. You must convert it into dynamic energy by the power of your thought. The difference between the $25-a-week clerk and the $25,000-a-year executive is solely one of thought. The clerk may have more brains than the executive--frequently has in actual weight of gray matter. He may even have a far better education. But he doesn't know how to apply his thought to get the greatest good from it.

If you have brains, use them. If you have skill, apply it. The world must profit by it, and therefore you.

We all have inspired moments when we see clearly how we may do great things, how we may accomplish wonderful undertakings. But we do not believe in them enough to make them come true. An imagination which begins

[p. 432]

and ends in day-dreaming is weakening to character.

Make the day-dreams come true. Make them so clear and distinct that they impress themselves upon your subconscious mind. There's nothing wrong with day-dreaming, except that most of us stop there. We don't try to make the dreams come true. The great inventor, Tesla, "dreams" every new machine complete and perfect in every particular before ever he begins his model for it. Mozart "dreamed" each of his wonderful symphonies complete before ever he put a note on paper. But they didn't stop with the dreaming. They visualized those dreams, and then brought them into actuality.

We lose our capacity to have visions if we do not take steps to realize them.

Power implies service, so concentrate

[p. 433]

all your thought on making your visions of great deeds come true. Thinking is the current that runs the dynamo of power. To connect up this current so that you can draw upon universal supply through your subconscious mind, is to become a Super-man. Do this, and you will have found the key to the solution of every problem of life.



Footnotes

^427:* Published by permission of The International Magazine Co. (Cosmopolitan Magazine). Copyright, 1921.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 434] [p. 435]

  

XVIII

  

This One Thing I Do

"How do you tackle your work each day?
  Do you grapple the task that comes your way,
    With a confident, easy mind?
  Do you start to toil with a sense of dread
    Or feel that you're going to do it?

"You can do as much as you think you can,
    But you'll never accomplish more;
  If you're afraid of yourself, young man,
    There's little for you in store.
  For failure comes from the inside first,
    It's there, if we only knew it,
  And you can win, though you face the worst,
    If you feel that you're going to do it."
                          --EDGAR A. GUEST. [**]

	
HOW did the Salvation Army get so much favorable publicity out of the War? They were a comparatively small part of the "Services" that catered to the boys "over there,"



[p. 436]

yet they carried off the lion's share of the glory. Do you know how they did it?

By concentrating on just one thing--DOUGHNUTS!

They served doughnuts to the boys--and they did it well. And that is the basis of all success in business--to focus on one thing and do that thing well. Better far to do one thing pre-eminently well than to dabble in forty.

Two thousand years ago, Porcius Marcus Cato became convinced, from a visit to the rich and flourishing City of Carthage, that Rome had in her a rival who must be destroyed. His countrymen laughed at him. He was practically alone in his belief. But he persisted. He concentrated all his thought, all his faculties, to that one end. At the end of every speech, at the end of every talk,

[p. 437]

he centered his hearers' thought on what he was trying to put over by epitomizing his whole idea in a single sentence--"Carthage must be destroyed!" And Carthage was destroyed.

If one man's concentration on a single idea could destroy a great nation, what can you not do when you apply that same principle to the building of a business?

I remember when I was first learning horsemanship, my instructor impressed this fact upon me: "Remember that a horse is an animal of one idea. You can teach him only one thing at a time."

Looking back, I'd say the only thing wrong with his instruction was that he took in too Little territory. He need not have confined himself to the horse. Most humans are the same way.

In fact, you can put ALL humans

[p. 438]

into that class if you want a thing done well. For you cannot divide your thought and do justice to any one of the different subjects you are thinking of. You've got to do one thing at a time. The greatest success rule I know in business--the one that should be printed over every man's desk, is--"This One Thing I Do." Take one piece of work at a time. Concentrate on it to the exclusion of all else. Then finish it! Don't half-do it, and leave it around to clutter up your desk and interfere with the next job. Dispose of it completely. Pass it along wherever it is to go. Be through with it and forget it! Then your mind will be clear to consider the next matter.

"The man who is perpetually hesitating which of two things he will do first," says William Wirt, "will do

[p. 439]

neither. The man who resolves, but suffers his resolution to be changed by the first counter-suggestion of a friend--who fluctuates from plan to plan and veers like a weather-cock to every point of the compass with every breath of caprice that blows--can never accomplish anything real or useful. It is only the man who first consults wisely, then resolves firmly, and then executes his purpose with inflexible perseverance, undismayed by those petty difficulties that daunt a weaker spirit, that can advance to eminence in any line."

Everything in the world, even a great business, can be resolved into atoms. And the basic principles behind the biggest business will be found to be the same as those behind the successful running of the corner newsstand. The whole practice of commerce is founded upon

[p. 440]

them. Any man can learn them, but only the alert and energetic can apply them. The trouble with most men is that they think they have done all that is required of them when they have earned their salary.

Why, that's only the beginning. Up to that point, you are working for someone else. From then on, you begin to work for yourself. Remember, you must give to get. And it is when you give that extra bit of time and attention and thought to your work that you begin to stand out above the crowd around you.

Norval Hawkins, for many years General Manager of Sales for the Ford Motor Company, wrote that "the greatest hunt in the Ford business right now is the MAN hunt." And big men in every industrial line echo his words. When it comes to a job that needs real

[p. 441]

ability, they are not looking for relatives or friends or men with "pull." They want a MAN--and they will, pay any price for the right man.

Not only that, but they always have a weather eye open for promising material. And the thing they value most of all is INITIATIVE.

But don't try to improve the whole works at once. Concentrate on one thing at a time. Pick some one department or some one process or some one thing and focus all your thought upon it. Bring to bear upon it the limitless resources of your subconscious mind. Then prepare a definite plan for the development of that department or the improvement of that process. Verify your facts carefully to make sure they are workable. Then--and not till then--present your plan.

[p. 442]

In "Thoughts on Business," you read: "Men often think of a position as being just about so big and no bigger, when, as a matter of fact, a position is often what one makes it. A man was making about $1,500 a year out of a certain position and thought he was doing all that could be done to advance the business. The employer thought otherwise, and gave the place to another man who soon made the position worth $8,000 a year--at exactly the same commission.

"The difference was in the man--in other words, in what the two men thought about the work. One had a little conception of what the work should be, and the other had a big conception of it. One thought little thoughts, and the other thought big thoughts.

"The standards of two men may differ, not especially because one is naturally

[p. 443]

more capable than the other, but because one is familiar with big things and the other is not. The time was when the former worked in a smaller scope himself, but when he saw a wider view of what his work might be he rose to the occasion and became a bigger man. It is just as easy to think of a mountain as to think of a hill--when you turn your mind to contemplate it. The mind is like a rubber band--you can stretch it to fit almost anything, but it draws in to a smaller scope when you let go.

"Make it your business to know what is the best that might be in your line of work, and stretch your mind to conceive it, and then devise some way to attain it.

"Big things are only little things put together. I was greatly impressed with this fact one morning as I stood watching the workmen erecting the steel framework

[p. 444]

for a tall office building. A shrill whistle rang out as a signal, a man over at the engine pulled a lever, a chain from the derrick was lowered, and the whistle rang out again. A man stooped down and fastened the chain around the tenter of a steel beam, stepped back and blew the whistle once more. Again the lever was moved at the engine, and the steel beam soared into the air up to the sixteenth story, where it was made fast by little bolts.

"The entire structure, great as it was, towering far above all the neighboring buildings, was made up of pieces of steel and stone and wood, put together according to a plan. The plan was first imagined, then penciled, then carefully drawn, and then followed by the workmen. It was all a combination of little things.

[p. 445]

"It is encouraging to think of this when you are confronted by a big task. Remember that it is only a group of little tasks, any of which you can easily do. It is ignorance of this fact that makes men afraid to try."

One of the most essential requisites in the accomplishment of any important work is patience. Not the patience that sits and folds its hands and waits--Micawber like--for something to turn up. But the patience that never jeopardizes or upsets a plan by forcing it too soon. The man who possesses that kind of patience can always find plenty to do in the meantime.

Make your plan--then wait for the opportune moment to submit it. You'd be surprised to know how carefully big men go over suggestions from subordinates which show the least promise. One

[p. 446]

of the signs of a really big man, you know, is his eagerness to learn from everyone and anything. There is none of that "know it all" about him that characterized the German general who was given a book containing the strategy by which Napoleon had for fifteen years kept all the armies of Europe at bay. "I've no time w read about bygone battles," he growled, thrusting the book away, "I have my own campaign to plan."

There is priceless wisdom to be found in books. As Carlyle put it--"All that mankind has done, thought, gained or been--it is lying in matchless preservation in the pages of books."

The truths which mankind has been laboriously learning through countless ages, at who knows what price of sweat and toil and starvation and blood--all are yours for the effort of reading them.

[p. 447]

And in business, knowledge was never so priceless or so easily acquired. Books and magazines are filled with the hows and whys, the rights and wrongs of buying and selling, of manufacturing and shipping, of finance and management. They are within the reach of anyone with the desire to KNOW.

Nothing pays better interest than judicious reading. The man who invests in more knowledge of his business than he needs to hold his job, is acquiring capital with which to get a better job.

As old Gorgon Graham puts it in "The Letters of a Self-Made Merchant To His Son"--

"I ain't one of those who believe that a half knowledge of a subject is useless, but it has been my experience that when a fellow has that half knowledge, he finds it's the other half which would really come in handy.

"What you know is a club for yourself, and

[p. 448]

what you don't know is a meat-ax for the other fellow. That is why you want to be on the look-out all the time for information about the business and to nail a fact just as a sensible man nails a mosquito--the first time it settles near him."

The demands made upon men in business today are far greater than in any previous generation. To meet them, you've got to use your talents to the utmost. You've got to find in every situation that confronts you, the best, the easiest and the quickest way of working it out. And the first essential in doing this is to plan your work ahead.

You'd be surprised at how much more work you can get through by carefully planning it, and then taking each bit in order and disposing of it before starting on the next.

Another thing--once started at work, don't let down. Keep on going until it is time to quit. You know how much

[p. 449]

power it takes to start an auto that is standing motionless. But when you get it going, you can run along in high at a fraction of the expenditure of gas. It is the same way with your mind. We are all mentally lazy. We hate to start using our minds. Once started, though, it is easy to keep along on high, if only we won't let down. For the moment we let down, we have that starting to do all over again. You can accomplish ten times as much, with far less effort or fatigue, if you will keep right on steadily instead of starting and stopping, and starting and stopping again.

Volumes have been written about personal efficiency, and general efficiency, and every other kind of efficiency in business. But boiled down, it all comes to this:

1--Know what you want. [p. 450]

2--Analyze the thing you've got to do to get it.

3--Plan your work ahead.

4--Do one thing at a time.

5--Finish that one thing and send it on its way before starting the next.

6--Once started, KEEP GOING! And when you come to some problem that "stumps" you, give your subconscious mind a chance.

Frederick Pierce, in "Our Unconscious Mind," gives an excellent method for solving business problems through the aid of the subconscious:

"Several years ago, I heard a successful executive tell a group of young men how he did his work, and included in the talk was the advice to prepare at the close of each day's business, a List of the ten most important things for the next day. To this I would add: Run them

[p. 451]

over in the mind just before going to sleep, not thoughtfully, or with elaboration of detail, but with the sure knowledge that the deeper centers of the mind are capable of viewing them constructively even though conscious attention is surrendered in sleep.

"Then, if there is a particular problem which seems difficult of solution, review its features lightly as a last game for the imaginative unconscious to play at during the night. Do not be discouraged if no immediate results are apparent. Remember that fiction, poetry, musical composition, inventions, innumerable ideas, spring from the unconscious, often in forms that give evidence of the highest constructive elaboration.

"Give your unconscious a chance. Give it the material, and stimulate it with keenly dwelt-on wishes along frank

[p. 452]

[paragraph continues] Ego Maximation lines. It is a habit which, if persisted in, will sooner or later present you with some very valuable ideas when you least expect them."

I remember reading of another man--a genius at certain kinds of work--who, whenever an especially difficult problem confronted him, "slept on it." He had learned the trick as a child. Unable to learn his lessons one evening, he had kept repeating the words to himself until he dozed in his chair, the book still in his hands. What was his surprise, on being awakened by his father a few minutes later to find that he knew them perfectly! He tried it again and again on succeeding evenings, and almost invariably it worked. Now, whenever a problem comes up that he cannot solve, he simply stretches out on a lounge in his office, thoroughly relaxes, and lets his subconscious mind solve the problem!    





Footnotes

^435:* From "A Heap o' Livin'." The Reilly & Lee Co.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[]

The Secret of the Ages
 In Seven Volumes
 VOLUME SIX

[]

  

The

  

SECRET

  

of

  

THE AGES



  

ROBERT COLLIER

  

VOLUME ONE

  

ROBERT COLLIER, Publisher
 599 Fifth Avenue
 New York

  

No connection with
 P. F. Collier & Son Co., Inc.

  

[1926]


Click to enlarge
Title Page: Volume 6



Click to enlarge
Verso: Volume 6


Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



  

Contents

  

VOLUME SIX

         	XIX

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGE

     
     	The Master Mind

      	<page 459>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XX

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	What Do You Lack?

      	<page 473>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XXI

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	The Sculptor and the Clay

      	<page 489>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XXII

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Why Grow Old?

      	<page 505>

     
     	   The Fountain of Youth

      	<page 516>

     
   
     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 457]

[p. 458] [p. 459]

  

XIX

  

The Master Mind

"One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
  Never doubted clouds would break,
  Never dreamed though right were worsted
  Wrong would triumph,
  Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
  Sleep to wake."
                                     --BROWNING.

	
AMONG your friends there is one of those men who doesn't have much use for the word "can't." You marvel at his capacity for work. You'll admire him the more the longer you know him.

You'll always respect him.

For he not only has made good, but he always will make good. He has found and appropriated to himself the

[p. 460]

[paragraph continues] "Talisman of Napoleon"--absolute confidence in himself.

The world loves a leader. All over the world, in every walk of life, people are eagerly seeking for some one to follow. They want some one else to do their thinking for them; they need some one to hearten them to action; they like to have some one else on whom to lay the blame when things go wrong; they want some one big enough to share the glory with them when success crowns his efforts.

But to instill confidence in them, that leader must have utter confidence in himself. A Roosevelt or a Mussolini who did not believe in himself would he inconceivable. It is that which makes men invincible--the Consciousness of their own Power. They put no limit upon their own capacities--therefore

[p. 461]

they have no limit. For Universal Mind sees all, knows all, and can do all, and we share in this absolute power to the exact extent to which we permit ourselves. Our mental attitude is the magnet that attracts from Universal Mind everything we may need to bring our desires into being. We make that magnet strong or weak as we have confidence in or doubt of our abilities. We draw to ourselves unlimited power or limit ourselves to humble positions according to our own beliefs.

A long time ago Emerson wrote: "There is one mind common to all individual men. Every man is an inlet to the same and to all of the same. He that is once admitted to the right of reason is made a freeman of the whole estate. What Plato has thought, he may think; what a saint has felt, he may feel;

[p. 462]

what at any time has befallen any man, he can understand. Who hath access to this Universal Mind, is a party to all that is or can be done, for this is the only and sovereign agent."

The great German physicist, Nernst, found that the longer an electric current was made to flow through a filament of oxide of magnesium, the greater became the conductivity of the filament.

In the same way, the more you call upon and use your subconscious mind, the greater becomes its conductivity in passing along to you the infinite resources of Universal Mind. The wisdom of a Solomon, the skill of a Michael Angelo, the genius of an Edison, the daring of a Napoleon, all may be yours. It rests with you only to form the contact with Universal Mind in order to draw from it what you will.

[p. 463]

Think of this power as something that you can connect with any time. It has the answer to all of your problems. It offers you freedom from fear, from worry, from sickness, from accident. No man and no thing can interfere with your use of this power or diminish your spare of it. No one, that is, but yourself.

Don Carlos Musser expresses it well in "You Are":

"Because of the law of gravitation the apple falls to the ground. Because of the law of growth the acorn becomes a mighty oak. Because of the law of causation, a man is 'as he thinketh in his heart.' Nothing can happen without its adequate cause."

Success does not come to you by accident. It comes as the logical result of the operation of law. Mind, working

[p. 464]

through your brain and your body, makes your world. That it is not a better world and a bigger one, is due to your limited thoughts and beliefs. They dam back the flood of ideas that Mind is constantly striving to manifest through you. God never made a failure or a nobody. He offers to the highest and the lowest alike, all that is necessary to happiness and success. The difference is entirely in the extent to which each of us AVAILS himself of that generosity.

There is no reason why you should hesitate to aspire to any position, any honor, any goal, for the Mind within you is fully able to meet any need. It is no more difficult for it to handle a great problem than a small one. Mind is just as much present in your little everyday affairs as in those of a big business or a great nation. Don't set it doing trifling

[p. 465]

rums in arithmetic when it might just as well be solving problems of moment to yourself and the world.

Start something! Use your initiative. Give your mind something to work upon. The greatest of all success secrets is initiative. It is the one quality which more than any other has put men in high places.

Conceive something. Conceive it first in your own mind. Make the pattern there and your subconscious mind will draw upon the plastic substance or energy all about you to make that model real.

Drive yourself. Force yourself. It is the dreamer, the man with imagination, who has made the world move. Without him, we would still be in the Stone Age.

Galileo looked at the moon and dreamed of how he might reach it. The telescope was the fruition of that dream.

[p. 466]

[paragraph continues] Watt dreamed of what might be done with steam--and our great locomotives and engines of today are the result. Franklin dreamed of harnessing the lightning--and today we have man-made thunderbolts.

Initiative, plus imagination, will take you anywhere. Imagination opens the eyes of the mind, and there is nothing good you can image there that is not possible of fulfillment in your daily life.

Imagination is the connecting link between the human and the Divine, between the formed universe and formless energy. It is, of all things human, the most God-like. It is our part of Divinity. Through it we share in the creative power of Universal Mind. Through it we can turn the most drab existence into a thing of life and beauty. It is the means by which we avail ourselves

[p. 467]

of all the good which Universal Mind is constantly offering to us in such profusion. It is the means by which we can reach any goal, win any prize.

What was it gave us the submarine, the aeroplane, wireless, electricity? Imagination. What was it that enabled man to build the Simplon Tunnel, the Panama Canal, the Hell Gate span? Imagination. What is it that makes us successful and happy, or poor and friendless? Imagination--or the lack of it.

It was imagination that sent Spanish and English and French adventurers to this new world. It was imagination that urged the early settlers westward--ever westward. It was imagination that built out railroads, our towns, our great cities.

Parents foolishly try to discourage imagination in their children, when all it needs is proper guidance. For imagination

[p. 468]

forms the world from which their future will take its shape. Restrain the one and you constrict the other. Develop the one in the right way, and there is no limit to the other. Uncontrolled, the imagination is like a rudderless ship. Or even, at times, like the lightning. But properly controlled, it is like the ship that carries riches from port to port. Or like the electric current, carrying unlimited power for industry and progress.

Do you want happiness? Do you want success? Do you want position, power, riches? Image them! How did God first make man? "In his image created He him." He "imaged" man in His Mind.

And that is the way everything has been made since time began. It was first imaged in Mind. That is the way everything

[p. 469]

you want must start--with a mental image.

So use your imagination! Picture in it your Heart's Desire. Imagine it--daydream it so vividly, so clearly, that you will actually BELIEVE you HAVE it. In the moment that you carry this conviction to your subconscious mind--in that moment your dream will become a reality. It may be a while before you realize it, but the important part is done. You have created the model. You can safely leave it to your subconscious mind to do the rest.

When Jesus adjured His disciples--"Whatsoever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye RECEIVE it," He was not only telling them a great truth, but he was teaching what we moderns would call excellent psychology as well. For this "belief" is what acts upon the subconscious

[p. 470]

mind. It is through this "belief" that formless energy is compressed into material form.

Every man wants to get out of the rut, to grow, to develop into something better. Here is the open road--open to you whether you have schooling, training, position, wealth, or not. Remember this: Your subconscious mind knew more from the time you were a baby than is in all the books in all the colleges and libraries of the world.

So don't let lack of training, lack of education, hold you back. Your mind can meet every need--and will do so if you give it the chance. The Apostles were almost all poor men, uneducated men, yet they did a work that is unequalled in historical annals. Joan of Arc was a poor peasant girl, unable to read or write--yet she saved France! The pages

[p. 471]

of history are dotted with poor men, uneducated men, who thought great thoughts, who used their imaginations to master circumstances and became rulers of men. Most great dynasties started with some poor, obscure man. Napoleon came of a poor, humble family. He got his appointment to the Military Academy only through very hard work and the pulling of many political strings. Even as a Captain of Artillery he was so poverty-stricken that he was unable to buy his equipment when offered an appointment to India. Business today is full of successful men who have scarcely the rudiments of ordinary education. It was only after he had made his millions that Andrew Carnegie hired a tutor to give him the essentials of an education.

So it isn't training and it isn't education

[p. 472]

that make you successful. These help, but the thing that really counts is that gift of the Gods--Creative Imagination!

You have that gift. Use it! Make every thought, every fact, that comes into your mind pay you a profit. Make it work and produce for you. Think of things--not as they are but as they MIGHT be. Make them real, live and interesting. Don't merely dream--but CREATE! Then use your imagination to make that CREATION of advantage to mankind--and, incidentally, yourself.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 473]

  

XX

  

What Do You Lack?

"I read the papers every day, and oft encounter tales which show there's hope for every jay who in life's battle fails. I've just been reading of a gent who joined the has-been ranks, at fifty years without a cent, or credit at the banks. But undismayed he buckled down, refusing to be beat, and captured fortune and renown; he's now on Easy Street. Men say that fellows down and out ne'er leave the rockly track, but facts will show, beyond a doubt, that has-beens do come back. I know, for I who write this rhyme, when forty-odd years old, was down and out, without a dime, my whiskers full of mold. By black disaster I was trounced until it jarred my spine; I was a failure so pronounced I didn't need a sign. And after I had soaked my coat, I said (at forty-three), 'I'll see if I can catch the goat that has escaped from me.' I labored hard; I strained my dome, to do my daily grind, until in triumph I came home, my billy-goat behind. And any man who still has health may with the winners stack, and have a chance at fame and wealth--for has-beens do come back."

--WALT MASON. [**]



[p. 474]

	
DO you know why it is that the Bolsheviki are so opposed to religion?

Because religion, as it is commonly accepted, teaches man resignation to conditions as they are--teaches, in effect, that God created some men poor and some rich. That this unequal distribution is a perfectly natural thing. And that we must not rail against it because it will all be made right in the next world.

Napoleon, in his early Jacobin days, denounced religion for that very reason. But when he had won to power, when he planned to make himself Emperor, then he found he had need for that religion, and re-established the Church in France.

For, he reasoned, how can people be satisfied without religion? If one man is starving, near another who is making

[p. 475]

himself sick by eating too much, how can you expect to keep the starving one resigned to his fate unless you teach him it will all be made right in some indefinite future state?

Organized society could not exist, as he planned it, without some being rich and some poor, and to keep the poor satisfied, there must be an authority to declare--"God wills it thus. But just be patient. In the hereafter all this will be different. YOU will be the ones then to occupy the places of honor."

Religion, in other words--as it is ordinarily taught--is a fine thing to keep the common people satisfied!

But Christianity was never meant for a weapon to keep the rich wealthy and secure, the poor satisfied and in their proper place. On the contrary, Christianity as taught by Jesus opened the way

[p. 476]

to all Good. And Christianity as it was practiced in its early years was an idealized form of Socialism that benefited each and all. No one was wealthier than his neighbors, it is true--but neither was any poverty-stricken. Theirs was the creed of the Three Musketeers--"All for one, and one for all!"

"Ask and ye shall receive," said Jesus. "Seek and ye shall find." That was not directed to the rich alone. That was to ALL men.

Providence has never made a practice of picking out certain families or certain individuals and favoring them to the detriment of other people--much as some of our "leading families" would have us believe it. It is only man that has arrogated to himself that privilege. We laugh now at the "divine right of Kings." It is just as ridiculous to think that a few

[p. 477]

have the right to all the good things of life, while the many have to toil and sweat to do them service.

To quote Rumbold's last words from the scaffold--"I never could believe that Providence had sent a few men into the world ready booted and spurred to ride, and millions ready saddled and bridled to be ridden."

There is nothing right in poverty. Not only that, but there is nothing meritorious in poverty. The mere fact that you are poor and ground down by fear and worry is not going to get you any forwarder in the hereafter. On the contrary, your soul is likely to be too pinched by want, too starved and shrivelled to be able to expand.

"The Kingdom of Heaven is within you." To me that means that Heaven is here and now. That if we want any

[p. 478]

happiness from it we've got to get it as we go along. I've never been much of a believer in accepting these promissory notes for happiness. Every time one of them falls due, you find you just have to renew it for another six months or a year, until one of these days you wake up and find that the bank has busted and all your notes are not worth the paper they are written on.

The Cumaean Sibyl is said to have offered Tarquin the Proud nine books for what he thought an exorbitant sum. So he refused. She burned three of the books, and placed the same price on the six as on the original nine. Again he refused. She burned three more books, and offered the remainder for the sum she had first asked. This time Tarquin accepted. The books were found to contain prophecies and invaluable directions

[p. 479]

regarding Roman policy, but alas, they were no longer complete.

So it is with happiness. If you take it as you go along, you get it in its entirety. But if you keep putting off the day when you shall enjoy it--if you keep taking promissory notes for happiness--every day will mean one day less of it that you will have. Yet the cost is just the same.

The purpose of existence is GROWTH. You can't grow spiritually or mentally without happiness. And by Happiness I don't mean a timid resignation to the "Will of God." That so-called "Will of God" is more often than not either pure laziness on the part of the resigned one or pure cussedness on the part of the one that is "putting something over" on him. It is the most sanctimonious expression yet devised to excuse some condition that

[p. 480]

no one has the energy or the ability to rectify.

No--by Happiness I mean the everyday enjoyment of everyday people. I mean love and laughter and honest amusement. Every one of us is entitled to it. Every one of us can have it--if he has the WILL and the ENERGY to get out and get it for himself.

Joyless work, small pay, no future, nothing to look forward to--God never planned such an existence. It is manmade--and you can be man enough to unmake it as far as you and yours are concerned.

God never made any man poor any more than He made any man sick. Look around you. All of Nature is bountiful. On every hand you see profusion--in the trees, in the flowers, in everything that He planned. The only Law of Nature

[p. 481]

is the law of Supply. Poverty is un-natural. It is man-made, through the limits man puts upon himself. God never put them there any more than He showed partiality by giving to some of His children gifts and blessings which He withheld from others. His gifts are just as available to you as to any man on earth. The difference is all in your understanding of how to avail yourself of the infinite supply all about you.

Take the worry clamps off your mentality and you will make the poverty clamps loosen up from your finances. Your affairs are so closely related to your consciousness that they too will relax into peace, order, and plenty. Divine ideas in your spiritual consciousness will become active in your business, and will work out as your abundant prosperity.

As David V. Bush says in "Applied

[p. 482]

[paragraph continues] Psychology and Scientific Living"--"Thoughts are things; thoughts are energy; thoughts are magnets which attract to us the very things which we think. Therefore, if a man is in debt, he will, by continually thinking about debt, bring more debts to him. For thoughts are causes, and he fastens more debts on to himself and actually creates more obligations by thinking about debts.

"Concentrate and think upon things that you want; not on things which you ought not to have. Think of abundance, of opulence, of plenty, of position, harmony and growth, and if you do not see them manifested today, they will be realized to-morrow. If you must pass through straits of life where you do not outwardly see abundance, know that you have it within, and that in time it will manifest itself.

[p. 483]

"I say, if you concentrate on debt, debt is what you will have; if you think about poverty, poverty is what you will receive. It is just as easy, when once the mind becomes trained, to think prosperity and abundance and plenty, as it is to think lack, limitation and poverty."

Prosperity is not limited to time or to place. It manifests when and where there is consciousness to establish it. It is attracted to the consciousness that is free from worry, strain, and tension.

So never allow yourself to worry about poverty. Be careful, take ordinary business precautions--of course. But don't center your thought on your troubles. The more you think of them, the more tightly you fasten them upon yourself. Think of the results you are after--not of the difficulties in the way. Mind will find the way. It is merely up to you to

[p. 484]

choose the goal, then keep your thought steadfast until that goal is won.

The greatest short-cut to prosperity is to LIVE IT! Prosperity attracts. Poverty repels. To quote Orison Swett Marden--"To be ambitious for wealth and yet always expecting to be poor, to be always doubting your ability to get what you long for, is like trying to reach East by travelling West. There is no philosophy which will help a man to succeed when he is always doubting his ability to do so, and thus attracting failure."

Again: "No matter how hard you may work for success, if your thought is saturated with the fear of failure it will kill your efforts, neutralize your endeavors, and make success impossible."

The secret of prosperity lies in so vividly imaging it in your own mind

[p. 485]

that you literally exude prosperity. You feel prosperous, you look prosperous, and the result is that before long you ARE prosperous.

I remember seeing a play a number of years ago that was based on this thought. A young fellow--a chronic failure--was persuaded by a friend to carry a roll of $1000 counterfeit bills in his pocket, and to show them, unostentatiously, when the occasion offered. Of course, everyone thought he had come into some legacy. The natural inference was that anyone who carried fifty or a hundred thousand dollar bills in his pockets must have a lot more in the bank. Opportunities flocked to him. Opportunities to make good. Opportunities to make money. He made good! And that without having to spend any of this spurious money of his. For most

[p. 486]

business today is done on credit. I know many wealthy men who seldom carry anything but a little change in their pockets for tips. Everything they do, everything they buy, is "Charged." And big deals are put through in the same way. If a man is believed to have plenty of money, if he has a reputation for honesty and fair-dealing, he may put through a transaction running into six or seven figures without paying one cent down. The thing that counts is not the amount of your balance at the Bank, but what others THINK of you, the IMAGE you have created in your own and in others minds.

What do you lack? What thing do you want most? Realize that before it or any other thing can be, it must first be imaged in Mind. Realize, too, that when you can close your eyes and actually

[p. 487]

[paragraph continues] SEE that thing, you have brought it into being--you have drawn upon that invisible substance all about you--you have created something. Hold it in your thought, focus your mind upon it, "BELIEVE THAT YOU HAVE IT"--and you can safely leave its material manifestation to the Genie-of-your-Mind.

God is but another name for the invisible, everywhere-present, Source-of-things. Out of the air the seed gathers the essences which are necessary to its bountiful growth; out of the invisible ether our minds gather the rich ideas that stimulate us to undertake and to carry out enterprises that bring prosperity to us. Let us see with the eye of the mind a bountiful harvest; then our minds will be quickened with ideas of abundance, and plenty will appear, not only in our world, but everywhere.

[p. 488]

"As the rain cometh down and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, and giveth seed to the sower and bread to the eater; so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it."--Isaiah.



Footnotes

^473:* From "Walt Mason--His Book." Barse & Hopkins, Newark, N. J.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 489]

  

XXI

  

The Sculptor and the Clay

"Eternal mind the Potter is,
  And thought the eternal clay.
  The hand that fashions is divine;
  His works pass not away.
  God could not make imperfect man
  His model Infinite, Unhallowed thought
  He could not plan--Love's work and
  Love must fit."
                              --ALICE DAYTON.

	
WHEN you step into your office on Monday morning, no doubt you have dreams of wonderful achievement. Your step is firm, your brain is clear and you have carefully thought out just WHAT you will do and HOW you will accomplish big things in your business. Perhaps the very plans you have in mind will influence your whole business career, and

[p. 490]

you have visions of the dollars that will be yours rolling into your bank account.

But do these dreams come true?

Are you always able to put through what you had planned to do--does your day's work have the snap and power you imagined it would have? Are you ever forced to admit that your dreams of big accomplishment are of ten shattered because of "fagged nerves" and lack of energy, because you have not the "pep"?

How easy it is to think back and see how success was in your grasp if only you had felt equal to that extra bit of effort, if only you had had the "pep," the energy to reach out and take it. The great men of the world have been well men, strong men. Sickness and hesitancy go hand in hand. Sickness means weakness, querulousness, lack of faith, lack of confidence in oneself and in others.

[p. 491]

But there is no real reason for sickness or weakness, and there is no reason why you should remain weak or sick if you are so afflicted now.

Remember the story of the sculptor Pygmalion? How he made a statue of marble so beautiful that every woman who saw it envied it? So perfect was it that he fell in love with it himself, hung it with flowers and jewels, spent day after day in rapt admiration of it, until finally the gods took pity upon him and breathed into it the breath of life.

There is more than Pagan mythology to that story. There is this much truth in it--that any man can set before his mind's eye the image of the figure he himself would like to be, and then breathe the breath of life into it merely by keeping that image before his subconscious

[p. 492]

mind as the model on which to do its daily building.

For health and strength are natural. It is ill-health and weakness that are unnatural. Your body was meant to be lithe, supple, muscular, full of red-blooded energy and vitality. A clear brain, a powerful heart, a massive chest, wrists and arms of steel--all these were meant for you--all these you can have if you will but know, and feel, and think aright.

Just take stock of yourself for a moment. Are your muscles tough, springy and full of vim? Do they do all you ask of them--and then beg for more? Can you eat a good meal--and forget it?

If you can't, it's your own fault. You can have a body alive with vitality, a skin smooth and fine of texture, muscles

[p. 493]

supple and virile. You can be the man you have always dreamed of being, without arduous dieting, without tiresome series of exercises, merely by following the simple rules herein laid down.

For what is it that builds up the muscles, puts energy and vitality into your system, gives you the pep and vigor of youth? Is it exercise? Then why is it that so many day laborers are poor, weak, anaemic creatures, forced to lay off from one to three months every year on account of sickness? They get plenty of exercise and fresh air. Why is it that so many athletes die of tuberculosis or of weak hearts? They get the most scientific exercise year in and year out.

Just the other day I read of the sudden death of Martin A. Delaney, the famous trainer, known all over the country as a physical director. He taught

[p. 494]

thousands how to be strong, but "Athletic Heart" killed him at 55. Passersby saw him running for a car, then suddenly topple over dead.

"Exercise as a panacea for all human ills is dangerously overrated," Dr. Charles M. Wharton, in charge of health and physical education at the University of Pennsylvania, said today (March 20, 1926), according to an Associated Press despatch.

Dr. Wharton, who has been a trainer of men for thirty years and was an all-American guard on the Pennsylvania football team in 1895 and 1896, declared the search for the fountain of youth by exercise and diet has been commercialized to a point of hysteria.

"Some one should cry a halt against this wild scramble for health by unnatural means," said Dr. Wharton. "This

[p. 495]

indiscriminate adoption of severe physical training destroys the health of more people than it improves."

Dr. Wharton said he was appalled by the amount of physical defects and weaknesses developed by overindulgence in athletics by students in preparatory schools.

"I know I am presenting an unpopular viewpoint, and it may sound strange coming from a physical director.

"In gymnasium work at the University of Pennsylvania we try to place our young men in sports which they will enjoy, and thus get a physical stimulation from relaxed play."

Is it diet? Then why is it that so many people you know, who have been dieting for years, are still such poor, flabby creatures? Doesn't it always work, or is it merely a matter of guess-work--and

[p. 496]

those were the cases where no one happened to guess right? Why is it that doctors disagree so on what is the correct diet? For years we have been taught to forswear too much meat. For years we have been told that it causes rheumatism and gout and hardening of the arteries--and a dozen or more other ailments.

Now comes Dr. Woods Hutchinson--a noted authority, quoted the world over--and says: "All the silly old prejudice against meat, that it heated the blood (whatever that means) and produced uric acid to excess, hardened the arteries, inflamed the kidneys, caused rheumatism, etc., has now been proved to be pure fairy tales, utterly without foundation in scientific fact.

"Red meats have nothing whatever to do with causing gout and rheumatism,

[p. 497]

because neither of these diseases is due to foods or drinks of any sort, but solely to what we call local infections. Little pockets of pus (matter) full of robber germs mostly streptococci--around the roots of our teeth, in the pouches of our tonsils, in the nasal passages and sinuses of our foreheads and faces opening into them;...Our belief now is: 'No pockets of pus, no rheumatism or gout.' Food of any kind has absolutely nothing to do with the case.

"On the other hand, the very worst cases on record in all medical history of hardening and turning to lime (calcification) of the arteries all over the body, and in the kidneys and intestines particularly, have been found in Trappist and certain orders of Oriental monks who live almost exclusively upon starch and

[p. 498]

pulse--that is, peas, beans, and lentils, and abstain from meat entirely."

Then what is right? Is it the combination of diet and exercise? But surely the patients in sanitariums and similar institutions would have every chance to get just the right combination, yet how often you see them come out little, if any, better off than when they went in.

No. None of these is the answer. As a matter of fact, the principal good of either diet or exercise is that it keeps before the patient's mind the RESULT he is working for, and in that way tends to impress it upon his subconscious mind. That is why physical culturists always urge you to exercise in front of a mirror. If results are achieved, it is MIND that achieves them--not the movements you go through or the particular kind of food you eat.

[p. 499]

Understand, I don't ask you to stop exercising. A reasonable amount of light, pleasant exercise is good for you mentally and physically. It develops your will power. It helps to impress upon your subconscious mind the image you want to see realized in your body. And it takes your mind off your troubles and worries, centering your thoughts instead upon your desires. Just where your thoughts should always be.

Outdoor exercise, tennis, horseback, swimming--any sort of active game--is the best rest there is for a tired mind. For mental tiredness comes from a too steady contemplation of ones problems. And anything that will take ones mind completely off them, and give the subconscious time to work out the solution, is good. That is why it so often happens that you go back to your work after

[p. 500]

a day of play--not merely refreshed, but with so clear a mind that the problems which before seemed insurmountable are but as child's play to you.

You who envy the rosy cheek and sparkling eye of youth, who awake in the morning weary and unrefreshed, who go to your daily tasks with fagged brain and heavy tread--just remember that Perfect Youth or Perfect Health is merely a state of mind.

There is only one thing that puts muscles on your bones. There is only one thing that keeps your organs functioning with precision and regularity. There is only one thing that builds for you a perfect body. That one thing is your subconscious mind.

Every cell and tissue, every bone and sinew, every organ and muscle in your entire body is subject to the control of

[p. 501]

your subconscious mind. As it directs, so they build or function.

True, that subconscious mind accepts suggestions from your conscious mind. Hold before it the thought that the exercise you are taking is building muscle upon your arms or shoulders, and your subconscious mind will fall in readily with the suggestion and strengthen those muscles. Hold before it the thought that some particular food gives you unusual energy and "pep," and the subconscious mind will be entirely agreeable to producing the; added vigor.

But have you ever noticed how some sudden joy (which is entirely a mental state) energizes and revitalizes you--more than all the exercise or all the tonics you can take? Have you ever noticed how martial music will relieve the fatigue of marching men? Have you

[p. 502]

ever noticed how sorrow (which is entirely a mental state) will depress and devitalize you, regardless of any amount of exercise or health foods you may take?

Each of us has within him all the essentials that go to the making of a Super-Man. But so has every acorn the essentials for making a great oak tree, yet the Japanese show us that even an oak may be stunted by continual pruning of its shoots. Negative and weak thoughts, thoughts of self-doubt, of mistrust, continually prune back the vigorous life ever seeking so valiantly to show forth the splendor and strength of the radiant inner self.

Choose what you will be! Your responsibility is to think, speak, act the true inner self. Your privilege is to show forth in this self, the fullness of peace and plenty. Keep steadfastly in

[p. 503]

mind the idea of yourself that you want to see realized. Your daily, hourly, and continual idea of yourself, your life, your affairs, your world, and your associates, determines the harvest, the showing forth. Look steadfastly to your highest ideal of self, and your steadfast and lofty ideal will draw forth blessing and prosperity not only upon you, but upon ail who know you.

For mind is the only creator, and thought is the only energy. All that counts is the image of your body that you are holding in your thought. If heretofore that image has been one of weakness, of ill-health, change it now--TODAY. Repeat to yourself, the first thing upon awakening in the morning and the last thing before going to sleep at night--"My body was made in the image and likeness of God. God first

[p. 504]

imagined it in its entirety, therefore every cell and bone and tissue is perfect, every organ and muscle performing its proper function. That is the only model of me in Universal Mind. That is the only model of me that my Subconscious Mind knows. Therefore, since Mind--God--is the only creator, that is the only model of me that I can have!"


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 505]

  

XXII

  

Why Grow Old?

"And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated."

	
REMEMBER how you used to plough through great masses of work day after day and month after month, cheerily, enthusiastically, with never a sign of tiring or nervous strain? Remember how you used to enjoy those evenings, starting out as fresh from your office or shop as if you hadn't just put a hard day's work behind you? No doubt you've often wondered why you can't work and enjoy yourself like that now, but solaced yourself with the moth-eaten fallacy that "As a man grows

[p. 506]

older he shouldn't expect to get the same fun out of life that he did in his earlier years."

Poor old exploded idea!

Youth is not a matter of time. It is a mental state. You can be just as brisk, just as active, just as light-hearted now as you were ten or twenty years ago. Genuine youth is just a perfect state of health. You can have that health, and the boundless energy and capacity for work or enjoyment that go with it. You can cheat time of ten, twenty or fifty years--not by taking thought of what you shall eat or what you shall drink, not by diet or exercise, but solely through a right understanding of what you should expect of your body.

"If only I had my life to live over again!" How often you have heard it said. How often you have thought it.

[p. 507]

But the fact is that you CAN have it. You can start right now and live again as many years as you have already experienced. Health, physical freedom and full vigor need not end for you at 35 or 40--nor at 60 or 70. Age is not a matter of years. It is a state of mind.

In an address before the American Sociological Society a few months ago Dr. Hornell Hart of Bryn Mawr predicted that--"Babies born in the year 2000 will have something like 200 years of life ahead of them, and men and women of 100 years will be quite the normal thing. But instead of being wrinkled and crippled, these centenarians will be in their vigorous prime."

Thomas Parr, an Englishman, lived to be 152 years old, and was sufficiently hale and hearty at the age of 120 to take unto himself a second wife. Even at

[p. 508]

152, his death was not due to old age, but to a sudden and drastic change in his manner of life. All his days he had lived upon simple fare, but his fame reaching the King, he was invited to London and there feasted so lavishly that he died of it.

In a despatch to the New York Times on February 14th last, I read of an Arab now in Palestine, one Salah Mustapha Salah Abu Musa, who at the age of 105 is growing his third set of teeth!

There is an ancient City in Italy which can be approached by sea only through a long stretch of shallow water full of rocks and cross currents. There is one safe channel, and it is marked by posts. In the days of the Sea Rovers the city used to protect itself by pulling up the posts whenever a rover hove in sight.

Mankind has taken to planting posts

[p. 509]

along its way to mark the flight of time. Every year we put in a new one, heedless of the fact that we are thus marking a clear channel for our Arch-Enemy, Age, to enter in from the sea of human belief.

But the fact is that there is no natural reason for man to grow old as soon as he does, no biological reason for him to grow old at all!

Why is it that the animals live eight to ten times their maturity, when man lives only about twice his? Why? Be-cause man hastens decrepitude and decay by holding the thought of old age always before him.

Dr. Alexis Carrel, Noble Prize winner and member of the Rockefeller Institute, has demonstrated that living cells taken from a body, properly protected and fed, can be kept alive indefinitely.

[p. 510]

[paragraph continues] Not only that, but they grow! In 1912 he took some tissue from the heart of an embryo chick and placed it in a culture medium. It is living and growing yet.

Recently Dr. Carrel showed a moving picture of these living cells before the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. They grow so fast that they double in size every twenty-four hours, and have to be trimmed daily!

The cells of your being can be made to live indefinitely when placed outside your body. Single-celled animals never die a natural death. They live on and on until something kills them. Now scientists are beginning to wonder if multi-cellular animals like man really need to die.

Under the title, "Immortality and Rejuvenation in Modern Biology," M. Metalnikov, of the Pasteur Institute, has

[p. 511]

just published a volume that should be read by all those who have decided that it is necessary to grow old and die.

Here is the first sentence of the concluding chapter of the book: "What we have just written forces us to maintain our conviction that immortality is the fundamental property of living organisms."

And further on:

"Old age and death are not a stage of earthly existence...."

And that, mind you, is set forth under the aegis of a scientific establishment that has no equal in the world, and of a scholar universally respected.

As the Journal of Paris says in reviewing the article:

"Most religious and philosophic systems assert the immortality of the soul. But the positive sciences have shown

[p. 512]

themselves more skeptical on this point. This idea seems to them quite contradictory to all that we know, or think we know, of animal life. Animal life originates as a tiny germ, which becomes an embryo, developing into an adult organism, which grows old and finally dies. This means the disappearance of all the faculties of life that so clearly distinguish it from an inanimate object. There is no scientific evidence to show that at this moment the 'soul' does not disappear with the body, and that it continues its existence separately. Biologists cannot even conceive the possibility of Separation of soul and body, so strong and indissoluble are the bonds that unite all our psychic manifestations with our bodily life. For them an immortal soul only can exist in an immortal body. What if it were so? What if our organism

[p. 513]

is really indestructible? It is this that M. Metalnikov attempts scientifically to prove.

"Death is a permanent and tangible phenomenon only in the case of man and the higher animals. It is not so for plants and for the simpler forms of animal life, the protozoans. These last, composed often of a single cell, just observable under the microscope, are however without the chief faculties that characterize the higher animals. They move about by means of vibratory hair-like processes, sustain themselves, seek their food, hunt animals still smaller than themselves, react to irritations of different kinds, and multiply. But this multiplication is not effected by means of special organs, as among the higher animals, but by the division of the whole organism into two equal parts. The

[p. 514]

common infusoria which abound in fresh water thus divide once or twice every twenty-four hours. Each daughter cell continues to live like the mother cell, of which it is the issue; it feeds, grows, and divides in its turn. And never, in this constantly renewed cycle in their lives, do we find the phenomenon of natural death, so characteristic and so universal in the higher animals. The infusorium is subject only to accidental death, such as we can cause by the addition of some poisonous element to the water in which it lives, or by heat.

"Experiments along this line were made long ago. The first were by de Saussure, in 1679. Having put an infusorium in a drop of water, he saw it divide under his eye. Four days later it was impossible to count the number of creatures. However, some authors

[p. 515]

thought that this reproductive facility was not unlimited. Maupas himself, who made a minute study of it forty years ago and succeeded in observing 700 successive generations of a single species, thought that it was finally subject to old age and to death.

"But the more recent works of Joukovsky at Heidelberg, of Koulaghine at Petrograd, of Calkins in England, of Weissmann, and still others, lead to an opposite opinion. The degeneration observed by these workers was due to auto-intoxication, caused by not renewing the culture-medium.

"Decisive experiments were made in Russia, dating from 1907, by Woodruff and by M. Metalnikov himself. Begun at Tsarskoe Selo, they continued until the tragic hours of the 1917 revolution, and were renewed at the University of

[p. 516]

[paragraph continues] Crimea. These investigators took an infusorium found in an aquarium, the Paramoecium caudatum, whose characteristics are well determined, and in thirteen years, in 1920, they had obtained 5,000 successive generations....

"Thus we are bound to say that a unicellular body possesses within itself the power of immortality.

"And we ourselves are made up only by the juxtaposition of simple cells."

The Fountain of Youth

Four hundred years ago Ponce de Leon set sail into the mysteries of an unknown world in search of the Fountain of Youth, when all the time the secret of that fountain was right within himself.

For the fact is, that no matter how many years have passed since you were

[p. 517]

born, you are only eleven months old today! Your body is constantly renewing itself. The one thing about it you can be surest of is CHANGE. Every one of the millions of cells of which it is composed is constantly being renewed. Even your bones are daily renewing themselves in this way.

These cells are building--building--building. Every day they tear down old tissue and rebuild it with new. There is not a cell in your body, not a muscle or tissue, not a bone, that is more than eleven months old! Why then should you feel age? Why should you be any less spry, any less cheerful, than these youngsters around you that you have been envying?

The answer is that you need not--if you will but realize your YOUTHFULNESS. Every organ, every muscle,

[p. 518]

tissue and cell of your body is subject to your subconscious mind. They rebuild exactly as that mind directs them. What is the model you are holding before your mind's eye? Is it one of age, of decrepitude? That is the model that most men use, because they know no better. That is the result that you see imaged upon their bodies.

But you need not follow their outworn models. You can hold before your mind's eye only the vision of youth, of manly vigor, of energy and strength and beauty--and that is the model that your cells will use to build upon.

Do you know what is responsible for the whole difference between Youth and Age? Just one thing. Youth looks forward always to something better. Age looks backward and sighs over its "lost" youth.

[p. 519]

In youth we are constantly growing. We KNOW we have not yet reached our prime. We know we can expect to continually IMPROVE. We look forward to ever-increasing physical powers. We look forward to a finer, more perfect physique. We look forward to greater mental alertness. We have been educated to expect these things. Therefore we BELIEVE we shall get them--and we GET them!

But what happens after we get to be thirty or forty years of age? We think we have reached our prime. We have been taught that we can no longer look forward to greater growth--that all we can hope for is to "hold our own" for a little while, and then start swiftly down-ward to old age and decay. History shows that no nation, no institution and no individual can continue for any length

[p. 520]

of time to merely "hold his own." You must go forward--or back. You must move--or life will pass you by. Yours is the choice. If you will realize that there is never any end to, GROWTH--that your body is constantly being rebuilt--that perfection is still so far ahead of you that you can continue GROWING towards it indefinitely--you need never know age. You can keep on growing more perfect, mentally and physically, every day. Every minute you live is a minute of conception and rebirth.

You may be weak and anaemic. You may be crippled or bent. No matter! You can start today to rebuild along new lines. In eleven months at the most, every one of those weak and devitalized cells, every one of those bent and crippled bones, will be replaced by new, strong, vigorous tissue.

[p. 521]

Look at Annette Kellerman--crippled and deformed as a child--yet she grew up into the world's most perfectly formed woman. Look at Roosevelt--weak and anaemic as a young man--yet he made himself the envy of the world for boundless vigor and energy. And they are but two cases out of thousands I could quote. Many of the world's strongest men were weaklings in their childhood. It matters not what your age, what your condition--you can start now renewing your youth, growing daily nearer the mode! of YOU that is imaged in Universal Mind.

Arthur Brisbane says that at the age of 85 George F. Baker is doing the work of ten men.

That is what every man of 85 ought to be doing, for he should have not only the physical vigor and strength and enthusiasm of 21, but combined with them

[p. 522]

he should have the skill and experience, the ripened judgment of 85.

There is no more despairing pronouncement than, the belief of the average man that he matures only to begin at once to deteriorate and decay. When the actual fact is, as stated in a recent utterance by the eminent Dr. Hammond, there is no physiological reason why a man should die. He asserted--and the statement is corroborated by scientists and physiologists--that the human body possesses inherent capacity to renew and continue itself and its functions indefinitely!

Your body wear out? Of course it does--just as all material things do. But with this difference--your body is being renewed just as fast as it wears out! Have you damaged some part of it? Don't worry. Down inside you is a chemical

[p. 523]

laboratory which can make new parts just as good or better than the old. Up in your subconscious mind is a Master Chemist with all the formulas of Universal Mind to draw upon, who can keep that chemical laboratory of yours making new parts just as fast as you can wear out the old.

But that Master Chemist is like all of us--like you. He is inclined to lazy a bit on the job--if you let him. Try to relieve him of some of his functions--and he won't bother about them further. Take to the regular use of drugs or other methods of eliminating the waste matter from the body, and your Master Chemist will figure that your conscious mm d has taken over this duty from him--and be will leave it thereafter to your conscious mind. Lead him to believe that you no longer expect him to rebuild your

[p. 524]

body along such perfect lines as in youth--and he will slow down in his work of removing the old, worn-out tissues, and of replacing them with new, better material. The result? Arteries clogged with worn-out cells. Tissues dried and shrunken. Joints stiff and creaky. In short--Old Age.

The fault is not with the Master Chemist. It is with you. You didn't hold him to the job. When a business or an enterprise or an expedition fails, it is not the rank and file who are to blame--it is the directing head. He didn't give his men the right plans to work on. He didn't supply the proper leadership. He didn't keep them keyed up to their best work.

What would you think of an engineer who, with the best plans in the world, the best material with which to build, threw

[p. 525]

away his plans when he was half through with the job and let his men do as they pleased, ruining all his early work and all his fine material by putting the rest of it together any which way?

Yet that is what you do when you stop LOOKING FORWARD at 30 or 40, and decide thereafter to just grow old any which way. You throw away the wonderful model on which you have been building, you take the finest material in the world, and let your workmen put it together any way they like. In fact, you do worse than that. You tell them you don't expect much from them any more. That any sort of a patched-up job they put together after that will be about as good as you can look for.

Man alive! What would you expect from ordinary workmen to whom you talked like that? Your inner workmen

[p. 526]

are no different. You will get from them just what you look for--no more, no less.

"Your time of life" should be the best time you have yet known. The engineer who has built forty bridges should be far more proficient than the one who has built only a few. The model you are passing on to your Master Chemist now ought to be a vastly more perfect model than the one you gave to him at twenty. Instead of feeling that your heart is giving out and your stomach weak, you ought to be boasting of how much better a heart you are now; making than a few years ago, how much more perfectly your stomach is functioning than before you learned that you were its boss.

Of one thing you can be sure. God never decreed a law of decay and death. If there is any such law, it is man-made--and man can unmake it. The Life

[p. 527]

[paragraph continues] Principle that came to this planet thousands or millions of years ago brought no Death Principle with it. For death is like darkness--it is nothing in itself. Death is merely the absence of life, just as darkness is merely the absence of light. Keep that life surging--strongly.

In the Book of Wisdom, of the Apocryphal writings, you read:

"For God made not death; neither hath He pleasure in the destruction of the living.

"For He created all things that they might have being; and the generative powers of the world are healthsome, and there is no poison of destruction in them, nor hath death dominion upon the earth.

"For righteousness is immortal:

"But ungodly men with their works and words called death unto them.

"For God created man to be immortal,

[p. 528]

and made Him to be an image of His own proper being.

"But by the envy of the devil came death into the world."

"Whosoever liveth and believeth in me (understandeth me)," said Jesus, "shall never die."

And again--"If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death."

Universal Mind knows no imperfection--no decay--no death. It does not produce sickness and death. It is your conscious mind that has decreed these evils. Banish the thought--and you can banish the effect. Life was never meant to be measured by years.

I remember reading a story of a traveler who had journeyed to a land of perpetual sun. Since there was no sunrise and no sunset, no moons or changing sea-sons, there was no means of measuring

[p. 529]

time. Therefore to the inhabitants of that land, time did not exist. And having no time, they never thought to measure ages and consequently never grew old. Like organisms with a single cell, they did not die except by violence.

There is more truth than fiction to that idea. The measurement of life by the calendar robs youth of its vigor and hastens old age. It reminds me of the days of our grandparents, when a woman was supposed to doll her hat and don a bonnet at 40. And donning a bonnet was like taking the veil. She was supposed to retire to her chimney corner and make way for the younger generation.

Men and women ought to grow with years into greater health, broader judgment, maturer wisdom. Instead of becoming atrophied, and dead to all new ideas, their minds should through practice

[p. 530]

hold ever stronger images before them of youthful vigor and freshness. The Psalmist says--"But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end."

No one need retire to the chimney corner, no matter how many years have passed over his head. Years should bring wisdom and greater health--not decrepitude. Many of the world's famous men did their greatest work long after the age when most men are in their graves. Tennyson composed the immortal lines of "Crossing the Bar" at the age of 80. Plato still had pen in hand at 81. Cato learned Greek at the same age. Humboldt completed his "Cosmos" in his ninetieth year, while John Wesley at 82 said--"It is twelve years now since I have felt any such sensation as fatigue."

You are only as old as your mind.

[p. 531]

[paragraph continues] Every function, every activity of your body, is controlled by your mind. Your vital organs, your blood that sends the material for rebuilding to every cell and tissue, the processes of elimination that remove all the broken down and waste material, all are dependent for their functioning upon the energy derived from your mind.

The human body can be compared to an electric transportation system. When the dynamo runs at full power every car speeds along, and everything is handled with precision. But let the dynamo slow down and the whole system lags.

That dynamo is your mind, and your thoughts provide the energy that runs it. Feed it thoughts of health and vigor and your whole system will reflect energy and vitality. Feed it thoughts of decrepitude and age, and you will find it slowing

[p. 532]

down to the halting pace you set for it.

You can grow old at 30. You can be young at 90. It is up to you. Which do you choose?

If you choose youth, then start this minute renewing your youth. Find a picture--or, better still, a statuette--of the man you would like to be, the form you would like to have. Keep it in your room. When you go to bed at night, visualize it in your mind's eye--hold it in your thought as YOU--as the man YOU ARE GOING TO BE!

The Journal of Education had the idea in their story of "The Prince and the Statue" in a recent issue:

"There was once a prince who had a crooked back. He could never stand straight up like even the lowest of his subjects. Because he was a very proud

[p. 533]

prince his crooked back caused him a great deal of mental suffering.

"One day he called before him the most skilful sculptor in his kingdom and said to him: 'Make me a noble statue of myself, true to my likeness in every detail with this exception--make this statue with a straight back. I wish to see my-self as I might have been.

"For long months the sculptor worked hewing the marble carefully into the likeness of the prince, and at last the work was done, and the sculptor went before the prince and said: 'The statue is finished; where shall I set it up?' One of the courtiers called out: 'Set it before the castle gate where all can see it,' but the prince smiled sadly, and shook his head. 'Rather,' said he, 'place it in a secret nook in the palace garden where only I shall see it.' The statue was

[p. 534]

placed as the prince ordered, and promptly forgotten by the world, but every morning, and every noon, and every evening the prince stole quietly away to where it stood and looked long upon it, noting the straight back and the unlifted head, and the noble brow. And each time he gazed, something seemed to go out of the statue and into him, tingling in his blood and throbbing in his heart.

"The days passed into months and the months into years; then strange rumors began to spread throughout the land. Said one: 'The prince's back is no longer crooked or my eyes deceive me.' Said another: 'The prince is more noble-looking or my eyes deceive me.' Said another: 'Our prince has the high look of a mighty man,' and these rumors came to the prince, and he listened with a queer

[p. 535]

smile. Then went he out into the garden to where the statue stood and, behold, it was just as the people said, his back had become as straight as the statue's, his head had the same noble bearing; he was, in fact, the noble man his statue proclaimed him to be."

A novel idea? Not at all! 2,500 years ago, in the Golden Age of Athens, when its culture led the world, Grecian mothers surrounded themselves with beautiful statues that they might bring forth perfect children and that the children in turn might develop into perfect men and women.

Eleven months from now you will have an entirely new body, inside and out. Not a single cell, not a single bit of tissue that is now in you will be there then. What changes da you want made in that new body? What improvements?

[p. 536]

Get your new model clearly in your mind's eye. Picture it. VISUALIZE it! Look FORWARD daily w a better physique, to greater mental power.

Give that model to your Subconscious Mind to build upon--and before eleven months are out, that model WILL BE YOU!   




     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[]

The Secret of the Ages
 In Seven Volumes
 VOLUME SEVEN

[]

  

The

  

SECRET

  

of

  

THE AGES



  

ROBERT COLLIER

  

VOLUME ONE

  

ROBERT COLLIER, Publisher
 599 Fifth Avenue
 New York

  

No connection with
 P. F. Collier & Son Co., Inc.

  

[1926]


Click to enlarge
Title Page: Volume 7



Click to enlarge
Verso: Volume 7


Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



  

Contents

  

VOLUME SEVEN

         	XXIII

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGE

     
     	The Medicine Delusion

      	<page 543>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	XXIV

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	The Gift of the Magi

      	<page 563>

     
     	   "Suffer Little Children to Come Unto Me"

      	<page 624>

     
     	   L'Envoi

      	<page 630>

     
   
     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 543]

  

XXIII

  

The Medicine Delusion

"I find the medicine worse than the malady."
                                 --SHAKESPEARE.

	
WE are getting rid of the drug illusion," declared Dr. Woods Hutchinson, the noted medical writer of America, at a luncheon given on June 6, 1925, by the English-Speaking Union to 700 American and Canadian doctors assembled in London, England.

"We are willing even to subscribe to the dictum of Oliver Wendell Holmes," the doctor added, "that if 99 per cent of all drugs we possess were thrown into the sea it would be a good thing for the human race, but rather hard on the fishes."

[p. 544]

Sir Arbuthnot Lane, Surgeon to King George, seconded Dr. Hutchinson's re-marks. "They might say," he went on, "that he was trying to establish a 'suicide club' for doctors. It practically came to that, because as the public became educated in matters of health the medical profession might disappear. It was in fact an anomaly that a medical profession should exist. If people were healthy, there was no reason to have doctors at all."

Twenty-five years ago, the charms of the Patent Medicine fakir and the incantations of the Indian Medicine Man were in the heyday of their popularity. So long as you talked about their aches and pains, their diseases and ailments, people would buy any kind of a nostrum that an unscrupulous fakir chose to palm off upon them. Patent medicine manufacturers

[p. 545]

made fabulous fortunes selling cheap whisky adulterated with burnt sugar and water, under a hundred different names for $1.00 the bottle. You could hardly pick up a magazine or newspaper without seeing a dozen of their lurid ads.

The day of the Indian Medicine Man and street-corner fakir has passed. And for a time, thanks to the crusade against them led by Collier's, and backed by a number of other reputable magazines, patent medicine manufacturers suffered an eclipse.

But they are back again today in a more respectable guise.

Pick up almost any small town paper and you will find a dozen "sovereign remedies" for tired women or fretful children or run-down men. Concoctions, most of them, containing just

[p. 546]

enough alcohol to give you a pleasant sense of stimulation, enough burnt sugar to color them--and a whole lot of water.

But if that were all, no great harm would be done. If the peddling of drugs depended entirely--or even mostly--on Patent Medicine advertisers, the end of it would soon be in sight. But it doesn't. The worst offenders of all are the ones who, of all people, should know better--some of the doctors.

Understand, I don't mean all of them. And I don't mean the best of them. There are thousands of them like Dr. Woods Hutchinson who have the courage to get up and say that medicine itself cannot cure disease. That it never has cured disease. That Nature is the only Healer. Drugs can give you temporary relief from pain--yes. They can cleanse

[p. 547]

[paragraph continues] --yes. But as for curing anything, the drug is not made that can do it.

The principal good that the administering of a drug has is in its effect upon the mind of the patient. Men have been taught for so many years that drugging is the only way to cure disease, that when you give them something, they BELIEVE they are going to be cured, and to the extent that they believe, they ARE CURED.

The best proof of that is to let two patients suffering from the same complaint go to two different physicians--the one a doctor of the regular school, the other a homeopath. The regular doctor will administer a dose containing ten thousand times as much of the mother drug as the homeopath. In fact, there is so slight a trace of any drug in the homeopath's prescription that it might be called

[p. 548]

none at all. Yet it frequently happens that his patient will respond just as readily to his denatured dose as the other will to his drug.

Dr. Gour, in a recent issue of Pearson's Magazine, said: "A few years ago there appeared an article in the Atlantic Monthly written by a young woman physician who was with the Red Cross in Russia. Immediately following the Kerensky revolution, the Russian peasants who, for the first time in their lives, found that they could keep what they earned, began to think of going to doctors for ailments which had afflicted them for years, but which they could never before afford to have treated. Within two weeks' time this young physician exhausted her supply of medicine. But the rush of peasant patients continued and she was reduced to the placebo

[p. 549]

idea of administering colored waters with a slight amount of a single drug--quinine, if I recall correctly. For several weeks she obtained such wonderful results in every conceivable form of affliction that she said her faith in specific medication was completely lost."

In a despatch from Rome to the New York Herald-Tribune, under date of June 15, 1926, I read:

"Under the skeptical eyes of local doctors Don Luigi Garofalo, a priest in the Quarto sector of Naples, alleges that he is curing all the ills that flesh is heir to, from pneumonia to broken bones, by a practical application of the theory derived from the text, 'Man is of dust and to dust he shall return.' Don Luigi argues that from a homeopathic viewpoint dust should be a curative element. So from dust taken from the reddish

[p. 550]

earth near Pozznoli, which contains traces of sulphur and copper, he makes pills for the afflicted, but he contends that any other earth will do.

"The cures, most of which have been effected by means of the red earth, include the healing of broken limbs, tubercular cases, toothache, internal lesions, heart diseases, mumps, paralysis and fevers."

Of course, it is not to be inferred from this that reliance can be placed upon red earth--or any other kind of earth--to cure you of any ill. But it shows that even so common, ordinary a thing as a bit of dirt can be used to arouse people from the lethargic condition in which sickness so frequently leaves them, and give them the power to help themselves.

Take another case. Your doctor prescribes regular doses of some drug. You

[p. 551]

take it once. It has the desired effect. You take it again. The effect is not quite so pronounced. You keep it up--and in a short time the drug seems to have lost its efficacy.

Why? The same chemical elements are there. And if you mix the same chemical elements in a retort, you will get the same results whether you do it once or a thousand times. Why doesn't it work the same way with drugs and your body?

Because the strongest factor in bringing about the desired effect in the beginning was your BELIEF--yours and that of your doctor. But as you kept on and on, your belief began to falter, until presently it died away altogether. You may have hoped, but the active belief suggestions to your subconscious mind had stopped carrying conviction.

[p. 552]

Dr. Richard C. Cabot, Professor of Medicine at Harvard University, in a recent address, declared that "three-quarters of all illnesses are cured without the victims even knowing they have had them.

"Proof of this contention is to be found in post-mortem examinations, which time after time reveal indelible and unmistakable traces of disease which the subject has conquered all unknowingly. Ninety per cent of all typhoid cures itself, as does 75 per cent of all pneumonia. In fact, out of a total of 215 diseases known to medical science, there are only about eight or nine which doctors conquer--the rest conquer themselves."

He went on to say that--"If nature, assisted by the proper mental and emotional moods, is capable of curing an ulcer in three or four weeks, why isn't

[p. 553]

it possible for the same force to heal a similar ulcer in a few minutes, when the curative processes have been speeded up abnormally?"

Great physicians have, on numerous occasions, maintained that there is no science in medicating people. In Preventive Medicine--yes. In Surgery. In Obstetrics. In a score of different lines that fall under the heading of the medical profession.

But the art of drugging is little ahead of where it was in the Middle Ages, when Egyptian mummies were in great demand among druggists and "powdered Pharaoh" was considered the greatest remedy for any ill that flesh was heir to.

Every day brings the discovery of some new drug, and the consequent dictum that the remedy previously pre-

[p. 554]

scribed was all a mistake--that it had little or no real value whatever.

One doctor says: "A medicine that will not kill you if you take an overdose is no good." Another: "The most prominent doctors now claim that there is not a single drug will do what it has been prescribed for in the past."

Dr.. Douglas White, writing in The Churchman, sums it up thus:

"All cure of every disease is spiritual. Healing can never be imposed from without by either the surgeon or physician; it is the living organism which, helped by the skill of the one or the other, is enabled to work its way back to health. The whole principle of healing in all cases is the vis medicatrix naturae. And when we speak of nature, we are only personifying the principle of life which Christians call God."

[p. 555]

In the Medical Record of September 25, 1920, Dr. Joseph Byrne, Professor of Neurology at Fordham University Medical School, said:

"At a conservative estimate it may be admitted that of all the ailments for which relief is sought, 90% or over are self limited and tend to get well. It may also be admitted that in over 90% of all human ailments, the psychic is the dominating factor."

In other words, Mind is the Healer. Drugs can sometimes make its work easier by removing obstructions, by killing off parasites. But the regular use of drugs is far more likely to harm than to heal. We might well quote to the druggists the old Hindoo proverb:

"God gives the mango;
    The farmer plants die seed.
  God cures the patient;
    The doctor takes the fees."

[p. 556]

In the Great War, the one drug that most proved its worth was Iodine. And what is Iodine? A cleanser. It killed germs. It cleansed wounds. But it has no healing power. And no healing was expected of it. It did all that was asked. It cauterized--cleansed--so that Nature (Mind) could do its own healing, unobstructed.

That would seem to be the most that should be expected of any drug--kill the germs of sickness or disease, cleanse so that Nature can the more easily do its rebuilding. And that is where the use of drugs should stop. Mind works best when it is interfered with least--when we throw ourselves entirely upon it for support, rather than share the responsibility with some outside agency.

Dr. Burnett Rae, a well-known English

[p. 557]

specialist, addressing a large audience on the subject of "Spiritual Healing and Medical Science," said the term "spiritual healing" was sometimes used in a manner which seemed to imply that there was a form of healing which was of a non-spiritual character, and that spiritual healing was incompatible with, or opposed to, medical practice. Healing could never be regarded as a purely physical process. He would go so far as to say that healing was always effected through the control of the mind, and medicinal remedies only set the machinery of the mind in motion. We are too apt to think of medical science as concerned with drugs or appliances and operations. These might completely pass away during the next twenty or fifty years.

It is not through drugs that the medical

[p. 558]

profession has done so much of good for the world. It is not through drugs that they have improved the general health, cleaned up plague spots, cut down infant mortality, lengthened the average life expectancy of mankind by fifteen years.

It is by scotching disease at its very source. It is by getting rid of artificially created unwholesome conditions, getting back to natural wholesome conditions.

What is it causes typhus? Filth--an entirely unwholesome condition, man-made. And how do doctors prevent the spread of typhus? By cleaning up--by getting back to natural wholesome conditions.

What is it causes typhoid? Impure water. And its prevention is simply the purifying of the water--getting

[p. 559]

back to Nature's perfect, wholesome supply.

Yellow fever has been practically stamped out of existence. Typhus is almost a forgotten plague, except in such backward places as parts of Russia and Asia.

Malaria has been conquered. And doctors predict that in another generation tuberculosis will be an almost forgotten malady.

How were these wonderful results brought about? Not through drugs--but by cleaning up! Cleaning out swamps and filth. Purifying water. Building drainage systems. Making everything round about as clean and wholesome as Nature herself.

Cleanliness--Purity--Sunshine!

God gave us in abundance all that is necessary for perfect health--clean air,

[p. 560]

pure water, clear sunshine. All we need to do is to keep these pure and clean, and to use all we possibly can of them. The greatest good the medical profession has done mankind is in discovering the value of these gifts of God and showing us how to use them.

The Chinese have long had the right idea--they pay their physicians to keep them well, not to cure them of sickness. And the thing that made the reputation of such men as Gorgas, Reed, Flexner, Carrel, was not their cure of disease--but their prevention of it.

That way lies the future of medicine--bringing our surroundings back to the natural wholesome conditions for which we were created. That way lies health and happiness for all--cleanliness inside and out, clean air, pure water, plenty of sunshine--and right thinking! 

[p. 561]

In the next Chapter, I shall try to show you how you can apply the illimitable power of Mind hopefully towards the successful treatment of disease.


     
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 562] [p. 563]

  

XXIV

  

The Gift of the Magi

"Sweep up the debris of decaying faiths;
  Sweep down the cobwebs of worn-out beliefs,
  And throw your soul wide open to the light
  Of Reason and of Knowledge. Be not afraid
  To thrust aside half-truths and grasp the whole."
                   --ELLA WHEELER WILCOX.

	
ALL over the world, sick, weak and devitalized men and women are searching for health and strength. By the hundreds of thousands, they drag their weary and aching boxes around, or languish on sick beds, waiting for someone to bring health to them corked up in a bottle.

But real, lasting health was never found in pill boxes or medicine bottles. There is one method--and only one--by which it can be gained and kept.

[p. 564]

[paragraph continues] That method is by using the power of the Subconscious, Mind.

For a long time the doctors pooh-poohed any such idea. Then as the evidence piled up, they grudgingly admitted that nervous troubles and even functional disorders might be cured by mind.

Even now there are some who, as Bernard Shaw put it, "Had rather bury a whole hillside ethically than see a single patient cured unethically. They will give credit to no method of healing outside the tenets of their own school."

Yet, as Warren Hilton has it in "Applied Psychology":

"All the literature of medicine, whether of ancient or modern times, abounds in illustrations of the power of of the mind over the body in health and in disease. And medical science has al-

[p. 565]

ways based much of its practice on this principle. No reputable school of medicine ever failed to instruct its students in practical applications of the principle of mental influence at the bedside of their patients. A brisk and cheery manner, a hopeful countenance, a supremely assured and confident demeanor--these things have always been regarded by the medical profession as but second in importance to sanitation and material remedies; while the value of the sugarcoated bread pill when the diagnosis was uncertain, has long been recognized.

"The properly trained nurse has always been expected to supplement the efforts of the attending physician by summoning the mental forces of the patient to his aid. She, therefore, surrounds the patient with an atmosphere of comfortable assurance. And by constantly

[p. 566]

advising him of his satisfactory progress toward speedy recovery she seeks to instil hope, confidence and mental effort.

"To quote Dr. Didama: 'The ideal physician irradiates the sick chamber with the light of his cheerful presence. He may not be hilarious--he is not indifferent--but he has an irrepressible good-nature which lifts the patient out of the slough of despond and places his feet on the firm land of health. In desperate cases, even a little harmless levity may be beneficial. A well-timed jest may break up a congestion; a pun may add pungency to the sharpest stimulant.' Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes reduced this principle to its cash equivalent when he said that a cheerful smile might be worth five thousand dollars a year to a physician.

[p. 567]

"Today, psychotherapy, or the healing of bodily disease by mental influence, has the unqualified endorsement of the American Therapeutic Society, the only national organization in America devoted exclusively to therapeutics. It has the enthusiastic support of men of such recognized international leadership in the scientific world and in the medical profession as Freud, Jung, Bleuler, Breuer, Prince, Janet, Babinski, Putnam, Gerrish, Sidis, Dubois, Munsterberg, Jones, Brill, Donley, Waterman and Taylor.

"The present attitude of reputable science toward the principle that the mind controls all bodily operations is, then, one of positive conviction. The world's foremost thinkers accept its truth. The interest of enlightened men and women everywhere is directed toward

[p. 568]

the mind as a powerful curative force and as a regenerative influence of hitherto undreamed-of resource."

The more progressive physicians everywhere now admit that there is practically no limit to how far mind can go in the cure of disease. As Dr. Walsh of Fordham University puts it: "Analysis of the statistics of diseases cured by mental influence shows that its results have been more strikingly manifest in organic than in the so-called nervous or functional diseases."

Everyone admits that the mind influences the body somewhat, for everyone has seen others grow pale with fear, or red with anger. Everyone has felt the stopping of the heartbeats at some sudden fright, the quickened breathing and the thumping of the heart caused by excitement. These and a hundred other

[p. 569]

evidences of the influence of mind over matter are common to all of us, and everyone will admit them.

But everyone does not know that our whole bodies seem to be nothing more or less than the outward expression of our thought. We sit in a draught, and education teaches us we should have a cold or fever: So we have a cold or fever. We eat something which we have been told is indigestible, and immediately we are assailed with pains. We see another yawn, and our impulse is to follow suit. In the same way, when we hear of sickness round about us, the fear of it visualizes it in our own minds and we, too, have it. The fear of these things seems to bring them about, the mental suggestion sent through to our subconscious minds. We have been educated in a medical age to think that most diseases

[p. 570]

are infectious or contagious. So the mere sight of a diseased person makes most of us withdraw into ourselves like a turtle within his shell. We fear we shall catch it--when one of the great dangers of disease is that very fear of it.

For years it has been accepted as an acknowledged fact that anyone trapped in a mine or other air-tight compartment would presently die of carbon dioxide poisoning--lack of oxygen. Now comes Houdini to prove that death for lack of oxygen is not necessary at all!

"Fear, and not poisoning by carbon dioxide, causes the death of miners and others trapped in air-tight compartments," in the opinion of Houdini, according to an Associated Press despatch of August 6, 1926.

Houdini had himself sunk in a sealed coffin in a swimming pool, without

[p. 571]

chance for a breath of outside air to reach him, and stayed there for an hour and a half, although, according to all previous scientific belief, he should have been dead at the end of four minutes. Yet Dr. W. J. McConnell of the United States Department of Mines, who examined Houdini before and after the experiment, reported no marked physical reactions from the test, and Houdini himself said he felt only a slight dizziness when he was released from the coffin!

"Anyone can do it," said Houdini. "The important thing is, to believe that you are safe."

The Chinese have a saying that when the plague comes, 5,000 people may die of the plague, but 50,000 will die of the fear of it.

Did you ever hurt a limb, or a finger, so that you thought you couldn't

[p. 572]

move it? And then, under the stress of some sudden emotion, forget all about the hurt and presently wake to find yourself using the finger or the limb just as readily and as painlessly as though there had never been anything wrong with it?

I have before me a clipping from the New York Times of March 29, 1925, telling of a cripple who had been paralyzed for six years, but under the spur of sudden fear, he ran up a stairway unaided, without crutch or cane. He had been treated in a number of hospitals, but because of an injury to his spine received in an auto accident, had been unable to walk without crutches or canes for six years. The patient in the bed next his own suddenly went crazy and attacked him, and in his fear this paralytic leaped from his bed and ran

[p. 573]

up a flight of stairs. According to the report, the sudden fright cured him!

Take the miracles of Lourdes, or of St. Anne of Beaupre, or of any of the dozens of shrines that dot the world. What is it that effects the cures? Two things--Desire and Faith. "What wouldst thou that I should do unto thee?" the Saviour asked the blind man who kept following and crying out to him. "Lord that I should receive my sight." And again of the cripple at the Pool of Bethesda Jesus asked--"Wouldst thou be made whole?"

Sounds like foolish questioning, doesn't it? But you remember the story of the famous Saint of Italy, who traveled from town to town healing the lame, the halt, and the blind. A pilgrim hastening to a town where the Saint was expected, met two lame beggars hurrying away.

[p. 574]

[paragraph continues] He asked them the reason for their haste, to be told, to his astonishment, it was because the Saint was coming to town. As they put it--"He will surely heal us, and where will our livelihood be then?"

So it is with many people today--not beggars, mind you--but people in every walk of life. They have become so wedded to their ailments, they "enjoy poor health" so thoroughly, that they are secretly a bit proud of it. Take away their complaints and they would be lost without them.

You must have the sincere desire first. That is prayer. Then the faith--the kind of faith that Jesus meant when he said--"Whatsoever ye ask for when ye pray, believe that ye receive it, and ye shall have it." Mind you, not "believe ye are going to receive it." "Believe that

[p. 575]

ye receive it"--now--this very minute. Know that the REAL you, the image of you held in Universal Mind--in short, the Truth concerning every organ in your body--is perfect. "Know the Truth." Believe that you HAVE this perfect image. On the day that you can truly believe this--carry this sincere conviction to your subconscious mind--on that day you WILL BE perfect.

This is the faith that Jesus meant when he said--"Thy faith hath made thee whole." This is the faith that is responsible for the miracles of Lourdes, for miraculous healings everywhere. It matters not whether you be Catholic or Protestant, Jew or Gentile. Desire and faith such as these will heal you.

A month or two ago I read in the newspapers of a farmer, blind for two years, who went out in the field and

[p. 576]

prayed "that he should receive his sight." At the end of the second day, his sight was completely restored. He was a Protestant. He went to no shrine--just out under the sky and prayed to God.

Today I have before me a clipping from the New York Sun of February 23, 1926, telling of Patrolman Dennis O'Brien of the Jersey City police force, who at the end of a Novena to Our Lady of Help at the Monastery of St. Michael's in Union City, recovered the use of his legs, which had been paralyzed since the time, two years before, when a bullet had entered the base of his spine, severing the cord of motor and sensory nerves. He was a Catholic.

Then here is one from the New York Sun of June 26, 1926, telling how Miss Elsie Meyer of the Bronx, New

[p. 577]

[paragraph continues] York, was healed overnight of a tumorous growth that had troubled her for months:

"I realized last fall that there was an unusual growth on my body," she said. "It might have resulted from the strain of lifting a trunk. I wanted to know what it was, and I first went to a doctor, who informed me it was a tumorous growth and likely to become serious.

"But I would not be frightened and refused to receive any medical remedies in the way of cure. I have been a believer in faith healing and member of the Unity Society, a branch of the New Thought organization, for a number of years, so I went to a New Thought . While this seemed to help me, the tumorous growth remained. I guess my faith wasn't strong enough at the time. That was last fall.

[p. 578]

"I came to the congress with the same growth, apparently unaffected by any attempts to cure it. But after attending the healing meeting at the congress yesterday I left with firm faith that I would get the healing I had asked for. When I retired I noticed the tumor was still on my body, but when I awoke this morning it had disappeared."

The chronicles of every religion are full of just such miracles. And the reason for them is the same in every case --prayer and faith. Given these, no healing is impossible.

Suppose we go back for a moment to the lowly Amoeba, the first bit of animal life upon the earth. I know not whether you are Fundamentalist or Evolutionist. The facts are a bit harder to prove from the Evolution side of it, so let us argue from that angle.

[p. 579]

The Amoeba, as you will recall from Chapter I, is the lowest form of animal life known to scientists, a sort of jelly-fish with but a single cell--without brains, without intelligence, possessing only LIFE. No one would ever contend that this jelly-fish could improve itself. No one would argue that it developed the next form of life out of its own mind or ideas.

Yet, according to science, the next form of life did develop from this jelly-like mass. The Amoeba certainly was not responsible for doing it. And it couldn't develop itself. So the conclusion is forced upon us that some outside Intelligence must have done it.

But there were no other living creatures. The Amoeba was alone of all animal life upon the planet. The condition of the water and atmosphere was

[p. 580]

such that few if any other forms of animals could have sustained life at that time. So the Intelligence which developed the next form of animal life must have been the same that created the Amoeba--that first brought LIFE to this Planet. That Intelligence is variously called God, Providence, Nature, the Life Principle, Mind, etc. For our purposes here let us call it Universal Mind.

Having formed life here on earth, Universal Mind proceeded to develop it. Starting with a single cell, It built tell upon tell, changing each form of life to meet the different conditions of atmosphere and environment that the cooling of the earth trust brought about. When the multi-cellular structure became complicated, It gave a brain to it to direct the different functions, just as you put

[p. 581]

a "governor" on a steam engine. When land appeared and the receding tides left certain animals high and dry for periods of hours, It gave these both lungs and gills--the one for the air, the other for the water.

When the creatures began to prey upon one another, It gave one speed, another a shell, a third an ink-like fluid, that each in its own way might escape and survive.

But always It progressed. Each new stage of life was an improvement over the previous one. And always It showed Its resourcefulness, Its ability to meet ANY need.

Finally, as the culmination of all Its efforts, It made MAN--a creature endowed not only with a brain like that of the lower animals, but with the power of reason--"made in His image and

[p. 582]

likeness," sharing Infinite Intelligence--himself a Creator and a part of Universal Mind.

All through the creation--from the time of the one-celled Amoeba right up to Man--every scientist will admit that the directing intelligence of Universal Mind was on the job every minute, that It formed the models on which each new and different kind of animal was made, that each of these models was perfect--the one model best fitted to cope with the conditions it had to confront.

Certainly when It came to Man, It is not likely to have been any less successful in forming a perfect model than it was in making the tiger or the elephant. So we can take it, I assume, that all will admit that Man as formed by Universal Mind is perfect--that the idea of Man

[p. 583]

as it exists in Universal Mind is perfect in every particular.

And Universal Mind, from the very beginning, has never taken a step back-ward, has never stood still. Always it has PROGRESSED. So it would seem safe to assume that man is not going backward now--that he is a more perfect creature than he was 5,000, 10,000 or 100,000 years ago--that he is constantly drawing nearer and nearer the likeness of his Creator.

The next step seems just as logical. If there was inherent in even the earliest and lowest forms of life the power to develop whatever means was requisite to meet each new emergency, such as a shell or lungs or legs or wings--if this power is still inherent in the lower forms of life such as the Plant Parasites referred to in a previous chapter, does it

[p. 584]

not seem a certainty that we have the same power within ourselves, if only we knew how to call it forth?

Jesus proved that we have, and his disciples and followers added still further proof. After the third century of the Christian era, that power was allowed to lapse through disuse, but of late years thousands have been taking advantage of it for themselves and for others through psychology or religion. A new Church has been founded upon the words of James: "Faith without WORKS is dead." It differs from most Churches in that it teaches that Jesus meant ALL that he said when he commanded his disciples to--"Go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils; freely ye have received, freely give." The sick,

[p. 585]

the lame, the halt and the blind have flocked to it literally by the hundred thousands. That thousands have been cured is beyond dispute. That many were cases which had been given up by the medical fraternity, the doctors quite frankly admit.

And the basis of all there cures is that there is nothing miraculous about the cure of disease at all. That it is "Divinely Natural." That it requires merely understanding. That Mind is the only Creator. And that the only image Universal Mind holds of your body is a perfect image, neither young nor old, but full of health, of vigor, of beauty and vitality. That all you have to do when assailed by disease is to go back to Universal Mind for a new conception of its perfect image--for the Truth concerning your body. Just as

[p. 586]

you would go back to the principle of mathematics for the Truth concerning any problem that worked out incorrectly. When you can make your subconscious mind copy after this Universal image--the Truth--instead of the diseased image you are holding in your thoughts, your sickness will vanish like the mere dream it is.

Does that sound too deep? Then look at it this way:

When you think an organ is diseased, it is your conscious mind that thinks this. Inevitably it sends this thought through to your subconscious mind, and the latter proceeds to build the cells of that organ along this imperfect, diseased model. Change the model--in other words, change your belief--and your subconscious mind will go back again to building along right lines.

[p. 587]

Your body, you know, is simply an aggregation of millions upon millions of protons and electrons, held together by mind. They are the universal substance all about us, the plastic lay from which the sculptor Mind shapes the forms you see.

To quote the New York Sun: "Man's body is made up of trillions of miniature solar systems, each with whirling planets and a central sun. These tiny systems are the atoms of modern science. The atoms of all elements are made up of protons and electrons in varying quantities and arranged in various ways.

"But what are protons and electrons?

"The masters of physics have succeeded in weighing and measuring them. We know that they carry the smallest possible charges of electricity, and we

[p. 588]

are learning much about the way they behave; but students are beginning to doubt that they have real substance, that they are anything one could hit with a lilliputian hammer. Dr. H. G. Gale of the University of Chicago, addressing the Ohio Academy of Science the other day, said there was good reason to believe that electrons were composed entirely of electricity and that their mass or weight was only a manifestation of electrical force. According to this view, nothing exists in the universe except electricity--and perhaps ether."

Your subconscious mind partakes of the creative power of Mind and because of that, it is daily, hourly, changing the particles of electrical energy which constitute your body to conform to the image you hold before it.

The clay cannot reply to the sculptor.

[p. 589]

[paragraph continues] No more can these tiny particles of electricity. Your body has nothing to say as to whether it shall be diseased or crippled. It is MIND that decides this. Jesus understood this, and it was on the basis of this understanding that he was able to cure any and all manner of disease. He was not a magician or occult wonder-worker, aiming to set aside the laws of nature. He was a TEACHER, demonstrating those laws. He didn't pick the learned Scribes and Pharisees and let them in on the secret of his wonder working. On the contrary, the men he chose were simple fisher folk, and to them he gave the UNDERSTANDING that enabled them, too, to cure the sick, the halt and the blind.

For what is sickness? An illusion, a mortal dream--merely the absence of health. Bring back that health image,

[p. 590]

and the sickness immediately disappears. Universal Mind never created disease. The only image it knows of man is the Truth--the perfect image. The only idea it has of your body is a perfect, healthy idea. "For God is of purer eyes than to behold evil."

Then where does disease come from? Who created it? No one did. It is a mere illusion--just as, if you think a pin is sticking you, and you concentrate your thought on the pain, it becomes unbearable. Yet when you investigate, you find that no pin was sticking you at all--merely a hair, or bit of cinder lodged against the skin. How often have you had some fancied pain, only to have it promptly disappear when your physician assured you there was nothing wrong with you at all. It would be the same way with all sickness, all pain, if you

[p. 591]

would understand that it is merely fear or suggestion working on your conscious mind, and that if you will deny this belief of pain or sickness, your subconscious mind will speedily make that denial good. Don't render that mind impotent by thoughts of fear, doubt and anxiety. If you do, it is going to get like a working crew which is constantly being stopped by strikes or walk-outs or changes of plans. It will presently get discouraged and stop trying.

To quote Dr. Geo. E. Pitzer again--"In proper, healthy or normal conditions of life, the objective mind and the subjective mind act in perfect harmony with each other. When this is the case, healthy and happy conditions always prevail. But these two minds are not always permitted to act in perfect harmony with each other; this brings mental

[p. 592]

disturbances; excites physical wrongs, functional and organic diseases.

"Our unconscious is a tremendous storage plant full of potential energy which can be expended for beneficial or harmful ends. Like every apparatus for storing up power, it can be man's most precious ally, if man is familiar with it and, hence, not afraid of it. Ignorance and fear, on the other hand, can transform a live electric wire into an engine of destruction and death."

Even as long ago as Napoleon's day, men had begun to get an inkling of this. "Think that you are well," said the astute Tallyrand, "instead of thinking that you are sick." And the formula of the Quakers is that an energetic soul is "master of the body which it loves."

So keep in mind the one basic fact that covers the whole ground--that

[p. 593]

[paragraph continues] Mind is all. There is no other cause. When you drive the belief in disease from your subconscious mind, you will drive away the pain and all the other symptoms with it.

Few sick people have any idea how much they can do for themselves. There is an old saying that every man is "a fool or his own physician at 40." When the science of Mind is more generally understood, that saying will become literally true. Every man will find within himself the Mind which "healeth all thy diseases." For every function of your body is governed by your mind. When sickness or pain assails you, deny it! Cling steadfastly to the one idea that covers all--that Universal Mind made your every organ perfect; that the only image of each organ now in Universal Mind is this perfect image; and that

[p. 594]

this perfect idea is endowed with resources sufficient to meet any need.

Jesus' command--"Be ye therefore perfect, even as your father in Heaven is perfect,"--was meant to be taken literally. And it can be followed literally if we will model our bodies upon the image He holds of us in Universal Mind. We are all sculptors, you know, but instead of marble or clay, our material is the plastic energy--protons and electrons--of which we and everything in this world about us are made. What are you making of it? What image are you holding in mind? Images of sickness? Of poverty? Of Limitation? Then you are reproducing these in your life.

Banish them! Forget them! Never let them enter your thought, and they will never again manifest themselves in your life.

[p. 595]

You admit that mind influences your body to some extent, but you think your physical organs hold the preponderance of power. So you depend upon them, and make yourself their slave.

"Know ye not," says Paul, "that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey?"

By holding before yourself the thought that your organs are the master, you make them your master, and deprive yourself of the directing intelligence of your subconscious mind. When an organ ceases to function properly, you try to doctor it, when the part that needs attention is your mind. If you are running an electric machine, and the current becomes weak or is switched off, you don't take the machine part, or oil it or tamper with it to make it run better.

[p. 596]

[paragraph continues] You go to the source of the power to find what is wrong there.

In the same way, when anything seems wrong with the functioning of your body, the place to investigate is your subconscious mind. Your stomach has no intelligence, nor your heart, nor your heart, nor any other of your organs. Your liver, for instance, could never figure out how much sugar should be turned into your blood every minute to keep your bodily temperature at 98 degrees, when you are sitting in a room that is warmed to only 65 degrees. It doesn't know how much more sugar is required to keep that temperature normal when you go out into a driving gale 10 below zero. Yet it supplies the requisite amount--neither too much nor too little. And it does it instantaneously. Where does it get the information?

[p. 597]

[paragraph continues] You don't know it. No mortal man could figure it out in a year's time.

It gets it from your subconscious mind. It gets both the information and the directions to use it. And every other of your bodily organs gets its information in the same place. Your muscles are not self-acting. Take away mind and those muscles are just like any other bit of matter--lifeless, inert. They have nothing to say as to what they shall do. They merely obey the behests of mind.

Have you ever seen one of those great presses at work in a newspaper plant? They seem almost human in their intelligence. At one end, great rolls of paper feed in. At the other, out comes the finished newspaper, folded, ready for delivery. Everything is automatic. Everything as perfect as machinery can

[p. 598]

be made. The "fingers" that fold the papers seem almost lifelike in their deftness.

But shut off the life-giving electric current--and what happens? The machinery is powerless. Take away the directing human intelligence, and how long before that wonderful machine would be a mass of scrap--mere bits of steel and rubber? How long could it function of itself?

So it is with your body. A wonderful mechanism--the most complicated, yet the most perfect in the world. But switch off the current of your mental dynamo, take away the intelligence that directs the working of your every organ, and what is left? A bit of bone and flesh--inert and useless.

In the final analysis, your body is merely a piece of mechanism--dependent

[p. 599]

entirely upon mind. It has no power, no volition, of its own. It does as mind tells it to, insofar as mind believes itself to be the Master. Your eyes, for instance, are merely lenses which transmit light from the outer world to the brain within. They contract or elongate, they open or close, just as mind directs. And mind, in its turn, keeps them constantly  with new, life-giving blood, replacing old tissue, old cells, as fast as they wear out, rebuilding ever, so that your eyes may continue to function perfectly as long as your conscious mind is dependent upon them for its impressions of outer objects. It doesn't matter how old you may be or how much you use them. Your eyes are like any other muscles of your body--they improve in strength with use. Give them but enough rest

[p. 600]

intervals for mind to repair and rebuild the used tissue, keep before your subconscious mind the perfect image of eyes on which you expect it to rebuild, and you need never fear glasses, you need never worry about "your eyes going back on you."

What is it happens when your muscles refuse to work--fail to perform their functions properly? You are what has happened. You have switched off the current from some particular part. You have been holding the belief so long and so firmly that the muscles have the preponderance of power, that your subconscious mind has come to believe it, too. And when the nerve or muscle suffers an injury, the subconscious mind--at the suggestion of your conscious mind--gives up all dominion over it.

All disease, all sickness, all imperfections

[p. 601]

of the human body are due to this one cause--your belief that your body is the master, that it can act, that it can catch cold, or become diseased, without the consent of mind. This is the procuring cause of all suffering. One disease is no different from another in this. They are all due to that one erroneous belief.

If you will deny the power of your body over your mind, you can destroy all fear of disease. And when the fear goes, the foundation of the disease is gone.

The way to begin is to refuse to believe or to heed any complaint from your body. Have no fear of climate or atmosphere, of dampness or drafts. It is only when you believe them unhealthy that they are so to you. When your stomach sends a report of distress, when

[p. 602]

it tells you that something you have eaten is disagreeing with it, treat it as you would an unruly servant. Remind it that it is not the judge of what is or is not good for it. That it has no intelligence. That it is merely a channel through which the food you give it passes for certain treatment and selection. That if the food is not good it has but to pass it through to the eliminatory organs as speedily as may be.

Your stomach is entirely capable of doing this. Every organ you have is capable of withstanding any condition--given the right state of mind to direct it. The only reason that they succumb to sickness or disease or injury is because you tell them to. Men have fallen from great heights without injury. Men have taken the most deadly poison without harm. Men have gone through fire

[p. 603]

and flood and pestilence with not a scratch to show. And what men have done once they can do again. The fact that it has been done shows that your body does not need to suffer injury from these conditions. And if it does not need to, then it would seem that the only reason it ordinarily suffers is because your fear of injury is the thought you are holding before your subconscious mind and therefore that is the thought that it images on your body.

In a despatch from Stockholm to the New York Herald-Tribune, dated January 18, 1926, I read that Dr. Henry Markus and Dr. Ernest Sahlgren, Stockholm scientists, have been able, through hypnotic suggestion, to offset the effect of poisons on the human system to a marked degree.

The scientists put three subjects into

[p. 604]

hypnotic sleep and then administered drugs, carefully recording the effects on blood pressure and pulse, both with and without "suggestion." When a drug which acts to increase blood pressure was administered without "suggestion," the blood pressure readings ranged between 109 to 130 and pulse readings from 54 to 100. But when the drug was administered with the "suggestion" to the mind of the patient that it was merely so much harmless water, the blood pressures were from 107 to 116 and pulse readings all less than 67. From which one would judge that it was the patient's belief which affected him, far more than any power in the drug.

Bear this in mind when anyone tells you that certain foods are not good for you. You can eat what you like, if you do it in moderation. Just remember--no

[p. 605]

matter what you may eat--if you relish it, if you BELIEVE it to be good for you, it will be good for you!

But, you may say, is not this like the tenets of a well-known religion? What of that? If certain fundamental truths have been uncovered by another why not use them, regardless of whether or not we agree with the philosophy from which they are taken.

To quote again from Dr. Richard C. Cabot of the Harvard Medical School: "There need be no conflict. There is opportunity for all sincere, humble-minded effort. Let us have no persecutions and no interference with the spread of truth and light from any source. Indictments against movements as powerful and sincere as Christian Science and Preventive Medicine are anachronistic. Let us all get busy along our own lines.

[p. 606]

[paragraph continues] 'With malice towards none, with charity for all, let us bind up the nation's wounds.'"

It has often seemed to me that if all the churches would take a leaf out of the book of ordinary Business Practice, forget their differences over dogma, and simply profit by the example that Mary Baker Eddy, Discoverer and Founder of Christian Science, has given them of building up an enormous following almost overnight, they would be much the better off thereby.

For what was it brought men and women into the Church in such vast numbers in the early day of Christianity? Healing! What was responsible for the phenomenal growth of the Christian Science Church? The healing of thousands of people of any and every kind of ill. What is it that people go to

[p. 607]

any Church for? To pray--and to find how to get an answer to their prayers. Show them the way to do this, show them the way to heal themselves of all their ills and lacks, and you will need to worry no more about the crowded theaters and the empty churches.

"If this be treason, make the most of it."

The moment any Symptom of illness shows in your body, vigorously deny its existence. Say to yourself "My body has no intelligence. Neither has any germ of disease. Therefore neither my body nor the disease can tell me I am sick. Mind is the only cause. And Mind has not directed them to make me sick. The only image of my body that Mind knows is a perfect, vigorous, healthy image. And that is the only image I am going to build on." Then

[p. 608]

forget the image of disease. It is only an illusion, and can be dispelled like any other illusion. Keep in your mind's eye the image of perfect health, of vigorous, boundless vitality.

Your body can not say it is sick. Therefore when the belief of sickness assails you, it must come either from your conscious mind or from outside suggestion. In either event, it is your job to see that no belief of sickness reaches your subconscious mind, that no fear of it, no thought of it, is imaged there.

To treat one who has already succumbed to the belief of sickness, explain to him, as I have explained to you here, that his body has no power for sickness or for health, any more than a log of wood has. That his body is merely an aggregation of millions of electrons--

[p. 609]

particles of electrical energy, really--subject wholly to his mind. That these particles of energy have neither substance nor intelligence; that they are constantly changing; and that the forms they take depend entirely upon the images he holds in his own mind.

His body is, in short, a mental concept. It is an exact reflection of the thought he is holding in mind of it. If has been sick, it is because he has been holding sickly, weak and unhealthy thoughts in his mind. If he wishes to get well, it is first necessary for him to change his thought. Instead of doctoring the machine, he is to go direct to the power house and change the current. Let him repeat to himself, night and morning, this little formula:

"There is no permanence to matter. The one surest thing about it is change.

[p. 610]

[paragraph continues] Every cell, every tissue in my body is constantly being renewed. The old, worn-out tissues are being torn down and carried away. New, perfect ones are replacing them. And the model on which those new organisms are being re-built is the perfect model that is held in Divine Mind.

"For God made man in His image. That image was perfect then--is perfect now. It is the only image that Divine Mind knows of me. It is the only image on which my subconscious mind is ever again going to pattern its re-building. Every minute of every day I am growing more and more into the image of God--the True Likeness He holds of me in His thought."

If he will do that, if he will bear in mind that matter as such has no feeling, no intelligence; that it is the mind that

[p. 611]

feels, the mind that directs, and therefore he has nothing to fear from any external causes, his fear of the disease will vanish. And the patient does not exist who will not speedily recover when his fear of the disease is gone.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you," said Jesus, "if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death." And again--"This is the life eternal." "Is," you will notice, not "shall be."

"The mind is Good's way of utilizing His energy," says the Rev. William T. Walsh, Rector of St. Luke's Church, New York City, in his book "Scientific Spiritual Healing." "God evolved the subconscious mind. It is His gift to us like all else that we possess, and because it is from Him we should give thanks and learn to use it intelligently.

[p. 612]

"God has so fashioned us that we do not have to give conscious attention to the vital processes. He has given us what is called the subconscious mind which looks after all the vital functions. This mind can receive commands from us and has wonderful ability to carry them out, for it is a law that every thought tends to realize itself subconsciously in the body.

"If you allow evil thoughts to remain, they are received by the subconscious which tends to realize them in the body just as much as though they were good, wholesome, health-giving spiritual thoughts. For remember, the subconscious does not reason and judge. It only receives and obeys."

When you have an accident, don't immediately think that you must be hurt. On the contrary, deny at once that you

[p. 613]

can be hurt. The denial will take away the creative power of your thought from any damaging condition. More than that, if you will immediately call to mind the fact that the only image of your body that Universal Mind holds is a perfect image, and that this is the image on which your; subconscious mind is building, you will find that this subconscious mind will speedily rebuild any damaged parts in accordance with that image.

As a matter of fact, if we could thoroughly realize that our bodies are made up merely of vortices of energy subject wholly to the control of mind, it should hurt us no more to run a knife through them than it does to run it through water. The water immediately resumes the shape of the vessel that holds it. Just so, our bodies should immediately

[p. 614]

resume the shape that mind holds them in.

But even with our present imperfect understanding, we can perform what the uninitiated would call miracles with our bodies. And each victory we win gives us a bit more of power over them. To conquer one diseased condition makes it easier to ward off or to conquer other diseased conditions. The body cannot oppose us. It is only the bias of education and the suggestions of those about. us that we have to combat.

There is no necessity for disease. There is no necessity even for fatigue. "They that wait upon the Lord shall run and not be weary; and they shall walk and not faint." Those words from Holy Writ were meant literally--and they can be applied literally if you will govern your body by mind, and not let custom and

[p. 615]

popular belief make your body the master. Whatever it is right for you to do, you can do without fear, no matter if it entails long-continued toil, hardship or danger. Depend upon it, your mind can call to your aid all the forces of Nature if they are necessary to your emergency.

"Therefore I say unto you," quoth the Master, "take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat and the body than raiment?"

Diet, exercise and rules of health never kept any one well of themselves. Often they attract the mind to the subject of sickness and thereby foster it.

Dieting is good insofar as it prevents gluttony. Temperance is just as important in eating as in the drinking of alcoholic

[p. 616]

liquor. But you can eat in moderation anything you like, anything that you relish and BELIEVE to be good for you, without fear of its disagreeing with you.

Reasonable exercise, too, is fine for both the body and the mind. Provided you do not make a fetich of it. It isn't the exercise that keeps you well--it is the mental image you hold in your thought.

The exercise merely helps to impress that mental image on your subconscious mind.

Electrical treatments, skin tonics, alcohol rubs, etc., all are useful only to  extent that they center the attention of the subconscious mind upon the parts affected. Exactly the same results, even to that pleasant little tingling of the skin, can be effected by mind alone, I

[p. 617]

remember reading an article by Mrs. Vance Cheney, telling how she cured herself of paralysis of the legs in just that way. After lying for months under the care of doctors and masseurs, she tired of them and decided to depend entirely upon mind. So, several times a day, she would utterly relax in every nerve and muscle, then consciously send her thought down along the nerves of her legs to her feet. Presently there would be that little tingling sensation in her feet--evidence of increased circulation--followed after a time by a feeling of drowsiness. A few weeks of these treatments completely restored the use of her legs.

The same effort can be made to throw off any physical trouble. Put your hand upon the part affected. Try to visualize that organ as it should be. See it functioning

[p. 618]

perfectly. BELIEVE that it IS working normally again! Your thought brings the blood to the affected part, clears up the trouble, provides new cells, new tissue, while your belief that the organ IS functioning properly will bring about that normal condition.

This is a treatment, however, that must be used with discretion, for to consciously interfere in the regular functioning of the body without any real need for such interference results in confusion rather than help. It is like going down a flight of stairs rapidly. Pay no attention to the movement of your feet, and they flit over the steps with never a sign of hesitancy or faltering. But try to watch them step by step, and you will either have to slow up or you will presently miss a step, stumble or fall.

[p. 619]

"The centipede was happy quite,
  Until the toad, for fun,
  Said, 'Pray, which leg goes after which?'
  This stirred his mind to such a pitch,
  He lay distracted in a ditch,
    Considering how to run."

There is one rule that will help anyone keep healthy. That rule is to forget your nerves, throw away your pills and your medicine bottles, and hold before your mind's eye only the perfect image that Universal Mind has of your body. That is the surest way to keep free from sickness.

And if you are already sick, the same rule applies. Know that Universal Mind never created disease--that it is but an illusion of your conscious mind. Know that mind is the only creator, that as Shakespeare puts it, "There is nothing, either good or bad, but thinking makes it so." Know that you have the say as

[p. 620]

to what that thinking shall be. Know, therefore, that by holding a perfect image of your body in your thoughts you can make your body perfect.

Have you ever cut your finger? Who was it coagulated the blood, stopped the gash, wove new skin? Who was it called upon the little phagocytes to come and kill the septic germs?

Not your conscious mind, certainly. Most people don't even know there are "any such animals." Their conscious minds don't know the first thing about healing. Whence comes the information? Whence the directing genius? Where but from the same intelligence that keeps your heart and lungs on the job while you sleep, that regulates your liver and your kidneys, that attends to all the functions of your body?

That intelligence is your subconscious

[p. 621]

mind. With the proper co-operation on your part, your subconscious mind will attend to these duties indefinitely, keeping your every organ perfect, your every function regular as clockwork.

But it is exceedingly amenable to suggestion. Worry about sickness or contagion, hold before it the thought that you are getting old, or that some organ is becoming feeble, and it will be perfectly agreeable to bringing about the condition you suggest. Convince it that there is no danger from contagion, hold before it the thought of health and strength, and it will be just as prompt in manifesting them.

So what you must realize is this: Be-fore anything can be made, there must be a model for it in mind. Before a house can be built, there must be a plan,

[p. 622]

a blueprint from which to build. Before you were created, Universal Mind held in thought the model on which you were made. That model was perfect then--is perfect now. The only idea of you that Universal Mind knows is a perfect model, where every cell and organism is formed along perfect lines.

True, many of us have built up imperfect models in our own thoughts, but we can get rid of them just as rapidly as we get rid of the fear of them.

Your body is changing every moment. Every cell, every organism, is constantly being rebuilt. Why rebuild along the old, imperfect lines? Why not build on the lines held in the thought of Universal Mind? You CAN do it! But the essence of it lies in the words of the Master: "Whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye RECEIVE

[p. 623]

them, and ye SHALL HAVE them."

It matters not what your ailment may be. It will respond to that treatment. Suppose, as an example, that your stomach has been troubling you, that you cannot eat what you would like, that you cannot assimilate your food, that you are weak and nervous is consequence. Every morning when you awake, and every night just before you drop off to sleep say to yourself--

"My stomach has neither intelligence nor feeling. It functions only as mind directs it. Therefore I need have no worry about its being weak or diseased, for the only image that Mind knows of stomach is Its perfect image. And that perfect image can assimilate or remove anything I may put into it. It is perfect, as everything that Universal Mind makes

[p. 624]

is perfect. And being perfect, it can do anything right I may ask of it without fear or anxiety."

Concentrate on the one organ at a time, and repeat this formula to yourself night and morning. Say it, feel it, BELIEVE it--and you can do what you please with that Organ. "As thy faith is, so be it done unto thee."

"Suffer Little Children to Come Unto Me"

"I can believe all you say about my fears and worries being responsible for my own illnesses," write many people, "but how about infants and little children? They have no fear. Why do they sicken and die?"

What many people do not understand is that the subconscious mind is just as amenable to suggestion from those round

[p. 625]

about you as it is from your own conscious mind. Otherwise you would be in no danger from anything you did not consciously know of. And the more ignorant you were, the safer you would be.

Suppose, for instance, you took a draught of what you believed to be pure "bootleg" whisky, but which in reality was no more than wood alcohol. Many others have done it. Your conscious mind would expect no harm from it--any mare than did theirs. You would have no fear of the result. No more did they. So, you would say, you should experience no harm.

Yet you would probably die--or at least go blind--as have these others. Why? Because your subconscious mind would know the wood alcohol for what it is. Your own conscious belief, and the

[p. 626]

preponderance of opinion of those about you, have instilled the conviction in your subconscious mind that wood alcohol is dire poison. Therefore when you pour this poison into your system--even though you do not consciously recognize it as such--your subconscious mind proceeds to bring about the effects you would logically expect such a poison to produce.

It is the same with contagion, with the hundreds of diseases which most people scarcely know the names of, but to which they are constantly falling victims. They don't know they have been exposed to contagion. They don't know that their systems are in such condition that certain diseases logically follow. But their subconscious minds do know it. And they have so thoroughly educated those minds to believe in the necessity for ill health,

[p. 627]

in the inevitability of sickness under certain conditions, that the subconscious proceeds to work out the contagion or the condition to its logical conclusion.

Grown people can change these subconscious convictions by the proper counter-suggestions, consciously given. But young children cannot reason. They accept the beliefs that are held by the generality of mankind, or that are strongly suggested to them by those nearest to them.

That is why babies and young children fall such easy victims to the fears of disease and contagion of their parents and those about them. That is why worry over a seeming epidemic so often results in the children catching it, even when they have apparently been in no way exposed to the contagion.

"Man," says a famous writer, "often

[p. 628]

has fear stamped upon him before his en-trance into the outer world; he is reared in fear; all his life is passed in bondage of fear of disease and death and thus his whole mentality becomes cramped, limited, and depressed, and his body follows its shrunken pattern and specification. IS IT NOT  THAT HEALTH EXISTS AT ALL? Nothing but the boundless Divine Love, exuberance, and vitality, constantly poured in, even though unconsciously to us, could in some degrees neutralize such an ocean of morbidity."

But the remedy is just as simple. Know that your children are primarily children of God. That the image He holds of them is perfect. And that His perfect image has within itself every power necessary to ward off disease of any kind.

[p. 629]

Put your children actively under His care. Throw the responsibility upon Him. Depend upon it, when you do this in the right way, no harm can come near them. Whenever fear assails you, whenever your children are exposed to danger or contagion, realize that "He shall give His angels (his thoughts) charge over them, to lead them in all their ways."

If your children are sick or ailing, read these thoughts aloud to them just as though you were talking to a grown person. Only address yourself to their subconscious minds. Read over the past few pages. Repeat to them the little formula outlined above, adapting it to their own particular need. Above all, BELIEVE it! Your faith will work just as great wonders for your children as for yourself.

Never doubt. Never fear. Go at

[p. 630]

your problem just as you would approach a difficult problem in mathematics. In mathematics, you know that the problem does not exist for which you cannot find the solution, provided you follow the rules and work in the right way.

As long as you do your part, the principle of mathematics will do the rest. It is the same in all of life. Don't worry. Don't fret. Go at your problem in the right way, no matter how difficult it may seem; follow the rules herein laid down, and you can  look to the Principle of Being to bring you the answer.

L'Envoi

"The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath,

[p. 631]

and buyeth that field." This field is your own consciousness--a treasure you find within yourself--which others cannot see. But you know it for the in-dwelling Spirit--"the Father within you"--and are willing to sell all that you have because this treasure is worth more than all other possessions.

If you have begun to realize this treasure, and use it even in a small way, the most wonderful thing that can happen to anyone on this planet has happened to you. What does it mean? It means that an ordinary human being, afflicted with all the sufferings and fears and worries and superstitions of the average man, has learned the Law of Being. It means that he has acquired a power above all that of his would-be destroyers. It means that he has put his foot upon the Rock of Life, that the Doorway of Heaven is open before

[p. 632]

him, that all of Good is as free to him as the air he breathes.

"There hath not failed one word of all His good promises." "And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers, God hath fulfilled the same unto us."

Surely we have every reason to be grateful for all the good round about us. Surely we should be thankful for the infinite power that has been given to us.

And being truly grateful, by the way, is the surest evidence of real faith that there is. Faith, you know, is "the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." Remember, when Jesus raised Lazarus from the dead, how He first prayed, then thanked the Father for answering His prayer? There was

[p. 633]

not yet any material evidence that the prayer had been answered. But Jesus had perfect faith in the Father. And it was justified. Immediately He had given thanks, Lazarus came forth from the tomb!

The world today is so much more wonderful than it was to former generations. Mankind has begun to glimpse its illimitable powers. The whole world is plastic and sensitive to new ideas. The soul of man is finding itself, and learning its relation to the Infinite. The veil between the visible and the invisible is being drawn aside. Through seeing the "Father do the works," we are becoming more assured of our own power, beginning to assert "the Father that is within us." We know that, given the right understanding, the works that Jesus did we can do also. We recognize his "miracles"

[p. 634]

as divinely natural laws, part of God's continuous plan.

So let us go with Him unto the Mount of Vision, taking as our motto His words--"See that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed thee in the Mount."


    
The Secret of the Ages, by Robert Collier, [1926], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 635]

  

INDEX OF
 SCRIPTURAL REFERENCES
 AND QUOTATIONS

[p. 636] [p. 637]

  

INDEX OF
 SCRIPTURAL REFERENCES AND
 QUOTATIONS

These passages are quoted from the King James version of the Bible. Authorized, Revised, and from various modern translations.

According to your faith--Matthew 9:29, vol. ii, page <page 139>, 154; vol. iii, page <page 243>; vol. iv, page <page 271>; vol. vii, page <page 624>

Acquaint now thyself with Him--Job 22:21, vol. v, page <page 382>

All things are yours--I Corinthians 3:22, 23, vol. v, page <page 345>

All that thou commandest us--Joshua 1:16, 17, vol. v, page <page 380>

All things were made by Him--John 1:3, vol. iii, page <page 223>

And God said, Let us make man--Genesis 1:26, 27, vol. ii, page <page 96>; vol. iii, page <page 194>, <page 241>; vol. iv, page <page 364>; vol. v, page <page 462>; vol. vi, page <page 468>; vol. vii, page <page 532>

And Moses was an hundred and--Deuteronomy 34:7, vol. vi, page <page 505>

And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily--Colossians 3:23, vol. v, page <page 392>

And the second is like unto it--Matthew 22:39, vol. iv, page <page 311>

And we declare unto you glad--The Acts 13:32, 33, vol. vii, page <page 632>

[p. 638]

And when thou prayest, be not--Matthew 6:5, vol. ii, page <page 147>

Are not two sparrows sold--Matthew 10:29, 30, 31, vol. i, page <page 69>

Ask and it shall be given--Matthew 7:7, vol. iii, page <page 173>, <page 237>

Ask and ye shall receive--John 16:24, vol. iii, page <page 206>; vol. vi, page <page 476>

As a man thinketh in his heart--Proverbs 23:7, vol. iii, page <page 212>; vol. iv, page <page 301>; vol. v, page <page 457>; vol. vi, page <page 463>

As the rain cometh down and--Isaiah 55:10, vol. vi, page <page 488>

Beauty for ashes, the oil of joy--Isaiah 61:3, vol. ii, page <page 145>

Because thou hast made the Lord--Psalms 91:9, 10, 11, vol. v, page <page 381>

Before Abraham was, I am--John 8:58, vol. iv, page <page 294>

Behold I stand at the door--Revelation 3:20, vol. ii, page <page 123>

Behold, the kingdom of God--Luke 17:21, vol. i, page <page 64>; vol. ii, page <page 97>, <page 101>; vol. iii, page <page 231>; vol. v, page <page 430>; vol. vi, page <page 477>

Believe that ye receive it--Mark 11:24, vol. v, page <page 384>; vol. vi, page <page 487>

Beloved now are we the sons--I John 3:2, vol. i, page <page 57>

Be not afraid--Matthew 14:27, vol. iii, page <page 243>

Be still, and know that I am God--Psalms 46:10, vol. iv, page <page 350>

Be ye therefore perfect--Matthew 5:48, vol. vii, page <page 594>

[p. 639]

Blessed are they which do hunger--Matthew 5:6, vol. ii, page <page 130>

Blessed is the man whose delight--Psalms 1:2, 3, vol. iii, page <page 235>

But thou are the same--Psalms 102:27, vol. vi, page <page 530>

But thou, when thou prayest--Matthew 6:6, vol. ii, page <page 148>

But where shall wisdom be found?--Job 28:12, vol. v, page <page 382>

Cast thy bread upon the waters--Ecclesiastes 11:1, vol. iv, page <page 306>

Come ye to the open fountain--Revelation 7:17

Commit thy works unto the Lord--Proverbs 16:3, vol. v, page <page 407>

Consider the lilies--Luke 12:27, vol. iii, page <page 229>

Delight thyself also in the Lord--Psalms 37:4, vol. v, page <page 388>

Do men gather figs of thistles?--Matthew 7:16, vol. iv, page <page 278>

Every good gift and every perfect--James 1:17, vol. ii, page <page 145>

Except ye turn and become as--Matthew 18:3, vol. iv, page <page 294>

Faith without works--James 2:17, vol. iv, page 282; vol. vii, <page 584>

Fear not little flock--Luke 12:32, vol. iv, page <page 354>

For God made not death--Apocrypha, Book of Wisdom 1:13, 18, vol. vi, page <page 527>

For herein is the Father glorified--John 15:8, vol. iii, page <page 230>

He shall give His angels charge--Psalms 91:11, vol. vii, page <page 629>

[p. 640]

He that believeth on me--John 14:12, vol. ii, page 96; vol. iv, page <page 337>

Hewers of wood-- 9:27, vol. v, page <page 428>

Ho, every one that thirsteth--Isaiah 55:1, vol. i, page <page 70>

I came that ye might have life--John 10:10, vol. iii, page <page 233>

I can of mine own self--John 5:30, John 14:10, vol. ii, page <page 114>, <page 139>; vol. iv, page <page 282>, <page 337>; vol. v, page <page 391>

If ye have faith as a grain--Matthew 17:20, vol. ii, page <page 87>

If ye abide in me and my words--John 15:7, vol. ii, page <page 96>

If a man keep my saying, he shall--John 8:51, vol. vi, page <page 528>

I have given you power--Luke 10:19, vol. iv, page <page 291>

In all thy ways acknowledge--Proverbs 3:6, vol. v, page <page 407>

In returning and rest--Isaiah 30:15, vol. v, page <page 377>

Jacob wrestles with the angel--Genesis 34:24-26, vol. v, page <page 379>

Know ye not that ye are the temple--I Corinthians 3:16, vol. iii, page <page 204>

Know ye not that to whom ye yield--Romans 6:16, vol. vii, page <page 595>

Lazarus raised from the dead--John 11:1-44, vol. v, page 389; vol. vii, page <page 632>

Let this mind be in you--Philippians 2:5, vol. ii, page <page 125>; vol. iv, page <page 269>, <page 290>

Lo I am with you always--Matthew 28:20, vol. iv, page <page 291>

Lord that I may receive--Luke 18:41, vol. vii, page <page 573>

[p. 641]

Now he that planteth and he--I Corinthians, 3:8-9, vol. v, page <page 395>

-first Psalm--vol. iii, page <page 156>

O taste and see that the Lord--Psalms 34:8, vol. iii, page <page 166>

Prophetic sons of God--Hosea 1:10, vol. iii, page <page 205>

See that thou make all things--Hebrews 8:5, vol. vii, page <page 634>

Seek ye first the kingdom--Matthew 7:33, vol. iii, page <page 230>

Son thou art ever with me--Luke 15:31, vol. iii, page <page 250>; vol. iv, page <page 354>

Suffer the little children--Mark 10:4, vol. vii, page <page 624>

The earth is full of the--Psalms 33:5, vol. iii, page <page 166>

The earth is the Lord's--Psalms 24:1, vol. iv, page <page 356>

The Father that dwelleth in me--John 14:10, vol. iii, page <page 242>; vol. vii, page <page 631>, <page 633>

The kingdom of heaven is like--Matthew 13:44, vol. vii, page <page 630>

The loaves and fishes--Luke 9:12-17, vol. iv, page <page 356>

The manna from heaven--Exodus 16:15, vol. v, page <page 376>

The mount of Vision--Exodus 24:13, 18, vol. vii, page <page 634>

The pillar of fire--Exodus 13:21, vol. v, page <page 376>

The sea rolled back--Exodus 14:21-22, vol. v, page <page 375>

The substance of things--Hebrews 11:1, vol. iv, page <page 264>; vol. vii, page <page 632>

The thing that I greatly--Job 3:25, vol. iv, page <page 340>

The tribute money--Matthew 17:27, vol. iv, page <page 357>

The water from the rock--Exodus 17:6, vol. v, page <page 376>

The water turned into wine--John 2:1, vol. v, page <page 389>

[p. 642]

The waters which came down--Joshua 3:16-17, vol. v, page <page 380>

Therefore I say unto you--Matthew 6:31-33, vol. iii, page <page 230>; vol. vii, page <page 615>

There hath not failed one--I Kings 8:56, vol. vii, page <page 632>

There is that scattereth--Proverbs 11:24, vol. iv, page <page 308>

They that wait upon the Lord, shall win--Isaiah 40:31, vol. vii, page <page 614>

They shall obtain joy and--Isaiah 35:10, vol. iii, page <page 206>

This is life eternal--John 17:3, vol. vii, page <page 611>

This one thing I do--Philippians 3:13, vol. v, page <page 438>

Thou art of purer eyes than to behold--Habakkuk 1:13, vol. vii, page <page 590>

Thou shall love the Lord--Matthew 22:37, 38, vol. iv, page <page 311>

Thou wilt show me the path--Psalms 16:11, vol. iii, page <page 166>

Thy faith hath made thee whole--Luke 8:48, vol. vii, page <page 575>

To him that hath--Matthew 25:29, vol. ii, page <page 107>, <page 108>

To know aright is life--John 17:3, vol. v, page <page 389>

Trust in the Lord and--Psalms 37:3, vol. iv, page <page 365>

Twenty-third psalm--vol. ii, page <page 156>

Verily, verily I say unto you--John 8:51, vol. vii, page <page 611>

We shall see Him as he is--I John 3:2, vol. i, page <page 57>

What eye never saw--I Corinthians 2:9, vol. iii, page <page 206>

[p. 643]

What things soever ye--Mark 11:24, vol. ii, page <page 110>, <page 111>, <page 139>, <page 148>; vol. v, page <page 462>; vol. vi, page <page 469>; vol. vii, page <page 574>, <page 623>

What wouldst thou that I--Mark 10:51, vol. vii, page <page 573>

Where there is no vision--Proverbs 29:18, vol. iii, page <page 191>

Who hath measured the waters--Isaiah 40:12, vol. v, page <page 390>

Who healeth all thy diseases--Psalms 103:3, vol. vii, page <page 593>

Whosoever shall be great--Matthew 20:26, 27, vol. iv, page <page 312>

Whosoever liveth and believeth--John 11:26, vol. vi, page <page 528>

Whosoever shall compel thee--Matthew 5:41, vol. iv, page <page 313>

Whosoever will let him take--Revelation 22:17, vol. i, page <page 70>

With all thy getting--Proverbs 4.7, vol. i, page 70; vol. iii, page <page 175>

Work out your own salvation--Philippians 2:12, vol. iv, page <page 330>

Wouldst thou be made whole--John 5:16, vol. vii, page <page 573>

Ye shall ask what ye will--John 15:7, vol. ii, page <page 125>

Ye shall know the truth--John 8:32, vol. iv, page <page 287>, <page 294>; vol. vii, page <page 575>

Your Father knoweth that ye--Luke 12:30, vol. iii, page <page 229>

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: ttb.txt =====


     
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

  

The THUNDER BIRD "Tootooch" LEGENDS

  

FOLK TALES

  

of the

  

INDIAN TRIBES

  

of the

  

Pacific Northwest

  

Coast Indians

  

by W. L. WEBBER

  

Seattle, Wash.

  

Ace Printing Co.

  

[1936]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, March 2009. This text is in the public domain in the United States because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.

Click to enlarge
Front Cover

Click to enlarge
Back Cover: Symbols of the Thunder Bird

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
The Spider Lady and Thunder Bird and His Four Sons

[p. 5]

  

PREFACE

The object of writing the "Thunder Bird" Legends is: To induce the Indians to think about themselves and to unite and band them together in all common purposes. Although they are heirs of the ages, the mighty forces of modern democracy threaten to strip them of their wise primitive culture as it has done to almost all of the American Indian tribes:

That these tales will give the Indians courage to guard and defend themselves from those who would transgress upon their inherited rights and privileges by imbuing them with thoughts and ideals of their own.

It is also hoped they will stir within, and unfold, their artistic talents, expand and develop their abilities, enabling them to  a greater and wider mode of life.

Throughout these stories an effort has been made to tell how the Indian Tribes lived, their hospitality and friendliness; the philosophical ideas of a heroic race of nature-loving people.

It is expected that the legends will be criticised by the Indians themselves as well as by others who have a greater knowledge than the writer has , but he nevertheless hopes that they will be accepted in the spirit in which they are dedicated.

THE AUTHOR

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

[p. 7]

  

FOREWORD

The Thunder Bird "TOOTOOCH" Legends have been written to explain the more important of the single objects carved on totem poles and other articles connected with totemism and the secret societies of the Northwestern Indian tribes. The legends tell how individuals as well as the tribes earned their crests as tokens of achievement and distinction. These stories have been passed down by word of mouth from time immemorial.

For years the writer has received inquiries regarding the totemic designs of poles and basketry, and, in and effort to satisfy them, he traced the Thunder Bird Legend. First published in a stamp-size booklet that has had a circulation of 275,000 copies, it so excited the imagination of the tourists invading the Northwest that the Indians could not keep up with the demand for totemic objects.

The designs in his book are from original drawings and carvings on totem poles at present in the possession of the author. They are the work of primitive-minded Indians of artistic ability, the most notable being Charlie James (Yakuglas of the Kwakiutls of Alert Bay). Other carvers have unknowingly contributed their truly excellent craftsmanship to this work, Jacob Louie and Herbert Francis of Nootka, and Titus Campbell of Port Essington being among them.

The stories have been collected during the past ten years from various Indian tillicums, and some have been taken from the works of Boas and Staunton, published by the American Museum of Natural History, New York City. These works were obtained through the courtesy of Mr. T. P. O. Menzies of the Vancouver City Museum, to whom the author wishes to express deep gratitude, as well as to other members of the Museum staff.

Charlie James and those like him are endeavoring to preserve the arts of their people. In all too much of Indian craftsmanship the influence of the white man has corrupted the primitive conception of art:  painting cannot cover poor workmanship. The Department of Indian Affairs could do much to re-educate the Indian along these lines by freely exhibiting collections of  old craftsmanship to the rising generation. The work of Charlie James, besides being on view in Stanley Park, Vancouver, and Lincoln Park, Chicago, has won an honored place in the collections of many noted collectors, including the Emperors of Japan and Siam. Under his guidance some famous mortuary posts have been reconstructed, and his present position of Instructor in the Art of Carving to the pupils of the Government Indian School, is one to which he is eminently suited.

The author is indebted to Anna Wilson, a Haida Indian. for one of the folk tales of her people, and also to Oscar Peers of the King-come Inlet Band for the Legend of the Cod Fish. The description of the Thunder Bird Totem Pole of Stanley Park was contributed by Elline Newman of Alert Bay.

It was originally intended that this work should be profusely illustrated in color by the excellent drawings of Mr. B. Slaughter, but it has been again found necessary to bring out this edition in a cheap and popular form, with black and white illustrations.

[p. 8]

THE LEGENDS

EXPLAINS THE TOTEM SYMBOLS

These Legends are the key to the most important single objects carved on Totem Poles and used in decorative arts of the Indian Tribes of the Pacific Northwest.

To the Indians who have adorned me with Knowledge Beyond Dreams

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

INDEX

          Preface

       5

     
      Foreword

       7

     
      The Transition of Totemism

       11

     
      Indian Baskets

       14

     
      The Aristocratic Aborigines

       18

     
      Stick Game

       19

     
      "Tootooch", The Thunder Bird

       20

     
      "Eena", The Beaver

       22

     
      "Ol-Hiyo", The Seal

       23

     
      "Kutze-ce-te-ut", The Wood Worm

       24

     
      "Kee-War-Kow", The Sun

       25

     
      "Sisuith or Se-Sook", The Two Headed Snake

       26

     
      "The Ill-Jow"

       27

     
      "Ho-Xhox" (Ho-Hook), The Crane

       28

     
      "Shwah Kuk", The Frog

       29

     
      "Chee-Che-Ka", The Mink

       30

     
      "Le-Loo", The Wolf

       31

     
      "Wolalee", The Salmon

       32

     
      "Chet-Woot", The Bear

       33

     
      "Men-a-Mooks", The Otter Spirit

       34

     
      "Pi-Chikamin", The Gift Copper

       35

     
      "Property Woman"

       36

     
      "Slag'ame", The Butterfly

       37

     
      "Shaman", The Medicine Man

       38

     
      "Chak-Chak", The Eagle

       39

     
      "Kwel-Kwel", The Owl

       40

     
      "Skam-m", The Halibut

       41

     
      "Welala", The Mountain Spirit

       42

     
      "Quil-Tum-Tum"

       43

     
      "Kwaie'tek", The Sea Gull

       44

     
      "Mateeh", The Goat

       45

     
      "Skana", The Black Fish

       46

     
      "He'-e-tlik", The Lightning Snake

       47

     
      "Eh-Kolie", The Whale

       48

     
      "The Young Raven"

       49

     
      "Kuuma", The Bull Head

       50

     
      "Gal-Quith", The Cod Fish

       51

     
      "Maht-Maht", The Duck

       52

     
      "Qa-Yel", The Great Raven

       53

     
      The Thunder Bird Totem Pole

       54

     
      The Shadow People and The Raven

       56

     
      Chief Sisa-Kaules Totem Pole

       58

     
      Tum Tum's Dream 

       59

     
      Siwash Rock

       62

     
      The Thunder Bird Totem Pole, Stanley Park

       64

     
   
      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10]

[p. 11]

  

THE TRANSITION OF TOTEMISM

When the early explorers, Captain Cook and the Fur Trader, Captain John Mears, sailed the seas of the Pacific Northwest, a great deal of their time was spent on the West Coast of Vancouver Island at Nootka, then known as "Friendly Cove," where the early ships of the Spanish Dons chanced to touch.

The early adventurers observed that the aborigines practiced what they thought to be a hitherto unknown religion, having many weird rituals and ceremonies and requiring a grotesque regalia representing the supernatural animals and birds. This religion has since been identified as Totemism.

Totemism was created in the pre-historic age by the fathers of organized society and improved as the mentality of the human race developed. When ancient hunting had ceased, the tribes formed themselves into fishing communes, out of which rose private property, social classes and slaves, thereby creating the custom of barter. This first transition of mankind  thousands of years ago in Europe, Asia and Africa. The records of these first human movements are given in stone on the Upper Nile and in the temples of India. It is hard to imagine in these modern times, when civilization is supposed to be at a high peak, that the Indians of the Northwest and other North American Indians, were so belated. The transitions of the human race are slow, they have many setbacks. Totemistic societies still function in many other parts of the world, as among the native tribes of Australia, Korea, and even in modern Japan.

The functions of the Totemism of the Indians of the Pacific Northwest and, especially, the British Columbia, represent many aspects. The first Totemic Symbol was supposed by the ancestors of these tribes to have floated to their shores from some unknown source. On it were perched three crows to guide it through the troubled waters of remote seas. The Indians also believed that when their forefathers were first placed upon the earth it was essential that they should marry their kith and kin, but they later discovered that if they were to continue this practice their race would decay. This was arrested by forbidding the members of the same family to mate, being blood relations. From this sprung totemism, functioning with its clans and their many septs. Among the Haidas, the seat of the culture, there came into being the Sky People and the Ocean People. From the Sky People came the Raven (Thunder Bird among other tribes), and the Eagle. From these came the septs embracing the Sun, Sky, Stars, the Moon and Birds and the Grandmother, the first Creator. From the Ocean People sprang the creatures that live in the water: Blackfish (Killer Whale), Codfish, Halibut, Salmon, Seal and Sea Otter, as well as many supernatural animals that were supposed to live beneath the sea. These latter are so grotesque that they seem to have stepped out of the preglacial ages of the dinosaurs. Around these symbols were created their culture and legends. They preserved them by carving them on their implements of daily use,

[p. 12]

also painting them in their interiors of their lodges, as they had not arrived mentally at the point of devising a method of inscribing this history on monuments or on the written page.

Prior to the time when the Indians came in contact with the Europeans, there were no outside Totem Poles or elaborate carvings. These were only achieved by the advent of iron tools, the culture therefore reached its height between 1860 and 1900. Indian villages of British Columbia then became veritable forests of totem poles, there being from ten to fifty erected in each locality. After 1900 the culture slowly declined on account of the Indian Act of the Dominion, which governs Indian affairs, and which forbids Potlatch Gatherings. The Clergy also prevailed upon the Indians saying: "There is only one true God." Hundreds of totems were cut down and burned. Some of the tribesmen deplored the destruction of these relics of art. Many of the grotesque and hideous monsters of their imagination were saved by collectors and found their way to museums throughout the world. At present there is not an Indian settlement of the North Pacific Coast that can show much of its former splendour. Due to the prohibition of Potlatches, which curtails their rites and feasts, the Indian's secret orders are now the almost forgotten glory of a changing race.

Of the aborigines of the Northwest there were only five tribes that carved Totem Poles, these were in Southeast Alaska and British  and comprised the Haidas, Tsimshians, Bella Coola, Kwakitutl and Nootka. There are various kinds of Totem Poles, they can not all be treated fully in this book: Family poles, Tribal Totems, and House Posts. The latter are used to support the heavy beams in community or private houses. They are from ten to twelve feet in height and composed of two or three objects such as Thunder Bird, Bear and a Slave (Two examples are to be seen in Stanley Park, Vancouver) or whatever was the owner's crest. Tribal Totem Poles are the mythological history which would embrace forms of , charms, evil spirits, legends and witchcraft. This would also apply to family Totems, which would also be inscribed with the individual's greatness gained through potlatches or by heredity and which were generally erected by the nephew of the deceased, the next in line of inheritance.

This passing of the inheritance to the nephew, may at first glance, appear an injustice to his son, but when we take into consideration the fact that primitive people simply do not recognize male parentage, tracing all their  through the female side, it is not an unreasonable arrangement. Any man may not be able to swear that his wife's son is his own, but he can certainly swear that his sister's son is his nephew. Again, we must remember that the son may have even better prospects as heir to his mother's brother.

The carving and erection of a totem pole was a very complicated and expensive undertaking, the carving alone, in some cases, costing as much as two thousand dollars and requiring months of labor. The carving of a Totem Pole for the deceased was generally looked after by the brother, in the interests of the nephew. The brother would

[p. 13]

consult the relatives who would discuss the matter fully, giving him the privilege of employing the carvers and selecting the cedar tree. This wood endures the elements longer than any other native timber. The neighboring tribes would then be invited to a potlatch which would last from two to three weeks. Food would be supplied to the guests. A great feast (gift feast) would take place accompanied by many dances and ceremonies and a general jollification. Useful presents would be distributed. In modern times it might be a blanket, a stove, a sewing machine or money. To each of the invited guests such enormous amounts would be given that the tribe or family would often be impoverished and become public charges. Some of these potlatches have been known to cost as much as $15,000.

The mythological art of the North Pacific Coast Indians is one of the most grotesque and beautiful of any of the native tribes if the North American Continent. The symmetrical lines and circles add tone throughout. One wonders how the primitive mind was capable of finding so many ways to add harmony and balance to each curve. Here and there was added the ever-seeing eye, it was carved or painted on utensils or tools or in the many different designs, for did not the eye have to see what was to be accomplished? Some of the eyes, including the human eye, are inserted in the body of the figure.

The Totem's symbols are never overlooked and are bound to excite the interest of the most casual observer. The small wooden, and more especially the slate Totem Poles, are also remarkable on account of the fantastic overlapping methods applied to each symbol without destroying its identity, but more often adding interest at some spot that at first seems to portray no significance. A cunning twist in the carving makes it perfect. Supernatural beings are always cut in such a way as to expose the tips of their ears, signifying that they lived as people on earth when it was in semi-darkness, before the light burst forth from the heavens through the aid of the Young Raven.

The transition of the primitive aboriginal from a state, of cannibalism and barbarism to the democracy of the white man has been such a severe shock that they have lost a generation of activity. It is only of recent years that they have become interested enough in themselves to carry on the arts and crafts of their fathers. The older people have kept the fires of memory burning by telling the deeds of the past to the younger generation, thereby stimulating the desire to carve again, but this time, up to the present, only to the extent of making small wooden totem poles for strangers who visit their villages. Most of the totems purchased are a mere confusion of carving, one object on top of another, giving the totem no special significance. To obtain a story pole with the story, would be almost impossible as it would be beneath the dignity of a Chief to carve and sell his own coat-of-arms. Other Indians would be ridiculed should they attempt to exploit the crest of another. The only one who is allowed to exercise that privilege is the reputable professional carver, retained to carve for the members of the tribe.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

INDIAN BASKETS

For ages there have been a great many Indian tribes living on the sheltered inlets and along the rivers that reach far into the heart of the mountain ranges of the Pacific Northwest. All tribes make their own particular kind of baskets for their domestic needs. The use of clay was unknown to them, although it could have been obtained in many localities. Therefore, the Indians gathered and fabricated the materials that were close at hand.

The tribes of the upper Fraser regions fashioned their baskets for daily use from birch-bark and split willows. The Thompsons, who inhabit the bench lands along the Fraser Canyon, made their baskets of cedar roots, splitting them into ribbons of uniform size and winding them around splints left over from the former process. Straight strips of the same material are used for sewing, a bone needle being used for this purpose.

The basket is built up on the spiral principal. They were made in many sizes and many shapes, to suit all needs, there were burden baskets, water buckets, cooking pots, trays, and those for the storing of food and clothing. A handy one was made for the purpose that could be laid flat or carried on the back, or hung on the branch of a tree.

Cooking was done by putting water in the cooking pot and then adding hot stones. A cover, made to fit, was put on and it was allowed to stand until the food was cooked. Trays were used as plates, to fan the fire and to dry berries on, by laying them in the sun. Many of the baskets show very little wear after fifty years of use.

The handicraft of the Thompsons was in great demand among the other Indian tribes and was traded and bartered for with buckskin hides, , and other useful commodities. There are no other Indian tribes of North America who have the technique or wealth of design of the Thompsons. One is amazed that straight lines can be arranged in so many hundreds of ways to make geometrical figures. The decorations are done with cat-tail flags and the bark of the wild cherry, either dyed or in the natural color. Basket designs were inherited. When a new one was created it belonged to the family and was never copied by others.

In this generation the younger Thompsons are being torn between two paths: the white man's civilization and their own. It is doubtful if they will carry on their ancestral art. It is true that the baskets they make at present are not so well done as those of earlier times, for the soul of the weaver is not in her art, the object being compensation only. Old Thompson baskets are very difficult to secure and are quite valuable, having been made by the older women whose work is in great demand by collectors. In Germany and other European countries, many British Columbia Indian basket designs serve to decorate textiles and other articles.

The Indians living close to salt water were also stone boilers but they did not depend on baskets so much for their cooking. They

[p. 15]

fashioned wooden boxes out of boards by an ingenious method and also hollowed out pieces of alder and other hard woods to serve their needs. Tree trunks, often ten feet in length, were used, in many cases for feast bowls. These were  carved with the owner's crest and inlaid with coast abalone shells. The boxes were made by grooving a board in three places on one side, then placing it in a ground trench filled with hot rocks over which water was poured to produce steam. A covering of cedar mats was used to confine the vapor. When the board was thoroughly steamed, it was bent at the grooves to right angles, thus forming a perfect square. The ends were fastened together with wooden pegs. A grooved bottom was then pegged on, making the box water-tight. Boxes of this kind were made for many purposes. When an Indian speaks of his "box", he means an elaborately carved and painted chest containing the regalia of the clan of which he is a member. Some day it will probably be used to put his body in after the toil of life is over.

The Indians who live on Vancouver Island, the surrounding islands and in the neighboring State of Washington, make their baskets out of the same materials as their ancestors. The grasses used are gathered from the tide flats of the lagoons. They are dried and bleached in the sun and seasoned by hanging them up in the rafters of their houses. The material is then colored as desired with  dyes, whereas, in former times, they made their own dyes from vegetables and mineral substances.

Among the handiwork of the Nootka women it is very seldom that any two baskets can be found exactly alike. There are so many hundreds of border designs. These are attractive and, in every case, the lid matches the body of the basket.

The grass is woven around bottles of all shapes and sizes, made into shopping bags, mats and handy trinket baskets and other articles which strike the Indian's fancy. These articles are of intriguing beauty, decorated in brilliant colors with pictographs from their folk tales, some of which are told and illustrated in these pages. This basket work is eagerly sought by souvenir hunters who wish to carry away with them, as a memento of their visit, something made in British Columbia. Many, but of course not all, can buy from the Indian women themselves. If this cannot be done they can be obtained from stores specializing in such things and which usually give the printed story of the design. They are also secured by the residents of these regions to send to their friends over-seas and elsewhere.

The Haidas of the Queen Charlotte Islands, their kin in Alaska and the related Tsimshians were the most cultured tribes among the Coast Indians. Intercourse with the "Paleface" has greatly modified the trend of their genius. The baskets have suffered as well as the weaving of beautiful woolen cloth of exceptional fineness. Although slate totem poles and coin silver work have been improved considerably in the last decade or so, this art is now on the decline. The older workers of these arts are joining the spirits of their ancestral totems.

[p. 16]

The basket work of each tribe varied, the Haidas originally made theirs in a bird-cage weave, using them for berrying, packing, crab nets and other purposes. These forms were also used by the Kwakiutls. At present they make their baskets mostly out of spruce roots, whereas, at one time, cedar bark was used more extensively. This fiber was made into cord, rope and matting, a material that all the Northwest tribes used. The spruce root baskets are very sturdy, the warp runs straight up instead of at an angle like that of the Nootka baskets. They are decorated with geometrical symbols in colors with a straw-like grass, some of them resembling the Greek Key. The designs are woven on the outside of the basket and never show through.

The Tsimshians made baskets of a similar weave to the Haidas but depended more on the cedar bark for material, though they have adopted the spruce root fiber in late years. Their older types were very rough and crude and are a great contrast, considering that the women folk of all tribes have such capable hands, doing their work with such beauty and loving care.

The Yak-utats of the Thlin-gets, who live along the Alaskan waterways, have a legend that the first basket was made in Skyland by the wife of the Sun, who had such a large family of children that she wished to place them on the Earth. One day she began to weave a basket of spruce roots with a long cord attached so that her children could be let down in to the world below. The Sun gazed proudly at his wife and her work, of which she soon became master, then teacher. Between them they wove a strong, flexible basket that was richly decorated with  angular shapes of the Shining-Heavens-People.

The art and technique of basket making is gradually being improved by these simple children of nature. The materials for their weaving are collected in the early Spring when the sap begins to flow. At that time the bark is more easily removed from the root without its being injured. This requires great skill and practice. A specially shaped knife is used for the task which is generally done by the older and more experienced women. Grasses for decorating the baskets are picked in early summer before they mature. It is split and bleached in the sun, it is then dipped in boiling water and dyed in various colors. There are six different weaves as well as forty shapes. They are quite pliable and will endure hard use for years. When new the baskets are a beautiful cream that, in time, changes to a brownish shade. The Thlin-gets take great care with their patterns and handle them admirably.

The Attu women who live on the Island of Attu, one of the Aleutians, that chain of islands along the Great Circle of the Ocean's Highway to the Orient, have the reputation of making the finest woven baskets of all the Northern Indians. These are made from a grass collected at the end of summer. A thin strip is taken off the center rib with a needle and then is tested for its strength and color. The grass is seasoned by putting it in a cloth bag hung up in the house until ready for use. The baskets are made in a twining weave as fine as sewing and,

[p. 17]

being of such texture that it is supposed by some that the Attu baskets are woven under water. One lady tourist, so it is reported, could not understand how the Indians could sit beneath the cold, cold water and weave baskets. Such is not the case, the grass is merely kept damp with water to keep it from becoming brittle while being woven.

If you are not already a collector of Indian basket work you will find it an absorbing hobby. You cannot help but think of these women sitting in their humble homes through the long rainy days and nights, telling tales to their children and other listeners, weaving the patterns and symbols that are to be passed on to strangers who will probably never know their real meanings. Some tell the stories of their legendary heroes and others the joys and sorrows of the weaver. The Indians think that their white brothers are queer people. They get a great deal of amusement out of observing the tourist while the tourist is absorbed in observing them. There is one language that all the Indians know: "Buy Basket" "Cheap, Cheap," "Some Clothes," "Some Money."

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

THE ARISTOCRATIC ABORIGINES

The Indians of the Northwest Coast had a method of binding the head of the growing infant with leather thongs, fastened to a flat board. This caused the skull to decrease in diameter and make it grow out behind, giving the effect shown by the Kloochman in the picture. These cone-like heads were a mark of distinction and were not permitted to other than the children of freemen. This custom prevailed among some of the tribes until thirty-five years ago. Indians now living have the so-called sugar-loaf heads, one of the last marks from their barbarian ancestors.

The labret was also used by members of these tribes. It had several forms, the most popular being a piece of flat wood, grooved around the edge and inserted in a hole below the lower lip. When it was in use the lip was held out firm and straight but when it was taken out the lip fell down into place so that the tongue could be thrust through the opening, creating the impression among early explorers that the people had two mouths.

The natives  the body as well as painting their faces with the symbols of their clan. Tattooing was generally applied on the backs of the arms and on the front of the legs, less frequently than on other parts of the body. The painting on their faces was done at potlatch feasts and was the identification mark of the clan or sept to which the individual belonged. Many older Totem Pole figures of men carry the facial markings, a custom that is now dying out.

The Indian woman shown in the frontispiece is weaving grass baskets. She is sitting on a cedar mat and wearing a double woven cape-like garment, made from the same material. Capes of this kind are still in use on Vancouver Island. They are very useful in the rainy season. With them the natives wear a flat, round hat, this also sheds the water. The chronicles of Captain Vancouver and other early voyagers, recorded that much of the clothing used by these uncivilized people was made of root fibers interwoven with the woolly hair of dogs which were bred for the purpose; these dogs, also used for food, are now extinct.

The Indians along the coast secured their food from the adjacent waters and were not land travellers. They did not use footwear of any kind either in summer or winter. In the cold weather these primitive people clothed themselves in garments of such value that the early adventurers chanced the hazards of the seven seas to barter for them. A small piece of iron often sufficed to buy a sea-otter hide or cloak, to be sold in China or American ports for a hundred dollars or more. These sea mammals have since been exterminated. A specimen of one may be seen in the Provincial Museum in Victoria.

Returning to the picture again: the Indian woman has to use a model of probably the original "Rock-a-bye-baby-in-the-tree-top." When the papoose frets, the cord is pulled with her toe. The wooden cradle then swings up and down and then to and fro. The house is decorated with the Black Fish (Killer Whale) Crest, showing that the inmate is a member of that clan, a sept of the Ocean people.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

STICK GAME

Among the aborigines of these regions gambling was one of the ruling passions. Although they had dice and throwing games, the most popular was the stick game. Each tribe had its own method of marking the sticks as well as of playing the game. Some were games of chance where luck prevailed; others required skill and the art of self-control.

Their games helped them in many ways to protect themselves from the forces of nature and from their enemies. They developed their powers of observation, trained the eye and hand. All these accomplishments stood them in good stead when attacked by the enemy with spear or club. A quick twist of the body or a movement of the hand or arm enabled them to ward off a fatal blow, thus saving their lives and often overcoming their antagonists as well.

Stick games were played in many ways. One game, "Le-hal", was played with thirty to fifty sticks of bone or wood from four to six inches in length. Each stick was marked with a symbol denoting its value. The players, sometimes as many as twenty, took their positions opposite each other. The sticks were divided among the players who covered them with a blanket, pieces of bark, or grass. A captain was appointed for each side. The player then took two sticks of different values and began to switch them from hand to hand with such lightning speed that it would puzzle the observer as to which hand held the winning stick. This was accompanied by the beating of drums or the rattle of deer's hoofs tied together and a rhythm of song. Oftentimes the spectators would join in the noise, making it harder for the one who was doing the guessing to control his emotions and judge the facial expressions of his opponent. If the stick was guessed rightly, it was then tossed over to the winner. If not, the guesser paid one himself.

There were many other games: dice, made of the curved teeth of the beaver. These were divided with threads of sinew and marked with dots between each strand.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

THE THUNDER BIRD

The Thunder Bird is the crest of the Raven Clan. It is not a mere idol, but a powerful, mystic emblem having its origin among the native tribes of British Columbia. The Medicine men and other members of these tribes believe that the Thunder Bird is a powerful god, under whose protection come brotherhood, peace plenty and goodwill. He is the Sagalie Tyee (Creator God), and when he flaps his wings and blinks his eyes it rains and the storm rages; thus the evil spirits are driven to the , high, mountain ranges.

Keep this emblem always and you will be under the protection of the Thunder Bird wherever you may be. It will bring you the best that life has to offer; your business dealings will prosper, the course of your love will run smooth, and goodwill toward your fellow creatures will fill your heart and will be returned a hundredfold.

This symbol is protected by numerous members of the clan scattered throughout this land and the possession of it, or the presence of a likeness of it in your house, will enable your fellow members to know you at sight wherever you may meet them. They are people whose sense of humor is strong, their hospitality is unlimited, they are jealous of the glory of this brotherhood and all the emblem stands for and will go far and do much for a Tillicum. Hyiu-Tillicum (Much Friend) is the password.

As a member of the Thunder Bird Fellowship you must resolve to live an upright and honorable life, distinguishing your name and yourself by Mamook (Good Works). Siam (The Bear) will come to your aid and give you strength and wisdom to paddle your own Camin (Canoe).

Seek out the silent places, ramble among the works of nature and gaze upon the sky and the green earth and so you will talk with Sagalie Tyee (The Great Spirit) who lives everywhere, in the trees, in the flowers, in the sun and wind, in the blades of grass, in the Skookum Chuck (Rivers) and in the Salt Chuck (Sea).

Live a simple life and waste not, for what cannot be used today can be held for tomorrow. Be clean in mind and body for if you are

[p. 21]

not, Tootooch (Thunder Bird) will be vexed with you, shaking his wings in thunder and flashing his eyes in lightning to show his anger.

Strive always for reputation for generosity of word and deed. Potlatch (give), that you may receive. Be kind and just, affectionate to children and to the aged and infirm. Make your word your bond. Call upon Siam (The Bear) for aid in helping you deal rightly by your tillicums and fellowmen.

Let the words "Put yourself in his place" be your guiding principle of conduct at all times.

Follow the rules and spread glory and reputation of the Raven Clan.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

Eena, THE BEAVER

The Beaver, the supernatural giant of extraordinary intelligence was captured and adopted by Kilisnu of the Kicksetti People. The Beaver was greatly respected for he could live longer under water than any other animal. He dwelt in a house in Salmon Lake which was so cunningly constructed that no one was ever able to enter. It was Beaver who showed the Indians how to make Salmon Weir. He also cut two spears with beautiful handles with his sharp teeth. When he was not using these to spear salmon he hid them in a hollow log. One day the spears were found by three members of the tribe, who used them with such results that they were able to give a bountiful supply of salmon to all inhabitants of their village.

They showed the spears to the village Chief, Kilisnu, claiming to have made them and to have given them great magic. But Beaver said: "I made them." This caused great confusion to the other claimants who became very jealous of Beaver as well as of each other. Then they mocked the Beaver and ridiculed him and made him the butt of their jokes, all the time keeping out of the way of his sharp teeth. At last Beaver got so angry that he took up one of the magic spears and threw it at the Chief, killing him and many others. Then he went to his floating house in the middle of Salmon Lake and in four days dug a tunnel under the Indian village, undermining the houses so that they sank into a pool. Those of the tribesmen who survived were forever after allowed to use the Beaver on their crest and so his crest has been used down the ages by many tribes through inter-marriage.

Beaver is nearly always shown gnawing his magic spear with his sharp teeth. Because of his industry he is almost always associated with Raven (Thunder Bird) on Totem Poles. He is also carved on the popular Kicksetti Totem Pole at Juneau.

There are other legends of the Beaver that tell of how the Indians acquired their crests by more honorable means than this story indicates.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

Ol-Hiyo, THE SEAL

The Seal Society among the Kwakiutls was one of the most important of their dancing and drama-acting bodies at their Winter feasts. Among the younger members of the tribe it was their first step to initiation into the higher orders.

There is no other animal that lives in the sea that is more useful to the Indian than the Seal. It furnishes a large amount of meat and fat and could be used for making clothing and blankets. Its intestines could be used for making floats, for nets and for many other purposes. Being t mid, it could be approached easily on the rocky islands or on sand bars close to where rivers emptied into the Salt Chuck (Sea).

The seals flesh was used at important feasts, the most tender and desirable parts being reserved for the highest guest. Therefore the seal symbol was used mostly for the decoration of the Indian's dishes and cooking vessels. These were sometimes ornamented, in many cases with coast abalone shells.

The Kwakiutl have a legend that at one time the Thunder Bird came to a man's house close to a river's mouth. Near by, on the rocks, was a herd of seal sleeping. Tootooch (Thunder Bird), with a rough club, killed them all. Building himself a fire he heated stones and upon these placed the seals to roast. After they had all been consumed he was still hungry. He borrowed the man's boat and seal spear and returned with four more seals. Rebuilding the fire he placed them on the rocks to cook so that he could carry them away with him. Close by was a big cedar stump. Thunder Bird said to the Stump, "Don't you wish you had some?" And then, he went into the woods for some skunk-cabbage leaves in which to wrap the seal meat. While he was gone, the Stump moved over and sat upon the seals which Thunder Bird had been cooking. When Thunder Bird came back and saw what the Stump had done he was so angry that he cried and cursed, as he was afraid he would get very hungry before he found any more seals.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

  

Kutze-ce-te-ut, THE WOOD WORM

The Wood Worm legend is a very important incident to the tribes affiliated with the Haidas of the Queen Charlotte Islands and the Mainland of British Columbia.

A daughter of a Chief had entered her maha-pil-pil (period of puberty) and was kept hidden behind a screen, not being allowed to come in contact with any other member of the tribe other than her own family for fear that she would make them lose their luck. Nor was she allowed to go near the river for fear that she would gaze on the salmon and that they would turn back, thus bringing hardship upon the tribe through their not being able to secure the fish for food. It was also believed that a girl at this stage of womanhood possessed great magical power.

One day, while putting wood on the fire, a stick kulakula (wood worm) fell from the bark. She picked it up carefully and wrapped it in a blanket. She took the worm to her sleeping place and offered it some food but it would not eat. Then she offered it her breast. From then on it grew very rapidly. She fondled her worm as if it was her own child, keeping it secreted behind the food boxes. Her mother, noticing her continual absences, came upon her fondling the worm which had grown as big as a man.

The Chief was called to look and was greatly amazed as he had never seen such a thing before. He held a consultation with the daughter's uncle. Her uncle invited her to his house for a special dish of food, much to her liking, and while she was eating he stole away to look at the wood worm. That evening the people were called together and they were told of the monster. They were told that the food and grease boxes were emptied at such a rate that soon the tribe would be on the verge of starvation and that it might give them some fatal disease. The following day the girl was again asked to her uncle's house and when she was away the men of the village took their long sharp fish spears and killed the object of their fear. When the girl returned to her apartment she found the elf dead. She cried bitterly, accusing the people of slaying her child. She then sang songs about Kutze-ce-te-ut until she died of grief.

In commemoration of this event the descendants of this girl's family display the figure of  as the crest of  ancestors. A totem pole with a carving of a Wood Worm is difficult to secure. It is more often found engraved on the native silver work.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 25]

  

Kee-War-Kow, THE SUN

This symbol belongs to the Shining Heavens, the town of the Sky People. It is the clan totem of the Tsimshians, living along the Nass and Skeena Rivers. The Indians have legends of the influence of the Sun upon their predecessors who lived in a rich mountain valley abundant in game and fruits and rivers which teemed with salmon.

In the Skyland there were the houses of the Sun, Moon, Stars and the Rainbow. Living within the Rainbow House was the Son of the Sun, the Creator of the Sunbeams. In the other houses lived the Smoke Kloochman (Cloud Woman), the Fair-Weather Woman, The power of Sleep Woman, the Hiyu-wind Kloochman (Storm Woman), Woman Watch Her Husband and the Story Woman. These are all the Grandmothers of Indian mythology.

Sun controlled the destinies of the Indians and was looked upon as the Creator of the Universe. In this house it was perpetual sunlight and the light was controlled for the use of mortals by opening and closing the great doors in the East and the West.

A great well called the Well of Sickness and Death went down from Skyland to the Earth. When the cover of the well was removed, the inhabitants of the earth were seen below whose spirits, after death, were drawn up the well into the celestial regions. Then the good and evil spirits are separated by burning them in the fires of life. The ashes were then cast to the Earth to be reincarnated in unborn souls.

Sun revealed to the Indians the arts of the chase and gaming. as Sun was a gambler. He also gave them Nanitsh (insight) into the natures of the animals of the wilds, which enabled them to hunt with success. He hardened them for the labor of life, taught them how to erect their fishing weirs and traps, to acquire stores of salmon by spearing them from the walls of steep canyons. Sun taught the womenfolk the crafts of the household, the weaving of clothing from the wool of the mountain goat and from cedar bark and the preserving of food.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

Sisuith or Se-Sook, THE TWO-HEADED SNAKE

Among the clan legends of the Northwest Indians at Alert Bay, one of the most important is that of Sisuith or Se-Sook.

Sisuith was a fabulous double-headed, horned, Oluk (Snake) with his heads one at each end. In the middle there was a human head with two protruding horns. This Ta-mah-no-us oluk (mystic snake) had the power to assume the shape of a fish and it was said that when he swam in the rivers he was measuring the life of the people.

The penalty of seeing, touching or eating Sisuith was a horrifying death. The joints of the victim were dislocated and the body bent backwards until the head touched the heels. Wherever Sisuith's pil-pil (blood) touched the skin of a human being, it turned to stone.

The ancestors of the Indians possessed  Skookum (power) and were favored by . If they possessed a belt made of his cast-off skin they were capable of performing magical feats such as turning Sisuith into a canoe which could move very rapidly through the water with the aid of its powerful fins. The eyes could be used as slinging stones with disastrous effect against their enemies.

The Houses of these mythical people had Sisuith carved on their cross-beams and when visitors entered the tongues of the serpent would constantly wag.

These symbols are used by clan members today in the ornamenting of their houses and articles of daily use. They are also carved on their Totem Poles.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

The Ill-Jow

The Ill-Jow is a hand-hammered amulet of pil chickamin (Native Copper) or of a silver coin held together with a thread of sinew or cotton through the small holes in the flange of the charm.

The Ill-Jow comes from the Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands, British Columbia. It is a symbol of the Spirit of Theft, a bringer of good fortune to its owner. The spirit would oft-times get behind a person's back and cunningly make a thief or robber out of his victim. To ward off this spirit and curtail his desire, the victim, possessing the "Good Medicine" Charm, would be guided in the paths of uprightness. If strict attention were paid to the charm it would overcome the evil. If this was done the victim was assured of prosperity and great riches would be his.

The Ill-Jow must come into the possession of the owner by theft. When obtained it is to be stuffed with threads, hair, bits of blanket or other small articles pilfered from others. The stuffed charm should be hidden among one's personal belongings, clothing or such, although it may be carried on the person. It should not be used for adornment and should be carried in a small bag for the purpose to prevent its coming under the human vulgar gaze. The Ill-Jow is to be resurrected occasionally and petitioned to give it Skookum (Strength and Courage) to promote the success of any project that is toward. The charm must be guarded with the utmost secrecy. Among the Indians who harbor this amulet it is considered a disgrace to let the other members of the tribe know, or even surmise that the "Medicine Charm" has been adopted. Once the charm has been secured it can never be passed to another to be disposed of. It should be thrown into a body of water or dropped into a deep well.

To gain possession of this talisman have some unsuspecting person barter for it or purchase it as for himself.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

  

Ho-Xhok, (HO-HOOK), THE CRANE

Among the Kwakiutl Indians, the Ho-Xhok was recognized as a fabulous bird, and always associated with the Thunder Bird. Ho-Xhok is represented as having a beak similar to that of a crane. This supernatural bird was the size of a man and could change herself into a human being by the power of his will. She is often placed with the Thunder Bird on the Totem Poles. At the Winter ceremonies of the Indian secret societies, this character would be portrayed with the utmost care. A great many rehearsals would be held in order to make the performance as realistic as possible and deceive the audience by sleight of hand.

The mask of the Ho-Xhok used at these winter feasts was made of red cedar, three to four feet in length. From it hung wooden carvings of human skulls on strips of cedar bark. In addition, the wearer would have on a cedar bark neck ring, cedar bark cuffs and leggings, a breach clout and a Chilkat blanket.

A legend of the tribes affiliated with the Kwakiutls gives this version: A number of women went to a nearby island to dig fern roots and the tender sprouts for food. While they were there a small fire was made to warm some dried whale meat. The smell of it and the human odor attracted the attention of Ho-Xhok who was as the top of a tall tree. As he came down he sharpened his beak on the bark of the branches. Upon reaching the ground he covered his beak and assumed the form of a man. When he came to the women they spread a mat for their guest on which was some whale meat. Ho-Xhok became angry and said: I do not eat whale meat, I only eat the brains of man." He then uncovered his beak and broke a woman's skull open and ate her brain.

One of the woman's companions who was hiding, slipped away in a canoe to the tenas town (village) and told the Tyee (Chief) of the tribe what had happened. The tribe held council and resolved to make war on Ho-Xhok. The chief came to the place where the slain woman lay and took her blood and rubbed it on himself. He then took a cedar board and fastened it to the tree, making a trap. Putting some whale meat on the fire he waited for Ho-Xhok to come down the tree again. As Ho-Xhok came down, sharpening his ruddy beak on the bottom of the tree, his beak stuck in the trap. The Chief called upon his Totem Spirit to give him strength and then ran and killed the fabulous bird by breaking off his bill and pushing him into the fire. This act liberated the tribe and gave the Chief and his daughters the right to use Ho-Xhok for their family crest and to pass it on to future generations.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

Shwah Kuk, THE FROG

According to the mythology of the Nootka Tribes of Vancouver Island, Saghalie Tyee, Creator of the Universe, lived in the Celestial Regions, where two gigantic frogs were the guardians of his household. When Huloima Tillicum (strangers) approached, the frogs would croak loudly to warn their master of their coming. The frogs had many other duties to perform. When the sun became too hot, it was the task of the frogs to regulate the heat. They also had means of correcting the Kula-Kula (birds) who made too much noise, disturbing the Creator's rest. They also acted as heralds, going around the Tenas-Town (village), giving out the orders of the day.

Another mythical story comes from the Tsim'shian tribes, Skeena River, British Columbia. As the voice of the frog was very strong and could be heard for long distances across the chuck (water), and was therefore a guide for the Indians in foggy weather, great attention was paid to his croaking. Long ago, a man and his wife were crossing a large bay. It was very foggy. They heard the croaking of a frog which guided them to the shore, for the frog was croaking all the time in their language, saying over and over again: "I will show you a place of safety." The Indians turned their canoe towards the place where this voice seemed to come from and finally reached the shore: "This frog is mine." The woman screamed: "No, it is mine! I will keep it!" Thus they argued until at last the woman took the frog and treated it like her own child. She took it to a lake in the woods and left it there, praising it for the noise it made which had helped them to find the shore.

A chief of great importance, whose presence was particularly desired at a Potlatch, was invited. When he appeared he surprised the other guests by wearing a kamo-suk (necklace) of live frogs tied leg to leg. Since that time his family have used the frog for a crest.

According to other Indian legends the supernatural Siam itchwoot (Grizzly Bear) was mortally afraid of frogs. Frogs were often put on Totem Poles or houses to prevent them falling down or being destroyed. The frog is used on the Totem Poles of Kit-wanga, along the Sheen,. River, also on Poles of Alaska, the most popular being Kicksetti or Tlingets.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

Chee-Che-Ka, THE MINK

Mink was a snooping individual. One day, when making his way through the forest, he climbed to the top of a split off cedar to get his bearings. From there he could see a lake. On the beach was a man busy with a canoe. Mink came down and approached the man who was loading it up with the carcasses of deer. After exchanging greetings he asked if he could help and the man agreed. When the deer had been loaded Mink made a mental count of them; ikt, moxt, klone, la-kit, kwin-in-num, tagh'-um, sin-a-mokat, stote-kin, kwaist, taht-lum, he counted in Chinook, ten. "Now," thought he, "Here's a chance to get something to eat." He asked if he could go along to the stranger's village and he was assured that he could. Getting into the canoe he took a paddle with which he worked industriously. At last they came to a village that was set back fifty yards from the bank. Suddenly he observed that the deer were being unloaded out of the canoe and put into the houses. This looked strange to the Mink as he did not see any people around. He asked the man how many houses were in the village. The man replied, "Forty, and in each house live thirty people."

Mink thought he would take a look around so going into the dwelling places he found, lying around, stone knives, spears, and bows and arrows. The fires were burning, heating stones to be put in the wooden boxes, filled with water to boil food, also others on which to roast the deer that had been in the canoe. It seemed as if a meal were being prepared. In every house he visited it was the same. No people were visible. Then the cunning and greed of Mink got the better of him. Why not take what he wanted, load the canoe and leave for whence he came? With that in mind he got into the canoe with all it would hold and paddled away about two hundred yards when the canoe was pulled back by an invisible cord. Try as he would, he could not paddle more than a hundred yards from the shore after that. He was always being pulled back. After paddling in the hot sun almost all afternoon, sweating, tired and hungry, Mink had to give up and assume his animal form again and then swim to the opposite bank. Mink never again went to the town of the invisible people.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

Le-Loo, THE WOLF

The Wolf was the sacred animal spirit of the Shaman (Medicine Man) and his Tillicums (Family). The Wolf people are one of the oldest clans of the primitive Northwest Indians.

The legend of the Nootka Indians, of Vancouver Island, Is as follows: They thought that if they could secure the young Wolf and take from him some inner part to rub on the outer side of their canoes, it would bring them great luck when whaling. Great whale hunters of this tribe were supposed to have secured the charm.

The ancestors of the tribes who lived along the Skeena, known to them as Coola Chuck Snase (The River of the Mist), acquired the Wolf crest by befriending the animal and for this service it became their guardian spirit.

Long ago, when winter snows were deep, a wolf came to a Chief's house one morning. He was in great pain and could not eat. The old Chief said to his nephews: "See whether there is anything hurting the Wolf." They did this and, finding a piece of bone caught in his throat, they removed it. Then more snow came and hunger stalked among the people. The Wolf returned in the form of a man and beckoned them to follow him. He led the Indians to a place where he had killed many caribou for their use.

The Wolf represents the genius of the land. He is carved on many totem poles. The Nootkans weave the symbol in their grass baskets and it is used on many other articles of their mamook (handicraft).

Members of the Wolf Clan are always welcome at the ceremonial Winter dances as they are keen for any game. One of their theme songs is: "He who steps upon the high places of the Earth."

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

Wolalee, THE SALMON

The Salmon is a symbol of abundance as it furnished the Indians with their principal food. The Indians have many beliefs about its origin, also as to how to prolong its migration. The ancient Thompson tribes who fished at Hell Gate along the Fraser River, believed that the Salmon must never be cut across the grain, for the living fish would then leave the waters, also that the head and entrails were to be cast back into the river in order to propagate its species.

A legend of the Kwakiutls tells of Tootooch (Thunder Bird's) hunger for salmon. In order to obtain them he married the Salmon Creek Woman, but she concealed her fish and told him that there were no more. But after she fed her child Tootooch saw the salmon crumbs between his teeth.

Then there began a Skookum hyak cooley (Salmon run) up the river. Thunder Bird helped her to catch them for their Winter food. He kept on eating so many of the salmon that the Salmon Klootchman (Salmon Woman) became alarmed for the welfare of her child. "He is eating the inside of the house out," she thought. Packing up what remained and taking her child, she left him without spear or net. Thunder Bird was never able to find his wife again which grieved him very much, so he started on new adventures. Coming to a town along the river he saw the Salmon House floating by. It was filled with live Salmon. He tried in vain to pull it to the shore but could not. Seeking aid, he spied an old man who was passing, using a magic walking stick made from the tentacle of an octopus. Thunder Bird bargained with the old man for the loan of his walking stick and he had to promise him some of the Salmon.

Receiving the stick he pointed it toward the house and the stick stretched itself out, the suckers of the octopus fastening themselves to the house with a death-like grip. Thunder Bird tried again to pull it to the shore but, try as he would, he did not have enough strength. Then he said to the rocks, "Get up and help me."

But the rocks did not move so to punish them he said: "You shall lie like that on the ground forever."

Close by were some trees. In a mild tone he asked them for help and they attached their branches to the stick and, by swaying to and fro with the aid of the wind, they were able to pull the house to the shore.

Jumping into the house, Thunder Bird found many salmon. After eating his fill, he told the balance of the fish to go up the different creeks and propagate their kind.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

Chet-Woot, THE BEAR

Among the Indian tribes of Alaska and British Columbia there are many tales relating how their ancestors acquired an additional totem for their family poles. This particular one is of interest on account of the British Columbia Totem Pole standing at the Yesler Way in Seattle.

It is a story of the Bear. This animal left a lasting impression upon the Indian's minds whenever they came in contact with one in its native haunts. At Potlatch Feasts the members of the Bear Clan were warmly welcomed. Considerable interest would be taken in their imitations and antics which would cause much laughter and gaiety.

Long ago, a lonely village maid of the Crow Clan, affiliated with the Ravens, went with other members of the tribe to gather raspberries at a place burned over by a fire of their own making. When crawling over a fallen tree trunk, she stepped in a slippery place where a bear had been. Her companions joked and laughed at her misfortune at which she laughed as well. Lagging behind, she was accosted by a young man who was the Bear in human form. He fell in love with her and asked her to come to his home and they would be married. She agreed and followed him up stream and over hills for four moons finally coming to the Bear's house in which lived his parents and brothers and sisters.

The maid was given the toil of a slave and unpleasant tasks to perform, so that the parents could gauge her usefulness in these tasks. She had to carry the water and get the sticks to keep the fire burning. The sticks she collected were dry but the sisters put them in water so that they would not burn and did other things to discourage her so she would not marry their brother. Not being able to keep the fire going was considered a disgrace, an indication that she would nor make a good wife. In her discouragement she left the Bear's house, travelling alone over the hills and along streams for four moons. Coming hack to her home, she related what had happened to her former companions.

In after years she told this story to her sons and daughters and to commemorate the event she made for each one of them a Chilkat blanket on which was told the story of her adventure. Later the family took the Bear as a totem crest.

Since that time it has been the custom for the mothers belonging to this clan to make a Chilkat blanket and give one to each of her children. The writer of these legends has one of the blankets.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

Men-a-Mooks, THE OTTER SPIRIT

Nearly every woman was supposed to possess the Otter Spirit and some of them had more than one. The more she had the greater would be her dignity. To possess none at all would be to command very little respect, therefore few women were willing to admit the absence of this spirit. It was supposed to be a good omen although at times it was known to cause death. The Otter Spirit lived within the woman, just above the stomach, making itself known by a peculiar sound and sometimes it rose with n the mouth, but it was never seen. However, some say it has been seen and, when taken out of the mouth. it is a small dark object. The women having this spirit are always conscious of its presence. It was not good for a man to acquire the Otter Spirit and it was hard for him to get rid of it unless he would seek out a Klootchman Doctin (Woman Doctor) and allow her to suck it from him through his lips.

If a woman who harbored the spirit mentioned to any other, she was ungrateful and it would cause the Spirit to do her a grievous bodily harm.

The Land Otter from which this spirit arises, was always regarded with much reverence and was considered sacred. Its flesh was never eaten or its meat burnt as offering to the Klatawa Tumtum (Departed Souls).

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

  

Pi-Chikamin, THE GIFT COPPER

The gift coppers were curiously shaped plates two and a half feet in length and weighing from fifteen to twenty pounds. They were made from native copper brought from Alaska and the Nass River. These coppers were beautifully etched and painted with the symbols of the owner's clan.

The typical shape of the copper was a raised "T" in the centre. The lower part was called the hind end and the upper part, which was decorated, was called the face. The actual value of the piece of copper was small but, like our bills of high denomination, they represented a large number of blankets made from the hides of fur-bearing animals, and of buckskin. Later, when the white man traded among them, the Indians used the cotton and woolen blanket.

Some coppers had the value of five thousand to seventy-five hundred blankets. The most valuable coppers were etched with Sea Bear, Beaver, and the Moon, the one shown here is of the Sea Bear who was Lord and Ruler of the deep.

Coppers were sometimes offered for sale by a rival. If the offer was not accepted it was an acknowledgment that the chief and members of the tribe did not have blankets enough to make the purchase. However, if the rival tribe had bought the copper, it could then be sold back to the original owner, but always at a higher price.

The ceremonies when selling these .coppers were very elaborate and were conducted during the winter festivals. Wealthy Chiefs, giving potlatches, would sometimes break their coppers in pieces and present them to the most important guests or throw the pieces into the sea. This was to show his utter disregard for its value on account of his wealth. This act would give him greater prestige in the community.

A copper was considered an insignia of distinguished leadership, bringing luck to its owner and warding off evil spirits.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

"PROPERTY WOMAN OR GREAT GRANDMOTHER"

The ancient aristocratic aborigines of the Northwest Coast at all times had property in mind. This consisted of furs, blankets, canoes, slaves, totem crests and wives. His chief interest lay in marrying a mate who could bring him property. He always looked forward to capturing the Mythical Great Grandmother or Property Woman, or to hear the cry of her child. Even this could bring riches.

Property Woman was described as having a cone-shaped head acquired by the method of binding her skull when she was an infant. Hence, the name "Flat Head". The practice was adopted by the aristocracy of many Indian Tribes as a badge of distinction. The child was called "Carried-on-the-back".

Property Woman was always spoken of as having brownish hair that draped her form, was young, and would never grow old and had a sweet voice. When heard by a man she caused him to become wealthy. If a piece of her blanket was found more riches would be acquired. Medicine Men would often eat magic herbs so that they could speak with her. The Indians, when searching for clams on sandy beaches, were always on the lookout for the way she laid out the clams in four squares. Again, they might find a place where she had buried her shell labret or some other article from her personal adornments.

Many chiefs claimed to have caught the Property Woman. Medicine men in their arrogance, claimed that she brought them gifts of food.

It is very seldom that the Property Woman is found on a Totem Pole, although she belongs to the Raven People.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

Slag'ame, THE BUTTERFLY

Among the many adventures and travels of Thunder Bird, while he was putting the finishing touches on creation, he met with Butterfly, who was also travelling around. They became quite chummy. Being supernatural, they were in their human form. They came to a Siwash Tyee's (Indian Chief's house on the Queen Charlotte Islands. The chief invited the tired travellers to stay for Muckamuck (dinner). Thunder Bird, wishing to uphold his dignity, did not wish to talk to ordinary mortals, so Butterfly did the interpreting.

The host asked Thunder Bird if he would like some boiled salmon with oolichan grease. Butterfly said that Thunder Bird did not eat salmon and ate both portions himself. Thunder Bird was then asked if he would like some tender seal meat, his favorite dish. Again Butterfly said that Thunder Bird did not care for seal. Thunder Bird was then handed some dried o'lil-lie (berry) cakes. Butterfly took them from him, saying that such things made him sick. The host was very angry, not knowing how to please Thunder Bird. He did not have anything more to offer him except some stale and smelly salmon so this was presented to the important guest. Butterfly said that Thunder Bird was very fond of tainted fish, but he could not eat, although he tried. By this time he too was getting very angry so he got up and left with Butterfly, who was so full of food that he could hardly walk, tagging along.

The trail took them to a creek spanned by a shaky cedar log. Thunder Bird crossed over the log first but Butterfly was afraid to cross because he was tired and drowsy. Thunder Bird said he would steady the log for him but when he mounted it Thunder Bird rolled the log on top of Butterfly. This removed all the food from his stomach. After Thunder Bird had eaten the food he sewed Butterfly up. That is why Butterfly is always flat.

Butterfly is carved on the totem poles of the Haidas. It is also woven into baskets and other fibre articles of the Indian tribes of Vancouver Island.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

Shaman, THE MEDICINE MAN

The Shaman, to whom all the Indians looked for wisdom, was their counsellor in sickness and health. At all times he was looked to to keep the evil spirits under control. This spiritual power was generally hereditary although it could be acquired by going into the fastnesses of the forest. He had to be clean so he lived in seclusion, fasting often, only eating fruits and roots and living in such a state of near-starvation as would produce delirium and trance-like dreams and visions. After arriving at that state, with wondrous eyes he would choose a Tahmahnawis (Spirit) from among the surrounding ghosts. It might be a beast or a bird, a rock or even a mountain. This he would call upon to give him special magical and spiritual powers to cure the sick, insure the success of the hunt, to bring success in fishing and to foretell events and happenings in distant places. The newly made Medicine man would then stagger back to his village if he had the strength and did not die on the way. There he would proclaim to the tribe the things he had encountered. After his family had nursed him back to health the chiefs would consult with him and, if he possessed an active imagination, which he usually did, the tribe would call "Wild Man's Society" together in the assembly house where the wonders which he had seen in the forest would be recounted, emphasis being placed on the magic the Totem had given him.

Then there would be feasting, the Shaman would speak in a mumble of words, supposedly the language the Spirit used, wearing a peculiar nose ornament, dressed as the Spirit for whom he was speaking, using an oval rattle and blowing through a carved, hollow, white bone, suspended by a cord from his neck. He would also wear a long bone thrust through the septum of his nose. He would destroy the spirits of the enemies of the invited guests. This would cause much disorder. Food was then put in the fire to keep the spirits well fed. Incidentally, thereafter they had to generously supply the living as well, for he controlled this spirit and was in good repute with the demon so that their desires would be granted.

If this was not done the Shaman would oftentimes be put to death.

When a Shaman died his body was put into a carved box and placed in the branches of a tree or on a high stump. His soul was supposed to go to some special place. in the Skyland. Most Shamans had great power over their people and generally were very halo-klahowya (wealthy).

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

Chak-Chak, THE EAGLE

Years ago the ancestors of the Eagle Clan believed in an after-life for all creatures. Food cast into the fire became invisible and everlasting and was for the departed spirits to partake of on their journey to the spirit land where they entered a greater and more wonderful life.

When Od-euons (The Great Eagle) is shown on totem poles of the Eagle Clan, it  signifies this legend:

A fearless, strong brave was killed in battle. At death his spirit strayed to Eagleland, a remote mythical village of the sky region on the West coast of the Queen Charlotte Islands. Upon his arrival he was received with a welcome by Od-euons, the Great Eagle Chief. As time went on, the brave proved that he was an untiring and fearless hunter of whales, the Eagle's mortal enemies, who dominated all oceans. The Whale Chief was the Right Whale, who had never been conquered. He could blow spouts of water high above the clouds, which was a warning of death for those who had many combats with the Right Whale, leaving many scars on the Whale's tough hide from his sharp claws. He would relate these adventures of strength and cunning to his fellow Eagles who regarded him as a cowardly old braggart.

The young brave was determined that he would show that the power of the Right Whale was a myth. He would conquer this master of the seas single-handed. Making his way high over the ocean he sighted the mammoth whale. Soaring high above, he waited for an opportunity to attack the whale unawares, and, when his chance came, he swooped down, digging his powerful talons deep into the flesh of the enemy, flapping his wings, straining every muscle, he could not raise the foe. The young eagle had to call his fellow eagles for help. As the ethics of their brotherhood demands that they always lend a hand to a brother, they flew to his aid. The wise old Eagle, hearing the call, sharpened his talons and rushed into the fray just in time for his fellows were badly weakened. Not only were they likely to lose the battle, but all of them might be destroyed as well. The coming of the old eagle changed the tide of battle. He showed his strength and daring by picking up the whale and carrying it homeward.

Thus the oldest and wisest saved his tribe from destruction. The old eagle was so pleased with the young eagle's conduct and daring that he gave him his daughter in marriage in celebration of the victory.

Ever after, the wise one, named Od-euons, means Great Eagle, the Mighty.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40]

  

Kwel-Kwel, THE OWL

This crest is used by the Tsimshian and Nootka Tribes for ornamenting objects pertaining to the clan and illustrating certain incidents in their legendary history.

A great Chief had a son who was always crying. His father sent him out of the house saying: "The White Owl shall fetch you." The boy went out with his Kahpho (sister). The White Owl came and carried the girl to the top of a lightning-stripped hemlock. The people could hear her crying but were unable to climb the tree to get her down. When she ceased to cry she was married to the Owl. They had a child, a son.

When the son grew up it was the desire of his mother to send him to her people. A head-dress of the owl was made for him by his mother and then his father composed a song for him. The Owl then carried them both back to his wife's home in the village.

When the girl's mother saw her grandson she was very frightened but she was assured by her daughter that he was her grandson. The Owl and the boy's mother then flew away.

When the boy became of age, his grand-parents gave a Hiu Muckamuck (feast) in his honor, and presents were distributed among the guests. This gave him and his descendants the right to use the Owl crest on their totem.

The Owl is regarded with reverence. The Nootka Indians of the West Coast of Vancouver Island believe that the spirits of all Medicine Men pass at death into the Owl Spirit.

The Indian never answers an owl when he says "Hoo Hoo", for, if the Indian should answer: "Who? Who" the Owl would then reply: "You, you". This would mean that the Indian would shortly die.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

Skam-m, THE HALIBUT

Long ago, when the Raven was performing the miracle of making the creatures of the universe, his work always made him tired and hungry. He stopped to do a little fishing, catching a peculiar fish which he wished to keep fresh so he did not kill it. How to keep the fish from flapping around and probably leaping out of the canoe puzzled him so going to the shore he went to the spruce trees and took some of the gum from their bark. This he fashioned into a woman whom he called Skam-m. He then commanded her to grow quickly and be beautiful. Then he told her to sit on the fish he had caught, promising her a part of it when he was through fishing. As the day was hot, for the sun was high, he wanted to get a good mess of fish as soon as possible, so without looking behind him he called: "Skam-m, are you there?" Skam-m answered "Oh." Shortly after he called again: "Skam-m, kla howya (How are you)?" To which she replied again: "Oh." As the sun was getting warmer, Raven called again: "Skam-m, are you still there?" To which she replied, in a weak voice, "Oh."

Raven looked around, trying to locate the small, feeble voice, only to find that a sticky pitch had taken her place. He was so surprised and angry that he cursed, for he could not eat a fish that was covered with pitch and had to throw it overboard. That is why the Halibut skin is dark on the top side and white beneath, burnt by hot pitch, has misplaced, pop-eyes and is flat by being sat upon by Skam-m. Halibut is flat even today. The Indians, when fishing, remembering Raven's experience always kill a halibut when caught, with a stout club.

The further experiences of Raven tell of him coming to the place where Siam Itchwood (Grizzly Bear) lived. He asked Grizzly Bear if he would like to go fishing for halibut, so they agreed to start early the next morning. Taking the canoe they went to a place where it was known to be good fishing. They fixed their fish hooks and put them in the sea. Only Raven caught halibut. When the canoe was full. Grizzly Bear asked Raven what he used for bait. Raven replied: "Gildasquyil." This Indian word has never been identified.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

Welala, THE MOUNTAIN SPIRIT

Welala is the mountain spirit of the Tsimshian tribes of the Nass and Skeena Rivers of British Columbia. It is also used by the Tlingets of Alaska and is found on the well known Kicksetti Totem Pole at Wrangell. The Indians believe that everything has a spirit. The soul came from the body and the body changed to stone, hence the Mountain Spirit.

The legend of Welala tells of a great hunter who was pursuing a bear he had wounded. The bear reached a steep cliff on a mountain where a door opened through which he entered. As the hunter came to the doorway he heard the voice of Welala singing: "Hap, hap." Then he fainted. The soul from his body was then levitated and transported into a secret council chamber in the mountain's hollow interior and into the presence of the great Chief Welala, who was wearing a bear skin.

The great Welala gave the hunter the right to use the ornaments that he himself was wearing and, from a carved box he took a dance mask, a small bearskin, a cedar-bark neck ring and other articles like those used at Winter dances. Welala also gave the hunter power to fly all over the world to seek and devour his enemies.

With the ornaments the hunter adorned himself and flew over Illahie (The Earth) for the space of four years, killing and devouring all whom he found in the woods.

Finally he came to his own village where the Medicine Men of his tribe succeeded in capturing him. He was then taken to his family where he was cured of his wandering and evil ways with the aid of magic herbs and was allowed to dance Welala dances until he was exhausted. The Village Chief then gave him back his slaves, coppers and canoes.

The Mountain Spirit of Welala is very secretive. It is looked upon by the Indian as giving special Tamahnous Skookum (Magical Power) of greatness and benevolence.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

Quil-Tum-Tum

This symbol and legend comes from the Indian tribes of Vancouver Island. It tells of Quil-Tum-Tum, the Earth's first man, surrounded by the Kingdom of Nature; the trees, flowers, foaming creeks, blue skies and towering mountains. This all intrigued him, yet he was lonely. He wished for a companion to share these gifts and to comfort him so he said to himself: "I will create an image of my own likeness and add to it a form more beautiful than my own; something that will be the envy of all the realm of Nature. He then went about it,  a stick of timber a little less than his own height. Throughout the rainy weather, night and day he toiled, cutting and scraping with crude knives of stone and shell. He hunted magic herbs in the forest to make flesh and skin to cover the carving which felt warm, but try as he would his carving would not take motion though he rolled it in his blankets and stood it on its head. Tired, vexed and hungry, he found there was no food left to eat in his boxes. Leaving a crude, half-made basket by the fire, he went in search of food.

While he was away, the birds came, robin, flicker, grouse and woodpecker. They all looked in and admired his wooden image, all agreeing that the only way that they could help was for them to fly and tell everyone what Quil-Tum-Tum was trying to do. It was Flicker who told the two maidens with lonely hearts who lived by a stream where it emptied into the sea.

They came to Quil-Tum-Tum's lodge of cedar shakes, sewn together with spruce root cords. They admired the industry of his hands but laughed at his idea of making a woman out of a stick of wood, no matter how beautiful the carving. The two maidens kept the fire burning and hid, waiting his return.

Upon Quil-Tum-Tum's return with food, he was surprised and happy to find the fire burning and the basket finished. He tried again to bring his treasured carving to life but he finally had to cease and go hunting again to rest his thoughts.

On returning he found the two maidens sitting by the fire where his carving was burning. At first he was angry, when they began to laugh he offered them the deer he had brought. They then stirred the fire and cooked him the finest meal he had ever eaten. He liked the two maidens so well that he married them and from them come the tribes that now live on Vancouver Island.

From that day to this there has never been a carving of a woman used as a Totem.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

Kwaie'tek, THE SEA GULL

This folk tale of the Sea Gull comes from the Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands. If it had not been for Sea Gull there would not have been any fish in the waters of the Pacific Northwest.

A Powerful Grandmother who lived in a great inlet controlled the tides by lying on her back and raising her legs up and down. In her house were many boxes filled with the fishes that now inhabit these waters. Raven, on his travels alighted on the beach and, taking off his mask, became human. As usual, he was very hungry and this time for Oolichan (Candle fish). He was doubtful as to whether he would be able to obtain any from the Grandmother so he said to her very pleasantly, "I am cold and tired."

The Grandmother asked him where he had been. "Out fishing for oolichan," he replied. Grandmother then said: "You old liar, you had better keep away from my house." This reply disturbed Raven. He would have to use more tact. He then went down to the beach, as the tide was out, and there he saw Sea Gull and the Crane. Sea Gull was in the act of swallowing a dead oolichan, one that Grandmother had thrown away. Raven was anxious to get hold of the dead fish to see what would happen so he thought the best way to do it would be to start a fight between Sea Gull and Crane. He told Sea Gull that Crane did not think much of him and called him a tattle tale who, with that big mouth of his, was always making a lot of noise when anything to eat was in sight. He then told Crane that Sea Gull said he had a long beak which was always being stuck into other people's business. At that Crane became angry and went and kicked Sea Gull in the stomach, causing him to belch up the oolichan, which Raven promptly picked up. He then rubbed the scales off the fish on his hat and went back to Grandmother, telling her that she did not have all the fish in the sea as there were more down on the beach than she ever had. At this she became vexed and, when the tide came in, she opened all her fish boxes and emptied them into the water.

And that is the reason for all the different kinds of fish being in the waters today. Sea Gull, ever since that day, has always been known as "Tattle tale."

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

Mateeh, THE GOAT

Temlaham, along the Skeena River, was a vast empire of towering timber-covered mountains, scarred deep with Klip Chuck (deep canyons), through which rushed foaming rivers teeming with salmon. The fertile valleys as well as the mountain tops were inhabited by innumerable wild animals. In this beautiful land dwelt the ancestors of the Goat Clan. The Sky Spirit, who controlled their destinies, commanded that they

should conserve the wild life. If they did this, the promised land was to be theirs forever.

The herds of wild animals multiplied so fast that the people forgot the edict of the Sky Spirit and began to slaughter them recklessly and for sport, leaving carcasses to rot and decay. Deer and mountain goats were needlessly killed, leaving their young to shift for themselves.

One day, while in search of game, a young hunter came upon a deserted kid whose mother had been killed. Taking the animal in his arms he made his way down the steep mountain side and at last to his house. He nursed the little animal back to health and became so attached to it that he would not allow anyone to ill-treat or abuse it.

As time went on there appeared in the Indian camp some Hulcima Tillicum (Strangers) in whose honor a potlatch was held. Unknown to the Indians, these strangers were mountain goats in human guise and they invited their hosts to come to their lodge, high up in the mountain, where they also would give a feast and show the Indians their mask dance. The Indians agreed to visit the strangers' camp but were very much humiliated when the young hunter insisted on taking his young pet goat with him. When the guests were all seated and the feasting had begun, the Goat people said they would prepare for their dance.

Leaving their guests they went outside. Suddenly there was heard a terrible rumbling of falling and sliding rocks which crashed upon the lodge, carrying it over the cliffs. The pet goat, who had sensed this danger beforehand, led his master away and, when the danger had passed, continued to guide him around the steep cliffs until they finally arrived at the foot of the mountain. All the other Indians perished in the disaster.

In gratitude for the generosity of the young mountain goat, the family of the young hunter adopted the animal as a crest and totem for themselves and future generations.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

Skana, THE BLACK FISH

The Black Fish (Killer Whale) always fired the imagination of the ancient Indian of the North Pacific who had a great admiration for his ferocious strength. A pack of three or four would attack and kill a large sized whale.

The people who lived among the islands were essentially fishermen of adventurous spirit, often pursuing the whale far out in the ocean in their Wolf canoes. They were constantly in dread of Black Fish and held them in great reverence. Some considered them to be evil spirits as sometimes they took great delight in attacking the canoes, overturning them and drowning the occupants. The Indians believed that when the tenas tillicum (younger members) of the  were lost at sea, their spirits, if they did not wish to live in Dreamland, at the Northern lights, could return, to be reincarnated as Black Fish, to roam the waters they loved so well. In the sea there was a stream that was forever flowing Southward and on its bank was Dorsal Fin Town and in one of the many great lodges lived a powerful Prince who had all the Ocean People for his subjects.

A legend of long ago tells of two strong warriors who, in their canoe, were challenged by the Black Fish to mortal combat. The Indians were hard pressed and, as there seemed no way of escape, one of the warriors swore on oath to his comrade saying, that if he were to be done to death he would stab as many Black Fish as came within his reach before he was transformed into one of them. When he sank into the water many bodies of dead Black Fish began to rise to the surface and, after a terrible commotion, there appeared also the body of the Prince. For this fear the members of the warrior's family were permitted to use the Black Fish Crest ever afterward.

The Killer Whale belongs to the clan of the Ocean People who praise him highly and, when attending potlatch gatherings, always come in canoes elaborately decorated with his effigy to signify that he was accustomed to travel and use his body as a canoe.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

  

He'-e-tlik, THE LIGHTNING SNAKE

This legend comes from the West Coast of Vancouver Island: He'-e-tlik was born supernatural. At a tender age he refused to eat the food given him by his mother. When asked by his parents why he did not eat the good things they liked, he replied: "The fragrant smell of the pines at the dawn of day is enough for me."

One day when He'-e-tlik was roaming alone in the forest, he came upon Tootooch (Thunder Bird), who was lonely for a companion. They soon became fast friends, agreeing never to part. He'-e-tlik then assumed the form of the Lightning Snake and entwined himself around the body of Thunder Bird who flew to his abode at the top of a high mountain.

Tootooch lived on the flesh of whales and when in search of this food he would put on his feathered coat, wings and mask. Lightning Snake would attach himself to his master and they would then fly over the sea. When the whale was sighted Thunder Bird would  in such a way as to be able to drop Lightning Snake onto the whale's back so as to pierce the animal's body. The shock of the lightning would kill the whale instantly. Thunder Bird would then seize the prey in his powerful talons and make off home.

The power of Lightning Snake was often felt by mortals of the earth for their evil deeds. Once he  his wrath upon a whole tribe, punishing them for forgetting Nature's Code of Morals and the rules of hunting and fishing, thereby becoming selfish and aggressive to their neighbors instead of working for themselves. To punish them he cut off their arms and legs. Thunder Bird then appeared among the people and, by sprinkling water on them, he enabled them to get up and put themselves together again. Some, in their hurry, picked up the wrong legs and arms which of course did not fit their bodies. On this account they were ever after known as the Wake delate (deformed people) among the other Indian tribes.

The Indians believed that anything of a material form was at the mercy of the Lightning Spirit and could be worn, broken or destroyed by it. Fish or game could be eaten but still existed elsewhere through its aid as long as they followed the Moral Law of Lightning Snake he would provide all their wants. He is now always spoken of as "One who lived on high." His power is never worshipped but is held in reverence.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

  

Eh-Kolie, THE WHALE

From the twilight of tribal history the emblem of the whale has been used by the Nootka Indians of Vancouver Island. This tribe were great sea hunters and pursued the whale many miles from land in their Wolf canoes.

The Nootkas believed that their universe lay on the back of a great whale and at the bottom of the sea he dwelt in a community house. He who is known as Eah-toop, the right whale, ruled over this Domain. In his household were two beautiful young mermaid-like women whose names were Ohk-iss and Paytles and who, at one time, were kidnapped by the spirit of Sin-Set but were rescued from the Wolf house by Tootooch, the Thunder Bird and returned by him to their home on the ocean floor.

The Indians always rejoiced when a whale was cast up on the beach and, if the Chief of the tribe was not present, there would be much fighting and quarreling. Often knives would flash and cut. Some would want this or that piece of whale meat or blubber. Traditionally, the whale belonged to the Chief, who would divide it according to the rank of individuals in the community after, of course, selecting the choicest parts for his own household. The meat would be boiled, the oil pressed out, and stored to be used later with fish and other foods.

A Haida legend tells of the following incident: The Raven was terribly hungry and wanted a whale to eat. He killed one by waiting for the whale to come up and blow and, when his blow hole was open, the raven flew down his throat and picked at his heart until he died. The Raven forgot that when a whale is dead the blow hole would close, and although he made a lot of fuss and noise he could not escape. He was a prisoner through his own folly.

The dead whale at last floated onto a beach near an Indian village. The Indians seized the prize and began cutting it up. As they did so the Raven flew out and disappeared behind the village. He then returned in human guise while the Indians were still working away at the whale. Said he to them: "You people are lucky today." They replied: "You think so? Well, there is some queer luck here." "What is wrong?" asked Raven. They then told him that when they first started to cut up the whale a bird flew out. He appeared much surprised at this. He asked to be allowed to help them finish and they hurried to fill their boxes with the meat and blubber so as to get them out of reach of the in-coming tide. Raven suggested that they should hold a meeting in the Chief's house and divide the whale so that each should know just how lucky he was. When they were away he assumed his bird-form again and, picking up all their boxes of whale meat, he flew with them to a steep mountain, calling over and over: "Kaw-kaw, some people never know their luck."

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

THE YOUNG RAVEN

Young Raven is a very important Mythical Character to the Indians inhabiting the Queen Charlotte Islands and those living amid the inland chain of channels of Alaska. His exploits were similar to those of Thunder Bird. The Supernatural Indian of the tribes living in the regions south of Prince Rupert.

Long ago, when the world was in darkness, the Powerful Raven, Saghalie Tyee (Creator of the Universe), lived at the headwaters of the Nass River. In his lodge he had beautifully carved cedar chests. In them the Sun, Moon and Stars were kept hidden from the mortal eye.

Our Character, Tenas Kaka (Young Raven), was an earthly being who desired light for himself and his fellow creatures. He changed himself into a Raven and flew through a bright opening in the sky where the Powerful Creator lived, guarding his virgin daughter.

Young Raven again changed himself, this time into a pine needle. Then he cast himself into a crystal spring where the Princess came for Muchamuck Chuck (Drinking Water). So it came that she swallowed the pine needle. Young Raven was then reborn as a child and, as he grew up, became the idol of the household. Like

all children he wanted everything he saw. He wanted to play with the lights that bestow their radiance on the heavens. First his Grandfather gave him the stars and, with childish glee, he threw them in the sky, but they did not give light. Then he cried for the Moon, but this only gave a glow. Then he coaxed so persistently for the Sun that it was given to him and, while his Grandfather slept, he pushed it through the smokehole, thus bringing sudden daylight into the world.

When the Young Raven realized what he had done and thought of his Grandfather's anger, he became alarmed and left his ancestral home, flying to the earth.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

Kuuma, THE BULL HEAD

This story comes from the Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands who followed the Raven's Code of Laws and, like all the Indians of the Northwest Pacific Coast, believed in perpetual life.

Ka-Ka (Raven), was feeling in the best of health and spirits for he had just finished his customary swim and he had scrubbed himself thoroughly with hemlock branches, rubbing the skin until the blood came. This did not trouble him very much, for Raven had Elip Skookum (great strength). To test it he would pull the branches of the trees and uproot others. He took this exercise to develop a strong body. He was making his way to his greased blackfish hunting canoe to relax and think. He knew his mind had to be alert to struggle with the forces of nature, the creation of his grandfather.

Raven was attracted to a receding pool, left by the tide, in which Bull Head was swimming around. Raven was beginning to feel hungry and was playing with some cracked mussel shells, slyly scattering them in the water here and there. Bull Head refused the attentions which were showered upon him and continued his swimming. At last he spoke and said: "I know you, you old liar and deceiver, this is another of your tricks." At this Raven became quite angry and pronounced this curse on Bull Head: "You will always have a big head and a small body. You will be smooth and slippery, be a scavenger and an outcast among all the fish of the sea." Raven then realized that this talk had made him hungrier than ever and that he would have to try elsewhere for something to eat.

The tide then came and joined the pool with deep water and Bull Head made his way quickly to Dorsal Fin Town in which lived queer creatures who were men before the Raven gave light to the world. Dorsal Fin Town was ruled by a mighty prince. In the houses were assembled the souls of the dead, waiting for their lives to be renewed. Bull Head told all the Ocean People what had been said by Raven.

Bull Head appears only on the black slate totem poles of the Haida Indians. It is difficult to secure this symbol which is jealously guarded. Among other tribes it is passing into disuse. The Bull Heads are a sept of the Killer Whales.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

Gal-Quith, THE COD FISH

At the time of this legend, the tribe of Boya-lith, of the Bella Bella Indians, were in the throes of a famine. During this period, a young man by the name of Cha-gum-cha-kas, decided to go out and see what he could do for his people. Asking another young man of the tribe to go out with him on this venture, the two started out early the following morning in a canoe and headed for the outmost islands of the Pacific Coast, known to the Indians as Che-Che-Kwas and later known to the white man as the Gander Islands.

They anchored in a tiny bay, sheltered from all winds, and there they slept. Cha-gum-cha-kas was suddenly awakened by a persistent knocking on the bottom of the canoe. Looking over the side he saw that it was codfish slapping the side of the canoe with its tail as it swam around. Catching the codfish on its next round, he tore it to pieces and threw the pieces overboard. He lay down again and, before the stars could wink twice, was sound asleep. When he awoke again he found himself in very strange surroundings, he saw that he was in a house decorated with things that grow in the sea.

Cha-gum-cha-kas woke his companion and they both stepped out of the canoe, as it was resting on dry land and, as they did so, two guards stepped out of their box and escorted them to the presence of the Big Chief. Standing beside the Chief, his apparel all torn to pieces, was the Chief's son, for it happened that the codfish the hunter had torn to pieces was the son of the Chief. So Cha-gum-cha-kas told his story and apologized with the deepest concern. The Chief then announced that there would be four days of feasting for the strangers and at the last feast both hunters were made Chiefs. Cha-gum-cha-kas as Chief Gal-quith and his friend as Chief Boya. On their departure the Big Chief filled their canoe with all the sea-food it would carry, for he knew of the famine prevailing among the tribe of the strangers.

Thus, when the two hunters awoke they found they had been away four years and not, as they had thought, four days. Preparations were made for a great feast, for they had been given up for lost. After telling all that had befallen them they were recognized as the two leading Chiefs of the tribe for they had acquired powers by which they were able to keep their people well fed with all sea foods. Both Chiefs took the Codfish and Halibut for their crests.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

Maht-Maht, THE DUCK

When Mallard Duck's son was to be married, all the ducks and water-fowl of creation, including Thunder Bird, were invited to the Wedding Feast at "Place-in-which-feathers-fly-about," a camp where these Kula kula Tillicums (Bird families) lived. Small fish were served at the feast. Feast bowls, containing mussels and clam soup were placed at each plate. Near the plate, a spoon made from a split mountain goat's horn was laid. The spoons were greatly admired, especially by the ducks.

In the course of the feast Mallard Duck was asked to relate some adventure he had been through so, in order to have a joke at the expense of Thunder Bird, he fearlessly told the guests that while flying one day, he had seen Thunder Bird roll a log over on Butterfly and flatten him out. He went on to say that Thunder Bird had then cut Butterfly open and eaten the food that he removed from his stomach. This story made Thunder Bird angry. He got up and kicked Mallard Duck into the fire, scorching the feathers on his breast. That is why all Mallard ducks are marked on the breast.

During the excitement the other ducks tucked the spoons under their wings and flew away and, when they were well out over the water, they wiped them off and stuck them on their bills. Ever since then these ducks had bills shaped like goat-horn spoons.

Both the Mallard and the Sawbill Duck are used in decoration, especially in the woven grass baskets and mats of Vancouver Island.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

Qa-Yel, THE GREAT RAVEN

The Indians of Alaska and British Columbia believed that the Great Raven was the Saghalie Tyee, Creator of the Universe and Master of the Tides; that he existed before his birth; that he would never grow old and that he could transform himself into anything in the world. It is supposed that he lived in Skyland at the head of the Nass River. He is always spoken of as being a Grandfather, living before the Great Flood. He is often confused with Young Raven, the mythical character who created the psychology of the Indians.

According to an old legend, the Raven was married and had a handsome daughter. He was extremely jealous of his wife and would not let his daughter marry for fear one of her children, or her husband, might kiss and love his wife.

Raven's duties were many and as a Creator he had to make everything in this world: the mountains, the trees, the blades of grass and whatever else there is in nature. When away at these tasks he would keep his wife imprisoned in a big basket suspended from the rafters of his lodge, leaving a number of Flickers to keep watch and see if by any chance the basket was disturbed. If so, they would fly and warn their master.

Then Young Raven was born and gave the mortals light by casting the sun into the heavens. One day, seeking further adventure, he opened the basket and let out Raven's wife. This made Old Raven very angry and he called Young Raven "a meddlesome blunderer." Raven then put on his tall, jointed, magic, dance hat. This made him amphibious. He then called on the tides to rise.

Young Raven stole the skin of a magic loon which he gave to his mother so that she might wear it to dive and win and thus avoid death while the rising water was flooding the house. Young Raven flew out of the smoke hole, blacking his coat of feathers forever. After flying for a long time trying to find a place to land he was compelled to come back to rest on the Great Raven's hat as it was the only visible thing. Finally he took his mother on his back and flew to the sky which he pierced with his beak and hung on until the waters receded. The strain on his hill, from holding on so long, gave it its peculiar curve.

Among the best known totem poles on which the Great Raven is figured, is Chief Shake's at Wrangell, Alaska. He is also carved on black slate and wooden totems of the Haidas of the Queen Charlotte Islands, British Columbia.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

Click to enlarge
The Thunder Bird Totem Pole

[p. 55]

  

THE THUNDER BIRD TOTEM POLE

This Totem Pole was the personal property of Charlie James (Yak-U-Las) master carver and; story-teller of the Kwakiutl Indians who live along the inlets adjacent to Alert Bay, British Columbia. The fourteen different symbols on the pole represent the secret societies to which he belonged--some were inherited, others he acquired through marriage or by giving potlatches (feasts). Behind each one there is a legend of the tribe's ancestors, the Myth People.

This talented Indian artist extended the arts of the tribes by his design, some of which have been used to illustrate this book. The originals were first painted on spruce boards and cottonwood veneer. Eight of the former now hang on the wall of the Lipsett Memorial at Hastings Park Exhibition Grounds and eight adorn the Vancouver City Museum. A twelve foot Thunderbird totem pole and some others were carved by Mr. James for the author of this work through the years of their friendship.

Click to enlarge
Silver Brooches, Earrings and Bracelets

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

  

THE SHADOW PEOPLE AND THE RAVEN

The Raven alighted on the beach and took off his wings and beak and became a man. When walking along, the sharp mussel shells attached to the rocks cut and bruised his feet. The day was hot, the sun burned his naked body.

Raven was making his way to the village when he came upon the lodge where the Shadow People lived. When they saw him coming they said among themselves: "Here comes that twister of the truth, who is full of conceit and has so many cunning tricks. We will have to watch him."

When Raven entered their house he was glad to get from under the blistering sun as his feet were sore. Once inside Raven was surprised to see everything was so orderly and clean. Suspended from the racks on the beams hung salmon and halibut. The roof planks had been set back from the smoke hole, allowing the light to brighten up every nook and corner. What impressed him most that there was not a person to be seen. Raven thought: "I'll do a little snooping around."

There were other foods in abundance: fern roots, barks and berries, boxes of oolichan grease were standing in rows. He then observed that there was something following him wherever he went. Although he was not hungry he could not resist the temptation to help himself and finally he selected a nice red salmon.

Then Raven made his way to the elevated platform that surrounded the interior of the lodge and came to the Chief's carved cedar chest, covered with soft sea-otter and other furs. There he sat down in comfort and placed his salmon beside him while he examined his feet which troubled him painfully, but when he reached for his fish it was gone! He thought that this was a trick of his mind and that perhaps he had not brought it after all.

Going back to where the fish were hung, he selected another and went back to his seat, noticing all the time that a Shadow followed close to him, both going and coming. To have a stranger tag him like an evil spirit and be unable to see him was rather mystifying. Raven sat and pondered it over. He laid his salmon beside him and again it disappeared as before. This business of taking a fish and not having it to eat was getting puzzling. He tried a third and then a fourth time and it was then he discovered that the salmon he had taken were still

[p. 57]

hanging on their hooks. And still beside him on the floor was the same confusing Shadow.

Then he stamped and tramped it on the floor.

While a voice spoke up and said:
 "You look to be well fed,
 What are you going to do?
 Where will this lead you to?"
 Whence the questions came,
 Raven could not name.
 Their bodies were not plain;
 He gazed and looked in vain.
 Sane or insane was he!
 Afraid to wait and see,
 He limped toward the door
 But, moving as before,
 His angry Shadow wriggled.
 The others laughed and giggled.
 Raven knew 'twas near.
 "Something strange is here,
 I'll out, and quick away,
 They'll have no more to say."

Raven then rambled about the village, passing people who did not appear to notice him and to make sure they did he approached close to where some children were playing games. They paid no attention to him for they did not realize what was on his mind or what he was trying to do. No matter where Raven went or what he did that day there was no escaping from his shadow.

At last Raven found shelter in a place where there were a number of wooden images. There he stopped to rest from thinking and to find himself. Was he more clever than his own intelligence and was he stronger than his own self and would he always have this Shadow for a companion?

Whether Raven found out all these things the Indians do not know, but his deeds and, still more, his conceit, have impressed the Haidas and Kwakiutls through the ages.

Raven rested his thoughts until his feet were better, then he assumed his bird-like shape and flew through the bright and happy skies seeking advice, for Raven had to live by mind and body. When flying high his shadow followed on the ground far below.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

  

CHIEF SISA-KAULA'S TOTEM POLE

  

Modelled after the Original Erected in Stanley Park, Vancouver, Canada.

This Totem Pole tells in Indian figures the story of Chief Sisa-Kaulas' great ancestor See-wid. See-wid was a delicate young man whose father was disappointed in him, thinking he was incapable of carrying on the family honor. One day another Indian in the same tribe, with more initiative than See-wid, saved the tribe from a great disaster at the hands of their enemies, which made the young man's father more than ever displeased with his delicate son. Shortly after this See-wid was walking in the forest. He came to a pool of clear water where he meditated over his inability to please his father and lead the fortunes of his people. Suddenly there appeared in the water a giant frog, who asked him: "Do you wish to come with me?" See-wid answered that he would, and climbing on to the frog's back the frog carried him down to the bottom of the pool, to the Spirit world. There he forgot his troubles, for the spirit of the deep gave him permission to use for his crests the sea- bear, sea-otter and the whale, a permission greatly coveted by the Indians. See-wid was a long time in returning to the land of the earth, and passed through many hardships before he was able to resume his life among his own people, but when he returned he was a strong man, and became one of the most powerful of the Indian chiefs.

(i) The top figure Kolus, sister of the Thunder Bird, who is always represented with folded wings. On Kolus' breast is seen painted the crest of the Raven Clan, signifying that this bird was seen by See-wid in his journey through the spirit world.

(ii) A noted chief, one of the ancestors of Sisa-aulaus, embracing his baby son.

(iii) The chief in figure (ii) is resting his feet on the upturned tail of a whale, Ka-Kow-In, upon whose back all creation rests. The face carved on the figure of the whale is symbolical of the time when the moon was stolen from the Creator.

(iv) The sea-otter, To-sil-la-gut, spirit of the deep, shown eating a sea-egg.

(v) The sea-bear who, according to Indian belief, was both able to live in the sea and enter the bowels of the earth.

(vi) A carved head with a wide open mouth. This is to signify the fate of a rival of the chief, or any who dared to speak evil against the chief. The head is that of the executed rival, exhibited as proof of the chief's power and triumph.

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59] [p. 60]

  

STORY OF THE MINK (BORN-TO-BE-IN-THE-SUN)

Tum-Tum had been digging for clams in the sand and catching baby crabs in the pools of water left by the outgoing tide. He was tired and was making his way to one of the whale canoes along the beach to lie down and rest. A long shadow from a high mountain in the west which would cool the afternoon air. Lying down on a bear-skin blanket he soon was on his way to slumber land where his ancestors dwelt.

Tum-Tum then heard someone approaching singing a song to the rhythm of their paddle.

"Oh my paddle steer me to shore
  As the times you have done before
  I seek "Born-To-Be-In-The-Sun"
  My boy, my boy, my only one."

He peeped from the bow of the canoe and spied a woman as she stepped on the beach and came toward where he was hiding. As she approached Tum-Tum asked who she was, and where she came from.

"My name is Nice-to-look-at. I am from Pleasant-places-in-the-ten-mountains. I am the mother of Born-to-be-in-the-Sun.

"I know him, he is the mink. Come, I will show you. He is now waiting for the frog-woman to come down off my grand-father's Thunder Bird Totem Pole."

The pretty lady took his hand. As they walked along she told her story.

"One morning, while I was making a sea-otter blanket, the sun came and shone on my back through a knot hole in my room. Shortly after the mink was born, he grew up to be a man very quickly.

One day he came to me and said, "Mother, I want to marry the frog-woman."

"But you won't like her croaking."

"That is just what I like."

"Go on," I said, so they were married, and then they left in a canoe for the distant mountains far across the waters and did not come back."

Tum-Turn lead pretty lady to where the Totem Pole stood and there was the mink talking to the frog-woman. His mother spoke gently to him. "My boy Born-to-be-in-the-Sun". He smiled and rolled his eyes.

"Mother, my wife and I have been resting under the protection of the Thunder Bird's spirit of goodwill. He will be glad to meet you."

At those words, Thunder Bird flew off from the top of the Totem Pole. Flashing his eyes like lightning and flapping his wings, making thunder. He circled the village and came back where the visitors were standing. He took off his feather clothing and mask and became a man.

Thunder Bird then commanded all those on the Totem to arouse themselves, come down to the ground, take off their masks and

[p. 61]

meet Mink's mother. Some of the myth people took off their masks and became human. Those who did not were Ho-hook. Zoon-a-qua and Raven. Nice-to-look-at related her story again of the sun, and she had come to seek him. But how to get to his house in the sky no one knew . Thunder Bird said he could fly up there. Raven thought it best to wait for sundown then the house would not be so high in the Heavens. Finally Tum-Tum said, "Let us make bird arrows and shoot them at his house. If it can be hit, we can shoot another and another into their hocks, then we will have an arrow chain that will reach from earth to Skyland."

So they all got busy making arrows. Mink made a strong yew wood bow. When all was ready, Tum-Tum took the bow and began shooting upward making the chain like he said. Only a blunt one was left over. Zoon-a-qua, the Sleepy one woke up and said, "I will shoot this one to wake the sun," for a cloud had blotted out the house. Up and up it went and was soon lost to sight. They all stood around in wonder, waiting to see what would happen. The sun has many tricks. The arrow returned with such swiftness that Zoon-a-qua could not dodge and it hit him on the head leaving a big bump which amazed everyone and made them laugh.

Tum-Tum shook the arrow chain and it became a cedar rope, up which he and Pretty Lady started to climb followed by the mink with the Frog-Woman on his back. After climbing for a long time they finally came to a big house. From its front a great stream of light poured forth over all creation. Standing near the doorway was a tall strong man with a broom in his hand bidding them welcome. This was all so strange the Frog-Woman began croaking. The Sun invited them to come inside. He inquired of Nice-to-look-at, "I've seen you before." The Mink spoke up and said, "This is your wife and I am your child." To which he replied, "I  now. Could you loan me your feet? I have to walk all the time, my feet get tired and if you don't keep sweeping your aunts and grandmothers (the clouds) will come and then it will get dark inside. And all Skyland as well, if Thunder Bird knows that he will flash his lightning and roll his thunder to scare the people of the village to spill their buckets of raindrops. You had better come in the house, the rascal may be up to some mischief right now." The sun began sweeping again.

When the Mink and his friends went inside they saw many  things. Everything was bright and spotlessly clean. In the four corners stood strong men holding up the beams that supported the roof. Large cedar crests carved with the Sun's crest were piled on top of each other all around the sides of the house. These excited the Mink's instinctive curiosity, so that he snooped around, opening and closing the boxes. One was filled with sunrises, one had sun-beams in it, another was full of rainbows, and one had sunsets. To open the four boxes at one time would be disastrous but the Mink did not know. Others held the Sun's masks, rattles, dishes carved of wood and costumes for his dances. Boxes of food were stored everywhere. In the center of the house there was a hole from which one could see the earth. Below this was the well of life and death through which the souls from the dead departed from the earth. Unborn souls went from here on the journey

[p. 62]

of life.

The Sun addressed the Mink again, "When are you going to lend me your feet? My, it's getting foggy in here."

The Mink had no more than started to take them off when there was a screeching noise like a thousand owls. The four strong men holding up the roof became frightened as the whole house trembled with a skyquake. There was a great confusion, the Thunder Bird was outside, lightning flashed, thunder rolled--he was having fun.

The Sun's visitors slid from one end of the house to the other until they all disappeared through the Well of Life and Death. They came floating down, down and down to the earth, landing  as a snowflake on a sandy beach, then started to make up their Totem-Pole again with the Thunder Bird on top.

Tum-Tum woke at the call of his mother. "You naughty boy, here is where you have been hiding. Get your blanket and come in the house out of the rain."

      
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge

[p. 63]

Click to enlarge
The Indian Maiden's Plea

     
The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends, by W.L. Webber, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64]

  

THE THUNDER BIRD TOTEM POLE

  

Stanley Park, Vancouver, Canada.

On the Knight Inlet of British Columbia there dwells a portion of the Kwakiutl Indian Tribe. Among them the Thunder Bird is known as Ts-o-na. This legend tells of the origin of their Totem Pole.

Tsona resided in Skyland, above the snowy peaks that border the inlet. One day he decided to live with the mortals of the earth, and be like them. Donning his Thunder Bird garments, he flew out of the door of the Upper World. When looking down from a mountain, he spied a berrying place by a river. There he would build a large community house for himself and his tribe. When the new lodge was finished he realized that it would have to be well guarded, for in those days the fish, birds and animals by the aid of their strong minds could change themselves into human beings. Since some of them had many evil ways he had, for his protection, the Grizzly Bears for guards.

One day as the bears were in search of food, they came upon a hungry stranger dressed in seal skins, who later became a slave to Thunder Bird.

Shortly after Dos-nog-wa, the powerful Stoneman, came to visit Tsona in his war canoe of a hundred men, for they were travelling around the world. Tsona offered them his friendship and the hospitality of his house and food. Before each guest was set a carved bowlful of oolichan grease in which to dip their fish and other eatables. These dishes were beautifully carved with the owner's crest, and one peculiar thing about them was that no matter how much of the grease was used, they were always full. Stoneman and his men were completely mystified by the unusual significance of this and the things that adorned the inside of Thunder Bird's household. When they got up to leave, they took what they had been using. As Tsona protested, they took him prisoner, and led him to their canoe. When they put out to sea, the clouds gathered, the wind blew, the water swirled and danced, and a storm was upon them. Thunder Bird's eyes blazed with fire more dazzling than the sun. Torrents of rain soon flooded the war canoe with water that washed it from end to end. The Indians had never experienced a storm like this before, and they became alarmed, expecting at any moment to be capsized into the sea. Dosnogwa offered to return Thunder Bird his freedom and his property, if he would calm the angry waves. He realized that he was in the hands of a supernatural power stronger than the self within him: one he could not defy or define. As they returned Thunder Bird to his home, the storm ceased. The day's splendour burst its glory once more upon the green things of the earth and the surrounding mountains. Never did the Indians forget their visions of the marvellous powers they had witnessed that day.

Across the shining waters of the inlet, by the mouth of a salmon river, there lived the great chief, Sisa-Kaulas, 'Everybody-Paddling-Toward-Him.' Among his family of many children there was a plump

[p. 65]

and pretty girl who Tsona had admired many times. He was filled with love for her, and finally he asked one day for her hand in marriage.

The Chief, to test his courage and sincerity, compelled him to walk around a hot fire, and also demanded that he give presents to him. A feast was held, and during it the Chief gave Tsona more valuable gifts than he had received, and bestowed upon him a crest and other honors. These, as always, would be delivered after the first child was born.

Should the first-born child be a son, the value of the gifts would be increased many times. This would give the wife the privilege of being independent, and of returning to her former home if she desired, or if the Chief requested. She was also required to send her children to live with their grandparents that they might learn their customs. Her eldest son would finally inherit the chiefship of her brother.

Tsona's eldest son dwelt in the home of his grandparents until he had attained manhood. He then began to build his own lodge and erect a totem pole as a crest, one that could be handed down to future generations in remembrance that it was Tsona who was the first man in the tribe to symbolize the Thunder Bird and bring peace and good will among all people. Accordingly he placed the Thunder Bird on the top, while beneath it was the Grizzly Bear holding the captive slave.

When the lodge was completed, a big feast was held. Presents were given to all the invited guests, who extended to him more favors of importance.

Two totem poles, symbolic of this ceremony are now erected in Stanley Park, close to the Lumberman's Arch. They may be seen from passing ships that ply the ocean's lanes. Strangers from many lands stand before this shrine of a fading glory gazing at these wooden carvings, these customs of a changing race.

The Lightning Symbol of the Thunder Bird.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: twi.txt =====


      
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ii]

 BY THE SAME WRITER--

	 
		THE SECRET ROSE
		 POEMS
		 THE WIND AMONG THE REEDS
		 THE SHADOWY WATERS
		
		 [p. iii]

 

THE CELTIC TWILIGHT

[p. iv]

Printed 1893

 Reprinted with additions 1902

[p. v]

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece

 

The Celtic Twilight

 

by W. B. YEATS

 

A. H. BULLEN, 18 Cecil Court

 

St. Martin's Lane, London, W.C.

 

MCMII

 

Scanned, proofed and formattted at sacred-texts.com, July 2001 by J. B. Hare. Additional formatting and proofing, January, 2004. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

[p. vi]

 Time drops in decay
 Like a candle burnt out.
 And the mountains and woods
 Have their day, have their day;
 But, kindly old rout
 Of the fire-born moods,
 You pass not away. 

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

 

THE HOSTING OF THE SIDHE

 The host is riding from Knocknarea,
 And over the grave of Clooth-na-bare;
 Caolte tossing his burning hair,
 And Niamh calling, 'Away, come away;
 Empty your heart of its mortal dream.
 The winds awaken, the leaves whirl round,
 Our cheeks are pale, our hair is unbound,
 Our breasts are heaving, our eyes are a-gleam,
 Our arms are waving, our lips are apart,
 And if any gaze on our rushing band,
 We come between him and the deed of his hand,
 We come between him and the hope of his heart.'
 The host is rushing 'twixt night and day;
 And where is there hope or deed as fair?
 Caolte tossing his burning hair,
 And Niamh calling, 'Away, come away.' 

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

 

Contents

  THIS BOOK  <page 1> 
  A TELLER OF TALES  <page 4> 
  BELIEF AND UNBELIEF  <page 8> 
  MORTAL HELP  <page 12> 
  A VISIONARY  <page 15> 
  VILLAGE GHOSTS  <page 23> 
  'DUST HATH CLOSED HELEN'S EYE'  <page 35> 
  A KNIGHT OF THE SHEEP  <page 50> 
  AN ENDURING HEART  <page 56> 
  THE SORCERERS  <page 61> 
  THE DEVIL  <page 69> 
  HAPPY AND UNHAPPY THEOLOGIANS  <page 71> 
  THE LAST GLEEMAN  <page 79> 
  REGINA, REGINA PIGMEORUM, VENI  <page 79> 
  'AND FAIR, FIERCE WOMEN'  <page 97> 
  ENCHANTED WOODS  <page 101> 
  MIRACULOUS CREATURES  <page 109> 
  ARISTOTLE OF THE BOOKS  <page 112> 
  THE SWINE OF THE GODS  <page 113> 
  A VOICE  <page 115> 
  KIDNAPPERS  <page 117> 
  THE UNTIRING ONES  <page 130> 
  EARTH, FIRE AND WATER  <page 135> 
  THE OLD TOWN  <page 137> 
  [p. x]    
  THE MAN AND HIS BOOTS  <page 141> 
  A COWARD  <page 143> 
  THE THREE O'BYRNES AND THE EVIL FAERIES  <page 145> 
  DRUMCLIFF AND ROSSES  <page 148> 
  THE THICK SKULL OF THE FORTUNATE  <page 160> 
  THE RELIGION OF A SAILOR  <page 163> 
  CONCERNING THE NEARNESS TOGETHER OF HEAVEN, EARTH, AND PURGATORY  <page 165> 
  THE EATERS OF PRECIOUS STONES  <page 167> 
  OUR LADY OF THE HILLS  <page 169> 
  THE GOLDEN AGE  <page 173> 
  A REMONSTRANCE WITH SCOTSMEN FOR HAVING SOURED THE DISPOSITION OF THEIR GHOSTS AND FAERIES  <page 176> 
  WAR  <page 183> 
  THE QUEEN AND THE FOOL  <page 186> 
  THE FRIENDS OF THE PEOPLE OF FAERY  <page 195> 
  DREAMS THAT HAVE NO MORAL  <page 208> 
  BY THE ROADSIDE  <page 231> 
  INTO THE TWILIGHT  <page 235> 
  

 

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

 

THIS BOOK

 

I

I HAVE desired, like every artist, to create a little world out of the beautiful, pleasant, and significant things of this marred and clumsy world, and to show in a vision something of the face of Ireland to any of my own people who would look where I bid them. I have therefore written down accurately and candidly much that I have heard and seen, and, except by way of commentary, nothing that I have merely imagined. I have, however, been at no pains to separate my own beliefs from those of the peasantry, but have rather let my men and women, dhouls and faeries, go their way unoffended or defended by any argument of mine. The things a man has heard and seen are threads of life, and if he pull them carefully from the confused distaff of memory, any who will can weave them into whatever garments of belief please them best. I too have woven my garment like another,

[p. 2]

but I shall try to keep warm in it, and shall be well content if it do not unbecome me.

Hope and Memory have one daughter and her name is Art, and she has built her dwelling far from the desperate field where men hang out their garments upon forked boughs to be banners of battle. O beloved daughter of Hope and Memory, be with me for a little.

1893.

 

II

I have added a few more chapters in the manner of the old ones, and would have added others, but one loses, as one grows older, something of the lightness of one's dreams; one begins to take life up in both hands, and to care more for the fruit than the flower, and that is no great loss per haps. In these new chapters, as in the old ones, I have invented nothing but my comments and one or two deceitful sentences that may keep some poor story-teller's commerce with the devil and his angels, or the like,

[p. 3]

from being known among his neighbours. I shall publish in a little while a big book about the commonwealth of faery, and shall try to make it systematical and learned enough to buy pardon for this handful of dreams.

1902.

W. B. YEATS.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

 

A TELLER OF TALES

MANY of the tales in this book were told me by one Paddy Flynn, a little bright-eyed old man, who lived in a leaky and one-roomed cabin in the village of Ballisodare, which is, he was wont to say, 'the most gentle'--whereby he meant faery--'place in the whole of County Sligo.' Others hold it, however, but second to Drumcliff and Drumahair. The first time I saw him he was cooking mushrooms for himself; the next time he was asleep under a hedge, smiling in his sleep. He was indeed always cheerful, though I thought I could see in his eyes (swift as the eyes of a rabbit, when they peered out of their wrinkled holes) a melancholy which was well-nigh a portion of their joy; the visionary melancholy of purely instinctive natures and of all animals.

And yet there was much in his life to depress him, for in the triple solitude of age, eccentricity, and deafness, he went

[p. 5]

about much pestered by children. It was for this very reason perhaps that he ever recommended mirth and hopefulness. He was fond, for instance, of telling how Collumcille cheered up his mother. 'How are you to-day, mother?' said the saint. 'Worse,' replied the mother. 'May you be worse to-morrow,' said the saint. The next day Collumcille came again, and exactly the same conversation took place, but the third day the mother said, 'Better, thank God.' And the saint replied, 'May you be better to-morrow.' He was fond too of telling how the Judge smiles at the last day alike when he rewards the good and condemns the lost to unceasing flames. He had many strange sights to keep him cheerful or to make him sad. I asked him had he ever seen the faeries, and got the reply, 'Am I not annoyed with them?' I asked too if he had ever seen the banshee. 'I have seen it,' he said, 'down there by the water, batting the river with its hands.'

I have copied this account of Paddy

[p. 6]

[paragraph continues] Flynn, with a few verbal alterations, from a note-book which I almost filled with his tales and sayings, shortly after seeing him. I look now at the note-book regretfully, for the blank pages at the end will never be filled up. Paddy Flynn is dead; a friend of mine gave him a large bottle of whiskey, and though a sober man at most times, the sight of so much liquor filled him with a great enthusiasm, and he lived upon it for some days and then died. His body, worn out with old age and hard times, could not bear the drink as in his young days. He was a great teller of tales, and unlike our common romancers, knew how to empty heaven, hell, and purgatory, faeryland and earth, to people his stories. He did not live in a shrunken world, but knew of no less ample circumstance than did Homer himself. Perhaps the Gaelic people shall by his like bring back again the ancient simplicity and amplitude of imagination. What is literature but the expression of moods by the vehicle

[p. 7]

of symbol and incident? And are there not moods which need heaven, hell, purgatory, and faeryland for their expression, no less than this dilapidated earth? Nay, are there not moods which shall find no expression unless there be men who dare to mix heaven, hell, purgatory, and faeryland together, or even to set the heads of beasts to the bodies of men, or to thrust the souls of men into the heart of rocks? Let us go forth, the tellers of tales, and seize whatever prey the heart long for, and have no fear. Everything exists, everything is true, and the earth is only a little dust under our feet.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

 

BELIEF AND UNBELIEF

THERE are some doubters even in the western villages. One woman told me last Christmas that she did not believe either in hell or in ghosts. Hell she thought was merely an invention got up by the priest to keep people good; and ghosts would not be permitted, she held, to go 'trapsin about the earth' at their own free will; 'but there are faeries,' she added, 'and little leprechauns, and water-horses, and fallen angels.' I have met also a man with a mohawk Indian tattooed upon his arm, who held exactly similar beliefs and unbeliefs. No matter what one doubts one never doubts the faeries, for, as the man with the mohawk Indian on his arm said to me, 'they stand to reason.' Even the official mind does not escape this faith.

A little girl who was at service in the village of Grange, close under the seaward slopes of Ben Bulben, suddenly disappeared

[p. 9]

one night about three years ago. There was at once great excitement in the neighbourhood, because it was rumoured that the faeries had taken her. A villager was said to have long struggled to hold her from them, but at last they prevailed, and he found nothing in his hands but a broomstick. The local constable was applied to, and he at once instituted a house-to-house search, and at the same time advised the people to burn all the bucalauns (ragweed) on the field she vanished from, because bucalauns are sacred to the faeries. They spent the whole night burning them, the constable repeating spells the while. In the morning the little girl was found, the story goes, wandering in the field. She said the faeries had taken her away a great distance, riding on a faery horse. At last she saw a big river, and the man who had tried to keep her from being carried off was drifting down it--such are the topsy-turvydoms of faery glamour--in a cockleshell.

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] On the way her companions had mentioned the names of several people who were about to die shortly in the village.

Perhaps the constable was right. It is better doubtless to believe much unreason and a little truth than to deny for denial's sake truth and unreason alike, for when we do this we have not even a rush candle to guide our steps, not even a poor sowlth to dance before us on the marsh, and must needs fumble our way into the great emptiness where dwell the mis-shapen dhouls. And after all, can we come to so great evil if we keep a little fire on our hearths and in our souls, and welcome with open hand whatever of excellent come to warm itself, whether it be man or phantom, and do not say too fiercely, even to the dhouls themselves, 'Be ye gone'? When all is said and done, how do we not know but that our own unreason may be better than another's truth? for it has been warmed

[p. 11]

on our hearths and in our souls, and is ready for the wild bees of truth to hive in it, and make their sweet honey. Come into the world again, wild bees, wild bees!

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

 

MORTAL HELP

ONE hears in the old poems of men taken away to help the gods in a battle, and Cuchullan won the goddess Fand for a while, by helping her married sister and her sister's husband to overthrow another nation of the Land of Promise. I have been told, too, that the people of faery cannot even play at hurley unless they have on either side some mortal, whose body, or whatever has been put in its place, as the story-teller would say, is asleep at home. Without mortal help they are shadowy and cannot even strike the balls. One day I was walking over some marshy land in Galway with a friend when we found an old, hard-featured man digging a ditch. My friend had heard that this man had seen a wonderful sight of some kind, and at last we got the story out of him. When he was a boy he was working one day with about thirty men and

[p. 13]

women and boys. They were beyond Tuam and not far from Knock-na-gur. Presently they saw, all thirty of them, and at a distance of about half-a-mile, some hundred and fifty of the people of faery. There were two of them, he said, in dark clothes like people of our own time, who stood about a hundred yards from one another, but the others wore clothes of all colours, 'bracket' or chequered, and some with red waistcoats.

He could not see what they were doing, but all might have been playing hurley, for 'they looked as if it was that.' Sometimes they would vanish, and then he would almost swear they came back out of the bodies of the two men in dark clothes. These two men were of the size of living men, but the others were small. He saw them for about half-an-hour, and then the old man he and those about him were working for took up a whip and said, 'Get on, get on, or we will have no work done!'

[p. 14]

I asked if he saw the faeries too, 'Oh, yes, but he did not want work he was paying wages for to be neglected.' He made every body work so hard that nobody saw what happened to the faeries.

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

 

A VISIONARY

A YOUNG man came to see me at my lodgings the other night, and began to talk of the making of the earth and the heavens and much else. I questioned him about his life and his doings. He had written many poems and painted many mystical designs since we met last, but latterly had neither written nor painted, for his whole heart was set upon making his mind strong, vigorous, and calm, and the emotional life of the artist was bad for him, he feared. He recited his poems readily, however. He had them all in his memory. Some indeed had never been written down. They, with their wild music as of winds blowing in the reeds, [*1] seemed to me the

[p. 16]

very inmost voice of Celtic sadness, and of Celtic longing for infinite things the world has never seen. Suddenly it seemed to me that he was peering about him a little eagerly. 'Do you see anything, X-----?' I said. 'A shining, winged woman, covered by her long hair, is standing near the doorway,' he answered, or some such words. 'Is it the influence of some living person who thinks of us, and whose thoughts appear to us in that symbolic form?' I said; for I am well instructed in the ways of the visionaries and in the fashion of their speech. 'No,' he replied; 'for if it were the thoughts of a person who is alive I should feel the living influence in my living body, and my heart would beat and my breath would fail. It is a spirit. It is some one who is dead or who has never lived.'

I asked what he was doing, and found he was clerk in a large shop. His pleasure, however, was to wander about upon the hills, talking to half-mad and visionary

[p. 17]

peasants, or to persuade queer and conscience-stricken persons to deliver up the keeping of their troubles into his care. Another night, when I was with him in his own lodging, more than one turned up to talk over their beliefs and disbeliefs, and sun them as it were in the subtle light of his mind. Sometimes visions come to him as he talks with them, and he is rumoured to have told divers people true matters of their past days and distant friends, and left them hushed with dread of their strange teacher, who seems scarce more than a boy, and is so much more subtle than the oldest among them.

The poetry he recited me was full of his nature and his visions. Sometimes it told of other lives he believes himself to have lived in other centuries, sometimes of people he had talked to, revealing them to their own minds. I told him I would write an article upon him and it, and was told in turn that I might do so if I did not mention his name, for he wished to be

[p. 18]

always 'unknown, obscure, impersonal.' Next day a bundle of his poems arrived, and with them a note in these words: 'Here are copies of verses you said you liked. I do not think I could ever write or paint any more. I prepare myself for a cycle of other activities in some other life. I will make rigid my roots and branches. It is not now my turn to burst into leaves and flowers.'

The poems were all endeavours to capture some high, impalpable mood in a net of obscure images. There were fine passages in all, but these were often embedded in thoughts which have evidently a special value to his mind, but are to other men the counters of an unknown coinage. To them they seem merely so much brass or copper or tarnished silver at the best. At other times the beauty of the thought was obscured by careless writing as though he had suddenly doubted if writing was not a foolish labour. He had frequently illustrated his verses with drawings,

[p. 19]

in which an unperfect anatomy did not altogether hide extreme beauty of feeling. The faeries in whom he believes have given him many subjects, notably Thomas of Ercildoune sitting motionless in the twilight while a young and beautiful creature leans softly out of the shadow and whispers in his ear. He had delighted above all in strong effects of colour: spirits who have upon their heads instead of hair the feathers of peacocks; a phantom reaching from a swirl of flame towards a star; a spirit passing with a globe of iridescent crystal--symbol of the soul--half shut within his hand. But always under this largess of colour lay some tender homily addressed to man's fragile hopes. This spiritual eagerness draws to him all those who, like himself, seek for illumination or else mourn for a joy that has gone. One of these especially comes to mind. A winter or two ago he spent much of the night walking up and down upon the

[p. 20]

mountain talking to an old peasant who, dumb to most men, poured out his cares for him. Both were unhappy: X----- because he had then first decided that art and poetry were not for him, and the old peasant because his life was ebbing out with no achievement remaining and no hope left him. Both how Celtic! how full of striving after a something never to be completely expressed in word or deed. The peasant was wandering in his mind with prolonged sorrow. Once he burst out with 'God possesses the heavens--God possesses the heavens--but He covets the world'; and once he lamented that his old neighbours were gone, and that all had forgotten him: they used to draw a chair to the fire for him in every cabin, and now they said, 'Who is that old fellow there?' 'The fret' [Irish for doom] 'is over me,' he repeated, and then went on to talk once more of God and heaven. More than once also he said, waving his arm towards the

[p. 21]

mountain, 'Only myself knows what happened under the thorn-tree forty years ago'; and as he said it the tears upon his face glistened in the moonlight.

This old man always rises before me when I think of X-----. Both seek--one in wandering sentences, the other in symbolic pictures and subtle allegoric poetry--to express a something that lies beyond the range of expression; and both, if X----- will forgive me, have within them the vast and vague extravagance that lies at the bottom of the Celtic heart. The peasant visionaries that are, the landlord duelists that were, and the whole hurly-burly of legends--Cuchulain fighting the sea for two days until the waves pass over him and he dies, Caolte storming the palace of the gods, Oisin seeking in vain for three hundred years to appease his insatiable heart with all the pleasures of faeryland, these two mystics walking up and down upon the mountains uttering the central dreams of their souls in no less dream-laden sentences,

[p. 22]

and this mind that finds them so interesting--all are a portion of that great Celtic phantasmagoria whose meaning no man has discovered, nor any angel revealed.

Footnotes

^15:1 I wrote this sentence long ago. This sadness now seems to me a part of all peoples who preserve the moods of the ancient peoples of the world. I am not so pre-occupied with the mystery of Race as I used to be, but leave this sentence and other sentences like it unchanged. We once believed them, and have, it may be, not grown wiser.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

 

VILLAGE GHOSTS

IN the great cities we see so little of the world, we drift into our minority. In the little towns and villages there are no minorities; people are not numerous enough. You must see the world there, perforce. Every man is himself a class; every hour carries its new challenge. When you pass the inn at the end of the village you leave your favourite whimsy behind you; for you will meet no one who can share it. We listen to eloquent speaking, read books and write them, settle all the affairs of the universe. The dumb village multitudes pass on unchanging; the feel of the spade in the hand is no different for all our talk: good seasons and bad follow each other as of old. The dumb multitudes are no more concerned with us than is the old horse peering through the rusty gate of the village pound. The ancient map-makers wrote across unexplored regions, 'Here are lions.' Across the villages of fishermen

[p. 24]

and turners of the earth, so different are these from us, we can write but one line that is certain, 'Here are ghosts.'

My ghosts inhabit the village of H-----, in Leinster. History has in no manner been burdened by this ancient village, with its crooked lanes, its old abbey churchyard full of long grass, its green background of small fir-trees, and its quay, where lie a few tarry fishing-luggers. In the annals of entomology it is well known. For a small bay lies westward a little, where he who watches night after night may see a certain rare moth fluttering along the edge of the tide, just at the end of evening or the beginning of dawn. A hundred years ago it was carried here from Italy by smugglers in a cargo of silks and laces. If the moth-hunter would throw down his net, and go hunting for ghost tales or tales of the faeries and such-like children of Lillith, he would have need for far less patience.

[p. 25]

To approach the village at night a timid man requires great strategy. A man was once heard complaining, 'By the cross of Jesus! how shall I go? If I pass by the hill of Dunboy old Captain Burney may look out on me. If I go round by the water, and up by the steps, there is the headless one and another on the quays, and a new one under the old churchyard wall. If I go right round the other way, Mrs. Stewart is appearing at Hillside Gate, and the devil himself is in the Hospital Lane.'

I never heard which spirit he braved, but feel sure it was not the one in the Hospital Lane. In cholera times a shed had been there set up to receive patients. When the need had gone by, it was pulled down, but ever since the ground where it stood has broken out in ghosts and demons and faeries. There is a farmer at H-----, Paddy B----- by name--a man of great strength,

[p. 26]

and a teetotaller. His wife and sister-in-law, musing on his great strength, often wonder what he would do if he drank. One night when passing through the Hospital Lane, he saw what he supposed at first to be a tame rabbit; after a little he found that it was a white cat. When he came near, the creature slowly began to swell larger and larger, and as it grew he felt his own strength ebbing away, as though it were sucked out of him. He turned and ran.

By the Hospital Lane goes the 'Faeries Path.' Every evening they travel from the hill to the sea, from the sea to the hill. At the sea end of their path stands a cottage. One night Mrs. Arbunathy, who lived there, left her door open, as she was expecting her son. Her husband was asleep by the fire; a tall man came in and sat beside him. After he had been sitting there for a while, the woman said, 'In the name of God, who are you?' He got up and went out, saying, 'Never leave the door open at this hour, or evil may come to you.' She woke her husband

[p. 27]

and told him. 'One of the good people has been with us,' said he.

Probably the man braved Mrs. Stewart at Hillside Gate. When she lived she was the wife of the Protestant clergyman. 'Her ghost was never known to harm any one,' say the village people; 'it is only doing a penance upon the earth.' Not far from Hillside Gate, where she haunted, appeared for a short time a much more remarkable spirit. Its haunt was the bogeen, a green lane leading from the western end of the village. I quote its history at length: a typical village tragedy. In a cottage at the village end of the bogeen lived a house-painter, Jim Montgomery, and his wife. They had several children. He was a little dandy, and came of a higher class than his neighbours. His wife was a very big woman. Her husband, who had been expelled from the village choir for drink, gave her a beating one day. Her sister heard of it, and came and took down one of the window shutters

[p. 28]

[paragraph continues] --Montgomery was neat about everything, and had shutters on the outside of every window--and beat him with it, being big and strong like her sister. He threatened to prosecute her; she answered that she would break every bone in his body if he did. She never spoke to her sister again, because she had allowed herself to be beaten by so small a man. Jim Montgomery grew worse and worse: his wife soon began to have not enough to eat. She told no one, for she was very proud. Often, too, she would have no fire on a cold night. If any neighbours came in she would say she had let the fire out because she was just going to bed. The people about often heard her husband beating her, but she never told any one. She got very thin. At last one Saturday there was no food in the house for herself and the children. She could bear it no longer, and went to the priest and asked him for some money. He gave her thirty shillings. Her husband met her,

[p. 29]

and took the money, and beat her. On the following Monday she got very ill, and sent for a Mrs. Kelly. Mrs. Kelly, as soon as she saw her, said, 'My woman, you are dying,' and sent for the priest and the doctor. She died in an hour. After her death, as Montgomery neglected the children, the landlord had them taken to the workhouse. A few nights after they had gone, Mrs. Kelly was going home through the bogeen when the ghost of Mrs. Montgomery appeared and followed her. It did not leave her until she reached her own house. She told the priest, Father S------, a noted antiquarian, and could not get him to believe her. A few nights afterwards Mrs. Kelly again met the spirit in the same place. She was in too great terror to go the whole way, but stopped at a neighbour's cottage midway, and asked them to let her in. They answered they were going to bed. She cried out, 'In the name of God let me in, or I will break open the door.' They

[p. 30]

opened, and so she escaped from the ghost. Next day she told the priest again. This time he believed, and said it would follow her until she spoke to it.

She met the spirit a third time in the bogeen. She asked what kept it from its rest. The spirit said that its children must be taken from the workhouse, for none of its relations were ever there before, and that three masses were to be said for the repose of its soul. 'If my husband does not believe you,' she said, 'show him that,' and touched Mrs. Kelly's wrist with three fingers. The places where they touched swelled up and blackened. She then vanished. For a time Montgomery would not believe that his wife had appeared: 'she would not show herself to Mrs. Kelly,' he said--'she with respectable people to appear to.' He was convinced by the three marks, and the children were taken from the workhouse. The priest said the masses, and the shade must have been at rest, for it has not since appeared.

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] Some time afterwards Jim Montgomery died in the workhouse, having come to great poverty through drink.

I know some who believe they have seen the headless ghost upon the quay, and one who, when he passes the old cemetery wall at night, sees a woman with white borders to her cap [*1] creep out and follow him. The apparition only leaves him at his own door. The villagers imagine that she follows him to avenge some wrong. 'I will haunt you when I die' is a favourite threat. His wife was once half-scared to death by what she considers a demon in the shape of a dog.

These are a few of the open-air spirits; the more domestic of their tribe gather within-doors, plentiful as swallows under southern eaves.

[p. 32]

One night a Mrs. Nolan was watching by her dying child in Fluddy's Lane. Suddenly there was a sound of knocking heard at the door. She did not open, fearing it was some unhuman thing that knocked. The knocking ceased. After a little the front-door and then the back-door were burst open, and closed again. Her husband went to see what was wrong. He found both doors bolted. The child died. The doors were again opened and closed as before. Then Mrs. Nolan remembered that she had forgotten to leave window or door open, as the custom is, for the departure of the soul. These strange openings and closings and knockings were warnings and reminders from the spirits who attend the dying.

The house ghost is usually a harmless and well-meaning creature. It is put up with as long as possible. It brings good luck to those who live with it. I remember two children who slept with their mother and sisters and brothers in one

[p. 33]

small room. In the room was also a ghost. They sold herrings in the Dublin streets, and did not mind the ghost much, because they knew they would always sell their fish easily while they slept in the 'ha'nted' room.

I have some acquaintance among the ghost-seers of western villages. The Connaught tales are very different from those of Leinster. These H----- spirits have a gloomy, matter-of-fact way with them. They come to announce a death, to fulfil some obligation, to revenge a wrong, to pay their bills even--as did a fisherman's daughter the other day--and then hasten to their rest. All things they do decently and in order. It is demons, and not ghosts, that transform themselves into white cats or black dogs. The people who tell the tales are poor, serious-minded fishing people, who find in the doings of the ghosts the fascination of fear. In the western tales is a whimsical grace, a curious extravagance. The people who recount them live in the most wild and

[p. 34]

beautiful scenery, under a sky ever loaded and fantastic with flying clouds. They are farmers and labourers, who do a little fishing now and then. They do not fear the spirits too much to feel an artistic and humorous pleasure in their doings. The ghosts themselves share in their quaint hilarity. In one western town, on whose deserted wharf the grass grows, these spirits have so much vigour that, when a misbeliever ventured to sleep in a haunted house, I have been told they flung him through the window, and his bed after him. In the surrounding villages the creatures use the most strange disguises. A dead old gentleman robs the cabbages of his own garden in the shape of a large rabbit. A wicked sea-captain stayed for years inside the plaster of a cottage wall, in the shape of a snipe, making the most horrible noises. He was only dislodged when the wall was broken down; then out of the solid plaster the snipe rushed away whistling.

Footnotes

^31:1 I wonder why she had white borders to her cap. The old Mayo woman, who has told me so many tales, has told me that her brother-in-law saw 'a woman with white borders to her cap going around the stacks in a field, and soon after he got a hurt, and he died in six months.'

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

 

'DUST HATH CLOSED HELEN'S EYE'

 

I

I HAVE been lately to a little group of houses, not many enough to be called a village, in the barony of Kiltartan in County Galway, whose name, Ballylee, is known through all the west of Ireland. There is the old square castle, Ballylee, inhabited by a farmer and his wife, and a cottage where their daughter and their son-in-law live, and a little mill with an old miller, and old ash-trees throwing green shadows upon a little river and great stepping-stones. I went there two or three times last year to talk to the miller about Biddy Early, a wise woman that lived in Clare some years ago, and about her saying, 'There is a cure for all evil between the two mill-wheels of Ballylee,' and to find out from him or another whether she meant the moss between the running waters or some other herb. I have been there this summer, and I shall

[p. 36]

be there again before it is autumn, because Mary Hynes, a beautiful woman whose name is still a wonder by turf fires, died there sixty years ago; for our feet would linger where beauty has lived its life of sorrow to make us understand that it is not of the world. An old man brought me a little way from the mill and the castle, and down a long, narrow boreen that was nearly lost in brambles and sloe bushes, and he said, 'That is the little old foundation of the house, but the most of it is taken for building walls, and the goats have ate those bushes that are growing over it till they've got cranky, and they won't grow any more. They say she was the handsomest girl in Ireland, her skin was like dribbled snow'--he meant driven snow, perhaps,--'and she had blushes in her cheeks. She had five handsome brothers, but all are gone now!' I talked to him about a poem in Irish, Raftery, a famous poet, made about her, and how it said, 'there is a strong cellar in Ballylee.'

[p. 37]

[paragraph continues] He said the strong cellar was the great hole where the river sank underground, and he brought me to a deep pool, where an otter hurried away under a grey boulder, and told me that many fish came up out of the dark water at early morning 'to taste the fresh water coming down from the hills.'

I first heard of the poem from an old woman who fives about two miles further up the river, and who remembers Raftery and Mary Hynes. She says, 'I never saw anybody so handsome as she was, and I never will till I die,' and that he was nearly blind, and had 'no way of living but to go round and to mark some house to go to, and then all the neighbours would gather to hear. If you treated him well he'd praise you, but if you did not, he'd fault you in Irish. He was the greatest poet in Ireland, and he'd make a song about that bush if he chanced to stand under it. There was a bush he stood under from the rain, and he made verses

[p. 38]

praising it, and then when the water came through he made verses dispraising it.' She sang the poem to a friend and to myself in Irish, and every word was audible and expressive, as the words in a song were always, as I think, before music grew too proud to be the garment of words, flowing and changing with the flowing and changing of their energies. The poem is not as natural as the best Irish poetry of the last century, for the thoughts are arranged in a too obviously traditional form, so the old poor half-blind man who made it has to speak as if he were a rich farmer offering the best of everything to the woman he loves, but it has naive and tender phrases. The friend that was with me has made some of the translation, but some of it has been made by the country people themselves. I think it has more of the simplicity of the Irish verses than one finds in most translations.

	 
		Going to Mass by the will of God,
		 The day came wet and the wind rose; [p. 39]
		 I met Mary Hynes at the cross of Kiltartan,
		 And I fell in love with her then and there.
		
		I spoke to her kind and mannerly,
		 As by report was her own way;
		 And she said, 'Raftery, my mind is easy,
		 You may come to-day to Ballylee.'
		
		When I heard her offer I did not linger,
		 When her talk went to my heart my heart rose.
		 We had only to go across the three fields,
		 We had daylight with us to Ballylee.
		
		The table was laid with glasses and a quart measure,
		 She had fair hair, and she sitting beside me;
		 And she said, 'Drink, Raftery, and a hundred welcomes,
		 There is a strong cellar in Ballylee.'
		
		O star of light and O sun in harvest,
		 O amber hair, O my share of the world,
		 Will you come with me upon Sunday
		 Till we agree together before all the people?
		
		I would not grudge you a song every Sunday evening,
		 Punch on the table, or wine if you would drink it,
		 But, O King of Glory, dry the roads before me,
		 Till I find the way to Ballylee.
		
		There is sweet air on the side of the hill
		 When you are looking down upon Ballylee; [p. 40]
		 When you are walking in the valley picking nuts and blackberries,
		 There is music of the birds in it and music of the Sidhe.
		
		What is the worth of greatness till you have the light
		 Of the flower of the branch that is by your side?
		 There is no god to deny it or to try and hide it,
		 She is the sun in the heavens who wounded my heart.
		
		There was no part of Ireland I did not travel,
		 From the rivers to the tops of the mountains,
		 To the edge of Lough Greine whose mouth is hidden,
		 And I saw no beauty but was behind hers.
		
		Her hair was shining, and her brows were shining too;
		 Her face was like herself, her mouth pleasant and sweet.
		 She is the pride, and I give her the branch,
		 She is the shining flower of Ballylee.
		
		It is Mary Hynes, this calm and easy woman,
		 Has beauty in her mind and in her face.
		 If a hundred clerks were gathered together,
		 They could not write down a half of her ways.'
		
		 An old weaver, whose son is supposed to go away among the Sidhe (the faeries)

[p. 41]

at night, says, 'Mary Hynes was the most beautiful thing ever made. My mother used to tell me about her, for she'd be at every hurling, and wherever she was she was dressed in white. As many as eleven men asked her in marriage in one day, but she wouldn't have any of them. There was a lot of men up beyond Kilbecanty one night, sitting together drinking, and talking of her, and one of them got up and set out to go to Ballylee and see her; but Cloon Bog was open then, and when he came to it he fell into the water, and they found him dead there in the morning. She died of the fever that was before the famine.' Another old man says he was only a child when he saw her, but he remembered that 'the strongest man that was among us, one John Madden, got his death of the head of her, cold he got crossing rivers in the night-time to get to Ballylee.' This is perhaps the man the other remembered, for tradition gives the one thing many shapes. There is an old

[p. 42]

woman who remembers her, at Derrybrien among the Echtge hills, a vast desolate place, which has changed little since the old poem said, 'the stag upon the cold summit of Echtge hears the cry of the wolves,' but still mindful of many poems and of the dignity of ancient speech. She says, 'The sun and the moon never shone on anybody so handsome, and her skin was so white that it looked blue, and she had two little blushes on her cheeks.' And an old wrinkled woman who lives close by Ballylee, and has told me many tales of the Sidhe, says, 'I often saw Mary Hynes, she was handsome indeed. She had two bunches of curls beside her cheeks, and they were the colour of silver. I saw Mary Molloy that was drowned in the river beyond, and Mary Guthrie that was in Ardrahan, but she took the sway of them both, a very comely creature. I was at her wake too--she had seen too much of the world. She was a kind creature. One day I was coming home through

[p. 43]

that field beyond, and I was tired, and who should come out but the Poisin Glegeal (the shining flower), and she gave me a glass of new milk.' This old woman meant no more than some beautiful bright colour by the colour of silver, for though I knew an old man--he is dead now--who thought she might know 'the cure for all the evils in the world,' that the Sidhe knew, she has seen too little gold to know its colour. But a man by the shore at Kinvara, who is too young to remember Mary Hynes, says, 'Everybody says there is no one at all to be seen now so handsome; it is said she had beautiful hair, the colour of gold. She was poor, but her clothes every day were the same as Sunday, she had such neatness. And if she went to any kind of a meeting, they would all be killing one another for a sight of her, and there was a great many in love with her, but she died young. It is said that no one that has a song made about them will ever live long.'

[p. 44]

Those who are much admired are, it is held, taken by the Sidhe, who can use ungoverned feeling for their own ends, so that a father, as an old herb doctor told me once, may give his child into their hands, or a husband his wife. The admired and desired are only safe if one says 'God bless them' when one's eyes are upon them. The old woman that sang the song thinks, too, that Mary Hynes was 'taken,' as the phrase is, 'for they have taken many that are not handsome, and why would they not take her? And people came from all parts to look at her, and maybe there were some that did not say "God bless her."' An old man who lives by the sea at Duras has as little doubt that she was taken, 'for there are some living yet can remember her coming to the pattern [*1] there beyond, and she was said to be the handsomest girl in Ireland.' She died young because the gods loved

[p. 45]

her, for the Sidhe are the gods, and it may be that the old saying, which we forget to understand literally, meant her manner of death in old times. These poor countrymen and countrywomen in their beliefs, and in their emotions, are many years nearer to that old Greek world, that set beauty beside the fountain of things, than are our men of learning. She 'had seen too much of the world'; but these old men and women, when they tell of her, blame another and not her, and though they can be hard, they grow gentle as the old men of Troy grew gentle when Helen passed by on the walls.

The poet who helped her to so much fame has himself a great fame throughout the west of Ireland. Some think that Raftery was half blind, and say, 'I saw Raftery, a dark man, but he had sight enough to see her,' or the like, but some think he was wholly blind, as he may have been at the end of his life. Fable makes all things perfect in their kind, and her

[p. 46]

blind people must never look on the world and the sun. I asked a man I met one day, when I was looking for a pool na mna Sidhe where women of faery have been seen, how Raftery could have admired Mary Hynes so much if he had been altogether blind? He said, 'I think Raftery was altogether blind, but those that are blind have a way of seeing things, and have the power to know more, and to feel more, and to do more, and to guess more than those that have their sight, and a certain wit and a certain wisdom is given to them.' Everybody, indeed, will tell you that he was very wise, for was he not only blind but a poet? The weaver whose words about Mary Hynes I have already given, says, 'His poetry was the gift of the Almighty, for there are three things that are the gift of the Almighty--poetry and dancing and principles. That is why in the old times an ignorant man coming down from the hillside would be better behaved and have better learning than a

[p. 47]

man with education you'd meet now, for they got it from God'; and a man at Coole says, 'When he put his finger to one part of his head, everything would come to him as if it was written in a book'; and an old pensioner at Kiltartan says, 'He was standing under a bush one time, and he talked to it, and it answered him back in Irish. Some say it was the bush that spoke, but it must have been an enchanted voice in it, and it gave him the knowledge of all the things of the world. The bush withered up afterwards, and it is to be seen on the roadside now between this and Rahasine.' There is a poem of his about a bush, which I have never seen, and it may have come out of the cauldron of fable in this shape.

A friend of mine met a man once who had been with him when he died, but the people say that he died alone, and one Maurteen Gillane told Dr. Hyde that all night long a light was seen streaming up to heaven from the roof of the house where

[p. 48]

he lay, and 'that was the angels who were with him'; and all night long there was a great light in the hovel, 'and that was the angels who were waking him. They gave that honour to him because he was so good a poet, and sang such religious songs.' It may be that in a few years Fable, who changes mortalities to immortalities in her cauldron, will have changed Mary Hynes and Raftery to perfect symbols of the sorrow of beauty and of the magnificence and penury of dreams.

1900.

 

II

When I was in a northern town awhile ago, I had a long talk with a man who had lived in a neighbouring country district when he was a boy. He told me that when a very beautiful girl was born in a family that had not been noted for good looks, her beauty was thought to have come from the Sidhe, and to bring misfortune with it. He went over the names

[p. 49]

of several beautiful girls that he had known, and said that beauty had never brought happiness to anybody. It was a thing, he said, to be proud of and afraid of. I wish I had written out his words at the time, for they were more picturesque than my memory of them.

1902.

Footnotes

^44:1 A 'pattern,' or 'patron,' is a festival in honour of a saint.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

 

A KNIGHT OF THE SHEEP

AWAY to the north of Ben Bulben and Cope's mountain lives 'a strong farmer,' a knight of the sheep they would have called him in the Gaelic days. Proud of his descent from one of the most fighting clans of the Middle Ages, he is a man of force alike in his words and in his deeds. There is but one man that swears like him, and this man lives far away upon the mountain. 'Father in Heaven, what have I done to deserve this?' he says when he has lost his pipe; and no man but he who lives on the mountain can rival his language on a fair day over a bargain. He is passionate and abrupt in his movements, and when angry tosses his white beard about with his left hand.

One day I was dining with him when the servant-maid announced a certain Mr. O'Donnell. A sudden silence fell upon the old man and upon his two daughters. At last the eldest daughter said somewhat

[p. 51]

severely to her father, 'Go and ask him to come in and dine.' The old man went out, and then came in looking greatly relieved, and said, 'He says he will not dine with us.' 'Go out,' said the daughter, 'and ask him into the back parlour, and give him some whiskey.' Her father, who had just finished his dinner, obeyed sullenly, and I heard the door of the back parlour--a little room where the daughters sat and sewed during the evening--shut to behind the men. The daughter then turned to me and said, 'Mr. O'Donnell is the tax-gatherer, and last year he raised our taxes, and my father was very angry, and when he came, brought him into the dairy, and sent the dairy-woman away on a message, and then swore at him a great deal. 'I will teach you, sir,' O'Donnell replied, 'that the law can protect its officers'; but my father reminded him that he had no witness. At last my father got tired, and sorry too, and said he would show

[p. 52]

him a short way home. When they were half-way to the main road they came on a man of my father's who was ploughing, and this somehow brought back remembrance of the wrong. He sent the man away on a message, and began to swear at the tax-gatherer again. When I heard of it I was disgusted that he should have made such a fuss over a miserable creature like O'Donnell; and when I heard a few weeks ago that O'Donnell's only son had died and left him heart-broken, I resolved to make my father be kind to him next time he came.'

She then went out to see a neighbour, and I sauntered towards the back parlour. When I came to the door I heard angry voices inside. The two men were evidently getting on to the tax again, for I could hear them bandying figures to and fro. I opened the door; at sight of my face the farmer was reminded of his peaceful intentions, and asked me if I knew where the whiskey was. I had

[p. 53]

seen him put it into the cupboard, and was able therefore to find it and get it out, looking at the thin, grief-struck face of the tax-gatherer. He was rather older than my friend, and very much more feeble and worn, and of a very different type. He was not like him, a robust, successful man, but rather one of those whose feet find no resting-place upon the earth. I recognized one of the children of reverie, and said, 'You are doubtless of the stock of the old O'Donnells. I know well the hole in the river where their treasure lies buried under the guard of a serpent with many heads.' 'Yes, sur,' he replied, 'I am the last of a line of princes.'

We then fell to talking of many commonplace things, and my friend did not once toss up his beard, but was very friendly. At last the gaunt old tax-gatherer got up to go, and my friend said, 'I hope we will have a glass together next year.' 'No, no,' was the

[p. 54]

answer, 'I shall be dead next year.' 'I too have lost sons,' said the other in quite a gentle voice. 'But your sons were not like my son.' And then the two men parted, with an angry flush and bitter hearts, and had I not cast between them some common words or other, might not have parted, but have fallen rather into an angry discussion of the value of their dead sons. If I had not pity for all the children of reverie I should have let them fight it out, and would now have many a wonderful oath to record.

The knight of the sheep would have had the victory, for no soul that wears this garment of blood and clay can surpass him. He was but once beaten; and this is his tale of how it was. He and some farm hands were playing at cards in a small cabin that stood against the end of a big barn. A wicked woman had once lived in this cabin. Suddenly one of the players threw down an ace and

[p. 55]

began to swear without any cause. His swearing was so dreadful that the others stood up, and my friend said, 'All is not right here; there is a spirit in him.' They ran to the door that led into the barn to get away as quickly as possible. The wooden bolt would not move, so the knight of the sheep took a saw which stood against the wall near at hand, and sawed through the bolt, and at once the door flew open with a bang, as though some one had been holding it, and they fled through.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

 

AN ENDURING HEART

ONE day a friend of mine was making a sketch of my Knight of the Sheep. The old man's daughter was sitting by, and, when the conversation drifted to love and lovemaking, she said, 'Oh, father, tell him about your love affair.' The old man took his pipe out of his mouth, and said, 'Nobody ever marries the woman he loves,' and then, with a chuckle, 'There were fifteen of them I liked better than the woman I married,' and he repeated many women's names. He went on to tell how when he was a lad he had worked for his grandfather, his mother's father, and was called (my friend has forgotten why) by his grandfather's name, which we will say was Doran. He had a great friend, whom I shall call John Byrne; and one day he and his friend went to Queenstown to await an emigrant ship, that was to take John Byrne to America. When they were walking along the quay, they

[p. 57]

saw a girl sitting on a seat, crying miserably, and two men standing up in front of her quarrelling with one another. Doran said, 'I think I know what is wrong. That man will be her brother, and that man will be her lover, and the brother is sending her to America to get her away from the lover. How she is crying! but I think I could console her myself.' Presently the lover and brother went away, and Doran began to walk up and down before her, saying, 'Mild weather, Miss,' or the like. She answered him in a little while, and the three began to talk together. The emigrant ship did not arrive for some days; and the three drove about on outside cars very innocently and happily, seeing everything that was to be seen. When at last the ship came, and Doran had to break it to her that he was not going to America, she cried more after him than after the first lover. Doran whispered to Byrne as he went aboard

[p. 58]

ship, 'Now, Byrne, I don't grudge her to you, but don't marry young.'

When the story got to this, the farmer's daughter joined In mockingly with, 'I suppose you said that for Byrne's good, father.' But the old man insisted that he had said it for Byrne's good; and went on to tell how, when he got a letter telling of Byrne's engagement to the girl, he wrote him the same advice. Years passed by, and he heard nothing; and though he was now married, he could not keep from wondering what she was doing. At last he went to America to find out, and though he asked many people for tidings, he could get none. More years went by, and his wife was dead, and he well on in years, and a rich farmer with not a few great matters on his hands. He found an excuse in some vague business to go out to America again, and to begin his search again. One day he fell into talk with an Irishman in a railway carriage,

[p. 59]

and asked him, as his way was, about emigrants from this place and that, and at last, 'Did you ever hear of the miller's daughter from Innis Rath?' and he named the woman he was looking for. 'Oh yes,' said the other, 'she is married to a friend of mine, John MacEwing. She lives at such-and-such a street in Chicago.' Doran went to Chicago and knocked at her door. She opened the door herself, and was 'not a bit changed.' He gave her his real name, which he had taken again after his grandfather's death, and the name of the man he had met in the train. She did not recognize him, but asked him to stay to dinner, saying that her husband would be glad to meet anybody who knew that old friend of his. They talked of many things, but for all their talk, I do not know why, and perhaps he did not know why, he never told her who he was. At dinner he asked her about Byrne, and she put her head down on the table and began to cry, and she cried so he was afraid her

[p. 60]

husband might be angry. He was afraid to ask what had happened to Byrne, and left soon after, never to see her again.

When the old man had finished the story, he said, 'Tell that to Mr. Yeats, he will make a poem about it, perhaps.' But the daughter said, 'Oh no, father. Nobody could make a poem about a woman like that.' Alas! I have never made the poem, perhaps because my own heart, which has loved Helen and all the lovely and fickle women of the world, would be too sore. There are things it is well not to ponder over too much, things that bare words are the best suited for.

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

 

THE SORCERERS

IN Ireland we hear but little of the darker powers, [*1] and come across any who have seen them even more rarely, for the imagination of the people dwells rather upon the fantastic and capricious, and fantasy and caprice would lose the freedom which is their breath of life, were they to unite them either with evil or with good. And yet the wise are of opinion that wherever man is, the dark powers who would feed his rapacities are there too, no less than the bright beings who store their honey in the cells of his heart, and the twilight beings who flit hither and thither, and that they encompass him with a passionate and melancholy multitude. They hold, too, that he who by long desire or through accident of birth possesses the power of piercing into

[p. 62]

their hidden abode can see them there, those who were once men or women full of a terrible vehemence, and those who have never lived upon the earth, moving slowly and with a subtler malice. The dark powers cling about us, it is said, day and night, like bats upon an old tree; and that we do not hear more of them is merely because the darker kinds of magic have been but little practised. I have indeed come across very few persons in Ireland who try to communicate with evil powers, and the few I have met keep their purpose and practice wholly hidden from those among whom they live. They are mainly small clerks and the like, and meet for the purpose of their art in a room hung with black hangings. They would not admit me into this room, but finding me not altogether ignorant of the arcane science, showed gladly elsewhere what they would do. 'Come to us,' said their leader, a clerk in a large flour-mill, 'and we will show you spirits who will talk to you face

[p. 63]

to face, and in shapes as solid and heavy as our own.'

I had been talking of the power of communicating in states of trance with the angelical and faery beings,--the children of the day and of the twilight--and he had been contending that we should only believe in what we can see and feel when in our ordinary everyday state of mind. 'Yes,' I said, 'I will come to you,' or some such words; 'but I will not permit myself to become entranced, and will therefore know whether these shapes you talk of are any the more to be touched and felt by the ordinary senses than are those I talk of.' I was not denying the power of other beings to take upon themselves a clothing of mortal substance, but only that simple invocations, such as he spoke of, seemed unlikely to do more than cast the mind into trance, and thereby bring it into the presence of the powers of day, twilight, and darkness.

'But,' he said, 'we have seen them

[p. 64]

move the furniture hither and thither, and they go at our bidding, and help or harm people who know nothing of them.' I am not giving the exact words, but as accurately as I can the substance of our talk.

On the night arranged I turned up about eight, and found the leader sitting alone in almost total darkness in a small back room. He was dressed in a black gown, like an inquisitor's dress in an old drawing, that left nothing of him visible: except his eyes, which peered out through two small round holes. Upon the table in front of him was a brass dish of burning herbs, a large bowl, a skull covered with painted symbols, two crossed daggers, and certain implements shaped like quern stones, which were used to control the elemental powers in some fashion I did not discover. I also put on a black gown, and remember that it did not fit perfectly, and that it interfered with my movements considerably. The sorcerer then took a

[p. 65]

black cock out of a basket, and cut its throat with one of the daggers, letting the blood fall into the large bowl. He opened a book and began an invocation, which was certainly not English, and had a deep guttural sound. Before he had finished, another of the sorcerers, a man of about twenty-five, came in, and having put on a black gown also, seated himself at my left band. I had the invoker directly in front of me, and soon began to find his eyes, which glittered through the small holes in his hood, affecting me in a curious way. I struggled hard against their influence, and my head began to ache. The invocation continued, and nothing happened for the first few minutes. Then the invoker got up and extinguished the light in the hall, so that no glimmer might come through the slit under the door. There was now no light except from the herbs on the brass dish, and no sound except from the deep guttural murmur of the invocation.

[p. 66]

Presently the man at my left swayed himself about, and cried out, 'O god! O god!' I asked him what ailed him, but he did not know he had spoken. A moment after he said he could see a great serpent moving about the room, and became considerably excited. I saw nothing with any definite shape, but thought that black clouds were forming about me. I felt I must fall into a trance if I did not struggle against it, and that the influence which was causing this trance was out of harmony with itself, in other words, evil. After a struggle I got rid of the black clouds, and was able to observe with my ordinary senses again. The two sorcerers now began to see black and white columns moving about the room, and finally a man in a monk's habit, and they became greatly puzzled because I did not see these things also, for to them they were as solid as the table before them. The invoker appeared to be gradually increasing in power, and I began to feel as if a tide of darkness was

[p. 67]

pouring from him and concentrating itself about me; and now too I noticed that the man on my left hand had passed into a death-like trance. With a last great effort I drove off the black clouds; but feeling them to be the only shapes I should see without passing into a trance, and having no great love for them, I asked for lights, and after the needful exorcism returned to the ordinary world.

I said to the more powerful of the two sorcerers--'What would happen if one of your spirits had overpowered me?' 'You would go out of this room,' he answered, 'with his character added to your own.' I asked about the origin of his sorcery, but got little of importance, except that he had learned it from his father. He would not tell me more, for he had, it appeared, taken a vow of secrecy.

For some days I could not get over the feeling of having a number of deformed and grotesque figures lingering about me. The Bright Powers are always beautiful

[p. 68]

and desirable, and the Dim Powers are now beautiful, now quaintly grotesque, but the Dark Powers express their unbalanced natures in shapes of ugliness and horror.

Footnotes

^61:1 I know better now. We have the dark powers much more than I thought, but not as much as the Scottish, and yet I think the imagination of the people does dwell chiefly upon the fantastic and capricious.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

 

THE DEVIL

My old Mayo woman told me one day that something very bad had come down the road and gone into the house opposite, and though she would not say what it was, I knew quite well. Another day she told me of two friends of hers who had been made love to by one whom they believed to be the devil. One of them was standing by the road-side when he came by on horseback, and asked her to mount up behind him, and go riding. When she would not he vanished. The other was out on the road late at night waiting for her young man, when something came flapping and rolling along the road up to her feet. It had the likeness of a newspaper, and presently it flapped up into her face, and she knew by the size of it that it was the Irish Times. All of a sudden it changed into a young man, who asked her to go walking with him. She would not, and he vanished.

[p. 70]

I know of an old man too, on the slopes of Ben Bulben, who found the devil ringing a bell under his bed, and he went off and stole the chapel bell and rang him out. It may be that this, like the others, was not the devil at all, but some poor wood spirit whose cloven feet had got him into trouble.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

 

HAPPY AND UNHAPPY THEOLOGIANS

 

I

A MAYO woman once said to me, 'I knew a servant girl who hung herself for the love of God. She was lonely for the priest and her society, [*1] and hung herself to the banisters with a scarf. She was no sooner dead than she became white as a lily, and if it had been murder or suicide she would have become black as black. They gave her Christian burial, and the priest said she was no sooner dead than she was with the Lord. So nothing matters that you do for the love of God.' I do not wonder at the pleasure she has in telling this story, for she herself loves all holy things with an ardour that brings them quickly to her lips. She told me once that she never hears anything described in a sermon that she does not afterwards see with her eyes. She has described to me the gates of Purgatory as

[p. 72]

they showed themselves to her eyes, but I remember nothing of the description except that she could not see the souls in trouble but only the gates. Her mind continually dwells on what is pleasant and beautiful. One day she asked me what month and what flower were the most beautiful. When I answered that I did not know, she said, 'the month of May, because of the Virgin, and the lily of the valley, because it never sinned, but came pure out of the rocks,' and then she asked, 'what is the cause of the three cold months of winter?' I did not know even that, and so she said, 'the sin of man and the vengeance of God.' Christ Himself was not only blessed, but perfect in all manly proportions in her eyes, so much do beauty and holiness go together in her thoughts. He alone of all men was exactly six feet high, all others are a little more or a little less.

Her thoughts and her sights of the people of faery are pleasant and beautiful too, and I have never heard her call them

[p. 73]

the Fallen Angels. They are people like ourselves, only better-looking, and many and many a time she has gone to the window to watch them drive their waggons through the sky, waggon behind waggon in long line, or to the door to hear them singing and dancing in the Forth. They sing chiefly, it seems, a song called 'The Distant Waterfall,' and though they once knocked her down she never thinks badly of them. She saw them most easily when she was in service in King's County, and one morning a little while ago she said to me, 'Last night I was waiting up for the master and it was a quarter-past eleven. I heard a bang right down on the table. 'King's County all over,' says I, and I laughed till I was near dead. It was a warning I was staying too long. They wanted the place to themselves.' I told her once of somebody who saw a faery and fainted, and she said, 'It could not have been a faery, but some bad thing, nobody could faint at a faery. It was a demon. I

[p. 74]

was not afraid when they near put me, and the bed under me, out through the roof. I wasn't afraid either when you were at some work and I heard a thing coming flop-flop up the stairs like an eel, and squealing. It went to all the doors. It could not get in where I was. I would have sent it through the universe like a flash of fire. There was a man in my place, a tearing fellow, and he put one of them down. He went out to meet it on the road, but he must have been told the words. But the faeries are the best neighbours. If you do good to them they will do good to you, but they don't like you to be on their path.' Another time she said to me, 'They are always good to the poor.'

 

II

There is, however, a man in a Galway village who can see nothing but wickedness. Some think him very holy, and others think him a little crazed, but some

[p. 75]

of his talk reminds one of those old Irish visions of the Three Worlds, which are supposed to have given Dante the plan of the Divine Comedy. But I could not imagine this man seeing Paradise. He is especially angry with the people of faery, and describes the faun-like feet that are so common among them, who are indeed children of Pan, to prove them children of Satan. He will not grant that 'they carry away women, though there are many that say so,' but he is certain that they are 'as thick as the sands of the sea about us, and they tempt poor mortals.'

He says, 'There is a priest I know of was looking along the ground like as if he was hunting for something, and a voice said to him, 'If you want to see them you'll see enough of them,' and his eyes were opened and he saw the ground thick with them. Singing they do be sometimes, and dancing, but all the time they have cloven feet.' Yet he was so scornful of unchristian things for all their dancing and singing

[p. 76]

that he thinks that 'you have only to bid them begone and they will go. It was one night,' he says, 'after walking back from Kinvara and down by the wood beyond I felt one coming beside me, and I could feel the horse he was riding on and the way he lifted his legs, but they do not make a sound like the hoofs of a horse. So I stopped and turned around and said, very loud, "Be off!" and he went and never troubled me after. And I knew a man who was dying, and one came on his bed, and he cried out to it, "Get out of that, you unnatural animal!" and it left him. Fallen angels they are, and after the fall God said, "Let there be Hell," and there it was in a moment.' An old woman who was sitting by the fire joined in as he said this with 'God save us, it's a pity He said the word, and there might have been no Hell the day,' but the seer did not notice her words. He went on, 'And then he asked the devil what would he take for the souls of all the people. And

[p. 77]

the devil said nothing would satisfy him but the blood of a virgin's son, so he got that, and then the gates of Hell were opened.' He understood the story, it seems, as if it were some riddling old folk tale.

'I have seen Hell myself. I had a sight of it one time in a vision. It had a very high wall around it, all of metal, and an archway, and a straight walk into it, just like what 'ud be leading into a gentleman's orchard, but the edges were not trimmed with box, but with red-hot metal. And inside the wall there were cross-walks, and I'm not sure what there was to the right, but to the left there were five great furnaces, and they full of souls kept there with great chains. So I turned short and went away, and in turning I looked again at the wall, and I could see no end to it.

'And another time I saw Purgatory. It seemed to be in a level place, and no walls around it, but it all one bright blaze, and the souls standing in it. And they suffer

[p. 78]

near as much as in Hell, only there are no devils with them there, and they have the hope of Heaven.

'And I heard a call to me from there, 'Help me to come out o' this!' And when I looked it was a man I used to know in the army, an Irishman, and from this county, and I believe him to be a descendant of King O'Connor of Athenry.

'So I stretched out my hand first, but then I called out, 'I'd be burned in the flames before I could get within three yards of you.' So then he said, 'Well, help me with your prayers,' and so I do.

'And Father Connellan says the same thing, to help the dead with your prayers, and he's a very clever man to make a sermon, and has a great deal of cures made with the Holy Water he brought back from Lourdes.'

1902.

Footnotes

^71:1 The religious society she had belonged to.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

 

THE LAST GLEEMAN

MICHAEL MORAN was born about 1794 off Black Pitts, in the Liberties of Dublin, in Faddle Alley. A fortnight after birth he went stone blind from illness, and became thereby a blessing to his parents, who were soon able to send him to rhyme and beg at street corners and at the bridges over the Liffey. They may well have wished that their quiver were full of such as he, for, free from the interruption of sight, his mind became a perfect echoing chamber, where every movement of the day and every change of public passion whispered itself into rhyme or quaint saying. By the time he had grown to manhood he was the admitted rector of all the ballad-mongers of the Liberties. Madden, the weaver, Kearney, the blind fiddler from Wicklow, Martin from Meath, M'Bride from heaven knows where, and that M'Grane, who in after days, when the true Moran was no more, strutted in

[p. 80]

borrowed plumes, or rather in borrowed rags, and gave out that there had never been any Moran but himself, and many another, did homage before him, and held him chief of all their tribe. Nor despite his blindness did he find any difficulty in getting a wife, but rather was able to pick and choose, for he was just that mixture of ragamuffin and of genius which is dear to the heart of woman, who, perhaps because she is wholly conventional herself, loves the unexpected, the crooked, the bewildering. Nor did he lack, despite his rags, many excellent things, for it is remembered that he ever loved caper sauce, going so far indeed in his honest indignation at its absence upon one occasion as to fling a leg of mutton at his wife. He was not, however, much to look at, with his coarse frieze coat with its cape and scalloped edge, his old corduroy trousers and great brogues, and his stout stick made fast to his wrist by a thong of leather: and he would have been a woeful

[p. 81]

shock to the gleeman MacConglinne, could that friend of kings have beheld him in prophetic vision from the pillar stone at Cork. And yet though the short cloak and the leather wallet were no more, he was a true gleeman, being alike poet, jester, and newsman of the people. In the morning when he had finished his breakfast, his wife or some neighbour would read the newspaper to him, and read on and on until he interrupted with, 'That'll do--I have me meditations'; and from these meditations would come the day's store of jest and rhyme. He had the whole Middle Ages under his frieze coat.

He had not, however, MacConglinne's hatred of the Church and clergy, for when the fruit of his meditations did not ripen well, or when the crowd called for something more solid, he would recite or sing a metrical tale or ballad of saint or martyr or of Biblical adventure. He would stand at a street comer, and when a crowd had gathered would begin in some such fashion

[p. 82]

as follows (I copy the record of one who knew him)--'Gather round me, boys, gather round me. Boys, am I standin' in puddle? am I standin' in wet?' Thereon several boys would cry, 'Ah, no! yez not! yer in a nice dry place. Go on with St. Mary; go on with Moses'--each calling for his favourite tale. Then Moran, with a suspicious wriggle of his body and a clutch at his rags, would burst out with 'All me buzzim friends are turned backbiters'; and after a final 'If yez don't drop your coddin' and diversion I'll lave some of yez a case,' by way of warning to the boys, begin his recitation, or perhaps still delay, to ask, 'Is there a crowd round me now? Any blackguard heretic around me?' The best-known of his religious tales was St. Mary of Egypt, a long poem of exceeding solemnity, condensed from the much longer work of a certain Bishop Coyle. It told how a fast woman of Egypt, Mary by name, followed pilgrims to Jerusalem for no good purpose, and then, turning

[p. 83]

penitent on finding herself withheld from entering the Temple by supernatural interference, fled to the desert and spent the remainder of her life in solitary penance. When at last she was at the point of death, God sent Bishop Zozimus to hear her confession, give her the last sacrament, and with the help of a lion, whom He sent also, dig her grave. The poem has the intolerable cadence of the eighteenth century, but was so popular and so often called for that Moran was soon nicknamed Zozimus, and by that name is he remembered. He had also a poem of his own called Moses, which went a little nearer poetry without going very near. But he could ill brook solemnity, and before long parodied his own verses in the following ragamuffin fashion:

	 
		In Egypt's land, contagious to the Nile,
		 King Pharaoh's daughter went to bathe in style.
		 She tuk her dip, then walked unto the land,
		 To dry her royal pelt she ran along the strand.
		 A bulrush tripped her, whereupon she saw
		 A smiling babby in a wad o' straw. [p. 84]
		 She tuk it up, and said with accents mild,
		 ''Tare-and-agers, girls, which av yez owns the child?'
		
		 [paragraph continues] His humorous rhymes were, however, more often quips and cranks at the expense of his contemporaries. It was his delight, for instance, to remind a certain shoemaker, noted alike for display of wealth and for personal uncleanness, of his inconsiderable origin in a song of which but the first stanza has come down to us:

	 
		At the dirty end of Dirty Lane,
		 Liv'd a dirty cobbler, Dick Maclane;
		 His wife was in the old king's reign
		     A stout brave orange-woman.
		 On Essex Bridge she strained her throat,
		 And six-a-penny was her note.
		 But Dickey wore a bran-new coat,
		     He got among the yeomen.
		 He was a bigot, like his clan,
		 And in the streets he wildly sang,
		 O Roly, toly, toly raid, with his old jade.
		
		 [paragraph continues] He had troubles of divers kinds, and numerous interlopers to face and put down. Once an officious peeler arrested him as a

[p. 85]

vagabond, but was triumphantly routed amid the laughter of the court, when Moran reminded his worship of the precedent set by Homer, who was also, he declared, a poet, and a blind man, and a beggarman. He had to face a more serious difficulty as his fame grew. Various imitators started up upon all sides. A certain actor, for instance, made as many guineas as Moran did shillings by mimicking his sayings and his songs and his getup upon the stage. One night this actor was at supper with some friends, when dispute arose as to whether his mimicry was overdone or not. It was agreed to settle it by an appeal to the mob. A forty-shilling supper at a famous coffeehouse was to be the wager. The actor took up his station at Essex Bridge, a great haunt of Moran's, and soon gathered a small crowd. He had scarce got through 'In Egypt's land, contagious to the Nile,' when Moran himself came up, followed by another crowd. The crowds met in great

[p. 86]

excitement and laughter. 'Good Christians,' cried the pretender, 'is it possible that any man would mock the poor dark man like that?'

'Who's that? It's some imposhterer,' replied Moran.

'Begone, you wretch! it's you'ze the imposhterer. Don't you fear the light of heaven being struck from your eyes for mocking the poor dark man?'

'Saints and angels, is there no protection against this? You're a most inhuman blaguard to try to deprive me of my honest bread this way,' replied poor Moran.

'And you, you wretch, won't let me go on with the beautiful poem. Christian people, in your charity won't you beat this man away? he's taking advantage of my darkness.'

The pretender, seeing that he was having the best of it, thanked the people for their sympathy and protection, and went on with the poem, Moran listening for a time in

[p. 87]

bewildered silence. After a while Moran protested again with:

'Is it possible that none of yez can know me? Don't yez see it's myself; and that's some one else?'

'Before I can proceed any further in this lovely story,' interrupted the pretender, 'I call on yez to contribute your charitable donations to help me to go on.'

'Have you no sowl to be saved, you mocker of heaven?' cried Moran, Put completely beside himself by this last injury. 'Would you rob the poor as well as desave the world? O, was ever such wickedness known?'

'I leave it to yourselves, my friends,' said the pretender, 'to give to the real dark man, that you all know so well, and save me from that schemer,' and with that he collected some pennies and half-pence. While he was doing so, Moran started his Mary of Egypt, but the indignant crowd seizing his stick were about to belabour him, when they fell back bewildered anew

[p. 88]

by his close resemblance to himself. The pretender now called to them to 'just give him a grip of that villain, and he'd soon let him know who the imposhterer was!' They led him over to Moran, but instead of closing with him he thrust a few shillings into his hand, and turning to the crowd explained to them he was indeed but an actor, and that he had just gained a wager, and so departed amid much enthusiasm, to eat the supper he had won.

In April 1846 word was sent to the priest that Michael Moran was dying. He found him at 15 (now 14 1/2) Patrick Street, on a straw bed, in a room full of ragged ballad-singers come to cheer his last moments. After his death the ballad-singers, with many fiddles and the like, came again and gave him a fine wake, each adding to the merriment whatever he knew in the way of rann, tale, old saw, or quaint rhyme. He had had his day, had said his prayers and made his confession, and why should they not give him a hearty

[p. 89]

send-off? The funeral took place the next day. A good party of his admirers and friends got into the hearse with the coffin, for the day was wet and nasty. They had not gone far when one of them burst out with 'It's cruel cowld, isn't it?' 'Garra',' replied another, 'we'll all be as stiff as the corpse when we get to the berrin-ground.' 'Bad cess to him,' said a third; 'I wish he'd held out another month until the weather got dacent.' A man called Carroll thereupon produced a half-pint of whiskey, and they all drank to the soul of the departed. Unhappily, however, the hearse was over-weighted, and they had not reached the cemetery before the spring broke, and the bottle with it.

Moran must have felt strange and out of place in that other kingdom he was entering, perhaps while his friends were drinking in his honour. Let us hope that some kindly middle region was found for him, where he can call dishevelled

[p. 90]

angels about him with some new and more rhythmical form of his old

	 
		Gather round me, boys, will yez
		     Gather round me?
		 And hear what I have to say
		     Before ould Salley brings me
		 My bread and jug of tay;
		
		 and fling outrageous quips and cranks at cherubim and seraphim. Perhaps he may have found and gathered, ragamuffin though he be, the Lily of High Truth, the Rose of Far-sought Beauty, for whose lack so many of the writers of Ireland, whether famous or forgotten, have been futile as the blown froth upon the shore.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 91]

 

REGINA, REGINA PIGMEORUM, VENI

ONE night a middle-aged man, who had lived all his life far from the noise of cab-wheels, a young girl, a relation of his, who was reported to be enough of a seer to catch a glimpse of unaccountable lights moving over the fields among the cattle, and myself, were walking along a far western sandy shore. We talked of the Forgetful People as the faery people are sometimes called, and came in the midst of our talk to a notable haunt of theirs, a shallow cave amidst black rocks, with its reflection under it in the wet sea sand. I asked the young girl if she could see anything, for I had quite a number of things to ask the Forgetful People. She stood still for a few minutes, and I saw that she was passing into a kind of waking trance, in which the cold sea breeze no longer troubled her, nor the dull boom of the sea distracted her attention. I then called

[p. 92]

aloud the names of the great faeries, and in a moment or two she said that she could hear music far inside the rocks, and then a sound of confused talking, and of people stamping their feet as if to applaud some unseen performer. Up to this my other friend had been walking to and fro some yards off, but now he passed close to us, and as he did so said suddenly that we were going to be interrupted, for he heard the laughter of children somewhere beyond the rocks. We were, however, quite alone. The spirits of the place had begun to cast their influence over him also. In a moment he was corroborated by the girl, who said that bursts of laughter had begun to mingle with the music, the confused talking, and the noise of feet. She next saw a bright light streaming out of the cave, which seemed to have grown much deeper, and a quantity of little people, [*1] in various coloured

[p. 93]

dresses, red predominating, dancing to a tune which she did not recognize.

I then bade her call out to the queen of the little people to come and talk with us. There was, however, no answer to her command. I therefore repeated the words aloud myself, and in a moment a very beautiful tall woman came out of the cave. I too had by this time fallen into a kind of trance, in which what we call the unreal had begun to take upon itself a masterful reality, and was able to see the faint gleam of golden ornaments, the shadowy blossom of dim hair. I then bade the girl tell this tall queen to marshal her followers according to their natural divisions, that we might see them. I found as before that I had to repeat the command myself. The creatures then came out of the cave, and drew themselves up, if I remember rightly, in four bands. One of these bands carried quicken

[p. 94]

boughs in their hands, and another had necklaces made apparently of serpents' scales, but their dress I cannot remember, for I was quite absorbed in that gleaming woman. I asked her to tell the seer whether these caves were the greatest faery haunts in the neighbourhood. Her lips moved, but the answer was inaudible. I bade the seer lay her hand upon the breast of the queen, and after that she heard every word quite distinctly. No, this was not the greatest faery haunt, for there was a greater one a little further ahead. I then asked her whether it was true that she and her people carried away mortals, and if so, whether they put another soul in the place of the one they had taken? 'We change the bodies,' was her answer. 'Are any of you ever born into mortal life?' 'Yes.' 'Do I know any who were among your people before birth?' 'You do.' 'Who are they?' 'It would not be lawful for you to know.' I then asked whether she and her people were

[p. 95]

not 'dramatizations of our moods'? 'She does not understand,' said my friend, 'but says that her people are much like human beings, and do most of the things human beings do.' I asked her other questions, as to her nature, and her purpose in the universe, but only seemed to puzzle her. At last she appeared to lose patience, for she wrote this message for me upon the sands--the sands of vision, not the grating sands under our feet--'Be careful, and do not seek to know too much about us.' Seeing that I had offended her, I thanked her for what she had shown and told, and let her depart again into her cave. In a little while the young girl awoke out of her trance, and felt again the cold wind of the world, and began to shiver.

I tell these things as accurately as I can, and with no theories to blur the history. Theories are poor things at the best, and the bulk of mine have perished long ago. I love better than any theory the sound of the Gate of Ivory, turning upon its hinges,

[p. 96]

and hold that he alone who has passed the rose-strewn threshold can catch the far glimmer of the Gate of Horn. It were perhaps well for us all if we would but raise the cry Lilly the astrologer raised in Windsor Forest, 'Regina, Regina Pigmeorum, Veni,' and remember with him, that God visiteth His children in dreams. Tall, glimmering queen, come near, and let me see again the shadowy blossom of thy dim hair.

Footnotes

^92:1 The people and faeries in Ireland are sometimes as big as we are, sometimes bigger, and sometimes, as I have been told, about three feet high. The [p. 93] Old Mayo woman I so often quote, thinks that it is something in our eyes that makes them seem big or little.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

 

'AND FAIR, FIERCE WOMEN'

ONE day a woman that I know came face to face with heroic beauty, that highest beauty which Blake says changes least from youth to age, a beauty which has been fading out of the arts, since that decadence we call progress, set voluptuous beauty in its place. She was standing at the window, looking over to Knocknarea where Queen Maive is thought to be buried, when she saw, as she has told me, 'the finest woman you ever saw travelling right across from the mountain and straight to her.' The woman had a sword by her side and a dagger lifted up in her hand, and was dressed in white, with bare arms and feet. She looked 'very strong, but not wicked,' that is, not cruel. The old woman had seen the Irish giant, and 'though he was a fine man,' he was nothing to this woman, 'for he was round, and could not have stepped out so soldierly'; 'she was like Mrs.-----' a

[p. 98]

stately lady of the neighbourhood, 'but she had no stomach on her, and was slight and broad in the shoulders, and was handsomer than any one you ever saw; she looked about thirty.' The old woman covered her eyes with her hands, and when she uncovered them the apparition had vanished. The neighbours were 'wild with her,' she told me, because she did not wait to find out if there was a message, for they were sure it was Queen Maive, who often shows herself to the pilots. I asked the old woman if she had seen others like Queen Maive, and she said, 'Some of them have their hair down, but they look quite different, like the sleepy-looking ladies one sees in the papers. Those with their hair up are like this one. The others have long white dresses, but those with their hair up have short dresses, so that you can see their legs right up to the calf.' After some careful questioning I found that they wore what might very well be a kind of buskin; she

[p. 99]

went on, 'They are fine and dashing looking, like the men one sees riding their horses in twos and threes on the slopes of the mountains with their swords swinging.' She repeated over and over, 'There is no such race living now, none so finely proportioned,' or the like, and then said, 'The present Queen [*1] is a nice, pleasant-looking woman, but she is not like her. What makes me think so little of the ladies is that I see none as they be,' meaning as the spirits. 'When I think of her and of the ladies now, they are like little children running about without knowing how to put their clothes on right. Is it the ladies? Why, I would not call them women at all.' The other day a friend of mine questioned an old woman in a Galway workhouse about Queen Maive, and was told that 'Queen Maive was handsome, and overcame all her enemies with a bawl stick, for the hazel is blessed, and the best weapon that can be got. You might

[p. 100]

walk the world with it,' but she grew 'very disagreeable in the end--oh very disagreeable. Best not to be talking about it. Best leave it between the book and the hearer.' My friend thought the old woman had got some scandal about Fergus son of Roy and Maive in her head.

And I myself met once with a young man in the Burren Hills who remembered an old poet who made his poems in Irish and had met when he was young, the young man said, one who called herself Maive, and said she was a queen 'among them,' and asked him if he would have money or pleasure. He said he would have pleasure, and she gave him her love for a time, and then went from him, and ever after he was very mournful. The young man had often heard him sing the poem of lamentation that he made, but could only remember that it was 'very mournful,' and that he called her 'beauty of all beauties.'

1902.

Footnotes

^99:1 Queen Victoria.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 101]

 

ENCHANTED WOODS

 

I

LAST summer, whenever I had finished my day's work, I used to go wandering in certain roomy woods, and there I would often meet an old countryman, and talk to him about his work and about the woods, and once or twice a friend came with me to whom he would open his heart more readily than to me, He had spent all his life lopping away the witch elm and the hazel and the privet and the hornbeam from the paths, and had thought much about the natural and supernatural creatures of the wood. He has heard the hedgehog--'grainne oge,' he calls him--'grunting like a Christian,' and is certain that he steals apples by rolling about under an apple tree until there is an apple sticking to every quill. He is certain too that the cats, of whom there are many in the woods, have a language of their own--some kind of old Irish. He says, 'Cats were serpents, and they were made into

[p. 102]

cats at the time of some great change in the world. That is why they are hard to kill, and why it is dangerous to meddle with them. If you annoy a cat it might claw or bite you in a way that would put poison in you, and that would be the serpent's tooth.' Sometimes he thinks they change into wild cats, and then a nail grows on the end of their tails; but these wild cats are not the same as the marten cats, who have been always in the woods. The foxes were once tame, as the cats are now, but they ran away and became wild. He talks of all wild creatures except squirrels--whom he hates--with what seems an affectionate interest, though at times his eyes will twinkle with pleasure as he remembers how he made hedgehogs unroll themselves when he was a boy, by putting a wisp of burning straw under them.

I am not certain that he distinguishes between the natural and supernatural very clearly. He told me the other day that

[p. 103]

foxes and cats like, above all, to be in the 'forths' and lisses after nightfall; and he will certainly pass from some story about a fox to a story about a spirit with less change of voice than when he is going to speak about a marten cat--a rare beast now-a-days. Many years ago he used to work in the garden, and once they put him to sleep in a garden-house where there was a loft full of apples, and all night he could hear people rattling plates and knives and forks over his head in the loft. Once, at any rate, be has seen an unearthly sight in the woods. He says, 'One time I was out cutting timber over in Inchy, and about eight o'clock one morning when I got there I saw a girl picking nuts, with her hair hanging down over her shoulders, brown hair, and she had a good, clean face, and she was tall and nothing on her head, and her dress no way gaudy but simple, and when she felt me coming she gathered herself up and was gone as if the earth had swallowed

[p. 104]

her up. And I followed her and looked for her, but I never could see her again from that day to this, never again.' He used the word clean as we would use words like fresh or comely.

Others too have seen spirits in the Enchanted Woods. A labourer told us of what a friend of his had seen in a part of the woods that is called Shanwalla, from some old village that was before the weed. He said, 'One evening I parted from Lawrence Mangan in the yard, and he went away through the path in Shanwalla, an' bid me goodnight. And two hours after, there he was back again in the yard, an' bid me light a candle that was in the stable. An' he told me that when he got into Shanwalla, a little fellow about as high as his knee, but having a head as big as a man's body, came beside him and led him out of the path an' round about, and at last it brought him to the lime-kiln, and then it vanished and left him.'

[p. 105]

A woman told me of a sight that she and others had seen by a certain deep pool in the river. She said, 'I came over the stile from the chapel, and others along with me; and a great blast of wind came and two trees were bent and broken and fell into the river, and the splash of water out of it went up to the skies. And those that were with me saw many figures, but myself I only saw one, sitting there by the bank where the trees fell. Dark clothes he had on, and he was headless.'

A man told me that one day, when he was a boy, he and another boy went to catch a horse in a certain field, full of boulders and bushes of hazel and creeping juniper and rock-roses, that is where the lake side is for a little clear of the woods. He said to the boy that was with him, 'I bet a button that if I fling a pebble on to that bush it will stay on it,' meaning that the bush was so matted the pebble would not be able to go through it. So he took up 'a pebble of cow-dung, and as

[p. 106]

soon as it hit the bush there came out of it the most beautiful music that ever was heard.' They ran away, and when they had gone about two hundred yards they looked back and saw a woman dressed in white, walking round and round the bush. 'First it had the form of a woman, and then of a man, and it was going round the bush.'

 

II

I often entangle myself in argument more complicated than even those paths of Inchy as to what is the true nature of apparitions, but at other times I say as Socrates said when they told him a learned opinion about a nymph of the Illissus, 'The common opinion is enough for me.' I believe when I am in the mood that all nature is full of people whom we cannot see, and that some of these are ugly or grotesque, and some wicked or foolish, but very many beautiful beyond any one

[p. 107]

we have ever seen, and that these are not far away when we are walking in pleasant and quiet places. Even when I was a boy I could never walk in a wood without feeling that at any moment I might find before me somebody or something I had long looked for without knowing what I looked for. And now I will at times explore every little nook of some poor coppice with almost anxious footsteps, so deep a hold has this imagination upon me. You too meet with a like imagination, doubtless, somewhere, wherever your ruling stars will have it, Saturn driving you to the woods, or the Moon, it may be, to the edges of the sea. I will not of a certainty believe that there is nothing in the sunset, where our forefathers imagined the dead following their shepherd the sun, or nothing but some vague presence as little moving as nothing. If beauty is not a gateway out of the net we were taken in at our birth, it will not long be beauty, and we will find it better to sit at home by the fire and fatten a lazy

[p. 108]

body or to run hither and thither in some foolish sport than to look at the finest show that light and shadow ever made among green leaves. I say to myself, when I am well out of that thicket of argument, that they are surely there, the divine people, for only we who have neither simplicity nor wisdom have denied them, and the simple of all times and the wise men of ancient times have seen them and even spoken to them. They live out their passionate lives not far off, as I think, and we shall be among them when we die if we but keep our natures simple and passionate. May it not even be that death shall unite us to all romance, and that some day we shall fight dragons among blue hills, or come to that whereof all romance is but

	 
		'Foreshadowings mingled with the images
		 Of man's misdeeds in greater days than these,'
		
		 as the old men thought in The Earthly Paradise when they were in good spirits.

1902

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

 

MIRACULOUS CREATURES

THERE are marten cats and badgers and foxes in the Enchanted Woods, but there are of a certainty mightier creatures, and the lake hides what neither net nor fine can take. These creatures are of the race of the white stag that flits in and out of the tales of Arthur, and of the evil pig that slew Diarmuid where Ben Bulben mixes with the sea wind. They are the wizard creatures of hope and fear, they are of them that fly and of them that follow among the thickets that are about the Gates of Death. A man I know remembers that his father was one night in the wood Of Inchy, 'where the lads of Gort used to be stealing rods. He was sitting by the wall, and the dog beside him, and he heard something come running from Owbawn Weir, and he could see nothing, but the sound of its feet on the ground was like the sound of the feet of a deer. And when it passed him, the dog got

[p. 110]

between him and the wall and scratched at it there as if it was afraid, but still he could see nothing but only hear the sound of hoofs. So when it was passed he turned and came away home.' 'Another time,' the man says, 'my father told me he was in a boat out on the lake with two or three men from Gort, and one of them had an eel-spear, and he thrust it into the water, and it hit something, and the man fainted and they had to carry him out of the boat to land, and when he came to himself he said that what he struck was like a calf, but whatever it was, it was not fish!' A friend of mine is convinced that these terrible creatures, so common in lakes, were set there in old times by subtle enchanters to watch over the gates of wisdom. He thinks that if we sent our spirits down into the water we would make them of one substance with strange moods of ecstasy and power, and go out it may be to the conquest of the world. We would, however, he believes, have first to outface

[p. 111]

and perhaps overthrow strange images full of a more powerful life than if they were really alive. It may be that we shall look at them without fear when we have endured the last adventure, that is death.

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112]

 

ARISTOTLE OF THE BOOKS

THE friend who can get the wood-cutter to talk more readily than he will to anybody else went lately to see his old wife. She lives in a cottage not far from the edge of the woods, and is as full of old talk as her husband. This time she began to talk of Goban, the legendary mason, and his wisdom, but said presently, 'Aristotle of the Books, too, was very wise, and he had a great deal of experience, but did not the bees get the better of him in the end? He wanted to know how they packed the comb, and he wasted the better part of a fortnight watching them, and he could not see them doing it. Then he made a hive with a glass cover on it and put it over them, and he thought to see. But when he went and put his eyes to the glass, they had it all covered with wax so that it was as black as the pot; and he was as blind as before. He said he was never rightly kilt till then. They had him that time surely!'

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

 

THE SWINE OF THE GODS

A FEW years ago a friend of mine told me of something that happened to him when he was a. young man and out drilling with some Connaught Fenians. They were but a car-full, and drove along a hillside until they came to a quiet place. They left the car and went further up the hill with their rifles, and drilled for a while. As they were coming down again they saw a very thin, long-legged pig of the old Irish sort, and the pig began to follow them. One of them cried out as a joke that it was a fairy pig, and they all began to run to keep up the joke. The pig ran too, and presently, how nobody knew, this mock terror became real terror, and they ran as for their lives. When they got to the car they made the horse gallop as fast as possible, but the pig still followed. Then one of them put up his rifle to fire, but when he looked along the barrel he could see nothing. Presently they turned

[p. 114]

a corner and came to a village. They told the people of the village what had happened, and the people of the village took pitchforks and spades and the like, and went along the road with them to drive the pig away. When they turned the corner they could not find anything.

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 115]

 

A VOICE

ONE day I was walking over a bit of marshy ground close to Inchy Wood when I felt, all of a sudden, and only for a second, an emotion which I said to myself was the root of Christian mysticism. There had swept over me a sense of weakness, of dependence on a great personal Being somewhere far off yet near at hand. No thought of mine had prepared me for this emotion, for I had been pre-occupied with Aengus and Edain, and with Mannanan, son of the sea. That night I awoke lying upon my back and hearing a voice speaking above me and saying, 'No human soul is like any other human soul, and therefore the love of God for any human soul is infinite, for no other soul can satisfy the same need in God.' A few nights after this I awoke to see the loveliest people I have ever seen. A young man and a young girl dressed in olive-green raiment, cut like old Greek raiment, were

[p. 116]

standing at my bedside. I looked at the girl and noticed that her dress was gathered about her neck into a kind of chain, or perhaps into some kind of stiff embroidery which represented ivy-leaves. But what filled me with wonder was the miraculous mildness of her face. There are no such faces now. It was beautiful, as few faces are beautiful, but it had neither, one would think, the light that is in desire or in hope or in fear or in speculation. It was peaceful like the faces of animals, or like mountain pools at evening, so peaceful that it was a little sad. I thought for a moment that she might be the beloved of Aengus, but how could that hunted, alluring, happy, immortal wretch have a face like this? Doubtless she was from among the children of the Moon, but who among them I shall never know.

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 117]

 

KIDNAPPERS

A LITTLE north of the town of Sligo, on the southern side of Ben Bulben, some hundreds of feet above the plain, is a small white square in the limestone. No mortal has ever touched it with his hand; no sheep or goat has ever browsed grass beside it. There is no more inaccessible place upon the earth, and few more encircled by awe to the deep considering. It is the door of faery-land. In the middle of night it swings open, and the unearthly troop rushes out. All night the gay rabble sweep to and fro across the land, invisible to all, unless perhaps where, in some more than commonly 'gentle' place--Drumcliff or Drum-a-hair--the nightcapped heads of faery-doctors may be thrust from their doors to see what mischief the 'gentry' are doing. To their trained eyes and ears the fields are covered by red-hatted riders, and the air is full of shrill voices--a sound like whistling, as an

[p. 118]

ancient Scottish seer has recorded, and wholly different from the talk of the angels, who 'speak much in the throat, like the Irish,' as Lilly, the astrologer, has wisely said. If there be a new-born baby or new-wed bride in the neighbourhood, the nightcapped 'doctors' will peer with more than common care, for the unearthly troop do not always return empty-handed. Sometimes a new-wed bride or a new-born baby goes with them into their mountains; the door swings to behind, and the new-born or the new-wed moves henceforth in the bloodless land of Faery; happy enough, but doomed to melt out at the last judgment like bright vapour, for the soul cannot live without sorrow. Through this door of white stone, and the other doors of that land where geabheadh tu an sonas aer pighin ('you can buy joy for a penny'), have gone kings, queens, and princes, but so greatly has the power of Faery dwindled, that there are none but peasants in these sad chronicles of mine.

[p. 119]

Somewhere about the beginning of last century appeared at the western corner of Market Street, Sligo, where the butcher's shop now is, not a palace, as in Keats's Lamia, but an apothecary's shop, ruled over by a certain unaccountable Dr. Opendon. Where he came from, none ever knew. There also was in Sligo, in those days, a woman, Ormsby by name, whose husband had fallen mysteriously sick. The doctors could make nothing of him. Nothing seemed wrong with him, yet weaker and weaker he grew. Away went the wife to Dr. Opendon. She was shown into the shop parlour. A black cat was sitting straight up before the fire. She had just time to see that the side-board was covered with fruit, and to say to herself, 'Fruit must be wholesome when the doctor has so much,' before Dr. Opendon came in. He was dressed all in black, the same as the cat, and his wife walked behind him dressed in black likewise. She gave him a guinea, and got a little bottle in

[p. 120]

return. Her husband recovered that time. Meanwhile the black doctor cured many people; but one day a rich patient died, and cat, wife, and doctor all vanished the night after. In a year the man Ormsby fell sick once more. Now he was a goodlooking man, and his wife felt sure the 'gentry' were coveting him. She went and called on the 'faery-doctor' at Cairnsfoot. As soon as he had heard her tale, he went behind the back door and began muttering, muttering, muttering-making spells. Her husband got well this time also. But after a while he sickened again, the fatal third time, and away went she once more to Cairnsfoot, and out went the faery-doctor behind his back door and began muttering, but soon he came in and told her it was no use--her husband would die; and sure enough the man died, and ever after when she spoke of him Mrs. Ormsby shook her head saying she knew well where he was, and it wasn't in heaven or hell or purgatory either. She probably believed that a log

[p. 121]

of wood was left behind in his place, but so bewitched that it seemed the dead body of her husband.

She is dead now herself, but many still living remember her. She was, I believe, for a time a servant or else a kind of pensioner of some relations of my own.

Sometimes those who are carried off are allowed after many years--seven usually--a final glimpse of their friends. Many years ago a woman vanished suddenly from a Sligo garden where she was walking with her husband. When her son, who was then a baby, had grown up he received word in some way, not handed down, that his mother was glamoured by faeries, and imprisoned for the time in a house in Glasgow and longing to see him. Glasgow in those days of sailing-ships seemed to the peasant mind almost over the edge of the known world, yet he, being a dutiful son, started away. For a long time he walked the streets of Glasgow; at last down in a cellar he saw his

[p. 122]

mother working. She was happy, she said, and had the best of good eating, and would he not eat? and therewith laid all kinds of food on the table; but he, knowing well that she was trying to cast on him the glamour by giving him faery food, that she might keep him with her, refused and came home to his people in Sligo.

Some five miles southward of Sligo is a gloomy and tree-bordered pond, a great gathering-place of water-fowl, called, because of its form, the Heart Lake. It is haunted by stranger things than heron, snipe, or wild duck. Out of this lake, as from the white square stone in Ben Bulben, issues an unearthly troop. Once men began to drain it; suddenly one of them raised a cry that he saw his house in flames. They turned round, and every man there saw his own cottage burning. They hurried home to find it was but faery glamour. To this hour on the border of the lake is shown a half-dug trench--the signet of their impiety. A

[p. 123]

little way from this lake I heard a beautiful and mournful history of faery kidnapping. I heard it from a little old woman in a white cap, who sings to herself in Gaelic, and moves from one foot to the other as though she remembered the dancing of her youth.

A young man going at nightfall to the house of his just married bride, met in the way a jolly company, and with them his bride. They were faeries, and had stolen her as a wife for the chief of their band. To him they seemed only a company of merry mortals. His bride, when she saw her old love, bade him welcome, but was most fearful lest be should eat the faery food, and so be glamoured out of the earth into that bloodless dim nation, wherefore she set him down to play cards with three of the cavalcade; and he played on, realizing nothing until he saw the chief of the band carrying his bride away in his arms. Immediately he started up, and knew that

[p. 124]

they were faeries; for slowly all that jolly company melted into shadow and night. He hurried to the house of his beloved. As he drew near came to him the cry of the keeners. She had died some time before he came. Some noteless Gaelic poet had made this into a forgotten ballad, some odd verses of which my white-capped friend remembered and sang for me.

Sometimes one hears of stolen people acting as good genii to the living, as in this tale, heard also close by the haunted pond, of John Kirwan of Castle Hacket. The Kirwans [*1] are a family much rumoured of in peasant stories, and believed to be

[p. 125]

the descendants of a man and a spirit. They have ever been famous for beauty, and I have read that the mother of the present Lord Cloncurry was of their tribe.

John Kirwan was a great horse-racing man, and once landed in Liverpool with a fine horse, going racing somewhere in middle England. That evening, as he walked by the docks, a slip of a boy came up and asked where he was stabling his horse. In such and such a place, he answered. 'Don't put him there,' said the slip of a boy; 'that stable will be burnt to-night.' He took his horse elsewhere, and sure enough the stable was burnt down. Next day the boy came and asked as reward to ride as his jockey in the coming race, and then was gone. The race-time came round. At the last moment the boy ran forward and mounted, saying, 'If I strike him with the whip in my left hand I will lose, but if in my right hand bet all you are worth.' For, said

[p. 126]

[paragraph continues] Paddy Flynn, who told me the tale, 'the left arm is good for nothing. I might go on making the sign of the cross with it, and all that, come Christmas, and a Banshee, or such like, would no more mind than if it was that broom.' Well, the slip of a boy struck the horse with his right hand, and John Kirwan cleared the field out. When the race was over, 'What can I do for you now?' said he. 'Nothing but this,' said the boy: 'my mother has a cottage on your land--they stole me from the cradle. Be good to her, John Kirwan, and wherever your horses go I will watch that no ill follows them; but you will never see me more.' With that he made himself air, and vanished.

Sometimes animals are carried off--apparently drowned animals more than others. In Claremorris, Galway, Paddy Flynn told me, lived a poor widow with one cow and its calf. The cow fell into the river, and was washed away. There

[p. 127]

was a man thereabouts who went to a red-haired woman--for such are supposed to be wise in these things--and she told him to take the calf down to the edge of the river, and hide himself and watch. He did as she had told him, and as evening came on the calf began to low, and after a while the cow came along the edge of the river and commenced suckling it. Then, as he had been told, he caught the cow's tail. Away they went at a great pace across hedges and ditches, till they came to a royalty (a name for the little circular ditches, commonly called raths or forts, that Ireland is covered with since Pagan times). Therein he saw walking or sitting all the people who had died out of his village in his time. A woman was sitting on the edge with a child on her knees, and she called out to him to mind what the red-haired woman had told him, and he remembered she had said, Bleed the cow. So he stuck his knife into the cow and drew blood. That broke

[p. 128]

the spell, and he was able to turn her homeward. 'Do not forget the spancel,' said the woman with the child on her knees; 'take the inside one.' There were three spancels on a bush; he took one, and the cow was driven safely home to the widow.

There is hardly a valley or mountainside where folk cannot tell you of some one pillaged from amongst them. Two or three miles from the Heart Lake lives an old woman who was stolen away in her youth. After seven years she was brought home again for some reason or other, but she had no toes left. She had danced them off. Many near the white stone door in Ben Bulben have been stolen away.

It is far easier to be sensible in cities than in many country places I could tell you of. When one walks on those grey roads at evening by the scented elder-bushes of the white cottages, watching the faint mountains gathering the clouds upon

[p. 129]

their heads, one all too readily discovers, beyond the thin cobweb veil of the senses, those creatures, the goblins, hurrying from the white square stone door to the north, or from the Heart Lake in the south.

Footnotes

^124:1 I have since heard that it was not the Kirwans, but their predecessors at Castle Hacket, the Hackets themselves, I think, who were descended from a man and a spirit, and were notable for beauty. I imagine that the mother of Lord Cloncurry was descended from the Hackets. It may well be that all through these stories the name of Kirwan has taken the place of the older name. Legend mixes everything together in her cauldron.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 130]

 

THE UNTIRING ONES

IT is one of the great troubles of life that we cannot have any unmixed emotions. There is always something in our enemy that we like, and something in our sweetheart that we dislike. It is this entanglement of moods which makes us old, and puckers our brows and deepens the furrows about our eyes. If we could love and hate with as good heart as the faeries do, we might grow to be long-lived like them. But until that day their untiring joys and sorrows must ever be one-half of their fascination. Love with them never grows weary, nor can the circles of the stars tire out their dancing feet. The Donegal peasants remember this when they bend over the spade, or sit full of the heaviness of the fields beside the griddle at nightfall, and they tell stories about it that it may not be forgotten. A short while ago, they say, two faeries, little creatures, one like a young man, one

[p. 131]

like a young woman, came to a farmer's house, and spent the night sweeping the hearth and setting all tidy. The next night they came again, and while the farmer was away, brought all the furniture up-stairs into one room, and having arranged it round the walls, for the greater grandeur it seems, they began to dance. They danced on and on, and days and days went by, and all the country-side came to look at them, but still their feet never tired. The farmer did not dare to live at home the while; and after three months he made up his mind to stand it no more, and went and told them that the priest was coming. The little creatures when they heard this went back to their own country, and there their joy shall last as long as the points of the rushes are brown, the people say, and that is until God shall burn up the world with a kiss.

But it is not merely faeries who know untiring days, for there have been men and women who, falling under their enchantment,

[p. 132]

have attained, perhaps by the right of their God-given spirits, an even more than faery abundance of life and feeling. It seems that when mortals have gone amid those poor happy leaves of the Imperishable Rose of Beauty, blown hither and thither by the winds that awakened the stars, the dim kingdom has acknowledged their birthright, perhaps a little sadly, and given them of its best. Such a mortal was born long ago at a village in the south of Ireland. She lay asleep in a cradle, and her mother sat by rocking her, when a woman of the Sidhe (the faeries) came in, and said that the child was chosen to be the bride of the prince of the dim kingdom, but that as it would never do for his wife to grow old and die while he was still in the first ardour of his love, she would be gifted with a faery life. The mother was to take the glowing log out of the fire and bury it in the garden, and her child would live as long as it remained unconsumed. The

[p. 133]

mother buried the log, and the child grew up, became a beauty, and married the prince of the faeries, who came to her at nightfall. After seven hundred years the prince died, and another prince ruled in his stead and married the beautiful peasant girl in his turn; and after another seven hundred years he died also, and another prince and another husband came in his stead, and so on until she had had seven husbands. At last one day the priest of the parish called upon her, and told her that she was a scandal to the whole neighbourhood with her seven husbands and her long life. She was very sorry, she said, but she was not to blame, and then she told him about the log, and he went straight out and dug until he found it, and then they burned it, and she died, and was buried like a Christian, and everybody was pleased. Such a mortal too was Clooth-na-bare, [*1] who went all

[p. 134]

over the world seeking a lake deep enough to drown her faery life, of which she had grown weary, leaping from hill to lake and lake to hill, and setting up a cairn of stones wherever her feet lighted, until at last she found the deepest water in the world in little Lough Ia, on the top of the Birds' Mountain at Sligo.

The two little creatures may well dance on, and the woman of the log and Clooth-na-bare sleep in peace, for they have known untrammelled hate and unmixed love, and have never wearied themselves with 'yes' and 'no,' or entangled their feet with the sorry net of 'maybe' and 'perhaps.' The great winds came and took them up into themselves.

Footnotes

^133:1 Doubtless Clooth-na-bare should be Cailleac Bare, which would mean the old Woman Bare. [p. 134] Bare or Bere or Verah or Dera or Dhera was a very famous person, perhaps the mother of the Gods herself. A friend of mine found her, as he thinks frequenting Lough Leath, or the Grey Lake on a mountain of the Fews. Perhaps Lough Ia is my mishearing, or the storyteller's mispronunciation of Lough Leath, for there are many Lough Leaths.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 135]

 

EARTH, FIRE AND WATER

SOME French writer that I read when I was a boy, said that the desert went into the heart of the Jews in their wanderings and made them what they are. I cannot remember by what argument he proved them to be even yet the indestructible children of earth, but it may well be that the elements have their children. If we knew the Fire Worshippers better we might find that their centuries of pious observance have been rewarded, and that the fire has given them a little of its nature; and I am certain that the water, the water of the seas and of lakes and of mist and rain, has all but made the Irish after its image. Images form themselves in our minds perpetually as if they were reflected in some pool. We gave ourselves up in old times to mythology, and saw the Gods everywhere. We talked to them face to face, and the stories of that communion are so

[p. 136]

many that I think they outnumber all the like stories of all the rest of Europe. Even to-day our country people speak with the dead and with some who perhaps have never died as we understand death; and even our educated people pass without great difficulty into the condition of quiet that is the condition of vision. We can make our minds so like still water that beings gather about us that they may see, it may be, their own images, and so live for a moment with a clearer, perhaps even with a fiercer life because of our quiet. Did not the wise Porphyry think that all souls come to be born because of water, and that 'even the generation of images in the mind is from water'?

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 137]

 

THE OLD TOWN

I FELL, one night some fifteen years ago, into what seemed the power of faery.

I had gone with a young man and his sister--friends and relations of my own--to pick stories out of an old countryman; and we were coming home talking over what he had told us. It was dark, and our imaginations were excited by his stories of apparitions, and this may have brought us, unknown to us, to the threshold, between sleeping and waking, where Sphinxes and Chimaeras sit open-eyed and where there are always murmurings and whisperings. I cannot think that what we saw was an imagination of the waking mind. We had come under some trees that made the road very dark, when the girl saw a bright light moving slowly across the road. Her brother and myself saw nothing, and did not see anything until we had walked for about half-an-hour

[p. 138]

along the edge of the river and down a narrow lane to some fields where there was a ruined church covered with ivy, and the foundations of what was called "the Old Town," which had been burned down, it was said, in Cromwell's day. We had stood for some few minutes, so far as I can recollect, looking over the fields full of stones and brambles and elder-bushes, when I saw a small bright light on the horizon, as it seemed, mounting up slowly towards the sky; then we saw other faint lights for a minute or two, and at last a bright flame like the flame of a torch moving rapidly over the river. We saw it all in such a dream, and it seems all so unreal, that I have never written of it until now, and hardly ever spoken of it, and even when thinking, because of some unreasoning impulse, I have avoided giving it weight in the argument. Perhaps I have felt that my recollections of things seen when the sense of reality was weakened must be

[p. 139]

untrustworthy. A few months ago, however, I talked it over with my two friends, and compared their somewhat meagre recollections with my own. That sense of unreality was all the more wonderful because the next day I heard sounds as unaccountable as were those lights, and without any emotion of unreality, and I remember them with perfect distinctness and confidence. The girl was sitting reading under a large old-fashioned mirror, and I was reading and writing a couple of yards away, when I heard a sound as if a shower of peas had been thrown against the mirror, and while I was looking at it I heard the sound again, and presently, while I was alone in the room, I heard a sound as if something much bigger than a pea had struck the wainscoting beside my head. And after that for some days came other sights and sounds, not to me but to the girl, her brother, and the servants. Now it was a bright light, now it was letters of

[p. 140]

fire that vanished before they could be read, now it was a heavy foot moving about in the seemingly empty house. One wonders whether creatures who live, the country people believe, wherever men and women have lived in earlier times, followed us from the ruins of the old town? or did they come from the banks of the river by the trees where the first light had shone for a moment?

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 141]

 

THE MAN AND HIS BOOTS

THERE was a doubter in Donegal, and he would not hear of ghosts or sheogues, and there was a house in Donegal that had been haunted as long as man could remember, and this is the story of how the house got the better of the man. The man came into the house and lighted a fire in the room under the haunted one, and took off his boots and set them On the hearth, and stretched out his feet and warmed him self. For a time he prospered in his unbelief; but a little while after the night had fallen, and everything had got very dark, one of his boots began to move. It got up off the floor and gave a kind of slow jump towards the door, and then the other boot did the same, and after that the first boot jumped again. And thereupon it struck the man that an invisible being had got into his boots, and was now going away in them. When the boots reached the door they went up-stairs

[p. 142]

slowly, and then the man heard them go tramp, tramp round the haunted room over his head. A few minutes passed, and he could hear them again upon the stairs, and after that in the passage outside, and then one of them came in at the door, and the other gave a jump past it and came in too. They jumped along towards him, and then one got up and hit him, and afterwards the other hit him, and then again the first hit him, and so on, until they drove him out of the room, and finally out of the house. In this way he was kicked out by his own boots, and Donegal was avenged upon its doubter. It is not recorded whether the invisible being was a ghost or one of the Sidhe, but the fantastic nature of the vengeance is like the work of the Sidhe who live in the heart of fantasy.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

 

A COWARD

ONE day I was at the house of my friend the strong farmer, who lives beyond Ben Bulben and Cope's mountain, and met there a young lad who seemed to be disliked by the two daughters. I asked why they disliked him, and was; told he was a coward. This interested me, for some whom robust children of nature take to be cowards are but men and women with a nervous system too finely made for their life and work. I looked at the lad; but no, that pink-and-white face and strong body had nothing of undue sensibility. After a little he told me his story. He had lived a wild and reckless life, until one day, two years before, he was coming home late at night, and suddenly fell himself sinking in, as it were, upon the ghostly world. For a moment he saw the face of a dead brother rise up before him, and then he turned and ran. He did not stop till he came to a cottage nearly a mile

[p. 144]

down the road. He flung himself against the door with so much of violence that he broke the thick wooden bolt and fell upon the floor. From that day he gave up his wild life, but was a hopeless coward. Nothing could ever bring him to look, either by day or night, upon the spot where he had seen the face, and he often went two miles round to avoid it; nor could, he said, 'the prettiest girl in the country' persuade him to see her home after a party if he were alone. He feared everything, for he had looked at the face no man can see unchanged--the imponderable face of a spirit.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 145]

 

THE THREE O'BYRNES AND THE EVIL FAERIES

IN the dim kingdom there is a great abundance of all excellent things. There is more love there than upon the earth; there is more dancing there than upon the earth; and there is more treasure there than upon the earth. In the beginning the earth was perhaps made to fulfil the desire of man, but now it has got old and fallen into decay. What wonder if we try and pilfer the treasures of that other kingdom!

A friend was once at a village near Sleive League. One day he was straying about a rath called 'Cashel Nore.' A man with a haggard face and unkempt hair, and clothes falling in pieces, came into the rath and began digging. My friend turned to a peasant who was working near and asked who the man was. 'That is the third O'Byrne,' was the answer. A few days after he learned this story: A great quantity of treasure had

[p. 146]

been buried in the rath in pagan times, and a number of evil faeries set to guard it; but some day it was to be found and belong to the family of the O'Byrnes. Before that day three O'Byrnes must find it and die. Two had already done so. The first had dug and dug until at last he had got a glimpse of the stone coffin that contained it, but immediately a thing like a huge hairy dog came down the mountain and tore him to pieces. The next morning the treasure had again vanished deep into the earth. The second O'Byrne came and dug and dug until he found the coffer, and lifted the lid and saw the gold shining within. He saw some horrible sight the next moment, and went raving mad and soon died. The treasure again sank out of sight. The third O'Byrne is now digging. He believes that he will die in some terrible way the moment he finds the treasure, but that the spell will be broken, and the O'Byrne family made rich for ever, as they were of old.

[p. 147]

A peasant of the neighbourhood once saw the treasure. He found the shin-bone of a hare lying on the grass. He took it up; there was a hole in it; he looked through the hole, and saw the gold heaped up under the ground. He hurried home to bring a spade, but when he got to the rath again he could not find the spot where he had seen it.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

 

DRUMCLIFF AND ROSSES

DRUMCLIFF and Rosses were, are, and ever shall be, please Heaven! places of unearthly resort. I have lived near by them and in them, time after time, and have gathered thus many a crumb of faery lore. Drumcliff is a wide green valley, lying at the foot of Ben Bulben, the mountain in whose side the square white door swings open at nightfall to loose the faery riders on the world. The great St. Columba himself, the builder of many of the old ruins in the valley, climbed the mountains on one notable day to get near heaven with his prayers. Rosses is a little sea-dividing, sandy plain, covered with short grass, like a green tablecloth, and lying in the foam midway between the round cairn-headed Knocknarea and 'Ben Bulben, famous for hawks':

	 
		'But for Benbulben and Knocknarea
		 Many a poor sailor'd be cast away,'
		
		 as the rhyme goes.

[p. 149]

At the northern corner of Rosses is a little promontory of sand and rocks and grass: a mournful, haunted place. No wise peasant would fall asleep under its low cliff, for he who sleeps here may wake 'silly,' the 'good people' having carried off his soul. There is no more ready shortcut to the dim kingdom than this plovery headland, for, covered and smothered now from sight by mounds of sand, a long cave goes thither 'full of gold and silver, and the most beautiful parlours and drawing-rooms.' Once, before the sand covered it, a dog strayed in, and was heard yelping helplessly deep underground in a fort far inland. These forts or raths, made before modern history had begun, cover all Rosses and all Columkille. The one where the dog yelped has, like most others, an underground beehive chamber in the midst. Once when I was poking about there, an unusually intelligent and 'reading' peasant who had come with me, and waited outside, knelt down by the

[p. 150]

opening, and whispered in a timid voice, 'Are you all right, sir?' I had been some little while underground, and he feared I had been carried off like the dog.

No wonder he was afraid, for the fort has long been circled by ill-boding rumours. It is on the ridge of a small hill, on whose northern slope lie a few stray cottages. One night a farmer's young son came from one of them and saw the fort all flaming, and ran towards it, but the 'glamour' fell on him, and he sprang on to a fence, cross-legged, and commenced beating it with a stick, for he imagined the fence was a horse, and that all night long he went on the most wonderful ride through the country. In the morning he was still beating his fence, and they carried him home, where he remained a simpleton for three years before he came to himself again. A little later a farmer tried to level the fort. His cows and horses died, and an manner of trouble overtook him, and finally he himself was led home, and left useless with

[p. 151]

[paragraph continues] 'his head on his knees by the fire to the day of his death.'

A few hundred yards southwards of the northern angle of Rosses is another angle having also its cave, though this one is not covered with sand. About twenty years ago a brig was wrecked near by, and three or four fishermen were put to watch the deserted hulk through the darkness. At midnight they saw sitting on a stone at the. cave's mouth two red-capped fiddlers fiddling with all their might. The men fled. A great crowd of villagers rushed down to the cave to see the fiddlers, but the creatures had gone.

To the wise peasant the green hills and woods round him are full of never-fading mystery. When the aged countrywoman stands at her door in the evening, and, in her own words, 'looks at the mountains and thinks of the goodness of God,' God is all the nearer, because the pagan powers are not far: because northward in Ben Bulben, famous for hawks, the white square

[p. 152]

door swings open at sundown, and those wild unchristian riders rush forth upon the fields, while southward the White Lady, who is doubtless Maive herself, wanders under the broad cloud nightcap of Knocknarea. How may she doubt these things, even though the priest shakes his head at her? Did not a herd-boy, no long while since, see the White Lady? She passed so close that the skirt of her dress touched him. 'He fell down, and was dead three days.' But this is merely the small gossip of faerydom--the little stitches that join this world and the other.

One night as I sat eating Mrs. H-----'s soda-bread, her husband told me a longish story, much the best of all I heard in Rosses. Many a poor man from Fin M'Cool to our own days has had some such adventure to tell of, for those creatures, the 'good people,' love to repeat themselves. At any rate the story-tellers do. 'In the times when we used to travel by the canal,' he said, 'I was coming down from Dublin. When we

[p. 153]

came to Mullingar the canal ended, and I began to walk, and stiff and fatigued I was after the slowness. I had some friends with me, and now and then we walked, now and then we rode in a cart. So on till we saw some girls milking cows, and stopped to joke with them. After a while we asked them for a drink of milk. "We have nothing to put it in here," they said, "but come to the house with us." We went home with them, and sat round the fire talking. After a while the others went, and left me, loath to stir from the good fire. I asked the girls for something to eat. There was a pot on the fire, and they took the meat out and put it on a plate, and told me to eat only the meat that came off the head. When I had eaten, the girls went out, and I did not see them again. It grew darker and darker, and there I still sat, loath as ever to leave the good fire, and after a while two men came in, carrying between them a corpse. When I saw them, coming I

[p. 154]

hid behind the door. Says one to the other, putting the corpse on the spit, "Who'll turn the spit? Says the other, "Michael H-----, come out of that and turn the meat." I came out all of a tremble, and began turning the spit. "Michael H------," says the one who spoke first, "if you let it burn we'll have to put you on the spit instead"; and on that they went out. I sat there trembling and turning the corpse till towards midnight. The men came again, and the one said it was burnt, and the other said it was done right. But having fallen out over it, they both said they would do me no harm that time; and, sitting by the fire, one of them cried out: "Michael H-----, can you tell me a story?" "Divil a one," said I. On which he caught me by the shoulder, and put me out like a shot. It was a wild blowing night. Never in all my born days did I see such a night--the darkest night that ever came out of the heavens. I did not know where I was

[p. 155]

for the life of me. So when one of the men came after me and touched me on the shoulder, with a "Michael H----, can you tell a story now?" "I can," says I. In he brought me; and putting me by the fire, says: "Begin." "I have no story but the one," says I, "that I was sitting here, and you two men brought in a corpse and put it on the spit, and set me turning it." "That will do," says he; "ye may go in there and lie down on the bed." And I went, nothing loath; and in the morning where was I but in the middle of a green field!'

'Drumcliff' is a great place for omens. Before a prosperous fishing season a herring-barrel appears in the midst of a storm-cloud; and at a place called Columkille's Strand, a place of marsh and mire, an ancient boat, with St. Columba himself, comes floating in from sea on a moonlight night: a portent of a brave harvesting. They have their dread portents too. Some few seasons ago a fisherman saw,

[p. 156]

far on the horizon, renowned Hy Brazel, where he who touches shall find no more labour or care, nor cynic laughter, but shall go walking about under shadiest boscage, and enjoy the conversation of Cuchullin and his heroes. A vision of Hy Brazel forebodes national troubles.

Drumcliff and Rosses are chokeful of ghosts. By bog, road, rath, hillside, sea-border they gather in all shapes: headless women, men in armour, shadow hares, fire-tongued hounds, whistling seals, and so on. A whistling seal sank a ship the other day. At Drumcliff there is a very ancient graveyard. The Annals of the Four Masters have this verse about a soldier named Denadhach, who died in 871: 'A pious soldier of the race of Con lies under hazel crosses at Drumcliff.' Not very long ago an old woman, turning to go into the churchyard at night to pray, saw standing before her a man in armour, who asked her where she was going. It was the 'pious soldier of the race of Con,'

[p. 157]

says local wisdom, still keeping watch, with his ancient piety, over the graveyard. Again, the custom is still common hereabouts of sprinkling the doorstep with the blood of a chicken on the death of a very young child, thus (as belief is) drawing into the blood the evil spirits from the too weak soul. Blood is a great gatherer of evil spirits. To cut your hand on a stone on going into a fort is said to be very dangerous.

There is no more curious ghost in Drumcliff or Rosses than the snipe-ghost. There is a bush behind a house in a village that I know well: for excellent reasons I do not say whether in Drumcliff or Rosses or on the slope of Ben Bulben, or even on the plain round Knocknarea. There is a history concerning the house and the bush. A man once lived there who found on the quay of Sligo a package containing three hundred pounds in notes. It

[p. 158]

was dropped by a foreign sea captain. This my man knew, but said nothing. It was money for freight, and the sea captain, not daring to face his owners, committed suicide in mid-ocean. Shortly afterwards my man died. His soul could not rest. At any rate, strange sounds were heard round his house, though that had grown and prospered since the freight money. The wife was often seen by those still alive out in the garden praying at the bush I have spoken of, for the shade of the dead man appeared there at times. The bush remains to this day: once portion of a hedge, it now stands by itself, for no one dare put spade or pruning-knife about it. As to the strange sounds and voices, they did not cease till a few years ago, when, during some repairs, a snipe flew out of the solid plaster and away; the troubled ghost, say the neighbours, of the note-finder was at last dislodged.

My forebears and relations have lived near Rosses and Drumcliff these many years. A few miles northward I am wholly a stranger, and can find nothing.

[p. 159]

[paragraph continues] When I ask for stories of the faeries, my answer is some such as was given me by a woman who lives near a white stone fort--one of the few stone ones in Ireland--under the seaward angle of Ben Bulben: 'They always mind their own affairs and I always mind mine': for it is dangerous to talk of the creatures. Only friendship for yourself or knowledge of your forebears will loosen these cautious tongues. My friend, 'the sweet Harp-String' (I give no more than his Irish name for fear of gaugers), has the science of unpacking the stubbornest heart, but then he supplies the potheen-makers with grain from his own fields. Besides, he is descended from a noted Gaelic magician who raised the 'dhoul' in Great Eliza's century, and he has a kind of prescriptive right to hear tell of all kind of other-world creatures. They are almost relations of his, if all people say concerning the parentage of magicians be true.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 160]

 

THE THICK SKULL OF THE FORTUNATE

 

I

ONCE a number of Icelandic peasantry found a very thick skull in the cemetery where the poet Egil was buried. Its great thickness made them feel certain it was the skull of a great man, doubtless of Egil himself. To be doubly sure they put it on a wall and hit it hard blows with a hammer. It got white where the blows fell but did not break, and they were convinced that it was in truth the skull of the poet, and worthy of every honour. In Ireland we have much kinship with the Icelanders, or 'Danes' as we call them and all other dwellers in the Scandinavian countries. In some of our mountainous and barren places, and in our seaboard villages, we still test each other in much the same way the Icelanders tested the head of Egil. We may have acquired the custom from those ancient Danish pirates,

[p. 161]

whose descendants the people of Rosses tell me still remember every field and hillock in Ireland which once belonged to their forebears, and are able to describe Rosses itself as well as any native. There is one seaboard district known as Roughley, where the men are never known to shave or trim their wild red beards, and where there is a fight ever on foot. I have seen them at a boat-race fall foul of each other, and after much loud Gaelic, strike each other with oars. The first boat had gone aground, and by dint of hitting out with the long oars kept the second boat from passing, only to give the victory to the third. One day the Sligo people say a man from Roughley was tried in Sligo for breaking a skull in a row, and made the defence not unknown in Ireland, that some heads are so thin you cannot be responsible for them. Having turned with a look of passionate contempt towards the solicitor who was prosecuting, and cried, 'that little fellow's skull if ye were to hit

[p. 162]

it would go like an egg-shell,' he beamed upon the judge, and said in a wheedling voice, 'but a man might wallop away at your lordship's for a fortnight.'

 

II

I wrote all this years ago, out of what were even then old memories. I was in Roughley the other day, and found it much like other desolate places. I may have been thinking of Moughorow, a much wilder place, for the memories of one's childhood are brittle things to lean upon.

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

 

THE RELIGION OF A SAILOR

A SEA captain when he stands upon the bridge, or looks out from his deck-house, thinks much about God and about the world. Away in the valley yonder among the corn and the poppies men may well forget all things except the warmth of the sun upon the face, and the kind shadow under the hedge; but he who journeys through storm and darkness must needs think and think. One July a couple of years ago I took my supper with a Captain Moran on board the s.s. Margaret, that had put into a western river from I know not where. I found him a man of many notions all flavoured with his personality, as is the way with sailors. He talked in his queer sea manner of God and the world, and up through all his words broke the hard energy of his calling.

'Sur,' said he, 'did you ever hear tell of the sea captain's prayer?'

'No,' said I; 'what is it?'

[p. 164]

'It is,' he replied, '"O Lord, give me a stiff upper lip."'

'And what does that mean?'

'It means,' he said, 'that when they come to me some night and wake me up, and say, "Captain, we're going down," that I won't make a fool o' meself. Why, sur, we war in mid Atlantic, and I standin' on the bridge, when the third mate comes up to me looking mortial bad. Says he, "Captain, all's up with us." Says I, "Didn't you know when you joined that a certain percentage go down every year?" "Yes, sur," says he; and says I, "Arn't you paid to go down?" "Yes, sur," says he; and says I, "Then go down like a man, and be damned to you!"'

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 165]

 

CONCERNING THE NEARNESS TOGETHER OF HEAVEN, EARTH, AND PURGATORY

IN Ireland this world and the world we go to after death are not far apart. I have heard of a ghost that was many years in a tree and many years in the archway of a bridge, and my old Mayo woman says, 'There is a bush up at my own place, and the people do be saying that there are two souls doing their penance under it. When the wind blows one way the one has shelter, and when it blows from the north the other has the shelter. It is twisted over with the way they be rooting under it for shelter. I don't believe it, but there is many a one would not pass by it at night.' Indeed there are times when the worlds are so near together that it seems as if our earthly chattels were no more than the shadows of things beyond. A lady I knew once saw a village child running about with a long trailing petticoat

[p. 166]

upon her, and asked the creature why she did not have it cut short. 'It was my grandmother's,' said the child; 'would you have her going about yonder with her petticoat up to her knees, and she dead but four days?' I have read a story of a woman whose ghost haunted her people because they had made her grave-clothes so short that the fires of purgatory burned her knees. The peasantry expect to have beyond the grave houses much like their earthly homes, only there the thatch will never grow leaky, nor the white walls lose their lustre, nor shall the dairy be at any time empty of good milk and butter. But now and then a landlord or an agent or a gauger will go by begging his bread, to show how God divides the righteous from the unrighteous.

1892 and 1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 167]

 

THE EATERS OF PRECIOUS STONES

SOMETIMES when I have been shut off from common interests, and have for a little forgotten to be restless, I get waking dreams, now faint and shadow-like, now vivid and solid-looking, like the material world under my feet. Whether they be faint or vivid, they are ever beyond the power of my will to alter in any way. They have their own will, and sweep hither and thither, and change according to its commands. One day I saw faintly an immense pit of blackness, round which went a circular parapet, and on this parapet sat innumerable apes eating precious stones out of the palms of their hands. The stones glittered green and crimson, and the apes devoured them with an insatiable hunger. I knew that I saw the Celtic Hell, and my own Hell, the Hell of the artist, and that all who sought after beautiful and wonderful things with too

[p. 168]

avid a thirst, lost peace and form and became shapeless and common. I have seen into other people's hells also, and saw in one an infernal Peter, who had a black face and white lips, and who weighed on a curious double scales not only the evil deeds committed, but the good deeds left undone, of certain invisible shades. I could see the scales go up and down, but I could not see the shades who were, I knew, crowding about him. I saw on another occasion a quantity of demons of all kinds of shapes--fish-like, serpent-like, ape-like, and dog-like--sitting about a black pit such as that in my own Hell, and looking at a moon--like reflection of the Heavens which shone up from the depths of the pit.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 169]

 

OUR LADY OF THE HILLS

WHEN we were children we did not say at such a distance from the post-office, or so far from the butcher's or the grocer's, but measured things by the covered well in the wood, or by the burrow of the fox in the hill. We belonged then to God and to His works, and to things come down from the ancient days. We would not have been greatly surprised had we met the shining feet of an angel among the white mushrooms upon the mountains, for we knew in those days immense despair, unfathomed love--every eternal mood,--but now the draw-net is about our feet. A few miles eastward of Lough Gill, a young Protestant girl, who was both pretty herself and prettily dressed in blue and white, wandered up among those mountain mushrooms, and I have a letter of hers telling how she met a troop of children, and became a portion of their dream. When they first saw her

[p. 170]

they threw themselves face down in a bed of rushes, as if in a great fear; but after a little other children came about them, and they got up and followed her almost bravely. She noticed their fear, and presently stood still and held out her arms. A little girl threw herself into them with the cry, 'Ah, you are the Virgin out o' the picture!' 'No,' said another, coming near also, 'she is a sky faery, for she has the colour of the sky.' 'No,' said a third, 'she is the faery out of the foxglove grown big.' The other children, however, would have it that she was indeed the Virgin, for she wore the Virgin's colours. Her good Protestant heart was greatly troubled, and she got the children to sit down about her, and tried to explain who she was, but they would have none of her explanation. Finding explanation of no avail, she asked had they ever heard of Christ? 'Yes,' said one; 'but we do not like Him, for He would kill us if it were not for the Virgin.' 'Tell Him to be good to me,'

[p. 171]

whispered another into her ear. 'We would not let me near Him, for dad says I am a divil,' burst out a third.

She talked to them a long time about Christ and the apostles, but was finally interrupted by an elderly woman with a stick, who, taking her to be some adventurous hunter for converts, drove the children away, despite their explanation that here was the great Queen of Heaven come to walk upon the mountain and be kind to them. When the children had gone she went on her way, and had walked about half-a-mile, when the child who was called 'a divil' jumped down from the high ditch by the lane, and said she would believe her 'an ordinary lady' if she had 'two skirts,' for 'ladies always had two skirts.' The 'two skirts' were shown, and the child went away crestfallen, but a few minutes later jumped down again from the ditch, and cried angrily, 'Dad's a divil, mum's a divil, and I'm a divil, and you are only an ordinary

[p. 172]

lady,' and having flung a handful of mud and pebbles ran away sobbing. When my pretty Protestant had come to her own home she found that she had dropped the tassels of her parasol. A year later she was by chance upon the mountain, but wearing now a plain black dress, and met the child who had first called her the Virgin out o' the picture, and saw the tassels hanging about the child's neck, and said, 'I am the lady you met last year, who told you about Christ.' 'No, you are not! no, you are not! no, you are not!' was the passionate reply. And after all, it was not my pretty Protestant, but Mary, Star of the Sea, still walking in sadness and in beauty upon many a mountain and by many a shore, who cast those tassels at the feet of the child. It is indeed fitting that man pray to her who is the mother of peace, the mother of dreams, and the mother of purity, to leave them yet a little hour to do good and evil in, and to watch old Time telling the rosary of the stars.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 173]

 

THE GOLDEN AGE

A WHILE ago I was in the train, and getting near Sligo. The last time I had been there something was troubling me, and I had longed for a message from those beings or bodiless moods, or whatever they be, who inhabit the world of spirits. The message came, for one night I saw with blinding distinctness a black animal, half weasel, half dog, moving along the top of a stone wall, and presently the black animal vanished, and from the other side came a white weasel-like dog, his pink flesh shining through his white hair and all in a blaze of light; and I remembered a pleasant belief about two faery dogs who go about representing day and night, good and evil, and was comforted by the excellent omen. But now I longed for a message of another kind, and chance, if chance there is, brought it, for a man got into the carriage and began to play on a fiddle made apparently of an old

[p. 174]

blacking-box, and though I am quite unmusical the sounds filled me with the strangest emotions. I seemed to hear a voice of lamentation out of the Golden Age. It told me that we are imperfect, incomplete, and no more like a beautiful woven web, but like a bundle of cords knotted together and flung into a comer. It said that the world was once all perfect and kindly, and that still the kindly and perfect world existed, but buried like a mass of roses under many spadefuls of earth. The faeries and the more innocent of the spirits dwelt within it, and lamented over our fallen world in the lamentation of the wind-tossed reeds, in the song of the birds, in the moan of the waves, and in the sweet cry of the fiddle. It said that with us the beautiful are not clever and the clever are not beautiful, and that the best of our moments are marred by a little vulgarity, or by a pin-prick out of sad recollection, and that the fiddle must ever lament about it all. It said that if

[p. 175]

only they who live in the Golden Age could die we might be happy, for the sad voices would be still; but alas! alas! they must sing and we must weep until the Eternal gates swing open.

We were now getting into the big glass-roofed terminus, and the fiddler put away his old blacking-box and held out his hat for a copper, and then opened the door and was gone.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

 

A REMONSTRANCE WITH SCOTSMEN FOR HAVING SOURED THE DISPOSITION OF THEIR GHOSTS AND FAERIES

NOT only in Ireland is faery belief still extant. It was only the other day I heard of a Scottish farmer who believed that the lake in front of his house was haunted by a water-horse. He was afraid of it, and dragged the lake with nets, and then tried to pump it empty. It would have been a bad thing for the water-horse had he found him. An Irish peasant would have long since come to terms with the creature. For in Ireland there is something of timid affection between men and spirits. They only ill-treat each other in reason. Each admits the other side to have feelings. There are points beyond which neither will go. No Irish peasant would treat a captured faery as did the man Campbell tells of. He caught a kelpie, and tied her behind him on his

[p. 177]

horse. She was fierce, but he kept her quiet by driving an awl and a needle into her. They came to a river, and she grew very restless, fearing to cross the water. Again he drove the awl and needle into her. She cried out, 'Pierce me with the awl, but keep that slender, hair-like slave (the needle) out of me.' They came to an inn. He turned the light of a lantern on her; immediately she dropped down like a falling star, and changed into a lump of jelly. She was dead. Nor would they treat the faeries as one is treated in an old Highland poem. A faery loved a little child who used to cut turf at the side of a faery hill. Every day the faery put out his hand from the hill with an enchanted knife. The child used to cut the turf with the knife. It did not take long, the knife being charmed. Her brothers wondered why she was done so quickly. At last they resolved to watch, and find out who helped her. They saw the small hand come out of the earth,

[p. 178]

and the little child take from it the knife. When the turf was all cut, they saw her make three taps on the ground with the handle. The small hand came out of the hill. Snatching the knife from the child, they cut the hand off with a blow. The faery was never again seen. He drew his bleeding arm into the earth, thinking, as it is recorded, he had lost his hand through the treachery of the child.

In Scotland you are too theological, too gloomy. You have made even the Devil religious. 'Where do you live, good-wyf, and how is the minister?' he said to the witch when he met her on the high-road, as it came out in the trial. You have burnt all the witches. In Ireland we have left them alone. To be sure, the 'loyal minority' knocked out the eye of one with a cabbage-stump on the 31st of March, 1711, in the town of Carrickfergus. But then the 'loyal minority' is half Scottish. You have discovered the faeries to be pagan and

[p. 179]

wicked. You would like to have them all up before the magistrate. In Ireland warlike mortals have gone amongst them, and helped them in their battles, and they in turn have taught men great skill with herbs, and permitted some few to hear their tunes. Carolan slept upon a faery rath. Ever after their tunes ran in his head, and made him the great musician he was. In Scotland you have denounced them from the pulpit. In Ireland they have been permitted by the priests to consult them on the state of their souls. Unhappily the priests have decided that they have no souls, that they will dry up like so much bright vapour at the last day; but more in sadness than in anger they have said it. The Catholic religion likes to keep on good terms with its neighbours.

These two different ways of looking at things have influenced in each country the whole world of sprites and goblins. For their gay and graceful doings you

[p. 180]

must go to Ireland; for their deeds of terror to Scotland. Our Irish faery terrors have about them something of make-believe. When a peasant strays into an enchanted hovel, and is made to turn a corpse all night on a spit before the fire, we do not feel anxious; we know he will wake in the midst of a green field, the dew on his old coat. In Scotland it is altogether different. You have soured the naturally excellent disposition of ghosts and goblins. The piper M'Crimmon, of the Hebrides, shouldered his pipes, and marched into a sea cavern, playing loudly, and followed by his dog. For a long time the people could hear the pipes. He must have gone nearly a mile, when they heard the sound of a struggle. Then the piping ceased suddenly. Some time went by, and then his dog came out of the cavern completely flayed, too weak even to howl. Nothing else ever came out of the cavern. Then there is the tale of the man who dived into a lake where treasure

[p. 181]

was thought to be. He saw a great coffer of iron. Close to the coffer lay a monster, who warned him to return whence he came. He rose to the surface; but the bystanders, when they heard he had seen the treasure, persuaded him to dive again. He dived. In a little while his heart and liver floated up, reddening the water. No man ever saw the rest of his body.

These water-goblins and water-monsters are common in Scottish folk-lore. We have them too, but take them much less dreadfully. Our tales turn all their doings to favour and to prettiness, or hopelessly humorize the creatures. A hole in the Sligo river is haunted by one of these monsters. He is ardently believed in by many, but that does not prevent the peasantry playing with the subject, and surrounding it with conscious fantasies. When I was a small boy I fished one day for congers in the monster hole. Returning home, a great eel on my shoulder, his head flapping down in front, his tail

[p. 182]

sweeping the ground behind, I met a fisherman of my acquaintance. I began a tale of an immense conger, three times larger than the one I carried, that had broken my line and escaped. 'That was him,' said the fisherman. 'Did you ever hear how he made my brother emigrate? My brother was a diver, you know, and grubbed stones for the Harbour Board. One day the beast comes up to him, and says, 'What are you after?' 'Stones, sur,' says he. 'Don't you think you had better be going?' 'Yes, sur,' says he. And that's why my brother emigrated. The people said it was because he got poor, but that's not true.'

You--you will make no terms with the spirits of fire and earth and air and water. You have made the Darkness your enemy. We--we exchange civilities with the world beyond.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 183]

 

WAR

WHEN there was a rumour of war with France a while ago, I met a poor Sligo woman, a soldier's widow, that I know, and I read her a sentence out of a letter I had just had from London: 'The people here are mad for war, but France seems inclined to take things peacefully,' or some like sentence. Her mind ran a good deal on war, which she imagined partly from what she had heard from soldiers, and partly from tradition of the rebellion of '98, but the word London doubled her interest, for she knew there were a great many people in London, and she herself had once lived in 'a congested district.' 'There are too many over one another in London. They are getting tired of the world. It is killed they want to be. It will be no matter; but sure the French want nothing but peace and quietness. The people here don't mind the war coming. They could not be worse than they are. They may as well die

[p. 184]

soldierly before God. Sure they will get quarters in heaven.' Then she began to say that it would be a hard thing to see children tossed about on bayonets, and I knew her mind was running on traditions of the great rebellion. She said presently, 'I never knew a man that was in a battle that liked to speak of it after. They'd sooner be throwing hay down from a hayrick.' She told me how she and her neighbours used to be sitting over the fire when she was a girl, talking of the war that was coming, and now she was afraid it was coming again, for she had dreamed that all the bay was 'stranded and covered with seaweed.' I asked her if it was in the Fenian times that she had been so much afraid of war coming. But she cried out, 'Never had I such fun and pleasure as in the Fenian times. I was in a house where some of the officers used to be staying, and in the daytime I would be walking after the soldiers' band, and at night I'd be going

[p. 185]

down to the end of the garden watching a soldier, with his red coat on him, drilling the Fenians in the field behind the house. One night the boys tied the liver of an old horse, that had been dead three weeks, to the knocker, and I found it when I opened the door in the morning.' And presently our talk of war shifted, as it had a way of doing, to the battle of the Black Pig, which seems to her a battle between Ireland and England, but to me an Armageddon which shall quench all things in the Ancestral Darkness again, and from this to sayings about war and vengeance. 'Do you know,' she said, 'what the curse of the Four Fathers is? They put the man-child on the spear, and somebody said to them, "You will be cursed in the fourth generation after you," and that is why disease or anything always comes in the fourth generation.'

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 186]

 

THE QUEEN AND THE FOOL

I HAVE heard one Hearne, a witch-doctor, who is on the border of Clare and Galway, say that in 'every household' of faery 'there is a queen and a fool,' and that if you are 'touched' by either you never recover, though you may from the touch of any other in faery. He said of the fool that he was 'maybe the wisest of all,' and spoke of him as dressed like one of the 'mummers that used to be going about the country.' Since then a friend has gathered me some few stories of him, and I have heard that he is known, too, in the highlands. I remember seeing a long, lank, ragged man sitting by the hearth in the cottage of an old miller not far from where I am now writing, and being told that he was a fool; and I find from the stories that my friend has gathered that he is believed to go to faery in his sleep; but whether he becomes an Amadan-na-Breena, a fool of the forth,

[p. 187]

and is attached to a household there, I cannot tell. It was an old woman that I know well, and who has been in faery herself, that spoke of him. She said, 'There are fools amongst them, and the fools we see, like that Amadan of Ballylee, go away with them at night, and so do the woman fools that we call Oinseachs (apes).' A woman who is related to the witch-doctor on the border of Clare, and who can Cure people and cattle by spells, said, 'There are some cures I can't do. I can't help any one that has got a stroke from the queen or the fool of the forth. I knew of a woman that saw the queen one time, and she looked like any Christian. I never heard of any that saw the fool but one woman that was walking near Gort, and she called out, 'There's the fool of the forth coming after me.' So her friends that were with her called out, though they could see nothing, and I suppose he went away at that, for she got no harm. He was like a big strong

[p. 188]

man, she said, and half naked, and that is all she said about him. I have never seen any myself, but I am a cousin of Hearne, and my uncle was away twenty-one years.' The wife of the old miller said, 'It is said they are mostly good neighbours, but the stroke of the fool is what there is no cure for; any one that gets that is gone. The Amadan-na-Breena we call him!' And an old woman who lives in the Bog of Kiltartan, and is very poor, said, 'It is true enough, there is no cure for the stroke of the Amadan-na-Breena. There was an old man I knew long ago, he had a tape, and he could tell what diseases you had with measuring you; and he knew many things. And he said to me one time, 'What month of the year is the worst?' and I said, 'The month of May, of course.' 'It is not,' he said; 'but the month of June, for that's the month that the Amadan gives his stroke!' They say he looks like any other man, but he's leathan (wide),

[p. 189]

and not smart. I knew a boy one time got a great fright, for a lamb looked over the wall at him with a beard on it, and he knew it was the Amadan, for it was the month of June. And they brought him to that man I was telling about, that had the tape, and when he saw him he said, 'Send for the priest, and get a Mass said over him.' And so they did, and what would you say but he's living yet and has a family! A certain Regan said, 'They, the other sort of people, might be passing you close here and they might touch you. But any that gets the touch of the Amadan-na-Breena is done for.' It's true enough that it's in the month of June he's most likely to give the touch. I knew one that got it, and he told me about it himself. He was a boy I knew well, and he told me that one night a gentleman came to him, that had been his landlord, and that was dead. And he told him to come along with him, for he wanted him to fight another man. And when he

[p. 190]

went he found two great troops of them, and the other troop had a living man with them too, and he was put to fight him. And they had a great fight, and he got the better of the other man, and then the troop on his side gave a great shout, and he was left home again. But about three years after that he was cutting bushes in a wood and he saw the Amadan coming at him. He had a big vessel in his arms, and it was shining, so that the boy could see nothing else; but he put it behind his back then and came running, and the boy said he looked wild and wide, like the side of the hill. And the boy ran, and he threw the vessel after him, and it broke with a great noise, and whatever came out of it, his head was gone there and then. He lived for a while after, and used to tell us many things, but his wits were gone. He thought they mightn't have liked him to beat the other man, and he used to be afraid something would come on him.' And an old woman

[p. 191]

in a Galway workhouse, who had some little knowledge of Queen Maive, said the other day, 'The Amadan-na-Breena changes his shape every two days. Sometimes he comes like a youngster, and then he'll come like the worst of beasts, trying to give the touch he used to be. I heard it said of late he was shot, but I think myself it would be hard to shoot him.'

I knew a man who was trying to bring before his mind's eye an image of Aengus, the old Irish god of love and poetry and ecstasy, who changed four of his kisses into birds, and suddenly the image of a man with a cap and bells rushed before his mind's eye, and grew vivid and spoke and called itself 'Aengus' messenger.' And I knew another man, a truly great seer, who saw a white fool in a visionary garden, where there was a tree with peacocks' feathers instead of leaves, and flowers that opened to show little human faces when the white fool had touched them with his coxcomb, and he saw at

[p. 192]

another time a white fool sitting by a pool and smiling and watching the images of many fair women floating up from the pool.

What else can death be but the beginning of wisdom and power and beauty? and foolishness may be a kind of death. I cannot think it wonderful that many should see a fool with a shining vessel of some enchantment or wisdom or dream too powerful for mortal brains in 'every household of them.' It is natural, too, that there should be a queen to every household of them, and that one should hear little of their kings, for women come more easily than men to that wisdom which ancient peoples, and all wild peoples even now, think the only wisdom. The self, which is the foundation of our knowledge, is broken in pieces by foolishness, and is forgotten in the sudden emotions of women, and therefore fools may get, and women do get of a certainty, glimpses of much that sanctity finds at the end of

[p. 193]

its painful journey. The man who saw the white fool said of a certain woman, not a peasant woman, 'If I had her power of vision I would know all the wisdom of the gods, and her visions do not interest her.' And I know of another woman, also not a peasant woman, who would pass in sleep into countries of an unearthly beauty, and who never cared for anything but to be busy about her house and her children; and presently an herb doctor cured her, as he called it. Wisdom and beauty and power may sometimes, as I think, come to those who die every day they live, though their dying may not be like the dying Shakespeare spoke of. There is a war between the living and the dead, and the Irish stories keep harping upon it. They will have it that when the potatoes or the wheat or any other of the fruits of the earth decay, they ripen in faery, and that our dreams lose their wisdom when the sap rises in the trees, and that our dreams can make the trees

[p. 194]

wither, and that one hears the bleating of the lambs of faery in November, and that blind eyes can see more than other eyes. Because the soul always believes in these, or in like things, the cell and the wilderness shall never be long empty, or lovers come into the world who will not understand the verse--

	 
		Heardst thou not sweet words among
		 That heaven-resounding minstrelsy?
		 Heardst thou not that those who die
		 Awake in a world of ecstasy?
		 How love, when limbs are interwoven,
		 And sleep, when the night of life is cloven,
		 And thought to the world's dim boundaries clinging,
		 And music when one's beloved is singing,
		 Is death?
		
		 1901.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 195]

 

THE FRIENDS OF THE PEOPLE OF FAERY

THOSE that see the people of faery most often, and so have the most of their wisdom, are often very poor, but often, too, they are thought to have a strength beyond that of man, as though one came, when one has passed the threshold of trance, to those sweet waters where Maeldun saw the dishevelled eagles bathe and become young again.

There was an old Martin Roland, who lived near a bog a little out of Gort, who saw them often from his young days, and always towards the end of his life, though I would hardly call him their friend. He told me a few months before his death that 'they' would not let him sleep at night with crying things at him in Irish, and with playing their pipes. He had asked a friend of his what he should do, and the friend had told him to buy a flute, and play on it when they began to shout

[p. 196]

or to play on their pipes, and maybe they would give up annoying him; and he did, and they always went out into the field when he began to play. He showed me the pipe, and blew through it, and made a noise, but he did not know how to play; and then he showed me where he had pulled his chimney down, because one of them used to sit up on it and play on the pipes. A friend of his and mine went to see him a little time ago, for she heard that 'three of them' had told him he was to die. He said they had gone away after warning him, and that the children (children they had 'taken,' I suppose) who used to come with them, and play about the house with them, had 'gone to some other place,' because 'they found the house too cold for them, maybe'; and he died a week after he had said these things.

His neighbours were not certain that he really saw anything in his old age, but they were all certain that he saw things

[p. 197]

when he was a young man. His brother said, 'Old he is, and it's all in his brain the things he sees. If he was a young man we might believe in him.' But he was improvident, and never got on with his brothers. A neighbour said, 'The poor man, they say they are mostly in his head now, but sure he was a fine fresh man twenty years ago the night he saw them linked in two lots, like young slips of girls walking together. It was the night they took away Fallon's little girl.' And she told how Fallon's little girl had met a woman 'with red hair that was as bright as silver,' who took her away. Another neighbour, who was herself 'clouted over the ear' by one of them for going into a fort where they were, said, 'I believe it's mostly in his head they are; and when he stood in the door last night I said, "The wind does be always in my ears, and the sound of it never stops," to make him think it was the same with him; but he says, "I hear them singing

[p. 198]

and making music all the time, and one of them is after bringing out a little flute, and it's on it he's playing to them." And this I know, that when he pulled down the chimney where he said the piper used to be sitting and playing, he lifted up stones, and he an old man, that I could not have lifted when I was young and strong.'

A friend has sent me from Ulster an account of one who was on terms of true friendship with the people of faery. It has been taken down accurately, for my friend, who had heard the old woman's story some time before I heard of it, got her to tell it over again, and wrote it out at once. She began by telling the old woman that she did not like being in the house alone because of the ghosts and fairies; and the old woman said, 'There's nothing to be frightened about in faeries, miss. Many's the time I talked to a woman myself that was a faery, or something of the sort, and no less and more than mortal anyhow. She

[p. 199]

used to come about your grandfather's house--your mother's grandfather, that is--in my young days. But you'll have heard all about her.' My friend said that she had heard about her, but a long time before, and she wanted to hear about her again; and the old woman went on, 'Well dear, the very first time ever I heard word of her coming about was when your uncle--that is, your mother's uncle--Joseph married, and building a house for his wife, for he brought her first to his father's, up at the house by the Lough. My father and us were living nigh hand to where the new house was to be built, to overlook the men at their work. My father was a weaver, and brought his looms and all there into a cottage that was close by. The foundations were marked out, and the building stones lying about, but the masons had not come yet; and one day I was standing with my mother foment the house, when we sees a smart wee woman coming up the field over the burn

[p. 200]

to us. I was a bit of a girl at the time, playing about and sporting myself, but I mind her as well as if I saw her there now!' My friend asked how the woman was dressed, and the old woman said, 'It was a gray cloak she had on, with a green cashmere skirt and a black silk handkercher tied round her head, like the country women did use to wear in them times.' My friend asked, 'How wee was she?' And the old woman said, 'Well now, she wasn't wee at all when I think of it, for all we called her the Wee Woman. She was bigger than many a one, and yet not tall as you would say. She was like a woman about thirty, brown-haired and round in the face. She was like Miss Betty, your grandmother's sister, and Betty was like none of the rest, not like your grandmother, nor any of them. She was round and fresh in the face, and she never was married, and she never would take any man; and we used to say that the Wee Woman--her being like

[p. 201]

[paragraph continues] Betty--was, maybe, one of their own people that had been took off before she grew to her full height, and for that she was always following us and warning and foretelling. This time she walks straight over to where my mother was standing. "Go over to the Lough this minute!"--ordering her like that--"Go over to the Lough, and tell Joseph that he must change the foundation of this house to where I'll show you fornent the thornbush. That is where it is to be built, if he is to have luck and prosperity, so do what I'm telling ye this minute." The house was being built on "the path" I suppose--the path used by the people of faery in their journeys, and my mother brings Joseph down and shows him, and he changes the foundations, the way he was bid, but didn't bring it exactly to where was pointed, and the end of that was, when he come to the house, his own wife lost her life with an accident that come to a horse that hadn't room to turn right

[p. 202]

with a harrow between the bush and the wall. The Wee Woman was queer and angry when next she come, and says to us, "He didn't do as I bid him, but he'll see what he'll see."' My friend asked where the woman came from this time, and if she was dressed as before, and the woman said, 'Always the same way, up the field beyant the burn. It was a thin sort of shawl she had about her in summer, and a cloak about her in winter; and many and many a time she came, and always it was good advice she was giving to my mother, and warning her what not to do if she would have good luck. There was none of the other children of us ever seen her unless me; but I used to be glad when I seen her coming up the burn, and would run out and catch her by the hand and the cloak, and call to my mother, "Here's the Wee Woman!" No man body ever seen her. My father used to be wanting to, and was angry with my mother and me, thinking we were telling

[p. 203]

lies and talking foolish like. And so one day when she had come, and was sitting by the fireside talking to my mother, I slips out to the field where he was digging. "Come up," says I, "if ye want to see her. She's sitting at the fireside now, talking to mother." So in he comes with me and looks round angry like and sees nothing, and he up with a broom that was near hand and hits me a crig with it. "Take that now!" says he, "for making a fool of me!" and away with him as fast as he could, and queer and angry with me. The Wee Woman says to me then, "Ye got that now for bringing people to see me. No man body ever seen me, and none ever will."

'There was one day, though, she gave him a queer fright anyway, whether he had seen her or not. He was in among the cattle when it happened, and he comes up to the house all trembling like. "Don't let me hear you say another word of your Wee Woman. I have got enough of her

[p. 204]

this time." Another time, all the same, he was up Gortin to sell horses, and before he went off, in steps the Wee Woman and says she to my mother, holding out a sort of a weed, "Your man is gone up by Gortin, and there's a bad fright waiting him coming home, but take this and sew it in his coat, and he'll get no harm by it." My mother takes the herb, but thinks to herself, "Sure there's nothing in it," and throws it on the floor, and lo and behold, and sure enough! coming home from Gortin, my father got as bad a fright as ever he got in his life. What it was I don't right mind, but anyway he was badly damaged by it. My mother was in a queer way, frightened of the Wee Woman, after what she done, and sure enough the next time she was angry. "Ye didn't believe me," she said, "and ye threw the herb I gave ye in the fire, and I went far enough for it." There was another time she came and told how William Hearne was dead in America. "Go over," she

[p. 205]

says, "to the Lough, and say that William is dead, and he died happy, and this was the last Bible chapter ever he read," and with that she gave the verse and chapter. "Go," she says, "and tell them to read them at the next class meeting, and that I held his head while he died." And sure enough word came after that how William had died on the day she named. And, doing as she did about the chapter and hymn, they never had such a prayer-meeting as that. One day she and me and my mother was standing talking, and she was warning her about something, when she says of a sudden, "Here comes Miss Letty in all her finery, and it's time for me to be off." And with that she gave a swirl round on her feet, and raises up in the air, and round and round she goes, and up and up, as if it was a winding stairs she went up, only far swifter. She went up and up, till she was no bigger than a bird up against the clouds, singing and singing the whole time the loveliest music I ever heard in my life

[p. 206]

from that day to this. It wasn't a hymn she was singing, but poetry, lovely poetry, and me and my mother stands gaping up, and all of a tremble. "What is she at all, mother?" says I. "Is it an angel she is, or a faery woman, or what?" With that up come Miss Letty, that was your grandmother, dear, but Miss Letty she was then, and no word of her being anything else, and she wondered to see us gaping up that way, till me and my mother told her of it. She went on gay-dressed then, and was lovely looking. She was up the lane where none of us could see her coming forward when the Wee Woman rose up in that queer way, saying, "Here comes Miss Letty in all her finery." Who knows to what far country she went, or to see whom dying?

'It was never after dark she came, but daylight always, as far as I mind, but wanst, and that was on a Hallow Eve night. My mother was by the fire, making ready the supper; she had a duck down and some

[p. 207]

apples. In slips the Wee Woman, "I'm come to pass my Hallow Eve with you," says she. "That's right," says my mother, and thinks to herself, "I can give her her supper nicely." Down she sits by the fire a while. "Now I'll tell you where you'll bring my supper," says she. "In the room beyond there beside the loom--set a chair in and a plate." "When ye're spending the night, mayn't ye as well sit by the table and eat with the rest of us?" "Do what you're bid, and set whatever you give me in the room beyant. I'll eat there and nowhere else." So my mother sets her a plate of duck and some apples, whatever was going, in where she bid, and we got to our supper and she to hers; and when we rose I went in, and there, lo and behold ye, was her supper-plate a bit ate of each portion, and she clean gone!'

1897.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 208]

 

DREAMS THAT HAVE NO MORAL

THE friend who heard about Maive and the hazel-stick went to the workhouse another day. She found the old people cold and wretched, 'like flies in winter,' she said; but they forgot the cold when they began to talk. A man had just left them who had played cards in a rath with the people of faery, who had played 'very fair'; and one old man had seen an enchanted black pig one night, and there were two old people my friend had heard quarrelling as to whether Raftery or Callanan was the better poet. One had said of Raftery, 'He was a big man, and his songs have gone through the whole world. I remember him well. He had a voice like the wind'; but the other was certain 'that you would stand in the snow to listen to Callanan.' Presently an old man began to tell my friend a story, and all listened delightedly, bursting into

[p. 209]

laughter now and then. The story, which I am going to tell just as it was told, was one of those old rambling moralless tales, which are the delight of the poor and the hard driven, wherever life is left in its natural simplicity. They tell of a time when nothing had consequences, when even if you were killed, if only you had a good heart, somebody would bring you to life again with a touch of a rod, and when if you were a prince and happened to look exactly like your brother, you might go to bed with his queen, and have only a little quarrel afterwards. We too, if we were so weak and poor that everything threatened us with misfortune, would remember, if foolish people left us alone, every old dream that has been strong enough to fling the weight of the world from its shoulders.

There was a king one time who was very much put out because he had no son, and he went at last to consult his chief adviser. And the chief adviser said, 'It's

[p. 210]

easy enough managed if you do as I tell you. Let you send some one,' says he, 'to such a place to catch a fish. And when the fish is brought in, give it to the queen, your wife, to eat.'

So the king sent as he was told, and the fish was caught and brought in, and he gave it to the cook, and bade her put it before the fire, but to be careful with it, and not to let any blob or blister rise on it. But it is impossible to cook a fish before the fire without the skin of it rising in some place or other, and so there came a blob on the skin, and the cook put her finger on it to smooth it down, and then she put her finger into her mouth to cool it, and so she got a taste of the fish. And then it was sent up to the queen, and she ate it, and what was left of it was thrown out into the yard, and there was a mare in the yard and a greyhound, and they ate the bits that were thrown out.

And before a year was out, the queen had a young son, and the cook had a

[p. 211]

young son, and the mare had two foals, and the greyhound had two pups.

And the two young sons were sent out for a while to some place to be cared, and when they came back they adviser and said, 'Tell me some way that I can know were so much like one another no person could know which was the queen's son and which was the cook's. And the queen was vexed at that, and she went to the chief which is my own son, for I don't like to be giving the same eating and drinking to the cook's son as to my own.' 'It is easy to know that,' said the chief adviser, 'if you will do as I tell you. Go you outside, and stand at the door they will be coming in by, and when they see you, your own son will bow his head, but the cook's son will only laugh.'

So she did that, and when her own son bowed his head, her servants put a mark on him that she would know him again. And when they were all sitting at their dinner after that, she said to Jack, that

[p. 212]

was the cook's son, 'It is time for you to go away out of this, for you are not my son.' And her own son, that we will call Bill, said, 'Do not send him away, are we not brothers?' But Jack said, 'I would have been long ago out of this house if I knew it was not my own father and mother owned it.' And for all Bill could say to him, he would not stop. But before he went, they were by the well that was in the garden, and he said to Bill, 'If harm ever happens to me, that water on the top of the well will be blood, and the water below will be honey.'

Then he took one of the pups, and one of the two horses, that was foaled after the mare eating the fish, and the wind that was after him could not catch him, and he caught the wind that was before him. And he went on till he came to a weaver's house, and he asked him for a lodging, and he gave it to him. And then he went on till he came to a king's house, and he sent in at the door to ask, 'Did he want

[p. 213]

a servant?' 'All I want,' said the king, 'is a boy that will drive out the cows to the field every morning, and bring them in at night to be milked.' 'I will do that for you,' said Jack; so the king engaged him.

In the morning Jack was sent out with the four-and-twenty cows, and the place he was told to drive them to had not a blade of grass in it for them, but was full of stones. So Jack looked about for some place where there would be better grass, and after a while he saw a field with good green grass in it, and it belonging to a giant. So he knocked down a bit of the wall and drove them in, and he went up himself into an apple-tree and began to eat the apples. Then the giant came into the field. 'Fee-faw-fum,' says he, 'I smell the blood of an Irishman. I see you where you are, up in the tree,' he said; 'you are too big for one mouthful, and too small for two mouthfuls, and I don't know what I'll do with you if I don't grind you up and make snuff for my nose.' 'As

[p. 214]

you are strong, be merciful,' says Jack up in the tree. 'Come down out of that, you little dwarf,' said the giant, 'or I'll tear you and the tree asunder.' So Jack came down. 'Would you sooner be driving red-hot knives into one another's hearts,' said the giant, 'or would you sooner be fighting one another on red-hot flags?' 'Fighting on red-hot flags is what I'm used to at home,' said Jack, 'and your dirty feet will be sinking in them and my feet will be rising.' So then they began the fight. The ground that was hard they made soft, and the ground that was soft they made hard, and they made spring wells come up through the green flags. They were like that all through the day, no one getting the upper hand of the other, and at last a little bird came and sat on the bush and said to Jack, 'If you don't make an end of him by sunset, he'll make an end of you.' Then Jack put out his strength, and he brought the giant down on his knees. 'Give me my

[p. 215]

life,' says the giant, 'and I'll give you the three best gifts.' 'What are those?' said Jack. 'A sword that nothing can stand against, and a suit that when you put it on, you will see everybody, and nobody will see you, and a pair of shoes that will make you ran faster than the wind blows.' 'Where are they to be found?' said Jack. 'In that red door you see there in the hill.' So Jack went and got them out. 'Where will I try the sword?' says he. 'Try it on that ugly black stump of a tree,' says the giant. 'I see nothing blacker or uglier than your own head,' says Jack. And with that he made one stroke, and cut off the giant's head that it went into the air, and he caught it on the sword as it was coming down, and made two halves of it. 'It is well for you I did not join the body again,' said the head, 'or you would have never been able to strike it off again.' 'I did not give you the chance of that,' said Jack. And he brought away the great suit with him.

[p. 216]

So he brought the cows home at evening, and every one wondered at all the milk they gave that night. And when the king was sitting at dinner with the princess, his daughter, and the rest, he said, 'I think I only hear two roars from beyond to-night in place of three.'

The next morning Jack went out again with the cows, and he saw another field full of grass, and he knocked down the wall and let the cows in. All happened the same as the day before, but the giant that came this time had two heads, and they fought together, and the little bird came and spoke to Jack as before. And when Jack had brought the giant down, he said, 'Give me my life, and I'll give you the best thing I have.' 'What is that?' says Jack. 'It's a suit that you can put on, and you will see every one but no one can see you.' 'Where is it?' said Jack. 'It's inside that little red door at the side of the hill.' So Jack went and brought out the suit. And then he cut off

[p. 217]

the giant's two heads, and caught them coming down and made four halves of them. And they said it was well for him he had not given them time to join the body.

That night when the cows came home they gave so much milk that all the vessels that could be found were filled up.

The next morning Jack went out again, and all happened as before, and the giant this time had four heads, and Jack made eight halves of them. And the giant had told him to go to a little blue door in the side of the hill, and there he got a pair of shoes that when you put them on would go faster than the wind.

That night the cows gave so much milk that there were not vessels enough to hold it, and it was given to tenants and to poor people passing the road, and the rest was thrown out at the windows. I was passing that way myself, and I got a drink of it.

That night the king said to Jack, 'Why is it the cows are giving so much milk

[p. 218]

these days? Are you bringing them to any other grass?' 'I am not,' said Jack, 'but I have a good stick, and whenever they would stop still or lie down, I give them blows of it, that they jump and leap over walls and stones and ditches; that's the way to make cows give plenty of milk.'

And that night at the dinner, the king said, 'I hear no roars at all.'

The next morning, the king and the princess were watching at the window to see what would Jack do when he got to the field. And Jack knew they were there, and he got a stick, and began to batter the cows, that they went leaping and jumping over stones, and walls, and ditches. 'There is no lie in what Jack said,' said the king then.

Now there was a great serpent at that time used to come every seven years, and he had to get a kines daughter to eat, unless she would have some good man to fight for her. And it was the princess at

[p. 219]

the place Jack was had to be given to it that time, and the king had been feeding a bully underground for seven years, and you may believe he got the best of everything, to be ready to fight it.

And when the time came, the princess went out, and the bully with her down to the shore, and when they got there what did he do, but to tie the princess to a tree, the way the serpent would be able to swallow her easy with no delay, and he himself went and hid up in an ivy-tree. And Jack knew what was going on, for the princess had told him about it, and had asked would he help her, but he said he would not. But he came out now, and he put on the suit he had taken from the first giant, and he came by the place the princess was, but she didn't know him. 'Is that right for a princess to be tied to a tree?' said Jack. 'It is not, indeed,' said she, and she told him what had happened, and how the serpent was coming to take her. 'If you will let me sleep for

[p. 220]

awhile with my head in your lap,' said Jack, 'you could wake me when it is coming.' So he did that, and she awakened him when she saw the serpent coming, and Jack got up and fought with it, and drove it back into the sea. And then he cut the rope that fastened her, and he went away. The bully came down then out of the tree, and he brought the princess to where the king was, and he said, 'I got a friend of mine to come and fight the serpent to-day, where I was a little timorous after being so long shut up underground, but I'll do the fighting myself to-morrow.'

The next day they went out again, and the same thing happened, the bully tied up the princess where the serpent could come at her fair and easy, and went up himself to hide in the ivy-tree. Then Jack put on the suit he had taken from the second giant, and he walked out, and the princess did not know him, but she told him all that had happened yesterday, and how some young gentleman she did

[p. 221]

not know had come and saved her. So Jack asked might he lie down and take a sleep with his head in her lap, the way she could awake him. And an happened the same way as the day before. And the bully gave her up to the king, and said he had brought another of his friends to fight for her that day.

The next day she was brought down to the shore as before, and a great many people gathered to see the serpent that was coming to bring the king's daughter away. And Jack brought out the suit of clothes he had brought away from the third giant, and she did not know him, and they talked as before. But when he was asleep this time, she thought she would make sure of being able to find him again, and she took out her scissors and cut off a piece of his hair, and made a little packet of it and put it away. And she did another thing, she took off one of the shoes that was on his feet.

And when she saw the serpent coming

[p. 222]

she woke him, and he said, 'This time I will put the serpent in a way that he will eat no more king's daughters.' So he took out the sword he had got from the giant, and he put it in at the back of the serpent's neck, the way blood and water came spouting out that went for fifty miles inland, and made an end of him. And then he made off, and no one saw what way he went, and the bully brought the princess to the king, and claimed to have saved her, and it is he who was made much of, and was the right-hand man after that.

But when the feast was made ready for the wedding, the princess took out the bit of hair she had, and she said she would marry no one but the man whose hair would match that, and she showed the shoe and said that she would marry no one whose foot would not fit that shoe as well. And the bully tried to put on the shoe, but so much as his toe would not go into it, and as to his hair, it didn't match

[p. 223]

at all to the bit of hair she had cut from the man that saved her.

So then the king gave a great ball, to bring all the chief men of the country together to try would the shoe fit any of them. And they were all going to carpenters and joiners getting bits of their feet cut off to try could they wear the shoe, but it was no use, not one of them could get it on.

Then the king went to his chief adviser and asked what could he do. And the chief adviser bade him to give another ball, and this time he said, 'Give it to poor as well as rich.'

So the ball was given, and many came flocking to it, but the shoe would not fit any one of them. And the chief adviser said, 'Is every one here that belongs to the house?' 'They are all here,' said the king, 'except the boy that minds the cows, and I would not like him to be coming up here.'

Jack was below in the yard at the time,

[p. 224]

and he heard what the king said, and he was very angry, and he went and got his sword and came running up the stairs to strike off the king's head, but the man that kept the gate met him on the stairs before he could get to the king, and quieted him down, and when he got to the top of the stairs and the princess saw him, she gave a cry and ran into his arms. And they tried the shoe and it fitted him, and his hair matched to the piece that had been cut off. So then they were married, and a great feast was given for three days and three nights.

And at the end of that time, one morning there came a deer outside the window, with bells on it, and they ringing. And it called out, 'Here is the hunt, where is the huntsman and the hound?' So when Jack heard that he got up and took his horse and his hound and went hunting the deer. When it was in the hollow he was on the hill, and when it was on the hill he was in the hollow, and that went

[p. 225]

on all through the day, and when night fell it went into a wood. And Jack went into the wood after it, and all he could see was a mud-wall cabin, and he went in, and there he saw an old woman, about two hundred years old, and she sitting over the fire. 'Did you see a deer pass this way?' says Jack. 'I did not,' says she, 'but it's too late now for you to be following a deer, let you stop the night here.' 'What will I do with my horse and my hound?' said Jack. 'Here are two ribs of hair,' says she, 'and let you tie them up with them.' So Jack went out and tied up the horse and the hound, and when he came in again the old woman said, 'You killed my three sons, and I'm going to kill you now,' and she put on a pair of boxing-gloves, each one of them nine stone weight, and the nails in them fifteen inches long. Then they began to fight, and Jack was getting the worst of it. 'Help, hound!' he cried out, then 'Squeeze hair,' cried out the old woman, and the rib of

[p. 226]

hair that was about the hound's neck squeezed him to death. 'Help, horse!' Jack called out, then, 'Squeeze hair,' called out the old woman, and the rib of hair that was about the horse's neck began to tighten and squeeze him to death. Then the old woman made an end of Jack and threw him outside the door.

To go back now to Bill. He was out in the garden one day, and he took a look at the well, and what did he see but the water at the top was blood, and what was underneath was honey. So he went into the house again, and he said to his mother, 'I will never eat a second meal at the same table, or sleep a second night in the same bed, till I know what is happening to Jack.'

So he took the other horse and hound then, and set off, over the hills where cock never crows and horn never sounds, and the devil never blows his bugle. And at last he came to the weaver's house, and when he went in, the weaver says, 'You

[p. 227]

are welcome, and I can give you better treatment than I did the last time you came in to me,' for she thought it was Jack who was there, they were so much like one another. 'That is good,' said Bill to himself, 'my brother has been here.' And he gave the weaver the full of a basin of gold in the morning before he left.

Then he went on till he came to the king's house, and when he was at the door the princess came running down the stairs, and said, 'Welcome to you back again.' And all the people said, 'It is a wonder you have gone hunting three days after your marriage, and to stop so long away.' So he stopped that night with the princess, and she thought it was her own husband all the time.

And in the morning the deer came, and bells ringing on her, under the windows, and called out, 'The hunt is here, where are the huntsmen and the hounds?' Then Bill got up and got his horse and his

[p. 228]

hound, and followed her over hills and hollows till they came to the wood, and there he saw nothing but the mud-wall cabin and the old woman sitting by the fire, and she bade him stop the night there, and gave him two ribs of hair to tie his horse and his hound with. But Bill was wittier than Jack was, and before he went out, he threw the ribs of hair into the fire secretly. When he came in the old woman said, 'Your brother killed my three sons, and I killed him, and I'll kill you along with him.' And she put her gloves on, and they began the fight, and then Bill called out, 'Help, horse.' 'Squeeze hair,' called the old woman; 'I can't squeeze, I'm in the fire,' said the hair. And the horse came in and gave her a blow of his hoof. 'Help, hound,' said Bill then. 'Squeeze, hair,' said the old woman; 'I can't, I'm in the fire,' said the second hair. Then the bound put his teeth in her, and Bill brought her down, and she cried for mercy. 'Give me my life,' she said, 'and

[p. 229]

[paragraph continues] I'll tell you where you'll get your brother again, and his hound and horse.' 'Where's that?' said Bill. 'Do you see that rod over the fire?' said she; 'take it down and go outside the door where you'll see three green stones, and strike them with the rod, for they are your brother, and his horse and hound, and they'll come to life again.' 'I will, but I'll make a green stone of you first,' said Bill, and he cut off her head with his sword.

Then he went out and struck the stones, and sure enough there were Jack, and his horse and hound, alive and well. And they began striking other stones around, and men came from them, that had been turned to stones, hundreds and thousands of them.

Then they set out for home, but on the way they had some dispute or some argument together, for Jack was not well pleased to hear he had spent the night with his wife, and Bill got angry, and he struck Jack with the rod, and turned him to a

[p. 230]

green stone. And he went home, but the princess saw he had something on his mind, and he said then, 'I have killed my brother.' And he went back then and brought him to life, and they lived happy ever after, and they had children by the basketful, and threw them out by the shovelful. I was passing one time myself, and they called me in and gave me a cup of tea.

1902.

       
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

 

BY THE ROADSIDE

LAST night I went to a wide place on the Kiltartan road to listen to some Irish songs. While I waited for the singers an old man sang about that country beauty who died so many years ago, and spoke of a singer he had known who sang so beautifully that no horse would pass him, but must turn its head and cock its ears to listen. Presently a score of men and boys and girls, with shawls over their heads, gathered under the trees to listen. Somebody sang Sa Muirnin Diles, and then somebody else Jimmy Mo Milestor, mournful songs of separation, of death, and of exile. Then some of the men stood up and began to dance, while another lilted the measure they danced to, and then somebody sang Eiblin a Ruin, that glad song of meeting which has always moved me more than other songs, because the lover who made it sang it to his sweetheart under the shadow of a mountain I looked at every

[p. 232]

day through my childhood. The voices melted into the twilight and were mixed into the trees, and when I thought of the words they too melted away, and were mixed with the generations of men. Now it was a phrase, now it was an attitude of mind, an emotional form, that had carried my memory to older verses, or even to forgotten mythologies. I was carried so far that it was as though I came to one of the four rivers, and followed it under the wall of Paradise to the roots of the trees of knowledge and of life. There is no song or story handed down among the cottages that has not words and thoughts to carry one as far, for though one can know but a little of their ascent, one knows that they ascend like medieval genealogies through unbroken dignities to the beginning of the world. Folk art is, indeed, the oldest of the aristocracies of thought, and because it refuses what is passing and trivial, the merely clever and pretty, as certainly as the vulgar and insincere, and because it

[p. 233]

has gathered into itself the simplest and most unforgetable thoughts of the generations, it is the soil where all great art is rooted. Wherever it is spoken by the fireside, or sung by the roadside, or carved upon the lintel, appreciation of the arts that a single mind gives unity and design to, spreads quickly when its hour is come.

In a society that has cast out imaginative tradition, only a few people--three or four thousand out of millions--favoured by their own characters and by happy circumstance, and only then after much labour, have understanding of imaginative things, and yet 'the imagination is the man himself.' The churches in the Middle Age won all the arts into their service because men understood that when imagination is impoverished, a principal voice--some would say the only voice--for the awakening of wise hope and durable faith, and understanding charity, can speak but in broken words, if it does not fall silent. And so it has always seemed to me that

[p. 234]

we, who would re-awaken imaginative tradition by making old songs live again, or by gathering old stories into books, take part in the quarrel of Galilee. Those who are Irish and would spread foreign ways, which, for all but a few, are ways of spiritual poverty, take part also. Their part is with those who were of Jewry, and yet cried out, 'If thou let this man go thou art not Caesar's friend.'

1901.

      
The Celtic Twilight, by William Butler Yeats, [1893, 1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 235]

 

INTO THE TWILIGHT

 Out-worn heart, in a time out-worn,
 Come clear of the nets of wrong and right;
 Laugh, heart, again in the gray twilight;
 Sigh, heart, again in the dew of the morn.
 Thy mother Eire is always young,
 Dew ever shining and twilight gray,
 Though hope fall from thee or love decay
 Burning in fires of a slanderous tongue.
 Come, heart, where hill is heaped upon hill,
 For there the mystical brotherhood
 Of hollow wood and the hilly wood
 And the changing moon work out their will.
 And God stands winding his lonely horn;
 And Time and World are ever in flight,
 And love is less kind than the gray twilight,
 And hope is less dear than the dew of the morn.




===== BOOK: two.txt =====


    
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE WORM OUROBOROS

 

by E. R. Eddison

 

Illustrations by Keith Henderson

 

London; Jonathan Cope

 

[1922]

 

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, November 2003. J. B. Hare, redactor. The text is in the public domain in the United States because it was first published prior to 1923. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact.

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

 To W. G. E. and to my friends K. H. and G. C. L. M. I dedicate this book

 It is neither allegory nor fable but a Story to be read for its own sake.

The proper names I have tried to spell simply. The e in Carce is long, like that in Phryne, the o in Krothering short and the accent on that syllable: Corund is accented on the first syllable, Prezmyra on the second, Brandoch Daha on the first and fourth, Gorice on the last syllable, rhyming with thrice: Corinius rhymes with Flaminius, Galing with sailing, La Fireez with desire ease: ch is always guttural, as in loch.

	 
		E. R. E.
		
		   9th January 1922

  

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
GORICE XII. IN CARCE

TRUE Thomas lay on Huntlie bank,
   A ferlie he spied wi his ee;
 And there he saw a Lady bright
   Come riding down by the Eildon Tree.

Her skirt was o the grass-green silk,
   Her mantle o the velvet fyne,
 At ilka tett of her horse's mane
   Hung fifty siller bells and nine.

True Thomas he pulld aff his cap,
   And louted low down on his knee:
 "Hail to thee, Mary, Queen of Heaven!
   For thy peer on earth could never be."

"O no, O no, Thomas," she says,
   "That name does not belong to me;
 I'm but the Queen of fair Elfland,
   That am hither come to visit thee.

"Harp and carp, Thomas," she says,
   "Harp and carp alang wi me.
 And if ye dare to kiss my lips,
   Sure of your bodie I will be."

"Betide me weal, betide me woe,
   That weird shall never daunton me."
 Syne he has kissed her rosy lips,
   All underneath the Eildon Tree.

THOMAS THE RHYMER

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

 

Contents

  INTRODUCTION, JAMES STEPHENS  <page xix> 
  THE INDUCTION  <page 1> 
  I. THE CASTLE OF LORD JUSS  <page 7> 
  II. THE WRASTLING FOR DEMONLAND  <page 24> 
  III. THE RED FOLIOT  <page 39> 
  IV. CONJURING IN THE IRON TOWER  <page 58> 
  V. KING GORICE'S SENDING  <page 77> 
  VI. THE CLAWS OF WITCHLAND  <page 86> 
  VII. GUESTS OF THE KING IN CARCE  <page 94> 
  VIII. THE FIRST EXPEDITION TO IMPLAND  <page 125> 
  IX. SALAPANTA HILLS  <page 143> 
  X. THE MARCHLANDS OF THE MORUNA  <page 163> 
  XI. THE BURG OF ESHGRAR OGO  <page 172> 
  XII. KOSHTRA PIVRARCHA  <page 191> 
  XIII. KOSHTRA BELORN  <page 221> 
  XIV. THE LAKE OF RAVARY  <page 237> 
  XV. QUEEN PREZMYRA  <page 247> 
  XVI. THE LADY SRIVA'S EMBASSAGE  <page 259> 
  XVII. THE KING FLIES HIS HAGGARD  <page 274> 
  XVIII. THE MURTHER OF GALLANDUS BY CORSUS  <page 288> 
  XIX. THREMNIR'S HEUGH  <page 302> 
  XX. KING CORINIUS  <page 315> 
  XXI. THE PARLEY BEFORE KROTHERING  <page 322> 
  XXII. AURWATH AND SWITCHWATER  <page 329> 
  XXIII. THE WEIRD BEGUN OF ISHNAIN NEMARTRA  <page 342> 
  XXIV. A KING IN KROTHERING  <page 349> 
  XXV. LORD GRO AND THE LADY MEVRIAN  <page 364> 
  XXVI. THE BATTLE OF KROTHERING SIDE  <page 378> 
  XXVII. THE SECOND EXPEDITION TO IMPLAND  <page 399> 
  XXVIII. ZORA RACH NAM PSARRION  <page 417> 
  XXVIX. THE FLEET AT MUELVA  <page 432> 
  XXX. TIDINGS OF MELIKAPHKHAZ  <page 436> 
  XXXI. THE DEMONS BEFORE CARCE  <page 450> 
  XXXII. THE LATTER END OF ALL THE LORDS OF WITCHLAND  <page 474> 
  XXXIII. QUEEN SOPHONISBA IN GALING  <page 493> 
  ARGUMENT: WITH DATES  <page 513> 
  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE ON THE VERSES  <page 519> 
  

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

 

Illustrations

   GORICE XII. IN CARCE  Frontispiece 
  THE LORDS JUSS, GOLDRY BLUSZCO, SPITFIRE, AND BRANDOCH DAHA  16 
  IN KOSHTRA BELORN  229 
  SOLDIERS OF DEMONLAND  393 
  HIPPOGRIFF IN FLIGHT  421 
  THE LAST CONJURING IN CARCE  484 
  

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xix]

 

INTRODUCTION

THE Worm Ouroboros, no worm, but the Serpent itself, is a wonderful book. As a story or as prose it is wonderful, and, there being a cause for every effect, the reason for writing it should be as marvellous again.

Shelley had to write the Prometheus Unbound, he was under compulsion; for a superhuman energy had come upon him, and he was forced to create a matter that would permit him to imagine, and think, and speak like a god. It was so with Blake, who willed to appear as a man but existed like a mountain; and, at their best, the work of these poets is inhuman and sacred. It does not greatly matter that they had or had not a message. It does not matter at all that either can be charged with nonsense or that both have been called madmen--the same charge might be laid against a volcano or a thunderbolt--or this book. It does not matter that they could transcend human endurance, and could move tranquilly in realms where lightning is the norm of speed. The work of such poets is sacred because it outpaces man, and, in a realm of their own, wins even above Shakespeare.

An energy such as came on the poets has visited the author of this book, and his dedicatory statement, that "it is neither allegory nor fable but a story to be read for

[p. xx]

its own sake," puts us off with the assured arrogance for of the poet who is too busy creating to have time for school-mastering. But, waking or in dream, this author has been in strange regions and has supped at a torrent which only the greatest know of.

The story is a long one--this reader would have--liked it twice as long. The place of action is indicated, casually, as the planet Mercury, and the story tells of the, wars between two great kingdoms of that planet, and the final overthrow of one.

Mr. Eddison is a vast man. He needed a whole cosmos to play in, and created one; and he forged a prose to tell of it that is as gigantic as his tale. In reading this book the reader must a little break his way in, and must surrender prejudices that are not allowed for. He may think that the language is more rotund than is needed for a tale, but, as he proceeds, he will see that only such a tongue could be spoken by these colossi; and, soon, he will delight in a prose that is as life-giving as it is magnificent.

Mr. Eddison's prose never plays him false; it rises and falls with his subject, and is tender, humorous, sour, precipitate and terrific as the occasion warrants. How nicely the Kaga danced for the Red Foliot.

"Foxy-red above, but with black bellies, round furry faces, innocent amber eyes and great soft paws. . . . On a sudden the music ceased, and the dancers were still, and standing side by side, paw in furry paw, they bowed shyly to the company, and the Red Foliot called them to, him, and kissed them on the mouth, and sent them to their seats."

"Corund leaned on the parapet and shaded his eyes with his hand, that was broad as a smoked haddock, and covered on the back with yellow hairs growing somewhat sparsely as the hairs on the skin of a young elephant."

"A dismal tempest suddenly surprised them. For forty days it swept them in hail and sleet over wide wallowing ocean, without a star, without a course."

[p. xxi]

"Night came down on the hills. A great wind moaning out of the hueless west tore the clouds as a ragged garment, revealing the lonely moon that fled naked betwixt them."

"Dawn came like a lily, saffron-hued, smirked with smoke-gray streaks, that slanted from the north."

"He was naked to the waist, his hair, breast and arms to the armpits clotted and adrop with blood and in his hands two bloody daggers."

Quotations can give some idea of the rhythm of his sentences, but it can give none of the massive sweep and intensity of his narrative. Milton fell in love with the devil because the dramatic action lay with him, and, in this book, Mr. Eddison trounces his devils for being naughty (the word "bad" has not significance here), but he trounces the Wizard King and his kingdom with affection and delight. What gorgeous monsters are Gorice the Twelfth and Corund and Corinius. The reader will not easily forget them; nor Gorice's great antagonist Lord Juss; nor the marvellous traitor, Lord Gro, with whom the author was certainly in love; nor the great fights and the terrible fighters Lords Brandoch Daha and Goldry Bluszco, and a world of others and their wives; nor will he forget the mountain Koshtra Pivrarcha, that had to be climbed, and was climbed--as dizzying a feat as literature can tell of.

"So huge he was that even here at six miles distance the eye might not at a glance behold him, but must sweep back and forth as over a broad landscape, from the ponderous roots of the mountain, where they sprang black and sheer from the glacier up the vast face, where buttress was piled upon buttress, and tower upon tower, in a blinding radiance of ice-hung precipice and snow-filled gully, to the lone heights where, like spears menacing high heaven, the white teeth of the summit-ridge cleft the sky."

Mr. Eddison's prose does not derive from the English Bible. His mind has more affinities with Celtic imaginings and method, and his work is Celtic in that it is inspired

[p. xxii]

by beauty and daring rather than by thoughts and moralities. He might be Scotch or Irish: scarcely the former, for, while Scotland loves full-mouthed verse, she, like England, is prose-shy. But, from whatever heaven Mr. Eddison come, he has added a masterpiece to English literature.

JAMES STEPHENS

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

 

The Induction

THERE was a man named Lessingham dwelt in an old low house in Wastdale, set in a gray old garden where yew-trees flourished that had seen Vikings in Copeland in their seedling time. Lily and rose and larkspur bloomed in the borders, and begonias with blossoms big as saucers, red and white and pink and lemon-colour, in the beds before the porch. Climbing roses, honeysuckle, clematis, and the scarlet flame-flower scrambled up the walls. Thick woods were on every side without the garden, with a gap north-eastward opening on the desolate lake and the great fells beyond it: Gable rearing his crag-bound head against the sky from behind the straight clean outline of the Screes.

Cool long shadows stole across the tennis lawn. The air was golden. Doves murmured in the trees; two chaffinches played on the near post of the net; a little water-wagtail scurried along the path. A French window stood open to the garden, showing darkly a dining-room panelled with old oak, its Jacobean table bright with flowers and silver and cut glass and Wedgwood dishes heaped with fruit: greengages, peaches, and green muscat grapes. Lessingham lay back in a hammock-chair watching through the blue smoke of an after-dinner cigar

[p. 2]

the warm light on the Gloire de Dijon roses that clustered about the bedroom window overhead. He had her hand in his. This was their House.

"Should we finish that chapter of Njal?" she said.

She took the heavy volume with its faded green cover, and read: "He went out on the night of the Lord's day, when nine weeks were still to winter; he heard a great crash, so that he thought both heaven and earth shook. Then he looked into the west airt, and he thought he saw hereabouts a ring of fiery hue, and within the ring a man on a gray horse. He passed quickly by him, and rode hard. He had a flaming firebrand in his hand, and he rode so close to him that he could see him plainly. He was black as pitch, and he sung this song with a mighty voice--

	 
		Here I ride swift steed,
		 His flank flecked with rime,
		 Rain from his mane drips,
		 Horse mighty for harm;
		 Flames flare at each end,
		 Gall glows in the midst,
		 So fares it with Flosi's redes
		 As this flaming brand flies;
		 And so fares it with Flosi's redes
		 As this flaming brand flies.
		
		 "Then he thought he hurled the firebrand east towards the fells before him, and such a blaze of fire leapt up to meet it that he could not see the fells for the blaze. It seemed as though that man rode east among the flames and vanished there.

"After that he went to his bed, and was senseless for a long time, but at last he came to himself. He bore in mind all that had happened, and told his father, but he bade him tell it to Hjallti Skeggi's son. So he went and told Hjallti, but he said he had seen 'the Wolf's Ride, and that comes ever before great tidings.'"

They were silent awhile; then Lessingham. said suddenly,[paragraph continues] 

[p. 3]

"Do you mind if we sleep in the east wing to-night?"

"What, in the Lotus Room?"

"Yes."

"I'm too much of a lazy-bones to-night, dear," she answered.

"Do you mind if I go alone, then? I shall be back to breakfast. I like my lady with me; still, we can go again when next moon wanes. My pet is not frightened, is she?"

"No!" she said, laughing. But her eyes were a little big. Her fingers played with his watch-chain. "I'd rather," she said presently, "you went later on and took me. All this is so odd still: the House, and that; and I love it so. And after all, it is a long way and several years too, sometimes, in the Lotus Room, even though it is all over next morning. I'd rather we went together. If anything happened then, well, we'd both be done in, and it wouldn't matter so much, would it?"

"Both be what?" said Lessingham. "I'm afraid your language is not all that might be wished."

"Well, you taught me!" said she; and they laughed.

They sat there till the shadows crept over the lawn and up the trees, and the high rocks of the mountain shoulder beyond burned red in the evening rays. He said, "If you like to stroll a bit of way up the fell-side, Mercury is visible to-night. We might get a glimpse of him just after sunset."

A little later, standing on the open hillside below the hawking bats, they watched for the dim planet that showed at last low down in the west between the sunset and the dark.

He said, "It is as if Mercury had a finger on me tonight, Mary. It's no good my trying to sleep to-night except in the Lotus Room."

Her arm tightened in his. "Mercury?" she said. "It is another world. It is too far."

But he laughed and said, "Nothing is too far."

They turned back as the shadows deepened. As they stood in the dark of the arched gate leading from the

[p. 4]

open fell into the garden, the soft clear notes of a spinet sounded from the house. She put up a finger. "Hark," she said. "Your daughter playing Les Barricades."

They stood listening. "She loves playing," he whispered. "I'm glad we taught her to play." Presently he whispered again, "Les Barricades Mysterieuses. What inspired Couperin with that enchanted name? And only you and I know what it really means. Les Barricades Mysterieuses."

 

That night Lessingham lay alone in the Lotus Room. Its casements opened eastward on the sleeping woods and the sleeping bare slopes of Illgill Head. He slept soft and deep; for that was the House of Postmeridian, and the House of Peace.

In the deep and dead time of the night, when the waning moon peered over the mountain shoulder, he woke suddenly. The silver beams shone through the open window on a form perched at the foot of the bed: a little bird, black, round-headed, short-beaked, with long sharp wings, and eyes like two stars shining. It spoke and said, "Time is."

So Lessingham got up and muffled himself in a great cloak that lay on a chair beside the bed. He said, "I am ready, my little martlet." For that was the House of Heart's Desire.

Surely the martlet's eyes filled all the room with starlight. It was an old room with lotuses carved on the panels and on the bed and chairs and roof-beams; and in the glamour the carved flowers swayed like water-lilies in a lazy stream. He went to the window, and the little martlet sat on his shoulder. A chariot coloured like the halo about the moon waited by the window, poised in air, harnessed to a strange steed. A horse it seemed, but winged like an eagle, and its fore-legs feathered and armed with eagle's claws instead of hooves. He entered the chariot, and that little martlet sat on his knee.

With a whirr of wings the wild courser sprang skyward. The night about them was like the tumult of bubbles

[p. 5]

about a diver's ears diving in a deep pool under a smooth steep rock in a mountain cataract. Time was swallowed up in speed; the world reeled; and it was but as the space between two deep breaths till that strange courser spread wide his rainbow wings and slanted down the night over a great island that slumbered on a slumbering sea, with lesser isles about it: a country of rock mountains and hill pastures and many waters, all a-glimmer in the moonshine.

They landed within a gate crowned with golden lions. Lessingham came down from the chariot, and the little black martlet circled about his head, showing him a yew avenue leading from the gates. As in a dream, he followed her.

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

 

I.

 

The Castle of Lord Juss

OF THE RARITIES THAT WERE IN THE LOFTY PRESENCE CHAMBER FAIR AND LOVELY TO BEHOLD, AND OF THE QUALITIES AND CONDITIONS OF THE LORDS OF DEMONLAND: AND OF THE EMBASSY SENT UNTO THEM BY KING GORICE XI., AND OF THE ANSWER THERETO.

THE eastern stars were paling to the dawn as Lessingham followed his conductor along the grass walk between the shadowy ranks of Irish yews, that stood like soldiers mysterious and expectant in the darkness. The grass was bathed in night-dew, and great white lilies sleeping in the shadows of the yews loaded the air of that garden with fragrance. Lessingham felt no touch of the ground beneath his feet, and when he stretched out his hand to touch a tree his hand passed through branch and leaves as though they were unsubstantial as a moonbeam.

The little martlet, alighting on his shoulder, laughed in his ear. "Child of earth," she said, "dost think we are here in dreamland?"

He answered nothing, and she said, "This is no dream.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 8]

Thou, first of the children of men, art come to Mercury, where thou and I will journey up and down for a season to show thee the lands and oceans, the forests, plains, and ancient mountains, cities and palaces of this world, Mercury, and the doings of them that dwell therein. But here thou canst not handle aught, neither make the folk ware of thee, not though thou shout thy throat hoarse. For thou and I walk here impalpable and invisible, as it were two dreams walking."

They were now on the marble steps which led from the yew walk to the terrace opposite the great gate of the castle. "No need to unbar gates to thee and me," said the martlet, as they passed beneath the darkness of that ancient portal, carved with strange devices, and clean through the massy timbers of the bolted gate thickly riveted with silver, into the inner court. "Go we into the lofty presence chamber and there tarry awhile. Morning is kindling the upper air, and folk will soon be stirring in the castle, for they lie not long abed when day begins in Demonland. For be it known to thee, O earth-born, that this land is Demonland, and this castle the castle of Lord Juss, and this day now dawning his birthday, when the Demons hold high festival in Juss's castle to do honour unto him and to his brethren, Spitfire and Goldry Bluszco; and these and their fathers before them bear rule from time immemorial in Demonland, and have the lordship over all the Demons."

She spoke, and the first low beams of the sun smote javelin-like through the eastern windows, and the freshness of morning breathed and shimmered in that lofty chamber, chasing the blue and dusky shades of departed night to the corners and recesses, and to the rafters of the vaulted roof. Surely no potentate of earth, not Croesus, not the great King, not Minos in his royal palace in Crete, not all the Pharaohs, not Queen Semiramis, nor all the Kings of Babylon and Nineveh had ever a throne room to compare in glory with that high presence chamber of the lords of Demonland. Its walls and pillars were of snow-white marble, every vein whereof was set with

[p. 9]

small gems: rubies, corals, garnets, and pink topaz. Seven pillars on either side bore up the shadowy vault of the roof; the roof-tree and the beams were of gold, curiously carved, the roof itself of mother-of-pearl. A side aisle ran behind each row of pillars, and seven paintings on the western side faced seven spacious windows on the east. At the end of the hall upon a dais stood three high seats, the arms of each composed of two hippogriffs wrought in gold, with wings spread, and the legs of the seats the legs of the hippogriffs; but the body of each high seat was a single jewel of monstrous size: the left-hand seat a black opal, asparkle with steel-blue fire, the next a fire-opal, as it were a burning coal, the third seat an alexandrite, purple like wine by night but deep sea-green by day. Ten more pillars stood in semicircle behind the high seats, bearing up above them and the dais a canopy of gold. The benches that ran from end to end of the lofty chamber were of cedar, inlaid with coral and ivory, and so were the tables that stood before the benches. The floor of the chamber was tessellated, of marble and green tourmaline, and on every square of tourmaline was carven the image of a fish: as the dolphin, the conger, the cat-fish, the salmon, the tunny, the squid, and other wonders of the deep. Hangings of tapestry were behind the high seats, worked with flowers, snake's-head, snapdragon, dragon-mouth, and their kind; and on the dado below the windows were sculptures of birds and beasts and creeping things.

But a great wonder of this chamber, and a marvel to behold, was how the capital of every one of the four-and-twenty pillars was hewn from a single precious stone, carved by the hand of some sculptor of long ago into the living form of a monster: here was a harpy with screaming mouth, so wondrously cut in ochre-tinted jade it was a marvel to hear no scream from her: here in wine-yellow topaz a flying fire-drake: there a cockatrice made of a single ruby: there a star sapphire the colour of moonlight, cut for a cyclops, so that the rays of the star trembled from his single eye: salamanders, mermaids,

[p. 10]

chimaeras, wild men o' the woods, leviathans, all hewn from faultless gems, thrice the bulk of a big man's body, velvet-dark sapphires, crystolite, beryl, amethyst, and the yellow zircon that is like transparent gold.

To give light to the presence chamber were seven escarbuncles, great as pumpkins, hung in order down the length of it, and nine fair moonstones standing in order on silver pedestals between the pillars on the dais. These jewels, drinking in the sunshine by day, gave it forth during the hours of darkness in a radiance of pink light and a soft effulgence as of moonbeams. And yet another marvel, the nether side of the canopy over the high seats was encrusted with lapis lazuli, and in that feigned dome of heaven burned the twelve signs of the zodiac, every star a diamond that shone with its own light.

 

Folk now began to be astir in the castle, and there came a score of serving men into the presence chamber with brooms and brushes, cloths and leathers, to sweep and garnish it, and burnish the gold and jewels of the chamber. Lissome they were and sprightly of gait, of fresh complexion and fair-haired. Horns grew on their heads. When their tasks were accomplished they departed, and the presence began to fill with guests. A joy it was to see such a shifting maze of velvets, furs, curious needleworks and cloth of tissue, tiffanies, laces, ruffs, goodly chains and carcanets of gold: such glitter of jewels and weapons: such nodding of the plumes the Demons wore in their hair, half veiling the horns that grew upon their heads. Some were sitting on the benches or leaning on the polished tables, some walking forth and back upon the shining floor. Here and there were women among them, women so fair one had said: it is surely white-armed Helen this one; this, Arcadian Atalanta; this, Phryne that stood to Praxiteles for Aphrodite's picture; this, Thais, for whom great Alexander to pleasure her fantasy did burn Persepolis like a candle; this, she that was rapt by the Dark God from the flowering fields of Enna, to be Queen for ever among the dead that be departed.

[p. 11]

Now came a stir near the stately doorway, and Lessingham beheld a Demon of burly frame and noble port, richly attired. His face was ruddy and somewhat freckled, his forehead wide, his eyes calm and blue like the sea. His beard, thick and tawny, was parted and brushed back and upwards on either side.

"Tell me, my little martlet," said Lessingham, "is this Lord Juss?"

"This is not Lord Juss," answered the martlet, "nor aught so worshipful as he. The lord thou seest is Volle, who dwelleth under Kartadza, by the salt sea. A great sea-captain is he, and one that did service to the cause of Demonland, and of the whole world besides, in the late wars against the Ghouls.

"But cast thine eyes again towards the door, where one standeth amid a knot of friends, tall and somewhat stooping, in a corselet of silver, and a cloak of old brocaded silk coloured Eke tarnished gold; something like to Volle in feature, but swarthy, and with bristling black moustachios."

"I see him," said Lessingham. "This then is Lord Juss!"

"Not so," said martlet. "'Tis but Vizz, brother to Volle. He is wealthiest in goods of all the Demons, save the three brethren only and Lord Brandoch Daha."

"And who is this?" asked Lessingham, pointing to one of light and brisk step and humorous eye, who in that moment met Volle and engaged him in converse apart. Handsome of face he was, albeit somewhat long-nosed and sharp-nosed: keen and hard and filled with life and the joy of it.

"Here thou beholdest," answered she, "Lord Zigg, the far-famed tamer of horses. Well loved is he among the Demons, for he is merry of mood, and a mighty man of his hands withal when he leadeth his horsemen against the enemy."

Volle threw up his beard and laughed a great laugh at some jest that Zigg whispered in his ear, and Lessingham leaned forward into the hall if haply he might catch

[p. 12]

what was said. The hum of talk drowned the words, but leaning forward Lessingham saw where the arras curtains behind the dais parted for a moment, and one of princely bearing advanced past the high seats down the body of the hall. His gait was delicate, as of some lithe beast of prey newly wakened out of slumber, and he greeted with lazy grace the many friends who hailed his entrance. Very tall was that lord, and slender of build, like a girl. His tunic was of silk coloured like the wild rose, and embroidered in gold with representations of flowers and thunderbolts. Jewels glittered on his left hand and on the golden bracelets on his arms, and on the fillet twined among the golden curls of his hair, set with plumes of the king-bird of Paradise. His horns were dyed with saffron, and inlaid with filigree work of gold. His buskins were laced with gold, and from his belt hung a sword, narrow of blade and keen, the hilt rough with beryls and black diamonds. Strangely light and delicate was his frame and seeming, yet with a sense of slumbering power beneath, as the delicate peak of a snow mountain seen afar in the low red rays of morning. His face was beautiful to look upon, and softly coloured like a girl's face, and his expression one of gentle melancholy, mixed with some disdain; but fiery glints awoke at intervals in his eyes, and the lines of swift determination hovered round the mouth below his curled moustachios.

"At last," murmured Lessingham, "at last, Lord Juss!" "Little art thou to blame," said the martlet, "for this misprision, for scarce could a lordlier sight have joyed thine eyes. Yet is this not Juss, but Lord Brandoch Daha, to whom all Demonland west of Shalgreth and Stropardon oweth allegiance: the rich vineyards of Krothering, the broad pasture lands of Failze, and all the western islands and their cragbound fastnesses. Think not, because he affecteth silks and jewels like a queen, and carrieth himself light and dainty as a silver birch tree on the mountain, that his hand is light or his courage doubtful in war. For years was he held for the third best man-at-arms in all Mercury, along with these, Goldry[paragraph continues] 

[p. 13]

Bluszco and Gorice X. of Witchland. And Gorice he slew, nine summers back, in single combat, when the Witches harried in Goblinland and Brandoch Daha led five hundred and fourscore Demons to succour Gaslark, the king of that country. And now can none surpass Lord Brandoch Daha in feats of arms, save perchance Goldry alone.

"Yet, lo," she said, as a sweet and wild music stole on the ear, and the guests turned towards the dais, and the hangings parted, "at last, the triple lordship of Demonland! Strike softly, music: smile, Fates, on this festal day! Joy and safe days shine for this world and Demonland! Turn thy gaze first on him who walks in majesty in the midst, his tunic of olive-green velvet ornamented with devices of hidden meaning in thread of gold and beads of chrysolite. Mark how the buskins, clasping his stalwart calves, glitter with gold and amber. Mark the dusky cloak streamed with gold and lined with blood-red silk: a charmed cloak, made by the sylphs in forgotten days, bringing good hap to the wearer, so he be true of heart and no dastard. Mark him that weareth it, his sweet dark countenance, the violet fire in his eyes, the sombre warmth of his smile, like autumn woods in late sunshine. This is Lord Juss, lord of this age-remembering castle, than whom none hath more worship in wide Demonland. Somewhat he knoweth of art magical, yet useth not that art; for it sappeth the life and strength, nor is it held worthy that a Demon should put trust in that art, but rather in his own might and main.

"Now turn thine eyes to him that leaneth on Juss's left arm, shorter but mayhap sturdier than he, apparelled in black silk that shimmers with gold as he moveth, and crowned with black eagle's feathers among his horns and yellow hair. His face is wild and keen like a sea-eagle's, and from his bristling brows the eyes dart glances sharp as a glancing spear. A faint flame, pallid like the fire of a Will-o'-the-Wisp, breathes ever and anon from his distended nostrils. This is Lord Spitfire, impetuous in war.

[p. 14]

"Last, behold on Juss's right hand, yon lord that bulks mighty as Hercules yet steppeth lightly as a heifer. The thews and sinews of his great limbs ripple as he moves beneath a skin whiter than ivory; his cloak of cloth of gold is heavy with jewels, his tunic of black sendaline hath great hearts worked thereon in rubies and red silk thread. Slung from his shoulders clanks a two-handed sword, the pommel a huge star-ruby carven in the image of a heart, for the heart is his sign and symbol. This is that sword forged by the elves, wherewith he slew the sea-monster, as thou mayest see in the painting on the wall. Noble is he of countenance, most like to his brother Juss, but darker brown of hair and ruddier of hue and bigger of cheekbone. Look well on him, for never shall thine eyes behold a greater champion than the Lord Goldry Bluszco, captain of the hosts of Demonland."

Now when the greetings were done and the strains of the lutes and recorders sighed and lost themselves in the shadowy vault of the roof, the cup-bearers did fill great gems made in form of cups with ancient wine, and the Demons caroused to Lord Juss deep draughts in honour of this day of his nativity. And now they were ready to set forth by twos and threes into the parks and pleasaunces, some to take their pleasure about the fair gardens and fishponds, some to hunt wild game among the wooded hills, some to disport themselves at quoits or tennis or riding at the ring or martial exercises; that so they might spend the livelong day as befitteth high holiday, in pleasure and action without care, and thereafter revel in the lofty presence chamber till night grew old with eating and drinking and all delight.

But as they were upon going forth, a trumpet was sounded without, three strident blasts.

"What kill-joy have we here?" said Spitfire. "The trumpet soundeth only for travellers from the outlands. I feel it in my bones some rascal is come to Galing, one that bringeth ill hap in his pocket and a shadow athwart the sun on this our day of festival."

[p. 15]

"Speak no word of ill omen," answered Juss. "Whosoe'er it be, we will straight dispatch his business and so fall to pleasure indeed. Some, run to the gate and bring him in."

The serving man hastened and returned, saying, "Lord, it is an Ambassador from Witchland and his train. Their ship made land at Lookinghaven-ness at nightfall. They slept on board, and your soldiers gave them escort to Galing at break of day. He craveth present audience."

"From Witchland, ha?" said Juss. "Such smokes use ever to go before the fire."

"Shall's bid the fellow," said Spitfire, "wait on our pleasure? It is pity such should poison our gladness."

Goldry laughed and said, "Whom hath he sent us? Laxus, think you? to make his peace with us again for that vile part of his practised against us off Kartadza, detestably falsifying his word he had given us?"

Juss said to the serving man, "Thou sawest the Ambassador. Who is he?"

"Lord," answered he, "His face was strange to me. He is little of stature and, by your highness' leave, the most unlike to a great lord of Witchland that ever I saw. And, by your leave, for all the marvellous rich and sumptuous coat a weareth, he is very like a false jewel in a rich casing."

"Well," said Juss, "a sour draught sweetens not in the waiting. Call we in the Ambassador."

Lord Juss sat in the high seat midmost of the dais, with Goldry on his right in the seat of black opal, and on his left Spitfire, throned on the alexandrite. On the dais sat likewise those other lords of Demonland, and the guests of lower degree thronged the benches and the polished tables as the wide doors opened on their silver hinges, and the Ambassador with pomp and ceremony paced up the shining floor of marble and green tourmaline.

"Why, what a beastly fellow is this?" said Lord Goldry in his brother's ear. "His hairy hands reach down to his knees. A shuffleth in his walk like a hobbled jackass."

[p. 16]

 

Click to enlarge
THE LORDS JUSS, GOLDRY BLUSZCO, SPITFIRE, AND BRANDOCH DAHA.

 

[p. 17]

"I like not the dirty face of the Ambassador," said Lord Zigg. "His nose sitteth flat on the face of him as it were a dab of clay, and I can see pat up his nostrils a summer day's journey into his head. If's upper lip bespeak him not a rare spouter of rank fustian, perdition catch me. Were it a finger's breadth longer, a might tuck it into his collar to keep his chin warm of a winter's night."

"I like not the smell of the Ambassador," said Lord Brandoch Daha. And he called for censers and sprinklers of lavender and rose water to purify the chamber, and let open the crystal windows that the breezes of heaven might enter and make all sweet.

So the Ambassador walked up the shining floor and stood before the lords of Demonland that sat upon the high seats between the golden hippogriffs. He was robed in a long mantle of scarlet lined with ermine, with crabs, woodlice, and centipedes worked thereon in golden thread. His head was covered with a black velvet cap with a peacock's feather fastened with a brooch of silver. Supported by his trainbearers and attendants, and leaning on his golden staff, he with raucous accent delivered his mission:

"Juss, Goldry, and Spitfire, and ye other Demons, I come before you as the Ambassador of Gorice XI., most glorious King of Witchland, Lord and great Duke of Buteny and Estremerine, Commander of Shulan, Thramne, Mingos, and Permio, and High Warden of the Esamocian Marches, Great Duke of Trace, King Paramount of Beshtria and Nevria and Prince of Ar, Great Lord over the country of Ojedia, Maltraeny, and of Baltary and Toribia, and Lord of many other countries, most glorious and most great, whose power and glory is over all the world and whose name shall endure for all generations. And first I bid you be bound by that reverence for my sacred office of envoy from the King, which is accorded by all people and potentates, save such as be utterly barbarous, to ambassadors and envoys."

"Speak and fear not," answered Juss. "Thou hast mine

[p. 18]

oath. And that hath never been forsworn, to Witch or other barbarian."

The Ambassador shot out his lips in an O, and threatened with his head; then grinned, laying bare his sharp and misshapen teeth, and proceeded:

"Thus saith King Gorice, great and glorious, and he chargeth me to deliver it to you, neither adding any word nor taking away: 'I have it in mind that no ceremony of homage or fealty hath been performed before me by the dwellers in my province of Demonland---------'"

As the rustling of dry leaves strewn in a flagged court when a sudden wind striketh them, there went a stir among the guests. Nor might the Lord Spitfire contain his wrath, but springing up and clapping hand to sword-hilt, as minded to do a hurt to the Ambassador, "Province?" he cried. "Are not the Demons a free people? And is it to be endured that Witchland should commission this slave to cast insults in our teeth, and this in our own castle?"

A murmur went about the hall, and here and there folk rose from their seats. The Ambassador drew down his head between his shoulders like a tortoise, baring his teeth and blinking with his small eyes. But Lord Brandoch Daha, lightly laying his hand on Spitfire's arm, said: "The Ambassador hath not ended his message, cousin, and thou hast frightened him. Have patience and spoil not the comedy. We shall not lack words to answer King Gorice: no, nor swords, if he must have them. But it shall not be said of us of Demonland that it needeth but a boorish message to turn us from our ancient courtesy toward ambassadors and heralds."

So spake Lord Brandoch Daha, in lazy half-mocking tone, as one who but idly returneth the ball of conversation; yet clearly, so that all might hear. And therewith the murmurs died down, and Spitfire said, 'I am tame. Say thine errand freely, and imagine not that we shall hold thee answerable for aught thou sayest, but him that sent thee."

"Whose humble mouthpiece I only am," said the Ambassador,

[p. 19]

somewhat gathering courage; "and who, saving your reverence, lacketh not the will nor the power to take revenge for any outrage done upon his servants. Thus saith the King: 'I therefore summon and command you, Juss, Spitfire, and Goldry Bluszco, to make haste and come to me in Witchland in my fortress of Carce, and there dutifully kiss my toe, in witness before all the world that I am your Lord and King, and rightful overlord of all Demonland.'"

Gravely and without gesture Lord Juss harkened to the Ambassador, leaning back in his high seat with either arm thrown athwart the arched neck of the hippogriff. Goldry, smiling scornfully, toyed with the hilt of his great sword. Spitfire sat strained and glowering, the sparks crackling at his nostrils.

"Thou hast delivered all?" said Juss.

"All," answered the Ambassador.

"Thou shalt have thine answer," said Juss. "While we take rede thereon, eat and drink"; and he beckoned the cupbearer to pour out bright wine for the Ambassador. But the Ambassador excused himself, saying that he was not athirst, and that he had store of food and wine aboard of his ship, which should suffice his needs and those of his following.

Then said Lord Spitfire, "No marvel though the spawn of Witchland fear venom in the cup. They who work commonly such villany against their enemies, as witness Recedor of Goblinland whom Corsus murthered with a poisonous draught, shake still in the knees lest themselves be so entertained to their destruction;" and snatching the cup he quaffed it to the dregs, and dashed it on the marble floor before the Ambassador, so that it was shivered into pieces.

And the lords of Demonland rose up and withdrew behind the flowery hangings into a chamber apart, to determine of their answer to the message sent unto them by King Gorice of Witchland.

When they were private together, Spitfire spake and said, "Is it to be borne that the King should put such

[p. 20]

shame and mockery upon us? Could a not at the least have made a son of Corund or of Corsus his Ambassador to bring us his defiance, 'stead of this filthiest of his domestics, a gibbering dwarf fit only to make them gab and game at their tippling bouts when they be three parts senseless with boosing?"

Lord Juss smiled somewhat scornfully. "With wisdom," he said, "and with foresight hath Witchland made choice of his time to move against us, knowing that thirty and three of our well-built ships are sunken in Kartadza Sound in the battle with the Ghouls, and but fourteen remain to us. Now that the Ghouls are slain, every soul, and utterly abolished from this world, and so the great curse and peril of all this world ended by the sword and great valour of Demonland alone, now seemeth the happy moment unto these late mouth-friends to fall upon us. For have not the Witches a strong fleet of ships, since their whole fleet fled at the beginning of their fight with us against the Ghouls, leaving us to bear the burden? And now are they minded for this new treason, to set upon us traitorously and suddenly in this disadvantage. For the King well judgeth we can carry no army to Witchland nor do aught in his despite, but must be long months a-shipbuilding. And doubt not he holdeth an armament ready aboard at Tenemos to sad hither if he get the answer he knoweth we shall send him."

"Sit we at ease then," said Goldry, "sharpening our swords; and let him ship his armies across the salt sea. Not a Witch shall land in Demonland but shall leave here his blood and bones to make fat our cornfields and our vineyards."

"Rather," said Spitfire, "apprehend this rascal, and put to sea to-day with the fourteen ships left us. We can surprise Witchland in his strong place of Carce, sack it, and give him to the crows to peck at, or ever he is well awake to the swiftness of our answer. That is my counsel."

"Nay." said Juss, "We shall not take him sleeping. Be

[p. 21]

certain that his ships are ready and watching in the Witchland seas, prepared against any rash onset. It were folly to set our neck in the noose; and little glory to Demonland to await his coming. This, then, is my rede: I will bid Gorice to the duello, and make offer to him to let lie on the fortune thereof the decision of this quarrel."

"A good rede, if it might be fulfilled," said Goldry. "But never will he dare to stand with weapons in single combat 'gainst thee or 'gainst any of us. Nevertheless the thing shall be brought about. Is not Gorice a mighty wrastler, and hath he not in his palace in Carce the skulls and bones of ninety and nine great champions whom he hath vanquished and slain in that exercise? Puffed up beyond measure is he in his own conceit, and folk say it is a grief to him that none hath been found this long while that durst wrastle with him, and wofully he pineth for the hundredth. He shall wrastle a fall with me!"

Now this seemed good to them all. So when they had talked on it awhile and concluded what they would do, glad of heart the lords of Demonland turned them back to the lofty presence chamber. And there Lord Juss spake and said: "Demons, ye have heard the words which the King of Witchland in the Overweening pride and shamelessness of his heart hath spoken unto us by the mouth of this Ambassador. Now this is our answer which my brother shall give, the Lord Goldry Bluszco; and we charge thee, O Ambassador, to deliver it truly, neither adding any word nor taking away."

And the Lord Goldry spake: "We, the lords of Demonland, do utterly scorn thee, Gorice XI., for the greatest of dastards, in that thou basely fleddest and forsookest us, thy sworn confederates, in the sea battle against the Ghouls. Our swords, which in that battle ended so great a curse and peril to all this world, are not bent nor broken. They shall be sheathed in the bowels of thee and thy minions, Corsus to wit, and Corund, and their sons, and Corinius, and what other evildoers harbour in waterish[paragraph continues] 

[p. 22]

Witchland, sooner than one little sea-pink growing on the cliffs of Demonland shall do thee obeisance. But, that thou mayest, if so thou wilt, feel our power somewhat, I, Lord Goldry Bluszco, make thee this offer: that thou and I do match ourselves singly each against other to wrastle three falls at the court of the Red Foliot, who inclineth neither to our side nor to thine in this quarrel. And we will bind ourselves by mighty oaths to these conditions, that if I overcome thee, the Demons shall leave you of Witchland in peace, and ye them, and the Witches shall forswear for ever their impudent claims on Demonland. But if thou, Gorice, win the day, then hast thou the glory of that victory, and withal full liberty to thrust thy claims upon us with the sword."

So spake the Lord Goldry Bluszco, standing in great pride and splendour beneath the starry canopy, and scowling terribly on the Ambassador from Witchland, so that the Ambassador was abashed and his knees smote together. And Goldry called his scribe and made him write the message for Gorice the King in great characters on a roll of parchment, and the lords of Demonland sealed it with their seals, and gave it to the Ambassador.

The Ambassador took it and made haste to depart; but when he was come to the stately doorway of the presence chamber, being near the door and amongst his attendants, and away from the lords of Demonland, he plucked up heart a little and turned and said: "Rashly and to thy certain undoing, O Goldry Bluszco, hast thou bidden our Lord the King to contend with thee in wrastling. For be thou never so mighty of limb, yet hath he overthrown as mighty. And he wrastleth not for sport, but will surely work thy life's decay, and keep the dead bones of thee with the bones of the ninety and nine champions whom he hath heretofore laid low in that exercise.

Therewith, because Goldry and the other lords scowled upon him terribly, and the guests near the door fell to hooting and reviling of the Witches, the Ambassador went forth hastily and hastily down the shining stairs and

[p. 23]

across the court, as one who fleeth along a lane on a dark and windy night, daring not to turn his head lest his eye behold some fearsome thing prepared to clasp him. So speeding, he was fain to catch up about his knees the folds of his velvet cloak richly worked with crabs and creeping things; and huge whooping and laughter went up among the common lag of people without, to behold his long and nerveless tail thus bared to their unfriendly gaze. Insomuch that they fell to shouting with one accord, "Though his mouth be foul he hath a fair tail! Saw ye not his tail? Hurrah for Gorice who hath sent us a monkey for his Ambassador!"

And with jibe and unmannerly yell the crowd hung lovingly upon the Ambassador and his train all the way down from Galing castle to the quays. So that it was like a sweet homecoming to him to come on board his well-built ship and have her rowed amain out of Lookinghaven. So when they had rounded Lookinghaven-ness and were free of the land, they hoisted sail and voyaged before a favouring breeze eastward over the teeming deep to Witchland.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

 

II

 

The Wrastling for Demonland

OF THE PROGNOSTICKS WHICH TROUBLED LORD GRO CONCERNING THE MEETING BETWEEN THE KING OF WITCHLAND AND THE LORD GOLDRY BLUSZCO; AND HOW THEY MET, AND OF THE ISSUE OF THAT WRASTLING.

"How could I have fallen asleep?" cried Lessingham. "Where is the castle of the Demons, and how did we leave the great presence chamber where they saw the Ambassador?" For he stood on rolling uplands that leaned to the sea, treeless on every side as far as the eye might reach; and on three sides shimmered the sea, kissed by the sun and roughened by the salt glad wind that charged over the downs, charioting clouds without number through the illimitable heights of air.

The little black martlet answered him, "My hippogriff travelleth as well in time as in space. Days and weeks have been left behind by us, in what seemeth to thee but the twinkling of an eye, and thou standest in the Foliot Isles, a land happy under the mild regiment of a peaceful prince, on the day appointed by King Gorice to wrastle with Lord Goldry Bluszco. Terrible must be the

[p. 25]

wrastling betwixt two such champions, and dark the issue thereof. And my heart is afraid for Goldry Bluszco, big and strong though he be and unconquered in war; for there hath not arisen in all the ages such a wrastler as this Gorice, and strong he is, and hard and unwearying, and skilled in every art of attack and defence, and subtle withal, and cruel and fell like a serpent."

Where they stood the down was cut by a combe that descended to the sea, and overhanging the combe was the palace of the Red Foliot, rambling and low, with many little towers and battlements, built of stones hewn from the wall of the combe, so that it was hard from a distance to discern what was palace and what native rock. Behind the palace stretched a meadow, flat and smooth, carpeted with the close wiry turf of the downs. At either end of the meadow were booths set up, to the north the booths of them of Witchland, and to the south the booths of the Demons. In the midst of the meadow was a space marked out with withies sixty paces either way for the wrastling ground.

Only the birds of the air and the sea-wind were abroad as then, save those that walked armed before the Witches' booths, six in company, harnessed as for battle in byrnies of shining bronze, with greaves and shields of bronze and helms that glanced in the sun. Five were proper slender youths, the eldest of whom had not yet beard full grown, black-browed and great of jaw; the sixth, huge as a neat, topped them by half a head. Age had flecked with gray the beard that spread over his big chest to his belt stiffened with studs of iron, but the vigour of youth was in his glance and in his voice, and in the tread of his foot, and in his fist so lightly handling his burly spear.

"Behold, wonder, and lament," said the martlet, "that the innocent eye of day should be enforced still to look upon the children of night everlasting. Corund of Witchland and his cursed sons."

Lessingham thought, "A most fiery politician is my little martlet: damned fiends and angels and nothing betwixt

[p. 26]

for her. But I'll dance to none of their tunes, but wait for these things' unfolding."

So walked those back and forth as caged lions before the Witches' booths, until Corund halted and leaning on his spear said to one of his sons, "Go in and seek out Gro that I may speak with him." And the son of Corund went, and returned anon with Lord Gro, that came with furtive step yet goodly and fair to behold. The nose of him was hooked like a sickle and his eyes great and fair like the eyes of an ox, inscrutable as they. Lean and spare was his frame. Pale was his face and pale his delicate hands, and his long black beard was tightly curled and bright as the coat of a black retriever.

Corund said, "How is it with the King?"

Gro answered him, "He chafeth to be at it; and to pass away the time he playeth at dice with Corinius, and the luck goeth against the King."

"What makest thou of that?" asked Corund.

And Gro said, "The fortune of the dice jumpeth not commonly with the fortune of war."

Corund grunted in his beard, and laying his large hand on Lord Gro's shoulder, "Speak to me a little apart," he said; and when they were private, "Darken not counsel," said Corund, "to me and my sons. Have I not these four years past been as a brother unto thee, and wilt thou still be secret toward us?"

But Gro smiled a sad smile and said, "Why should we by words of ill omen strike yet another blow where the tree tottereth?"

Corund groaned. "Omens," said he, "increase upon us from that time forth when the King accepted the challenge, evilly, and flatly against thy counsel and mine and the counsel of all the great ones in the land. Surely the Gods have made him fey, having ordained his destruction and our humbling before these Demons." And he said, "Omens thicken upon us, O Gro. First, the night raven that went widdershins round about the palace of Carce, that night when the King accepted this challenge, and we were all drunken with wine after our great

[p. 27]

feasting and surfeiting in his halls. Next, the stumbling of the King whenas he went upon the poop of the long ship which bare us on this voyage to these islands. Next, the squint-eyed cup-bearer that poured out unto us yesternight. And throughout, the devilish pride and bragging humour of the King. No more: he is fey. And the dice fall against him."

Gro spake and said, "O Corund, I will not hide it from thee that my heart is heavy as thy heart under shadow of ill to be. For as I lay sleeping betwixt the strokes of night, a dream of the night stood by my bed and beheld me with a glance so fell that I was all adrad and quaking with fear. And it seemed to me that the dream smote the roof above my bed, and the roof opened and disclosed the outer dark, and in the dark travelled a bearded star, and the night was quick with fiery signs. And blood was on the roof, and great gouts of blood on the walls and on the cornice of my bed. And the dream screeched like the screech-owl, and cried, Witchland from thy hand, O King! And methought the whole world was lighted in a lowe, and with a great cry I awoke out of the dream."

"Thou art wise," said Corund; "and belike the dream was a true dream, sent thee through the gate of horn, and belike it forebodeth events great and evil for the King and for Witchland."

Gro said, "Disclose it not to the others, for none can strive with Fate and gain the victory, and it would but cast down their hearts. But it is fitting we be ready against evil hap. If (which yet may the Gods forfend) ill come of this wrastling bout, fail not every one of you ere you act on any enterprise to take counsel of me. 'Bare is back without brother behind it.' Together must we do that we do."

"Thou hast my firm assurance on't," said Corund.

Now began a great company to come forth from the palace and take their stand on, either side of the wrastling ground. The Red Foliot sate in his car of polished ebony, drawn by six black horses with flowing manes

[p. 28]

and tails; before him went his musicians, pipers and minstrels doing their craft, and behind him fifty spearmen, weighed down with armour and ponderous shields that covered them from chin to toe. Their armour was stained with madder, in such wise that they seemed bathed in blood. Mild to look on was the Red Foliot, yet kingly. His skin was scarlet like the head of the green woodpecker. He wore a diadem of silver and robes of scarlet trimmed with black fur.

So when the Foliots were assembled, one stood forth with a horn at the command of the Red Foliot and blew three blasts. Therewith came forth from their booths the lords of Demonland and their men-at-arms, Juss, Goldry, Spitfire, and Brandoch Daha, all armed as for battle save Goldry, who was muffled in a cloak of cloth of gold with great hearts worked thereon in red silk thread. And from their booths in turn came the lords of Witchland all armed, and their fighting men, and little love there was in the glances they and the Demons cast upon each other. In the midst stalked the King, his great limbs muffled, like Goldry's, in a cloak: and it was of black silk lined with black bearskin, and ornamented with crabs worked in diamonds. The crown of Witchland, fashioned like a hideous crab and encrusted with jewels so thickly that none might discern the iron whereof it was framed, weighed on his beetling brow. His beard was black and bristly, spade-shaped and thick: his hair close cropped. His upper lip was shaved, displaying his sneering mouth, and from the darkness below his eyebrows looked forth eyes that showed a green light, like those of a wolf. Corund walked at the King's left elbow, his giant frame an inch less in stature than the King. Corinius went on the right, wearing a rich cloak of sky-blue tissue over his shining armour. Tall and soldier-like was Corinius, and young and goodly to look upon, with swaggering gait and insolent eye, thick-lipped withal and somewhat heavy of feature, and the sun shone brightly on his shaven jowl.

Now the Red Foliot let sound the horn again, and standing

[p. 29]

in his ebony car he read out the conditions, as thus: "O Gorice XI., most glorious King of Witchland, and O Lord Goldry Bluszco, captain of the hosts of Demonland, it is compact betwixt you, and made fast by mighty oaths whereof I, the Red Foliot, am keeper, that ye shall wrastle three falls together on these conditions, namely, that if Gorice the King be victorious, then hath he that glory and withal full liberty to enforce with the sword his claims of lordship over many-mountained Demonland: but if victory fall to the Lord Goldry Bluszco, then shall the Demons let the Witches abide in peace, and they them, and the Witches shall forswear for ever their claims of lordship over the Demons. And you, O King, and you, O Goldry Bluszco, are likewise bound by oath to wrastle fairly and to abide by the ruling of me, the Red Foliot, whom ye are content to choose as your umpire. And I do swear to judge justly between you. And the laws of your wrastling are that neither shall strangle his adversary with his hands, nor bite him, nor claw nor scratch his flesh, nor poach out his eyes, nor smite him with his fists, nor do any other unfair thing against him, but in all other respects ye shall wrastle freely together. And he that shall be brought to earth with hip or shoulder shall be accounted fallen."

The Red Foliot said, "Have I spoken well, O King, and do you swear to these conditions?"

The King said, "I swear."

The Red Foliot asked in like manner, "Dost thou swear to these conditions, O Lord Goldry ?"

And Goldry answered him, "I swear."

Without more ado the King stepped into the wrastling ground on his side, and Goldry Bluszco on his, and they cast aside their rich mantles and stood forth naked for the wrastling. And folk stood silent for admiration of the thews and sinews of those twain, doubting which were mightier of build and likelier to gain the victory. The King stood taller by a little, and was longer in the arm than Goldry. But the great frame of Goldry showed excellent proportions, each part wedded to each as in

[p. 30]

the body of a God, and if either were brawnier of chest it was he, and he was thicker of neck than the King.

Now the King mocked Goldry, saying, "Rebellious hound, it is fit that I make demonstration unto thee, and unto these Foliots and Demons that witness our meeting, that I am thy King and Lord not by virtue only of this my crown of Witchland, which I thus put by for an hour, but even by the power of my body over thine and by my might and main. Be satisfied that I will not have done with thee until I have taken away thy life, and sent thy soul squealing bodiless into the unknown. And thy skull and thy marrow-bones will I have away to Carce, to my palace, to be a token unto all the world that I have been the bane of an hundredth great champion by my wrastling, and thou not least among them that I have slain in that exercise. Thereafter, when I have eaten and drunken and made merry in my royal palace at Carce, I will sail with my armies over the teeming deep to many-mountained Demonland. And it shall be my footstool, and these other Demons the slaves of me, yea, and the slaves of my slaves."

But the Lord Goldry Bluszco laughed lightly and said to the Red Foliot, "O Red Foliot, I am not come hither to contend with the King of Witchland in windy railing, but to match my strength against his, sinew against sinew."

Now they stood ready, and the Red Foliot made a sign with his hand, and the cymbals clashed for the first bout.

At the clash the two champions advanced and clasped one another with their strong arms, each with his right arm below and left arm above the other's shoulder, until the flesh shrank beneath the might of their arms that were as brazen bands. They swayed a little this way and that, as great trees swaying in a storm, their legs planted firmly so that they seemed to grow out of the ground like the trunks of oak trees. Nor did either yield ground to other, nor might either win a master hold upon his enemy. So swayed they back and forth for a long time,

[p. 31]

breathing heavily. And now Goldry, gathering his strength, gat the King lifted a little from the ground, and was minded to swing him round and so dash him to earth. But the King, in that moment when he found himself lifted, leaned forward mightily and smote his heel swiftly round Goldry's leg on the outside, striking him behind and a little above the ankle, in such wise that Goldry was fain to loosen his hold on the King; and greatly folk marvelled that he was able in that plight to save himself from being thrown backward by the King. So they gripped again until red wheals rose on their backs and shoulders by reason of the grievous clasping of their arms. And the King on a sudden twisted his body sideways, with his left side turned from Goldry; and catching with his leg Goldry's leg on the inside below the great muscle of the calf, and hugging him yet closer, he lurched mightily against him, striving to pull Goldry backward and so f all upon him and crush him as they fell to earth. But Goldry leaned violently forward, ever tightening his hold on the King, and so violently bare he forward in his strength that the King was baulked of his design; and clutched together they fell both to earth side by side with a heavy crash, and lay bemused while one might count half a score.

The Red Foliot proclaimed them even in this bout, and each returned to his fellows to take breath and rest for a space.

Now while they rested, a flittermouse flew forth from the Witchland booths and went widdershins round the wrastling ground and so returned silently whence she came. Lord Gro saw her, and his heart waxed heavy within him. He spake to Corund and said, "Needs must that I make trial even at this late hour if there be not any means to turn. the King from further adventuring of himself, ere all be lost."

Corund said, "Be it as thou wilt, but it will be in vain."

So Gro stood by the King and said, "Lord, give over this wrastling. Great of growth and mightier of limb than

[p. 32]

any that you did overcome aforetime is this Demon, yet have you vanquished him. For you did throw him, as we plainly saw, and wrongfully hath the Red Foliot adjudged you evenly matched because in the throwing of him your majesty's self did fall to earth. Tempt not the fates by another bout. Yours is the victory in this wrastling: and now we, your servants, wait but your nod to make a sudden onslaught on these Demons and slay them, as we may lightly overcome them taken at unawares. And for the Foliots, they be peaceful and sheep-like folk, and will be held in awe when we have smitten the Demons with the edge of the sword. So may you depart, O King, with pleasure and great honour, and afterward fare to Demonland and bring it into subjection."

The King looked sourly upon Lord Gro, and said, "Thy counsel is unacceptable and unseasonable. What lieth behind it?"

Gro answered, "There have been omens, O King."

And the King said, "What omens?"

Gro answered and said, "I will not hide it from you, O my Lord the King, that in my sleep about the darkest hour a dream of the night came to my bed and beheld me with a glance so fell that the hairs of my head stood up and pale terror gat hold upon me. And methought the dream smote up the roof above my bed, and the roof yawned to the naked air of the midnight, that laboured with fiery signs, and a bearded star travelling in the houseless dark. And I beheld the roof and the walls one gore of blood. And the dream screeched like the screech-owl, crying, Witchland from thy hand, O King! And therewith the whole world seemed lighted in one flame, and with a shout I awoke sweating from the dream."

But the King rolled his eyes in anger upon Lord Gro and said "Well am I served and faithfully by such false scheming foxes as thou. It ill fits your turn that I should carry this deed to the end with mine own hand only, and in the blindness of your impudent folly ye come to me with tales made for scaring of babes, praying me

[p. 33]

gently to forgo my glory that thou and thy fellows may make yourselves big in the world's eyes by deeds of arms."

Gro said, "Lord, it is not so."

But the King would not hear him, but said, "Methinks it is for loyal subjects to seek greatness in the greatness of their King, nor desire to shine of their own brightness. As for this Demon, when thou sayest that I have overcome him thou speakest a gross and impudent lie. In this bout I did but measure myself with him. But thereby know I of a surety that when I put forth my might he will not be able to withstand me; and all ye shall shortly behold how, as one shattereth a stalk of angelica, I will break and shatter the limbs of this Goldry Bluszco. As for thee, false friend, subtle fox, unfaithful servant, this long time am I grown weary of thee slinking up and down my palace devising darkly things I know not: thou, that art nought akin to Witchland, but an outlander, a Goblin exile, a serpent warmed in my bosom to my hurt. But these things shall have an end. When I have put down this Goldry Bluszco, then shall I have leisure to put down thee also."

And Gro bowed in sorrow of heart before the anger of the King, and held his peace.

Now was the horn blown for the second bout, and they stepped into the wrastling ground. At the clashing of the cymbals the King sprang at Goldry as the panther springeth, and with the rush bare him backward and well nigh forth of the wrastling ground. But when they were carried almost among the Demons where they stood to behold the contest, Goldry swung to the left and strove as before to get the King lifted off his feet; but the King foiled him and bent his ponderous weight upon him, so that Goldry's spine was like to have been crushed beneath the murthering violence of the King's arms. Then did the Lord Goldry Bluszco show forth his great power as a wrastler, for, even under the murthering clasp of the King, he by the might that was in the muscles of his brawny chest shook the King first to the right and then

[p. 34]

to the left; and the King's hold was loosened, and all his skill and mastery but narrowly saved him from a grievous fall. Nor did Goldry delay nor ponder how next to make trial of the King, but sudden as the lightning he slackened his hold and turned, and with his back under the King's belly gave a mighty lift; and they that witnessed it stood amazed in expectancy to see the King thrown over Goldry's head. Yet for all his striving might not Goldry get the King lifted clean off the ground. Twice and three times he strove, and at each trial he seemed further from his aim, and the King bettered his hold. And at the fourth essay that Goldry made to lift the King over his back and fling him headlong, the King thrust him forward and tripped him from behind, so that Goldry was crawled on his hands and knees. And the King clung to him from behind and passed his arms round his body beneath the armpits and so back over the shoulders, being minded to clasp his two hands at the back of Goldry's neck.

Then said Corund, "The Demon is sped already. By this hold hath the King brought to their bane more than three score famous champions. He delayeth only till his fingers be knit together behind the neck of the accursed Demon to draw the head of him forward until the bones of the neck or the breastbone be bursten asunder."

"He delayeth over long for my peace," said Gro.

The King's breath came out of him in great puffs and grunts as he strained to bring his fingers to meet behind Goldry's neck. Nor was it aught else than the hugeness of his neck and burly chest that saved the Lord Goldry Bluszco in that hour from utter destruction. Crawled on his hands and knees he could nowise escape from the hold of the King, neither lay hold on him in turn; howbeit because of the bigness of Goldry's neck and chest it was impossible for the King to fasten that hold upon him, for all his striving.

When the King perceived that this was so, and that he but wasted his strength, he said, "I will loose my hold on thee and let thee up, and we will stand again face

[p. 35]

to face. For I deem it unworthy to grapple on the ground like dogs."

So they stood up, and wrastled another while in silence. Soon the King made trial once again of the fall whereby he had sought to throw him in the first bout, twisting suddenly his right side against Goldry, and catching with his leg Goldry's leg, and therewith leaning against him with main force. And when, as before, Goldry bare forward with great violence, tightening his grip, the King lurched mightily against him, and, being still ill content to have missed his hold that never heretofore had failed him, he thrust his fingers up Goldry's nose in his cruel anger, scratching and clawing at the delicate inner parts of the nostrils in such wise that Goldry was fain to draw back his head. Therewith the King, lurching against him yet more heavily, gat him thrown a grievous fall on his back, and himself fell atop of him, crushing him and stunning him on the earth.

And the Red Foliot proclaimed Gorice the King victorious in this bout.

Therewithal the King turned him back to his Witches, that loudly acclaimed his mastery over Goldry. He said unto Lord Gro, "It is as I have spoken: the testing first, next the bruising, and in the last bout the breaking and killing." And the King looked evilly on Gro. Gro answered him not a word, for his soul was grieved to see blood on the nails and fingers of the King's left hand, and he thought he knew that the King must have been sore bested in this bout, seeing that he must do this beastly deed or ever he might overcome the might of his adversary.

But the Lord Goldry Bluszco when he was come to his senses and had gotten him up from that great fall, spake to the Red Foliot in mickle wrath, saying, "This devil hath overcome me by craft, doing that which it is a shame to do, in that he clawed me with his fingers up my nose."

The sons of Corund raised an uproar at the words of Goldry, loudly crying that he was the greatest liar and

[p. 36]

dastard; and all they of Witchland shouted and cursed in like manner. But Goldry shouted in a voice like a brazen trumpet that was plain to hear above the clamour of the Witches, "O Red Foliot, judge now fairly betwixt me and King Gorice, as thou art sworn to do. Let him show his finger nails, if there be not blood on them. This fall is void, and I claim that we wrastle it anew. " And the lords of Demonland in like manner shouted that this fall should be wrastled anew.

Now the Red Foliot had seen somewhat of what was done, and well was he minded to call the bout void. Yet had he forborne to do this out of fear of King Gorice that had looked upon him with a basilisk's eye, threatening him. And now, while the Red Foliot was troubled in his mind, uncertain between the angry shouts of the Witches and the Demons whether safety lay rather with his honour or with truckling to King Gorice, the King spake a word to Corinius, who went straightway and standing by the Red Foliot spake privily in his ear. And Corinius menaced the Red Foliot, and said, "Beware lest thy mind be swayed by the brow-beating of the Demons. Rightfully hast thou adjudged the victory in this bout unto our Lord the King, and this talk of thrusting of fingers in the nose is but a pretext and a vile imagination of this Goldry Bluszco, who, being thrown fairly before thine eyes and before us all, and perceiving himself unable to stand against the King, now thinketh with his swaggering he can bear it away, and thinketh by cheats and subtleties to avoid defeat. If, against thine own beholding and the witness of us and the plighted word of the King, thou art so hardy as to harken to the guileful persuading of these Demons, yet bethink thee that the King hath overborne ninety and nine great champions in this exercise, and this shall be the hundredth; and bethink thee, too, that Witchland lieth nearer to thine Isles than Demonland by many days' sailing. Hard shall it be for thee to abide the avenging sword of Witchland if thou do him despite, and against thy sworn oath as umpire incline wrongfully to his enemies in this dispute."

[p. 37]

So spake Corinius; and the Red Foliot was cowed. Albeit he believed in his heart that the King had done what thereof Goldry accused him, yet for terror of the King and of Corinius that stood by and threatened him he durst not speak his thought, but in sore perplexity gave order for the horn to be blown for the third bout.

And it came to pass at the blowing of the horn that the flittermouse fared forth again from the booths of the Witches, and going widdershins round about the wrastling ground returned on silent wing whence she came.

When the Lord Goldry Bluszco understood that the Red Foliot would pay no heed to his accusation, he grew red as blood. A fearsome sight it was to behold how he swelled in his wrath, and his eyes blazed like disastrous stars at midnight, and being wood with anger he gnashed his teeth till the froth stood at his lips and slavered down his chin. Now the cymbals clashed for the onset. Therewith ran Goldry upon the King as one straught of his wits, bellowing as he ran, and gripped him by the right arm with both his hands, one at the wrist and one near the shoulder. And so it was that, before the King might move, Goldry spun round with his back to the King and by his mickle strength and the strength of the anger that was in him he heaved the King over his head, hurling him as one hurleth a ponderous spear, head-foremost to the earth. And the King smote the ground with his head, and the bones of his head and his spine were driven together and smashed, and blood flowed from his ears and nose. With the might of that throw Goldry's wrath departed from him and left him strengthless, in such sort that he reeled as he went from the wrastling ground. His brethren, Juss and Spitfire, bare him up on either side, and put his cloak of cloth of gold worked with red hearts about his mighty limbs.

Meanwhile dismay was fallen upon the Witches to behold their King so caught up on a sudden and dashed upon the ground, where he lay crumpled in an heap, shattered like the stalk of an hemlock that one breaketh

[p. 38]

and shattereth. In great agitation the Red Foliot came down from his car of ebony and made haste thither where the King was fallen; and the lords of Witchland came likewise thither stricken at heart, and Corund lifted the King in his burly arms. But the King was stone dead. So those sons of Corund made a litter with their spears and laid the King on the litter, and spread over him Hs royal mantle of black silk lined with bearskin, and set the crown of Witchland on his head, and without word spoken bare him away to the Witches' booths. And vie other lords of Witchland without word spoken followed after.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

 

III

 

The Red Foliot

OF THE ENTERTAINMENT OF THE WITCHES IN THE PALACE OF THE RED FOLIOT; AND OF THE WILES AND SUBTLETIES OF LORD GRO; AND HOW THE WITCHES DEPARTED BY NIGHT OUT OF THE FOLIOT ISLES.

THE Red Foliot gat him back into his palace and sat in his high seat. And he sent unto the lords of Witchland and of Demonland that they should come and see him. Nor did they delay, but came straightway and sat on the long benches, the Witches on the eastern side of the hall and the Demons on the west; and their fighting men stood in order on either side behind them. So sat they in the shadowy hall, and the sun declining to the western ocean shone through the high windows of the hall on the polished armour and weapons of the Witches.

The Red Foliot spake among them and said, "A great champion hath been strook to earth this day in fair and equal combat. And according to the solemn oaths whereby ye are bound, and whereof I am the keeper, there is here an end to all unpeace betwixt Witchland and Demonland,

[p. 40]

and ye of Witchland are to forswear for ever your claims of lordship over the Demons. Now for a sealing and making fast of this solemn covenant between you I see no likelier rede than that ye all join with me here this day in good friendship to forget your quarrels in drinking of the arvale of King Gorice XI., than whom hath reigned none mightier nor more worshipful in all this world, and thereafter depart in peace to your native lands."

So spake the Red Foliot, and the lords of Witchland assented thereto.

But Lord Juss answered and said, "O Red Foliot, as to the oaths sworn between us and the King of Witchland, thou hast spoken well; nor shall we depart one tittle the from the article of our oaths, and the Witches may abide in peace for ever as for us if, as is clean against their use and nature, they forbear to devise evil against us. For the nature of Witchland was ever as a flea, that attacketh a man in the dark. But we will not eat nor drink with the lords of Witchland, who bewrayed and forsook us their sworn confederates at the sea-fight against the Ghouls. Nor we will not drink the arvale of King Gorice XI., who worked a shameful and unlawful sleight against my kinsman this day when they wrastled together."

So spake Lord Juss, and Corund whispered Gro in the ear, saying, "Were't not for the privilege of this respected company, now were the time to set upon them." But Gro said, "I prithee yet have patience. This were over hazardous, for the luck goeth against Witchland. Let us rather take them in their beds to-night."

Fain would the Red Foliot turn the Demons from their resolve, but without avail; they courteously thanking him for his hospitality which they said they would enjoy that night in their booths, being minded on the morrow to take to their beaked ship and fare over the unvintaged sea to Demonland.

Therewith stood up Lord Juss, and with him the Lord[paragraph continues] 

[p. 41]

Goldry Bluszco, that went in all his war gear, his horned helm of gold and his golden byrny set with ruby hearts, and bare his two-handed sword forged by the elves wherewith he slew the beast out of the sea in days gone by; and Lord Spitfire that glared upon the lords of Witchland as a falcon glareth, hungering for her prey; and the Lord Brandoch Daha that looked on them, and chiefly on Corinius, with the eye of contemptuous amusement, playing idly with the jewelled hilt of his sword, until Corinius grew ill at case beneath his gaze and shifted this way and that in his seat, scowling back defiance. For all the rich array and goodly port and countenance of Corinius, he seemed but a very boor beside the Lord Brandoch Daha, and dearly did each hate the other. So the lords of Demonland with their fighting men went forth from the hall.

 

The Red Foliot sent after them and made them in their own booths to be served of great plenty of wine and good and delicate meats, and sent them musicians and a minstrel to gladden them with songs and stories of old time, that they might lack nought of entertainment. But for his other guests he let bear in the massy cups of silver, and the great eared wine jars holding two firkins apiece, and he let pour forth to the Witches and the Foliots, and they drank the cup of memory unto King Gorice XI., slain that day by the hand of Goldry Bluszco. Thereafter when their cups were brimmed anew with foaming wine the Red Foliot spake among them and said, "O ye lords of Witchland, will you that I speak a dirge in honour of Gorice the King that the dark reaper hath this day gathered?" So when they said yea to this, he called to him his player on the theorbo and his player on the hautboy, and commanded them saying, "Play me a solemn music." And they played softly in the Aeolian mode a music that was like the wailing of wind through bare branches on a moonless night, and the Red Foliot

[p. 42]

leaned forth from his high seat and recited this lamentation:

	 
		I that in heill was and gladness
		 Am trublit now with great sickness
		   And feblit with infirmitie:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		Our plesance here is all vain glory,
		 This fals world is but transitory,
		   The flesh is bruckle, the Feynd is slee:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		The state of man does change and vary,
		 Now sound, now sick, now blyth, now sary,
		   Now dansand mirry, now like to die:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		No state in Erd here standis sicker;
		 As with the wynd wavis the wicker,
		   So wannis this world's vanitie:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		Unto the Death gois all Estatis,
		 Princis, Prelattis, and Potestatis,
		   Baith rich and poor of all degree:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		He takis the knichtis in to field
		 Enarmit under helm and scheild;
		   Victor he is at All mellie:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		That strong unmerciful tyrand
		 Takis, on the motheris breast sowkand,
		   The babe full of benignitie:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		 [p. 43]

	 
		He takis the campion in the stour,
		 The captain closit in the tour,
		   The lady in bour full of bewtie:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		He spairis no lord for his piscence,
		 Na clerk for his intelligence;
		   His awful straik may no man flee:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		Art-magicianis and astrologis,
		 Rethoris, logicianis, theologis,
		   Them helpis no conclusionis slee:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		In medecine the most practicianis,
		 Leechis, surrigianis, and physicianis,
		   Themself from Death may nocht supplee:--
		   Timor Mortis conturbat me.
		
		 When the Red Foliot had spoken thus far his dirge, he was interrupted by an unseemly brawling betwixt Corinius and one of the sons of Corund. For Corinius, who gave not a fig for music or dirges, but liked well of carding and dicing, had brought forth his dice box to play with the son of Corund. They played awhile to Corinius's great content, for at every throw he won and the other's purse waxed light. But at this eleventh stanza the son of Corund cried out that the dice of Corinius were loaded. And he smote Corinius on his shaven jowl with the dice box, calling him cheat and mangy rascal, whereupon Corinius drew forth a bodkin to smite him in the neck withal; but some went betwixt them, and with much ado and much struggling and cursing they were parted, and it being shown that the dice were not loaded, the son of Corund was fain to make amends to Corinius, and so were they set at one again.

Now was the wine poured forth yet again to the lords

[p. 44]

of Witchland, and the Red Foliot drank deep unto the glory of that land and the rulers thereof. And he issued command saying, "Let my Kagu come and dance before us, and thereafter my other dancers. For there is no pleasure whereon the Foliots do more dearly dote than this pleasure of the dance, and sweet to us it is to behold delightful dancing, be it the stately splendour of the Pavane which progresseth as large clouds at sun-down that pass by in splendour; or the graceful Allemande; or the Fandango, which goeth by degrees from languorous beauty to the swiftness and passion of Bacchanals dancing on the high lawns under a summer moon that hangeth in the pine trees; or the joyous maze of the Galliard; or the Gigue, dear to the Foliots. Therefore delay not, but let my Kagu come, that she may dance before us."

Therewith hastened the Kagu into the shadowy hall, moving softly and rolling a little in her gait, with her head thrust forward; and a little flurried was she in her bearing as she darted this way and that her large and beautiful eyes, mild and timid, that were like liquid gold heated to redness. Somewhat like a heron she was, but stouter, and shorter of leg, and her beak shorter and thicker than the heron's; and so long and delicate was her pale gray plumage that hard it was to say whether it were hair or feathers. So the wind instruments and the lutes and dulcimers played a Coranto, and the Kagu tripped up the hall betwixt the long tables, jumping a little and bowing a little in her step and keeping excellent time to the music; and when she came near to the dais where the Red Foliot sat ravished with delight at her dancing, the Kagu lengthened her step and glided smoothly and slowly forward toward the Red Foliot; and so gliding she drew herself up in stately wise and opened her mouth and drew back her head till her beak lay tight against her breast, flouncing out her feathers so that they showed like a widecut skirt with a crinoline, and the crest that was on her head rose up erect half again her own height from the ground, and she sailed

[p. 45]

majestically toward the Red Foliot. On this wise did the Kagu at every turn that she took in the Coranto, forth and back along the length of the Foliots' hall. And they all laughed sweetly at her, being overjoyed at her dancing. When the dance was done, the Red Foliot called the Kagu to him and made her sit on the bench beside him, and stroked her soft gray feathers and made much of her. All bashfully she sat beside the Red Foliot, casting her ruby eyes in wonder upon the Witches and their company.

Next the Red Foliot called for his Cat-bears, that stood before him foxy-red above but with black bellies, round furry faces, and innocent amber eyes, and soft great paws, and tails barred alternately with ruddy rings and creamy; and he said, "O Cat-bears, dance before us, since dearly we delight in your dancing."

They asked, "Lord, will you that we perform the Gigue?"

And he answered them, "The Gigue, and ye love me."

So the stringed instruments began a swift movement, and the tambourines and triangles entered on the beat, and swiftly twinkled the feet of the Cat-bears in the joyous dance. The music rippled and ran and the dancers danced till the hall was awhirl with the rhythm of their dancing, and the Witches roared applause. On a sudden the music ceased, and the dancers were still, and standing side by side, paw in furry paw, they bowed shyly to the company, and the Red Foliot called them to him and kissed them on the mouth and sent them to their seats, that they might rest and view the dances that were to follow.

Next the Red Foliot called for his white Peacocks, coloured like moonlight, that they might lead the Pavane before the lords of Witchland. In glorious wise did they spread their tails for the stately dance, and a fair and lovely sight it was to see their grace and the grandeur of their carriage as they moved to the music chaste and noble. With them were joined the Golden Pheasants, who

[p. 46]

spread wide their collars of gold, and the Silver Pheasants, and the Peacock Pheasants, and the Estridges, and the Bustards, footing it in pomp, pointing the toes, and bowing and retiring in due time to the solemn strains of the Pavane. Every instrument took part in the stately Pavane. the lutes and the dulcimers, and the theorbos, and the sackbuts, and the hautboys; the flutes sweetly warbling as birds in the upper air, and the silver trumpets, and the horns that breathed deep melodies trembling with mystery and tenderness that shakes the heart; and the drum that beateth to battle, and the wild throb of the harp, and the cymbals clashing as the clash of armies. And a nightingale sitting by the Red Foliot sang the Pavane in passionate tones that dissolved the soul in their sweet, mournful beauty.

The Lord Gro covered his face with his mantle and wept to hear and behold the divine Pavane; for as ghosts rearisen it raised up for him old happy half-forgotten days in Goblinland, before he had conspired against King Gaslark and been driven forth from his dear native land, an exile in waterish Witchland.

Thereafter let the Red Foliot give order for the Galliard. Joyously swept forth the melody from the stringed instruments, and two dormice, fat as butter, spun into the hall. Wilder whirled the music, and the dormice capered ever higher till they bounded from the floor up to the beams of the vaulted roof, and down again, and up again to the roof-beams in the joyful dance. And the Foliots joined in the Galliard, spinning and capering in mad delight of the dance. And into the hall twirled six capripeds, footing it lightly as the music swept ever faster, and a one-footer that leaped hither and thither about and about, as the flea hoppeth, till the Witches grew hoarse with singing and shouting and hounding of him on. Yet ever capered the dormice higher and wilder than any else, and so swiftly flashed their little feet to the galloping music that no eye might follow their motion.

[p. 47]

But little enow was Lord Gro gladdened by the merry dance. Sad melancholy sat with him for his companion, darkening his thoughts and making joy hateful to him as sunshine to owls of the night. So that he was well pleased to mark the Red Foliot go softly from his seat on the dais and forth from the hall by a door behind the arras, and seeing this, himself departed softly amid the full tide of the Galliard, forth of that hall of swift movement and gleeful laughter, forth into the quiet evening, where above the smooth downs the wind was lulled to sleep in the vast silent spaces of the sky, and the west was a bower of orange light fading to purple and unfathomable blue in the upper heaven, and nought was heard save the murmur of the sleepless sea, and nought seen save a flight of wildfowl flying against the sunset. In this quietness Gro walked westward above the combe until he came to the land's edge and stood on the lip of a chalk cliff falling to the sea, and was ware of the Red Foliot, alone on that high western cliff, gazing in a study at the dying colours in the west.

When they had stood for a while without speech, gazing over the sea, Gro spake and said, "Consider how as day now dieth in yonder chambers of the west, so hath the glory departed from Witchland."

But the Red Foliot answered him not, being in a study.

Then Gro said, "Though Demonland lieth where thou sawest the sun descend, yet eastward out of Witchland must thou look for the morning splendour. Not more surely shalt thou behold the sun go up thence to-morrow than thou shalt see shine forth in short season the glory and honour and power of Witchland, and beneath her destructive sword her enemies shall be as grass before the sickle."

The Red Foliot said, "I am in love with peace and the soft influence of the evening air. Leave me; or if thou wilt stay, break not the charm."

[p. 48]

"O Red Foliot," said Gro, "art thou in love with peace indeed? So should the rising again of Witchland tune sweet music to thy thought, since we of Witchland love peace, nor are we stirrers up of strife, but the Demons only. The war against the Ghouls, whereby the four corners of the earth were shaken, was hatched by Demonland--"

"Thou speakest," said the Red Foliot, "clean against thine intention, a great praise of them. For who ever saw the like of these man-eating Ghouls for corruption of manners, inhuman degeneration, and deluge of iniquities? Who every fifth year from time immemorial have had their grand climacterical year, and but last year brake forth in never-imagined ferocity. But if they sail now, 'tis on the dark lake they sail, grieving no earthly seas nor rivers. Praise Demonland, therefore, who did put them down for ever."

"I make no question of that," answered Lord Gro. "But foul water, as soon as fair, will quench hot fire. Sore against our will did we of Witchland join with the Demons in that war, foreseeing (as hath been bloodily approved) that the issue must be but the puffing up of the Demons, who desire no other thing than to be lords and tyrants of all the world."

"Thou," said the Red Foliot, "wast in thy young days King Gaslark's man: a Goblin born and bred: his very foster-brother, nourished at the same breast. Why must I observe thee, a plain traitor against so good a king? Whose perfidy the common people then did openly reprove (as I did well perceive even so lately as last autumn, when I was in the city of Zaju Zaculo at the time of their festivities for the betrothal of the king's cousin german the Princess Armelline unto the Lord Goldry Bluszco), they carrying filthy pictures of thee in the street, singing of thee thus:

[p. 49]

	 
		It was pittie
		 One so wittie
		   Malcontent:
		 Leaving reason
		 Should to treason
		   So be bent.
		
		But his gifts
		 Were but shifts
		   Void of grace:
		 And his braverie
		 Was but knaverie
		   Vile and base."
		
		 Said Gro, wincing a little, "The art of it agreeth well with the sentiment, and with the condition of those who invented it. I will not think so noble a prince as thou art will set thy sails to the wind of the rabble's most partial hates and envies. For the vile addition of traitor, I do reject and spit upon it. But true it is that, regarding not the god of fools and women, nice opinion, I do steer by mine own lode-star still. Howbeit, I came not to discourse to thee on so small a matter as myself. This I would say unto thee with most sad and serious entertain: Be not lulled to think the Demons will leave the world at peace: that is farthest from their intent. They would not listen to thy comfortable words nor sit at meat with us, so set be they to imagine mischief against us. What said Juss? 'Witchland was ever as a flea': ay, as a flea which he itcheth to crush betwixt his finger-nails. O, if thou be in love with peace, a short way lieth open to thy heart's desire."

Nought spake the Red Foliot, gazing still into the dim reflections of the sunset which lingered below a darkening sky where stars were born. Gro said softly, as a cat purring, "Where softening unctions failed,

[p. 50]

sharp surgery bringeth speediest ease. Wilt thou not leave it to me?"

But the Red Foliot looked angrily upon him, saying, "What have I to do with your enmities? You are sworn to keep the peace, and I will not abide your violence nor your breaking of oaths in my quiet kingdom."

Gro said, "Oaths be of the heart, and he that breaketh them in open fact is oft, as now, no breaker in truth, for already were they scorned and trampled on by his opposites."

But the Red Foliot said again, "What have I to do with your enmities that set you by the ears like fighting dogs? I am yet to learn that he that hath a righteous heart, and clean hands, and hateth none, must needs be drawn into the brawls and manslayings of such as you and the Demons."

Lord Gro looked narrowly upon him, saying, "Thinkest thou that the strait path of him that affecteth neither side lieth still open for thee? If that were thine aim, thou shouldst have bethought thee ere thou gavest thy judgement on the second bout. For clear as day it was to us and to thine own people, and most of all to the Demons, that the King played foul in that bout, and when thou calledst him victorious thou didst loudly by that word trumpet thyself his friend, and unfriends to Demonland. Markedst thou not, when they left the hall, with what a snake's eye Lord Juss beheld thee? Not with us only but with thee he refused to eat and drink, that so his superstitious scruples may be unhurt when he proceeds to thy destruction. For on this are they determined. Nothing is more certain."

The Red Foliot sank his chin upon his breast, and stood silent for a space. The hues of death and silence spread themselves where late the fires of sunset glowed, and large stars opened like flowers on the illimitable fields of the night sky: Arcturus, Spica, Gemini, and the Little Dog, and Capella and her Kids.

[p. 51]

The Red Foliot said, "Witchland lieth at my door. And Demonland: how stand I with Demonland?'

And Gro said, "Also to-morrow's sun goeth up out of Witchland."

For a while they spoke not. Then Lord Gro took forth a scroll from his bosom, and said, "The harvest of this world is to the resolute, and he that is infirm of purpose is ground betwixt the upper and the nether millstone. Thou canst not turn back: so would they scorn and spurn thee, and we Witches likewise. And now by these means only may lasting peace be brought about, namely, by the setting of Gorice of Witchland on the throne of Demonland, and the utter humbling of that brood beneath the heel of the Witches."

The Red Foliot said, "Is not Gorice slain, and drank we not but now his arvale, slain by a Demon? and is he not the second in order of that line who hath so died by a Demon?"

"A twelfth Gorice," said Gro, "at this moment of time sitteth King in Carce. O Red Foliot, know thou that I am a reader of the planets of the night and of those hidden powers that work out the web of destiny. Whereby I know that this twelfth King of the house of Gorice in Carce shall be a most crafty warlock, full of guiles and wiles, who by the might of his egromancy and the sword of Witchland shall exceed all earthly powers that be. And ineluctable as the levin-bolt of heaven goeth out his wrath against his enemies." So saying, Gro stooped and took a glowworm from the grass, saying kindly to it, "Sweeting, thy lamp for a moment," and breathed upon it, and held it to the parchment, saying, "Sign now thy royal name to these articles, which require thee not at all to go to war, but only (in case war shall arise) to be of our party, and against these Demons that do privily pursue thy life."

[p. 52]

But the Red Foliot said, "Wherein am I certified that thou speakest not a lie?"

Then took Gro a writing from his purse and showed thereon a seal like the seal of Lord Juss; and there was written: "Unto Voll al love and truste: and fayll nat whenas thow saylest upon Wychlande to caste of iij or iv shippes for the Folyott Isles to putt downe those and brenne the Redd Folyott in hys hous. For if wee get nat the lyfe of these wormes chirted owt of them the shame will stikk on us for ever." And Gro said, "My servant stole this from them while they spoke with thee in thine hall to-night."

Which the Red Foliot believed, and took from his belt his ink-horn and his pen, and signed his royal name to the articles of the treaty proposed to him,

Therewith Lord Gro put up the parchment in his bosom and said, "Swift surgery. Needs must that we take them in their beds to-night; so shall to-morrow's dawn bring glory and triumph to Witchland, now fixed in an eclipse, and to the whole world peace and soft contentment."

But the Red Foliot answered him, "My Lord Gro, I have signed these articles, and thereby stand I bound in enmity to Demonland. But I will not bewray my guests that have eaten my salt, be they never so deeply pledged mine enemies. Be it known to thee, I have set guards on your booths this night and on the booths of them of Demonland, that no unpeaceful deeds may be done betwixt you. This which I have done, by this will I stand, and ye shall both depart to-morrow in peace, even as ye came. Because I am your friend and sworn to your party, I and my Foliots will be on your side when war is between Witchland and Demonland. But I will not suffer night-slayings nor murthers in my Isles."

Now with these words of the Red Foliot, Lord Gro was as one that walketh along a flowery path to his rest, and in the last steps a gulf yawneth suddenly

[p. 53]

athwart the path, and he standeth a-gape and disappointed at the hither side. Yet in his subtlety he made no sign, but straight replied, "Righteously hast thou decreed and wisely, O Red Foliot, for it was truly said:

	 
		Let worthy minds ne'er stagger in distrust
		 To suffer death or shame for what is just,
		
		 and that which we sow in darkness must unfold in the open light of day, lest it be found withered in the very hour of maturity. Nor would I have urged thee otherwise, but that I do throughly fear these Demons, and all my mind was to take their plotting in reverse. Do then one thing only for us. If we set sail homeward and they on our heels, they will fall upon us at a disadvantage, for they have the swifter ship; or if they get to sea before us, they will lie in wait for us on the high seas. Suffer us then to sail to-night, and do thou on some pretext delay them here for three days only, that we may get us home or ever they leave the Foliot Isles."

"I will not gainsay thee in this," answered the Red Foliot, "for here is nought but what is fair and just and lieth with mine honour. I will come to your booths at midnight and bring you down to your ship."

 

When Gro came to the Witches' booths he found them guarded even as the Red Foliot had said, and the booths of them of Demonland in like manner. So went he into the royal booth where the King lay in state on a bier of spear-shafts, robed in his kingly robes over his armour that was painted black and inlaid with gold, and the crown of Witchland on his head. Two candles burned at the head of King Gorice and two at his feet; and the night wind blowing through the crannies of the booth made them flare and flicker, so that shadows danced unceasingly on the wall and roof and floor. On the benches round

[p. 54]

the walls sat the lords of Witchland sullen of countenance, for the wine was dead in them. Balefully they eyed Lord Gro at his coming in, and Corinius sate upright in his seat and said, "Here is the Goblin, father and fosterer of our misfortunes. Come, let us slay him."

Gro stood among them with head erect and held Corinius with his eye, saying, "We of Witchland are not run lunatic, my Lord Corinius, that we should do this gladness to the Demons, to bite each at the other's throat like wolves. Methinks if Witchland be the land of my adoption only, yet have I not done least among you to ward off sheer destruction from her in this pass we stand in. If ye have aught against me, let me hear it and answer it."

Corinius laughed a bitter laugh. "Harken to the fool! Are we babies and milksops, thinkest thou, and is it not clear as day thou stoodest in the way of our falling on the Demons when we might have done so, urging what silly counsels I know not in favour of doing it by night? And now is night come, and we close prisoned in our booths, and no chance to come at them unless we would bring an hornets' nest of Foliots about our ears and give warning of our intent to the Demons and every living soul in this island. And all this has come about since thy slinking off and plotting with the Red Foliot. But now hath thy guile overreached itself, and now we will kill thee, and so an end of thee and thy plotting."

With that Corinius sprang up and drew his sword, and the other Witches with him. But Lord Gro moved not an eyelid, only he said, "Hear mine answer first. All night lieth before us, and 'tis but a moment's task to murther me."

Therewith stood forth the Lord Corund with his huge bulk betwixt Gro and Corinius, saying in a great voice, "Whoso shall point weapon 'gainst him, shall first have to do with me, though it were one of

[p. 55]

my sons. We will hear him. If he clear not himself, then will we hew him in pieces."

They sat down, muttering. And Gro spake and said, "First behold this parchment, which is the articles of a solemn covenant and alliance, and behold where the Red Foliot hath set his sign manual thereto. True, his is a country of no might in arms, and we might tread him down and ne'er feel the leavings stick to our boot, and little avail can their weak help be unto us in the day of battle. But there is in these Isles a meetly good road and riding-place for ships, which if our enemies should occupy, their fleet were most aptly placed to do us all the ill imaginable. Is then this treaty a light benefit where now we stand? Next, know that when I counselled you take the Demons in their beds 'stead of fall upon them in the Foliots' hall, I did so being advertised that the Red Foliot had commanded his soldiers to turn against us or against the Demons, whichever first should draw sword upon the other. And when I went forth from the hall it was, as Corinius hath so deeply divined, to plot with the Red Foliot; but the aim of my plotting I have shown you, on these articles of alliance. And indeed, had I as Corinius vilely accuseth me practised with the Red Foliot against Witchland, I had hardly been so simple as return into the mouth of destruction when I might have bided safely in his palace."

Now when Gro perceived that the anger of the Witches against him was appeased by his defence, wherein he spake cunningly both true words and lies, he spake again among them saying, "Little gain have I of all my pains and thought expended by me for Witchland. And better it were for Witchland if my counsel were better heeded. Corund knoweth how, to mine own peril, I counselled the King to wrastle no more after the first bout, and if he had ta'en my rede, rather than suspect me and threaten

[p. 56]

me with death, we should not be now to bear him home dead to the royal catacombs in Carce."

Corund said, "Truly hast thou spoken."

"In one thing only have I failed," said Gro; "and it can shortly be amended. The Red Foliot, albeit of our party, will not be won to attack the Demons by fraud, nor will he suffer us smite them in these Isles. Some fond simple scruples hang like cobwebs in his mind, and he is stubborn as touching this. But I have prevailed upon him to make them tarry here for three days' space, while we put to sea this very night, telling him, which he most innocently believeth, that we fear the Demons, and would flee home ere they be let loose to take us at a disadvantage on the high seas. And home we will indeed ere they set sail, yet not for fear of them, but rather that we may devise a deadly blow against them or ever they win home to Demonland."

"What blow, Goblin?" said Corinius.

And Gro answered and said, "One that I win devise upon with our Lord the King, Gorice XII., who now awaiteth us in Carce. And I will not blab it to a wine-bibber and a dicer who hath but now drawn sword against a true lover of Witchland." Whereupon Corinius leaped up in mickle wrath to thrust his sword into Gro. But Corund and his sons restrained him.

In due time the stars revolved to midnight, and the Red Foliot came secretly with his guards to the Witches' booths. The lords of Witchland took their weapons and the men-at-arms bare the goods, and the King went in the midst on his bier of spearshafts. So went they picking their way in the moonless night round the palace and down the winding path that led to the bed of the combe, and so by the stream westward toward the sea. Here they deemed it safe to light a torch to show them the way. Desolate

[p. 57]

and bleak showed the sides of the combe in the wind-blown flare; and the flare was thrown back from the jewels of the royal crown of Witchland, and from the armoured buskins on the King's feet showing stark with toes pointing upward from below his bear-skin mantle, and from the armour and the weapons of them that bare him and walked beside him, and from the black cold surface of the little river hurrying for ever over its bed of boulders to the sea. The path was rugged and stony, and they fared slowly, lest they should stumble and drop the King .

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

 

IV

 

Conjuring in the Iron Tower

OF THE HOLD OF CARCE, AND OF THE MIDNIGHT PRACTICES OF KING GORICE XII. IN THE ANCIENT CHAMBER, PREPARING DOLE AND DOOM FOR THE LORDS OF DEMONLAND.

WHEN the Witches were come aboard of their ship and all stowed, and the rowers set in order on the benches, they bade farewell to the Red Foliot and rowed out to the deep, and there hoisted sail and put up their helm and sailed eastward along the land. The stars wheeled overhead, and the east grew pale, and the sun came out of the sea on the larboard bow. Still sailed they two days and two nights, and on the third day there was land ahead, and morning rose abated by mist and cloud, and the sun was as a hall of red fire over Witchland in the east. So they hung awhile off Tenemos waiting for the tide, and at high water sailed over the bar and up the Druima past the dunes and mud-flats and the Ergaspian mere, till they reached the bend of the river below Carce. Solitary marsh-land stretched on either side as far as the eye might reach, with clumps of

[p. 59]

willow and rare homesteads showing above the flats. Northward above the bend a bluff of land fell sharply to the elbow of the river, and on the other, side sloped gently away for a few miles till it lost itself in the dead level of the marshes. On the southern face of the bluff, monstrous as a mountain in those low sedge-lands, hung square and black the fortress of Carce. It was built of black marble, rough-hewn and unpolished, the outworks enclosing many acres. An inner wall with a tower at each corner formed the main stronghold, in the south-west corner of which was the palace, overhanging the river. And on the south-west corner of the palace, towering sheer from the water's edge seventy cubits and more to the battlements, stood the keep, a round tower lined with iron, bearing on the corbel table beneath its parapet in varying form and untold repetition the sculptured figure of the crab of Witchland. The outer ward of the fortress was dark with cypress trees: black flames burning changelessly to heaven from a billowy sea of gloom. East of the keep was the water-gate, and beside it a bridge and bridge-house across the river, strongly fortified with turrets and machicolations and commanded from on high by the battlements of the keep. Dismal and fearsome to view was this strong place of Carce, most like to the embodied soul of dreadful night brooding on the waters of that sluggish river: by day a shadow in broad sunshine, the likeness of pitiless violence sitting in the place of power, darkening the desolation of the mournful fen; by night, a blackness more black than night herself.

Now was the ship made fast near the water-gate, and the lords of Witchland landed and their fighting men, and the gate opened to them, and mournfully they entered in and climbed the steep ascent to the palace, bearing with them their sad burden of the King. And in the great hall in Carce was Gorice XI. laid in state for that night; and the day wore

[p. 60]

to its close. Nor was any word from King Gorice XII. But when the shades of night were falling, there came a chamberlain to Lord Gro as he walked upon the terrace without the western wall of the palace; and the chamberlain said, "My lord, the King bids you attend him in the Iron Tower, and he chargeth you bring unto him the royal crown of Witchland."

Gro made haste to fulfil the bidding of the King, and betook himself to the great banqueting hall, and all reverently be lifted the iron crown of Witchland set thick with priceless gems, and went by a winding stair to the tower, and the chamberlain went before him. When they were come to the first landing, the chamberlain knocked on a massive door that was forthwith opened by a guard; and the chamberlain said, "My lord, it is the King's will that you attend his majesty in his secret chamber at the top of the tower." And Gro marvelled, for none had entered that chamber for many years. Long ago had Gorice VII. practised forbidden arts therein, and folk said that in that chamber he raised up those spirits whereby he gat his bane. Sithence was the chamber sealed, nor had the late Kings need of it, since little faith they placed in art magical, relying rather on the might of their hands and the sword of Witchland. But Gro was glad at heart, for the opening of this chamber by the King met his designs half way. Fearlessly he mounted the winding stairs that were dusky with the shadows of approaching night and hung with cobwebs and strewn with the dust of neglect, until he came to the small low door of that chamber, and pausing knocked thereon and harkened for the answer.

And one said from within, "Who knocketh?" and Gro answered, "Lord, it is I, Gro." And the bolts were drawn and the door opened, and the King said, "Enter." And Gro entered and stood in the presence of the King.

Now the fashion of the chamber was that it was

[p. 61]

round, filling the whole space of the loftiest floor of the round donjon keep. It was now gathering dusk, and weak twilight only entered through the deep embrasures of the windows that pierced the walls of the tower, looking to the four quarters of the heavens. A furnace glowing in the big hearth threw fitful gleams into the recesses of the chamber, lighting up strange shapes of glass and earthenware, flasks and retorts, balances, hour-glasses, crucibles and astrolabes, a monstrous three-necked alembic of phosphorescent glass supported on a bain-marie, and other instruments of doubtful and unlawful aspect. Under the northern window over against the doorway was a massive table blackened with age, whereon lay great books bound in black leather with iron guards and heavy padlocks. And in a mighty chair beside this table was King Gorice XII., robed in his conjuring robe of black and gold, resting his cheek on his hand that was lean as an eagle's claw. The low light, mother of shade and secrecy, that hovered in that chamber moved about the still figure of the King, his nose hooked as the eagle's beak, his cropped hair, his thick close-cut beard and shaven upper lip, his high cheek-bones and cruel heavy jaw, and the dark eaves of his brows whence the glint of green eyes showed as no friendly lamp to them without. The door shut noiselessly, and Gro stood before the King. The dusk deepened, and the firelight pulsed and blinked in that dread chamber, and the King leaned without motion on his hand, bending his brow on Gro; and there was utter silence save for the faint purr of the furnace.

In a while the King said, "I sent for thee, because thou alone wast so hardy as to urge to the uttermost thy counsel upon the King that is now dead, Gorice XI. of memory ever glorious. And because thy counsel was good. Marvellest thou that I wist of thy counsel?"

Gro said, "O my Lord the King, I marvel not of

[p. 62]

this. For it is known to me that the soul endureth, albeit the body perish."

"Keep thou thy lips from overspeech," said the King. "These be mysteries whereon but to think may snatch thee into peril, and whoso speaketh of them, though in se secret a place as this, and with me only, yet at his most bitter peril speaketh he."

Gro answered, "O King, I spake not lightly; moreover, you did tempt me by your questioning. Nevertheless I am utterly obedient to your majesty's admonition."

The King rose from his chair and walked towards Gro, slowly. He was exceeding tall, and lean as a starved cormorant. Laying his hands upon the shoulders of Gro, and bending his face to Gro's, "Art not afeared," he asked, "to abide me in this chamber, at the close of day? Or hast not thought on't, and on these instruments thou seest, their use and purpose, and the ancient use of this chamber?"

Gro blenched never a whit, but stoutly said, "I am not afeared, O my Lord the King, but rather rejoiced I at your summons. For it jumpeth with mine own designs, when I took counsel secretly in my heart after the woes that the Fates fulfilled for Witchland in the Foliot Isles. For in that day, O King, when I beheld the light of Witchland darkened and her might abated in the fall of King Gorice XI. of glorious memory, I thought on you. Lord, the twelfth Gorice raised up King in Carce; and there was present to my mind the word of the soothsayer of old, where, he singeth:

	 
		Ten, eleven, twelf I see
		 In sequent varietie
		 Of puissaunce and maistrye
		 With swerd, sinwes, and grammarie,
		 In the holde of Carce
		 Lordinge it royally.
		
		 [p. 63]

[paragraph continues] And being minded that he singleth out you, the twelfth, as potent in grammarie, all my care was that these Demons should be detained within reach of your spells until we should have time to win home to you and to apprise you of their farings, that so you might put forth your power and destroy them by art magic or ever they come safe again to many-mountained Demonland."

The King took Gro to his bosom and kissed him, saying, "Art thou not a very jewel of wisdom and discretion? Let me embrace thee and love thee for ever."

Then the King stood back from him, keeping his hands on Gro's shoulders, and gazed piercingly upon him for a space in silence. Then kindled he a taper that stood in an iron candlestick by the table where the books lay, and held it to Gro's face. And the King said, "Ay, wise thou art and of good discretion, and some courage hast thou. But if thou be to serve me this night, needs must I try thee first with terrors till thou be inured to them, as tried gold runneth in the crucible; or if thou be base metal only, till that thou be eaten up by them."

Gro said unto the King, "For many years, Lord, or ever I came to Carce, I fared up and down the world, and I am acquainted with objects of terror as a child with his toys. I have seen in the southern seas, by the light of Achemar and Canopus, giant sea-horses battling with eight-legged cuttle-fishes in the whirlpools of the Korsh. Yet was I unafraid. I was in the isle Ciona when the first of the pit brast forth in that isle and split it as a man's skull is split with an axe, and. the green gulfs of the sea swallowed that isle, and the stench and the steam hung in the air for days where the burning rock and earth had sizzled in the ocean. Yet was I unafraid. Also was I with Gaslark in the flight out of Zaje Zaculo, when the Ghouls took the palace over our heads, and portents walked in his halls in broad daylight, and the Ghouls conjured the sun out of heaven. Yet was I unafraid. And for thirty days and thirty nights wandered I alone on the face of the Moruna in Upper Impland, where scarce a living soul hath been: and there the evil

[p. 64]

wights that people the air of that desert dogged my steps and gibbered at me in darkness. Yet was I unafraid; and came in due time to Morna Moruna, and thence, standing on the lip of the escarpment as it were on the edge of the world, looked southaway where never mortal eye had gazed aforetime, across the untrodden forests of the Bhavinan. And in that skyey distance, pre-eminent beyond range on range of ice-robed mountains, I beheld two peaks throned for ever between firm land and heaven in unearthly loveliness: the spires and airy ridges of Koshtra Pivrarcha, and the wild precipices that soar upward from the abysses to the queenly silent snow-dome of Koshtra Belorn."

When Gro had ended, the King turned him away and, taking from a shelf a retort filled with a dark blue fluid, set it on a bain-marie, and a lamp thereunder. Fumes of a faint purple hue came forth from the neck of the retort, and the King gathered them in a flask. He made signs over the flask and shook forth into his hand therefrom a fine powder. Then said he unto Gro, holding out the powder in the open palm of his hand, "Look narrowly at this powder." And Gro looked. The King muttered an incantation, and the powder moved and heaved, and was like a crawling mass of cheesemites in an overripe cheese. It increased in volume in the King's hand, and Gro perceived that each particular grain had legs. The grains grew before his eyes, and became the size of mustard seeds, and then of barleycorns, swiftly crawling each over other. And even as he marvelled, they waxed great as kidney beans, and now was their shape and seeming clear to him, so that he beheld that they were small frogs and paddocks; and they overflowed from the King's hand as they waxed swiftly in size, pouring on to the floor. And they ceased not to increase and grow; and now were they large as little dogs, nor might the King retain more than a single one, holding his hand under its belly while it waved its legs in the air; and they were walking on the tables and jostling on the floor. Pallid they were, and permeable to light like thin horn, and their

[p. 65]

hue a faint purple, even as the hue of the vapour whence they were engendered. And now was the room filled with them so that they mounted perforce one on another's shoulders, and they were of the bigness of well fatted hogs; and they goggled their eyes at Gro and croaked. The King looked narrowly on Gro, who stood in the presence of that spectacle, the crown of Witchland in his hands; and the King marked that the crown trembled not a whit in Gro's hands that held it. So he said a certain word, and the paddocks and the frogs grew small again, shrinking more swiftly than they had grown, and so vanished.

The King now took from the shelf a ball the size of the egg of an estridge, of dark green glass. He said unto Gro, "Look well at this glass and tell me what thou seest." Gro answered him, "I see a shifting shadow within." The King commanded him saying, "Dash it down with all thy strength upon the floor." The Lord Gro lifted the ball with both hands above his head, and it was ponderous as a ball of lead, and according to the command of Gorice the King he hurled it on the floor, so that it was pashed in pieces. And, behold, a puff of thick smoke burst forth from the fragments of the ball and took the form of one of human shape and dreadful aspect, whose two legs were two writhing snakes; and it stood in the chamber so tall that the head of it touched the vaulted. ceiling, viewing the King and Gro malevolently and menacing them. The King caught down a sword that hung against the wall, and put it in Gro's hand, shouting, "Smite off the legs of it! and delay not, or thou art but dead!" Gro smote and cut off the left leg of the evil wight, easily, as it were cutting of butter. But from the stump came forth two fresh snakes a-writhing; and so it fared likewise with the right leg, but the King shouted, "Smite and cease not, or thou art but a dead dog!" and ever as Gro hewed a snake in twain forth came two more from the wound, till the chamber was a maze of their wriggling forms. And still Gro hewed with a will, until the sweat stood on his brow, and he

[p. 66]

said, panting between the strokes, "O King, I have made him many-legged as a centipede: must I make him a myriapod ere night's decline?" And the King smiled, and spake a word of hidden meaning; and therewith the turmoil was gone as a gust of wind departeth, and nought left save the shivered splinters of the green ball on the chamber floor.

"Wast not afearied?" asked the King, and when Gro said nay, "Methinks these sights of terror should much afflict thee," said the King, "since well I know thou art not skilled in art magical."

"Yet am I a philosopher," answered Lord Gro; "and somewhat know I of alchymy and the hidden properties of this material world: the virtues of herbs, plants, stones, and minerals, the ways of the stars in their courses, and the influences of those heavenly bodies. And I have held converse with birds and fishes in their degree, and that generation which creepeth on the earth is not held in scorn by me, but oft talk I in sweet companionship with the eft of the pond, and the glowworm, and the lady-bird, and the pismire, and their kind, making them my little gossips. So have I a certain lore which lighteth me in the outer court of the secret temple of grammarie and art forbid, albeit I have not peered within that temple. And by my philosophy, O King, I am certified concerning these apparitions which you have raised for me, that they be illusions and phantasms only, able to terrify the soul indeed of him that knoweth not divine philosophy, but without bodily power or essence. Nor is aught to fear in such, save the fear itself wherewith they strike the simple."

Then said the King, "By what token knowest thou this?"

And the Lord Gro made answer unto him, "O King, as a child weaveth a daisy-chain, thus easily did you conjure up these shapes of terror. Not in such wise fareth he that calleth out of the deep the deadly terror indeed; but with toil and sweat and with straining of thought, will, heart, and sinew fareth he."

[p. 67]

The King smiled. "Thou sayest true. Now, therefore, since phantasmagoria maketh not thy heart to quail, I present thee a more material horror."

And he lighted the candles in the great candlesticks of iron and opened a little secret door in the wall of the chamber near the floor; and Gro beheld iron bars within the little door, and heard a hissing from behind the bars. The King took a key of silver of delicate construction, the handle slender and three spans in length, and opened the iron grated door. And the King said, "Behold and see, that which sprung from the egg of a cock, hatched by the deaf adder. The glance of its eye sufficeth to turn to stone any living thing that standeth before it. Were I but for one instant to loose my spells whereby I hold it in subjection, in that moment would end my life days and thine. So strong in properties of ill is this serpent which the ancient Enemy that dwelleth in darkness hath placed upon this earth, to be a bane unto the children of men, but an instrument of might in the hand of enchanters and sorcerers."

Therewith came forth that offspring of perdition from its hole, strutting erect on its two legs that were the legs of a cock; and a cock's head it had, with rosy comb and wattles, but the face of it like no fowl's face of middle-earth but rather a gorgon's out of Hell. Black shining feathers grew on its neck, but the body of it was the body of a dragon with scales that glittered in the rays of the candles, and a scaly crest stood on its back; and its wings were like bats' wings, and its tail the tail of an aspick with a sting in the end thereof, and from its beak its forked tongue flickered venomously. And the stature of the thing was a little above a cubit. Now because of the spells of King Gorice whereby he held it ensorcelled it might not cast its baneful glance upon him, nor upon Gro, but it walked back and forth in the candle light, averting its eyes from them. The feathers on its neck were fluffed up with anger and wondrous swiftly twirled its scaly tail, and it hissed ever more fiercely, irked by the bonds of the King's enchantment; and the

[p. 68]

breath of it was noisome, and hung in sluggish wreaths about the chamber. So for a while it walked before them, and as it looked sidelong past him Gro beheld the light of its eyes that were as sick moons burning poisonously through a mist of greenish yellow in the dusk of night. And strong loathing seized him, so that his gorge rose to behold the thing, and his brow and the palms of his hands became clammy, and he said, "My Lord the King, I have looked steadfastly on this cockatrice arid it affrighteth me no whit, but it is loathly in my sight, so that my gorge riseth because of it," and with that he fell a-vomiting. And the King commanded that serpent back into its hole, whither it returned, hissing wrathfully.

Now the King poured forth wine, speaking a charm over the cup, and when the bright wine had revived Lord Gro, the King spake saying, "It is well, O Gro, that thou hast shown thyself a philosopher indeed, and of heart intrepid. Yet even as no blade is utterly tried until one try it in very battle, where if it snap woe and doom wait on the hand that wields it, so must thou in this midnight suffer a yet fiercer furnace-heat of terror, wherein if thou be reduced we are both lost eternally, and this Carce and all Witchland blasted with us for ever in ruin and oblivion. Durst abide this trial?"

Gro answered, "I am hot to obey your word, O King. For well know I that it is idle to hope by phantoms and illusions to appal the Demons, and that against the Demons the deadly eye of thy cockatrice were turned in vain. Stout of heart are they, and instructed in all lore, and Juss a sorcerer of ancient power, who hath charms to blunt the glance of basilisk or cockatrice. He that would strike down the Demons must conjure indeed."

"Great," said the King, "is the strength and cunning of the seed of Demonland. By main strength have they now shown mastery over us, as sadly witnesseth the overthrow of Gorice XI., 'gainst whom no mortal could stand up and wrastle and not die, till cursed Goldry, drunk with spleen and envy, slew him in the Foliot Isles. Nor was there any aforetime to outdo us in feats

[p. 69]

of arms, and Gorice X., victorious in single combats without number, made our name glorious over all the world. Yet at the last he gat his death, out of all expectation and by what treacherous sleight I know not, standing in single combat against the curled step-dancer from Krothering. But I, that am skilled in grammarie, do bear a mightier engine against the Demons than brawny sinews or the sword that smiteth asunder. Yet is mine engine perilous to him that useth it."

Therewith the King unlocked the greatest of those books that lay by on the massive table, saying in Gro's ear, as one who would not be overheard, "This is that awful book of grammarie wherewith in this same chamber, on such a night, Gorice VII. stirred the vasty deep. And know that from this circumstance alone ensued the ruin of King Gorice VII., in that, having by his hellish science conjured up somewhat from the primaeval dark, and being utterly fordone with the sweat and stress of his conjuring, his mind was clouded for a moment, in such sort that either he forgot the words writ in this grammarie, or the page whereon they were writ, or speech faded him to speak those words that must be spoken, or might to do those things which must be done to complete the charm. Wherefore he kept not his power over that which he had called out of the deep, but it turned upon him and tare him limb from limb. Such like doom will I avoid, renewing in these latter days those self-same spells, if thou durst stand by me undismayed the while I utter my incantations. And shouldst thou mark me fail or waver ere all be accomplished, then shalt thyself lay hand on book and crucible and fulfil whatsoever is needful, as I shall first show thee. Or quailest thou at this?"

Gro said, "Lord, show me my task. And I will carry it, though all the Furies of the pit flock to this chamber to say me nay."

So the King instructed Gro, rehearsing to him those acts that were needful, and making known unto him the divers pages of the grammarie whereon were writ those

[p. 70]

words which must be spoken each in its due time and sequence. But the King pronounced not yet those words, pointing only to them in the book, for whoso speaketh those words in vain and out of season is lost. And now when the retorts and beakers with their several necks and tubes and the appurtenances thereof were set in order, and the unhallowed processes of fixation, conjunction, deflagration, putrefaction, and rubefication were nearing maturity, and the baleful star Antares standing by the astrolabe within a little of the meridian signified the instant approach of midnight, the King described on the floor with his conjuring rod three pentacles inclosed within a seven-pointed star, with the signs of Cancer and of Scorpio joined by certain runes. And in the midst of the star he limned the image of a green crab eating of the sun. And turning to the seventy-third page of his great black grammarie the King recited in a mighty voice words of hidden meaning, calling on the name that it is a sin to utter.

Now when he had spoken the first spell and was silent, there was a deadly quiet in that chamber, and a chill in the air as of winter. And in the quiet Gro heard the King's breath coming and going, as of one who hath rowed a course. Now the blood rushed back to Gro's heart and his hands and feet became cold and a cold sweat brake forth on his brow. But for all that, he held yet his courage firm and his brain ready. The King motioned. to Gro to break off the tail of a certain drop of black glass that lay on the table; and with the snapping of its tail the whole drop fell in pieces in a coarse black powder. Gro by the King's direction gathered that powder and dropped it in the great alembic wherein a green fluid seethed and bubbled above the flame of a lamp; and the fluid became red as blood, and the body of the alembic filled with a tawny smoke, and sparks of sun-like brilliance flashed and crackled through the smoke. Thereupon distilled from the neck of the alembic a white oil incombustible, and the King dipped his rod in that oil and described round the seven-pointed star on

[p. 71]

the floor the figure of the worm Ouroboros, that eateth his own tail. And he wrote the formula of the crab below the circle, and spake his second spell.

When that was done, yet more biting seemed the night air and yet more like the grave the stillness of the chamber. The King's hand shook as with an ague as he turned the pages of the mighty book. Gro's teeth chattered in his head. He gritted them together and waited. And now through every window came a light into the chamber as of skies paling to the dawn. Yet not wholly so; for never yet came dawn at midnight, nor from all four quarters of the sky at once, nor with such swift strides of increasing light, nor with a light so ghastly. The candle flames burned filmy as the glare waxed strong from without: an evil pallid light of bale and corruption, wherein the hands and faces of the King Gorice and his disciple showed death-pale, and their lips black as the dark skin of a grape where the bloom has been rubbed off from it. The King cried terribly, "The hour approacheth!" And he took a phial of crystal containing a decoction of wolf's jelly and salamander's blood, and dropped seven drops from the alembic into the phial and poured forth that liquor on the figure of the crab drawn on the floor. Gro leaned against the wall, weak in body but with will unbowed. So bitter was the cold that his hands and feet were benumbed, and the liquor from the phial congealed where it fell. Yet the sweat stood in beads on the forehead of the King by reason of the mighty striving that was his, and in the overpowering glare of that light from the underskies he stood stiff and erect, hands clenched and arms outstretched, and spake the words LURO VOPO VIR VOARCHADUMIA.

Now with those words spoken the vivid light departed as a blown-out lamp, and the midnight closed down again without. Nor was any sound heard save the thick panting of the King; but it was as if the night held its breath in expectation of that which was to come. And the candles sputtered and burned blue. The King swayed and

[p. 72]

clutched the table with his left hand; and again the King pronounced terribly the word VOARCHADUMIA.

Thereafter for the space of ten heart-beats silence hung like a kestrel poised in the listening night. Then went a crash through earth and heaven, and a blinding wildfire through the chamber as it had been a thunderbolt. All Carce quaked, and the chamber was filled with a beating of wings, like the wings of some monstrous bird. The air that was wintry cold waxed on a sudden hot as the breath of a burning mountain, and Gro was near choking with the smell of soot and the smell of brimstone. And the chamber rocked as a ship riding in a swell with the wind against the tide. But the King, steadying himself against the table and clutching the edge of it till the veins on his lean hand seemed nigh to bursting, cried in short breaths and with an altered voice, "By these figures drawn and by these spells enchanted, by the unction of wolf and salamander, by the unblest sign of Cancer now leaning to the sun, and by the fiery heart of Scorpio that flameth in this hour on night's meridian, thou art my thrall and instrument. Abase thee and serve me, worm of the pit. Else will I by and by summon out of ancient night intelligences and dominations mightier far than thou, and they shall serve mine ends, and thee shall they chain with chains of quenchless fire and drag thee from torment to torment through the deep."

Therewith the earthquake was stilled, and there remained but a quivering of the walls and floor and the wind of those unseen wings and the hot smell of soot and brimstone burning. And speech came out of the teeming air of that chamber, strangely sweet, saying, "Accursed wretch that troublest our quiet, what is thy will?" The terror of that speech made the throat of Gro dry, and the hairs on his scalp stood up.

The King trembled in all his members like a frightened horse, yet was his voice level and his countenance unruffled as he said hoarsely, "Mine enemies sail at day-break from the Foliot Isles. I loose thee

[p. 73]

against them as a falcon from my wrist. I give thee them. Turn them to thy will: how or where it skills not, so thou do but break and destroy them off the face of the world. Away!"

But now was the King's endurance clean spent, so that his knees failed him and he sank like a sick man into his mighty chair. But the room was filled with a tumult as of rushing waters, and a laughter above the tumult like to the laughter of souls condemned. And the King was reminded that he had left unspoken that word which should dismiss his sending. But to such weariness was he now come and so utterly was his strength gone out from him in the exercise of his spells, that his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth, so that he might not speak the word; and horribly he rolled up the whites of his eyes beckoning to Giro, the while his nerveless fingers sought to turn the heavy pages of the grammarie. Then sprang Gro forth to the table, and against it sprawling, for now was the great keep of Carce shaken anew as one shaketh a dice box, and lightnings opened the heavens, and the thunder roared unceasingly, and the sound of waters stunned the ear in that chamber, and still that laughter pealed above the turmoil. And Gro knew that it was now with the King even as it had been with Gorice VII. in years gone by, when his strength gave forth and the spirit tare him. and plastered those chamber-walls with his blood. Yet was Gro mindful, even in that hideous storm of terror, of the ninety-seventh page whereon the King had shown him the word of dismissal, and he wrenched the book from the King's palsied grasp and turned to the page. Scarce had his eye found the word, when a whirlwind of hail and sleet swept into the chamber, and the candles were blown out and the tables overset. And in the plunging darkness beneath the crashing of the thunder Gro pitching headlong felt claws clasp his head and body. He cried in his agony the word, that was the word TRIPSARECOPSEM, and so fell a-swooning.

 

It was high noon when the Lord Gro came to his

[p. 74]

senses in that chamber. The strong spring sunshine poured through the southern window, lighting up the wreckage of the night. The tables were cast down and the floor strewn and splashed with costly essences and earths spilt from shattered phials and jars and caskets: aphroselmia, shell of gold, saffron of gold, asem, amianth, stypteria of Melos, confounded with mandragora, vinum ardens, sal armoniack, devouring aqua regia, little pools and scattered globules of quicksilver, poisonous decoctions of toadstools and of yewberries, monkshood, thorn-apple, wolf's bane and black hellebore, quintessences of dragon's blood and serpent's bile; and with these, splashed together and wasted, elixirs that wise men have died a-dreaming of: spiritus mundi, and that sovereign alkahest which dissolveth every substance dipped therein, and that aurum potabile which being itself perfect induceth perfection in the living frame. And in this welter of spoiled treasure were the great conjuring books hurled amid the ruin of retorts and aludels of glass and lead and silver, sand-baths, matrasses, spatulae, athanors, and other instruments innumerable of rare design, tossed and broken on the chamber floor. The King's chair was thrown against the furnace, and huddled against the table lay the King, his head thrown back, his black beard pointing skyward, showing his sinewy hairy throat. Gro looked narrowly at him; saw that he seemed unhurt and slept deep; and so, knowing well that sleep is a present remedy for every ill, watched by the King in silence all day till supper time, for all he was sore an-hungered.

When at length the King awoke, he looked about him in amaze. "Methought I tripped at the last step of last night's journey," he said. "And truly strange riot hath left its footprints in my chamber."

Gro answered, "Lord, sorely was I tried; yet fulfilled I your behest."

The King laughed as one whose soul is at ease, and standing upon his feet said unto Gro, "Take up the crown of Witchland and crown me. And that high honour shalt thou have, because I do love thee for this night gone by."

[p. 75]

Now without were the lords of Witchland assembled in the courtyard, being bound for the great banqueting hall to eat and drink, unto whom the King came forth from the gate below the keep, robed in his conjuring robe. Wondrous bright sparkled the gems of the iron crown of Witchland above the heavy brow and cheekbones and the fierce disdainful lip of the King, as he stood there in his majesty, and Gro with the guard of honour stood in the shadow of the gate. And the King said, "My lords Corund and Corsus and Corinius and Gallandus, and ye sons of Corsus and of Corund, and ye, other Witches, behold your King, the twelfth Gorice, crowned with this crown in Carce to be King of Witchland and of Demonland. And all countries of the world and the rulers thereof, so many as the sun doth spread his beams over, shall do me obeisance, and call me King and Lord."

All they shouted assent, praising the King and bowing down before him.

Then said the King, "Imagine not that oaths sworn unto the Demons by Gorice XI. of memory ever glorious bind me any whit. I will not be at peace with this Juss and his brethren, but do account them all mine enemies. And this night have I made a sending to take them on the waste of waters as they sail homeward to many-Mountained Demonland."

Corund said, "Lord, your words are as wine unto us. And well we guessed that the principalities of darkness were afoot last night, seeing all Carce rocked and the foundations thereof rose and fell as the breast of the large earth a-breathing."

When they were come into the banqueting hall, the King said, "Gro shall sit at my right hand this night, since manfully hath he served me." And when they scowled at this, and spake each in the other's ear, the King said, "Whoso among you shall so serve me and so, water the growth of this Witchland as hath Gro in this night gone by, unto him will I do like honour." But unto Gro he said, "I will bring thee home to Goblinland in

[p. 76]

triumph, that wentest forth an exile. I will pluck Gaslark from his throne, and make thee king in Zaje Zaculo, and all Goblinland shalt thou hold for me in fee, exercising dominion over it."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

 

V

 

King Gorice's Sending

OF KING GASLARK, AND OF THE COMING OF THE SENDING UPON THE DEMONS ON THE HIGH SEAS; WITH HOW THE LORD JUSS BY THE EGGING ON OF HIS COMPANIONS WAS PERSUADED TO AN UNADVISED RASHNESS.

THE next morning following that night when King Gorice XII. sat crowned in Carce as is aforesaid, was Gaslark a-sailing on the middle sea, homeward from the east. Seven ships of war he had, and they steered in column south-westward close hauled on the starboard tack. Greatest and fairest among them was she who led the line, a great dragon of war painted azure of the summer sea with towering head of a worm, plated with gold and wrought with overlapping scales, gaping defiance from her bows, and a worm's tail erect at the poop. Seventy and five picked men of Goblinland sailed on that ship, clad in gay kirtles and byrnies of mail and armed with axes, spears, and swords. Their shields, each with his device, hung at the bulwarks. On the high poop sat King Gaslark, his sturdy hands grasping the great

[p. 78]

steering paddle. Goodly of mien and well knit were all they of Goblinland that went on that great ship, yet did Gaslark outdo them all in goodliness and strength and all kingliness. He wore a silken kirtle of Tyrian purple. Broad wristlets of woven gold were on his wrists. Dark-skinned was he as one that hath lived all his days in the hot sunshine: clean-cut of feature, somewhat hooky-nosed, with great eyes and white teeth and tight-curled black moustachios. Nought restful was there in his presence and bearing, but rashness and impetuous fire; and he was wild to look on, swift and beautiful as a stag in autumn.

Teshmar, that was the skipper of his ship, stood at his elbow. Gaslark said to him, "Is it not one of the three gallant spectacles of the world, a good ship treading the hastening furrows of the sea like a queen in grace and beauty, scattering up the wave-crests before her stem in a glittering rain?"

"Yea, Lord," answered he; "and what be the other two?"

"One that I most unhappily did miss, whereof but yesterday we had tidings: to behold such a battling of great champions and such a victory as Lord Goldry obtained upon yonder vaunting tyrant."

"The third shall be seen, I think," said Teshmar, "when the Lord Goldry Bluszco shall in your royal palace of Zaje Zaculo, amid pomp and high rejoicing, wed the young princess your cousin: most fortunate lord, that must be lord of her whom all just censure doth acknowledge the ornament of earth, the model of heaven, the queen of beauty."

"Kind Gods hasten the day," said Gaslark. "For truly 'tis a most sweet lass, and those kinsmen of Demonland my dearest friends. But for whose great upholding time and again, Teshmar, in days gone by, where were I today and my kingdom, and where thou and all of you?" The king's brow darkened a little with thought. After a time he began to say, "I must have more great action:

[p. 79]

these trivial harryings, spoils of Nevria, chasing of Esamocian black-a-moors, be toys not worthy of our great name and renown among the nations. Something I would enact that shall embroil and astonish the world, even as the Demons when they purged earth of the Ghouls, ere I go down into silence."

Teshmar was staring toward the southern bourne. He pointed with his hand: "There rideth a great ship, O king. And methinks she hath a strange look."

Gaslark gazed earnestly at her for an instant, then straightway shifted his helm and steered towards her. He spake no more, staring ever as he sailed, marking ever as the distance lessened more and more particulars of that ship. Her silken sail fluttered in tatters from the yard; she rowed feebly, as one groping in darkness, with barely strength to stay her from drifting stern-foremost before the wind. So hung she on the sea, as one struck stupid by some blow, doubting which way her harbour lay or which way her course. As a thing which hath been held in the flame of a monstrous candle, so seemed she, singed and besmirched with soot. Smashed was her proud figure-head, and smashed was her high forecastle, and burned and shattered the carved timbers of the poop and the fair seats that were thereon. She leaked, so that a score of her crew must be still a-baling to keep her afloat. Of her fifty oars, half were broken or gone adrift, and many of the ship's company lay wounded and some slain under her thwarts.

And now was King Gaslark ware as he drew near that here was the Lord Juss on her ruined poop a-steering, and by him Spitfire and Brandoch Daha. Their jewelled arms and gear and rich attire were black with most stinking soot, and it was as though admiration and grief and anger were so locked and twined within them that none of these passions might win forth to outward showing on their frozen countenances.

When they were within hailing distance, Gaslark hailed them. They answered him not, only beholding him with

[p. 80]

alien eyes. But they stopped the ship, and Gaslark lay aboard of her and came on board and went up on the poop and greeted them. And he said, "Well met in an ill hour. "What's the matter?"

The Lord Juss made as if to speak, but no word came. Only he took Gaslark by both hands and sat down with a great groan on the poop, averting his face. Gaslark said, "O Juss, for so many a time as thou hast borne part in my evils and succoured me, surely right requireth I have part of thine?"

But Juss answered in a thick, strange voice all unlike himself, "Mine, sayest thou, O Gaslark? What in the stablished world is mine, that am thus in a moment reived of him that was mine own heartstring, my brother, the might of mine arm, the chiefest citadel of my dominion?" And he burst into a great passion of weeping.

King Gaslark's rings were driven into the flesh of his fingers by the grip of Juss's strong hands on his. But he scarce wist of the pain, such agony of mind was in him for the loss of his friend, and for the bitterness and wonder that it was to behold these three great lords of Demonland weep like frightened women, and all their ship's company of tried men of war weeping and wailing besides. And Gaslark saw well that their lordly souls were unseated for a season because of some dreadful fact, the havoc whereof his eyes most woefully beheld, while its particulars were yet dark to him, yet with a terror in darkness that might well make his heart to quail.

By much questioning he was at last well advertised of what had befallen: how they the day before, in broad noon, on such a summer sea, had heard a noise like the flapping of wings outstretched from one edge of the sky to another, and in a moment the calm sea was lifted up and fell again and the whole sea clashed together and roared, yet was the ship not sunken. And there was a tumult about them of thunder and raging waters and black night and wildfire in the night; which presently passing away and the darkness lifting, the sea lay solitary

[p. 81]

as far as eye might reach. "And nothing is more certain," said Juss, "than that this is a sending of King Gorice XII. spoken of by the prophets as a great clerk of necromancy beyond all other this world hath seen. And this is his vengeance for the woes we wrought for Witchland in the Foliot Isles. Against such a peril I had provided certain amulets made of the stone alectorian, which groweth in the gizzard of a cock hatched on a moonless night when Saturn burneth in a human sign and the lord of the third house is in the ascendant. These saved us, albeit sorely buffeted, from destruction: all save Goldry alone. He, by some cursed chance, whether he neglected to wear the charm I gave him, or the chain of it was broken in the plunging of the ship, or by some other means 'twas lost: when daylight came again, we stood but three on this poop where four had stood. More I know not."

"O Gaslark," said Spitfire, "our brother that is stolen from us, with us it surely lieth to find him and set him free."

But Juss groaned and said, "In which star of the unclimbed sky wilt thou begin our search? Or in which of the secret streams of ocean where the last green rays are quenched in oozy darkness?"

Gaslark was silent for a while. Then he said, "I think nought likelier than this, that Gorice hath caught away Goldry Bluszco into Carce, where he holdeth him in duress. And thither must we straightway to deliver him."

Juss answered no word. But Gaslark seized his hand, saying, "Our ancient love and your oft succouring of Goblinland in days gone by make this my quarrel. Hear now my rede. As I fared from the east through the Straits of Rinath I beheld a mighty company of forty sail, bound eastward to the Beshtrian sea. Well it was they marked us not as we lay under the isles of Ellien in the dusk of evening. For touching later at Norvasp in Pixyland we learned that there sailed Laxus with the whole[paragraph continues] 

[p. 82]

Witchland fleet, being minded to work evil deeds among the peaceful cities of the Beshtrian seaboard. And as well met were an antelope with a devouring lion, as I and my seven ships with those ill-doers in such strength on the high seas. But now, behold how wide standeth the door to our wishes. Laxus and that great armament are safe harrying eastward-ho. I make question whether at this moment more than nine score or ten score fighting men be left in Carce. I have here of mine own nigh on five hundred. Never was fairer chance to take Witchland with his claws beneath the table, and royally may we scratch his face ere he get them forth again." And Gaslark laughed for joy of battle, and cried, "O Juss, smiles it not to thee, this rede of mine?"

"Gaslark," said Lord Juss, "nobly and with that open hand and heart that I have loved in thee from of old hast thou made this offer. Yet not so is Witchland to be overcome, but after long days of labour only, and laying of schemes and building of ships and gathering of hosts answerable to the strength we bare of late against the Ghouls when we destroyed them."

Nor for all his urging might Gaslark move him any whit.

But Spitfire sat by his brother and spake. privately to him: "Kinsman, what ails thee? Is all high heart and swiftness to action crushed out of Demonland, and doth but the unserviceable juiceless skin remain to us? Thou art clean unlike that thou hast ever been, and could Witchland behold us now well might he judge that base fear had ta'en hold upon us, seeing that with the odds of strength so fortunately of our side we shrink from striking at him."

Juss said in Spitfire's ear, "This it is, that I do misdoubt me of the steadfastness of the Goblins. Too like to fire among dead leaves is the sudden flame of their valour, a poor thing to rely on if once they be checked. So do I count it folly trusting in them for our main

[p. 83]

strength to go up against Carce. Also it is but a wild fancy that Goldry hath been transported into Carce."

But Spitfire leaped up a-cursing, and cried out, "O Gaslark, thou wert best fare home to Goblinland. But we will sail openly to Carce and crave audience of the great King, entreating him suffer us to kiss his toe, and acknowledging him to be our King and us his ill-conditioned, disobedient children. So may be haply restore unto us our brother, when he hath chastised us, and haply of his mercy send us home to Demonland, there to fawn upon Corsus or vile Corinius, or whomsoever he shall set up in Galing for his Viceroy. For with Goldry hath all manliness departed out of Demonland, and we be milksops that remain, and objects of scorn and spitting."

Now while Spitfire spake thus in wrath and sorrow of heart, the Lord Brandoch Daha fared fore and aft on the gangway about and about, as a caged panther fareth when feeding time is long overdue. And at whiles he clapped hand to the hilt of his long and glittering sword and rattled it in the scabbard. At length, standing over against Gaslark, and eyeing him with a mocking glance, "O Gaslark," he said, "this that hath befallen breedeth in me a cruel perturbation which carries my spirits outwards, stirring up a tempest in my mind and preparing my body to melancholy, and madness itself. The cure of this is only fighting. Wherefore if thou love me, Gaslark, out with thy sword and ward thyself. Fight I must, or this passion will kill me quite out. 'Tis pity to draw upon my friend, but sith we be banned from fighting with our enemies, what choice remaineth?"

Gaslark laughed and seized him playfully by the arms, saying, "I will not fight with thee, how prettily soe'er thou ask it, Brandoch Daha, that savedst Goblinland from the Witches"; but straight grew grave again and said to Juss, "O Juss, be ruled. Thou seest what temper thy friends are in. All we be as hounds tugging against the

[p. 84]

leash to be loosed against Carce in this happy hour, that likely cometh not again."

Now when Lord Juss perceived them all against him, and hot-mouthed for that attempt, be smiled scornfully and said, "O my brother and my friends, what echoes and quailpipes are you become who seem to catch wisdom by imitating her voice? But ye be mad like March hares, every man of you, and myself too. Break ice in one place, 'twill crack in more. And truly I care not greatly for my life now that Goldry is gone from me. Cast we lots, then, which of us three shall fare home to Demonland with this our ship, that is but a lame duck since this sending. And he on whom the lot shall fall must fare home to concert the raising of a mighty fleet and armament to carry on our war against the Witches."

So spake Lord Juss, and all they who had but a short hour ago felt themselves in such point that there was in them no hope of convalescence nor of life, had now their spirits raised in a seeming drunkenness, and thought only on the gladness of battle.

The lords of Demonland marked each his lot and cast it in the helm of Gaslark, and Gaslark shook the helm, and there leapt forth the lot of the Lord Spitfire. Right wrathful was he. So the lords of Demonland did off their armour and their costly apparel that was black with soot, and let cleanse it. Sixty of their fighting men that were unscathed by the sending went aboard one of Gaslark's ships, and the crew of that ship manned the ship of Demonland, and Spitfire took the steering paddle, and the Demons that were hurt lay in the hold of the hollow ship. They brought forth a spare sail and hoisted it in place of that that was destroyed; so in sore discontent, yet with a cheerful countenance, the Lord Spitfire set sail for the west. And Gaslark the king sat by the steering paddle of his fair dragon of war, and by him the Lord Juss and the Lord Brandoch Daha, who was like a war-horse impatient for battle. Her prow swung north and so round eastaway, and her sail broidered with

[p. 85]

flower-de-luces smote the mast and filled to the west wind, and those other six fared after her in line ahead with white sails unfurled, striding majestic over the full broad billows.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

 

VI

 

The Claws of Witchland

OF KING GASLARK'S LEADING IN THE ATTEMPT ON CARCE IN THE DARK, AND HOW HE PROSPERED THEREIN, AND OF THE GREAT STAND OF LORD JUSS AND LORD BRANDOCH DAHA.

ON the evening of the third day, whenas they drew near to within sight of the Witchland coast, they brailed up their sails and waited for the night, that so they might make the landfall after dark; for little to their mind it was that the King should have news of their farings. This was their plan, to beach their ships on the lonely shore some two leagues north of Tenemos, whence it was but two hours' march across the fen to Carce. So when the sun set and all the ways were darkened they muffled their oars and rowed silently to the low shore that showed strangely near in the darkness, yet ever seemed to flee and keep its distance as they rowed toward it. Coming at length ashore, they drew their ships up on the beach. Some fifty men of the Goblins they left to guard the ships, while the rest took their weapons. And when they were marshalled they marched inland over the sand-dunes and so on to the open fen; and seeing that the

[p. 87]

most of them by far were of Goblinland, it was agreed between those three, Juss, Brandoch Daha, and Gaslark, that Gaslark should have command of this emprise. So fared they silently across the marshes, that were firm enough for marching so it were done circumspectly, rounding the worst moss-hags and the small lochs that were scattered here and there. For the weather had been fine for a season, and little new water stood on the marsh. But as they drew near to Carce the weather worsened and fine rain began to fall. And albeit there was little comfort marching through the drizzling murk of night towards that fortress of evil name, yet was Lord Juss glad at the rain, since it favoured surprise, and on surprise hung all their hopes.

About the middle night they halted within four hundred paces of the outer walls of Carce, that loomed ghostly through the watery curtain, silent as it had been a tomb where Witchland lay in death, rather than the mailed shell wherein so great a power sat waiting. The sight of that vast bulk couched shadowy in the rain lighted the fire of battle in the breast of Gaslark, nor would aught please him save that they should go forthwith up to the walls with all their force, and so march round them seeking where they might break suddenly in and seize the place. Nor would he listen to the counsel of Lord Juss, who would send forth detachments to select a spot for assault and bring back word before the whole force advanced. "Be sure," said Gaslark, "that they within are all foxed and cupshotten the third night with swilling of wine, in honour of such triumph as he hath gotten by his sending, and but a sorry watch is kept on such night. For who, say they, shall come up against Carce now that the power of Demonland is stricken in pieces? The scorned Goblins, ha? A motion for laughter and derision. But thine advance guard might give them warning or ever our. main force could seize the occasion. Nay, but as the Ghouls in an evil day coming suddenly upon me in Zaje Zaculo gat my palace taken ere we were well ware of their coming, so must we take this

[p. 88]

hold of Carce. And if thou fearest a sally, right hotly do I desire it. For if they open the gate we are enough to force an entry in despite of any numbers they are like to have within."

Now Juss thought ill of this counsel, yet, for a strange languor that still hung about his wits, he would not gainsay Gaslark. So crept they in stealth near to the great walls of Carce. Softly ever fell the rain, and breathless stood the cypresses within the outer ward, and blank and dumb and untenanted frowned the black marble walls of that sleeping castle. And dour midnight waited over all.

Now Gaslark issued command, bidding them march warily round the walls northward, for no way was betwixt the lofty walls and the river on the south and east, but to the north-east was he hopeful to find a likely place to win into the hold. In such order went they that Gaslark with an hundred of his ablest men led the van, and after him came the Demons. The main strength of the Goblins followed after, with Teshmar for their captain. Warily they marched, and now were they on the rising ground that ran back north and west from the bluff of Carce to the fen. Full eager were they of Goblinland and flown with the intoxication of impending battle, and they of the vanguard fared apace, outstripping the Demons, so that Juss was fain to hasten after them lest they should lose touch and fall to confusion. But Teshmar's men feared greatly to be left behind, nor might he hold them back, but they must run betwixt the Demons and the walls, meaning to join with Gaslark. Juss swore under his breath, saying, "See the unruly rabble of Goblinland. And they will yet be our undoing."

In such case stood they, nor were Teshmar's folk more than twenty paces from the walls, when, sudden as night-lightning, flares were kindled along the walls, dazzling the Goblins and the Demons and brightly lighting them for those that manned the walls, who fell a-shooting at them with spears and arrows and a-slinging of stones. In the same moment opened a postern gate, whence sallied forth the Lord Corinius with an hundred and

[p. 89]

fifty stout lads of Witchland, shouting, "He that would sup of the crab of Witchland must deal with the nippers ere he essay the shell"; and charging Gaslark's army in the flank he cut them clean in two. As one wood fared forth Corinius, smiting on either hand with a two-edged axe with heft lapped with bronze; and greatly though the folk of Gaslark outnumbered him, yet were they so taken at unawares and confounded by the sudden onslaught of Corinius that they might not abide him but everywhere gave ground before his onslaught. And many were wounded and some were slain; and with these Teshmar of Goblinland, the master of Gaslark's ship. For smiting at Corinius and missing of his aim he louted forward with the blow, and Corinius hewed at him with his axe and the blow came on Teshmar's neck and so hewed off his head. Now Gaslark with the best of his fighting men was Come some way past the postern, but whenas they fell to fighting he turned back straightway to meet Corinius, calling loudly on his men to rally against the Witches and drive them back within the walls. So when Gaslark was gotten through the press to within reach of Corinius, he thrust at Corinius with a spear, wounding him in the arm. But Corinius smote the spear-shaft asunder with his axe, and leapt upon Gaslark, giving him a great wound on the shoulder. And Gaslark took to his sword, and many blows they bandied that made either stagger, till Corinius struck Gaslark on the helm a great down-stroke of his axe, as one driveth a pile with a wooden mallet. And because of the good helm he wore, given by Lord Juss in days gone by as a gift of love and friendship, was Gaslark saved and his head not cloven asunder; for on that helm Corinius's axe might not bite. Yet with that great stroke were Gaslark's senses driven forth of him for a season, so that he fell senseless to the earth. And with his fall came dismay upon them of Goblinland.

All this befell in the first brunt of the battle, nor were the lords of Demonland yet fully joined in the

[p. 90]

mellay, for the great press of Gaslark's men were between them and the Witches; but now Juss and Brandoch Daha went forth mightily with their following, and took up Gaslark that lay like one dead, and Juss bade a company of the Goblins bear him to the ships, and there was he bestowed safe and sound. But the Witches shouted loudly that King Gaslark was slain; and at this chosen time Corund, that was come privily forth of a hidden door on the western side of Carce with fifty men, took the Goblins mightily in the rear. So they, still falling back before Corinius and Corund, and their hearts sick at the supposed slaying of Gaslark, waxed full of doubt and dejection; for in the watery darkness they might nowise perceive by how much they outwent in numbers the men of Witchland. And panic took them, so that they broke and fled before the Witches, that came after them resolute, as a stoat holdeth by a rabbit, and slew them by scores and by fifties as they fled from Carce. Scarce three score men of that brave company of Goblinland that went up with Gaslark against Carce won away into the marshes and came to their ships, escaping pitiless destruction.

But Corund and Corinius and their main force turned without more ado against the Demons, and bitter was the battle that befell betwixt them, and great the clatter of their blows. And now were the odds clean changed about with the putting of the Goblins out of the battle, since but few of Witchland were fallen, and they were as four to one against the Demons, hemming them in and having at them from every side. And some shot at them from the wall, until a chance shot came that was like to have stove in Corund's helm, who straightway sent word that when the rout was ended he would make lark-pies of the cow-headed doddipole whosoever he might be that had set them thus a-shooting, spoiling sport for their comrades and endangering their lives. Therewith ceased the shooting from the wall.

[p. 91]

And now grim and woundsome grew the battle, for the Demons mightily withstood the onset of the Witches, and the Lord Brandoch Daha rushed with an onslaught ever and anon upon Corund or upon Corinius, nor might either of these great captains bear up long against him, but every time gave back before Lord Brandoch Daha; and bitterly cursed they one another as each in turn was fain to save himself amid the press of their fighting men. Nor could one hope in one night's space to behold such deeds of derring-do as were done that night by Lord Brandoch Daha, that played his sword lightly as one handleth a willow wand; yet death sat on the point thereof. In such wise that eleven stout sworders of Witchland were slain by him, and fifteen besides were sorely wounded. And at the last, Corinius, stung by Corund's taunts as by a gadfly, and well nigh bursting for grief and shame at his ill speeding, leapt upon Lord Brandoch Daha as one reft of his wits, aiming at him a great two-handed blow that was apt enough to cleave him to the brisket. But Brandoch Daha slipped from the blow lightly as a kingfisher flying above an alder-shadowed stream avoideth a branch in his flight, and ran Corinius through the right wrist with his sword. And straight was Corinius put out of the fight. Nor had they greater satisfaction that went against Lord Juss, who mowed at them with great swashing blows, beheading some and hewing some asunder in the midst, till they were fain to keep clear of his reaping. So fought the Demons in the glare and watery mist, greatly against great odds, until all were smitten to earth save those two lords alone, Juss and Brandoch Daha.

Now stood King Gorice on the outer battlements of Carce, all armed in his black armour inlaid with gold; and he beheld those twain how they fought back to back, and how the Witches beset them on every side Yet nowise might prevail against them. And the King said unto Gro that was by him on the wall, "Mine

[p. 92]

eyes dazzle in the mist and torchlight. What be these that maintain so bloody an advantage upon my kemperie-men?"

Gro answered him, "Surely, O King, these be none other than Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha of Krothering."

The King said, "So by degrees cometh my sending home to me. For by my art I have intelligence, albeit not certainly, that Goldry was taken by my sending; so have I my desire on him I hold most in hate. And these, saved by their enchantments from like ruin, have been driven mad to rush into the open mouth of my vengeance." And when he had gazed awhile, the King sneered and said unto Gro, "A sweet sight, to behold an hundred of my ablest men flinch and duck before these twain. Till now methought there was a sword in Witchland, and methought Corinius and Corund not simple braggarts without power or heart, as here appeareth, since like boys well birched they do cringe from the shining swords of Juss and the vile upstart from Krothering."

But Corinius, who stood no longer in the battle but by the King, full of spleen and his wrist all bloody, cried out, "You do us wrong, O King. Juster it were to praise my great deed in ambushing this mighty company of our enemies and putting them all to the slaughter. And if I prevailed not against this Brandoch Daha your majesty needs not to marvel, since a greater than I, Gorice X. of memory ever glorious, was lightly conquered by him. Wherin methinks I am the luckier, to have but a gored wrist and not my death. As for these twain, they be stick-frees, on whom no point or edge may bite. And nought were more to be looked for, since we deal with such a sorcerer as this Juss."

"Rather," said the King, "are ye all grown milksops. But I have no further stomach for this interlude, but straight will end it."

Therewith the King called to him the old Duke Corsus, bidding him take nets and catch the Demons therein. And Corsus, faring forth with nets, by sheer weight of numbers

[p. 93]

and with the death of near a score of the Witches at length gat this performed, and Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha well tangled in the nets, and lapped about as silkworms in their cocoons, and so drawn into Carce. Soundly were they bumped along the ground, and glad enow were the Witches to have gotten those great fighters scotched at last. For utterly spent were Corund and his men, and fain to drop for very weariness.

So when they were gotten into Carce, the King let search with torches and bring in them of Witchland that lay hurt before the walls; and any Demons or Goblins that were happed upon in like case he let slay with the sword. And the Lord Juss and the Lord Brandoch Daha, still lapped tightly in their nets, he let fling into a corner of the inner court of the palace like two bales of damaged goods, and set a guard upon them until morning.

As the lords of Witchland were upon going to bed they beheld westward by the sea a red glow, and tongues of fire burning in the night. Corinius said unto Lord Gro, "Lo where thy Goblins burn their ships, lest we pursue them as they flee shamefully homeward in the ship they keep from the burning. One ship sufficeth, for most of them be dead."

And Corinius betook him sleepily to bed, pausing on the way to kick at the Lord Brandoch Daha, that lay safely swathed in his net powerless as then to do him harm.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

 

VII

 

Guests of the King in Carce

OF THE TWO BANQUET HALLS THAT WERE IN CARCE, THE OLD AND THE NEW, AND OF THE ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY KING GORICE XII. IN THE ONE HALL TO LORD JUSS AND LORD BRANDOCH DAHA AND IN THE OTHER TO THE PRINCE LA FIREEZ; AND OF THEIR LEAVE-TAKING WHEN THE BANQUET WAS DONE.

THE morrow of that battle dawned fair on Carce. Folk lay long abed after their toil, and until the sun was high nought stirred before the walls. But toward noon came forth a band sent by King Gorice to bring in the spoil; and they took up the bodies of the slain and laid them in howe on the right bank of the river Druima half a mile below Carce, Witches, Demons, and Goblins in one grave together, and raised up a great howe over them.

Now was the sun's heat strong, but the shadow of the great keep rested still on the terrace without the western wall of the palace. Cool and redolent of ease and soft repose was that terrace, paved with flagstones of red jasper, with spleenwort, assafoetida, livid toadstools, dragons' teeth, and bitter moon-seed growing in the joints.

[p. 95]

On the outer edge of the terrace were bushes of arbor vitae planted in a row, squat and round like sleeping dormice, with clumps of choke-pard aconite in the interspaces. Many hundred feet in length was the terrace from north to south, and at either end a flight of black marble steps led down to the level of the inner ward and its embattled wall.

Benches of green jasper massily built and laden with velvet cushions of many colours stood against the palace wall facing to the west, and on the bench nearest the Iron Tower a lady sat at ease, eating cream wafers and a quince tart served by her waiting-women in dishes of pale gold for her morning meal. Tall was that lady and slender, and beauty dwelt in her as the sunshine dwells in the red floor and gray-green trunks of a beech wood in early spring. Her tawny hair was gathered in deep folds upon her head and made fast by great silver pins, their heads set with anachite diamonds. Her gown was of cloth of silver with a knotted cord-work of black silk embroidery everywhere decked with little moonstones, and over it she wore a mantle of figured satin the colour of the wood-pigeon's wing, tinselled and overcast with silver threads. White-skinned she was, and graceful as an antelope. Her eyes were green, with yellow fiery gleams. Daintily she ate the tart and wafers, sipping at whiles from a cup of amber, artificially carved, white wine cool from the cellars below Carce; and a maiden sitting at her feet played on a seven-stringed lute, singing very sweetly this song:

	 
		Aske me no more where Jove bestowes,
		 When June is past, the fading rose;
		 For in your beautie's orient deepe,
		 These flowers, as in their causes, sleepe.
		
		Aske me no more whether doth stray
		 The golden atomes of the day;
		 For in pure love heaven did prepare
		 Those powders to inrich your haire.
		
		 [p. 96]

	 
		Aske me no more whether doth hast
		 The nightingale when May is past;
		 For in your sweet dividing throat
		 She winters and keepes warme her note.
		
		Aske me no more where those starres light,
		 That downewards fall in dead of night;
		 For in your eyes they sit, and there
		 Fixed become as in their sphere.
		
		Aske me no more if east or west
		 The Phenix builds her spicy nest;
		 For unto you at last Shi flies,
		 And in your fragrant bosome dyes.
		
		 "No more," said the lady; "thy voice is cracked this morning. Is none abroad yet thou canst find to tell me of last night's doings? Or are all gone my lord's gate, that I left sleeping still as though all the poppies of all earth's gardens breathed drowsiness about his head?"

"One cometh, madam," said the damosel.

The lady said, "The Lord Gro. He may resolve me. Though were he in the stour last night, that were a wonder indeed."

Therewith came Gro along the terrace from the north, clad in a mantle of dun-coloured velvet with a collar of raised work of gold upon silver purl; and his long black curly beard was perfumed with orange-flower water and angelica. When they had greeted one another and the lady had bidden her women stand apart, she said, "My lord, I thirst for tidings. Recount to me all that befell since sundown. For I slept soundly till the streaks of morning showed through my chamber windows, and then I awoke from a flying dream of sennets sounding to the onset, and torches in the night, and war's alarums. And there were torches indeed in my chamber lighting my lord to bed, that answered me no word but straightway fell asleep as in utter weariness. Some slight scratches he hath, but else unhurt. I would not wake him, for balm is in slumber;

[p. 97]

also is he ill to do with if one wake him so. But the tattle and wild surmise of the servants bloweth as ever to all points of wonder: as that a great armament of Demonland is disembarked at Tenemos, and all routed last night by my lord and by Corinius, and Goldry Bluszco slain in single combat with the King. Or that Juss hath set a charm on Laxus and all our fleet, making them sail like parricides against this land, Juss and the other Demons leading them; and all slain save Laxus and Goldry Bluszco, but these brought bound into Carce, stark mad and frothing at the lips, and Corinius dead of his wounds after slaying of Brandoch Daha. Or, foolishly," and her green eyes lightened dangerously, "that it was my brother risen in revolt to wrest Pixyland from the overlordship of Gorice, and joined with Gaslark to that end, and their army overthrown and both ta'en prisoner."

Gro laughed and said, "Surely, O my Lady Prezmyra, truth masketh in many a strange disguise when she rideth rumour's broomstick through kings' palaces. But somewhat of herself hath she shown thee, if thou conclude that an event was brought to birth betwixt dark and sunrise to stagger the world, and that the power of Witchland bloomed forth this night into unbeholden glory."

"Thou speakest big, my lord," said the lady. "Were the Demons in it?"

"Ay, madam," he said.

"And triumphed on? and slain?"

"All slain save Juss and Brandoch Daha, and they taken," said Gro.

"Was this my lord's doing?" she asked.

"Greatly, as I think," said Gro; "though Corinius claimeth for himself, as commonly, the main honour of it."

Prezmyra said, "He claimeth overmuch." And she said, "There were none in it save Demons?"

Gro, knowing her thought, smiled and made answer, "Madam, there were Witches."

"My Lord Gro," she cried, "thou dost ill to mock me. Thou art my friend. Thou knowest the Prince my brother

[p. 98]

proud and sudden to anger. Thou knowest it chafeth him to have Witchland over him. Thou knowest the time is many days overpast when he should bring his yearly tribute to the King."

Gro's great ox-eyes were soft as he looked upon the Lady Prezmyra, saying, "Most assuredly am I thy friend, madam. Belike, if truth were told, thou and thy lord are all the true friends I have in waterish Witchland: you two, and the King: but who sleepeth safe in the favour of kings? Ah, madam, none of Pixyland stood in the battle yesternight. Therefore let thy soul be at ease. But my task it was, standing on the battlements beside the King, to smile and smile while Corinius and our fighting men made a bloody havoc of four or five hundred of mine own kinsfolk."

Prezmyra caught her breath and was silent a moment. Then, "Gaslark?"

"The main force was his, it appeareth," answered Lord Gro. "Corinius braggeth himself his banesman, and certain it is he felled him to earth. But I am secretly advertised he was not among the dead taken up this morning."

"My lord," she said, "my desire for news drinks deep while thou art fasting. Some, bring meat and wine for my Lord Gro." And two damosels ran and returned with sparkling golden wine in a beaker, and a dish of lampreys with hippocras sauce. So Gro sat him down on the jasper bench and, while he ate and drank, rehearsed to the Lady Prezmyra the doings of the night.

When he had ended she said, "How hath the King dealt with those twain, Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha?"

Gro answered, "He hath them clapped up in the old banqueting hall in the Iron Tower." And his brow darkened, and he said, "'Tis pity thy lord lay thus long abed, and so came not to the council, where Corsus and Corinius, backed by thy step-sons and the sons of Corsus, egged on the King to use shamefully these lords of Demonland. True is that distich which admonisheth us--

[p. 99]

	 
		Know when to speak, for many times it brings
		 Danger to give the best advice to Kings;
		
		 and little for my health, and little gain withal, had it been had I then openly withstood them. Corinius is ever watchful to fling Goblin in my teeth. But Corund weigheth in their councils as his hand weigheth in battle."

Now as Gro spake came the Lord Corund on the terrace, calling for still wine to cool his throat withal. Prezmyra poured forth to him: "Thou art blamed to me for keeping thy bed, my lord, that shouldst have been devising with the King touching our enemies ta'en captive in this night gone by."

Corund sat by his lady on the bench and drank. "If that be all, madam," said be, "then have I little to charge my conscience withal. For nought lies readier than strike off their heads, and so bring all to a fit and happy ending."

"Far otherwise," said Gro, "hath the King determined. He let drag before him Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha, and with many fleers and jibes, 'Welcome,' he saith, 'to Carce. Your table shall not lack store of delicates while ye are my guests; albeit ye come unbidden.' Therewith he let drag them to the old banquet hall. And he bade his smiths drive great iron staples into the wall, whereon he let hang up the Demons by their wrists, spread-eagled against the wall, making both wrists and ankles fast to the staples with gyves of iron. And the King let dight the table before their feet as for a banquet, that the sight and the savour might torment them. And he called all us to his council thither that we might praise his conceit and mock them anew."

Said Prezmyra, "A great king should rather be a dog that killeth clean, than a cat that patteth and sporteth with his prey."

"True it is," said Corund, "that they were safer slain." He rose from his seat. "'Twere not amiss," he said, "that I had word with the King."

"Wherefore so?" asked Prezmyra.

"He that sleepeth late," said Corund, eyeing her humorously,[paragraph continues] 

[p. 100]

"sometimes hath news for her that riseth betimes to sit on the western terrace. And this was I come to tell thee, that I but now behold eastward from our chamber window, riding toward Carce out of Pixyland down the Way of Kings--"

"La Fireez?" she said.

"Mine eyes be strong enow and clear enow," said Corund, "but thou'dst scarce require me swear to mine own brother at three miles' distance. And as for thine, I leave thee the swearing."

"Who should ride down the Way of Kings from Pixyland," cried Prezmyra, "but La Fireez?"

"That, madam, let Echo answer thee," said Corund. "And it sticketh in my mind, that the Prince my brother-in-law is one that tieth to his heartstrings the remembrance of past benefits. This too, that none did him ever a greater benefit than Juss, that saved his life six winters back in Impland the More. Wherefore, if La Fireez be to share our revels this night, needful it is that the King command these gabblers to keep silence touching our entertainment of these lords in the old banquet hall, and in general touching the share of Demonland in this fighting."

Prezmyra said, "Come, I'll go with thee."

They found the King on the topmost battlements above the water-gate with his lords about him, gazing eastaway toward the long low hills beyond which lay Pixyland. But when Corund began to open his mind to the King, the King said, "Thou growest old, O Corund, and like a good-for-nothing chapman bringest not thy wares to market ere the market be done. I have already ta'en order for this, and straitly charged my people that nought befell last night save a faring of the Goblins against Carce, and their overthrow, and my chasing of them with a great slaughter into the sea. Whoso by speech or sign shall reveal to La Fireez that the Demons were in it, or that these enemies of mine are thus entertained by me to their discomfort in the old banquet hall, he shall lose nothing but his life."

[p. 101]

Corund said, "It is well, O King."

The King said, "Captain general, what is our strength?" Corinius answered, "Seventy and three were slain, and the others for the most part hurt: I among them, that am thus one-handed for the while. I will not engage to find you, O King, fifty sound men in Carce."

"My Lord Corund," said the King, "thine eyes pierced ever a league beyond the best among us, young or old. How many makest thou yon company?"

Corund leaned on the parapet and shaded his eyes with his hand that was broad as a smoked haddock and covered on the back with yellow hairs growing somewhat sparsely, as the hairs on the skin of a young elephant. "He rideth with three score horse, O King. One or two more I give you for good luck, but if a have a horseman fewer than sixty, never love me more."

The King muttered an imprecation. "It is the curse of chance bringeth him thus pat when I have my powers abroad and am left with too little strength to awe him if he prove irksome. One of thy sons, O Corund, shall take horse and ride south to Zorn and Permio and muster a few score fighting men from the herdsmen and farmers with what speed he may. It is commanded."

 

Now was the afternoon wearing to evening when the Prince La Fireez was come in with all his company, and greetings done, and the tribute safe bestowed, and sleeping room appointed for him and his. And now ere all gathered together in the great banquet hall that was built by Gorice XI., when he was first made King, in the southeast corner of the palace; and it far exceeded in greatness and magnificence the old hall where Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha were held in duress. Seven equal walls it had, of dark green jasper, specked with bloody spots. In the midst of one wall was the lofty doorway, and in the walls right and left of this and in those that inclosed the angle opposite the door were great windows placed high, giving light to the banquet hall. In each of the seven angles of the wall a caryatide, cut in the likeness of a

[p. 102]

three-headed giant from ponderous blocks of black serpentine, bowed beneath the mass of a monstrous crab hewn out of the same stone. The mighty claws of those seven crabs spreading upwards bare up the dome of the roof, that was smooth and covered all over with paintings of battles and hunting scenes and wrastling bouts in dark and smoky colours answerable to the gloomy grandeur of that chamber. On the walls beneath the windows gleamed weapons of war and of the chase, and on the two blind walls were nailed up all orderly the skulls and dead bones of those champions which had wrastled aforetime with King Gorice XI. or ever he appointed in an evil hour to wrastle with Goldry Bluszco. Across the innermost angle facing the door was a long table and a carven bench behind it, and from the two ends of that table, set square with it, two other tables yet longer and benches by them on the sides next the wall stretched to within a short space of the door. Midmost of the table to the right of the door was a high seat of old cypress wood, great and fair, with cushions of black velvet broidered with gold, and facing it at the opposite table another high seat, smaller, and the cushions of it sewn with silver. In the space betwixt the tables five iron braziers, massive and footed with claws like an eagle's, stood in a row, and behind the benches on either side were nine great stands for flamboys to light the hall by night, and seven behind the cross bench, set at equal distances and even with the walls. The floor was paved with steatite, white and creamy, with veins of rich brown and black and purples and splashes of scarlet. The tables resting on great trestles were massy slabs of a dusky polished stone, powdered with sparks of gold as small as atoms.

The women sat on the cross-bench, and midmost of them the Lady Prezmyra, who outwent the rest in beauty and queenliness as Venus the lesser planets of the night. Zenambria, wife to Duke Corsus, sat on her left, and on her right Sriva, daughter to Corsus, strangely fair for such a father. On the upper bench, to the right of the door, the lords of Witchland sat above and below the[paragraph continues] 

[p. 103]

King's high seat, clad in holiday attire, and they of Pixyland had place over against them on the lower bench. The high seat on the lower bench was set apart for La Fireez. Great plates and dishes of gold and silver and painted porcelain were set in order on the tables, laden with delicacies. Harps and bagpipes struck up a barbaric music, and the guests rose to their feet, as the shining doors swung open and Gorice the King followed by the prince his guest entered that hall.

Like a black eagle surveying earth from some high mountain the King passed by in his majesty. His byrny was of black chain mail, its collar, sleeves, and skirt edged with plates of dull gold set with hyacinths and black opals. His hose were black, cross-gartered with bands of sealskin trimmed with diamonds. On his left thumb was his great signet ring fashioned in gold in the semblance of the worm Ouroboros that eateth his own tail: the bezel of the ring the head of the worm, made of a peach-coloured ruby of the bigness of a sparrow's egg. His cloak was woven of the skins of black cobras stitched together with gold wire, its lining of black silk sprinkled with dust of gold. The iron crown of Witchland weighed on. his brow, the claws of the crab erect like horns; and the sheen of its jewels was many-coloured like the rays of Sirius on a clear night of frost and wind at Yule-tide.

The Prince La Fireez went in a mantle of black sendaline sprinkled everywhere with spangles of gold, and the tunic beneath it of rich figured silk dyed deep purple of the Pasque flower. From the golden circlet on his head two wings sprung aloft exquisitely fashioned in plates of beaten copper veneered with jewels and enamels and plated with precious metals to the semblance-of the wings of the oleander hawk-moth. He was something below the common height, but stout and strong and sturdily knit, with red crisp curly hair, broad-faced and ruddy, clean-shaved, with high wide-nostrilled nose and bushy red heavy eyebrows, whence his eyes, most like his lady sister's, sea-green and fiery, shot glances like a lion's.

When the King was come into his high seat, with[paragraph continues] 

[p. 104]

Corund and Corinius on his left and right in honour of their great deeds of arms, and La Fireez facing him in the high seat on the lower bench, the thralls made haste to set forth dishes of pickled grigs and oysters in the shell, and whilks, snails, and cockles fried in olive oil and swimming in red and white hippocras. And the feasters delayed not to fall to on these dainties, while the cupbearer bore round a mighty bowl of beaten gold filled with sparkling wine the hue of the yellow sapphire, and furnished with six golden ladles resting their handles in six half-moon shaped nicks in the rim of that great bowl. Each guest when the bowl was brought to him must brim his goblet with the ladle, and drink unto the glory of Witchland and the rulers thereof.

Somewhat greenly looked Corinius on the Prince, and whispering Heming, Corund's son, in the ear, who sat next him, he said, "True it is that La Fireez is the showiest of men in all that belongeth to gear and costly array. Mark with what ridiculous excess he affecteth Demonland in the great store of jewels he flaunteth, and with what an apish insolence he sitteth at the board. Yet this lobcock liveth only by our sufferance, and I see a hath not forgot to bring with him to Witchland the price of our hand withheld from twisting of his neck."

Now were borne round dishes of carp, pilchards, and lobsters, and thereafter store enow of meats: a fat kid roasted whole and garnished with peas on a spacious silver charger, kid pasties, plates of neats' tongues and sweetbreads, sucking rabbits in jellies, hedgehogs baked in their skins, hogs' haslets, carbonadoes, chitterlings, and dormouse pies. These and other luscious meats were borne round continually by thralls who moved silent on bare feet; and merry waxed the talk as the edge of hunger became blunted a little, and the cockles of men's hearts were warmed with wine.

"What news in Witchland?" asked La Fireez.

'I have heard nought newer," said the King, "than the slaying of Gaslark." And the King recounted the battle in the night, setting forth as in a frank and open

[p. 105]

honesty every particular of numbers, times, and comings and goings; save that none might have guessed from his tale that any of Demonland had part or interest in that battle.

La Fireez said, "Strange it is that he should so attack you. An enemy might smell some cause behind it."

"Our greatness," said Corinius, looking haughtily at him, "is a lamp whereat other moths than he have been burnt. I count it no strange matter at all."

Prezmyra said, "Strange indeed, were it any but Gaslark. But sure with him no wild sudden fancy were too light but it should chariot him like thistle-down to storm heaven itself."

"A bubble of the air, madam: all fine colours without and empty wind within. I have known other such," said Corinius, still resting his gaze with studied insolence on the Prince.

Prezmyra's eye danced. "O my Lord Corinius," said she, "change first thine own fashion, I pray thee, ere thou convince gay attire of inward folly, lest beholding thee we misdoubt thy precept--or thy wisdom."

Corinius drank his cup to the drains and laughed. Somewhat reddened was his insolent handsome face about the cheeks and shaven jowl, for surely was none in that hall more richly apparelled than he. His ample chest was cased in a jerkin of untanned buckskin plated with silver scales, and he wore a collar of gold that was rough lined with smaragds and a long cloak of sky-blue silk brocade lined with cloth of silver. On his left wrist was a mighty ring of gold, and on his head a wreath of black bryony and sleeping nightshade. Gro whispered Corund in the ear, "He bibbeth it down apace, and the hour is yet early. This presageth trouble, since ever with him indiscretion treadeth hard on the heels of surliness as he waxeth drunken."

Corund grunted assent, saying aloud, "To all peaks of fame might Gaslark have climbed, but for this same rashness. Nought more pitiful hath been heard to tell of than his great sending into Impland, ten

[p. 106]

years ago, when, on a sudden conceit that a should lay all Impland under him and become the greatest king in all the world, he hired Zeldornius and Helteranius and Jalcanaius Fostus--"

"The three most notable captains found on earth," said La Fireez.

"Nothing is more true," said Corund. "These he hired, and brought 'em ships and soldiers and horses and such a clutter of engines of war as hath not been seen these hundred years, and sent 'em-whither? To the rich and pleasant lands of Beshtria? No. To Demonland? Not a whit. To this Witchland, where with a twentieth part the power a hath now risked all and suffered death and doom? No! but to yonder hell-besmitten wilderness of Upper Impland, treeless, waterless, not a soul to pay him tribute: had he laid it under him save wandering bands of savage Imps, with more bugs on their bodies than pence in their purses, I warrant you. Or was he minded to be king among the divels of the air, ghosts, and hob-thrushes that be found in that desert?"

"Without controversy there be seventeen several sorts of divels on the Moruna," said Corsus, very loud and sudden, so that all turned to look on him; "fiery divels, divels of the air, terrestrial divels, as you 'may say, and watery divels, and subterranean divels. Without controversy there be seven seen sorts, seventeen several sorts of hob-thrushes, and several sorts of divels, and if the humour took me I could name them all by rote."

Wondrous solemn was the heavy face of Corsus, his eyes, baggy underneath and somewhat bloodshed, his pendulous cheeks, thick blubber upper-lip, and bristly gray moustachios and whiskers. He had eaten, mainly to provoke thirst, pickled olives, capers, salted almonds, anchovies, fumadoes, and pilchards fried with mustard, and now awaited the salt chine of beef to be a pillow and a resting place for new potations.

The Lady Zenambria asked, "Knoweth any for certain

[p. 107]

what fate befell Jalcanaius and Helteranius and Zeldornius and their armies?"

"Heard I not," said Prezmyra, "that they were led by Will-o'-the-Wisps to the regions Hyperborean, and there made kings?"

"Told thee by the madge-howlet, I fear me, sister," said La Fireez. "Whenas I fared through Impland the More, six years ago, there was many a wild tale told me hereof, but nought within credit."

Now was the chine served in amid shallots on a great dish of gold, borne by four serving men, so weighty was the dish and its burden. Some fight there glowed in the dull eye of Corsus to see it come, and Corund rose up with brimming goblet, and the Witches cried, "The song of the chine, O Corund!" Great as a neat stood Corund in his russet velvet kirtle, girt about with a broad belt of crocodile hide edged with gold. From his shoulders hung a cloak of wolf's skin with the hair inside, the outside tanned and diapered with purple silk. Daylight was nigh gone, and through a haze of savours rising from the feast the flamboys shone on his bald head set about with thick grizzled curls, and on his keen gray eyes, and his long and bushy beard. He cried, "Give me a rouse, my lords! and if any fail to bear me out in the refrain, I'll ne'er love him more." And he sang this song of the chine in a voice like the sounding of a gong; and all they roared in the refrain till the piled dishes on the service tables rang:

	 
		Bring out the Old Chyne, the Cold Chyne to me,
		 And how Ile charge him come and see,
		 Brawn tusked, Brawn well sowst and fine,
		 With a precious cup of Muscadine:
		
		
			 
				  How shall I sing, how shall I look,
				 In honour of the Master-Cook?
				
				 The Pig shall turn round and answer me,
		 Canst thou spare me a shoulder? a wy, a wy.[p. 108]
		 The Duck, Goose, and Capon, good fellows all three
		 Shall dance thee an antick, so shall the Turkey:
		 But O! the Cold Chyne, the Cold Chyne for me:
		
		
			 
				  How shall I sing, how shall I look,
				 In honour of the Master-Cook?
				
				 With brewis Ile noynt thee from head to th' heel,
		 Shal make thee run nimbler than the new oyld wheel;
		 With Pye-crust wee'l make thee
		 The eighth wise man to be;
		 But O! the Old Chyne, the Cold Chyne for me:
		
		
			 
				  How shall I sing, how shall I look,
				 In honour of the Master-Cook?
				
				   When the chine was carved and the cups replenished, the King issued command saying, "Call hither my dwarf, and let him act his antick gestures before us."

Therewith came the dwarf into the hall, mopping and mowing, clad in a sleeveless jerkin of striped yellow and red mockado. And his long and nerveless tail dragged on the floor behind him.

"Somewhat fulsome is this dwarf," said La Fireez.

"Speak within door, Prince," said Corinius. "Know'st not his quality? A hath been envoy extraordinary from King Gorice XI. of memory ever glorious unto Lord Juss in Galing and the lords of Demonland. And 'twas the greatest courtesy we could study to do them, to send 'em this looby for our ambassador."

The dwarf practised before them to the great content of the lords of Witchland and their guests, save for his japing upon Corinius and the Prince, calling them two peacocks, so like in their bright plumage that none might tell either from other; which somewhat galled them both.

And now was the King's heart waxen glad with wine, and he pledged Gro, saying, "Be merry, Gro, and doubt not that I will fulfil my word I spake unto thee, and make thee king in Zaje Zaculo."

"Lord, I am yours for ever," answered Gro. "But

[p. 109]

methinks I am little fitted to be a king. Methinks I was ever a better steward of other men's fortunes than of mine own."

Whereat the Duke Corsus, that was sprawled on the table well nigh asleep, cried out in a great voice but husky withal, "A brace of divels broil me if thou sayest not sooth! If thine own fortunes come off but bluely, care not a rush. Give me some wine, a full weeping goblet. Ha! Ha! whip it away! Ha! Ha! Witchland! When wear you the crown of Demonland, O King?"

"How now, Corsus," said the King, "art thou drunk?"

But La Fireez said, "Ye sware peace with the Demons in the Foliot Isles, and by mighty oaths are ye bound to put by for ever your claims of lordship over Demonland. I hoped your quarrels were ended."

"Why so they are," said the King.

Corsus chuckled weakly. "Ye say well: very well, O King, very well, La Fireez. Our quarrels are ended. No room for more. For, look you, Demonland is a ripe fruit ready to drop me thus in our mouth." Leaning back he gaped his mouth wide open, suspending by one leg above it an hortolan basted with its own dripping. The bird slipped through his fingers, and fell against his cheek, and so on to his bosom, and so on the floor, and his brazen byrny and the sleeves of his pale green kirtle were splashed with the gravy.

Whereat Corinius let fly a great peal of laughter; I but La Fireez flushed with anger and said, scowling, "Drunkenness, my lord, is a jest for thralls to laugh at."

"Then sit thou mum, Prince," said Corinius, "lest thy quality be called in question. For my part I laugh at my thoughts, and they be very choice."

But Corsus wiped his face and fell a-singing:

	 
		Whene'er I bib the wine down,
		   Asleepe drop all my cares.
		     A fig for fret,
		     A fig for sweat, [p. 110]
		   A fig care I for cares.
		     Sith death must come, though I say nay,
		     Why grieve my life's days with all affaires?
		
		Come, bib we then the wine down
		   Of Bacchus faire to see;
		   For alway while we bibbing be,
		   Asleepe drop all our cares.
		
		 With that, Corsus sank heavily forward again on the table. And the dwarf, whose japes all else in that company had taken well seven when themselves were the mark thereof, leaped up and down, crying, "Hear a wonder! This pudding singeth. When with two platters, thralls! ye have served it o' the board without a dish. One were too little to contain so vast a deal of bullock's blood and lard. Swift, and carve it ere the vapours burst the skin."

"I will carve thee, filth," said Corsus, lurching to his feet; and catching the dwarf by the wrist with one hand he gave him a great box on the ear with the other. The dwarf squealed and bit Corsus's thumb to the bone, so that he loosed his hold; and the dwarf fled from the hall, while the company laughed pleasantly.

"So flieth folly before wisdom which is in wine," said the King. "The night is young: bring me botargoes, and caviare and toast. Drink, Prince. The red Thramnian wine that is thick like honey wooeth the soul to divine philosophy. How vain a thing is ambition. This was Gaslark's bane, whose enterprises of such pitch and moment have ended thus, in a kind of nothing. Or what thinkest thou, Gro, thou which art a philosopher?"

"Alas, poor Gaslark," said Gro. "Had all grown to his mind, and had he 'gainst all expectation gotten us overthrown, even so had he been no nearer to his heart's desire than when he first set forth. For he had of old in Zaje Zaculo eating and drinking and gardens and treasure and musicians and a fair wife, all soft ease and contentment all his days. And at the last, howsoe'er

[p. 111]

we shape our course, cometh the poppy that abideth all of us by the harbour of oblivion hard to cleanse. Dry withered leaves of laurel or of cypress tree, and a little dust. Nought else remaineth."

"With a sad brow I say it," said the King: "I hold him wise that resteth happy, even as the Red Foliot, and tempteth not the Gods by over-mounting ambition to his dejection."

La Fireez had thrown himself back in his high seat with his elbows resting on its lofty arms and his hands dangling idly on either side. With head held high and incredulous smile he harkened to the words of Gorice the King.

Gro said in Corund's ear, "The King hath found strange kindness in the cup."

"I think thou and I be clean out o' fashion," answered Corund, whispering, "that we be not yet drunken; the cause whereof is that thou drinkest within measure, which is good, and me this amethyst at my belt keepeth sober, were I never so surfeit-swelled with wine."

La Fireez said, "You are pleased to jest, O King. For my part, I had as lief have this musk-million on my shoulders as a head so blockish as to want ambition."

"If thou wert not our princely guest," said Corinius, I had called that spoke in the right fashion of a little man. Witchland affecteth not such vaunts, but can afford to speak as our Lord the King in proud humility. Turkey cocks do strut and gobble; not so the eagle, who holdeth the world at his discretion."

"Pity on thee," cried the Prince, "if this cheap victory turn thee so giddy. Goblins!"

Corinius scowled. Corsus chuckled, saying to himself but loud enough for all to hear, "Goblins, quotha? They were small game had they been all. Ay, there it is: had they been all."

The King's brow was like a foul black cloud. The women held their breath. But Corsus, blandly insensible of these gathering thunders, beat time on the table with his cup, drowsily chanting to a most mournful air:

[p. 112]

	 
		When birds in water deepe do lie,
		 And fishes in the air doe flie,
		 When water burns and fire doth freeze,
		 And oysters grow as fruits on trees--
		
		 A resounding hecup brought him to a full close.

The talk had died down, the lords of Witchland. ill at case, studying to wear their faces to the bent of the King's looks. But Prezmyra spake, and the music of her voice came like a refreshing shower. "This song of my Lord Corsus," she said, "made me hopeful for an answer to a question in philosophy; but Bacchus, you see, hath ta'en his soul into Elysium for a season, and I fear me nor truth nor wisdom cometh from his mouth to-night. And this was my question, whether it be true that all animals of the land are in their kind in the sea? My Lord Corinius, or thou, my princely brother, can you resolve me?"

"Why, so it is received, madam," said La Fireez. "And inquiry will show thee many pretty instances: as the sea-frog, the sea-fox, the sea-dog, the sea-horse, the sea-lion, the sea-bear. And I have known the barbarous people of Esamocia eat of a conserve of sea-mice mashed and brayed in a mortar with the flesh of that beast named bos marinus, seasoned with salt and garlic."

"Foh! speak to me somewhat quickly," cried the Lady Sriva, "ere in imagination I taste such nasty meat. Prithee, yonder gold peaches and raisins of the sun as an antidote."

"Lord Gro will instruct thee better than I," said La Fireez. "For my part, albeit I think nobly of philosophy, yet have I little leisure to study it. Oft have I hunted the badger, yet never answered that question of the doctors whether he hath the legs of one side shorter than of the other. Neither know I, for all the lampreys I have eat, how many eyes the lamprey hath, whether it be nine or two."

Prezmyra smiled: "O my brother, thou art too too

[p. 113]

smoored, I fear me, in the dust of action and the field to be at accord with these nice searchings. But be there birds under the sea, my Lord Gro?"

Gro made answer, "In rivers, certainly, though it be but birds of the air sojourning for a season. As I myself have found them in Outer Impland, asleep in winter time at the bottom of lakes and rivers, two together, mouth to mouth, wing to wing. But in the spring they revive again, and by and by are the woods full of their singing. And for the sea, there be true sea cuckows, sea-thrushes, and sea-sparrows, and many more."

"It is passing strange," said Zenambria.

Corsus sang:

	 
		When sorcerers do leave their charme,
		 When spiders do the fly no harme.
		
		 Prezmyra turned to Corund saying, "Was there not a merry dispute betwixt you, my lord, concerning the toad and the spider, thou maintaining that they do poisonously destroy one another, and my Lord Gro that he would show thee to the contrary?"

"'Twas even so, lady," said Corund, "and it is yet in controversy."

Corsus sang:

	 
		And when the blackbird leaves to sing,
		 And likewise serpents for to sting,
		 Then you may saye, and justly too,
		 The old world now is turned anew:
		
		 and so sank back into bloated silence.

"My Lord the King," cried Prezmyra, "I beseech you give order for the ending of this difference between two of your council, ere it wax to dangerous heat. Let them be given a toad, O King, and spiders without delay, that they may make experiment before this goodly company."

[p. 114]

Therewith all fell a-laughing, and the King commanded a thrall, who shortly brought fat spiders to the number of seven and a crystal wine-cup, and inclosed with them beneath the cup a toad, and set all before the King. And all beheld them eagerly.

"I will wager two firkins of pale Permian wine to a bunch of radishes," said Corund, "that victory shall be given unto the spiders. Behold how without resistance they do sit upon his head and pass all over his body."

Gro said, "Done."

"Thou wilt lose the wager, Corund," said the King. "This toad taketh no hurt from the spiders, but sitteth quiet out of policy, tempting them to security, that upon advantage he may swallow them down."

While they watched, fruits were borne in: queen-apples, almonds, pomegranates and pistick nuts; and fresh bowls and jars of wine, and among them a crystal flagon of the peach-coloured wine of Krothering vintaged many summers ago in the vineyards that stretch southward toward the sea from below the castle of Lord Brandoch Daha.

Corinius drank deep, and cried, "'Tis a royal drink, this wine of Krothering! Folk say it will be good cheap this summer."

Whereat La Fireez shot a glance at him, and the King marking it said in Corinius's ear, "Wilt thou be prudent? Let not thy pride flatter thee to think aught shall avail thee, any more than my vilest thrall, if by thy doing this Prince smell out my secrets."

By then was the hour waxing late, and the women took their leave, lighted to the doors in great state by thralls with flamboys. In a while, when they were gone, "A plague of all spiders!" cried Corund. "Thy toad hath swallowed one already."

"Two more!" said Gro. "Thy theoric crumbleth apace, O Corund. He hath two at a gulp, and but four remain."

The Lord Corinius, whose countenance was now aflame with furious drinking, held high his cup and

[p. 115]

catching the Prince's eye, "Mark well, La Fireez," he cried, "a sign and a prophecy. First one; next two at a mouthful; and early after that, as I think, the four that remain. Art not afeared lest thou be found a spider when the brunt shall come?"

"Hast drunk thyself horn-mad, Corinius?" said the King under his breath, his voice shaken with anger.

"He is as witty a marmalade-eater as ever I conversed with," said La Fireez, "but I cannot tell what the dickens he means."

"That," answered Corinius, "which should make thy smirking face turn serious. I mean our ancient enemies, the haskardly mongrels of Demonland. First gulp, Goldry, taken heaven knows whither by the King's sending in a deadly scud of wind--"

"The devil damn thee!" cried the King, "what drunken brabble is this?"

But the Prince La Fireez waxed red as blood, saying, "This it is then that lieth behind this hudder mudder, and ye go to war with Demonland? Think not to have my help therein."

"We shall not sleep the worse for that," said Corinius. "Our mouth is big enough for such a morsel of marchpane as thou, if thou turn irksome."

"Thy mouth is big enough to blab the secretest intelligence, as we now most laughably approve," said La Fireez. "Were I the King, I would draw lobster's whiskers on thy skin, for a tipsy and a prattling popinjay."

"An insult!" cried the Lord Corinius, leaping up. I would not take an insult from the Gods in heaven. Reach me a sword, boy! I will make Beshtrian cut-works in his guts."

"Peace, on your lives!" said the King in a great voice, while Corund went to Corinius and Gro to the Prince to quiet them. "Corinius is wounded in the wrist and cannot fight, and belike his brain is fevered by the wound."

"Heal him, then, of this carving the Goblins gave

[p. 116]

him, and I will carve him like a capon," said the Prince.

"Goblins!" said Corinius fiercely. "Know, vile fellow, the best swordsman in the world gave me this wound. Had it been thou that stood before me, I had cut thee into steaks, that art caponed already."

But the King stood up in his majesty, saying, "Silence, on your lives!" And the King's eyes glittered with wrath, and he said, "For thee, Corinius, not thy hot youth and rebellious blood nor yet the wine thou hast swilled into that greedy belly of thine shall mitigate the rigour of my displeasure. Thy punishment I reserve unto to-morrow. And thou, La Fireez, look thou bear thyself more humbly in my halls. Over pert was the message brought me by thine herald at thy coming hither this morning, and too much it smacked of a greeting from an equal to an equal, calling thy tribute a gift, though it, and thou, and all thy principality are mine by right to deal with as seems me good. Yet did I bear with thee: unwisely, as I think, since thy pertness nourished by my forbearance springeth up yet ranker at my table, and thou insultest and brawlest in my halls. Be advised, lest my wrath forge thunderbolts against thee."

The Prince La Fireez answered and said, "Keep frowns and threats for thine offending thralls, O King, since me they affright not, and I laugh them to scorn. Nor am I careful to answer thine injurious words; since well thou knowest my old friendship unto thine house, O King, and unto Witchland, and by what bands of marriage I am bound in love to the Lord Corund, to whom I gave my lady sister. If it suit not my stomach to proclaim like a servile minister thy suzerainty, yet needest thou not to carp at this, since thy tribute is paid thee, ay, and in over-measure. But unto Demonland am I bound, as all the world knoweth, and sooner shalt thou prevail upon the lamps of heaven to come down and fight for thee against the Demons than upon me. And unto Corinius that so boasteth I say that Demonland

[p. 117]

hath ever been too hard for you Witches. Goldry Bluszco and Brandoch Daha have shown you this. This is my counsel unto thee, O King, to make peace with Demonland: my reasons, first that thou hast no just cause of quarrel with them, next (and this should sway thee more) that if thou persist in fighting against them it will be the ruin of thee and of all Witchland."

The King bit his fingers with signs of wonderful anger, and for a minute's time no sound was in that hall. Only Corund spake privately to the King saying, "Lord, O for all sakes swallow your royal rage. You may whip him when my son Hacmon returneth, but till then he outnumbers us, and your own party so overwhelmed with wine that, trust me, I would not adventure the price of a turnip on our chances if it come to fighting."

Troubled at heart was Corund, for well he knew how dear beyond account his lady wife held the keeping of the peace betwixt La Fireez and the Witches.

In this moment Corsus, somewhat roused in an evil hour out of lethargy by the loud talk and movement, began to sing:

	 
		When all the prisons hereabout
		 Have justled all their prisoners out,
		 Because indeed they have no cause
		 To keepe 'em in by common laws.
		
		 Whereat Corinius, in whom wine and quarrelling and the King's rebukes had lighted a fire of reckless and outrageous malice before which all counsels of prudence or policy were dissipated like wax in a furnace, shouted loudly, "Wilt see our prisoners, Prince, i' the old banquet hall, to prove thyself an ass?"

"What prisoners?" cried the Prince, springing to his feet. "Hell's furies! I am weary of these dark equivocations and will know the truth."

[p. 118]

"Why wilt thou rage so beastly?" said the King. "The man is drunk. No more wild words."

"Thou canst not daff me so. I will know the truth," said La Fireez.

"So thou shalt," said Corinius. "This it is: that we Witches be better men than thou and thy hen-hearted Pixies, and better men than the accursed Demons. No need to hide it further. Two of that brood we have laid by the heels, and nailed 'em up on the wall of the old banquet hall, as farmers nail up weasels and polecats on a barn door. And there shall they bide till they be dead: Juss and Brandoch Daha."

"O most villanous lie!" said the King. "I'll have thee hewn in pieces."

But Corinius said, "I nurse your honour, O King. We must no longer skulk before these Pixies."

"Thou diest for it," said the King, "and it is a lie."

Now was dead silence for a space. At last the Prince sat down slowly. His face was white and drawn, and he spake unto the King, slowly and in a quiet voice: "O King, that I was somewhat hot with you, forgive me. And if I have omitted any form of allegiance due to you, think rather that in my blood it is to chafe at such ceremonies than that I had any lack of friendship unto you or ever dreamed of questioning your over-lordship. Aught that you shall require of me and that lieth with mine honour, aught of ceremony or fealty, will I with joy perform. And, save against Demonland, is my sword ready against your enemies. But here, O King, tottereth a tower ready to fall athwart our friendship and pash it in pieces. It is known to you, O King, and to all the lords of Witchland, that my bones were whitening these six years in Impland the More if Lord Juss had not saved me from the barbarous Imps that followed Fax Fay Faz, who besieged me four months with my small following shut up in Lida Nanguna. My friendship shall you have, O King, if you yield me up my friends."

But the King said, "I have not thy friends."

[p. 119]

"Show me then the old banquet hall," said the Prince. The King said, "I will show it thee anon."

"I will see it now," said the Prince, and he rose from his seat.

"I will dissemble with thee no longer," said the King. "I do love thee well. But when thou askest me to yield up to thee Juss and Brandoch Daha, thou askest a thing all Pixyland and thy dear heart's blood were unable to purchase from me. These be my worst enemies. Thou knowest not at what cost of toil and danger I have at last laid hand on them. And now let not thy hopes make thee an unbeliever, when I swear to thee that Juss and Brandoch Daha shall rot and die in prison."

And for all his gentle speeches, and offers of wealth and rich advantage and upholding in peace and war, might not La Fireez shake the King. And the King said, "Forbear, La Fireez, or thou wilt vex me. They must rot."

So when the Prince La Fireez saw that he might not move the King by soft words, he took up his fair crystal goblet, egg-shaped with three claws of gold to stand withal welded to a collar of gold about its middle bossed with topazes, and hurled it at Gorice the King, so that the goblet smote him on the forehead, and the crystal was brast asunder with the force of the blow, and the King's forehead laid open, and the King strook senseless.

Therewith was huge uproar in the banquet hall; nor would Corund that any should have speedier hand therein than he, but catching up his two-edged sword and crying, "Look to the King, Gro! Here's distressful revels!" he leaped upon the table. And his sons likewise and Gallandus and the other Witches seized their weapons, and in like manner did La Fireez and his men; and there was battle in the great hall in Carce. Corinius, whose left hand only might as now wield weapon, even so sprang forth in most gallant wise, calling upon the Prince with many vile

[p. 120]

words to abide his onset. But the fumes of unbridled potations, that being flown to his brain had made him frantic mad, wrought in his legs more foggily, dulling their wonted nimbleness. And his foot sliding in a puddle of spilt wine he fell backward a grievous fall, striking his head against the polished table. And Corsus that was now well nigh speechless and quite stupefied with drink, so that a baby might tell as well as he what meant this hubbub, reeled cup in hand, shouting, "Drunkenness is better for the body than physic! Drink always, and you shall never die!" So shouting he was smitten square in the mouth by a breast of veal flung at him by Elaron of Pixyland, the captain of the Prince's bodyguard, and so fell like a hog athwart Corinius, and there lay without sense or motion. Then were the tables overset, and wounds given and taken, and swiftly ran the tide of vantage against the Witches. For albeit the Pixies were none such great soldiers as they of Witchland, yet this served them mightily that they were well nigh sober and their foes as so many casks filled with wine, staggering and raving for the most part from their long tippling and quaffing. Nor did Corund's amethyst avail him throughly, but the wine clogged his veins so that he waxed scant of breath and his strokes lighter and slower than they were wont.

Now for the love he bare his sister Prezmyra and for his old kindness sake for Witchland, the Prince charged his men to fight only for the overpowering of the Witches, slaying none if so it might be, and on their lives to look to it that the Lord Corund took no hurt. And when they had fairly gotten the mastery, La Fireez made certain of his folk take jars of wine and therewith souse Corund and his men most lustily in the face, while others held them at weapon's point, until by the power of the wine both within and without they were well brought under. And they barricaded the great doorway of the hall with the benches and table tops and heavy oaken trestles, and La Fireez

[p. 121]

charged Elaron hold the door with the most of his following, and set guards without each window that none might come forth from the hall.

But the Prince himself took flamboys and went six in company to the old banquet hall, overpowered the guard, brake open the doors, and so stood before Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha that hung shackled to the wall side by side. Something dazzled they were in the sudden torch-light, but Lord Brandoch Daha spake and hailed the Prince, and his mocking haughty lazy accents were scarcely touched with hollowness, for all his hunger-starving and long watching and the cark and care of his affliction. "La Fireez!" he said. "Day ne'er broke up till now. And methought ye were yonder false fitchews fostered in filth and fen, the spawn of Witchland, returned again to fleer and flout at us."

La Fireez told them how things had gone, and he said, "Occasion gallopeth apace. Upon this bargain do I loose you, that ye come incontinently with me out of Carce, and seek no revenge to-night upon the Witches."

Juss said yea to this; and Brandoch Daha laughed, saying, "Prince, I so love thee, I could refuse thee nothing, were it shave half my beard and go in fustian till harvest-time, sleep in my clothes, and discourse pious nothings seven hours a day with my lady's lap-dog. This night we be utterly thine. An instant only bear with us: this fare shows too good to rest untasted after so much looking on. It were discourteous too to leave it so." Therewith, their chains being now stricken off, he eat a great slice of turkey and three quails boned and served in jelly, and Juss a dozen plovers' eggs and a cold partridge. Lord Brandoch Daha said, "I prithee break the egg-shells, Juss, when the meat is out, lest some sorcerer should prick or write thy name thereon, and so mischief thy person." And pouring out a stoup of wine, he quaffed it off, and filling it again, "Perdition catch me if it be

[p. 122]

not mine own wine of Krothering! Saw any a carefuller host than King Gorice?" And he pledged Lord fuss in the second cup, saying, "I will drink with thee next in Carce when the King of Witchland and all the lords thereof are slain."

Thereafter they took their weapons that lay by on the table, set there to distress their souls and with little expectation they should so take them up again; and glad at heart albeit somewhat stiff of limb they went forth with La Fireez from that banquet hall.

When they were come into the court-yard fuss spake and said, "Herein might honour hold us back even hadst thou made no bargain with us, La Fireez. For great shame it were to us and we fell upon the lords of Witchland when they were drunk and unable to meet us in equal battle. But let us ere we be gone from Carce ransack this hold for my kinsman Goldry Bluszco, since for his sake only and in hope to find him here we fared on this journey."

"So you touch no other thing but only Goldry if ye shall find him, I am content," said the Prince.

So when they had found keys they ransacked all Carce, even to the dread chamber where the King had conjured and the vaults and cellars below the river. But it availed not.

And as they stood in the court-yard in the torchlight there came forth on a balcony the Lady Prezmyra in her nightgown, disturbed by this ransacking. Ethereal as a cloud she seemed, pavilioned in the balmy night, as a cloud touched by the exhalations of the unrisen moon. "What transformation is this?" said she. "Demons loose in the court?"

"Content thee, dear heart," said the Prince. "Thy man is safe, and all else beside as I think; save that the King hath a broken head, the which I lament, and will without question soon be healed. They lie all in the banquet hall to-night, being too sleepy-sodden with the feast to take their chambers."

[p. 123]

Prezmyra cried, "My fears are fallen upon me. Art thou broken with Witchland?"

"That may I not forejudge," he answered. "Tell them to-morrow that nought I did in hatred, and nought but what I was by circumstance enforced to. For I am not such a coward nor so great a villain as leave my friends caged up while strength is left me to work for their setting free."

"You must straightway forth from Carce," said Prezmyra, "and that o' the instant. My step-son Hacmon, which was sent to gather strength to awe thee if need were, rideth by now from the south with a great company. Thy horses are fresh, and ye may well outdistance the King's men if they ride after you. If thou wilt not yet raise up a river of blood betwixt us, begone."

"Why fare thee well, then, sister. And doubt it not, these rifts 'tween me and Witchland shall soon be patched up and forgot." So spake the Prince with a merry voice, yet grieved at heart. For well he weened the King should never pardon him that blow, nor his robbing him of his prey.

But she said, sadly, "Farewell, my brother. And my heart tells me I shall never see thee more. When thou took'st these from prison, thou didst dig up two mandrakes shall bring sorrow and death to thee and to me and to all Witchland."

The Prince was silent, but Lord fuss bowed to Prezmyra saying, "Madam, these things be on the knees of Fate. But imagine not that while life and breath be in us we shall leave to uphold the Prince thy brother. His foes be our foes for this night sake."

"Thou swearest it?" she said.

He answered, "Madam, I swear it unto thee and unto him."

The Lady Prezmyra withdrew sadly to her chamber. And in short space she heard their horse-hooves on the bridge, and looking forth beheld where they galloped on the Way of Kings dim in the coppery

[p. 124]

light of a waning moon rising over Pixyland. So sate she by the window of Corund's lofty bed-chamber gazing through the night, long after her brother and the lords of Demonland and her brother's men were ridden beyond her seeing, long after their last hoof-beat had ceased to echo on the road. In a while fresh horse-hooves sounded from the south, and a noise as of many riding in company; and she knew it was young Hacmon back from Permio.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

 

VIII

 

The First Expedition to Impland

OF THE HOME-COMING OF THE DEMONS, AND HOW LORD JUSS WAS TAUGHT IN A DREAM WHITHER HE MUST SEEK FOR TIDINGS OF HIS DEAR BROTHER. AND HOW THEY TOOK COUNSEL AT KROTHERING, AND DETERMINED OF THEIR EXPEDITION TO IMPLAND.

Midsummer night, ambrosial, starry-kirtled, walked on the sea, as the ship that brought the Demons home drew nigh to her journey's end. The cloaks of Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha, who slept on the poop, were wet with dew. Smoothly they had passage through that charmed night, where winds were hushed asleep and nought was heard save the waves talking beneath the bows of the ship, the lilting changeless song of the steersman, and the creak, dip, and swash of oars keeping time to his singing. Vega burned like a sapphire near the zenith, and Arcturus low in the north-west, beaconing over Demonland. In the remote south-east Fomalhaut rose from the sea, a lonely splendour in the dim region of Capricorn and the Fishes.

[p. 126]

So rowed they till day broke, and a light wind sprang up fresh and keen. Juss waked, and stood up to scan the gray glassy surface of the sea spread to vast distances where sky and water faded into one. Astern, great clouds bridged the gates of day, boiling upwards into crags of wine-dark vapour and burning plumes of sunrise. In the stainless spaces of the sky above these sailed the horned moon, frail and wan as a white foam-flower blown from the waves. Westward, facing the thunder-smoke of dawn, the fine far ridge of Kartadza was like cut crystal against the sky: the first island sentinel of many-mountained Demonland, his topmost cliffs dawn-illumined with pale gold and amethyst while yet the lesser heights lay obscure, lapped in the folds of night. And with the opening day the mists swathing the mountain's skirts were lifted up in billowy masses that grew and shrank and grew again, made restless by the wayward winds which morning waked in the hollow mountain side, and torn by them into wisps and streamers. Some were blown upward, steaming up the great gullies in the rocks below the peak, while now and then a puff of cloud swam free for a minute, floated a minute's space as ready to sail skyward, then indolently stooped again to the mountain wall to veil it in an unsubstantial fleece of golden vapour. And now all the western seaboard of Demonland lay clear to view, stretching fifty miles and more from Northhouse Skerries past the Drakeholms and the low downs of Kestawick and Byland, beyond which tower the mountains of the Scarf, past the jagged sky-line of the Thornbacks and the far Neverdale peaks overhanging the wooded shores of Onwardlithe and Lower Tivarandardale, to the extreme southern headland, filmy-pale in the distance, where the great range of Rimon Armon plunges its last wild bastion in the sea.

As a lover gazing on his mistress, so gazed Lord Juss on Demonland rising from the sea. No word spake he till they carne off Lookinghaven-ness and could see where beyond the beaked promontory the

[p. 127]

sound opened between Kartadza and the mainland. Albeit the outer sea was calm, the air in the sound was thick with spray from the churning of the waters among the reefs and swallowing shoals. For the tide ran like a mill-race through that sound, and the roaring of it was plain to hear at two miles' distance where they sailed. Juss said, "Mindest thou my shepherding of the Ghoul fleet into yonder jaws? I would not tell thee for shame whenas the fit was on me. But this is the first day since the sending came upon us that I have not wished in my heart that the Races of Kartadza had gulped me down also and given me one ending with the accursed Ghouls."

Lord Brandoch Daha looked swiftly upon him and was silent.

Now in a short while was the ship come into Lookinghaven and alongside of the marble quay. There amid his folk stood Spitfire, who greeted them, saying, "I made all ready to bring three of you home in triumph from your ship, but Volle counselled against it. Glad am I that I took his counsel, and put by those things I had prepared. They had cut me to the heart to see them now."

Juss answered him, "O my brother, this noise of hammers in Lookinghaven, and these ten keels laid on the slips, show me ye have been busied on things nearer our needs than bay-leaves and the instruments of joy since thou camest home."

So they took horse, and while they rode they related to Spitfire all that had befallen since their faring to Carce. In such wise came they north past the harbour, and so over Havershaw Tongue to Beckfoot where they took the upper path that climbs into Evendale close under the screes of Starksty Pike, and so came a little before noon to Galing.

The black rock of Galing stands at the end of the spur that runs down from the south ridge of Little Drakeholm, dividing Brankdale from Evendale. On three sides the cliffs fall sheer from the castle walls to the

[p. 128]

deep woods of oak and birch and rowan tree which carpet the flats of Moongarth Bottom and feather the walls of the gill through which the Brankdale beck plunges in waterfall after waterfall. Only on the northeast may aught save a winged thing come at the castle, across a smooth grass-grown saddle less than a stone's throw in width. Over that saddle runs the paven way leading from the Brankdale road to the Lion Gate, and within the gate is that garden of the grass walk between the yews where Lessingham stood with the martlet nine weeks before, when first he came to Demonland.

When night fell and supper was done, Juss walked alone on the walls of his castle, watching the constellations burn in the moonless sky above the mighty shadows of the mountains, listening to the hooting of the owls in the woods below and the faint distant tinkle of cow-bells, and breathing the fragrance borne up from the garden on the night wind that even in high summer tasted keen of the mountains and the sea. These sights and scents and voices of the holy night so held him in thrall that it wanted but an hour of midnight when he left the battlements, and called the sleepy house-carles to light him to his chamber in the south tower of Galing.

Wondrous fair was the great four-posted bed of the Lord Juss, builded of solid gold, and hung with curtains of dark-blue tapestry whereon were figured sleep-flowers. The canopy above the bed was a mosaic of tiny stones, jet, serpentine, dark hyacinth, black marble, bloodstone, and lapis lazuli, so confounded in a maze of altering hue and lustre that they might mock the palpitating sky of night. And therein was the likeness of the constellation of Orion, held by Juss for guardian of his fortunes, the stars whereof, like those beneath the golden canopy in the presence chamber, were jewels shining of their own light, yet dead wood glimmering in the dark. For Betelgeuze

[p. 129]

was a ruby shining, and a diamond for Rigel, and pale topazes for the other stars. The four posts of the bed were of the thickness of a man's arm in their upper parts, but their lower parts great as his waist and carven in the image of birds and beasts: at the foot of the bed a lion for courage and an owl for wisdom, and at the head an alaunt for faithfulness of heart and a kingfisher for happiness. On the cornice of the bed and on the panels above the pillow against the wall were carved Juss's deeds of derring-do; and the latest carving was of the sea-fight with the Ghouls. To the right of the bed stood a table with old books of songs and books of the stars and of herbs and beasts and travellers' tales, and there was Juss wont to lay his sword beside him while he slept. All the walls were panelled with dark sweet-smelling wood, and armour and weapons hung thereon. Mighty chests and almeries hasped and bound with gold stood against the wall, wherein he kept his rich apparel. Windows opened to the west and south, and on each window-ledge stood a bowl of palest jade filled with white roses; and the air entering the bed-chamber was laden with their scent.

About cock-crow came a dream unto Lord Juss, standing by his head and touching his eyes so that he seemed to wake and look about the chamber. And he seemed to behold an evil beast all burning as a drake, busy in his chamber, with many heads, the most venomous that ever he the days of his life had seen, and about it its five fawns, like to itself but smaller. It seemed to Juss that in place of his sword there lay a great spear of fair workmanship on the table by his bed; and it seemed to him in his dream that this spear had been his all his life, and was his greatest treasure, and that with it he might accomplish all things and without it scarcely aught to his mind. He laboured to reach out his hand to the spear, but some power withheld him so that for all his striving he might not stir. But that beast took up

[p. 130]

the spear in its jaws, and went with it forth from the chamber. It seemed to Juss that the power that held him departed with the departing of the beast, so that he leaped up and snatched down weapons from the wall and made an onslaught on the fawns of that fell beast that were tearing down the woven hangings and marring with their fiery breath the figure of the kingfisher at the head of his bed. All the chamber was full of the reek of burning, and he thought his friends were with him in the chamber, Volle and Vizz and Zigg and Spitfire and Brandoch Daha, fighting with the beasts, and the beasts prevailed against them. Then it seemed to him that the bedpost carven in the likeness of an owl spake to him in his dream in human speech; and the owl said, "O fool, that shalt justly be put in great misery without end, except thou bring back the spear. Hast thou forgot that this only is thy greatest treasure and most worthiest thy care?"

Therewith came back that grim and grisful beast into the chamber, and Juss assailed it, crying to the owl, "Uncivil owl, where then must I find my spear that this beast hath hidden?"

And it seemed to him that the owl made answer, "Inquire in Koshtra Belorn."

So tumultuous was Lord Juss's dream that he was flung at waking out of bed on to the deerskin carpets of the floor, and his right hand clutched the hilt of his great sword where it lay on the table by his bed, whereas in his dream he had beheld the spear. Mightily moved was, he; and forthwith clothed himself, and faring through the dim corridors came to Spitfire's chamber, and sat on the bed and waked him. And Juss told him his dream, and said, "I hold myself clean of all blame hereabout, for from that day forth this only hath been my care, how to find my dear brother and fetch him home, and only then to wreak myself on the Witches. And what was this spear in my dream if not Goldry? This vision of the

[p. 131]

night kindleth for us a beacon fire we needs must seek to. It bade me inquire in Koshtra Belorn, and till that be done never will I rest nor so much as think on aught besides."

Spitfire answered and said, "Thou beest our oldest brother, and I shall follow and obey thee in all that thou wilt do or shalt ordain hereof."

Then fared Juss to the guest-chamber, where Lord Brandoch Daha lay a-sleeping, and waked him and told him all. Brandoch Daha snuggled him tinder the bedclothes and said, "Let me be and let me sleep yet two hours. Then will I rise and bathe and array myself and eat my morning meal, and thereafter will I take rede with thee and tell thee somewhat for thine advantage. I have not slept in a goose-feather bed and sheets of lawn these many weeks. If thou plague me now, by God, I will incontinently take horse over the Stile to Krothering, and let thee and thine affairs go to the devil."

So Juss laughed and left him in peace. And later when they had eaten they walked in a plashed alley, where the air was cool and the purple shadow on the path was dappled with bright flecks of sunshine. Lord Brandoch Daha said, "Thou knowest that Koshtra Belorn is a great mountain, beside which our mountains of Demonland would seem but little hills unremarked, and that it standeth in the uttermost parts of earth beyond the wastes of Upper Impland, and thou mightest search a year through all the peopled countries of the world and not find one living soul who had so much as beheld it from afar."

"This much I know," said Lord Juss.

"Is thine heart utterly bent on this journey?" said Brandoch Daha. "Or is it not preposterous, and a thing to comfort our enemies, that we should thus at the bidding of a dream fly to far and perilous lands, rather than pay Witchland presently for the shame he hath done us?"

Juss answered him, "My bed is hallowed by spells

[p. 132]

of such a virtue that no naughty dream flown through the ivory gate nor no noisome wizardry hath power to trouble his sleep who sleepeth there. This dream is true. For Witchland there is time enow. If thou wilt not go with me to Koshtra Belorn, I must go without thee."

"Enough," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "Thou knowest for thee I tie my purse with a spider's thread. Then fare we must to Impland, and herein may I help thee. For listen while I tell thee a thing. Whenas I slew Gorice X. in Goblinland, Gaslark gave me along with other good gifts, a great curiosity: a treatise or book copied out on parchment by Bhorreon his secretary, wherein it speaketh of all the ways to Impland and what countries and kingdoms lie next to the Moruna and the fronts thereof, and the marvels that he found in those lands. And all that is writ in this book was set down faithfully by Bhorreon after the telling of Gro, the same which now hath part with the Witchlanders. Great honour had Gro as then from Gaslark for his far journeyings and for that which is written in this book of wonders; and this it was that had first put in Gaslark's mind to send that expedition into Impland, which so reduced him and came so wretchedly to nought. If then thou wilt seek to Koshtra Belorn, come home with me to-day and I will show thee my book."

So spake Lord Brandoch Daha, and Lord Juss straightway ordered forth the horses, and sent messengers to Volle under Kartadza and to Vizz at Darklairstead bidding them meet him at Krothering with what speed they might. It was four hours before noon when Juss, Spitfire, and Brandoch Daha rode down from Galing and through the woods of Moongarth Bottom at the foot of the lake, taking the main bridle road up Breakingdale, that runs by the western margin of Moonmere under the buttresses of the Scarf. They rode slowly, for the sun was strong on their backs. Glassy was the lake and like a turquoise,

[p. 133]

and the birch-clad slopes to the east and north and the bare rugged ridges of Stathfell and Budrafell beyond were mirrored in its depths. On the left as they rode, the spurs of the Scarf impended from on high in piled bastions of black porphyry like giants' castles; and little valleys choked with monstrous boulders, among which the silver birches crowding showed like tiny garden plants, ran steeply back between the spurs. Up those valleys appeared successively the main summits of the Scarf, savage and remote, frowning downward as it were between their own knees: Glaumry Pike, Micklescarf, and Illstack. By noon they had climbed to the extreme head of Breakingdale, and halted on the Stile, a little beyond the watershed, under the sheer northern wall of Ill Drennock. Before them the pass plunged steeply into Amadardale. The lower reach of Switchwater shone fifteen miles or more to the west, well nigh hidden in the heat-haze. Nearer at hand in the northwest lay Rammerick Mere, bosomed among the smooth-backed Kelialand hills and the easternmost Uplands of Shalgreth Heath, with the sea beyond; and on the valley floor, near the watersmeet where Transdale runs into Amadardale, it was possible to descry the roofs of Zigg's house at Many Bushes.

When they came down thither, Zigg was out a-hunting. So they left word with his lady wife and drank a stirrup cup and rode on, up Switchwater Way, and for twelve miles and more along the southern shore of Switchwater. So dropped they into Gashterndale, and thence rounding the western slopes of Erngate End came up on the Krothering Side when the shadows were lengthening in the golden summer evening. The Side ran gently west for a league or more to where Thunderfirth lay like beaten gold beneath the sun. Across the Firth the pine-forests of Westmark, old as the world, rose toward Brocksty Edge and Gemsar Edge: a far-flung amphitheatre of bare cliff and scree shutting in the prospect to the north. High on the left towered the precipices of Erngate End; southward and south-eastward

[p. 134]

lay the sea. So rode they down the Side, through deep peaceful meadows fair with white ox-eye daisies, bluebells and yellow goatsbeard and sea campion, deep-blue gentians, agrimony and wild marjoram, and pink clover and bindweed and great yellow buttercups feasting on the sun. And on an eminence beyond which the land fell away more steeply toward the sea, the onyx towers of Krothering standing above woods and gardens showed milk-white against heaven and the clear hyaline.

When they were now but half a mile from the castle Juss said, "Behold and see. The Lady Mevrian hath espied us from afar, and rideth forth to bring thee home."

Brandoch Daha cantered ahead to meet her: a lady light of build and exceeding fair to look upon, brave of carriage like a war-horse, soft of feature, clear-browed, gray-eyed and proud-eyed: sweet-mouthed, but not as one who can speak nought but sweetness. Her robe was of pale buff-coloured silk, with corsage covered as by a spider's web with fine golden threads; and she wore a point-lace ruffle stiffened with gold and silver wire and spangled with little diamonds. Her deep hair, black as the raven's wing, was fastened with pins of gold, and a yellow rose that nestled in its coils was as the moon looking forth among thick clouds of night.

"Doings be afoot, my lady sister," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "One King of Witchland have we done down since we sailed hence; and guested in Carce with another, little to our content. All which things I'll tell thee anon. Now lieth our road south for Impland, and Krothering is but our caravanserai."

She turned her horse, and they rode all in company into the shadow of the ancient cedars that clustered to the north of the home-meads and pleasure gardens, stately, gaunt-limbed, flat-browed, bleak against the sky. On the left a lily-paven lake slept cool beneath mighty elms with a black swan near the bank and her four cygnets dozing in a row, their heads tucked beneath their wings, so that they looked like balls of gray-brown

[p. 135]

froth floating on the water. The path leading to the bridge-gate zig-zagged steeply up the mound between low broad balustrades of white onyx bearing at intervals square onyx pots, planted some with yellow roses and some with wondrous flowers, great and delicate, with frail white shell-like petals. Deep, mysterious centres had those flowers, thick with soft hairs within, and dark within with velvety purple streaked with black and blood colour and dust of gold.

The castle of Lord Brandoch Daha standing at the top of the mound was circled by a ditch both broad and deep. The gate before the drawbridge was of iron gilded and richly wrought. The towers and gatehouse were of white onyx like the castle itself, and on either hand before the gate was a colossal marble hippogriff, standing more than thirty feet high at the withers; and the wings and hooves and talons of the hippogriffs and their manes and forelocks were overlaid with gold, and their eyes carbuncles of purest lustre. Over the gate was written in letters of gold:

	 
		Ye braggers an 'a',
		 Be skeered and awa'
		 Frae Brandoch Daha.
		
		 But to tell even a tenth part of the marvels rich and beautiful that were in the house of Krothering: its cool courts and colonnades rich with gems and fragrant with costly spices and strange blooms: its bed-chambers where, caught like Aphrodite in her golden net, the spirit of sleep seemed ever to shake slumber from its plumes, and none might be waking long in those chambers but sweet sleep overcame their eyelids: the Chamber of the Sun and the Chamber of the Moon, and the great middle hall with its high gallery and ivory stair: to tell of all these were but to cloy imagination with picturing in one while of over-much glory and splendour.

 

Nought befell that night save the coming of Zigg before

[p. 136]

sun-down, and of those brethren Volle and Vizz in the night, having ridden hard in obedience to the word of Juss. In the morning when they had eaten their day-meal the lords of Demonland went down into pleasaunces, and with them the Lady Mevrian. And in an alley that was roofed with beams of cedar resting on marble pillars, the beams and pillars smothered with dark-red roses, they sat looking eastward across a sunk garden. The weather was sweet and gracious, and thick dew lay on the pale terraced lawns that led down among flower beds to the fish-pond in the midst. The water made a cool mirror whereon floated yellow and crimson water-lilies opening to the sky. All the greens and flower-colours glowed warm and clean, but soft withal and shadowy, veiled in the gray haze of the summer morning.

They sat here and there as they listed on chairs and benches, near a huge tank or vase of dark green jade where sulphur-coloured lilies grew in languorous beauty, their back-curled petals showing the scarlet anthers; and all the air was heavy with their sweetness. The great jade vase was round and flat like the body of a tortoise, open at the top where the lilies grew. It was carved with scales, as it. were the body of a dragon, and a dragon's head a-gaping reared itself at one end, and at the other the tail curved up and over like the handle of a basket, and the tail had little fore and hind feet with claws, and a smaller head at the end of the tail gaped downwards biting at the large head. Four legs supported the body, and each leg was a small dragon standing on its hind feet, its head growing into the parent body as the thigh or shoulder joint should join the trunk. In the curve of the creature's neck, his back propped against its head, sat the Lord Brandoch Daha in graceful ease, one foot touching the ground, the other swinging free; and in his hands was the book, bound in dark puce-coloured goatskin and gold, given him by Gaslark in years gone by. Zigg watched him idly turn

[p. 137]

the pages while the others talked. Leaning toward Mevrian he whispered in her ear, "Is not he able and shapen for to subdue and put under him all the world: thy brother? A man of blood and peril, and yet so fair to behold that it is a marvel?"

Her eyes danced. She said, "It is pure truth, my lord."

Now spake Spitfire saying, "Read forth to us, I pray thee, the book of Gro; for my soul is afire to set forth on this faring."

"'Tis writ somewhat crabbedly," said Brandoch Daha, "and most damnably long. I spent half last night a-searching on't, and 'tis most apparent no other way lieth to these mountains save by the Moruna, and across the Moruna is (if Gro say true) but one way, and that from the Gulf of Muelva: 'a xx dayes journeye from northe by south-est.' For here he telleth of watersprings by the way, but he saith in other parts of the desert be no watersprings, save only springs venomous, where 'The water riketh like a sething potte continually, having sumwhat a sulphureous and sumwhat onpleasant savor,' and, 'The grownd nurysheth here no plante nor herbe except yt bee venomous champinions or tode stooles.'"

"If he say true?" said Spitfire. "He is a turncoat and a renegado. Wherefore not therefore a liar?"

"But a philosopher," answered Juss. "I knew him Well of old in Goblinland, and I judge him to be one who is not false save only in policy. Subtle of mind he is, and dearly loveth plotting and scheming, and, as I think, perversely affecteth ever the losing side if he be brought into any quarrel; and this hath dragged him oft-times to misfortune. But in this book of his travels he must needs speak truth, as it seemeth to me, to be true to his own self."

The Lady Mevrian looked approvingly on Lord Juss and her eye twinkled. For well it liked her humour to hear men's natures so divined.

[p. 138]

"O Juss, friend of my heart," said Lord Brandoch Daha, "thy words proceed, as ever they did, from the true fount of wisdom, and I embrace them and thee. This book is a guide which we shall follow not helter-skelter but as old men of war. If then the right road to Morna Moruna lie from the Gulf of Muelva, were we not best sail straight thitherward and lay up our ships in that Gulf where the coast and the country side be without habitation, rather than fare to some nearer haven of Outer Impland such as Arlan Mouth whither thou and Spitfire fared six summers ago?"

"Not Arlan Mouth, o' this journey," said Juss. "Some sport perchance we might obtain there had we leisure for fighting with the accursed inhabitants, but every day's delay we now do make holdeth my brother another day in bondage. The princes and Fazes of the Imps have many strong walled towns and towers in all those coastlands, and hard by in a mediamnis of the river Arlan, in Orpish, is the great castle of Fax Fay Faz, whereto Goldry and I drave him home from Lida Nanguna."

"'Tis an ill coast too, to find a landing," said Brandoch Daha, turning the leaves of the book. "As he saith, 'Ymplande the More beginnith at the west syde of the in mowth of Arlan and occupiethe all the lond unto the hedeland Sibrion, and therefro sowth awaye to the Corshe, by gesse a vij hundered myles, wherby the se is not ther of nature favorable nor no haven is or cumming yn meete for shippes.'"

So after some talk and searching of that book of Gro they determined this should be their plan: to fare to Impland by way of the Straits of Melikaphkhaz and the Didornian Sea, and so lay up their ships in the Gulf of Muelva, and landing there start straightway across the wilderness to Morna Moruna, even as Gro had described the way.

"Ere we leave it," said Brandoch Daha, "hear what he speaketh concerning Koshtra Belorn. This he beheld from Morna Moruna, whereof he saith: 'The contery is

[p. 139]

hylly, sandy, and baren of wood and corne, as forest ful of lynge, mores, and mosses, with stony hillies. Here is a mighty stronge and usid borow for flying serpens in sum baren, hethy, and sandy grownd, and thereby the litle round castel of Morna Moruna stondith on Omprenne Edge, as on the limit of the worlde, sore wether beten and yn ruine. This castelle was brent in tyme of warre, spoyled and razyd by Kynge Goriyse the fourt of Wytchlande in auncient dayes. And they say there was blamelesse folke dwellid therein and ryghte gentle, nor was ther any need for Goriyse to have usid them so cruellie, when hee cawsyd the hole howsholde there to appere before hym and then slawe sum owt of hande, and the residew he throughe all downe the steep cliffe. And but few supervivid after the gret falle, and these fled awaye thorough the untrodden forests of Bavvynaune and withoute question perysht ther yn great sorwe and miserie. Sum fable that it was for thys cruel facte sake that King Goriyse was eat by divels on the Moruna with al hys hoste, one man onely cumming home again to tell of these thynges bifallen.' Now mark: 'From Morna Moruna I behelde sowthawaye two grete mowntaynes standing over Bavvinane as two Queenes in bewty seted in the skye by estimacion xx legues fro hence above meny more ise robed mowntaines supereminente. The wyche as I lernyd was Coschtre Belourne the one and the othere Koshtre Pivrarca. And I veuyed them continuallie unto the going downe of the sun, and that was the fayrest sighte and the most bewtifullest and gallant marvaille that mine eyen hath sene. Therewith talkid I with the smaule thynges that dwell there in the ruines and in the busschis growing round abowte as it ys my wonte, and amongst them one of those byrdes cawld martlettes that have feete so litle that they seime to have none. And thys litle martlette sittynge in a frambousier or raspis busche tolde mee that none may come alive unto Coschtra Beloorn, for the mantycores of the mowntaines will certeynely ete his brains ere he come thither. And were he so fortunate

[p. 140]

as scape these mantycores, yet cowlde bee never climbe up the gret crages of yce and rocke on Koschtre Beloorn, for none is so stronge as to scale them but by art magicall, and such is the vertue of that mowntayne that no magick avayleth there, but onlie strength and wisdome alone, and as I seye these woulde not avayl to climbe those cliffes and yce ryvers.'"

"What be these mantichores of the mountains that eat men's brains?" asked the Lady Mevrian.

"This book is so excellent well writ," said her brother, "that thine answer appeareth on this same page: 'The beeste Mantichora, whych is as muche as to saye devorer of Menne, rennith as I herde tell, on the skirt of the mowntaynes below the snow feldes. These be monstrous bestes, ghastlie and ful of horrour, enemies to mankinde, of a red coloure, with ij rowes of huge grete tethe in their mouthes. It hath the head of a man, his eyen like a ghoot, and the bodie of a lyon lancing owt sharpe prickles fro behinde. And hys tayl is the tail of a scorpioun. And is more delyverer to goo than is fowle to flee. And hys voys is as the roaryng of x lyons.'"

"These beasts," said Spitfire, "were alone enough to draw me thither. I shall bring thee home a small one, madam, to keep chained in the court."

"That should dash me from thy friendship for ever, cousin," said Mevrian, stroking the feathery ears of her little marmoset that cuddled in her lap. "That which feedeth on brains were overnourished in Demonland, and belike would overrun the whole country-side."

"Send it to Witchland," said Zigg. "Where when it hath eat up Gro and Corund it may sup lightly on the King, and then most fortunately starve for lack of its proper nutriment."

Juss stood up from his seat. "Thou and I and Spitfire," said be to Brandoch Daha, "must to work roundly and gather strength, for 'tis already midsummer. You, Vizz, Volle, and Zigg, must have the warding of our homes whiles we be gone. We cannot be less than two thousand swords on this faring."

[p. 141]

"How many ships, Volle," asked Lord Brandoch Daha, "canst thou give us, busked and boun, ere this moon wane?"

"There be fourteen afloat," said Volle. "Besides these, ten keels lie on the slips at Lookinghaven, and nine more hath Spitfire but now laid down on the beach before his house at Owlswick."

"Thirty and three in sum," said Spitfire. "You see we have not twiddled our thumbs whilst ye were gone."

Juss paced back and forth with great strides, his brow clouded and his jaw clenched. In a while he said, "Laxus hath forty sail, dragons of war. I am not so idle-headed as fare without an army into Impland, but certain it is that if our ill-willers would move war against us we stand in apparent weakness, here or abroad, to throw back their onset."

Volle said, "Of these nineteen ships a-building no more than two can take the water before a month be past, and but seven more ere six months' time, push we never so mightily the work."

"The season weareth, and my brother wasteth in duress. We must sail ere another moon grow old," said Juss.

Volle said, "Then with sixteen sail thou sailest, O Juss; and then thou leavest us not one ship at home till more be finished and launched."

"How can we leave you so?" cried Spitfire.

But Brandoch Daha looked towards his lady sister, met her glance, and was satisfied. "The choice lieth fair before us," said he. "If we will eat the egg, little need to debate whether the shell must go."

Mevrian rose from her seat laughing, and said, "Then let the council rise, my lords." And her eyes grew serious, and she said, "Shall they make rhymes upon us that we of Demonland, whom men repute and hold the mightiest lords in all the world, hung sheepishly back from this high needful enterprise lest, our greatest captains being

[p. 142]

abroad, our enemies might haply take us at home a disadvantage? It shall not be said of the women of Demonland that they upheld such counsels."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

 

IX

 

Salapanta Hills

OF THE LANDING OF LORD JUSS AND HIS COMPANIONS IN OUTER IMPLAND AND THEIR MEETING WITH ZELDORNIUS, HELTERANIUS, AND JALCANAIUS FOSTUS; AND OF THE TIDINGS TOLD BY MIVARSH, AND THE DEALINGS OF THE THREE GREAT CAPTAINS ON THE HILLS OF SALAPANTA.

On the thirty and first day after that council held in Krothering, the fleet of Demonland put to sea from Lookinghaven: eleven dragons of war and two great ships of burthen, bound for the uttermost seas of earth in quest of the Lord Goldry Bluszco. Eighteen hundred Demons fared on that expedition, and not a man among them that was not a complete soldier. For five days they rowed southaway on a windless sea, and on the sixth the sea-cliffs of Goblinland came out of the haze on their starboard bow. They rowed south along the land, and on the tenth day out from Lookinghaven passed under the Ness of Ozam, journeying thence four days with a favouring wind over the open seas to Sibrion. But now, when they had rounded that dark promontory and were

[p. 144]

about steering east along the coast of Impland the more, and less than ten days' journey lay between them and their haven in Muelva, a dismal tempest suddenly surprised them. For forty days it swept them in hail and sleet over wide-wallowing ocean, without a star, without a course; till, on a fierce midnight of wind and darkness and roaring waters was Juss's and Spitfire's ship and other four in her company driven on the rocks on a lee shore and broken in pieces. Hardly, and after long battling among great waves, those brethren won ashore, weary and hurt. In the inhospitable light of a wet and windy dawn they mustered on the beach such of their folk as had escaped out of the mouth of destruction; and they were three hundred and thirty and three.

Spitfire, beholding these things, spake and said, "This land hath a villanous look stirreth my remembrance, as but to behold verjuice soureth the mouth of him who once tasted thereof. Rememberest thou this land?"

Juss scanned the low long coast-line that swept north and west to an estuary, and beyond ran westwards till it was lost in the scud and driving spray. Desolate birds flew above the welter of the surges. He said, "Certainly this is Arlan Mouth, where least of all I had choosed to come a-land with so small a head of men. Yet shalt thou prove here, as it hath ever been, how all occasions are but steps for us to climb fame by."

"Our ships lost," cried Spitfire, "and the more part of our men, and worst of all, Brandoch Daha that is worth ten thousand. Easilier shall a little ant bib this ocean dry, than shall we in this taking perform our enterprise." And he cursed and blasphemed, saying, "Cursed be the malice of the sea, which, having broke our power, now speweth us ashore here to our mere undoing; and so hath done great succour to the King of Witchland, and unto all the world beside great damage."

But Juss answered him, "Think not that these contrary winds come of fortune or by the influence of malignant and combustive stars. This weather bloweth out of Carce.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 145]

Even as these very waves thou beholdest have each his back-wash or undertow, so followeth after every sending an undertow of evil hap, whereby, albeit in essence a less deadly thing, many have been drowned and washed away who stood unremoved against the main stroke of the breaker. So were we twice since that day brought near to our bane: first, when our judgement being darkened with a strange distraction we went up with Gaslark against Carce; next, when this storm wrecked us here by Arlan Mouth. Though by mine art I rebated the King's sending, yet against the maleficial undertow that followed it my charms avail not, nor the virtues of all sorcerous herbs that grow."

"Are these things so, and wilt thou yet be temperate?" said Spitfire.

"Content thee," said Juss. "The sands run down. A certain time only runneth this stream for our hurt; it must now have well nigh spent itself, and it were too perilous for him to conjure a second time, as last May he conjured in Carce."

"Who told thee that?" asked Spitfire.

"I do but conjecture it," answered he, "from my studying of certain prophetic writings touching the princes of that blood and line. Whereby it appeareth (yet not clearly, but riddle-wise) that if one and the same King, essaying a second time in his own person an enterprise in that kind, should fail, and the powers of darkness destroy him, then is not his life spilt alone (as it fortuned aforetime unto Gorice VII. at his first attempt), but there shall be an end for ever of the whole house of Gorice which hath for so many generations reigned in Carce."

"Well," said Spitfire, "so stand we to our chance. Old muckhills will bloom at last."

 

Now for nineteen days fared those brethren and their company eastward through Outer Impland: first across a country of winding sleepy rivers and reedy lakes innumerable, then by rolling uplands and champaign ground.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 146]

At length, on an even, they came upon a heath running up eastward to a range of tumbled hills. The hills were not lofty nor steep, but rugged of outline and their surface rough with crags and boulders, so that it was a maze of little eminences and valleys grown upon by heather and fern and rank sad-coloured grass, with stunted thorn trees and junipers harbouring in the clefts of the rocks. On the water-shed, as on an horse's withers, looking west to the red October sunset and south to the far line of the Didornian Sea, they came upon a spy-fortalice, old and desolate, and one sitting in the gate. For very joy their hearts melted within them, when they knew him for none other than Brandoch Daha.

So they embraced him as one beyond hope risen from the grave. And he said, "Through the Straits of Melikaphkhaz was I borne, and wrecked at last on the lonely shore ten leagues southward from this spot, whither I won alone, having lost my ship and all my dear companions. In my mind it was that ye must fare by this road to Muelva if ye suffered shipwreck in the outer coasts of Impland.

"Harken," he said, "and I will tell you a wonder. A seven-night have I awaited you in this roosting-stead of daws and owls. And it is a caravanserai of great armies that pass by in the wilderness, and having parleyed with two I await the third. For well I think that here I have made discovery of a great mystery, one that hath engaged the speculations of wise men for years. For on that day of my coming hither, when sunset was red, as now you see it, behold an army marching up from the east with great flags a-flaunting in the wind and all kinds of music. Which I beholding, methought if these be enemies, then goeth down my life's days with honour, and if friends, then cometh provender from those waggons of burthen that follow this army. A weighty argument; since not so much as the smell of victuals had I, save nasty nuts and berries of the open field, since I came forth of the sea. So went I, taking my weapons, on the walls of

[p. 147]

this spy-fortalice and hailed them, bidding them say forth their quality. And he that was their captain rode up under the walls, and hailed me with all courtesy and noble port. And who think ye 'twas?"

They answered nought.

"One that hath been famous," said be, "up and down the earth for a marvellous valorous and brave soldier of fortune. Have ye forgot that enterprise of Gaslark that had its burying in Impland?"

"Was he little and dark," asked Juss, "like a keen dagger suddenly unsheathed at midnight? Or bright with the splendour of a pennoned spear at a jousting on high holiday? Or was he dangerous of aspect like an old sword, rusty in the midst but bright at point and edge, brought forth for deeds of destiny at the fated day?"

"Thine arrow striketh in the triple ring o' the mark," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "Great of growth he was, and a very peacock of splendour in his panoply of war; and a great pitch-black stallion bare him. So I spake him fair, saying, 'O most magnificent and godlike Helteranius, conqueror in an hundred fights, what makest thou these long years in Outer Impland with this great head of men? And what dark lodestone draws you these nine years, since with great sound of trumpets and tramp of horses thou and Zeldornius and Jalcanaius Fostus went forth to make Impland Gaslark's footstool; since which time all the world believeth you lost and dead?' And he beheld me with alien eyes, and made answer, 'O Brandoch Daha, the world journeyeth to its silly will, but I fare alway with my purpose before me. Be it nine years, or but nine moons, or nine ages, what care I? Zeldornius would I encounter and engage him in battle, that still fleeth before my face. Eat and drink with me to-night; but think not to detain me nor to turn me to idle thoughts beside my purpose. For with the dawning of the day I must forth again in quest of Zeldornius.'

"So I ate and drank and was merry that night with Helteranius in his pavilion of silk and gold. And with the

[p. 148]

dawn he marshalled his army and marched westward toward the plains.

"And on the third day, as I sat without this wall, cursing your slow coming, behold an army marching from the east and one leading them mounted on a small dun horse; and he was clad in black armour shining like the raven's wing, with black eagle's plumes in his helm, and eyes like the eyes of a cat-a-mountain, full of sparkling flame. Little was he, and fierce of face, and lithe, and hard to look on and tireless to look on like a stoat. And I hailed him from where I sat, saying, 'O most notable and puissant Jalcanaius Fostus, shatterer of the hosts of men, whitherward over the lonely heaths forlorn, thou and thy great armament?' And he lighted down from his horse, and took me by the arms with both his hands, and said, 'If a man dream, to speak with dead men betokens profit. And art not thou of the dead, O Brandoch Daha? For in forgotten days, that now spring up in my mind as flowers in a weed-choked garden after many years, so bloomest thou in my memory: great among the great ones of the world that was, thou and thine house in Krothering above the sea-lochs in many-mountained Demonland. But oblivion, like a sounding sea, soundeth betwixt me and those days; and the noise of the surf stoppeth mine ears, and the mist of the sea darkeneth mine eyes that strain for a sight of those far times and the deeds thereof. Yet for those dead days' sake, eat with me and drink with me to-night, since here for a night once more I pitch my moving tent on Salapanta Hills. And to-morrow I fare onward. For never may rest bring balm to my soul until I find out Helteranius and smite his head from his shoulders. Great shame to him but little marvel is it, that he still courseth before me as an hare. For traitors were ever dastards. And who ever heard tell of a more hellish devilish damned traitor than he? Nine years ago, when Zeldornius and I made ready to decide our quarrels by battle, word came to me in a lucky hour how that this Helteranius with cunning colubrine and

[p. 149]

malice viperine and sleights serpentine went about to attack me in the rear. So turned I right about to crush him, but the fat chuff-cat was fled.'

"So spake Jalcanaius Fostus; and I ate and drank with him that night, and caroused with him in his tent. And at break of day he struck camp and rode westaway with his army."

Brandoch Daha ceased, and looked eastward toward the gates of night. And lo, an army faring up from the lower moor-lands, toward them on the ridge, horsemen and footmen in dense array, and their captain on a great brown horse riding in the van. Long-limbed he was and lean, all armed in dusty rusty armour hacked and dinted in an hundred fights, with worn leather gauntlets on his hands and a faded campaigning cloak thrown back from his shoulders. He carried his casque at his saddle-bow and his head was bare: the head of an old lean hunting-dog, with white hair swept back from a rugged brow where blue veins showed; great-nosed and bony-faced, with huge bushy white moustachios and eyebrows. and blue eyes gleaming from cavernous eye-sockets. His horse was curst-looking, with ears laid back and blood-shed dangerous eyes, and he in the saddle sat erect and unyielding as a lance.

When he and his army came up upon the ridge, he drew rein and hailed the Demons. And he said, "On every ninth day these nine years have I beheld this lonely place of earth, as I pursued after Jalcanaius Fostus that still eludeth me and still fleeth before me; and this is strange, since he was ever a great fighter and engaged these nine years past to do battle with me. And now fear cometh upon me that eld draweth a veil of illusion athwart mine eyes, portending the approach of death or ever I perform my will. For here in the uncertain light of evening rise up before me shapes and semblances as of guests of Gaslark the king in Zaje Zaculo in days gone by: old friends of Gaslark's out of many-mountained Demonland: Brandoch Daha, that slew the King of Witchland,

[p. 150]

and Spitfire of Owlswick, and Juss his brother, the same which had lordship over all the Demons ere we fared to Impland. Ghosts and back-comers of a world forgot. But if ye be right flesh and blood, speak and discover yourselves."

Juss answered him, "O most redoubtable Zeldornius and in war invincible, well might a man expect spirits of the dead on these quiet hills about cockshut time. And if thou deem us such, how much more shall we, that be wanderers new-shipwrecked out of hungry seas, suppose thee but a shade, and these great hosts of thine but fetches of the dead that be departed, steaming up from Erebus as daylight dies?"

"O most renowned and redoubtable Zeldornius," said Brandoch Daha, "thou wast once my guest in Krothering. To resolve thy doubts and ours, bid us to supper. It were matter indeed if spirits bodiless were able to bib wine and eat up earthly bake-meats."

So Zeldornius let pitch his tents, and appointed the fifth hour before midnight for those lords of Demonland to sup with him. Ere they forgathered in Zeldornius's tent they spake among themselves, and Spitfire said, "Was ever such a wonder or such a pitiful trick o' the Fates as bringeth these three great captains to waste the remnant of their days in this remote wilderness? Doubt not but there's practice in it, that maketh them march these long years this changeless round, each fleeing one that would fain encounter him, and still seeking another that flies before him."

"Never went man with that look of the eyes Zeldornius hath," said Juss, "but he was a man ensorcelled."

"With such a look," said Brandoch Daha, "went Helteranius and Jalcanaius. But mark our interest. 'Twere good to break the charm and claim their help for our pains. Shall's show the old lion all the truth of this fact to-night?"

So spake Lord Brandoch Daha, and those brethren deemed his counsel good. So at supper, when men's

[p. 151]

hearts were gladdened with good cheer, the Lord Juss sate him down by Zeldornius and opened to him this matter, saying, "O renowned Zeldornius, how befalleth it that these nine years thou pursuest after Jalcanaius Fostus, shatterer of hosts, and what was your difference betwixt you that set you by the ears?"

Zeldornius said, "O Juss, must I answer thee by reasons in this matter that is ruled by the high stars and Fate that lays men at their length? Enough for thee that unpeace befell betwixt me and Jalcanaius mighty in war, and it was confirmed between us that by the arbitrament of the bloody field we should end our difference. But he abode me not; and these nine years I seek to meet with him in vain."

"There was a third of you," said Juss. "What tidings hast thou of Helteranius?"

Zeldornius answered him, "No tidings."

"Wilt thou," said Juss, "that I enlighten thee hereon?"

Zeldornius said, "Thou and thy fellows alone of the children of men have spoken with me since these things began. For they that dwelt in this region fled years ago, accounting the place accursed. A paltry crew they were, and mean meat enow for our swords. Speak then, if thou meanest me well, and show me all."

"Helteranius," said Lord Juss, "pursueth thee these nine years, as thou pursuest Jalcanaius Fostus. My cousin here hath seen him but six days ago, in this same place, and talked with him, and shook him by the hand, and knew his mind. Surely ye be all three holden by some enchantment, that being old comrades in arms so strangely and to so little purpose do pursue each the other's life. I prithee let us be a mean betwixt you all to set you at one again, and free you from so strange a thraldom."

But with those words spoken was Zeldornius grown red as blood. In a while he said, "It were black treachery. I'll not credit it."

But Lord Brandoch Daha answered him, "From his own lips I received it, O Zeldornius. And thereto I plight my

[p. 152]

troth. This besides, that Jalcanaius Fostus was turned from battling with thee nine years ago (as he himself hath told me, and made firm his saying with most fearful oaths), by intelligence brought him that Helteranius was in that hour minded to take him in the rear."

"Ay," said Spitfire, "and unto this day he marcheth on Helteranius's track as thou on his."

With those words spoken was Zeldornius grown yellow as old parchment, and his white moustachios bristled like a lion's. He sat silent awhile, then, resting upon Juss the cold and steady gaze of his blue eyes, "The world comes back to me," he said, "and this memory therewith, that they of Demonland were truth-tellers whether to friend or foe, and ever held it shame to cog and lie." All they bowed gravely and he said with a great lowe of anger in his eyes, "This Helteranius deviseth against me, it well appeareth, the self-same treachery whereof he was falsely accused to Jalcanaius Fostus. There were no likelier place to crush him than here on Salapanta ridge. If I stand here to abide his onset, the lie of the ground befriendeth me, and Jalcanaius cometh at his heels to gather the broken meats after I have made my feast."

Brandoch Daha said in Juss's ear, "Our peacemaking taketh a pretty turn. Heels i' the air: monstrous unlady-like!"

But nought they could say would move Zeldornius. So in the end they offered him their backing in this adventure. "And when the day is won, then shalt thou lend us thy might in our enterprise, and aid us in our wars with Witchland that be for to come."

But Zeldornius said, "O Juss and ye lords of Demonland, I yield you thanks; but ye shall not meddle in this battle. For we came three captains with our hosts unto this land, and beheld the land, and laid it under us. Ours it is, and if any meddle or make with us, were we never so set at enmity one with another, we must join together in his despite and bring him to bane. Be still then, and behold and see what birth fate shall bring

[p. 153]

forth on Salapanta Hills. But if I live, thereafter shall ye have my friendship and my help in all your enterprises whatsoever."

For awhile he sat without speech, his stark veined hands clenched on the board before him; then rising, went without word to the door of his pavilion to study the night. Then turned he back to Lord Juss, and spake to him: "Know that when this moon now past was but three days old I began to be troubled with a catarrh or rheum which yet troubleth me; and well thou wottest that whoso falleth sick on the third day of the moon's age, he will die. To-night also is a new moon, and of a Saturday; and that betokeneth fighting and bloodshed. Also the wind bloweth from the south; and he that beginneth that game with a south wind shall have the victory. With such uncertain blackness and brightness openeth the door of Fate before me."

Juss bowed his head, and said, "O Zeldornius, thy speech is sooth."

"I was ever a fighter," said Zeldornius.

Far into the night sat they in the tent of renowned Zeldornius, drinking and talking of life and destiny and old wars and the chances of war and great adventure; and an hour after midnight they parted, and Juss and Spitfire and Brandoch Daha betook them to their rest in the watch-tower on the ridge of Salapanta.

 

On such wise passed three days by, Zeldornius waiting with his army on the hill, and the Demons supping with him nightly. And on the third day he drew out his army as for battle, expecting Helteranius. But neither that day nor the next nor the next day following brought sight nor tidings of Helteranius, and strange it seemed to them and hard to guess what turn of fortune had delayed his coming. The sixth night was overcast, and mirk darkness covered the earth. When supper was done, as the Demons betook themselves to their sleeping place, they heard a scuffle and the voice of Brandoch Daha,

[p. 154]

who went foremost of them, crying, "Here have I caught a heath-dog's whelp. Give me a light. What shall I do with him?"

Men were roused and lights brought, and Brandoch Daha surveyed that which he held pinioned by the arms, caught by the entrance to the fortalice: one with scared wild-beast eyes in a swart face, golden ear-rings in his ears, and a thick close-cropped beard interlaced with gold wire twisted among its curls; bare-armed, with a tunic of otter-skin and wide hairy trousers cross-stitched with silver thread, a circlet of gold on his head, and frizzed dark hair plaited in two thick tails that hung forward over his shoulders. His lips were drawn back, like a cross-grained dog's snarling betwixt fear and fierceness, and his white pointed teeth and the whites of his eyes flashed in the torch-light.

So they had him with them into the tower, and set him before them, and Juss said, "Fear not, but tell forth unto us thy name and lineage, and what brings thee lurking in the night about our lodging. We mean thee no hurt, so thou practise not against us and our safety. Art thou a dweller in this Impland, or a wanderer, like as we be, from countries beyond the seas? hast thou companions, and if so, where be they, and what, and how many?"

And the stranger gnashed upon them with his teeth, and said, "O devils transmarine, mock not but slay."

Juss entreated him kindly, giving him meat and drink, and in a while made question of him once more, "What is thy name?"

Whereto he replied, "O devil transmarine, pity of thine ignorance sith thou know'st not Mivarsh Faz." And he fell into a great passion of weeping, crying aloud, "Woe worth the woe that is fallen upon all the land of Impland!"

"What's the matter?" said Juss.

But Mivarsh ceased not to wail and to lament, saying, "Out harrow and alas for Fax Fay Faz and Illarosh Faz

[p. 155]

and Lurmesh Faz and Gandassa Faz and all the great ones in the land!" And when they would have questioned him he cried again, "Curse ye bitterly Philpritz Faz, which betrayed us into the hand of the devil ultramontane in the castle of Orpish."

"What devil is this thou speakest of?" asked Juss.

"He hath come," he answered, "over the mountains out of the north country, that alone was able to answer Fax Fay Faz. And the voice of his speech is like unto the roaring of a bull."

"Out of the north?" said Juss, giving him more wine, and exchanging glances with Spitfire and Brandoch Daha. "I would hear more of this."

Mivarsh drank, and said, "O devils transmarine, ye give me strong waters which comfort my soul, and ye speak me soft words. But shall I not fear soft words? Soft words were spoke by this devil ultramontane, when he and cursed Philpritz spake soft words unto us in Orpish: unto me, and unto Fax Fay Faz, and Gandassa, and Illarosh, and unto all of us, after our overthrow in battle against him by the banks of Arlan."

Juss asked, "Of what fashion is he to look on?"

"He hath a great yellow beard beflecked with gray," said Mivarsh, "and a bald shiny pate, and standeth big as a neat."

Juss spake apart to Brandoch Daha, "There's matter in it if this be true." And Brandoch Daha poured forth unto Mivarsh and bade him drink again, saying, "O Mivarsh Faz, we be strangers and guests in wide-flung Impland. Be it known to thee that our power is beyond ken, and our wealth transcendeth the imagination of man. Yet is our benevolence of like measure with our power and riches, overflowing as honey from our hearts unto such as receive us openly and tell us that which is. Only be warned, that if any lie to us or assay craftily to delude us, not the mantichores that lodge beyond the Moruna were more dreadful to that man than we."

Mivarsh quailed, but answered him, "Use me well, you

[p. 156]

were best, and you shall hear from me nought but what is true. First with the sword he vanquished us, and then with subtle words invited us too talk with him in Orpish, pretending friendship. But they are all dead that harkened to him. For when he held them closed up in the council room in Orpish, himself went secretly forth, while his men laid hands on Gandassa Faz and on Illarosh Faz, and on Fax Fay Faz that was greatest amongst us, and on Lurmesh Faz, and cut off their heads and set them up on poles without the gate. And our armies that waited without were dismayed to see the heads of the Fazes of Impland so set on poles, and the armies of the devils ultramontane still threatening us with death. And this big bald bearded devil spake them of Impland fair, saying these that he had slain were their oppressors and he would give them their hearts' desire if they would be his men, and he would make them free, every man, and share out all Impland amongst them. So were the common sort befooled and brought under by this bald devil from beyond the mountains, and now none withstandeth him in all Impland. But I that had held back from his council in Orpish, fearing his guile, hardly escaped from my folk that rose against me. And I fled into the woods and wildernesses."

"Where last saw ye him?" asked Juss.

Mivarsh answered him, "A three days' journey northwest of this, at Tormerish in Achery."

"What made he there?" asked Juss.

Mivarsh answered, "Still devising evil."

"Against whom?" asked Juss.

Mivarsh answered, "Against Zeldornius, which is a devil transmarine."

"Give me some more wine," said Juss, "and fill again a beaker for Mivarsh Faz. I do love nought so much as tale-telling a-nights. With whom devised he against Zeldornius?"

Mivarsh answered, "With another devil from beyond seas; I have forgot his name."

[p. 157]

"Drink and remember," said Juss; "or if 'tis gone from thee, paint me his picture."

"He hath about my bigness," said Mivarsh, that was little of stature. "His eyes be bright, and he somewhat favoureth this one," pointing at Spitfire, "though belike he hath not all so fierce a face. He is lean-faced and dark of skin. He goeth in black iron."

"Is he Jalcanaius Fostus?" asked Juss.

And Mivarsh answered, "Ay."

"There's musk and amber in thy speech," said Juss. "I must have more of it. What mean they to do?"

"This," said Mivarsh: "As I sat listening in the dark without their tent, it was made absolute that this Jalcanaius had been deceived in supposing that another devil transmarine, whom men call Helteranius, had been minded to do treacherously against him; whereas, as the bald devil made him believe, 'twas no such thing. And so it was concluded that Jalcanaius should send riders after Helteranius to make peace between them, and that they two should forthwith join to kill Zeldornius, one falling on him in the front and the other in the rear."

"So 'tis come to this?" said Spitfire.

"And when they have Zeldornius slain," said Mivarsh, "then must they help this bald-pate in his undertakings."

"And so pay him for his redes?" said Juss.

And Mivarsh answered, "Even so."

"One thing more I would know," said Juss. "How great a following hath he in Impland?"

"The greatest strength that he can make," answered Mivarsh, "of devils ultramontane is as I think two score hundred. Many Imps beside will follow him, but they have but our country weapons."

Lord Brandoch Daha took Juss by the arm and went forth with him into the night. The frosted grass crunched Under their tread: strange stars blinked in the south in a windy space betwixt cloud and sleeping earth, Achernar

[p. 158]

near the meridian bedimming all lesser fires with his pure radiance.

"So cometh Corund upon us as an eagle out of the sightless blue," said Brandoch Daha, "with twelve times our forces to let us the way to the Moruna, and all Impland like a spaniel smiling at his heel; if indeed this simple soul say true, as I think he doth."

"Thou fallest all of a holiday mood," said Juss, "at the first scenting of this great hazard."

"O Juss," cried Brandoch Daha, "thine own breath lighteneth at it, and thy words come more sprightly forth. Are not all lands, all airs, one country unto us, so there be great doings afoot to keep bright our swords?"

Juss said, "Ere we sleep I will inform Zeldornius how the wind shifteth. He must face both ways now, till this field be cut. This battle must not go against him, for his enemies be engaged (if Mivarsh say true) to give the help of their swords to Corund."

So fared they to Zeldornius's tent, and Juss said by the way, "Of this be satisfied: Corund bareth not blade on the hills of Salapanta. The King hath intelligencers to keep him advertised of all enchanted circles of the world, and well be knoweth what influences move here, and with what danger to themselves outlanders draw sword here, as witness the doom fulfilled these nine years by these three captains. Therefore will Corund, instructed in these things by his master that sent him, look to deal with us otherwhere than in this charmed corner of the earth. And he were as well take a bear by the tooth as meddle in the fight that now impendeth, and so bring upon him these three seasoned armies joined in one for his destruction."

They passed the guard with the watchword, and waked Zeldornius and told him all. And he, muffled in his great faded cloak, went forth to see guards were set and all sure against an onslaught from either side. And standing by his tent to give good night to those lords of Demonland,

[p. 159]

he said, "It likes me better so. I ever was a fighter; so, one fight more."

 

The morrow dawned and passed uneventful, and the morrow's morrow. But on the third morning after the coming of Mivarsh, behold, east and west, great armies marching from the plains, and Zeldornius's array drawn up to meet them on the ridge, with weapons gleaming and horses champing and trumpets blowing the call -of battle. No greetings were betwixt them, nor so much as a message of challenge or defiance, but Jalcanaius with his black riders rushed to the onset from the west and Helteranius from the east. But Zeldornius, like a gray old wolf, snapping now this way now that, stemmed the tide of their onslaught. So began the battle great and fell, and continued the livelong day. Thrice on either side Zeldornius went forth with a great strength of chosen men, in so much that his enemies fled before him as the partridge doth before the sparrow-hawk; and thrice did Helteranius and thrice Jalcanaius Fostus rally and hurl him back, mounting the ridge anew.

But when it drew near to evening, and the dark day darkened toward night, the battle ceased, dying down suddenly into silence. Those lords of Demonland came down from their tower, and walked among the heaps of dead men slain toward a place of slabby rock in the neck of the ridge. Here, alone on that field, Zeldornius leaned upon his spear, gazing downward in a study, his arm cast about the neck of his old brown horse who hung his head and sniffed the ground. Through a rift in the western clouds the sun glared forth; but his beams were not so red as the ling and bent of Salapanta field.

As Juss and his companions drew near, no sound was heard save from the fortalice behind them: a discordant plucking of a harp, and the voice of Mivarsh where he walked and harped before the walls, singing this ditty:

[p. 160]

	 
		  The hag is astride
		   This night for to ride;
		 The devill and shee together:
		   Through thick and through thin,
		   Now out and then in,
		 Though ne'er so foule be the weather.
		
		  A thorn or a burr
		   She takes for a spurre,
		 With a lash of a bramble she rides now;
		   Through brakes and through bryars,
		   O're ditches and mires,
		 She followes the spirit that guides now.
		
		  No beast for his food
		   Dares now range the wood,
		 But husht in his laire he lies lurking;
		   While mischiefs, by these,
		   On land and on seas,
		 At noone of night are a working.
		
		  The storme will arise
		   And trouble the skies;
		 This night, and more for the wonder,
		   The ghost from the tomb
		   Affrighted shall come,
		 Cal'd out by the clap of the thunder.
		
		 When they were come to Zeldornius, the Lord Juss spake saying, "O most redoubtable Zeldornius, renowned in war, surely thy prognostications by the moon were true. Behold the noble victory thou hast obtained upon thine enemies."

But Zeldornius answered him not, still gazing downwards before his feet. And there was Helteranius fallen, the sword of Jalcanaius Fostus standing in his heart, and his right hand grasping still his own sword that had given Jalcanaius his bane-sore.

So looked they awhile on those two great captains

[p. 161]

slain. And Zeldornius said, "Speak not comfortably to me of victory, O Juss. So long as that sword, and that, had his master alive, I did not more desire mine own safety than their destruction who with me in days gone by made conquest of wide Impland. And see with what a poisoned violence they laboured my undoing, and in what an unexpected ruin are they suddenly broken and gone." And as one grown into a deep sadness he said, "Where were all heroical parts but in Helteranius? and a man might make a garment for the moon sooner than fit the o'erleaping actions of great Jalcanaius, who now leaveth but his body to bedung that earth that was lately shaken at his terror. I have waded in red blood to the knee; and in this hour, in my old years, the world is become for me a vision only and a mock-show."

Therewith he looked on the Demons, and there was that in his eyes that stayed their speech.

In a while he spake again, saying, "I sware unto you my furtherance if I prevailed. But now is mine army passed away as wax wasteth before the fire, and I wait the dark ferryman who tarrieth for no man. Yet, since never have I wrote mine obligations in sandy but in marble memories, and since victory is mine, receive these gifts: and first thou, O Brandoch Daha, my sword, since before thou wast of years eighteen thou wast accounted the mightiest among men-at-arms. Mightily may it avail thee, as me in time gone by. And unto thee, O Spitfire, I give this cloak. Old it is, yet may it stand thee in good stead, since this virtue it hath that he who weareth it shall not fall alive into the hand of his enemies. Wear it for my sake. But unto thee, O Juss, give I no gift, for rich thou art of all good gifts: only my good will give I unto thee, ere earth gape for me."

So they thanked him well. And he said, "Depart from me, since now approacheth that which must complete this day's undoing."

So they fared back to the spy-fortalice, and night came down on the hills. A great wind moaning out of the hue

[p. 162]

less west tore the clouds as a ragged garment, revealing the lonely moon that fled naked betwixt them. As the Demons looked backward in the moonlight to where Zeldornius stood gazing on the dead, a noise as of thunder made the firm land tremble and drowned the howling of the wind. And they beheld how earth gaped for Zeldornius.

After that, the dark shut down athwart the moon, and night and silence hung on the field of Salapanta.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

 

X

 

The Marchlands of the Moruna

OF THE JOURNEY OF THE DEMONS FROM SALAPANTA TO ESHGRAR OGO: WHEREIN IS SET DOWN CONCERNING THE LADY OF ISHNAIN NEMARTRA, AND OTHER NOTABLE MATTERS.

Mivarsh Faz came betimes on the morrow to the lords of Demonland, and found them ready for the road. So he asked them where their journey lay, and they answered, "East."

"Eastward," said Mivarsh, "all ways lead to the Moruna. None may go thither and not die."

But they laughed and answered him, "Do not too narrowly define our power, sweet Mivarsh, restraining it to thy capacities. Know that our journey is a matter determined of, and it is fixed with nails of diamond to the wall of inevitable necessity."

They took leave of him and went their ways with their small army. For four days they journeyed through deep Woods carpeted with the leaves of a thousand autumns, where at midmost noon twilight dwelt among hushed Woodland noises, and solemn eyeballs glared nightly between

[p. 164]

the tree-trunks, gazing on the Demons as they marched or took their rest.

The fifth day, and the sixth and the seventh, they journeyed by the southern margin of a gravelly sea, made all of sand and gravel and no drop of water, yet ebbing and flowing alway with great waves as another sea doth, never standing still and never at rest. And always by day and night as they came through the desert was a great noise very hideous and a sound as it were of tambourines and trumpets; yet was the place solitary to the eye, and no living thing afoot there save their company faring to the east.

On the eighth day they left the shore of that waterless sea and came by broken rocky ground to the descent to a wide vale, shelterless and unfruitful, with the broad stony bed of a little river winding in the strath. Here, looking eastward, they beheld in the lustre of a late bright-shining sun a castle of red stone on a terrace of the fell-side beyond the valley. Juss said, "We can be there before nightfall, and there will we take guesting." When they drew near they were ware, betwixt sunset and moonlight, of one sitting on a boulder in their path about a furlong from the castle, as if gazing on them and awaiting their coming. But when they came to the boulder there was no such person. So they passed on their way toward the castle, and when they looked behind them, lo, there was he sitting on the boulder bearing his head in his hands: a strange thing, which would cause any man to abhor.

The castle gate stood open, and they entered in, and so by the court-yard to a great hall, with the board set as for a banquet, and bright fires and an hundred candles burning in the still air; but no living thing was there to be seen, nor voice heard in all that castle. Lord Brandoch Daha said, "In this land to fail of marvels only for an hour were the strangest marvel. Banquet we lightly and so to bed." So they sat down and ate, and drank of the honey-sweet wine, till all thoughts of war and hardship and the unimagined perils of the wilderness and Corund's

[p. 165]

great army preparing their destruction faded from their minds, and the spirit of slumber wooed their weary frames.

Then a faint music, troublous in its voluptuous wild sweetness, floated on the air, and they beheld a lady enter on the dais. Beautiful she seemed beyond the beauty of mortal women. In her dark hair was the likeness of the horned moon in honey-coloured cymophanes every stone whereof held a straight beam of light imprisoned that quivered and gleamed as sunbeams quiver wading in the clear deeps of a summer sea. She wore a coat-hardy of soft crimson silk, close fitting, so that she did truly apparel her apparel and with her own loveliness made it more sumptuous. She said, "My lords and guests in Ishnain Nemartra, there be beds of down and sheets of lawn for all of you that be aweary. But know that I keep a sparrow-hawk sitting on a perch in the eastern tower, and he that will wake my sparrow-hawk this night long, alone without any company and without sleep, I shall come to him at the night's end and shall grant unto him the first thing that he will ask me of earthly things." So saying she departed like a dream.

Brandoch Daha said, "Cast we lots for this adventure."

But Juss spake against it, saying, "There's likely some guile herein. We must not in this accursed land suffer aught to seduce our minds, but follow our set purpose. We must not be of those who go forth for wool and come home shorn."

Brandoch Daha and Spitfire mocked at this, and cast lots between themselves. And the lot fell upon Lord Brandoch Daha. "Thou shalt not deny me this," said he to Lord Juss, "else will I never more do thee good."

I never could yet deny thee anything," answered Juss. "Art not thou and I finger and thumb? Only forget not, whatsoe'er betide, wherefore we be come hither."

"Art not thou and I finger and thumb?" said Brandoch Daha. "Fear nothing, O friend of my heart. I'll not forget

So while the others slept, Brandoch Daha waked the

[p. 166]

sparrow-hawk, night-long in the eastern chamber. For all that the cold hillside without was rough with hoar-frost the air was warm in that chamber and heavy, disposing strongly to sleep. Yet he closed not an eye, but still beheld the sparrow-hawk, telling it stories and tweaking it by the tail ever and anon as it grew drowsy. And it answered shortly and boorishly, looking upon him malevolently.

And with the golden dawn, behold that lady in the shadowy doorway. At her entering in, the sparrow-hawk clicked its wings as in anger, and without more ado tucked its beak beneath its wing and went to sleep. But that bright lady, looking on the Lord Brandoch Daha, spake and said, "Require it of me, my Lord Brandoch Daha, that which thou most desirest of earthly things."

But he, as one bedazzled, stood up saying, "O lady, is not thy beauty at the dawn of day an irradiation that might dispel the mists of hell? My heart is ravished with thy loveliness and only fed with thy sight. Therefore thy body will I have, and none other thing earthly."

"Thou art a fool," she cried, "that knowest not what thou askest. Of all things earthly mightest thou have taken choose; but I am not earthly."

He answered, "I will have nought else."

"Thou dost embrace then a great danger," said she, "and loss of all thy good luck, for thee and thy friends beside."

But Brandoch Daha, seeing how her face became on a sudden such as are new-blown roses at the dawning, and her eyes wide and dark with love-longing, came to her and took her in his arms and fell to kissing and embracing of her. On such wise they abode for awhile, that he was ware of no thing else on earth save only the sense-maddening caress of that lady's hair, the perfume of it, the kiss of her mouth, the swell and fall of that lady's breast straining against his. She said in his ear softly, 'I see thou art too masterful. I see thou art one who will be denied nothing, on whatsoever thine heart is set. Come." And they passed by a heavy-curtained doorway

[p. 167]

into an inner chamber, where the air was filled with the breath of myrrh and nard and ambergris, a fragrancy as of sleeping loveliness. Here, amid the darkness of rich hangings and subdued glints of gold, a warm radiance of shaded lamps watched above a couch, great and broad and downy-pillowed. And here for a long time they solaced them with love and all delight.

Even as all things have an end, he said at the last, "O my lady, mistress of hearts, here would I abide ever, abandoning all else for thy love sake. But my companions tarry for me in thine halls below, and great matters wait on my direction. Give me thy divine mouth once again, and bid me adieu."

She was lying as if asleep across his breast: smooth-skinned, white, warm, with shapely throat leaned backward against the spice-odorous darknesses of her unbound hair; one tress, heavy and splendid like a python, coiled between white arm and bosom. Swift as a snake she turned, clinging fiercely about him, pressing fiercely again to his her insatiable sweet fervent lips, crying that here must he dwell unto eternity in the intoxication of perfect love and pleasure.

But when in the end, gently constraining her to loose him and let him go, he arose and clothed and armed him, that lady caught about her a translucent robe of silvery sheen, as when the summer moon veils but not hides with a filmy cloud her beauties' splendour, and so standing before him spake and said, "Go then. This is got by casting of pearls to hogs. I may not slay thee, since over thy body I have no other power. But because thou shalt not laugh overmuch, having required me of that which was beyond the pact and being enjoyed is now slighted of thee and abused, therefore know, proud man, that three gifts I here will grant thee thereto of mine own choosing. Thou shalt have war and not peace. He that thou worst hatest shall throw down and ruin thy fair lordship, Krothering Castle and the mains thereof. And though vengeance shall overtake him at the last, by another's hand than thine shall it come, and to thine hand shall it be denied."

[p. 168]

Therewith she fell a-weeping. And the Lord Brandoch Daha, with great resolution, went forth from the chamber. And looking back from the threshold he beheld both that and the outer chamber void of lady and sparrow-hawk both. And a great weariness came suddenly upon him. So, going down, he found Lord Juss and his companions sleeping on the cold stones, and the banquet hall empty of all gear and dank with moss and cobwebs, and bats sleeping head-downward among the crumbling roof-beams; nor was any sign of last night's banqueting. So Brandoch Daha roused his companions, and told Juss how he had fared, and of the weird laid on him by that lady.

And they went greatly wondering forth of the accursed castle of Ishnain Nemartra, glad to come off so scatheless.

 

On that ninth day of their journey from Salapanta they came through waste lands of stone and living rock, where not so much as an earth-louse stirred with life. Gorges split the earth here and there: rock-walled labyrinths of gloom, unvisited for ever by sunbeam or moonbeam, turbulent in their depths with waters that leaped and churned for ever, never still and never silent. So was that day's journey tortuous, turning now up now down along those river banks to find crossing places.

When they were halted at noon by the deepest rift they had yet beheld, there came one hastening to them and fell down by Juss and lay panting face to earth as breathless from long running. And when they raised him up, behold Mivarsh Faz, harnessed in the gear of a black rider of Jalcanaius Fostus and armed with axe and sword. Great was his agitation, and he speechless for lack of breath. They used him kindly, and gave him to drink from a great skin of wine, Zeldornius's gift, and anon he said, "He hath armed countless hundreds of our folk with weapons taken from Salapanta field. These, led by the devils his sons, with Philpritz cursed of the gods, be gone before to hold all the ways be-east of you. Night and

[p. 169]

day have I ridden and run to warn you. Himself, with his main strength of devils ultramontane, rideth hot on your tracks."

They thanked him well, marvelling much that he should be at such pains to advertise them of their danger. "I have eat your salt," answered be, "and moreover ye are against this naughty wicked baldhead that came over the mountains to oppress us. Therefore I would do you good. But I can little. For I am poor, that was rich in land and fee. And I am alone, that had formerly five hundred spearmen lodging in my halls to do my pleasure."

"There's need to do quickly that we do," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "How great start of him hadst thou?"

"He must be upon you in an hour or twain," said Mivarsh, and fell a-weeping.

"To cope him in the open," said Juss, "were great glory, and our certain death."

"Give me to think, but a minute's while," said Brandoch Daha. And while they busked them he walked musing by the lip of that ravine, switching pebbles over the edge with his sword. Then he said, "This is without doubt that stream Athrashah spoken of by Gro. O Mivarsh, runneth not this flood of Athrashah south to the salt lakes of Ogo Morveo, and was there not thereabout a hold named Eshgrar Ogo?"

Mivarsh answered, "This is so. But never heard I of any so witless as go thither. Here where we stand is the land fearsome enough; but Eshgrar Ogo standeth at the very edge of the Moruna. No man hath harboured there these hundred years."

"Standeth it yet?" said Brandoch Daha.

"For all I wot of," answered Mivarsh.

"Is it strong?" he asked.

"In old times it was thought no place stronger," answered Mivarsh. "But ye were as well die here by the hand of the devils ultramontane, as there be torn in pieces by bad spirits."

Brandoch Daha turned him about to Juss. "It is resolved?" said he. Juss answered, "Yea;" and forthwith

[p. 170]

they started at a great pace south along the river. "Methought you should have been gotten clean away ere this," said Mivarsh as they went. "This is but nine or ten days' journey, and 'tis now the sixteenth day since ye did leave me on Salapanta Hills."

Brandoch Daha laughed. "Sixteenth!" said he. "Thou'lt be rich, Mivarsh, if thou reckon gold pieces o' this fashion thou dost days. This is but our ninth day's journey."

But Mivarsh stood stoutly to it, saying that was the seventh day after their departure when Corund first came to Salapanta, "And I fleeing now nine days before his face chanced on your tracks, and now out of all expectation on you." Nor for all their mocking would he be turned from this. And when, as they still pressed through the desert southward, the sun declined and set in a clear sky, behold the moon a little past her full: and Juss saw that she was seven days older than on that night she was when they came to Ishnain Nemartra. So he showed this wonder to Brandoch Daha and Spitfire, and much they marvelled.

"You are much to thank me," said Brandoch Daha, "that I kept you not a full year awaiting of me. Beshrew me, but that seven days' space seemed to me but an hour! "

"Likely enow, to thee," said Spitfire somewhat greenly. "But all we slept the week out on the cold stones, and I am half lamed yet with the ache on't."

"Nay," said Juss, laughing; "I will not have thee blame him."

The moon was high when they came to the salt lakes that lay one a little above the other in rocky basins. Their waters were like rough silver, and the harsh face of the wilderness was black and silver in the moonlight; and it was as a country of dead bones, blind and sterile beneath the moon. Betwixt the lakes a rib of rock rose monstrous to an eminence crag-begirt on every side, with dark walls ringing it round above the cliffs. Thither they hastened, and as they climbed and stumbled among the crags a she-owl squeaked on the battlements and took

[p. 171]

wing ghost-like above their heads. The teeth of Mivarsh Faz chattered, but right glad were the Demons as they won up the rocks and entered at last into that deserted burg. Without, the night was still; but fires were burning in the desert eastward, and others as they watched were kindled in the west, and soon was the circle joined of twinkling points of red round about Eshgrar Ogo and the lakes.

Juss said, "By an hour have we forestalled them. And behold how he ringeth us about as men ring a scorpion in flame."

So they made all sure, and set the guard, and slept until past dawn. But Mivarsh slept not, for terror of hob-thrushes from the Moruna.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 172]

 

XI

 

The Burg of Eshgrar Ogo

OF THE LORD CORUND'S BESIEGING OF THE BURG ABOVE THE LAKES OF OGO MORVEO, AND WHAT BEFELL THERE BETWIXT HIM AND THE DEMONS; WHEREIN IS ALSO AN EXAMPLE HOW THE SUBTLE OF HEART STANDETH AT WHILES IN GREAT DANGER OF HIS DEATH.

WHEN the Lord Corund knew of a surety that he held them of Demonland shut up in Eshgrar Ogo, he let dight supper in his tent, and made a surfeit of venison pasties and heath-cocks and lobsters from the lakes. Therewith he drank nigh a skinful of sweet dark Thramnian wine, in such sort that an hour before midnight, becoming speechless, he was holpen by Gro to his couch and slept a great deep sleep till morning.

Gro watched in the tent, his right elbow propped on the table, his check resting on his hand, his left hand reaching forward with delicate fingers toying now with the sleek heavy perfumed masses of his beard, now with the goblet whence he sipped ever and anon pale wine of Permio. His thoughts inconstant as insects in a summer

[p. 173]

garden flitted ever round and round, resting now on the scene before him, the great form of his general wrapt in slumber, now on other scenes sundered by great gulfs of time or weary leagues of perilous ways. So that in one instant he saw in fancy that lady in Carce welcoming her lord returned in triumph, and him, may be, crowned king of new-vanquished Impland; and in the next, swept from the future to the past, beheld again the great sending-off in Zaje Zaculo, Gaslark in his splendour on the golden stairs saying adieu to those three captains and their matchless armament foredoomed to dogs and crows on Salapanta Hills; and always, like a gloomy background darkening his mind, loomed the yawning void, featureless and vast, beyond the investing circle of Corund's armies: the blind blasted emptiness of the Moruna.

With such fancies, melancholy like a great bird settled upon his soul. The lights flickered in their sockets, and for very weariness Gro's eyelids closed at length over his large liquid eyes; and, too tired to stir from his seat to seek his couch, he sank forward on the table, his head pillowed on his arms. The red glow of the brazier slumbered ever dimmer and dimmer on the slender form and black shining curls of Gro, and on the mighty frame of Corund where he lay with one great spurred booted leg stretched along the couch, and the other flung out sideways resting its heel on the ground.

 

It wanted but two hours of noon when a sunbeam striking through an opening in the hangings of the tent shone upon Corund's eyelids, and he awoke fresh and brisk as a youth on a hunting morn. He waked Gro, and giving him a clap on the shoulder, "Thou wrongest a fair morn," he said. "The devil damn me black as buttermilk if it be not great shame in thee; and I, that was born this day six and forty years as the years come about, busy with mine affairs since sunrise."

Gro yawned and smiled and stretched himself. "O[paragraph continues] 

[p. 174]

Corund," he said, "counterfeit a livelier wonder in thine eyes if thou wilt persuade me thou sawest the sunrise. For I think that were as new and unexampled a sight for thee as any I could produce to thee in Impland."

Corund answered, "Truly I was seldom so uncivil as surprise Madam Aurora in her nightgown. And the thrice or four times I have been forced thereto, taught me it is an hour of crude airs and mists which breed cold dark humours in the body, an hour when the torch of life burns weakest. Within there! bring me my morning draught."

The boy brought two cups of white wine, and while they drank, "A thin ungracious drink is the well-spring," said Corund: "a drink for queasy-stomached skipjacks: for sand-levericks, not for men. And like it is the dayspring: an ungrateful sapless hour, an hour for stab-i'-the-backs and cold-blooded betrayers. Ah, give me wine," he cried, "and noon-day vices, and brazen-browed iniquities."

"Yet there's many a deed of profit done by owl-light," said Gro.

"Ay," said Corund: "deeds of darkness: and there, my lord, I'm still thy scholar. Come, let's be doing." And taking his helm and weapons, and buckling about him his great wolfskin cloak, for the air was eager and frosty without, he strode forth. Gro wrapped himself in his fur mantle, drew on his lambskin gloves, and followed him.

"If thou wilt take my rede," said Lord Gro, as they looked on Eshgrar Ogo stark in the barren sunlight, "thou'lt do this honour to Philpritz, which I question not he much desireth, to suffer him and his folk take first knock at this nut. It hath a hard look. Pity it were to waste good Witchland blood in a first assault, when these vile instruments stand ready to our purpose."

Corund grunted in his beard, and with Gro at his elbow paced in silence through the lines, his keen eyes searching ever the cliffs and walls of Eshgrar Ogo, till in some

[p. 175]

half-hour's space he halted again before his tent, having made a complete circuit of the burg. Then he spake: "Put me in yonder fighting-stead, and if it were only but I and fifty able lads to man the walls, yet would I hold it against ten thousand."

Gro held his peace awhile, and then said, "Thou speakest this in all sadness?"

"In sober sadness," answered Corund, squaring his shoulders at the burg.

"Then thou'lt not assault it?"

Corund laughed. "Not assault it. quotha! That were a sweet tale 'twixt the boiled and the roast in Carce: I'd not assault it!"

"Yet consider," said Gro, taking him by the arm. "So shapeth the matter in my mind: they be few and shut up in a little place, in this far land, out of reach and out of mind of all succour. Were they devils and not men, the multitude of our armies and thine own tried qualities must daunt them. Be the place never so cocksure, doubt not some doubts thereof must poison their security. Therefore before thou risk a repulse which must dispel those doubts use thine advantage. Bid Juss to a parley. Offer him conditions: it skills not what. Bribe them out into the open."

"A pretty plan," said Corund. "Thou'lt merit wisdom's crown if thou canst tell me what conditions we can offer that they would take. And whilst thou riddlest that, remember that though thou and I be masters hereabout, another reigns in Carce."

Lord Gro laughed gently. "Leave jesting," he said, "O Corund, and never hope to gull me to believe thee such a babe in policy. Shall the King blame us though we sign away Demonland, ay and the wide world besides, to Juss to lure him forth? Unless indeed we were so neglectful of our interest as suffer him, once forth, to elude our clutches."

"Gro," said Corund, "I love thee. But hardly canst thou receive things as I receive them that have dealt all

[p. 176]

my days in great stripes, given and taken in the open field. I sticked not to take part in thy notable treason against these poor snakes of Impland that we trapped in Orpish. All's fair against such dirt. Besides, great need was upon us then, and hard it is for an empty sack to stand straight. But here is far other matter. All's won here but the plucking of the apple: it is the very main of my ambition to humble these Demons openly by the terror of my sword: wherefore I will not use upon them cogs and stops and all thy devilish tricks, such as should bring me more of scorn than of glory in the eyes of aftercomers."

So speaking, he issued command and sent an herald to go forth beneath the battlements with a flag of truce. And the herald cried aloud and said: "From Corund of Witchland unto the lords of Demonland: thus saith the Lord Corund, 'I hold this burg of Eshgrar Ogo as a nut betwixt the crackers. Come down and speak with me in the batable land before the burg, and I swear to you peace and grith while we parley, and thereto pledge I mine honour as a man of war."

So when the due ceremonies were performed, the Lord Juss came down from Eshgrar Ogo and with him the lords Spitfire and Brandoch Daha and twenty men to be their bodyguard. Corund went to meet them with his guard about him, and his four sons that fared with him to Impland, Hacmon, namely, and Heming and Viglus and Dormanes: sullen and dark young men, likely of look, of a little less fierceness than their father. Gro, fair to see and slender as a racehorse, went at his side, muffled to the ears in a cloak of ermine; and behind came Philpritz Faz helmed with a winged helm of iron and gold. A gilded corselet had Philpritz, and trousers of panther's skin, and he came a-slinking at Corund's heel as the jackal slinks behind the lion.

When they were met, Juss spake and said, "This would I know first, my Lord Corund, how thou comest hither,

[p. 177]

and why, and by what right thou disputest with us the ways eastward out of Impland."

Corund answered, leaning on his spear, "I need not answer thee in this. And yet I will. How came I? I answer thee, over the cold mountain wall of Akra Skabranth. And 'tis a feat hath not his fellow in man's remembrance until now, with so great a force and in so short a space of time."

"'Tis well enough," said Juss. "I'll grant thee thou hast outrun mine expectations of thee."

"Next thou demandest why," said Corund. "Suffice it for thee that the King hath had advertisement of your farings into Impland and your designs therein. For to bring these to nought am I come."

"There was many firkins of wine drunk dry in Carce," said Hacmon, "and many a noble person senseless and spewing on the ground ere morn for pure delight, when cursed Goldry was made away. We were little minded these healths should be proved vain at last."

"Was that ere thou rodest from Permio?" said Lord Brandoch Daha. "The merry god wrought of our side that night, if my memory cheat not."

"Thou demandest last," said Corund, "my Lord Juss, by what right I bar your passage eastaway. Know, therefore, that not of mine own self speak I unto you, but as vicar in wide-fronted Impland of our Lord Gorice XII., King of Kings, most glorious and most great. There remaineth no way out for you from this place save into the rigour of mine hands. Therefore let us, according to the nature of great men, agree to honourable conditions. And this is mine offer, O Juss. Yield up this burg of Eshgrar Ogo, and therewith thy sealed word in a writing acknowledging our Lord the King to be King of Demonland and all ye his quiet and obedient subjects, even as we be. And I will swear unto you of my part, and in the name of our Lord the King, and give you hostages thereto, that ye shall depart in peace whither you list with all love and safety."

[p. 178]

The Lord Juss scowled fiercely on him. "O Corund he said, "as little as we do understand the senseless wind, so little we understand thy word. Oft enow hath gray silver been in the fire betwixt us and you Witchlanders; for the house of Gorice fared ever like the foul toad, that may not endure to smell the sweet savour of the vine when it flourisheth. So for this time we will abide in this hold, and withstand your most grievous attempts."

"With free honesty and open heart," said Corund, "I made thee this offer; which if thou refuse I am not thy lackey to renew it."

Gro said, "It is writ and sealed, and wanteth but thy sign-manual, my Lord Juss," and with the word he made sign to Philpritz Faz that went to Lord Juss with a parchment. Juss put the parchment by, saying, "No more: ye are answered," and he was turning on his heel when Philpritz, louting forward suddenly, gave him a great yerk beneath the ribs with a dagger slipped from his sleeve. But Juss wore a privy coat that turned the dagger. Howbeit with the greatness of that stroke he staggered aback.

Now Spitfire clapped hand to sword, and the other Demons with him, but Juss loudly shouted that they should not be truce-breakers but know first what Corund would do. And Corund said, "Dost hear me, Juss? I had, neither hand nor part in this."

Brandoch Daha drew up his lip and said, "This is nought but what was to be looked for. It is a wonder, O Juss, that thou shouldst hold out to such mucky dog a hand without a whip in it."

"Such strokes come home or miss merely," said Gro softly in Corund's ear, and he hugged himself beneath his cloak, looking with furtive amusement on the Demons. But Corund with a face red in anger said, "It is thine answer, O Juss?" And when Juss said, "It is our answer, O Corund," Corund said violently, "Then red war I give you; and this withal to testify our honour." And he let

[p. 179]

lay hands on Philpritz Faz and with his own hand hacked the head from his body before the eyes of both their armies. Then in a great voice he said, "As bloodily as I have revenged the honour of Witchland on this Philpritz, so will I revenge it on all of you or ever I draw off mine armies from these lakes of Ogo Morveo."

So the Demons went up into the burg, and Gro and Corund home to their tents. "This was well thought on," said Gro, "to flaunt the flag of seeming honesty, and with the motion rid us of this fellow that promised ever to grow thorns to make uneasy our seat in Impland."

Corund answered him not a word.

In that same hour Corund marshalled his folk and assaulted Eshgrar Ogo, placing those of Impland in the van. They prospered not at all. Many a score lay slain without the walls that night; and the obscene beasts from the desert feasted on their bodies by the light of the moon.

 

Next morning the Lord Corund sent an herald and bade the Demons again to a parley. And now he spake only to Brandoch Daha, bidding him deliver up those brethren Juss and Spitfire, "And if thou wilt yield them to my pleasure, then shalt thou and all thy people else depart in peace without conditions."

"An offer indeed," said Lord Brandoch Daha; "if it be not in mockery. Say it loud, that my folk may hear."

Corund did so, and the Demons heard it from the walls of the burg.

Lord Brandoch Daha stood somewhat apart from Juss and Spitfire and their guard. "Libel it me out," he said. "For good as I now must deem thy word, thine hand and seal must I have to show my followers ere they consent with me in such a thing."

"Write thou," said Corund to Gro. "To write my name is all my scholarship." And Gro took forth his ink-born and wrote in a great fair hand this offer on a parchment. "The most fearfullest oaths thou knowest," said[paragraph continues] 

[p. 180]

Corund; and Gro wrote them, whispering, "He mocketh us only." But Corund said, "No matter: 'tis a chance worth our chancing," and slowly and with labour signed his name to the writing, and gave it to Lord Brandoch Daha.

Brandoch Daha read it attentively, and tucked it in his bosom beneath his byrny. "This," he said, "shall be a keepsake for me of thee, my Lord Corund. Reminding me," and here his eyes grew terrible, "so long as there surviveth a soul of you in Witchland, that I am still to teach the world throughly what that man must abide that durst affront me with such an offer."

Corund answered him, "Thou art a dapper fellow. It is a wonder that thou wilt strut in the tented field with all this womanish gear. Thy shield: how many of these sparkling baubles thinkest thou I'd leave in it were we once come to knocks?"

"I'll tell thee," answered Lord Brandoch Daha. "For every jewel that hath been beat out of my shield in battle, never yet went I to war that I brought not home an hundredfold to set it fair again, from the spoils I obtained from mine enemies. Now this will I bid thee, O Corund, for thy scornful words: I will bid thee to single combat, here and in this hour. Which if thou deny, then art thou an open and apparent dastard."

Corund chuckled in his beard, but his brow darkened somewhat. "I pray what age dost thou take me of?" said he. "I bare a sword when thou was yet in swaddling clothes. Behold mine armies, and what advantage I hold upon you. Oh, my sword is enchanted, my lord: it will not out of the scabbard."

Brandoch Daha smiled disdainfully, and said to Spitfire, "Mark well, I pray thee, this great lord of Witchland. How many true fingers hath a Witch on his left hand?"

"As many as on his right," said Spitfire.

"Good. And how many on both?"

[p. 181]

"Two less than a deuce," said Spitfire; "for they be false fazarts to the fingers' ends."

"Very well answered," said Lord Brandoch Daha.

"You're pleasant," Corund said. "But your fusty jibes move me not a whit. It were a simple part indeed to take thine offer when all wise counsels bid me use my power and crush you."

"Thou'dst kill me soon with thy mouth," said Brandoch Daha. "In sum, thou art a brave man when it comes to roaring and swearing: a big bubber of wine, as men say to drink drunk is an ordinary matter with thee every day in the week; but I fear thou durst not fight."

"Doth not thy nose swell at that?" said Spitfire.

But Corund shrugged his shoulders. "A footra for your baits!" he answered. "I am scarce bounden to do such a kindness to you of Demonland as Jay down mine advantage and fight alone, against a sworder. Your old foxes are seldom taken in springes."

"I thought so," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "Surely the frog will have hair sooner than any of you Witchlanders shall dare to stand me."

So ended the second parley before Eshgrar Ogo. The same day Corund essayed again to storm the hold, and grievous was the battle and hard put to it were they of Demonland to hold the walls. Yet in the end were Corund's men thrown back with great slaughter. And night fell, and they returned to their tents.

 

"Mine invention," said Gro, when on the next day they took counsel together, "hath yet some contrivance in her purse which shall do us good, if it fall but out to our mind. But I doubt much it will dislike thee."

"Well, say it out, and I'll give thee my censure on't," said Corund.

Gro spake: "It hath been shown we may not have down this tree by hewing above ground. Let's dig about the roots. And first give them a seven-night's space for reckoning up their chances, that they may see morning

[p. 182]

and evening from the burg thine armies set down to in. vest them. Then, when their hopes are something sobered by that sight, and want of action hath trained their minds to sad reflection, call them to parley, going straight beneath the wall; and this time shalt thou address thyself only to the common sort, offering them all generous and free conditions thou canst think on. There's little they can ask that we'd not blithely grant them if they'll but yield us up their captains."

"It mislikes me," answered Corund. "Yet it may serve, But thou shalt be my spokesman herein. For never yet went I cap in hand to ask favour of the common muck o' the world, nor I will not do it now."

"O but thou must," said Gro. "Of thee they will receive in good faith what in me they would account but practice."

"That's true enough," said Corund., "But I cannot stomach it. Withal, I am too rough spoken."

Gro smiled. "He that hath need of a dog," he said, "calleth him 'Sir Dog.' Come, come, I'll school thee to it. Is it not a smaller thing than months of tedious hardship in this frozen desert? Bethink thee too what honour it were to thee to ride home to Carce with Juss and Spitfire and Brandoch Daha bounden in a string."

Not without much persuasion was Corund won to this. Yet at the last he consented. For seven days and seven nights his armies sat before the burg without sign; and on the eighth day he bade the Demons to a parley, and when that was granted went with his sons and twenty men-at-arms up the great rib of rock between the lakes, and stood below the east wall of the burg. Bitter chill was the air that day. Powdery snow light-fallen blew in little wisps along the ground, and the rocks were slippery with an invisible coat of ice. Lord Gro, being troubled with an ague, excused himself from that faring and kept his tent.

Corund stood beneath the walls with his folk about him. "I have matter of import," he cried, "and It is need,

[p. 183]

ful it be heard both by the highest and the lowest amongst you. Ere I begin, summon them all to this part of the walls: a look-out is enow to shield you of the other parts from any sudden onslaught, which besides I swear to you is clean without my purpose." So when they were thick on the wall above him, he began to say, "Soldiers of Demonland, against you had I never quarrel. Behold how in this Impland I have made freedom flourish as a flower. I have strook off the heads of Philpritz Faz, and Illarosh, and Lurmesh, and Gandassa, and Fax Fay Faz, that were the lords and governors here aforetime, abounding in all the bloody and crying sins, oppression, gluttony, idleness, cruelty, and extortion. And of my clemency I delivered all their possessions unto their subjects to hold and order after their own will alone, who before did put on patience and endured with much heart-burning the tyranny of these Fazes, until by me they found a remedy for their more freedom. In like manner, not against you do I war, O men of Demonland; but against the tyrants that enforced you for their private gain to suffer hardship and death in this remote country: namely, against Juss and Spitfire that came hither in quest of their cursed brother whom the might of the great King hath happily removed. And against Brandoch Daha am I come, of insolence untamed, who liveth a chambering idle life eating and drinking and exercising tyranny, while the pleasant lands of Krothering and Failze and Stropardon, and the dwellers in the isles, Sorbey, Morvey, Strufey, Dalney, and Kenarvey, and they of Westmark and all the western parts of Demonland groan and wax lean to feed his luxury. To your hurt only have these three led you, as cattle to the slaughter. Deliver them to me, that I may chastise them, and I, that am great viceroy of Impland, will make you free and grant you lordships: a lordship for every man of you in this my realm of Impland."

While Corund spake, the Lord Brandoch Daha went among the soldiers bidding them hold their peace and not

[p. 184]

murmur against Corund. But those that were most hot for action he sent about an errand preparing what he had in mind. So that when the Lord Corund ceased from his declaiming, all was ready to hand, and with one voice the soldiers of Lord Juss that stood upon the wall cried out and said, "This is thy word, O Corund, and this our answer," and therewith flung down upon him from pots and buckets and every kind of vessel a deluge of slops and offal and all filth that came to hand. A bucketful took Corund in the mouth, befouling all his great beard, so that he gave back spitting. And he and his, standing close beneath the wall, and little expecting so sudden and ill an answer, fared shamefully, being all well soused and bemerded with filth and lye.

Therewith went up great shouts of laughter from the walls. But Corund cried out, "O filth of Demonland, this is my latest word with you. And though 'twere ten years I must besiege this hold, yet will I take it over your heads. And very ill to do with shall ye find me in the end, and very puissant, proud, mighty, cruel, and bloody in my conquest."

"What, lads?" said Lord Brandoch Daha, standing on the battlements, "have we not fed this beast with pig-wash enow, but he must still be snuffing and snouking at our gate? Give me another pailful."

So the Witches returned to their tents with great shame. So hot was Corund in anger against the Demons, that he stayed not to eat nor drink at his coming down from Eshgrar Ogo, but straight gathered force and made an assault upon the burg, the mightiest he had yet essayed; and his picked men of Witchland were in that assault, and he himself to lead them. Thrice by main fury they won up into the hold, but all were slain who set foot therein, and Corund's young son Dormanes wounded to the death. And at even they drew off from the battle. There fell in that fight an hundred and four-score Demons, and of the Imps five hundred, and of the Witches

[p. 185]

three hundred and ninety and nine. And many were hurt of either side.

Wrath sat like thunder on Corund's brow at suppertime. He ate his meat savagely, thrusting great gobbets in his mouth, crunching the bones like a beast, taking deep draughts of wine with every mouthful, which yet dispelled not his black mood. Over against him Gro sat silent, shivering now and then for all that he kept his ermine cloak about him and the brazier stood at his elbow. He made but a poor meal, drinking mulled wine in little sips and dipping little pieces of bread in it.

So wore without speech that cheerless and unkindly meal, until the Lord Corund, looking suddenly across the board at Gro and catching his eye studying him, said, "That was a bright star of thine and then shined clear upon thee when thou tookest this bout of shivering fits and so wentest not with me to be soused with muck before the burg."

"Who would have dreamed," answered Gro, "of their using so base and shameful a part?"

"Not thou, I'll swear," said Corund, looking evilly upon him and marking, as he thought, a twinkling light in Gro's eyes. Gro shivered again, sipped his wine, and shifted his glance uneasily under that unfriendly stare.

Corund drank awhile in silence, then flushing suddenly a darker red, said, leaning heavily across the board at him, "Dost know why I said 'not thou'?"

"'Twas scarce needful, to thy friend," said Gro.

"I said it," said Corund, "because I know thou didst look for another thing when thou didst skulk shamming here."

"Another thing?"

"Sit not there like some prim-mouthed miss feigning an innocence all know well thou hast not," said Corund, "or I'll kill thee. Thou plottedst my death with the Demons. And because thyself hast no shred of honour in thy soul, thou hadst not the wit to perceive that their nobility

[p. 186]

would shrink from such a betrayal as thy hopes entertained."

Gro said, "This is a jest I cannot laugh at; or else 'tis madman's brabble."

"Dissembling cur," said Corund, "be sure that I hold him not less guilty that holds the ladder than him that mounts the wall. It was thy design they should smite us at unawares when we went up to them with this proposal thou didst urge on me so hotly."

Gro made as if to rise. "Sit down!" said Corund. "Answer me; didst not thou egg on the poor snipe Philpritz to that attempt on Juss?"

"He told me on't," said Gro.

"O, thou art cunning," said Corund. "There too I see thy treachery. Had they fallen upon us, thou mightest have thrown thyself safely upon their mercy."

"This is foolishness," said Gro. "We were far stronger."

"'Tis so," said Corund. "When did I charge thee with wisdom and sober judgement? With treachery I know thou art soaked wet."

"And thou art my friend!" said Gro.

Corund said in a while, "I have long known thee to be both a subtle and dissembling fox, and now I durst trust thee no more, for fear I should fall further into thy danger. I am resolved to murther thee."

Gro fell back in his chair and flung out his arms. "I have been here before," he said. "I have beheld it, in moonlight and in the barren glare of day, in fair weather and in hail and snow, with the great winds charging over the wastes. And I knew it was accursed. From Morna Moruna, ere I was born or thou, O Corund, or any of us, treason and cruelty blacker than night herself had birth, and brought death to their begetter and all his folk. From Morna Moruna bloweth this wind about the waste to blast our love and bring us destruction. Ay, kill me; I'll not ward myself, not i' the smallest."

"'Tis small matter, Goblin," said Corund, "whether

[p. 187]

thou shouldst or no. Thou art but a louse between my fingers, to kill or cast away as shall seem me good."

"I was King Gaslark's man," said Gro, as if talking in a dream; "and between a man and a boy near fifteen years I served him true and costly. Yet it was my fortune in all that time and at the ending thereof only to get a beard on my chin and remorse at heart. To what scorned purpose must I plot against him? Pity of Witchland, of Witchland sliding as then into the pit of adverse luck, 'twas that made force upon me. And I served Witchland well: but fate ever fought o' the other side. I it was that counselled King Gorice XI. to draw out from the fight at Kartadza. Yet wanton Fortune trod down the scale for Demonland. I prayed him not wrastle with Goldry in the Foliot Isles. Thou didst back me. Nought but rebukes and threats of death gat I therefrom; but because my redes were set at nought, evil fell upon Witchland. I helped our Lord the King when he conjured and made a sending against the Demons. He loved me therefor and upheld me, but great envy was raised up against me in Carce for that fact. Yet I bare up, for thy friendship and thy lady wife's were as bright fires to warm me against all the frosts of their ill-will. And now, for love of thee, I fared with thee to Impland. And here by the Moruna where in old days I wandered in danger and in sorrow, it is fitting I behold at length the emptiness of all my days."

Therewith Gro fell silent a minute, and then began to say: "O Corund, I'll strip bare my soul to thee before thou kill me. It is most true that until now, sitting before Eshgrar Ogo, it hath been present to my heart how great an advantage we held against the Demons, and the glory of their defence, so little a strength against us so many, and the great glory of their flinging of us back, these things were a splendour to my soul beholding them. Such glamour hath ever shone to me all my life's days when I behold great men battling still beneath the bludgeonings of adverse fortune that, howsoever they be mine enemies,

[p. 188]

it lieth not in my virtue to withhold from admiration of them and well nigh love. But never was I false to thee, nor much less ever thought, as thou most unkindly accusest me, to compass thy destruction."

"Thou dost whine like a woman for thy life," said Corund. "Cowardly hounds never stirred pity in me." Yet he moved not, only looking dourly on Gro.

Gro plucked forth his own sword, and pushed it towards Corund hilt-foremost across the board. "Such words are worse than sword-thrusts betwixt us twain," said he, "Thou shalt see how I'll welcome death. The King will praise thee, when thou showest the cause. And it will be sweet news to Corinius and them that have held me in their hate, that thy love hath cast me off, and thou hast rid them of me at last."

But Corund stirred not. After a space, he filled another cup, and drank, and sat on. And Gro sat motionless before him. At last Corund rose heavily from his seat, and pushing Gro's sword back across the table, "Thou'dst best to bed," said he. "But the night air's o'er shrewd for thine ague. Sleep on my couch to-night."

 

The day dawned cold and gray, and with the dawn Corund ordered his lines round about Eshgrar Ogo, and sat down for a siege. For ten days he sat before the burg, and nought befell from dawn till night, from night till dawn: only the sentinels walked on the walls and Corund's folk guarded their lines. On the eleventh day came a bank of fog rolling westward from the Moruna, chill and dank, blotting out the features of the land. Snow fell, and the fog hung on the land, and night came of such a pitchy blackness that even by torch-light a man might not see his hand stretched forth at arm's length before him. Five days the fog held. On the fifth night, it being the twenty-fourth of November, in the darkness of the third hour after midnight, the alarm was sounded and Corund summoned by a runner from the north with word that a sally was made from Eshgrar Ogo, and the

[p. 189]

lines bursten through in that quarter, and fighting going forward in the mirk. Corund was scarce harnessed and gotten forth into the night, when a second runner came hot-foot from the south with tidings of a great fight thereaway. All was confounded in the dark, and nought certain, save that the Demons were broken out from Eshgrar Ogo. In a space, as Corund came with his folk to the northern quarter and joined in the fight, came a message from his son Heming that Spitfire and a number with him were broken out at the other side and gotten away westward, and a great band chasing him back towards Outer Impland; and therewith that more than an hundred Demons were surrounded and penned in by the shore of the lakes, and the burg entered and taken by Corund's folk; but of Juss and Brandoch Daha no certain news, save that they were not of Spitfire's company, but were with those against whom Corund went in person, having fared forth northaway. So went the battle through the night. Corund himself had sight of Juss, and exchanged shots with him with twirl-spears in a lifting of the fog toward dawn, and a son of his bare witness of Brandoch Daha in that same quarter, and had gotten a great wound from him.

When night was past, and the Witches returned from the pursuit, Corund straitly questioned his officers, and went himself about the battlefield hearing each man's story and viewing the slain. Those Demons that were hemmed against the lakes had all lost their lives, and some were taken up dead in other parts, and some few alive. These would his officers let slay, but Corund said, "Since I am king in Impland, till that the King receive it of me, it is not this handful of earth-lice shall shake my safety here; and I may well give them their lives, that fought sturdily against us." So he gave them peace. And he said unto Gro, "Better that for every Demon dead in Ogo Morveo ten should rise up against us, if but Juss only and Brandoch Daha were slain."

"I'll be in the tale with thee, if thou wilt proclaim

[p. 190]

them dead," said Gro. "And nothing is likelier, if they be gone with but two or three on to the Moruna, than that such a tale should come true ere it were told in Carce,"

"Pshaw!" said Corund, "to the devil with such false feathers. What's done shows brave enow without them: Impland conquered, Juss's army minced to a gallimaufry, himself and Brandoch Daha chased like runaway thralls up on the Moruna. Where if devils tear them, 'tis my best wish come true. If not, thou'lt hear of them, be sure. Dost think these can survive on earth and not raise a racket that shall be heard from hence to Carce?"

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 191]

 

XII

 

Koshtra Pivrarcha

OF THE COMING OF THE LORDS OF DEMONLAND TO MORNA MORUNA, WHENCE THEY BEHELD THE ZIMIAMVIAN MOUNTAINS, SEEN ALSO BY GRO IN YEARS GONE BY; AND OF THE WONDERS SEEN BY THEM AND PERILS UNDERGONE AND DEEDS DONE IN THEIR ATTEMPT ON KOSHTRA PIVRARCHA, THE WHICH ALONE OF ALL EARTH'S MOUNTAINS LOOKETH DOWN UPON KOSHTRA BELORN; AND NONE SHALL ASCEND UP INTO KOSHTRA BELORN THAT HATH NOT FIRST LOOKED DOWN UPON HER.

Now it is to be said of Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha that they, finding themselves parted from their people in the fog, and utterly unable to find them, when the last sound of battle had died away wiped and put up their bloody swords and set forth at a great pace eastward. Only Mivarsh fared with them of all their following. His lips were drawn back a little, showing his teeth, but he carried himself proudly as one who being resolved to die walks with a quiet mind to his destruction. Day after day they journeyed, sometimes in clear weather, sometimes in mist or sleet, over the changeless desert,

[p. 192]

without a landmark, save here a little sluggish river, or here a piece of rising ground, or a pond, or a clump of rocks: small things which faded from sight amid the waste ere they were passed by a half-mile's distance. So was each day like yesterday, drawing to a morrow like to it again. And always fear walked at their heel and sat beside them sleeping: clanking of wings heard above the wind, a brooding hush of menace in the sunshine, and noises out of the void of darkness as of teeth chattering. So came they on the twentieth day to Morna Moruna, and stood at even in the sorrowful twilight by the little round castle, silent on Omprenne Edge.

From their feet the cliffs dropped sheer. Strange it was, standing on that frozen lip of the Moruna, as on the limit of the world, to gaze southward on a land of summer, and to breathe faint summer airs blowing up from blossoming trees and flower-clad alps. In the depths a carpet of huge tree-tops clothed a vast stretch of country, through the midst of which, seen here and there in a bend of silver among the woods, the Bhavinan bore the waters of a thousand secret mountain solitudes down to an unknown sea. Beyond the river the deep woods, blue with distance, swelled to feathery hill-tops with some sharper-featured loftier heights bodying cloudily beyond them. The Demons strained their eyes searching the curtain of mystery behind and above those foot-hills; but the great peaks, like great ladies, shrouded themselves against their curious gaze, and no glimpse was shown them of the snows.

Surely to be in Morna Moruna was to be in the death chamber of some once lovely presence. Stains of fire were on the walls. The fair gallery of open wood-work that ran above the main hall was burnt through and partly fallen in ruin, the blackened ends of the beams that held it jutting blindly in the gap. Among the wreck of carved chairs and benches, broken and worm-eaten, some shreds of figured tapestries rotted, the home now of beetles and spiders. Patches of colour, faded lines, mildewed and damp with the corruption of two hundred

[p. 193]

years, lingered to be the memorials, like the mummied skeleton of a king's daughter long ago untimely dead, of sweet gracious paintings on the walls. Five nights and five days the Demons and Mivarsh dwelt in Morna Moruna, inured to portents till they marked them as little as men mark swallows at their window. In the still night were flames seen, and flying forms dim in the moonlit air; and in moonless nights unstarred, moans heard and gibbering accents: prodigies beside their beds, and ridings in the sky, and fleshless fingers plucking at Juss unseen when he went forth to make question of the night.

Cloud and mist abode ever in the south, and only the foot-hills showed of the great ranges beyond Bhavinan. But on the evening of the sixth day before Yule, it being the nineteenth of December when Betelgeuze stands at midnight on the meridian, a wind blew out of the northwest with changing fits of sleet and sunshine. Day was fading as they stood above the cliff. All the forest land was blue with shades of approaching night: the river was dull silver: the wooded heights afar mingled their outlines with the towers and banks of turbulent deep blue vapour that hurtled in ceaseless passage through the upper air. Suddenly a window opened in the clouds to a space of clean wan wind-swept sky high above the shaggy hills. Surely Juss caught his breath in that moment, to see those deathless ones where they shone pavilioned in the pellucid air, far, vast, and lonely, most like to creatures of unascended heaven, of wind and of fire all compact, too pure to have aught of the gross elements of earth or water. It was as if the rose-red light of sundown had been frozen to crystal and these hewn from it to abide to everlasting, strong and unchangeable amid the welter of earthborn mists below and tumultuous sky above them. The rift ran wider, eastward and westward, opening on more peaks and sunset-kindled snows. And a rainbow leaning to the south was like a sword of glory across the vision.

Motionless, like hawks staring from that high place of

[p. 194]

prospect, Juss and Brandoch Daha looked on the mountains of their desire.

Juss spake, haltingly as one talking in a dream. "The sweet smell, this gusty wind, the very stone thy foot standeth on: I know them all before. There's not a night since we sailed out of Lookinghaven that I have not beheld in sleep these mountains and known their names."

"Who told thee their names?" asked Lord Brandoch Daha.

"My dream," Juss answered. "And first I dreamed it in mine own bed in Galing when I came borne from guesting with thee last June. And they be true dreams that are dreamed there." And he said, "Seest thou where the foothills part to a dark valley that runneth deep into the chain, and the mountains are bare to view from crown to foot? Mark where, beyond the nearer range, bleak-visaged precipices, cobweb-streaked with huge snow corridors, rise to a rampart where the rock towers stand against the sky. This is the great ridge of Koshtra Pivrarcha, and the loftiest of those spires his secret mountaintop."

As he spoke, his eye followed the line of the eastern ridge, where the towers, like dark gods going down from heaven, plunge to a parapet which runs level above a curtain of avalanche-fluted snow. He fell silent as his gaze rested on the sister peak that east of the gap flamed skyward in wild cliffs to an airy snowy summit, soft-lined as a maiden's cheek, purer than dew, lovelier than a dream.

While they looked the sunset fires died out upon the mountains, leaving only pale hues of death and silence. "If thy dream," said Lord Brandoch Daha, "conducted thee down this Edge, over the Bhavinan, through yonder woods and hills, up through the leagues of ice and frozen rock that stand betwixt us and the main ridge, up by the right road to the topmost snows of Koshtra Belorn: that were a dream indeed."

"All this it showed me," said Juss, "up to the lowest rocks of the great north buttress of Koshtra Pivrarcha,

[p. 195]

that must first be scaled by him that would go up to Koshtra Belorn. But beyond those rocks not even a dream hath ever climbed. Ere the light fades, I'll show thee our pass over the nearer range." He pointed where a glacier crawled betwixt shadowy walls down from a torn snow-field that rose steeply to a saddle. East of it stood two white peaks, and west of it a sheer-faced and long-backed mountain like a citadel, squat and dark beneath the wild sky-line of Koshtra Pivrarcha that hung in air beyond it.

"The Zia valley," said Juss, "that runneth into Bhavinan. There lieth our way: under that dark bastion called by the Gods Tetrachnampf."

 

On the morrow Lord Brandoch Daha came to Mivarsh Faz and said, "It is needful that this day we go down from Omprenne Edge. I would for no sake leave thee on the Moruna, but 'tis no walking matter to descend this wall. Art thou a cragsman?"

"I was born," answered he, "in the high valley of Perarshyn by the upper waters of the Beirun in Impland. There boys scarce toddle ere they can climb a rock. This climb affrights me not, nor those mountains. But the land is unknown and terrible, and many loathly ones inhabit it, ghosts and eaters of men. O devils transmarine, and my friends, is it not enough? Let us turn again, and if the Gods save our lives we shall be famous for ever, that came unto Morna Moruna and returned alive."

But Juss answered and said, "O Mivarsh Faz, know that not for fame are we come on this journey. Our greatness already shadoweth all the world, as a great cedar tree spreading his shadow in a garden; and this enterprise, mighty though it be, shall add to our glory only so much as thou mightest add to these forests of the Bhavinan by planting of one more tree. But so it is, that the great King of Witchland, practising in darkness in his royal palace of Carce such arts of grammarie and sendings magical as the world hath not been grieved with

[p. 196]

until now, sent an ill thing to take my brother, the Lord Goldry Bluszco, who is dear to me as mine own soul. And They that dwell in secret sent me word in a dream, bidding me, if I would have tidings of my dear brother, inquire in Koshtra Belorn. Therefore, O Mivarsh, go with us if thou wilt, but if thou wilt not, why, fare thee well. For nought but my death shall stay me from going thither."

And Mivarsh, bethinking him that if the mantichores of the mountains should devour him along with those two lords, that were yet a kindlier fate than all alone to abide those things he wist of on the Moruna, put on the rope, and after commending himself to the protection of his gods followed Lord Brandoch Daha down the rotten slopes of rock and frozen earth at the head of a gully leading down the cliff.

For all that they were early afoot, yet was it high noon ere they were off the rocks. For the peril of falling stones drove them out from the gully's bed first on to the eastern buttress and after, when that grew too sheer, back to the western wall. And in an hour or twain the gully's bed grew shallow and it narrowed to an end, whence Brandoch Daha gazed between his feet to where, a few spear's lengths below, the smooth slabs curved downward out of sight and the eye leapt straight from their clean-cut edge to shimmering tree-tops that showed tiny as mosses beyond the unseen gulf of air. So they rested awhile; then returning a little up the gully forced a way out on to the face and made a hazardous traverse to a new gully westward of the first, and so at last plunged down a long fan of scree and rested on soft fine turf at the foot of the cliffs.

Little mountain gentians grew at their feet; the path, less forest lay like the sea below them; before them the mountains of the Zia stood supreme: the white gables of Islargyn, the lean dark finger of Tetrachnampf nan Tshark lying back above the Zia Pass pointing to the sky, and west of it, jutting above the valley, the square bastion of Tetrachnampf nan Tsurm. The greater mountains

[p. 197]

were for the most part sunk behind this nearer range, but Koshtra Belorn still towered above the Pass. As a queen looking down from her high window, so she overlooked those green woods sleeping in the noon-day; and on her forehead was beauty like a star. Behind them where they sat, the escarpment reared back in cramped perspective, a pile of massive buttresses cleft with ravines leading upward from that land of leaves and waters to the hidden wintry flats of the Moruna.

 

That night they slept on the fell under the stars, and next day, going down into the woods, came at dusk to an open glade by the waters of the broad-bosomed Bhavinan. The turf was like a cushion, a place for elves to dance in. The far bank full half a mile away was wooded to the water with silver birches, dainty as mountain nymphs, their limbs gleaming through the twilight, their reflections quivering in the depths of the mighty river. In the high air day lingered yet, a faint warmth tingeing the great outlines of the mountains, and west ward up the river the young moon stooped above the trees. East of the glade a little wooded eminence, no higher than a house, ran back from the river bank, and in its shoulder a hollow cave.

"How smiles it to thee?" said Juss. "Be sure we shall find no better place than this thou seest to dwell in until the snows melt and we may on. For though it be summer all the year round in this fortunate valley, it is winter on the great hills, and until the spring we were mad to essay our enterprise."

"Why then," said Brandoch Daha, "turn we shepherds awhile. Thou shalt pipe to me, and I'll foot thee measures shall make the dryads think they ne'er went to school. And Mivarsh shall be a goat-foot god to chase them; for to tell thee truth country wenches are long grown tedious to me. O, 'tis a sweet life. But ere we fall to it, bethink thee, O Juss: time marcheth, and the world waggeth:

[p. 198]

what goeth forward in Demonland till summer be come and we home again?"

"Also my heart is heavy because of my brother Spitfire," said Juss. "Oh, 'twas an ill storm, and ill delays."

"Away with vain regrettings," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "For thy sake and thy brother's fared I on this journey, and it is known to thee that never yet stretched I out mine hand upon aught that I have not taken it, and had my will of it."

So they made their dwelling in that cave beside deep-eddying Bhavinan, and before that cave they ate their Yule feast, the strangest they had eaten all the days of their lives: seated, not as of old, on their high seats of ruby or of opal, but on mossy banks where daisies slept and creeping thyme; lighted not by the charmed escarbuncle of the high presence chamber in Galing, but by the shifting beams of a brushwood fire that shone not on those pillars crowned with monsters that were the wonder of the world but on the mightier pillars of the sleeping beechwoods. And in place of that feigned heaven of jewels self-effulgent beneath the golden canopy at Galing, they ate pavilioned under a charmed summer night, where the great stars of winter, Orion, Sirius, and the Little Dog, were raised up near the zenith, yielding their known courses in the southern sky to Canopus and the strange stars of the south. When the trees spake, it was not with their winter voice of bare boughs creaking, but with whisper of leaves and beetles droning in the fragrant air. The bushes were white with blossom, not with hoar-frost, and the dim white patches under the trees were not snow, but wild lilies and wood anemones sleeping in the night.

All the creatures of the forest came to that feast, for they were without fear, having never looked upon the face of man. Little tree-apes, and popinjays, and titmouses, and coalmouses, and wrens, and gentle round-eyed lemurs, and rabbits, and badgers, and dormice, and pied squirrels, and beavers from the streams, and storks, and ravens, and bustards, and wombats, and the spider-monkey

[p. 199]

with her baby at her breast: all these came to gaze with curious eye upon those travellers. And not these alone, but fierce beasts of the woods and wildernesses: the wild buffalo, the wolf, the tiger with monstrous paws, the bear, the fiery-eyed unicorn, the elephant, the lion and she-lion in their majesty, came to behold them in the firelight in that quiet glade.

"It seems we hold court in the woods to-night," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "It is very pleasant. Yet bold thee ready with me to put some fire-brands amongst 'em if need befall. 'Tis likely some of these great beasts are little schooled in court ceremonies."

Juss answered, "And thou lovest me, do no such thing. There lieth this curse upon all this land of the Bhavinan, that whoso, whether he be man or beast, slayeth in this land or doeth here any deed of violence, there cometh down a curse upon him that in that instant must destroy and blast him for ever off the face of the earth. Therefore it was I took away from Mivarsh his bow and arrows when we came down from Omprenne Edge, lest he should kill game for us and so a worse thing befall him."

Mivarsh harkened not, but sat all a-quake, looking intently on a crocodile that came ponderously out upon the bank. And now he began to scream with terror, crying, "Save me! let me fly! give me my weapons! It was foretold me by a wise woman that a cocadrill-serpent must devour me at last!" Whereat the beasts drew back uneasily, and the crocodile, his small eyes wide, startled by Mivarsh's cries and violent gestures, lurched with what speed he might back into the water.

 

Now in that place Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha and Mivarsh Faz abode for four moons' space. Nothing they lacked of meat and drink, for the beasts of the forest, finding them well disposed, brought them of their store. Moreover, there came flying from the south, about the ending of the year, a martlet which alighted in Juss's bosom and said to him, "The gentle[paragraph continues] 

[p. 200]

Queen Sophonisba, fosterling of the Gods, had news of your coming. And because she knoweth you both mighty men of your hands and high of heart, therefore by me she sent you greeting."

Juss said, "O little martlet, we would see thy Queen face to f ace, and thank her."

"Ye must thank her," said the bird, "in Koshtra Belorn."

Brandoch Daha said, "That shall we fulfil. Thither only do our thoughts intend."

"Your greatness," said the martlet, "must approve that word. And know that it is easier to lay under you all the world in arms than to ascend up afoot into that mountain."

"Thy wings were too weak to lift me, else I'd borrow them," said Brandoch Daha.

But the martlet answered, "Not the eagle that flieth against the sun may alight on Koshtra Belorn. No foot may tread her, save of those blessed ones to whom the Gods gave leave ages ago, till they be come that the patient years await: men like unto the Gods in beauty and in power, who of their own might and main, unholpen by magic arts, shall force a passage up to her silent snows."

Brandoch Daha laughed. "Not the eagle?" he cried, "but thou, little flitter-jack?"

"Nought that hath feet," said the martlet. "I have none."

The Lord Brandoch Daha took it tenderly in his hand and held it high in the air, looking to the high lands in the south. The birches swaying by the Bhavinan were not more graceful nor the distant mountain-crags behind them more untameable to behold than he. "Fly to thy Queen," he said, "and say thou spakest with Lord Juss beside the Bhavinan and with Lord Brandoch Daha of Demonland. Say unto her that we be they that were for to come; and that we, of our own might and main, ere spring be well turned summer, will come up to her if Koshtra Belorn to thank her for her gracious sendings."

[p. 201]

Now when it was April, and the sun moving among the signs of heaven was about departing out of Aries and entering into Taurus, and the melting of the snows in the high mountains had swollen all the streams to spate, filling the mighty river so that he brimmed his banks and swept by like a tide-race, Lord Juss said, "Now is the season propitious for our crossing of the flood of Bhavinan and setting forth into the mountains."

"Willingly," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "But shall's walk it, or swim it, or take to us wings? To me, that have many a time swum back and forth over Thunderfirth to whet mine appetite ere I brake my fast, 'tis a small matter of this river stream howso swift it runneth. But with our harness and weapons and all our gear, that were far other matter."

"Is it for nought we are grown friends with them that do inhabit these woods?" said Juss. "The crocodile shall bear us over Bhavinan for the asking."

"It is an ill fish," said Mivarsh; "and it sore dislikes me."

"Then here thou must abide," said Brandoch Daha. "But be not dismayed, I will go with thee. The fish may bear us both at a draught and not founder."

"It was a wise woman foretold it me," answered Mivarsh, "that such a kind of serpent must be my bane. Yet be it according to your will."

So they whistled them up the crocodile; and first the Lord Juss fared over Bhavinan, riding on the back of that serpent with all his gear and weapons of war, and landed several hundred paces down stream for the stream was very strong; and thereafter the crocodile returning to the north bank took the Lord Brandoch Daha and Mivarsh Faz and put them across in like manner. Mivarsh put on a gallant face, but rode as near the tail as might be, fingering certain herbs from his wallet that were good against serpents, his lips moving in urgent supplication to his gods. When they were come ashore they thanked the crocodile and bade him farewell and went their way swiftly through the woods. And[paragraph continues] 

[p. 202]

Mivarsh, as one new loosed from prison, went before them with a light step, singing and snapping his fingers.

Now had they for three days or four a devious journey through the foot-hills, and thereafter made their dwelling for forty days space in the Zia valley, above the gorges. Here the valley widens to a flat-floored amphitheatre, and lean limestone crags tower heavenward on every side. High in the south, couched above great gray moraines, the Zia glacier, wrinkle-backed like some dragon survived out of the elder chaos, thrusts his snout into the valley. Here out of his caves of ice the young river thunders, casting up a spray where rainbows hover in bright weather. The air blows sharp from the glacier, and alpine flowers and shrubs feed on the sunlight.

Here they gathered them good store of food. And every morning they were afoot before the sunrise, to ascend the mountains and make sure their practice ere they should attempt the greater peaks. So they explored all the spurs of Tetrachnampf and Islargyn, and those peaks themselves; the rock peaks of the lower Nuanner range overlooking Bhavinan; the snow peaks east of Islargyn: Avsek, Kiurmsur, Myrsu, Byrshnargyn, and Borch Mehephtharsk, loftiest of the range, by all his ridges, dwelling a week on the moraines of the Mehephtharsk glacier above the upland valley of Foana; and westward the dolomite group of Burdjazarshra and the great wall of Shilack.

Now were their muscles by these exercises grown like bands of iron, and they hardy as mountain bears and sure of foot as mountain goats. So on the ninth day of May they crossed the Zia Pass and camped on the rocks under the south wall of Tetrachnampf nan Tshark. The sun went down, like blood, in a cloudless sky. On either hand and before them, the snows stretched blue and silent. The air of those high snowfields was bitter cold. A league and more to the south a line of black cliffs bounded the glacier-basin. Over that black wall, twelve miles away, Koshtra Belorn and Koshtra Pivrarcha towered against an opal heaven.

[p. 203]

While they supped in the fading light, Juss said, "The wall thou seest is called the Barriers of Emshir. Though over it lieth the straight way to Koshtra Pivrarcha, yet is it not our way, but an ill way. For, first, that barrier hath till now been held unclimbable, and so proven even by half-gods that alone assayed it."

"I await not thy second reason," said Brandoch Daha. "Thou hast had thy way until now, and now thou shalt give me mine in this, to come with me to-morrow and show how thou and I make of such barriers a puff of smoke if they stand in the path between us and our fixed ends."

"Were it only this," answered Juss, "I would not gainsay thee. But not senseless rocks alone are we set to deal with if we take this road. Seest thou where the Barriers end in the east against yonder monstrous pyramid of tumbled crags and hanging glaciers that shuts out our prospect east-away? Menksur men call it, but in heaven it hath a more dreadful name: Ela Mantissera, which is to say, the Bed of the Mantichores. O Brandoch Daha, I will climb with thee what unsealed cliff thou list, and I will fight with thee against the most grisfullest beasts that ever grazed by the Tartarian streams. But both these things in one moment of time, that were a rash part and a foolish."

But Brandoch Daha laughed, and answered him, "To nought else may I liken thee, O Juss, but to the sparrow-camel. To whom they said, 'Fly,' and it answered, 'I cannot, for I am a camel'; and when they said, 'Carry,' it answered, 'I cannot, for I am a bird.'"

"Wilt thou egg me on so much?" said Juss.

"Ay," said Brandoch Daha, "if thou wilt be assish."

"Wilt thou quarrel?" said Juss.

"Thou knowest me," said Brandoch Daha.

"Well," said Juss, "thy counsel hath been right once and saved us, for nine times that it hath been wrong, and my counsel saved thee from an evil end. If ill behap us, it shall be set down that it had from thy peevish will

[p. 204]

original." And they wrapped them in their cloaks and slept.

On the morrow they rose betimes and set forth south across the snows that were crisp and hard for the frosts of the night. The Barriers, as it were but a stone's-throw removed, stood black before them; starlight swallowed up size and distance that showed only by walking, as still they walked and still that wall seemed no nearer nor no larger. Twice and thrice they dipped into a valley or crossed a raised-up fold of the glacier; till they stood at break of day below the smooth blank wall frozen and bleak, with never a ledge in sight great enough to bear snow, barring their passage southward.

They halted and ate and scanned the wall before them. And ill to do with it seemed. So they searched for an ascent, and found at last a spot where the glacier swelled higher, a mile or less from the western shoulder of Ela Mantissera. Here the cliff was but four or five hundred feet high; yet smooth enow and ill enow to look on; yet their likeliest choice.

Some while it was ere they might get a footing on that wall, but at length Brandoch Daha, standing on Juss's shoulder, found him a hold where no hold showed from below, and with great travail fought a passage up the rock to a stance some hundred feet above them, whence sitting sure on a broad ledge great enough to hold six or seven folk at a time he played up Lord Juss on the rope and after him Mivarsh. An hour and a half it cost them for that short climb.

"The north-east buttress of Ill Stack was children's gruel to this," said Lord Juss.

"There's more aloft," said Lord Brandoch Daha, lying back against the precipice, his hands clasped behind his head, his feet a-dangle over the ledge. "In thine ear, Juss: I would not go first on the rope again on such a pitch for all the wealth of Impland."

"Wilt repent and return?" said Juss.

"If thou'lt be last down," he answered. "If not, I'd

[p. 205]

liever risk what waits untried above us. If it prove worse, I am confirmed atheist."

Lord Juss leaned out, holding by the rock with his right hand, scanning the wall beside and above them. An instant he hung so, then drew back. His square jaw was set, and his teeth glinted under his dark moustachios something fiercely, as a thunder-beam betwixt dark sky and sea in a night of thunder. His nostrils widened, as of a war-horse at the call of battle; his eyes were like the violet levin-brand, and all his body hardened like a bowstring drawn as he grasped his sharp sword and pulled it forth grating and singing from its sheath.

Brandoch Daha sprang afoot and drew his sword, Zeldornius's loom. "What stirreth?" he cried. "Thou look'st ghastly. That look thou hadst when thou tookest the helm and our prows swung westward toward Kartadza Sound, and the fate of Demonland and all the world beside hung in thine hand for wail or bliss."

"There's little sword-room," said Juss. And again he looked forth eastward and upward along the cliff.

Brandoch Daha looked over his shoulder. Mivarsh took his bow and set an arrow on the string.

"It hath scented us down the wind," said Brandoch Daha.

Small time was there to ponder. Swinging from hold to hold across the dizzy precipice, as an ape swingeth from bough to bough, the beast drew near. The shape of it was as a lion, but bigger and taller, the colour a dull red, and it had prickles lancing out behind, as of a porcupine; its face a man's face, if aught so hideous might be conceived of human kind, with staring eyeballs, low wrinkled brow, elephant ears, some wispy mangy likeness of a lion's mane, huge bony chaps, brown blood-stained gubber-tushes grinning betwixt bristly lips. Straight for the ledge it made, and as they braced them to receive it, with a great swing heaved a man's height above them and leaped down upon their ledge from aloft betwixt Juss and Brandoch Daha ere they were well aware of its changed course. Brandoch Daha smote at it a great swashing

[p. 206]

blow and cut off its scorpion tail; but it clawed Juss's shoulder, smote down Mivarsh, and charged like a lion upon Brandoch Daha, who, missing his footing on the narrow edge of rock, fell backwards a great fall, clear of the cliff, down to the snow an hundred feet beneath them.

As it craned over, minded to follow and make an end of him, Juss smote it in the hinder parts and on the ham, shearing away the flesh from the thigh bone, and his sword came with a clank against the brazen claws of its foot. So with a horrid bellow it turned on Juss, rearing like a horse; and it was three heads greater than a tall man in stature when it reared aloft, and the breadth of its chest like the chest of a bear. The stench of its breath choked Juss's mouth and his senses sickened, but he slashed it athwart the belly, a great round-armed blow, cutting open its belly so that the guts fell out. Again he hewed at it, but missed, and his sword came against the rock, and was shivered into pieces. So when that noisome vermin fell forward on him roaring like a thousand lions, Juss grappled with it, running in beneath its body and clasping it and thrusting his arms into its inward parts, to rip out its vitals if so he might. So close he grappled it that it might not reach him with its murthering teeth, but its claws sliced off the flesh from his left knee down ward to the ankle bone, and it fell on him and crushed him on the rock, breaking in the bones of his breast. And Juss, for all his bitter pain and torment, and for all he was well nigh stifled by the sore stink of the creature's breath and the stink of its blood and puddings blubbering about his face and breast, yet by his great strength wrastled with that fell and filthy man-eater. And ever he thrust his right hand, armed with the hilt and stump of his broken sword, yet deeper into its belly until he searched out its heart and did his will upon it, slicing the heart asunder like a lemon and severing and tearing all the great vessels about the heart until the blood gushed about him like a spring. And like a caterpillar the beast curled up and straightened out in its death

[p. 207]

spasms, and it rolled and fell from that ledge, a great fall, and lay by Brandoch Daha, the foulest beside the fairest of all earthly beings, reddening the pure snow with its blood. And the spines that grew on the hinder parts of the beast went out and in like the sting of a new-dead wasp that goes out and in continually. It fell not clean to the snow, as by the care of heaven was fallen Brandoch Daha, but smote an edge of rock near the bottom, and that strook out its brains. There it lay in its blood, gaping to the sky.

Now was Juss stretched face downward as one dead, on that giddy edge of rock. Mivarsh had saved him, seizing him by the foot and drawing him back to safety when the beast fell. A sight of terror he was, clotted from head to toe with the beast's blood and his own. Mivarsh bound his wounds and laid him tenderly as he might back against the cliff, then peered down a long while to know if the beast were dead indeed.

When he had gazed downward earnestly so long that his eyes watered with the strain, and still the beast stirred not, Mivarsh prostrated himself and made supplication saying aloud, "O Shlimphli, Shlamphi, and Shebamri, gods of my father and my father's fathers, have pity of your child, if as I dearly trow your power extendeth over this far and forbidden country no less than over Impland, where your child hath ever worshipped you in your holy places, and taught my sons and my daughters to revere your holy names, and made an altar in mine house, pointed by the stars in manner ordained from of old, and offered up my seventh-born son and was minded to offer up my seventh-born daughter thereon, in meekness and righteousness according to your holy will; but this I might not do, since you vouchsafed me not a seventh daughter, but six only. Wherefore I beseech you, of your holy names' sake, strengthen my hand to let down this my companion safely by the rope, and thereafter bring me safely down from this rock, howsoever he be a devil and an unbeliever; O save his life, save both their lives. For I am sure that if these be not

[p. 208]

saved alive, never shall your child return, but in this far land starve and die like an insect that dureth but for a day."

So prayed Mivarsh. And belike the high Gods were moved to pity of his innocence, hearing him so cry for help unto his mumbo-jumbos, where no help was; and belike they were not minded that those lords of Demonland should there die evilly before their time, unhonoured, unsung. Howsoever, Mivarsh arose and made fast the rope about Lord Juss, knotting it cunningly beneath the arms that it might not tighten in the lowering and crush his breast and ribs, and so with much ado lowered him down to the foot of the cliff. Thereafter came Mivarsh himself down that perilous wall, and albeit for many a time he thought his bane was upon him, yet by good cragsmanship spurred by cold necessity he gat him down at last. Being down, he delayed not to minister to his companions, who came to themselves with heavy groaning. But when Lord Juss was come to himself he did his healing art both on himself and on Lord Brandoch Daha, so that in a while they were able to stand upon their feet, albeit something stiff and weary and like to vomit. And it was by then the third hour past noon.

While they rested, beholding where the beast mantichora lay in his blood, Juss spake and said, "It is to be said of thee, O Brandoch Daha, that thou to-day hast done both the worst and the best. The worst, when thou wast so stubborn set to fare upon this climb which hath come within a little of spilling both thee and me. The best, whenas thou didst smite off his tail. Was that by policy or by chance?"

"Why," said he, "I was never so, poor a man of my hands that I need turn braggart. 'Twas handiest to my sword, and it disliked me to see it wagging. Did aught lie on it?"

"The sting of his tail," answered Juss, "were competent for thine or my destruction, and it grazed but our little finger."

"Thou speakest like a book," said Brandoch Daha.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 209]

"Else might I scarce know thee for my noble friend, being berayed with blood as a buffalo with mire. Be not angry with me, if I am most at ease to windward of thee."

Juss laughed. "If thou be not too nice," he said, "go to the beast and dabble thyself too with the blood of his bowels. Nay, I mock not; it is most needful. These be enemies not of mankind only, but each of other: walking every one by himself, loathing every one his kind living or dead, so that in all the world there abideth nought loathlier unto them than the blood of their own kind, the least smell whereof they do abhor as a mad dog abhorreth water. And 'tis a clinging smell. So are we after this encounter most sure against them."

That night they camped at the foot of a spur of Avsek, and set forth at dawn down the long valley eastward. All day they heard the roaring of mantichores from the desolate flanks of Ela Mantissera that showed now no longer as a pyramid but as a long-backed screen, making the southern rampart of that valley. It was ill going, and they somewhat shaken. Day was nigh gone when beyond the eastern slopes of Ela they came where the white waters of the river they followed thundered together with a black water rushing down from the south-west. Below, the river ran east in a wide valley dropping afar to tree-clad depths. In the fork above the watersmeet the rocks enclosed a high green knoll, like some fragment of a kindlier clime that over-lived into an age of ruin.

"Here, too," said Juss, "my dream walked with me. And if it be ill crossing there where this stream breaketh into a dozen branching cataracts a little above the Watersmeet, yet well I think 'tis our only crossing." So, ere the light should fade, they crossed that perilous edge above the water-falls, and slept on the green knoll.

That knoll Juss named Throstlegarth, after a thrush that waked them next morning, singing in a little wind-stunted mountain thorn that grew among the rocks. Strangely sounded that homely song on the cold mountain

[p. 210]

side, under the unhallowed heights of Ela, close to the confines of those enchanted snows which guard Koshtra Belorn.

No sight of the high mountains had they from Throstlegarth, nor, for a long while, from the bed of that straight steep glen of the black waters up which now their journey lay. Rugged spurs and buttresses shut them in. High on the left bank above the cataracts they made their way, buffeted by the wind that leaped and charged among the crags, their ears sated with the roaring sound of waters, their eyes filled with the spray blown upward. And Mivarsh followed after them. Silent they fared, for the way was steep and in such a wind and such a noise of torrents a man must shout lustily if he would be heard. Very desolate was that valley, having a dark aspect and a ghastful, such as a man might look for in the infernal glens of Pyriphlegethon or Acheron. No living thing they saw, save at whiles high above them an eagle sailing down the wind, and once a beast's form running in the hollow mountain side. This stood at gaze, lifting up its foul human platter-face with glittering eyes bloody and great as saucers; scented its fellow's blood, started, and fled among the crags.

So fared they for the space of three hours, and so, coming suddenly round a shoulder of the hill, stood on the upper threshold of that glen at the gates of a flat upland valley. Here they beheld a sight to darken all earth's glories and strike dumb all her singers with its grandeur. Framed in the crags of the hillsides, canopied by blue heaven, Koshtra Pivrarcha stood before them. So huge he was that even here at six miles' distance the eye might not at a glance behold him, but must sweep back and forth as over a broad landscape from the ponderous roots of the mountain where they sprang black and sheer from the glacier, up the vast face, where buttress was piled upon buttress and tower upon tower in a blinding radiance of ice-hung precipice and snow-filled gully, to the lone heights where like spears menacing high heaven the white teeth of the summit-ridge cleft

[p. 211]

the sky. From right to left he filled nigh a quarter of the heavens, from the graceful peak of Ailinon looking over his western shoulder, to where on the east the snowy slopes of Jalchi shut in the prospect, hiding Koshtra Belorn.

They camped that evening on the left moraine of the High Glacier of Temarm. Long spidery streamers of cloud, filmy as the gauze of a lady's veil, blew eastward from the spires on the ridge, signs of wild weather aloft.

Juss said, "Glassy clear is the air. That forerunneth not fair weather."

"Well, time shall wait for us if need be," said Brandoch Daha. "So mightily my desire crieth unto me from those horns of ice that, having once looked on them, I had as lief die as leave them unclimbed. But of thee, O Juss, I make some marvel. Thou wast bidden inquire in Koshtra Belorn, and sure she were easier won than Koshtra Pivrarcha, going behind Jalchi by the snowfields and so avoiding her great western cliffs."

"There is a saw in Impland," answered Juss, "'Ware of a tall wife.' Even so there lieth a curse on any that shall attempt Koshtra Belorn that hath not first looked down upon her; and he shall have his death or ever he have his will. And from one point only of earth may a man look down on Koshtra Belorn; and 'tis from yonder unascended tooth of ice where thou seest the last beam burn. For that is the topmost pinnacle of Koshtra Pivrarcha. And it is the highest point of the stablished earth."

They were spent a minute's space. Then Juss spake: "Thou wast ever greatest amongst us as a mountaineer. Which way likes thee best for our climbing up him?"

"O Juss," said Brandoch Daha, "on ice and snow thou art my master. Therefore give me thy rede. For mine own choice and pleasure, I have settled it this hour and more: namely to ascend into the gap between the two mountains, and thence turn westward up the east ridge of Pivrarcha."

"It is the fearsomest climb to look on," said Juss,

[p. 212]

"and belike the grandest, and for both counts I had wagered it thy choice. That gap hight the Gates of Zimiamvia. It, and the Koshtra glacier that runneth up to it, lieth under the weird I told thee of. It were our death to adventure there ere we had looked down upon Koshtra Belorn; which done, the charm is broke for us, and from that time forth it needeth but our own might and skill and a high heart to accomplish whatsoever we desire."

"Why then, the great north buttress," cried Brandoch Daha. "So shall she not behold us as we climb, until we come forth on the highest tooth and overlook her and tame her to our will."

So they supped and slept. But the wind cried among the crags all night long, and in the morning snow and sleet blotted out the mountains. All day the storm held, and in a lull they struck camp and came down again to Throstlegarth, and there abode nine days and nine nights in wind and rain and battering hail.

On the tenth day the weather abated, and they went up and crossed the glacier and lodged them in a cave in the rock at the foot of the great north buttress of Koshtra Pivrarcha. At dawn Juss and Brandoch Daha went forth to survey the prospect. They crossed the mouth of the steep snow-choked valley that ran up to the main ridge betwixt Ashnilan on the west and Koshtra Pivrarcha on the east, rounded the base of Ailinon, and climbed from the west to a snow saddle some three thousand feet up the ridge of that mountain, whence they might view the buttress and choose their way for their attempt.

"'Tis a two days' journey to the top," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "If night on the ridge freeze us not to death, I dread no other hindrance. That black rib that riseth half a mile above our camp, shall take us clean up to the crest of the buttress, striking it above the great tower at the northern end. If the rocks be like those we camped on, hard as diamond and rough as a

[p. 213]

sponge, they shall not fail us but by our own neglect. As I live, I ne'er saw their like for climbing."

"So far, well," said Juss.

"Above," said Brandoch Daha, "I'd drive thee a chariot until we come to the first great kick o' the ridge. That must we round, or ne'er go further, and on this side it showeth ill enough, for the rocks shelve outward. If they be iced, there's work indeed. Beyond that, I'll prophesy nought, O Juss, for I can see nought clear save that the ridge is hacked into clefts and steeples. How we may overcome them must be put to the proof. It is too high and too far to know. This only: where we would go, there have we gone until now. And by that ridge lieth, if any way there lieth, the way to this mountain top that we crossed the world to climb."

 

Next day with the first paling of the skies they arose all three and set forth southward over the crisp snows. They roped at the foot of the glacier that came down from the saddle, some five thousand feet above them, where the main ridge dips between Ashnilan and Koshtra Pivrarcha. Ere the brighter stars were swallowed in the light of morning they were cutting their way among the labyrinthine towers and chasms of the ice-fall. Soon the new daylight flooded the snowfields of the High Glacier of Temarm, dyeing them green and saffron and palest rose. The snows of Islargyn glowed far away in the north to the right of the white dome of Emshir. Ela Mantissera blocked the view north-eastward. The buttress that bounded their valley on the east plunged it in shadow blue as a summer sea. High on the other side the great twin peaks of Ailinon and Ashnilan, roused by the warm beams out of their frozen silence of the night, growled at whiles with avalanches and falling stones.

Juss was their leader in the ice-fall, guiding them now along high knife-edges that fell away on either hand to unsounded depths, now within the very lips of those chasms, along the bases of the ice-towers. These, five times a man's height, some square, some pinnacled, some

[p. 214]

shattered or piled with the ruins of their kind, leaned above the path, as ready to fall and overwhelm the climbers and dash their bones for ever down to those blue-green secret places of frost and silence where the chips of ice chinked hollow as Juss pressed onward, cutting his steps with Mivarsh's axe. At length the slope eased and they walked out on the unbroken surface of the glacier, and passing by a snow-bridge over the great rift betwixt the glacier and the mountain side came two hours before noon to the foot of the rock-rib that they had scanned from Ailinon.

Now was Brandoch Daha to lead them. They climbed face to the rock, slowly and without rest, for sound and firm as the rocks were the holds were small and few and the cliffs steep. Here and there a chimney gave them passage upward, but the climb was mainly by cracks and open faces of rock, a trial of main strength and endurance such as few might sustain for a short while only: but this wall was three thousand feet in height. By noon they gained the crest, and there rested on the rocks too weary to speak, looking across the avalanche-swept face of Koshtra Pivrarcha to the corniced parapet that ended against the western precipices of Koshtra Belorn.

For some way the ridge of the buttress was broad and level. Then it narrowed suddenly to the width of a horse's back, and sprang skyward two thousand feet and more. Brandoch Daha went forward and climbed a few feet up the cliff. It bulged out above him, smooth and holdless. He tried it once and again, then came down saying, "Nought without wings."

Then he went to the left. Here hanging glaciers overlooked the face from on high, and while he gazed an avalanche of ice-blocks roared down it. Then he went to the right, and here the rocks sloped outward, and the sloping ledges were piled with rubbish and the rocks rotten and slippery with snow and ice. So having gone a little way he returned, and, "O Juss," he said, "wilt take it right forth, and that must be by flying, for hold there is none: or wilt go east and dodge the avalanche: or

[p. 215]

west, where all is rotten and slither and a slip were our destruction?"

So they debated, and at length decided on the eastern road. It was an ill step round the jutting corner of the tower, for little hold there was, and the rocks were undercut below, so that a stone or a man loosed from that place must fall clear at a bound three or four thousand feet to the Koshtra glacier and there be dashed in pieces. Beyond, wide ledges gave them passage along the wall of the tower, that now swept inward, facing south. Far overhead, dazzling white in the sunshine, the broken glacier-edges and splinters jutted against the blue, and icicles greater than a man hung glittering from every ledge: a sight heavenly fair, whereof they yet had little joy, hastening as they had not hastened in their lives before to be out of the danger of that ice-swept face.

Suddenly was a noise above them like the crack of a giant whip, and looking up they beheld against the sky a dark mass which opened like a flower and spread into a hundred fragments. The Demons and Mivarsh hugged the cliffs where they stood, but there was little cover. All the air was filled with the shrieking of the stones, as they swept downwards like fiends returning to the pit, and with the crash of them as they dashed against the cliffs and burst in pieces. The echoes rolled and reverberated from cliff to distant cliff, and the limbs of the mountain seemed to writhe as under a scourge. When it was done, Mivarsh was groaning for pain of his left wrist sore hurt with a stone. The others were scatheless.

Juss said to Brandoch Daha, "Back, howsoever it dislike thee."

Back they went; and an avalanche of ice crashed down the face which must have destroyed them had they proceeded. "Thou dost misjudge me," said Brandoch

Daha, laughing. "Give me where my life lieth on mine own might and main; then is danger meat and drink to me, and nought shall turn me back. But here on this cursed cliff, on the ledges whereof a cripple might walk

[p. 216]

at ease, we be the toys of chance. And it were pure folly to abide upon it a moment longer."

"Two ways be left us," said Juss. "To turn back, and that were our shame for ever; and to essay the western traverse."

"And that should be the bane of any save of me and thee," said Brandoch Daha. "And if our bane, why, we shall sleep sound."

"Mivarsh," said Juss, "is nought so bounden to this adventure. He hath bravely held by us, and bravely stood our friend. Yet here we be come to such a pass, I sore misdoubt me if it were less danger of his life to come with us than seek safety alone."

But Mivarsh put on a hardy face. Never a word he spake, but nodded his head, as who should say, "Forward."

"First I must be thy leech," said Juss. And he bound up Mivarsh's wrist. And because the day was now far spent, they camped under the great tower, hoping next day to reach the top of Koshtra Pivrarcha that stood unseen some six thousand feet above them.

 

Next morning, when it was light enough to climb, they set forth. For two hours' space on that traverse not a moment passed but they were in instant peril of death. They were not roped, for on those slabbery rocks one man had dragged a dozen to perdition had he made a slip. The ledges sloped outward; they were piled with broken rock and mud; the soft red rock broke away at a hand's touch and plunged at a leap to the glacier below. Down and up and along, and down and up and up again they wound their way, rounding the base of that great tower, and came at last by a rotten gully safe to the ridge above it.

While they climbed, white wispy clouds which had gathered in the high gullies of Ailinon in the morning had grown to a mass of blackness that hid all the mountains to the west. Great streamers ran from it across the gulf below, joined and boiled upward, lifting and sinking

[p. 217]

like a full-tided sea, rising at last to the high ridge where the Demons stood and wrapping them in a cloak of vapour with a chill wind in its folds, and darkness in broad noon-day. They halted, for they might not see the rocks before them. The wind grew boisterous, shouting among the splintered towers. Snow swept powdery and keen across the ridge. The cloud lifted and plunged again like some great bird shadowing them with its wings. From its bosom the lightning flared above and below. Thunder crashed on the heels of the lightning, sending the echoes rolling among the distant cliffs. Their weapons, planted in the snow, sizzled with blue flame; Juss had counselled laying them aside lest they should perish holding them. Crouched in a hollow of the snow among the rocks of that high ridge of Koshtra Pivrarcha, Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha and Mivarsh Faz weathered that night of terror. When night came they knew not, for the storm brought darkness on them hours before sun-down. Blinding snow and sleet and fire and thunder, and wild winds shrieking in the gullies till the firm mountain seemed to rock, kept them awake. They were near frozen, and scarce desired aught but death, which might bring them ease from that hellish roundelay.

Day broke with a weak gray light, and the storm died down. Juss stood up weary beyond speech. Mivarsh said, "Ye be devils, but of myself I marvel. For I have dwelt by snow mountains all my days, and many I wot of that have been benighted on the snows in wild weather. And not one but was starved by reason of the cold. I speak of them that were found. Many were not found, for the spirits devoured them."

Whereat Lord Brandoch Daha laughed aloud, saying, "O Mivarsh, I fear me that in thee I have but a graceless dog. Look on him, that in hardihood and bodily endurance against all hardships of frost or fire surpasseth me as greatly as I surpass thee. Yet is he weariest of the three. Wouldst know why? I'll tell thee: all night he hath striven against the cold, chafing not himself only

[p. 218]

but me and thee to save us from frost-bite. And be sure nought else had saved thy carcase."

By then was the mist grown lighter, so that they might see the ridge for an hundred paces or more where it went up before them, each pinnacle standing out shadowy and unsubstantial against the next succeeding one more shadowy still. And the pinnacles showed monstrous huge through the mist, like mountain peaks in stature.

They roped and set forth, scaling the towers or turning them, now on this side now on that; sometimes standing on teeth of rock that seemed cut off from all earth else, solitary in a sea of shifting vapour; sometimes descending into a deep gash in the ridge with a blank wall rearing aloft on the further side and empty air yawning to left and right. The rocks were firm and good, like those they had first climbed from the glacier. But they went but a slow pace, for the climbing was difficult and made dangerous by new snow and by the ice that glazed the rocks.

As the day wore the wind was fallen, and all was still when they stood at length before a ridge of hard ice that shot steeply up before them like the edge of a sword. The east side of it on their left was almost sheer, ending in a blank precipice that dropped out of sight without a break. The western slope, scarcely less steep, ran down in a white even sheet of frozen snow till the clouds engulfed it.

Brandoch Daha waited on the last blunt tooth of rock at the foot of the ice-ridge. "The rest is thine," he cried to Lord Juss. "I would not that any save thou should tread him first, for he is thy mountain."

"Without thee I had never won up hither," answered Juss; "and it is not fitting that I should have that glory to stand first upon the peak when thine was the main achievement. Go thou before."

"I will not," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "And it is not so."

So Juss went forward, smiting with his axe great steps

[p. 219]

just below the backbone of the ridge on the western side, and Lord Brandoch Daha and Mivarsh Faz followed in the steps.

Presently a wind arose in the unseen spaces of the sky, and tore the mist like a rotten garment. Spears of sunlight blazed through the rifts. Distant sunny lands shimmered in the unimaginable depths to the southward, seen over the crest of a tremendous wall that stood beyond the abyss: a screen of black rock buttresses seamed with a thousand gullies of glistening snow, and crowned as with battlements with a row of mountain peaks, savage and fierce of form, that made the eye blink for their brightness: the lean spires of the summit-ridge of Koshtra Pivrarcha. These, that the Demons had so long looked up to as in distant heaven, now lay beneath their feet. Only the peak they climbed still reared itself above them, clear now and near to view, showing a bare beetling cliff on the north-east, overhung by a cornice of snow. Juss marked the cornice, turned him again to his step-cutting, and in half an hour from the breaking of the clouds stood on that unascended pinnacle, with all earth beneath him.

 

They went down a few feet on the southern side and sat on some rocks. A fair lake studded with islands lay bosomed in wooded and crag-girt hills at the foot of a deep-cut valley which ran down from the Gates of Zimiamvia. Ailinon and Ashnilan rose near by in the west, with the delicate white peak of Akra Garsh showing between them. Beyond, mountain beyond mountain like the sea.

Juss looked southward where the blue land stretched in fold upon fold of rolling country, soft and misty, till it melted in the sky. "Thou and I," said he, "first of the children of men, now behold with living eyes the fabled land of Zimiamvia. Is that true, thinkest thou, which philosophers tell us of that fortunate land: that no mortal foot may tread it, but the blessed souls do inhabit it of the dead that be departed, even they that were great

[p. 220]

upon earth and did great deeds when they were living, that scorned not earth and the delights and the glories thereof, and yet did justly and were not dastards nor yet oppressors?"

"Who knoweth?" said Brandoch Daha, resting his chin in his hand and gazing south as in a dream. "Who shall say he knoweth?"

They were silent awhile. Then Juss spake saying, "If thou and I come thither at last, O my friend, shall we remember Demonland?" And when he answered him not, Juss said, "I had rather row on Moonmere under the stars of a summer's night, than be a King of all the land of Zimiamvia. And I had rather watch the sunrise on the Scarf, than dwell in gladness all my days on an island of that enchanted Lake of Ravary, under Koshtra Belorn."

Now the curtain of cloud that had hung till now about the eastern heights was rent into shreds, and Koshtra Belorn stood like a bride before them, two or three miles to eastward, facing the slanting rays of the sun. On all her vast precipices scarce a rock showed bare, so encrusted were they with a dazzling robe of snow. More lovely she seemed and more graceful in her airy poise than they had yet beheld her. Juss and Brandoch Daha rose up, as men arise to greet a queen in her majesty. In silence they looked on her for some minutes.

Then Brandoch Daha spake, saying, "Behold thy bride, O Juss."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

 

XIII

 

Koshtra Belorn

HOW THE LORD JUSS ACCOMPLISHED AT LENGTH HIS DREAM'S BEHEST, TO INQUIRE IN KOSHTRA BELORN; AND WHAT MANNER OF ANSWER HE RECEIVED.

THAT night they spent safely, by favour of the Gods, under the highest crags of Koshtra Pivrarcha, in a sheltered hollow piled round with snow. Dawn came like a lily, saffron-hued, smirched with smoke-gray streaks that slanted from the north. The great peaks stood as islands above a main of level cloud, out of which the sun walked flaming, a ball of red-gold fire. An hour before his face appeared, the Demons and Mivarsh were roped and started on their eastward journey. Ill to do with as was the crest of the great north buttress by which they had climbed the mountain, seven times worse was this eastern ridge, leading to Koshtra Belorn. Leaner of back it was, flanked by more profound abysses, deeplier gashed, too treacherous and too sudden in its changes from sure rock to rotten and perilous: piled with tottering crags, hung about with cornices of uncertain snow, girt with cliffs smooth and holdless as

[p. 222]

a castle wall. Small marvel that it cost them thirteen hours to come down that ridge. The sun wheeled towards the west when they reached at length that frozen edge, sharp as a sickle, that was in the Gates of Zimiamvia. Weary they were, and ropeless; for by no means else might they come down from the last great tower save by the rope made fast from above. A fierce north-easter had swept the ridges all day, bringing snow-storms on its wings. Their fingers were numbed with cold, and the beards of Lord Brandoch Daha and Mivarsh Faz stiff with ice.

Too weary to halt, they set forth again, Juss leading. It was many hundred paces along that ice-edge, and the sun was near setting when they stood at last within a stone's throw of the cliffs of Koshtra Belorn. Since before noon avalanches had thundered ceaselessly down those cliffs. Now, in the cool of the evening, all was still. The wind was fallen. The deep blue sky was without a cloud. The fires of sunset crept down the vast white precipices before them till every ledge and fold and frozen pinnacle glowed pink colour, and every shadow became an emerald. The shadow of Koshtra Pivrarcha lay cold across the lower stretches of the face on the Zimiamvian side. The edge of that shadow was as the division betwixt the living and the dead.

"What dost think on?" said Juss to Brandoch Daha, that leaned upon his sword surveying that glory.

Brandoch Daha started and looked on him. "Why," said he, "on this: that it is likely thy dream was but a lure, sent thee by the King to tempt us on to mighty actions reserved for our destruction. On this side at least 'tis very certain there lieth no way up Koshtra Belorn."

"What of the little martlet," said Juss, "who, whiles we were yet a great way off, flew out of the south to greet us with a gracious message?"

"Well if it were not a devil of his," said Brandoch Daha.

"I will not turn back," said Juss. "Thou needest not

[p. 223]

to come with me." And he turned again to look on those frozen cliffs.

"No?" said Brandoch Daha. "Nor thou with me. Thou'lt make me angry if thou wilt so vilely wrest my words. Only fare not too securely; and let that axe still be ready in thine hand, as is my sword, for kindlier work than step-cutting. And if thou embrace the hope to climb her by this wall before us, then hath the King's enchantery made thee fey."

By then was the sun gone down. Under the wings of night uplifted from the east, the unfathomable heights of air turned a richer blue; and here and there, most dim and hard to see, throbbed a tiny point of light: the greater stars opening their eyelids to the gathering dark. Gloom crept upward, brimming the valleys far below like a rising tide of the sea. Frost and stillness waited on the eternal night to resume her reign. The solemn cliffs of Koshtra Belorn stood in tremendous silence, death-pale against the sky.

Juss came backward a step along the ridge, and laying his hand on Brandoch Daha's, "Be still," he said, "and behold this marvel." A little up the face of the mountain on the Zimiamvian side, it was as if some leavings of the after-glow had been entangled among the crags and frozen curtains of snow. As the gloom deepened, that glow brightened and spread, filling a rift that seemed to go into the mountain.

"It is because of us," said Juss, in a low voice. "She is afire with expectation of us."

No sound was there save of their breath coming and going, and of the strokes of Juss's axe, and of the chips of ice chinking downwards into silence as he cut their way along the ridge. And ever brighter, as night fell, burned that strange sunset light above them. Perilous climbing it was for fifty feet or more from the ridge, for they had no rope, the way was hard to see, and the rocks were steep and iced and every ledge deep in snow. Yet came they safe at length up by a steep short gully to the gully's head where it widened to that rift of the wondrous

[p. 224]

light. Here might two walk abreast, and Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha took their weapons and entered abreast into the rift. Mivarsh was fain to call to them, but he was speechless. He came after, close at their heels like a dog.

For some way the bed of the cave ran upwards, then dipped at a gentle slope deep into the mountain. The air was cold, yet warm after the frozen air without. The rose-red light shone warm on the walls and floor of that passage, but none might say whence it shone. Strange sculptures glimmered overhead, bull-headed men, stags with human faces, mammoths, and behemoths of the flood: vast forms and uncertain carved in the living rock. For hours Juss and his companions pursued their way, winding downward, losing all sense of north and south. Little by little the light faded, and after an hour or two they went in darkness: yet not in utter darkness but as of a starless night in summer where all night long twilight lingers. They went a soft pace, for fear of pitfalls in the way.

After a while Juss halted and sniffed the air. "I smell new-mown hay," he said, "and flower-scents. Is this my fantasy, or canst thou smell them too?"

"Ay, and have smelt it this half-hour past." answered Brandoch Daha; "also the passage wideneth before us, and the roof of it goeth higher as we journey."

"This," said Juss, "is a great wonder."

They fared onward, and in a while the slope slackened, and they felt loose stones and grit beneath their feet, and in a while soft earth. They bent down and touched the earth, and there was grass growing, and night-dew on the grass, and daisies folded up asleep. A brook tinkled on the right. So they crossed that meadow in the dark, until they stood below a shadowy mass that bulked big above them. In a blind wall so high the top was swallowed up in the darkness a gate stood open. They crossed that threshold and passed through a paved court that clanked under their tread. Before them a flight of steps went up to folding doors under an archway.

[p. 225]

Lord Brandoch Daha felt Mivarsh pluck him by the sleeve. The little man's teeth were chattering together in his head for terror. Brandoch Daha smiled and put an arm about him. Juss had his foot on the lowest step.

In that instant came a sound of music playing, but of what instruments they might not guess. Great thundering chords began it, like trumpets calling to battle, first high, then low, then shuddering down to silence; then that great call again, sounding defiance. Then the keys took new voices, groping in darkness, rising to passionate lament, hovering and dying away on the wind, until nought remained but a roll as of muffled thunder, long, low, quiet, but menacing ill. And now out of the dark ness of that induction burst a mighty form, three ponderous blows, as of breakers that plunge and strike on a desolate shore; a pause; those blows again; a grinding pause; a rushing of wings. as of Furies steaming up from the pit; another flight of them dreadful in its deliberation; then a wild rush upward and a swooping again; con fusion of hell, ranging serpents blazing through night sky. Then on a sudden out of a distant key, a sweet melody, long-drawn and clear, like a blaze of low sun shine piercing the dust-clouds above a battle-field. This was but an interlude to the terror of the great main theme that came in tumultuous strides up again from the deeps, storming to a grand climacteric of fury and passing away into silence. Now came a majestic figure, stately and calm, born of that terror, leading to it again: battlings of these themes in many keys, and at last the great triple blow, thundering in new strength, crushing all joy and sweetness as with a mace of iron, battering the roots of life into a general ruin. But even in the main stride of its outrage and terror, that great power seemed to shrivel. The thunder-blasts crashed weaklier, the harsh blows rattled awry, and the vast frame of con quest and destroying violence sank down panting, tottered and rumbled ingloriously into silence.

Like men held in a trance those lords of Demonland listened to the last echoes of the great sad chord

[p. 226]

where that music had breathed out its heart, as if the very heart of wrath were broken. But this was not the end. Cold and serene as some chaste virgin vowed to the Gods, with clear eyes which see nought below high heaven, a quiet melody rose from that grave of terror. Weak it seemed at first, a little thing after that cataclysm; a little thing, like spring's first bud peeping after the blasting reign of cold and ice. Yet it walked undismayed, gathering as it went beauty and power. And on a sudden the folding doors swung open, shedding a flood of radiance down the stairs.

Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha watched, as men watch for a star to rise, that radiant portal. And like a star indeed, or like the tranquil moon appearing, they beheld after a while one crowned like a Queen with a diadem of little clouds that seemed stolen from the mountain sunset, scattering soft beams of rosy brightness. She stood alone under that mighty portico with its vast shadowy forms of winged lions in shining stone black as jet. Youthful she seemed, as one that hath but just bidden adieu to childhood, with grave sweet lips and grave black eyes and hair like the night. Little black martlets perched on her either shoulder, and a dozen more skimmed the air above her head, so swift of wing that scarcely the eye might follow them. Meantime, that delicate and simple melody mounted from height to height, until in a while it burned with all the fires of summer, burned as summer to the uttermost ember, fierce and compulsive in its riot of love and beauty. So that, before the last triumphant chords died down in silence, that music had brought back to Juss all the glories of the mountains, the sunset fires on Koshtra Belorn, the first great revelation of the peaks from Morna Moruna; and over all these, as the spirit of that music to the eye made manifest, the image of that Queen so blessed-fair in her youth and her clear brow's sweet solemn respect and promise: in every line and pose of her fair form, virginal dainty as a flower, and kindled from withinward as never flower was with that divinity before

[p. 227]

the face of which speech and song fall silent and men may but catch their breath and worship.

When she spoke, it was with a voice like crystal: "Thanks be and praise to the blessed Gods. For lo, the years depart, and the fated years bring forth as the Gods ordain. And ye be those that were for to come."

Surely those great lords of Demonland stood like little boys before her. She said again, "Are not ye Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha of Demonland, come up to me by the way banned to all mortals else, come up into Koshtra Belorn?"

Then answered Lord Juss for them both and said, "Surely, O Queen Sophonisba, we be they thou namest."

Now the Queen carried them into her palace, and into a great hall where was her throne and state. The pillars of the hall were as vast towers, and there were galleries above them, tier upon tier, rising higher than sight could reach or the light of the gentle lamps in their stands that lighted the tables and the floor. The walls and the pillars were of a sombre stone unpolished, and on the walls strange portraitures: lions, dragons, nickers of the sea, spread-eagles, elephants, swans, unicorns, and other, lively made and richly set forth with curious colours of painting: all of giant size beyond the experience of human kind so that to be in that hall was as it were to shelter in a small spot of light and life, canopied, vaulted, and embraced by the circumambient unknown.

The Queen sate on her throne that was bright like the face of a river ruffled with wind under a silver moon. Save for those little martlets she was unattended. She made those lords of Demonland sit down before her face, and there were brought forth by the agency of unseen hands tables before them and precious dishes filled with unknown viands. And there played a soft music, made in the air by what unseen art they knew not.

The Queen said, "Behold, ambrosia which the Gods do eat and nectar which they drink; on which meat and wine myself do feed, by the bounty of the blessed Gods.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 228]

And the savour thereof wearieth not, and the glow thereof and the perfume thereof dieth not for ever."

So they tasted of the ambrosia, that was white to look on and crisp to the tooth and sweet, and being eaten revived strength in the body more than a surfeit of bullock's flesh, and of the nectar that was all afoam and coloured like the inmost fires of sunset. Surely somewhat of the peace of the Gods was in that nectar divine.

The Queen said, "Tell me, why are ye come?"

Juss answered, "Surely there was a dream sent me O Queen Sophonisba, through the gate of horn, and it bade me inquire hither after him I most desire, for want of whom my whole soul languisheth in sorrow this year gone by: even after my dear brother, the Lord Goldry Bluszco."

His words ceased in his throat. For with the speaking of that name the firm fabric of the palace quivered like the leaves of a forest under a sudden squall. Colour went from the scene, like the blood chased from a man's face by fear, and all was of a pallid hue, like the landscape which one beholds of a bright summer day after lying with eyes closed for a space face-upward under the blazing sun: all gray and cold, the warm colours burnt to ashes. Withal, followed the appearance of hateful little creatures issuing from the joints of the paving stones and the great blocks of the walls and pillars: some like grasshoppers with human heads and wings of flies, some like fishes with stings in their tails, some fat like toads, some like eels a-wriggling with puppy-dogs' heads and asses' ears: loathly ones, exiles of glory, scaly and obscene.

The horror passed. Colour returned. The Queen sat like a graven statue, her lips parted. After a while she said with a shaken voice, low and with downcast eyes, "Sirs, you demand of me a very strange matter, such as wherewith never hitherto I have been acquainted. As you are noble, I beseech you speak not that name again. In the name of the blessed Gods, speak it not again."

[p. 229]

 

Click to enlarge
IN KOSHTRA BELORN.

 

[p. 230]

Lord Juss was silent. Nought good were his thoughts within him.

In due time a little martlet by the Queen's command brought them to their bed-chambers. And there in great beds soft and fragrant they went to rest.

Juss waked long in the doubtful light, troubled at heart. At length he fell into a troubled sleep. The glimmer of the lamps mingled with his dreams and his dreams with it, so that scarce he wist whether asleep or waking he beheld the walls of the bed-chamber dispart in sunder, disclosing a prospect of vast paths of moonlight, and a solitary mountain peak standing naked out of a sea of cloud that gleamed white beneath the moon. It seemed to him that the power of flight was upon him, and that he flew to that mountain and hung in air beholding it near at hand, and a circle as the appearance of fire round about it, and on the summit of the mountain the likeness of a burg or citadel of brass that was green with eld and surface-battered by the frosts and winds of ages. On the battlements was the appearance of a great company both men and women, never still, now walking on the wall with hands lifted up as in supplication to the crystal lamps of heaven, now flinging themselves on their knees or leaning against the brazen battlements to bury their faces in their hands, or standing at gaze as night-walkers gazing into the void. Some seemed men of war, and some great courtiers by their costly apparel, rulers and kings and kings' daughters, grave bearded counsellors, youths and maidens and crowned queens. And when they went, and when they stood, and when they seemed to cry aloud bitterly, all was noiseless even as the tomb, and the faces of those mourners pallid as a dead corpse is pallid.

Then it seemed to Juss that he beheld a keep of brass flat-roofed standing on the right, a little higher than the walls, with battlements about the roof. He strove to cry aloud, but it was as if some devil gripped his throat stifling him, for no sound came. For in the midst of the roof, as it were on a bench of stone, was the appearance

[p. 231]

of one reclining; his chin resting in his great right hand, his elbow on an arm of the bench, his cloak about him gorgeous with cloth of gold, his ponderous two-handed sword beside him with its heart-shaped ruby pommel darkly resplendent in the moonlight. Nought otherwise looked he than when Juss last beheld him, on their ship before the darkness swallowed them; only the ruddy hues of life seemed departed from him, and his brow seemed clouded with sorrow. His eye met his brother's, but with no look of recognition, gazing as if on some far point in the deeps beyond the star-shine. It seemed to Juss that even so would he have looked to find his brother Goldry as he now found him; his head unbent for all the tyranny of those dark powers that held him in captivity: keeping like a God his patient vigil, heedless alike of the laments of them that shared his prison and of the menace of the houseless night about him.

The vision passed; and Lord Juss perceived himself in his bed again, the cold morning light stealing between the hangings of the windows and dimming the soft radiance of the lamps.

 

Now for seven days they dwelt in that palace. No living thing they encountered save only the Queen and her little martlets, but all things desirous were ministered unto them by unseen hands and all royal entertainment. Yet was Lord Juss heavy at heart, for as often as he would question the Queen of Goldry, so she would ever put him by, praying him earnestly not a second time to pronounce that name of terror. At last, walking with her alone in the cool of the evening on a trodden path of a meadow where asphodel grew and other holy flowers beside a quiet stream, he said, "So it is, O Queen Sophonisba, that when first I came hither and spake with thee I well thought that by thee my matter should be well sped. And didst not thou then promise me thy goodness and grace from thee thereafter?"

"This is very true," said the Queen.

"Then why," said he, "when I would question thee of

[p. 232]

that I make most store of, wilt thou always daff me and put me by?"

She was silent, hanging her head. He looked sidelong for a minute at her sweet profile, the grave clear lines of her mouth and chin. "Of whom must I inquire," he said, "if not of thee, which art Queen in Koshtra Belorn and must know this thing?"

She stopped and faced him with dark eyes that were like a child's for innocence and like a God's for splendour. "My lord, that I have put thee off, ascribe it not to evil intent. That were an unnatural part indeed in me unto you of Demonland who have fulfilled the weird and set me free again to visit again the world of men which I so much desire, despite all my sorrows I there fulfilled in elder time. Or shall I forget you are at enmity with the wicked house of Witchland, and therefore doubly pledged my friends?"

"That the event must prove, O Queen," said Lord Juss.

"O saw ye Morna Moruna?" cried she. "Saw ye it in the wilderness?" And when he looked on her still dark and mistrustful, she said, "Is this forgot? And methought it should be mention and remembrance made thereof unto the end of the world. I pray thee, my lord, what age art thou?"

"I have looked upon this world," answered Lord Juss, "for thrice ten years."

"And I," said the Queen, "but seventeen summers. Yet that same age had I when thou wast born, and thy grandsire before thee, and his before him. For the Gods gave me youth for ever more, when they brought me hither after the realm-rape that befell our house, and lodged me in this mountain."

She paused, and stood motionless, her hands clasped lightly before her, her head bent, her face turned a little away so that he saw only the white curve of her neck and her cheek's soft outline. All the air was full of sunset, though no sun was there, but a scattered splendour only, shed from the high roof of rock that was like a sky

[p. 233]

above them self-effulgent. Very softly she began again to speak, the crystal accents of her voice sounding like the faint notes of a bell borne from a great way off on the quiet air of a summer evening. "Surely time past is gone by like a shadow since those days, when I was Queen in Morna Moruna, dwelling there with my lady mother and the princes my cousins in peace and joy. Until Gorice III. came out of the north, the great King of Witchland, desiring to explore these mountains, for his pride sake and his insolent heart; which cost him dear. 'Twas on an evening of early summer we beheld him and his folk ride over the flowering meadows of the Moruna. Nobly was he entertained by us, and when we knew what way he meant to go, we counselled him turn back, and the mantichores must tear him if he went. But he mocked at our advisoes, and on the morrow departed, he and his, by way of Omprenne Edge. And never again were they seen of living man.

"That had been small loss; but hereof there befell a great and horrible mischief. For in the spring of the year came Gorice IV. with a great army out of waterish Witchland, saying with open mouth of defamation that we were the dead King's murtherers: we that were peaceful folk, and would not entertain an action should call us villain for all the wealth of Impland. In the night they came, when all we save the sentinels upon the walls were in our beds secure in a quiet conscience. They took the princes my cousins and all our men, and before our eyes most cruelly murthered them. So that my mother seeing these things fell suddenly into deadly swoonings and was presently dead. And the King commanded them burn the house with fire, and he brake down the holy altars of the Gods, and defiled their high places. And unto me that was young and fair to look on he gave this choice, to go with him and be his slave, other else to be cast down from the Edge and all my bones be broken. Surely I chose this rather. But the Gods, that do help every rightful true cause, made light my fall, and guided me hither safe through all perils

[p. 234]

of height and cold and ravening beasts, granting me youth and peaceful days for ever, here on the borderland between the living and the dead.

"And the Gods blew upon all the land of the Moruna in the fire of their wrath, to make it desolate, and man and beast cut off therefrom, for a witness of the wicked deeds of Gorice the King, even as Gorice the King made desolate our little castle and our pleasant places. The face of the land was lifted up to high airs where frosts do dwell, so that the cliffs of Omprenne Edge down which ye came are ten times the height they were when Gorice III. came down them. So was an end of flowers on the Moruna, and an end there of spring and of summer days for ever."

The Queen ceased speaking, and Lord Juss was silent for a space, greatly marvelling.

"Judge now," said she, "if your foes be not my foes. It is not hidden from me, my lord, that you deem me but a lukewarm friend and no helper at all in your enterprise. Yet have I ceased not since ye were here to search and to inquire, and sent my little martlets west and east and south and north after tidings of him thou namedst. They are swift, even as wingy thoughts circling the stablished world; and they returned to me on weary wings, yet with never a word of thy great kinsman."

Juss looked at her eyes that were moist with tears. Truth sat in them like an angel. "O Queen," he cried, "why need thy little minions scour the world, when my brother is here in Koshtra Belorn?"

She shook her head, saying, "This I will swear to thee, there hath no mortal come up into Koshtra Belorn save only thee and thy companions these two hundred years."

But Juss said again, "My brother is here in Koshtra Belorn. Mine eyes beheld him that first night, hedged about with fires. And he is held captive on a tower of brass on a peak of a mountain."

"There be no mountains here," said she, "save this in whose womb we have our dwelling."

[p. 235]

"Yet so I beheld my brother," said Juss, "under the white beams of the full moon."

"There is no moon here," said the Queen.

So Lord Juss rehearsed to her his vision of the night, telling her point to point of everything. She harkened gravely, and when he had done, trembled a little and said, "This is a mystery, my lord, beyond my resolution.

She fell silent awhile. Then she began to say in a hushed voice, as if the very words and breath might breed some dreadful matter: "Taken up in a sending maleficial by King Gorice XII. So it hath ever been, that whensoever there dieth one of the house of Gorice there riseth up another in his stead, and so from strength to strength. And death weakeneth not this house of Witchland, but like the dandelion weed being cut down and bruised it springeth up the stronger. Dost thou know why?"

He answered, "No."

"The blessed Gods," said she, speaking yet lower, "have shown me many hidden matters which the sons of men know not neither imagine. Behold this mystery. There is but One Gorice. And by the favour of heaven (that moveth sometimes in a manner our weak judgement seeketh in vain to justify) this cruel and evil One, every time whether by the sword or in the fulness of his years he cometh to die, departeth the living soul and spirit of him into a new and sound body, and liveth yet another lifetime to vex and to oppress the world, until that body die, and the next in his turn, and so continually; having thus in a manner life eternal."

Juss said, "Thy discourse, O Queen Sophonisba, is in a strain above mortality. This is a great wonder thou tellest me; whereof some little part I guessed aforetime, but the main I knew not. Rightfully, having such a timeless life, this King weareth on his thumb that worm Ouroboros which doctors have from of old made for an ensample of eternity, whereof the end is ever at the beginning and the beginning at the end for ever more."

[p. 236]

"See then the hardness of the thing," said the Queen. "But I forget not, my lord, that thou hast a matter nearer thine heart than this: to set free him (name him not!) concerning whom thou didst inquire of me. Touching this, know it for thy comfort, some ray of light I see. Question me no more till I have made trial thereof, lest it prove but a false dawn. If it be as I think, 'tis a trial yet abideth thee should make the stoutest blench."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 237]

 

XIV

 

The Lake of Ravary

OF THE FURTHERANCE GIVEN BY QUEEN SOPHONISBA, FOSTERLING OF THE GODS, TO LORD JUSS AND LORD BRANDOCH DAHA; WITH HOW THE HIPPOGRIFF'S EGG WAS HATCHED BESIDE THE ENCHANTED LAKE, AND WHAT ENSUED THEREFROM.

Next day the Queen came to Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha and made them go with her, and Mivarsh with them to serve them, over the meadows and down a passage like that whereby they had entered the mountain, but this led downward. "Ye may marvel," she said, "to see daylight in the heart of this great mountain. Yet it is but the hidden work of Nature. For the rays of the sun, striking all day upon Koshtra Belorn and upon her robe of snow, sink into the snow like water, and so soaking through the secret places of the rocks shine again in this hollow chamber where we dwell and in these passages cleft by the Gods to give us our goings out and our comings in. And as sunset followeth broad day with coloured fires, and moonlight or darkness followeth sunset, and dawn followeth night ushering the bright day once more, so these changes of the

[p. 238]

dark and light succeed one another within the mountain."

They passed on, ever downward, till after many hours they came suddenly forth into dazzling sunlight. They stood at a cave's mouth on a beach of sand white and clean, that was lapped by the ripples of a sapphire lake: a great lake, sown with islets craggy and luxuriant with trees and flowering growths. Many-armed was the lake, winding everywhere in secret reaches behind promontories that were spurs of the mountains that held it in their bosom: some wooded or green with lush flower-spangled turf to the water's edge, some with bare rocks abrupt from the water, some crowned with rugged lines of crag that sent down scree-slopes into the lake below. It was mid-afternoon, sweet-aired, a day of dappled cloud-shadows and changing lights. White birds circled above the lake, and now and then a kingfisher flashed by like a streak of azure flame. That was a westward facing beach, at the end of a headland that ran down clothed with pine-forests with open primrose glades from a spur of Koshtra Belorn. Northward the two great mountains stood at the head of a straight narrow valley that ran up to the Gates of Zimiamvia. Vaster they seemed than the Demons had yet beheld them, showing at but six or seven miles' distance a clear sixteen thousand feet above the lake. Nor from any other point of prospect were they more lovely to behold: Koshtra Pivrarcha like an eagle armed, shadowing with wings, and Koshtra Belorn as a Goddess fallen a-dreaming, gracious as the morning star of heaven. Wondrous bright were their snows in the sunshine, yet ghostly and unsubstantial to view seen through the hazy summer air. Olive trees, gray and soft-outlined like embodied mist, grew in the lower valleys; woods of oak and birch and every forest tree clothed the slopes; and in the warmer folds of the mountain sides belts of creamy rhododendrons straggled upwards even to the moraines above the lower glaciers and the very margin of the snows.

The Queen watched Lord Juss as his gaze moved to

[p. 239]

the left past Koshtra Pivrarcha, past the blunt lower crest of Goglio, to a great lonely peak many miles distant that frowned over the rich maze of nearer ridges which stood above the lake. Its southern shoulder swept in a long majestic line of cliffs up to a clean sharp summit; northward it fell steeplier away. Little snow hung on the sheer rock faces, save where the gullies cleft them. For grace and beauty scarce might Koshtra Belorn herself surpass that peak: but terrible it looked, and as a mansion of old night, that not high noon-day could wholly dispossess of darkness.

"There standeth a mountain great and fair," said Lord Brandoch Daha, "which was hid in a cloud when we were on the high ridges. It hath the look of a great beast couchant."

Still the Queen watched Lord Juss, who looked still on that peak. Then he turned to her, his hands clenched on the buckles of his breast-plates. She said, "Was it as I think?"

He took a great breath. "It was so I beheld it in the beginning," he said, "as from this place. But here are we too far off to see the citadel of brass, or know if it be truly there." And he said to Brandoch Daha, "This remaineth, that we climb that mountain."

"That can ye never do," said the Queen.

"That shall be shown," said Brandoch Daha.

"List," said she. "Nameless is yonder mountain upon earth, for until this hour, save only for me and you, the eye of living man hath not looked upon it. But unto the Gods it hath a name, and unto the spirits of the blest that do inhabit this land, and unto those unhappy souls that are held in captivity on that cold mountain top: Zora Rach nam Psarrion, standing apart above the noiseless lifeless snow-fields that feed the Psarrion glaciers; loneliest and secretest of all earth's mountains, and most accursed. O my lords," she said, "think not to climb up Zora. Enchantments ring round Zora, so that ye should not get so near as to the edges of the snow-fields at her feet ere ruin gathered you."

[p. 240]

Juss smiled. "O Queen Sophonisba, little thou knowest our mind, if thou think this shall turn us back."

"I say it," said the Queen, "with no such vain purpose; but to show you the necessity of that way I shall now tell you of, since well I know ye will not give over this attempt. To none save to a Demon durst I have told it, lest heaven should hold me answerable for his death. But unto you I may with the less danger commit this dangerous counsel if it be true, as I was taught long ago, that the hippogriff was seen of old in Demonland."

"The hippogriff?" said Lord Brandoch Daha. "What else is it than the emblem of our greatness? A thousand years ago they nested on Neverdale Hause, and there abide unto this day in the rocks the prints of their hooves and talons. He that rode it was a forefather of mine and of Lord Juss."

"He that shall ride it again," said Queen Sophonisba, "he only of mortal men may win to Zora Rach, and if he be man enough of his hands may deliver him we wot of out of bondage."

"O Queen," said Juss, "somewhat I know of grammarie and divine philosophy, yet must I bow to thee for such learning, that dwellest here from generation to generation and dost commune with the dead. How shall we find this steed? Few they be, and high they fly above the world, and come to birth but one in three hundred years."

She answered, "I have an egg. In all lands else must such an egg lie barren and sterile, save in this land of Zimiamvia which is sacred to the lordly races of the dead. And thus cometh this steed to the birth: when one of might and heart beyond the wont of man sleepeth in this land with the egg in his bosom, greatly desiring some high achievement, the fire of his great longing hatcheth the egg, and the hippogriff cometh out therefrom, weak-winged at first as thou hast seen a butterfly new-hatched out his chrysalis. Then only mayst thou mount him, and if thou be man enow to turn him to thy

[p. 241]

will he shall bear thee to the uttermost parts of earth unto thine heart's desire. But if thou be aught less than greatest, beware that steed, and mount only earthly coursers. For if there be aught of dross within thee, and thine heart falter, or thy purpose cool, or thou forget the level aim of thy glory, then will he toss thee to thy ruin."

"Thou hast this thing, O Queen?" said Lord Juss.

"My lord," she said softly, "more than an hundred years ago I found it, while I rambled on the cliffs that are about this charmed Lake of Ravary. And here I hid it, being taught by the Gods what thing I had found and knowing what was foreordained, that certain of earth should come at last to Koshtra Belorn. Thinking in my heart that he that should come might be of those who bare some great unfulfilled desire, and might be of such might as could ride to his desire on such a steed."

They abode, talking little, by the charmed lake's shore till evening. Then they arose, and went with her to a pavilion by the lake, built in a grove of flowering trees. Ere they went to rest, she brought them the hippogriff's egg, great as a man's body, yet light of weight, rough and coloured like gold. And she said, "Which of you, my lords?"

Juss answered, "He, if might and a high heart should only count; but I, because my brother it is that we must free from his dismal place."

So the Queen gave the egg to Lord Juss; and he, bearing it in his arms, bade her good-night, saying, "I need no other laudanum than this to make me sleep."

And the ambrosial night came down. And gentle sleep, softer than sleep is on earth, closed their eyes in that pavilion beside the enchanted lake.

 

Mivarsh slept not. Small joy had he of that Lake of Ravary, caring for none of its beauties but mindful still of certain lewd hulks he had seen basking by its shores all through the golden afternoon. He had questioned one

[p. 242]

of the Queen's martlets concerning them, who laughed at him and let him know that these were crocodiles, wardens of the lake, tame and gentle toward the heroes of bliss who resorted thither to bathe and disport themselves. "But should such an one as thou," she said, "adventure there, they would chop thee up at a mouthful." This saddened him. And indeed, little ease of heart had he since he came out of Impland, and dearly he desired his home, though it were sacked and burnt, and the men of his own blood, though they should prove his foes. And well he thought that if Juss should fly with Brandoch Daha mounted on hippogriff to that cold mountain top where souls of the great were held in bondage, he should never win back alone to the world of men, past the frozen mountains, and the mantichores, and past the crocodile that dwelt beside Bhavinan.

He lay awake an hour or twain, weeping quietly, until out of the giant heart of midnight came to him with fiery clearness the words of the Queen, saying that by the heat of great longing in his heart that claspeth it must that egg be hatched, and that that man should then mount and ride on the wind unto his heart's desire. Therewith Mivarsh sat up, his hands clammy with mixed fear and longing. It seemed to him, awake and alone among the sleepers in that breathless night, that no longing could be greater than his longing. He said in his heart, "I will arise, and take the egg privily from the devil transmarine and clasp it myself. I do him no wrong thereby, for said she not it was perilous? Also every man raketh the embers to his own cake."

So he arose, and came secretly to Juss where he lay with his strong arms circling the egg. A beam of the moon came in by a window, shining on the face of Juss, that was as the face of a God. Mivarsh bent over him and teased the egg gently from his embrace, praying fervently the while. And, for Juss was in a profound slumber, his soul mounting in vision far from earth, far from that shore divine, to lone regions where Goldry watched still in frozen mournful patience on the heights

[p. 243]

of Zora, at last Mivarsh gat the egg and bare it to his bed. Very warm it was, crackling to his ear as he embraced it, as of a power moving from withinwards.

In such wise Mivarsh fell asleep, clasping the egg as a man should clasp his dearest. And a little before dawn it hatched in his arms and fell asunder, and he started awake, his arms about the neck of a strange steed. It went forth into the pale light before the sunrise, and he with it, holding it fast. The sheen of its hair was like the peacock's neck; its eyes like the changing fires of a star of a windy night. Its nostrils widened to the breath of the dawn. Its wings unfolded and grew stiff, their feathers like the tail-feathers of the peacock pheasant, white with purple eyes, and hard to the touch as iron blades. Mivarsh was mounted on its back, seizing the shining mane with both hands, trembling. And now was he fain to descend, but the hippogriff snorted and reared, and he, fearing a great fall, clung closer. It stamped with its silver hoofs, flapping its wings, ramping like a lioness, tearing up the grass with its claws. Mivarsh screamed, torn between hope and fear. It plunged forward and leaped into the air and flew.

The Demons, waked by the whirring of wings, rushed from the pavilion, to behold that marvel flown against the obscure west. Wild was its flight, like a snipe dipping and plunging. And while they looked, they saw the rider flung from his seat and heard, some moments after, a dull flop and splash of a body fallen in the lake.

The wild steed vanished, winging toward the upper air. Rings ran outward from the splash, troubling the surface of the lake, marring the dark reflection of Zora Rach mirrored in the sleeping waters.

"Poor Mivarsh!" cried Lord Brandoch Daha. "After all the weary leagues I made him go with me." And he threw off his cloak, took a dagger in his teeth, and swam with great overarm strokes out to the spot where Mivarsh fell. But nought he found of Mivarsh. Only he saw near by on an island beach a crocodile, big and bloated, that eyed him guiltily and stayed not for his

[p. 244]

coming, but lumbering into the water dived and disappeared. So Brandoch Daha turned and swam ashore again.

Lord Juss stood as a man stricken to stone. As one despaired he turned to, the Queen, who now came forth to them wrapped in a mantle of swansdown; yet high he held his head. "O Queen Sophonisba, here is that secret glome or bottom of our days, come when we sniffed the sweetness of the morning."

"My lord," said she, "the flies hemerae take life with the sun and die with the dew. But thou, if thou be truly great, join not hands with desperation. Let the sad ending of this poor servant of thine be to thee a monument against such folly. Earth is not ruined for a single shower. Come back with me to Koshtra Belorn."

He looked at the grand peak of Zora, dark against the wakening east. "Madam," he said, "thou hast little more than half my years, and yet by another computation thou art seven times mine age. I am not light of will, nor thou shalt not find me a fool to thee. Let us go back to Koshtra Belorn."

They brake their fast quietly and returned by the way they came. And the Queen said, "My lords Juss and Brandoch Daha, there be few steeds of such a kind to carry you to Zora Rach nam Psarrion, and not ye, though ye be beyond the half-gods in your might and virtue, might have power to ride them but if ye take them from the egg. So high they fly, so shy they are, ye should not catch them though ye waited ten men's lifetimes. I will send my martlets to see if there be another egg in the world."

So she despatched them, north and west and south and east. And in due time those little birds returned on weary wing, all save one, without tidings.

"All have come back to me," said the Queen, "save Arabella alone. Dangers attend them in the world: birds of prey, men that slay little birds for their sport. Yet hope with me that she may come back at last."

But the Lord Juss spake and said, "O Queen[paragraph continues] 

[p. 245]

Sophonisba, to hope and wait lieth not in my nature, but to be swift, resolute, and exact whensoever I see my way before me. This have I ever approved, that the strawberry groweth underneath the nettle still. I will assay the ascent of Zora."

Nor might all her prayers turn him from this rashness, wherein the Lord Brandoch Daha besides did most eagerly second him.

Two nights and two days they were gone, and the Queen abode them in great trouble of heart in her pavilion by the enchanted lake. The third evening came Brandoch Daha back to the pavilion, bringing with him Juss that was like a man at point of death, and himself besides deadly sick.

"Tell me not anything," said the Queen. "Forgetfulness is the only sovran remedy, which with all my art I will strive to induce in thy mind and in his. Surely I despaired ever to see you in life again, so rashly entered into those regions forbid."

Brandoch Daha smiled, but his look was ghastly. "Blame us not overmuch, dear Queen. Who shoots at the mid-day sun, though he be sure he shall never hit the mark, yet as sure he is he shall shoot higher than who aims but at a bush." His voice broke in his throat; the whites of his eyes rolled up; he caught at the Queen's hand like a frightened child. Then with a mighty effort mastering himself, "I pray bear with me a little," he said. "After a little good meats and drinks taken 'twill pass. I pray look to Juss: is a dead, think you?"

Days passed, and months, and the Lord Juss lay yet as it were in the article of death tended by his friend and by the Queen in that pavilion by the lake. At length when winter was gone in middle earth, and the spring far spent, back came that last little martlet on weary wing she they had long given up for lost. She sank in her mistress's bosom, almost dead indeed for weariness. But the Queen cherished her, and gave her nectar, so that she gathered strength and said, "O Queen Sophonisba, fosterling of the Gods, I flew for thee east and south

[p. 246]

and west and north, by sea and by land, in heat and frost, unto the frozen poles, about and about. And at the last came to Demonland, to the range of Neverdale. There is a tarn among the mountains, that men call Dule Tarn. Very deep it is, and men that live by bread do hold it for bottomless. Yet hath it a bottom, and on the bottom lieth an hippogriff's egg, seen by me, for I flew at a great height above it."

"In Demonland!" said the Queen. And she said to Lord Brandoch Daha, "It is the only one. Ye must go home to fetch it."

Brandoch Daha said, "Home to Demonland? After we spent our powers and crossed the world to find the way?"

But when Lord Juss knew of it, straightway with hope so renewed began his sickness to depart from him, so that he was in a few weeks' space very well recovered.

And it was now a full year gone by since first the Demons came up into Koshtra Belorn.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 247]

 

XV

 

Queen Prezmyra

HOW THE LADY PREZMYRA DISCOVERED TO LORD GRO WHAT SHE WOULD HAVE BROUGHT ABOUT FOR DEMONLAND, IN WHICH SHOULD ALSO APPEAR HER LORD'S YET MORE GREATNESS AND ADVANCEMENT: AND HOW HER TOO LOUD SPEAKING OF HER PURPOSE WAS THE OCCASION WHEREBY THE LORD CORINIUS WAS TO LEARN THE SWEETNESS OF BLISS DEFERRED.

ON that same twenty-sixth night of May, when Lord Juss and Lord Brandoch Daha beheld from earth's loftiest pinnacle the land of Zimiamvia and Koshtra Belorn, Gro walked with the Lady Prezmyra on the western terrace in Carce. It wanted yet two hours of midnight. The air was warm, the sky a bower of moonbeam and star-beam. Now and then a faint breeze stirred as if night turned in her sleep. The walls of the palace and the Iron Tower cut off the terrace from the direct moonlight, and flamboys spreading their wobbling light made alternating regions of brightness and gloom. Galloping strains of music and the noise of revelry came from within the palace.

Gro spake: "If thy question, O Queen, overlie a wish

[p. 248]

to have me gone, I am as lightning to obey thee howsoe'er it grieve me."

'Twas an idle wonder only," she said. "Stay and it like thee."

"It is but a native part of wisdom," said he, "to follow the light. When thou wast departed from the hall methought all the bright lights were bedimmed." He looked at her sidelong as they passed into the radiance of a flamboy, studying her countenance that seemed clouded with grievous thought. Fair of all fairs she seemed, stately and splendid; crowned with a golden crown set about with dark amethysts. A figure of a crab-fish topped it above the brow, curiously wrought in silver and bearing in either claw a ball of chrysolite the bigness of a thrush's egg.

Lord Gro said, "This too was part of my mind, to behold those stars in heaven that men call Berenice's Hair, and know if they can outshine in glory thine hair, O Queen."

They paced on in silence. Then, "These phrases of forced gallantry," she said, "sort ill with our friendship, my Lord Gro. If I be not angry, think it is because I father them on the deep healths thou hast caroused unto our Lord the King on this night of nights, when the returning year bringeth back the date of his sending, and our vengeance upon Demonland."

"Madam," he said, "I would but have thee give over this melancholy. Seemeth it to thee a little thing that the King hath pleased so singularly to honour Corund thy husband as give him a king's style and dignity and all Impland to hold in fee? All took notice of it how uncheerfully thou didst receive this royal crown when the King gave it thee to-night, in honour of thy great lord, to wear in his stead till he come home to claim it; this, and the great praise spoke by the King of Corund, which methinks should bring the warmth of pride to thy cheeks. Yet are all these things of as little avail against thy frozen scornful melancholy as the weak winter sun availeth against congealed pools in a black frost."

[p. 249]

"Crowns are cheap trash to-day," said Prezmyra; "whenas the King, with twenty kings to be his lackeys, raiseth up now his lackeys to be kings of the earth. Canst wonder if my joyance in this crown were dashed some little when I looked on that other given by the King to Laxus?"

"Madam," said Gro, "thou must forgive Laxus in his own particular. Thou knowest he set not so much as a foot in Pixyland; and if now he must be called king thereof, that should rather please thee, being in despite of Corinius that carried war there and by whatsoever means of skill or fortune overcame thy noble brother and drave him into exile."

"Corinius," she answered, "tasteth in that miss that bane or ill-hap which I dearly pray all they may groan under who would fatten by my brother's ruin."

"Then should Corinius's grief lift up thy joy," said Gro. "Yet certain it is, Fate is a blind puppy: build not on her next turn."

"Am not I a Queen?" said Prezmyra. "Is not this Witchland? Have we not strength to make curses strong, if Fate be blind indeed?"

They halted at the head of a flight of steps leading down to the inner ward. The Lady Prezmyra leaned awhile on the black marble balustrade, gazing seaward over the level marshes rough with moonlight. "What care I for Laxus?" she said at last. "What care I for Corinius? A cast of hawks flown by the King against a quarry that in dearworthiness and nobility outshineth an hundred such as they. Nor I will not suffer mine indignation so to wit-wanton with fair justice as persuade me to put the wite on Witchland. It is most true the Prince my brother practised with our enemies the downthrow of our fortunes, breaking open, had he but known it, the gate of destruction for himself and us, that night when our banquet was turned by him to a battle and our winey mirths to bloody rages." She was silent for a time, then said, "Oathbreakers: a most odious name, flat against all humanity.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 250]

Two faces in one hood. O that earth would start up and strike the sins that tread on her!"

"I see thou lookest west over sea," said Gro.

"There's somewhat thou canst see, then, my Lord Gro, by owl-light," said Prezmyra.

"Thou didst tell me at the time," he said, "with what compliments in vows and strange well-studied promises of friendship the Lord Juss took leave of thee at their escaping out of Carce. Yet art thou to blame, O Queen, if thou take in too ill part the breaking of such promises given in extremity, which prove commonly like fish, new, stale, and stinking in three days."

"Sure, 'tis a small matter," said she, "that my brother should cast aside all ties of interest and alliance to save these great ones from an evil death; and they, being delivered, should toss him a light grammercy and go their ways, leaving him to be exterminated out of his own country and, for all they know or reck, to lose his life. May the great Devil of Hell torture their souls!"

"Madam," said Lord Gro, "I would have thee view the matter soberly, and leave these bitter flashes. The Demons did save thy brother once in Lida Nanguna, and his delivering of them out of the hand of our Lord the King was but just payment therefor. The scales hang equal."

She answered, "Do not defile mine ears with their excuses. They have shamefully abused us; and the guilt of their black deed planteth them day by day more firmlier in my deeper-settled hate. Art thou so deeply read in nature and her large philosophy, and I am yet to teach thee that deadliest hellebore or the vomit of a toad are qualified poison to the malice of a woman?"

The darkness of a great cloud-bank spreading from the south swallowed up the moonlight. Prezmyra turned to resume her slow pacing down the terrace. The yellow fiery sparkles in her eyes glinted in the flamboys' flare. She looked dangerous as a lioness, and delicate and graceful like an antelope. Gro walked beside her, saying, 'Mid not Corund drive them forth in winter on to the Moruna,

[p. 251]

and can they continue there in life, alone amid so many devouring perils?"

"O my lord," she cried, "say these good tidings to the kitchen wenches, not to me. Why, thyself didst enter in past years the very heart of the Moruna and yet earnest off, else art thou the greatest liar. This only canker-frets my soul: that days go by, and months, and Witchland beateth down all peoples under him, and yet he suffereth the crown of pride, these rebels of Demonland, to go yet untrodden under feet. Doth he deem it the better part to spare a foe and spoil a friend? That were an unhappy and unnatural conclusion. Or is he fey, even as was Gorice XI.? Heaven foreshield it, yet as ill an end may bechance him and utter ruin come on all of us if he will withhold his scourge from Demonland until Juss and Brandoch Daha come home again to meet with him."

"Madam," said Lord Gro, "in these few words thou hast given me the picture of mine own mind in small. And forgive me that I bespake thee warily at the first, for these are matters of heavy moment, and ere I opened my mind to thee I would know that it agreed with thine. Let the King smite now, in the happy absence of their greatest champions. So shall we be in strength against them if they return again, and perchance Goldry with them."

She smiled, and it seemed as if all the sultry night freshened and sweetened at that lady's smile. "Thou art a dear companion to me," she said. "Thy melancholy is to me as some shady wood in summer, where I may dance if I will, and that is often, or be sad if I will, and that is in these days oftener than I would: and never thou crossest my mood. Save but now thou didst so, to plague me with thy precious flattering jargon, till I had thought thee skin-changed with Laxus or young Corinius, seeking such lures as gallants spread their wings to, to stoop in ladies' bosoms."

"For I would shake thee from this late-received sadness," said Gro. And he said, "Thou art to commend me too, since I spake nought but truth."

"Oh, have done, my lord," she cried, "or I'll dismiss

[p. 252]

thee hence." And as they walked Prezmyra sang softly:

	 
		He that cannot chuse but love,
		 And strives against it still,
		 Never shall my fancy move,
		 For he loves 'gaynst his will;
		 Nor he which is all his own,
		 And can att pleasure chuse;
		 When I am caught he can be gone,
		 And when he list refuse.
		 Nor he that loves none but faire,
		 For such by all are sought;
		 Nor he that can for foul ones care,
		 For his Judgement then is naught;
		 Nor he--
		
		 She broke off suddenly, saying, "Come, I have shook off the ill disposition the sight of Laxus bred in me and of his tawdry crown. Let's think on action. And first, I will tell thee a thing. This we spoke of hath been in my mind these two or three moons, ever since Corinius's campaigning in Pixyland. So when word came of my lord's destroying of the Demon host, and his driving of Juss and Brandoch Daha like runaway thralls on the Moruna, I sent him a letter by the hand of Viglus that bare him from our Lord the King the king's name in Impland. Therein I expressed how that the crown of Demonland should be a braver crown for us than this of Impland, howsoe'er it sparkle, praying him urge upon the King his sending of an armament to Demonland, and my lord the leader thereof; or, if he could not as then come home to ask it, then I entreated him make me his ambassador to lay this counsel before the King and crave the enterprise for Corund."

"Is not his answer in those letters I brought thee?" said Gro.

"Ay," said she, "and a very scurvy beggarly lickspittle answer for a great lord to send to such a matter as I propounded. Alack, it puffs away all my wifely duty but to

[p. 253]

speak on't, and makes me rail like a gangrel-woman."

"I'll walk apart, madam," said Gro, "if thou wouldst have privateness to deliver thy mind."

Prezmyra laughed. "'Tis not all so bad," she said, "and yet it makes me angry. The enterprise he commends, up to the hilt, and I have his leave to broach it to the King, as his mouth-piece, and press it with him out of all ho. But for the leading on't, he will not have it, he. Corsus must have it, or Corinius. Stay, let me read it out," and standing near one of the lights she took a parchment from her bosom. "Pooh! 'tis too fond; I will not shame my lord to read it, even to thee."

"Well," said Gro, "were I the King, Corund should be my general to put down Demonland. Corsus he may send, for he hath done great work in his day, but in mine own judgement I like him not for such an errand. Corinius he hath not yet forgiven for his fault at the banquet a year ago."

"Corinius!" said Prezmyra. "So his butchery of mine own dear land goeth not only without reward, but hath not so much as bought him back to favour, thou thinkest?"

"I think not," said Lord Gro. "Besides, he is mad wroth to have plucked that prickly fruit but for another's eating. He bare himself so presumptuous-ill in the hall to-night, gleeking and galling at Laxus, slapping of his sword, and with so many more shameless braves and wanton fashions, and worst of all his most openly seeking to toy with Sriva, i' this first month of her betrothal unto Laxus, it will be a wonder if blood be not spilt betwixt them ere the night be done. Methinks he is not i' the mood to take the field again without some sure reward; and methinks the King, guessing his mind, would not offer him a new enterprise and so give him the glory of refusing it."

They stood near the arched gateway that opened on the terrace from the inner court. Music still sounded from the great banquet hall of Gorice XI. Under the archway and in the shadows of the huge buttresses of the walls it was as though the elements of gloom, expelled from the

[p. 254]

bright circles round the flamboys, huddled with sister glooms to make a double darkness.

"Well, my lord," said Prezmyra, "doth thy wisdom bless my resolve?"

"Whate'er it be, yes, because it is thine, O Queen."

"Whate'er it be!" she cried. "Dost hang in doubt on't? What else, but seek audience with the King as my first care in the morning. Have I not my lord's bidding so far?"

"And if thy zeal outrun his bidding in one particular?" said Gro.

"Why, just!" said she. "And if I bring thee not word ere to-morrow's noon that order is given for Demonland, and my Lord Corund named his general for that sailing, ay, and letters sealed for his straight recall from Orpish--"

"Hist!" said Gro. "Steps i' the court."

They turned towards the archway, Prezmyra singing under her breath:

	 
		Nor he that still his Mistresse payes,
		 For she is thrall'd therefore;
		 Nor he that payes not, for he sayes
		 Within, shee's worth no more.
		 Is there then no kinde of men
		 Whom 1 may freely prove?
		 1 will vent that humour then
		 In mine own selfe love.
		
		 Corinius met them in the gateway, coming from the banquet house. He halted full in their path to peer closely through the darkness at Prezmyra, so that she felt the heat of his breath, heavy with wine. It was too dark to know faces but he knew her by her stature and bearing.

"Cry thee mercy, madam," he said. "Methought an instant 'twas--but no matter. Your best of rest."

So saying he made way for her with a deep obeisance, jostling roughly against Gro with the same motion. Gro,

[p. 255]

little minded for a quarrel, gave him the wall, and followed Prezmyra into the inner court.

 

The Lord Corinius sat him down on the nearest of the benches, leaned his stalwart back luxuriously upon the cushions and there rested, thripping his fingers and singing to himself.

	 
		What an Ass is he
		   Waits a woman's leisure
		   For a minute's pleasure,
		 And perhaps may be
		   Gull'd at last, and lose her;
		 What an ass is he?
		
		What need I to care
		   For a woman's favour?
		   If another have her,
		 Why should I despair?
		   When for gold and labour
		 I can have my share.
		
		If I chance to see
		   One that's brown, I love her,
		   Till I see another
		 Browner is than she;
		   For I am a lover
		 Of my liberty.
		
		 A rustle behind him on his left made him turn his head. A figure stole out of the deep shadow of the buttress nearest the archway. He leapt up and was first in the gate, blocking it with open arms. "Ah," he cried, "so titmice roost i' the shade, ha? What ransom shall I have of thee for making me keep empty tryst last night? Ay, and wast creeping hence to make me a fool once more the night-long and I had not caught thee."

The lady laughed. "Last night my father kept me by him; and to-night, my lord, wouldst thou not have been fitly served for thy shameless ditty? Is that a sweet serenade

[p. 256]

for ladies' ears? Sing it again, to thy liberty, and show thyself an ass."

"Thou art very bold to provoke me, madam, with not even a star to be thy witness if I quite thee for't. These flamboys are old roisterers, grown gray in scenes of riot. They shall not blab."

"Nay, if thou speakest in wine I'm gone, my lord;" and as he took a step towards her, "and I return not, here or otherwise, but fling thee off for ever," she said. "I will not be entreated like a serving-maid. I have borne too long with thy forced soldier fashions."

Corinius caught his arms about her, lifting her against his broad chest so that her toes scarce kept footing on the ground. "O Sriva," he said thickly, bending his face to hers, "dost think to light so great a fire, and after walk through it and not be scorched thereat?"

Her arms were close pinioned at her sides in that strong embrace. She seemed to swoon, as a lily swooning in the flaming noon-day. Corinius bent down his face and kissed her fiercely, saying, "By all the sweets that ever darkness tasted, thou art mine to-night."

"To-morrow," she said, as if stifled.

But Corinius said, "My dearest happiness, to-night."

"My dear lord," said the Lady Sriva softly, "sith thou hast made such a conquest of my love, be not a harsh and forward conqueror. I swear to thee by all the dreadful powers that clip the earth about, there's matter in it I should to my father this night, nay more, now on the instant. 'Twas this only made me avoid thee but now: this, and no light conceit to vex thee."

"He can attend our pleasure," said Corinius. "'Tis an old man, and oft sitteth late at his book."

"How? and thou leftcst him carousing?" said she. "There's that I must impart to him ere the wine quite o'erflow his wits. Even this delay, how sweet soe'er to us, is dangerous."

But Corinius said, "I will not let thee go."

"Well," said she, "be a beast, then. But know I'll cry on a rescue shall make all Carce run to find us, and my

[p. 257]

brothers, ay, and Laxus, if he be a man, shall deal thee bitter payment for thy violence toward me. But if thou wilt be thy noble self, and respect my love with friendship, let me go. And if thou come secretly to my chamber door, an hour past midnight; I think thou'lt find no bolt to it."

"Ha, thou swearest it?" he said.

She answered, "Else may steep destruction swallow me quick."

"An hour past midnight. And until then 'tis a year in my desires," said he.

"There spoke my noble lover," said Sriva, giving him her mouth once more. And swiftly she fared through the shadowy archway and across the court to where in the north gallery her father Corsus bad his chamber.

The Lord Corinius went back to his seat, and there reclined for a space in slothful ease, humming to an old tune:

	 
		My Mistris is a shittle-cock,
		   Compos'd of Cork and feather;
		 Each Battledore sets on her dock,
		   And bumps her on the leather.
		   But cast her off which way you Will,
		   She will requoile to another still--
		   Fa, la, la, la, la, la.
		
		 He stretched his arms and yawned. "Well, Laxus, my chub-faced meacock, this medicine hath eased powerfully my discontent. 'Tis but fair, sith I must miss my crown, that I should have thy mistress. And to say true, seeing how base, little, and ordinary a kingdom is this of Pixyland, and what a delectable sweet wagtail this Sriva, whom besides I have these two years past ne'er looked on but my mouth watered: why, I may hold me part paid for the nonce; until I weary of her.

	 
		Love is all my life,
		   For it keeps me doing:
		   Yet my love and wooing
		 Is not for a Wife--
		
		 [p. 258]

"An hour past midnight, ha? What wine's best for lovers? I'll go, drink a stoup, and so to dice with some et these lads to pass away the time till then."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 259]

 

XVI

 

The Lady Sriva's Embassage

HOW THE DUKE CORSUS THOUGHT IT PROPER TO COMMIT AN ERRAND OF STATE UNTO HIS DAUGHTER: AND HOW SHE PROSPERED THEREIN.

SRIVA fared swiftly to her father's closet, and finding her lady mother sewing in her chair, nodding toward sleep, two candles at her left and right, she said, "My lady mother, there's a queen's crown waits the plucking. 'Twill drop into the foreign woman's lap if thou and my father bestir you not. Where is he? Still i' the banquet house? Thou or I must fetch him on the instant."

"Fie!" cried Zenambria. "How thou'st startled me! Fall somewhat into a slower speech, my girl. With such wild sudden talk I know not what thou meanest nor what's the matter."

But Sriva answered, "Matter of state. Thou goest not? Good, then I fetch him. Thou shalt hear all anon, mother;" and so turned towards the door. Nor might all her mother's crying out upon the scandal of their so returning to the banquet long past the hour of the women's withdrawal turn her from this. So that the Lady Zenambria,

[p. 260]

seeing her so wilful, thought it less evil to go herself; and so went, and in awhile returned with Corsus.

Corsus sat in his great chair over against his lady wife, while his daughter told her tale.

"Twice and thrice," said she, "they passed me by, as near as I stand to thee, O my father, she leaning most familiarly on the arm of her curled philosopher. 'Twas plain they had never a thought that any was by to overhear them. She said so and so;" and therewith Sriva told all that was spoke by the Lady Prezmyra as to an expedition to Demonland, and as to her purposed speaking with the King, and as to her design that Corund should be his general for that sailing, and letters sealed on the morrow for his straight recall from Orpish.

The Duke listened unmoved, breathing heavily, leaning heavily forward, his elbow on his knees, one great fat hand twisting and pushing back the sparse gray growth of his moustachios. His eyes shifted with sullen glance about the chamber, and his blabber cheeks, scarlet from the feast, flushed to a deeper hue.

Zenambria said, "Alas, and did not I tell thee long ago, my lord, that Corund did ill to wed with a young wife? And thence cometh now that shame that was but to be looked for. It is pity indeed of so goodly a man, now past his prime age, she should so play at fast and loose with his honour, and be at the far end of the world. Indeed and indeed, I hope he will revenge it on her at his coming home. For sure I am, Corund is too high-minded to buy advancement at so shameful a price."

"Thy talk, wife," said Corsus, "showeth long hair and a short wit. In brief, thou art a fool."

He was silent for a space, then raised his gaze to Sriva, where she rested, her back to the massive table, half standing, half sitting, a dainty jewel-besparkled hand planted on the table's edge at her either side, her arms like delicate white pillars supporting that fair frame. Somewhat his dull eye brightened, resting on her. "Come hither," he said, "on my knee: so."

[p. 261]

When she was seated, "'Tis a brave gown," said he, "thou wearest to-night, my pretty pug. Red, for a sanguine humour." His great arm gave her a back, and his hand, huge as a platter, lay like a buckler beneath her breast. "Thou smell'st passing sweet."

'Tis malabathrum in the leaf," answered she.

"I'm glad it likes thee, my lord," said Zenambria. "My woman still protesteth that such, being boiled with wine, yieldeth a perfume that passeth all other."

Corsus still looked on Sriva. After a while he asked, "What madest thou on the terrace i' the dark, ha?"

She looked down, saying, "It was Laxus prayed me meet him there."

"Hum!" said Corsus. "'Tis strange then he should await thee this hour gone by in the paved alley of the privy court."

"He did mistake me," said Sriva. "And well is he served, for such neglect."

"So. And thou turnest politician to-night, my little puss-cat?" said Corsus. "And thou smellest an expedition to Demonland? 'Tis like enow. But methinks the King will send Corinius."

"Corinius?" said Sriva. "It is not thought so. 'Tis Corund must have it, if thou push not the matter to a decision with the King to-night, O my father, ere my lady fox be private with him to-morrow."

"Bah!" said Corsus. "Thou art but a girl, and knowest nought. She hath not the full blood nor the resolution to carry it thus. No, 'tis not Corund stands i' the light, it is Corinius. It is therefore the King withheld from him Pixyland, which was his due, and tossed the bauble to Laxus."

"Why, 'tis a monstrous thing," said Zenambria, "if Corinius shall have Demonland, which surely much surpasseth this crown of Pixyland. Shall this novice have all the meat, and thou, because thou art old, have nought but the bones and the parings?"

"Hold thy tongue, mistress," said Corsus, looking upon

[p. 262]

her as one looketh on a sour mixture. "Why hadst not the wit to angle for him for thy daughter?"

"Truly, husband, I'm sorry for it," said Zenambria.

The Lady Sriva laughed, placing her arm about her father's bullock-neck and playing with his whiskers. "Content thee," she said, "my lady mother. I have my choice, and that is very certain, of these and of all other in Carce. And now I bethink me on the Lord Corinius, why, there's a proper man indeed: weareth a shaven lip too, which, as experienced opinion shall tell thee, far exceedeth your nasty moustachios."

"Well," said Corsus, kissing her, "howe'er it shape, I'll to the King to-night to move my matter with him. Meanwhile, madam," he said to Zenambria, "I'll have thee take thy chamber straight. Bolt well the door, and for more safety I will lock it myself o' the outer side. There's much mirth toward to-night, and I'd not have these staggering drunken swads offend thee, as full well might befall, whiles I am on mine errand of state."

Zenambria bade him good-night, and would have taken her daughter with her, but Corsus said nay to this, saying, "I'll see her safe bestowed."

When they were alone, and the Lady Zenambria locked away in her chamber, Corsus took forth from an oaken cupboard a great silver flagon and two chased goblets. These he brimmed with a sparkling yellow wine from the flagon and made Sriva drink with him not once only but twice, emptying each time her goblet. Then he drew up his chair and sinking heavily into it folded his arms upon the table and buried his head upon them.

Sriva paced back and forth, impatient at her father's strange posture and silence. Surely the wine lighted riot in her veins; surely in that silent room came back to her Corinius's kisses hot upon her mouth, the strength of his arms like bands of bronze holding her embraced. Midnight tolled. Her bones seemed to melt within her as she bethought of her promise, due in an hour.

[p. 263]

"Father," said she at last, "midnight hath stricken. Wilt thou not go ere it be too late?"

The Duke raised his face and looked at her. He answered "No." "No," he said again, "where's the profit? I wax old, my daughter, and must wither. The world is to the young. To Corinius; to Laxus; to thee. But most of all to Corund, who if a be old yet hath his mess of sons, and mightiest of all his wife, to be his ladder to climb thrones withal."

"But thou saidst but now--" said Sriva.

"Ay, when thy mammy was by. She cometh to her second childhood before her time, so as to a child I speak to her. Corund did ill to wed with a young wife, ha? Phrut! Is not this the very bulwark and rampire of his fortune? Didst ever see a fellow so spurted up in a moment? My secretary when I managed the old wars against the Ghouls, and now climbed clean over me, that am yet nine year his elder. Called king, forsooth, and like to be ta'en soon (under the King) for Dominus fac totum, throughout all the land if a play this woman as a should. Will not the King, for such payment as she intends, give Demonland upon Impland and all the world beside? Hell's dignity, that would I, and 'twere offered me."

He stood up, reaching unsteadily for the wine jug. Furtively he watched his daughter, shifting his gaze ever as her eye met his.

"Corund," said he, pouring out some wine, "would split his sides for laughter to hear thy mother's prim-mouthed brabble: he that hath enjoined upon his wife, there's ne'er a doubt on't, this very errand, and if he visit it on her at his coming home 'twill but be with hotter love and gratitude for that she wins him in our despite. Trust me, 'tis not every lady of quality shall find favour with a King."

The casement stood open, and while they stood without speech sounds of a lute trembled upward from the court below, and a man's voice; soft and deep, singing this song:

[p. 264]

	 
		  Hornes to the bull,
		     Hooves to the steede,
		   To little hayres
		     Light feete for speed,
		 And unto lions she giveth tethe
		   A-gaping dangerouslye.
		
		  Fishes to swim,
		     And birds to flye,
		   And men to judge
		     And reeson why,
		 She teacheth. Yet for womankind
		   None of these thinges hath she.
		
		  For women beautie
		     She hath made
		   Their onely shielde
		     Their onely blade.
		 O'er sword and fire they triumph stille,
		   Soe they but beautious be.
		
		 The Lady Sriva knew it was Laxus singing to her chamber window. Her blood beat wildly, the spirit of enterprise winging her imagination not toward him, nor yet Corinius, but into paths strangely and perilously inviting, undreamed of until now. The Duke her father came towards her, thrusting the chairs from his way, and saying, "Corund and his mess of sons! Corund and his young Queen! If he conjure with the white rose, why not thou and I with the red? It hath as fair a look, the devil damn me else, and savoureth as excellent sweet perfume."

She stared at him big-eyed, with blushing cheeks. He took her hands in his.

"Shall this outland woman," he said, "and her sallow-checked gallant still ruffle it over us? Long beards, whether they be white or black, are too huge a blemish in our eye, methinks. The thing seemeth not supportable, that

[p. 265]

this precise madam with her foreign fashions--Dost fear to stand i' the field against her?"

Sriva put her forehead on his shoulder and said, scarce to be heard, "And it come to that, I'll show thee."

"It must be now," said Corsus. "Prezmyra, thou hast told me, seeketh audience betimes i' the morning. Women are best at night-time, too."

"If Laxus should hear thee!" she said.

He answered, "Tush, he need never blame thee, even if he knew on't, and we can manage that. Thy silly mother prated but now of honour. 'Tis but a school-name; and if 'twere other, tell me whence springeth the fount of honour if not from the King of Kings? If he receive thee, then art thou honoured, and all they that have to do with thee. I am yet to learn dishonour lieth on that man or woman whom the King doth honour."

She laughed, turning from him toward the window, her hands still held in his. "Foh, thou hast given me a strong potion! and I think that swayeth me more than thy many arguments, O my father, which to say truth I cannot well remember because I did not much believe."

Duke Corsus took her by the shoulders. His face overlooked her by a little, for she was not tall of build. "By the Gods," he said, "'tis a stronger sweet scent of the red rose to make a great man drunk withal than of the white, though that be a bigger flower." And he said, "Why not, for a game, for a madcap jest? A mantle and hood, a mask if thou wilt, and my ring to prove thee mine ambassador. I'll attend thee through the court-yard to the foot o' the stairs."

She said nothing, smiling at him as she turned for him to put the great velvet mantle about her shoulders.

"Ha," said he, "'tis well seen a daughter is worth ten sons."

 

In the meanwhile Gorice the King sate in his private chamber writing at a parchment spread before him on the table of polished marmolite. A silver lamp burned at his

[p. 266]

left elbow. The window stood open to the night. The King had laid aside his crown, that sparkled darkly in the shadow below the lamp. He put down his pen and read again what he bad writ, in manner following:

Fram Me, Gorice the Twelft, Greate Kyng of Wychlande and of Ympelande and of Daemonlande and of al kyngdomes the sonne dothe spread hys bemes over, unto Corsus My servaunte: Thys is to signifye to the that thoue shalt with all convenient spede repaire with a suffycyaunt strengthe of menne and schyppes to Daemonlande, bycause that untowarde and traytorly cattell that doe there inhabyt are to fele by the the sharpnes of My correctioun. I wyll the, as holdynge the place of My generalle ther, that thow enter forcybly ynto the sayd cuntrie and doe with al dilygence spoyl ravysche and depopulate that lande, enslavying oppressyng and puttyng to the dethe as thow shalt thynke moost servychable al them that shal fall ynto thy powre, and in pertyculer pullyng downe and ruinating all thayr stronge houlds or castels, as Galinge, Dreppabie, Crothryng, Owleswyke, and othere. Thys enterpryse in head is one of the gretest that ever was since yt is to trampe downe Daemonlande and once and for al to cutt thayr coames whose crestes may daunger us, and thow art toe onderstande that withowt extraordinair experiens of thy former merrits I wolde not commyt to the so greate a chairge, and especially in such a tyme. And since al gret enterpryses oughte to bee sodeynly and resolutely prosequuted, therefore thys oughte to bee done and executed at furthest in harveste nexte. Therefore yt is My commaundemente that thow Corsus take order for the instant furnesshynge of shippes, seamen, souldiers, horsemen, officiers, and pertyculer personnes, wepons, municions, and al other necessaries whych is thought to be needfull for the armie and boast whych shalbe levied for the sayd entrepryse, for whyche this letter shalbe thy suffycyaunt warrant under My hande. Given under My signeth of Ouroboros in My

[p. 267]

pallaice of Carcie thys xxix daie of may, beynge the vij daie of My yeare II.

 

The King took wax and a taper from the great gold inkstand, and scaled the warrant with the ruby head of the worm Ouroboros, saying, "The ruby, most comfortable to the heart, brain, vigour, and memory of man. So, 'tis confirmed."

In that instant when the wax was yet soft of the King's seal sealing that commission for Corsus, one tapped gently at the chamber door. The King bade enter, and there came the captain of his bodyguard and stood before the King, with word that one waited without, praying instant audience, "And showed me for a token, O my Lord the King, a bull's head with fiery nostrils graven in a black opal in the bezel of a ring, which I knew for the signet of my Lord Corsus that his lordship beareth alway on his left thumb. And 'twas this, O King, that only persuaded me to deliver the message unto your Majesty in this unseasonable hour. Which if it be a fault in me, I do humbly hope your Majesty will pardon."

"Knowest thou the man?" said the King.

He answered, "I might not know him, dread Lord, for the mask and great hooded cloak he weareth. It is a little man, and speaketh a husky whisper."

"Admit him," said King Gorice; and when Sriva was come in, masked and hooded and holding forth the ring, he said, "Thou lookest questionable, albeit this token opened a way for thee. Put off these trappings and let me know thee."

But she, speaking still in a husky whisper, prayed that they might be private ere she disclosed herself. So the King bade leave them private.

"Dread Lord," said the soldier, "is it your will that I stand ready without the door?"

"No," said the King. "Void the ante-chamber, set the guard, and let none disturb me." And to Sriva he said, "If thine errand prove not more honester than thy looks,

[p. 268]

this is an ill night's journey for thee. At the lifting of my finger I am able to metamorphose thee to a mandrake. If indeed thou beest aught else already."

When they were alone the Lady Sriva doffed her mask and put back her hood, uncovering her head that was crowned with two heavy trammels of her dark brown hair bound up and interwoven above her brow and ears and pinned with silver pins headed with garnets coloured like burning coals. The King beheld her from under the great shadow of his brows, darkly, not by so much as the moving of an eyelid or a lineament of his lean visage betraying aught that passed in his mind at this disclosing.

She trembled and said, "O my Lord the King, I hope you will indulge and pardon in me this trespass. Truly I marvel at mine own boldness how I durst come to you."

With a gesture of his hand the King bade her be seated in a chair on his right beside the table. "Thou needest not be afraid, madam," he said. "That I admit thee, let it make thee assured of welcome. Let me know thine errand."

The fire of her father's wine shuddered down within her like a low-lit flame in a gust of wind as she sat there alone with King Gorice XII. in the circle of the lamplight. She took a deep breath to still her heart's fluttering and said, "O King, I was much afeared to come, and it was to ask you a boon: a little thing for you to give, Lord, and yet to me that am the least of your handmaids a great thing to receive. But now I am come indeed, I durst not ask it."

The glitter of his eyes looking out from their eaves of darkness dismayed her; and little comfort had she of the iron crown at his elbow, bright with gems and fierce with uplifted claws, or of the copper serpents interlaced that made the arms of his chair, or of the bright image of the lamp reflected in the table top where were red streaks like streaks of blood and black streaks like edges of swords streaking the green shining surface of the stone.

Yet she took heart to say, "Were I a great lord had

[p. 269]

done your majesty service as my father hath, or these others you did honour to-night, O King, it had been otherwise." He said nothing, and still gathering courage she said, "I too would serve you, O King. And I came to ask you how."

The King smiled. "I am much beholden to thee, madam. Do as thou hast done, and thou shalt please me well. Feast and be merry, and charge not thine head with these midnight questionings, lest too much carefulness make thee grow lean."

"Grow I so, O King? You shall judge." So speaking the Lady Sriva rose up and stood before him in the lamplight. Slowly she opened her arms upwards right and left, putting back her velvet cloak from her shoulders, until the dark cloak hanging in folds from either uplifted hand was like the wings of a bird lifted up for flight. Dazzling fair shone her bare shoulders and bare arms and throat and bosom. One great hyacinth stone, hanging by a gold chain about her neck, rested above the hollow of her breasts. It flashed and slept with her breathing's alternate fall and swell.

"You did threaten me, Lord, but now," she said, "to transmew me to a mandrake. Would you might change me to a man."

She could read nothing in the crag-like darkness of his countenance, the iron lip, the eyes that were like pulsing firelight out of hollow caves.

"I should serve you better so, Lord, than my poor beauty may. Were I a man, I had come to you to-night and said, 'O King, let us not suffer any longer of that hound Juss. Give me a sword, O King, and I will put down Demonland for you and tread them under feet.'"

She sank softly into her chair again, suffering her velvet cloak to fall over its back. The King ran his finger thoughtfully along the upstanding claws of the crown beside him on the table.

"Is this the boon thou askest me?" he said at length. "An expedition to Demonland?"

[p. 270]

She answered it was.

"Must they sail to-night?" said the King, still watching her.

She smiled foolishly.

"Only," he said, "I would know what gadfly of urgency stung thee on to come so strangely and suddenly and after midnight."

She paused a minute, then summoning courage: "Lest another should first come to you, O King," she answered. "Believe me, I know of preparations, and one that shall come to you in the morning praying this thing for another. What intelligence soever some hath, I am sure of that to be true that I have."

"Another?" said the King.

Sriva answered, "Lord, I'll say no names. But there be some, O King, be dangerous sweet suppliants, hanging their hopes belike on other strings than we may tune."

She had bent her head above the polished table, looking curiously down into its depths. Her corsage and gown of scarlet silk brocade were like the chalice of a great flower; her white arms and shoulders like the petals of the flower above it. At length she looked up.

"Thou smilest, my Lady Sriva," said the King.

"I smiled at mine own thought," she said. "You'll laugh to hear it, O my Lord the King, being so different from what we spoke on. But sure, of women's thoughts is no more surety nor rest than is in a vane that turneth at all winds."

"Let me hear it," said the King, bending forward, his lean hairy hand flung idly across the table's edge.

"Why thus it was, Lord," said she. "There came me in mind of a sudden that saying of the Lady Prezmyra when first she was wed to Corund and dwelt here in Carce. She said all the right part of her body was of Witchland but the left Pixy. Whereupon our people that were by rejoiced much that she had given the right part of her body to Witchland. Whereupon she said, but her heart was on the left side."

[p. 271]

"And where wearest thou thine?" asked the King. She durst not look at him, and so saw not the comic light go like summer lightning across his dark countenance as she spoke Prezmyra's name.

His hand had dropped from the table edge; Sriva felt it touch her knee. She trembled like a full sail that suddenly for an instant the wind leaves. Very still she sat, saying in a low voice, "There's a word, my Lord the King, if you'd but speak it, should beam a light to show you mine answer."

But he leaned closer, saying, "Dost think I'll chaffer with thee? I'll know the answer first i' the dark."

"Lord," she whispered, "I would not have come to you in this deep and dead time of the night but that I knew you noble and the great King, and no amorous surfeiter that should deal false with me."

Her body breathed spices: soft warm scents to make the senses reel: perfume of malabathrum bruised in wine, essences of sulphur-coloured lilies planted in Aphrodite's garden. The King drew her to him. She cast her arms about his neck, saying close to his ear, "Lord, I may not sleep till you tell me they must sail, and Corsus must be their captain."

The King held her gathered up like a child in his embrace. He kissed her on the mouth, a long deep kiss. Then he sprang to his feet, set her down like a doll before him upon the table by the lamp, and so sat back in his own chair again and sat regarding her with a strange and disturbing smile.

On a sudden his brow darkened, and thrusting his face towards hers, his thick black square-cut beard jutting beneath the curl of his shaven upper lip, "Girl," he said, "who sent thee o' this errand?"

He rolled his eye upon her with such a gorgon look that her blood ran back with a great leap towards her heart, and she answered, scarce to be heard, "Truly, O King, my father sent me."

"Was he drunk when he sent thee?" asked the King.

[p. 272]

"Truly, Lord, I think he was," said she.

"That cup that he was drunken withal," said King Gorice, "let him prize and cherish it all his life natural. For if in his sober senses he should make no more estimation of me than think to bribe my favours with a bona roba; by my soul, in his evil health he had sought to do it, for it should cost him nothing but his life."

Sriva began to weep, saying, "O King, your gentle pardon."

But the King paced the room like a prowling lion. "Did he fear I should supply Corund in his place?" said he. "This was a cocksure way to make me do it, if indeed his practice had might to move me at all. Let him learn to come to me with his own mouth if he hope to get good of me. Other else, out of Carce let him go and avoid my sight, that all the great masters of Hell may conduct him thither."

The King paused at length beside Sriva, that was perched still upon the table. showing a kind of sweetness in tears, sobbing very pitifully, her face hidden in her two bands. So for a time he beheld her, then lifted her down, and while he sat in his great chair, holding her on his knee with one hand, with the other drew hers gently from before her face. "Come," he said, "I blame it not on thee. Give over all thy weeping. Reach me that writing from the table."

She turned in his arms and stretched a hand out for the parchment.

"Thou knowest my signet?" said the King.

She nodded, ay.

"Read," said he, letting her go. She stood by the lamp, and read.

The King was behind her. He took her beneath the arms, bending to speak hot-breathed in her ear. "Thou seest, I had already chose my general. Therefore I let thee know it, because I mean not to let thee go till morning; and I would not have thee think thy loveliness,

[p. 273]

howe'er it please me, moveth such deep-commanding spells as to sway my policy."

She lay back against his breast, limp and strengthless, while he kissed her neck and eyes and throat; then her lips met his in a long voluptuous kiss. Surely the King's hands upon her were like live coals.

Bethinking her of Corinius, fuming at an open door and an empty chamber, the Lady Sriva was yet content.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 274]

 

XVII

 

The King Flies His Haggard

HOW THE LADY PREZMYRA CAME TO THE KING ON AN ERRAND OF STATE, AND HOW SHE PROSPERED THEREIN: WHEREIN IS ALSO SEEN WHY THE KING WOULD SEND THE DUKE CORSUS INTO DEMONLAND; AND HOW ON THE FIFTEENTH DAY OF JULY THESE LORDS, CORSUS, LAXUS, GRO, AND GALLANDUS, SAILED WITH A FLEET FROM TENEMOS.

On the morn came the Lady Prezmyra to pray audience of the King, and being admitted to his private chamber stood before him in great beauty and splendour, saying, "Lord, I came to thank you as occasion served not for me fitly so to do last night i' the banquet hall. Sure, 'tis no easy task, since when I thank you as I would, I must seem too unmindful of Corund's deserving who hath won this kingdom: but if I speak too large of that, I shall seem to minish your bounty, O King. And ingratitude is a vice abhorred."

"Madam," said the King, "thou needest not to thank me. And to mine ears great deeds have their own trumpets."

[p. 275]

So now she told him of her letters received from Corund out of Impland. "It is well seen, Lord," said she, "how in these days you do beat down all peoples under you, and do set up new tributary kings to add to your great praise in Carce. O King, how long must this ill weed of Demonland offend us, going still untrodden under feet?"

The King answered her not a word. Only his lip showed a gleam of teeth, as of a tiger's troubled at his meal.

But Prezmyra said with great hardiness, "Lord, be not angry with me. Methinks it is the part of a faithful servant honoured by his master to seek new service. And where lieth likelier service Corund should do you than west over seas, to lead presently an army naval thither and make an end of them, ere their greatness stand up again from the blow wherewith last May you did strike them?"

"Madam," said the King, "this charge is mine. I'll tell thee when I need thy counsel, which is not now." And standing up as if to end the matter, he said, "I do intend some sport to-day. They tell me thou hast a falcon gentle towereth so well she passeth the best Corinius hath. 'Tis clear calm weather. Wilt thou take her out to-day and show us the mounty at a heron?"

She answered, "Joyfully, O King. Yet I beseech you add this favour to all your former goodness, to hear me yet one word. Something persuades me you have already determined of this enterprise, and by your putting of me off I do fear your majesty meaneth not Corund shall undertake it but some other."

Dark and immovable as his own dark fortress facing the bright morning, Gorice the King stood and beheld her. Sunshine streaming through the eastern casement lighted red-gold smouldering splendours in the heavy coils of that lady's hair, and flew back in dazzling showers from the diamonds fastened among those coils. After a space he said, "Suppose I am a gardener. I go not to the butterfly for counsel. Let her be glad that there be rose-trees there and red stonecrops for her delight; which

[p. 276]

if any be lacking I'll give her more for the asking, as I'll give thee more masques and revels and all brave pleasures in Carce. But war and policy is not for women."

"You have forgot, O King," said the Lady Prezmyra, "Corund made me his ambassador." But seeing a blackness fall upon the King's countenance she said in haste, "But not in all, O King. I will be open as day to you. The expedition he strongly urged, but not for himself the leading on't."

The King looked evilly upon her. "I am glad to hear it," he said. Then, his brow clearing, "Know thou it for thy good, madam, order is ta'en for this already. Ere winter-nights return again, Demonland shall be my footstool. Therefore write to thy lord I gave him his wish beforehand."

Prezmyra's eyes danced triumph. "O the glad day!" she cried. "Mine also, O King?"

"If thine be his," said the King.

"Ah," said she, "you know mine outgallops it."

"Then school thine, madam," said the King, "to run in harness. Why think'st thou I sent Corund into Impland, but that I knew he had excellent wit and noble courage to govern a great kingdom? Wouldst have me a wilful child snatch Impland from him like a sampler half stitched?"

Then, taking leave of her with more gracious courtesy, "We shall look to see thee then, madam, o' the third hour before noon," he said, and smote on a gong, summoning the captain of his guard. "Soldier," he said, "conduct the Queen of Impland. And bid the Duke Corsus straight attend me."

 

The third hour before noon the Lord Gro met with Prezmyra in the gate of the inner court. She had a riding-habit of dark green tiffany and a narrow ruff edged with margery-pearls. She said, "Thou comest with us, my lord? Surely I am beholden to thee. I know thou lovest not the sport, yet to save me from Corinius I must have thee.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 277]

He plagueth me much this morning with strange courtesies; though why thus on a sudden I cannot tell."

"In this," said Lord Gro, "as in greater matters, I am thy servant, O Queen. 'Tis yet time enough, though. This half hour the King will not be ready. I left him closeted with Corsus, that setteth presently about his arming against the Demons. Thou hast heard?"

"Am I deaf," said Prezmyra, "to a bell clangeth through all Carce?"

"Alas," said Gro, "that we waked too long last night, and lay too long abed i' the morning!"

Prezmyra answered, "That did not I. And yet I'm angry with myself now that I did not so."

"How? Thou sawest the King before the council?"

She bent her head for yes.

"And he nay-said thee?"

"With infinite patience," said she, "but most irrevocably. My lord must hold by Impland till it be well broke to the saddle. And truly, when I think on't, there's reason in that."

Gro said, "Thou takest it, madam, with that clear brow of nobleness and reason I had looked for in thee."

She laughed. "I have the main of my desire, if Demonland shall be put down. Natheless, it maketh a great wonder the King picketh for this work so rude a bludgeon when so many goodly blades lie ready to his hand. Behold but his armoury."

For, standing in the gateway at the head of the steep descent to the river, they beheld where the lords of Witchland were met beyond the bridge-gate to ride forth to the hawking. And Prezmyra said, "Is it not brave, my Lord Gro, to dwell in Carce? Is it not passing brave to be in Carce, that lordeth it over all the earth?"

Now came they. down and by the bridge to the Way of Kings to meet with them on the open mead on the left bank of Druima. Prezmyra said to Laxus that rode on a black gelding full of silver hairs, "I see thou hast thy goshawks forth to-day, my lord."

"Ay, madam," said he. "There is not a stronger hawk

[p. 278]

than these. Withal they are very fierce and crabbed, and I must keep them private lest they slay all other sort."

Sriva, that was by, put forth a hand to stroke them. "Truly," she said, "I love them well, thy goshawks. They be stout and kingly." And she laughed and said, "Truly to-day I look not lower than on a King."

"Thou mayst look on me, then," said Laxus, "albeit I bear not my crown i' the field."

"'Tis therefore I'll mark thee not," said she.

Laxus said to Prezmyra, "Wilt thou not praise my hawks, O Queen?"

"I praise them," answered she, "circumspectly. For methinks they fit thy temper better than mine. These be good hawks, my lord, for flying at the bush. I am for the high mountee."

Her step-son Heming, black-browed and sullen-eyed, laughed in his throat, knowing she mocked and thought on Demonland.

Meanwhile Corinius, mounted on a great white liard like silver with black ear-tips, mane, and tail, and all four feet black as coal, drew up to the Lady Sriva and spoke with her apart, saying secretly so that none but she might hear, "Next time thou shalt not carry it so, but I will have thee when and where I would. Thou mayst gull. the Devil with thy perfidiousness, but not me a second time, thou lying cozening vixen."

She answered softly, "Beastly man, I did perform the very article of mine oath, and left thee an open door last night. If thou didst look to find me within, that were beyond aught I promised. And know for that I'll seek a greater than thou, and a nicer to my liking: one less ready to swap each kitchen slut on the lips. I know thy practice, my lord, and thy conditions."

His face flamed red. "Were that my custom, I'd now amend it. Thou art so true a runt of their same litter, they shall all be loathly to me as thou art loathly."

"Mew!" said she, "wittily spoke, i' faith; and right in the manner of a common horse-boy. Which indeed thou art."

[p. 279]

Corinius struck spurs into his horse so that it bounded aloft; then cried out and said to Prezmyra, "Incomparable lady, I shall show thee my new horse, what rounds, what bounds, what stop he makes i' the full course of the gallop galliard." And therewith, trotting up to her, made his horse fetch a close turn in a flying manner upon one foot, and so away, rising to a racking pace, an amble, and thence after some double turns returning at the gallop and coming to a full stop by Prezmyra.

"'Tis very pretty, my lord," said she. "Yet I would not be thy horse."

"So, madam?" he cried. "Thy reason?"

"Why," said she, "were I the most temperate, strongest, and of the gentlest nature i' the world, of the heat of the ginger, most swift to all high curvets and caprioles, I'd fear my crest should fall i' the end, tired with thy spur-galling."

Whereat the Lady Sriva fell a-laughing.

Now came Gorice the King among them with his austringers and falconers and his huntsmen with setters and spaniels and great fierce boar-hounds drawn in a string. He rode upon a black mare with eyes fire-red, so tall a tall man's head scarce topped her withers. He wore a leather gauntlet on his right hand, on the wrist whereof an eagle sat, hooded and motionless, gripping with her claws. He said, "It is met. Corsus goeth not with us: I fly him at higher game. His sons attend him, losing not an hour in preparation for this journey. The rest, take pleasure in the chase."

So they praised the King, and rode forth with him castaway. The Lady Sriva whispered Corinius in the ear, "Enchantery, my lord, ruleth in Carce, and this it must be bringeth it about that none may see nor touch me 'twixt midnight hour and cock-crow save he that must be King in Demonland."

But Corinius made as not to hear her, turning toward the Lady Prezmyra, that turned thence toward Gro. Sriva laughed. Merry of heart she seemed that day, eager as the small merlin sitting on her fist, and willing at every

[p. 280]

turn to have speech with King Gorice. But the King heeded her not at all, and gave her not a look nor a word.

So rode they awhile, jesting and discoursing, toward the Pixyland border, rousing herons by the way whereat none made better sport than Prezmyra's falcons, flown from her fist at many hundred paces as the quarry rose, and mounting with it to the clouds in corkscrew flights, ring upon ring, up and up till the fowl was but a speck in the upper sky, and her falcons two lesser specks beside it.

But when they were come to the higher ground and the scrub and underwood, then the King whistled his eagle off his fist. She flew from him as if she would never have turned head again, yet presently upon his shout came in; then soaring aloft waited on above his head, till the hounds started a wolf out of the brake. Thereon she swooped sudden as a thunderbolt; and the King lighted down and helped her with his hunting-knife; and so again, thrice and four times till four wolves were slain. And that was the greatest sport.

The King made much of his eagle, giving her the last wolf's lights and liver to gorge herself withal. And he gave her over to his falconer, and said, "Ride we now into the flats of Armany, for I will fly my haggard: my haggard eagle caught this March in the hills of Largos. Many a good night's rest hath she cost me, to wake her and man her and teach her to know my call and be obedient. I will fly her now at the big black boar of Largos that afflicteth the farmers hereabout these two years past and bringeth them death and loss. So shall we see good sport. if she be not too coy and wild."

So the King's falconer brought the haggard and the King took her on his fist. A black eagle she was, red-beaked and glorious to look on. Her jesses were of red leather with little silver varvels whereon the crab of Witchland was engraved in small. Her hood was of red leather tasselled with silver. First she bated from the fist of the King, screaming and flapping her wings, but soon was quiet. And the King rode forth, sending, his great brindled

[p. 281]

hounds before him to put up the boar; and all his company followed after.

In no long time they roused the boar, that turned red-eyed and moody-mad on the King's hounds, and charged among them ripping up the foremost so that her bowels gushed out. The King unhooded his eagle and flew her off his fist. But she, wild and ungentle, fastened not upon the boar but on a hound that held him by the ear. She fixed her cruel claws in the hound's neck and picked his eyes out ere a man might speak two curses on her.

Gro, that was by the King, muttered, "O, I like not that. 'Tis ominous."

By then was the King ridden up, and thrust the boar through with his spear, piercing him above and a little behind the shoulder so that the blade went through the heart of him and he sank down dying in his blood. Then the King smote his eagle in his wrath with the butt of his spear-shaft, but smote' her lightly and with a glancing blow, and away she flew and was lost to sight. And the King was angry, for all that the boar was slain, for the loss of his hound and his haggard, and for her ill behaviour. So he bade his huntsmen skin the boar and bring home his skin to be a trophy, and so turned homeward.

After a while the King called to him the Lord Gro to ride forward a little with him and out of earshot of the rest. The King said to him, "Thou hast a discontented look. Is it that I send not Corund into Demonland to crown the work he began at Eshgrar Ogo? Thou babblest besides of omens."

Gro answered, "My Lord the King, pardon my fears. For omens, indeed 'tis oft as the saw sayeth, 'As the fool thinketh, so the bell blinketh.' I spake in haste. Who shall weep Fate from her determined purpose? But since you did name Corund's name----"

"I named him," said the King, "because I am still ringing in the ears with women's talk. Whereto also I doubt not thou art privy."

[p. 282]

"Only so much," answered he, "that this is my thought: he were our best, O King."

"Haply so," said the King. "But wouldst have me therefore hold my stroke in the air while occasion knocketh at the gate? I'll tell thee, I am potent in art magical, but scarce may I stay time's wing the while I fetch Corund out of Impland and pack him westaway."

Gro held his peace. "Well," said the King, "I will hear more from thee."

"Lord," he answered, "I like not Corsus."

The King gave him a frump to his face. Gro held his peace again awhile, but seeing the King would have more, he said, "Since it likes your majesty to demand my counsel, I will speak. You know, Lord, of all your men in Carce Corinius is least my friend, and if I back him you will be little apt to think me moved by interest. In my clear judgement, if Corund be barred from this journey (as reason is, I freely embrace it, he must bide in Impland, both to harvest there his victories and to deny the road to Juss and Brandoch Daha if haply they return from the Moruna, and besides, time, as you most justly say, O King, calleth for speedy action): if he be barred, you have no better than Corinius. A complete soldier, a tried captain, young, fierce, and resolute, and one that sitteth not down again when once he standeth up till that his will be accomplished. Send him to Demonland."

"No," said the King. "I will not send Corinius. Hast thou not seen hawks that be in their prime and full pride for beauty and goodness, but must be tamed ere they be flown at the quarry? Such an one is he, and I will tame him with harshness and duress till I be certain of him. Also I have sworn and told him, last year when in his drunkenness he betrayed my counsel and o'erset all our plans, broke me from Pixyland and set my prisoners free, that Corund and Corsus and Laxus should be preferred and advanced before him until by quiet service he shall purchase my good will again."

"Give then the glory to Corsus, but to Corinius the

[p. 283]

rude work on't for a tiring. Send him as Corsus's secretary, and your work shall be better performed, O King."

But the King said, "No. Thou art a fool to think he would receive it, that being in disgrace could not humble himself but look bigger than before. And certainly I will not ask him, and so give him the glory to refuse it."

"My Lord the King," said Gro, "when I said unto you, I like not Corsus, you did scoff. Yet 'tis no simple niceness made me say it, but because I do fear he shall prove a false cloth: he will shrink in the wetting and can abide no trial."

"By the blight of Sathanas," said the King, "what crazy talk is this? Hast forgot the Ghouls twelve years ago? True, thou wast not here. And yet, what skills it? When the fame hath gone back and forth through all the world of their great spill when Witchland stood i' the greatest strait that ever she stood, and more than any other Corsus was to praise for our delivering. And since then, five years later, when he held Harquem against Goldry Bluszco, and made him at last to give over the siege and go home most ingloriously, and else had all the Sibrion coast been the Demons' appanage not ours."

Gro bowed his head, having nought to say. The King was silent awhile, then bared his teeth. "When I would burn mine enemy's house," he said, "I choose me a good brand, full of pitch and rosin, apt to sputter well i' the fire and fry them. Such an one is Corsus, since he fared to Goblinland ten years ago, on that ill faring which, had I been King, I never had agreed to; when Brandoch Daha took him prisoner on Lormeron field and despitefully used him, stripped him stark naked, shaved him all of one side smooth as a tennis ball and painted him yellow and sent him home with mickle shame to Witchland. Hell devour me, but I think his heart is in this enterprise. I think thou'lt see brave doings in Demonland when he comes thither."

Still Gro was silent, and the King said after awhile, "I have given thee reasons enow, I think, why I send Corsus into Demonland. There is yet this other, that by

[p. 284]

itself weigheth not one doit, yet with the others beareth down the balance if more thou lookest for. Unto mine other servants great tasks have I given, and great rewards: to Corund Impland and a king's crown therefor, to Laxus the like in Pixyland, to thee by anticipation Goblinland, for so I do intend. But this old hunting-dog of mine sitteth yet in's kennel with ne'er a bone to busy his teeth withal. That is not well, and shall no longer be neither, since there's no reason for't."

"Lord," said Gro, "in all argument and wise prevision you have quite o'erset me. Yet my heart misgives me. You would ride to Galing. You have ta'en an horse therefor with never a star in's forehead. Instead, I see there is a cloud in's face; and such prove commonly furious, dogged, full of mischief and misfortune."

They came down now upon the Way of Kings. Westward before them lay the marshes, with the great bulk of Carce eight or ten miles distant their chiefest landmark, and the towers of Tenemos breaking the level horizon line beyond it. The King, after a long silence, looked down on Gro. His lean rugged countenance was outlined darkly against the sky, terrible and proud. "Thou too," said be, "shalt be in this faring to Demonland. Laxus shall have sway afloat, since that is his element of water. Gallandus shall be secretary to Corsus, and thou shalt be with them in their counsels. But the main command, as I have decreed, lieth in Corsus. I'll not crop his authority, no, not by an hair's breadth. Sith Juss hath called the main, I will go hazard with Corsus. If I throw out with him, Hell rot him for a false die. But 'tis not such a cast shall cast away all my fortune. I have a langret in my purse shall cross-bite for me i' the end and win me all, howsoe'er the Demons cog against me."

 

So ended that day's sporting. And that day, and the next, and near a month thereafter was the Duke Corsus busied up and down the land preparing his great armament. And on the fifteenth day of July was the fleet busked and boun in Tenemos Roads, and that great army

[p. 285]

of five thousand men-at-arms, with horses and all instruments of war, marched from their camp without Carce down to the sea.

First of them went Laxus with his guard of mariners, he wearing the crown of Pixyland and they loudly acclaiming him as king and Gorice of Witchland as his overlord. A gallant man he seemed, ready-looking and hard, well-armed, with open countenance and bright seaman's eyes, and brown, crisp, curly beard and hair. Next came the main foot army heavy-armed with axe and spear and the short Witchland hanger, yeomen and farmers from the low lands about Carce or from the southern vineyards or the hill country against Pixyland: burly swashing fellows, rough as bears, hardy as wild oxen, agile as an ape; four thousand fighting men chose out by Corsus up and down the land as best for this great conquest. The sons of Corsus, Dekalajus and Gorius, rode abreast before them with twenty pipers piping a battle song. Surely the tramp of that great army on the paven way was like the tramp of Fate moving from the east. Gorice the King, sitting in state on the battlements above the water-gate, sniffed with his nostrils as a lion at the scent of blood. It was early morn, and the wind hung southerly, and the great banners, blue and green and purple and gold, each with an iron crab displayed above it, flaunted in the sun.

Now came four or five companies of horse, four hundred or more in all, with brazen armour and bucklers and glancing. spears; and last of all, Corsus himself with his picked legion of five hundred veterans to bring up the rear, fierce soldiers of the coast-lands that followed him of old to the eastern main and Goblinland, and had stood beside him in the great days when he smote the Ghouls in Witchland. On Corsus's left and right, a little behind him, rode Gro and Gallandus. Ruddy of countenance was Gallandus, gay of carriage and likely-looking, long of limb, with long brown moustachios and large kind eyes like a dog.

Prezmyra stood beside the King, and with her the

[p. 286]

ladies Zenambria and Sriva, watching the long column marching toward the sea. Heming the son of Corund leaned on the battlements. Behind him stood Corinius, scornful-lipped, with folded arms, most glorious in holiday attire, a wreath of dwale about his brows, and wearing on his mighty breast the gold badge of the King's captain general in Carce.

Corsus, as he rode by beneath them, planted on the point of his sword his great helm of bronze plumed with green-dyed estridge-plumes and raised it high above his head in homage to the King. The sparse gray locks of his hair lifted in the breeze, and pride flamed on the heavy face of him like a November sunset. He rode a dark bay, heavily built like a bear, that stepped ponderously as weighed down by his rider's bulk and the great weight of gear and battle-harness. His veterans marching at his heel lifted their helms on spear and sword and bill, singing their old marching song in time to the clank of their mailed feet marching down the Way of Kings:

	 
		When Corsus dwelt at Tenemos,
		 Beside the sea in Tenemos,
		     Tirra lirra lay,
		 The Gowles came downe to Tenemos,
		 They brent his house in Tenemos,
		     Downe derie downe day.
		
		But Corsus carved the Gowls
		     The coarsest meat
		     They ere did ete,
		 He made him garters with their bowels.
		 When bee came home to Tenemos,
		 Came home agayn to Tenemos,
		     With a roundelaye.
		
		 The King held aloft his staff-royal, returning Corsus his salute, and all Carce shouted from the walls.

[p. 287]

In such wise rode the Lord Corsus down to the ships with his great army that should bring bale and woe to Demonland.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 288]

 

XVIII

 

The Murther of Gallandus by Corsus

OF THE UPRISING OF THE WARS OF KING GORICE XII. IN DEMONLAND; WHEREIN IS SEEN HOW IN AN OLD MAN OF WAR STIFFNECKEDNESS AND TYRANNY MAY OVERLIVE GOOD GENERALSHIP, AND HOW A GREAT KINGS DISPLEASURE DURETH ONLY SO LONG AS IT AGREETH WITH HIS POLICY.

Nought befell to tell of after the sailing of the fleet from Tenemos till August was nigh spent. Then came a ship of Witchland from the west and sailed up the river to Carce and moored by the water-gate. Her skipper went straight aland and up into the royal palace in Carce and the new banquet hall, whereas was King Gorice XII. eating and drinking with his folk. And the skipper gave letters into the hand of the King.

By then was night fallen, and all the bright lights kindled in the hall. The feast was three parts done, and thralls poured forth unto the King and unto them that sat at meat with him dark wines that crown the banquet. And they set before the feasters sweetmeats wondrous fair: bulls and pigs and gryphons and other, made all of sugar paste, some wines and spigots in their bellies to

[p. 289]

taste of, every one with his silver fork. Mirth and pleasure was that night in the great hall in Carce; but now were all fallen silent, looking on the King's countenance while he read his letters. But none might read the countenance of the King, that was inscrutable as the high blind walls of Carce brooding on the fen. So in that waiting silence, sitting in his great high seat, he read his letters, which were sent by Corsus, and writ in manner following:

 

"Renouned Kinge and moste highe Prince and Lorde, Goreiyse Twelft of Wychlonde and of Daemounlonde and of all kingdomes the sonne dothe spread his bemes over, Corsus your servaunte dothe prosterate miself befoare your Greateness, evene befoare the face of the erthe. The Goddes graunte unto you moste nowble Lorde helthe and continewance and saffetie meny yeres. After that I hadde receaved my dispache and leave fram your Majestie wherby you did of your Royall goodnes geave and graunt unto mee to be cheefe commaundere of al the warlyke foarces furneshed and sent by you into Daemonlond, hit may please your Majestic I did with haiste carry mine armie and all wepons municions vittualls and othere provicions accordingly toward those partes of Daemonlonde that lye coasted against the estern seas. Here with xxvij schyppes and the moare partt of my peopell I sayling upp ynto the Frith Micklefrith did fynde x or xi Daemouns schyppes asayling whereof had Vol the commaundemente withowt the herborough of Lookingehaven, and by and by did mak syncke all schyppes of the sayd Voll withowt excepcioun and did sleay the maist paart of them that were with hym, and hys ashipboard.

"Nowe I lette you onderstande O my Lorde the Kyng that or ever wee made the landfalle I severinge my armye ynto ij trowpes had dispatched Gallandus with xiij schyppes north-abowt to lande with xv honderede menne at Eccanois, with commande that hee shoulde thenceawaye fare upp ynto the hylles thorow Celyalonde and

[p. 290]

soe sease the passe calld the Style because none schoulde cum overe fram the west; for that is a gode fyghtynge stede as a man myghte verry convenably hould ageyrist gret nomberes yf he bee nat an asse.

"So havinge ridd me wel of Vol, and by my hoep and secreat intilligence these were thayr entire flete that was nowe al sonken and putt to distruccioun by mee, and trewly hit was a paltry werk and light, so few they were agaynst my foarce agaynst them, I dyd comme alande att the place hyghte Grunda by the northe perte of the frith wher the watere owt of Breakingdal falleth into the se. Here I made make my campe with the rampyres thereof reachynge to the schore of the salt se baithe befoare and behynde of me, and drew in supplies and brent and slawe and sent forth hoarsmen to bryng mee in intelligence. And on the iv daie hadd notise of a gret powre and strengtht cumming at me from sowth out of Owlesyke to assaille mee in Grunda. And dyd fyghte agaynst them and dyd flinge them backe beinge iv or v thowsand souldiers. Who returning nexte daie towarde Owlswyke I dyd followe aftir, and so toke them facynge me in a plaise cauled Crosbie Owtsykes where they did make shifte to kepe the phords and passages of Ethrey river very stronge. Heare was bifaln an horable great murtheringe battell where Thy Servaunte dyd oppresse and over-throwe with mitch dexteritee those Daemons, makynge of them so bluddie and creuell a slawghter as hathe not been sene afore not once nor twice in mans memorye, and blythely I tel you of Vizze theyr cheefe capitaine kild and ded of strips taken at Crosby felde.

"Soe have I nowe in the holow of my hand by thys victorie the conquest and possession of al thys lande of Daemonlande, and doe nowe purpose to dele with thayr castels villages riches cattell howssys and poepell in my waye on al thys estren seaborde within L miells compas with rapes and murtheres and burnyngs and all harsche dyscypline according to your Majesties wille. And do stande with mine armie befoare Owleswyk, bluddie Spitfyer's notable great castel and forteres that alone yet

[p. 291]

liveth in this lande of your daungerous grivious and malitious arche enymies, and the same Spitfire being att my cominge fledde into the mowntaynes all do submytt and become your Majesties vassalls. But I wyll nat conclud nor determyn of peace no not with man weoman nor chyld of them but kyll them al, havinge always befoare my minde the satisfactioun of your Princely Pleasure.

"Lest I be too large I leve here to tel you of many rare and remarcable occurants and observacions whych never the less I laye by in my mynde to aquent you with agaynst my coming home or by further writinge. Laxus bearing a kings name do puffe himself up alledging he wan the sefight but I shall satisfy your Majestie to the contrary. Gro followeth the wars in as goode sort as his lean spare bodey will wel beare. Of Gallandus I nedes must saye he do meddyl too much in my counsailles, still desyring me do thus and thus but I will nat. Heretofore in the like unrespective manner he hath now and then used mee which I have swolewed but will not no more. Who if hee go about to calumniate me in any thinge I praye you Lorde let mee know it though I despise baithe him and all such. And in acknowledgement of Your highe favors unto meward do kiss your Majesties hand.

"Most humbly and reverently untoe my Lorde the Kynge, undir my seal.

CORSUS."

 

The King put up the writing in his bosom. "Bring me Corsus's cup," said he.

They did so, and the King said, "Fill it with Thramnian wine. Drop me an emerald in it to spawn luck i' the cup, and drink him fortune and wisdom. in victory."

Prezmyra, that had watched the King till now as a mother watches her child in the crisis of a fever, rose up radiant in her seat, crying, "Victory!" And all they fell a-shouting and smiting on the boards till the roof-beams shook with their great shouting, while the King drank first and passed on the cup that all might drink in turn.

But Gorice the King sat dark among them as a cliff of

[p. 292]

serpentine that frowns above dancing surges of a spring-tide summer sea.

When the women left the banquet hall the Lady Prezmyra came to the King and said, "Your brow is too dark, Lord, if indeed this news is all good that lights your heart and mind from withinward."

The King answered and said, "Madam, it is very good news. Yet remember that hard it is to lift a full cup without spilling."

 

Now was summer worn and harvest brought in, and on the twenty-seventh day after these tidings afore-writ came another ship of Witchland out of the west sailing over the teeming deep, and rowed on a full tide up Druima and through the Ergaspian Mere, and so anchored below Carce an hour before supper time. That was a calm clear sunshine evening, and King Gorice rode home from his hunting at that instant when the ship made fast by the water-gate. And there was the Lord Gro aboard of her; and the face of him as he came up out of the ship and stood to greet the King was the colour of quicklime a-slaking.

The King looked narrowly at him, then greeting him with much outward show of carelessness and pleasure made him go with him to the King's own lodgings. There the King made Gro drink a great stoup of red wine, and said to him, "I am all of a muck sweat from the hunting. Go in with me to my baths and tell me all while I bathe me before supper. Princes of all men be in greatest danger, for that men dare not acquaint them with their own peril. Thou look'st prodigious. Know that shouldst thou proclaim to me all my fleet and army in Demonland brought to sheer destruction, that should not dull my stomach for the feast to-night. Witchland is not so poor I might not pay back such a loss thrice and four times and yet have money in my purse."

So speaking, the King was come with Gro into his great bath chamber, walled and floored with green serpentine, with dolphins carved in the same stone to belch

[p. 293]

water into the baths that were lined with white marble and sunken in the floor, both wide and deep, the hot bath on the left and the cold bath, many times greater, on the right as they entered the chamber. The King dismissed all his attendants, and made Gro sit on a bench piled with cushions above the hot bath, and drink more wine. And the King stripped off his jerkin of black cowhide and his hose and his shirt of white Beshtrian wool and went down into the steaming bath. Gro looked with wonder on the mighty limbs of Gorice the King, so lean and yet so strong to behold, as if he were built all of iron; and a great marvel it was how the King, when he had put off his raiment and royal apparel and went down stark naked into the bath, yet seemed to have put off not one whit of his kingliness and the majesty and dread which belonged to him.

So when he had plunged awhile in the swirling waters of the bath, and soaped himself from head to foot and plunged again, the King lay back luxuriously in the water and said to Gro, "Tell me of Corsus and his sons, and of Laxus and Gallandus, and of all my men west over seas, as thou shouldest tell of those whose life or death in our conceit importeth as much as that of a scarab fly. Speak and fear not, keeping nothing back nor glozing over nothing. Only that should make me dreadful to thee if thou shouldst practise to deceive me."

Gro spake and said, "My Lord the King, you have letters, I think, from Corsus that have told you how we came to Demonland, and how we gat a victory over Volle in the sea-fight, and landed at Grunda, and fought two battles against Vizz and overthrew him in the last, and he is dead."

"Didst thou see these letters?" asked the King.

Gro answered, "Ay."

"Is it a true tale they tell me?"

Gro answered, "Mainly true, O King, though somewhat now and then he windeth truth to his turn, swelling overmuch his own achievement. As at Grunda, where he maketh too great the Demons' army, that by a just

[p. 294]

computation were fewer than us, and the battle was not ours nor theirs, for while our left held them by the sea they stormed our camp on the right. And well I think was to enveagle us into country that should be likelier to his purpose that Vizz fell back toward Owlswick in the night. But as touching the battle of Crossby Outsikes Corsus braggeth not too much. That was greatly fought and greatly devised by him, who also slew Vizz with his own hands in the thick of the battle, and made a great victory over them and scattered all their strength, coming upon them at unawares and taking them upon advantage."

So saying Gro stretched forth his delicate white fingers to the goblet at his side and drank. "And now, O King," said he, leaning forward over his knees and running his fingers through the black perfumed curls above his ears, "I am to tell you the uprising of those discontents that infected all our fortunes and confounded us all. Now came Gallandus with some few men down from Breakingdale, leaving his main force of fourteen hundred men or so to hold the Stile as was agreed upon aforetime. Now Gallandus had advertisement of Spitfire come out of the west country where he was sojourning when we came into Demonland, disporting himself in the mountains with hunting of the bears that do there inhabit, but now come hot-foot eastward and agathering of men at Galing. And on Gallandus's urgent asking, was held a council of war three days after Crossby Outsikes, wherein Gallandus set forth his counsel that we should fare north to Galing and disperse them.

"All thought well of this counsel, save Corsus. But he took it mighty ill, being stubborn set to carry out his predetermined purpose, which was to follow up this victory of Crossby Outsikes by so many cruel murthers, rapes, and burnings, up and down the country side in Upper and Lower Tivarandardale and down by Onwardlithe and the southern seaboard, as should show those vermin he was their master whom they did require,

[p. 295]

and the scourge in your hand, O King, that must scourge them to the bare bone.

"To which Gallandus making answer that the preparations at Galing did argue something to be done and not afar off, and that 'This were a pretty matter, if Owlswick and Drepaby shall be able to enforce us cast our eyes over our shoulders while those before us' (meaning in Galing) 'strike us in the brains'; Corsus answereth most unhandsomely, 'I will not satisfy myself with this intelligence until I find it more soundly seconded.' Nor would he listen, but said that this was his mind, and all we should abide by it or an ill thing should else befall us: that this south-eastern corner of the land being gained with great terror and cruelty the neck of the wars in Demonland should then be broken, and all the others whether in Galing or otherwhere could not choose but die like dogs; that 'twas pure folly, because of the hardness and naughty ways of the country, to set upon Galing; and that he would quickly show Gallandus he was lord there. So was the council broke up in great discontent. And Gallandus abode before Owlswick, which as thou knowest, O King, is a mighty strong place, seated on an arm of the land that runneth out into the sea beside the harbour, and a paven way goeth thereto that is covered with the sea save at low tide of a spring-tide. And we drew great store of provisions thither against a siege if such should befall us. But Corsus with his main forces went south about the country, murthering and ravishing, on his way to the new house of Goldry Bluszco at Drepaby, giving out that from henceforth should folk speak no more of Drepaby Mire and Drepaby Combust that the Ghouls did burn, but both should shortly be burnt alike as two cinders."

"Ay," said the King, coming out of the bath, "and did he burn it so?"

Gro answered, "He did, O King."

The King lifted his arms above his head and plunged head foremost into the great cold swimming bath. Coming forth anon, he took a towel to dry himself, and

[p. 296]

holding an end of it in either hand came and stood by Gro, the towel rushing back and forth. behind his shoulders, and said, "Proceed, tell me more."

"Lord," said Gro, "so it was that they in Owlswick gave up the place at last unto Gallandus, and Corsus came back from the burning of Drepaby Mire. All the folk in that part of Demonland had he brought to misery in her most sharp condition. But now was he to find by sour experience what that neglect had bred him when he went not north to Galing as Gallandus had counselled him to do.

"For now was word of Spitfire marching out from Galing with an hundred and ten score foot and two hundred and fifty horse. Upon which tidings we placed ourselves in very warlike fashion and moved north to meet them, and on the last morn of August fell in with their army in a place called the Rapes of Brima in the open parts of Lower Tivarandardale. All we were blithe at heart, for we held them at an advantage both in numbers (for we were more than three thousand four hundred fighting men, whereof were four hundred a-horseback), and in the goodness of our fighting stead, being perched on the edge of a little valley looking down on Spitfire and, his folk. There we abode for a time, watching what be would do, till Corsus grew weary of this and said, 'We are more than they. I will march north and then east across the head of the valley and so cut them off, that they escape not north again to Galing after the battle when they are worsted by us.'

"Now Gallandus nay-said this strongly, willing him to stand and abide their onset; for being mountaineers they must certainly choose at length, if we kept quiet, to attack us up the slope, and that were mightily to our advantage. But Corsus, that still grew from day to day more hard to deal with, would not hear him, and at last sticked not to accuse him before them all (which was most false) that be did practise to gain the command for himself, and had caused Corsus to be set upon to

[p. 297]

have him and his sons murthered as they went from his lodging the night before.

"And Corsus gave order for the march across their front as I have told it you, O King; which indeed was the counsel of a madman. For Spitfire, when he saw our column crossing the dale-head on his right, gave order for the charge, took us i' the flank, cut us in two, and in two hours had our army smashed like an egg that is dropped from a watch-tower on pavement of hard granite. Never saw I so evil a destruction wrought on a great army. Hardly and in evil case we won back to Owlswick with but seventeen hundred men, and of them some hundreds wounded sore. And if two hundred fell o' the other side, 'tis a wonder and past expectation, so great was Spitfire's victory upon us at the Rapes of Brima. And now was our woe worsened by fugitives coming from the north, telling how Zigg had fallen upon the small force that was left to hold the Stile and clean o'erwhelmed them. So were we now shut up in Owlswick and close besieged by Spitfire and his army, who but for the devilish folly of Corsus, had ne'er made head against us.

"An ill night was that, O my Lord the King, in Owlswick by the sea. Corsus was drunk, and both his sons, guzzling down goblet upon goblet of the wine from Spitfire's cellars in Owlswick. Till at last he was fallen spewing on the floor betwixt the tables, and Gallandus standing amongst us all, galled to the quick after this shame and ruin of our fortunes, cried out and said, 'Soldiers of Witchland, I am aweary of this Corsus: a rioter, a lecher, a surfeiter, a brawler, a spiller of armies, our own not our enemies', who must bring us all to hell and we take not order to prevent him.' And he said, 'I will go home again to Witchland, and have no more share nor part in this shame.' But all they cried, 'To the devil with Corsus! Be thou our general.'"

Gro was silent a minute. "O King," he said at last, "if so it be that the malice of the Gods and mine unfortune have brought me to that case that I am part guilty of that which came about, blame me not overmuch. Little[paragraph continues] 

[p. 298]

I thought any word of mine should help Corsus and the going forward of his bad enterprise. When all they called still upon Gallandus, saying, 'Ha, ha, Gallandus! weed out the weeds, lest the best corn fester! Be thou our general,' he took me aside to speak with him; because he said he would take further judgement of me before he would consent in so great a matter. And I, seeing deadly danger in these disorders, and thinking that there only lay our safety if he should have command who was both a soldier and whose mind was bent to high attempts and noble enterprises, did egg him forward to accept it. So that be, albeit unwilling, said yea to them at last. Which all applauded; and Corsus said nought against it, being too sleepy-sodden as we thought with drunkenness to speak or move.

"So for that night we went to bed. But in the morn, O King, was a great clamour betimes in the main court in Owlswick. And I, running forth in my shirt in the misty gray of dawn, beheld Corsus standing forth in a gallery before Gallandus's lodgings that were in an upper chamber. He was naked to the waist, his hairy breast and arms to the armpits clotted and adrip with blood, and in his hands two bloody daggers. He cried in a great voice, 'Treason in the camp, but I have scotched it. He that will have Gallandus to his general, come up and I shall mix his blood with his and make them familiar.'"

By then had the King drawn on his silken hose, and a clean silken shirt, and was about lacing his black doublet trimmed with diamonds. "Thou tellest me," said he, "two faults committed by Corsus. That first he lost me a battle and nigh half his men, and next did murther Gallandus in a spleen against him when he would have amended this."

'Willing Gallandus in his sleep," said Gro, "and sending him from the shade into the house of darkness."

"Well," said the King, "there be two days in every month when whatever is begun will never reach completion. And I think it was on such a day he did execute his purpose upon Gallandus."

"The whole camp," said Lord Gro, was up in a mutiny

[p. 299]

against him, being marvellously offended at the murther of so worthy a man in arms. Yet durst they not openly go against him; for his veterans guard his person, and he hath let slice the guts out of some dozen or more that were foremost in murmuring at him, so that the rest are afeared to make open rebellion. I tell you, O King, your army of Demonland is in great danger and peril. Spitfire sitteth down before Owlswick in mickle strength, and there is no expectation that we shall hold out long without supply of men. There is danger too lest Corsus do some desperate act. I see not how, with so mutinous an army as his, he can dare to attempt anything at all. Yet hath he his ears filled with the: continual sound of reputation, and the contempt which will be spread to the disgrace of him if he repair not soon his fault on the Rapes of Brima. It is thought that the Demons have no ships, and Laxus commandeth the sea. Yet hard it is to make any going between betwixt the fleet and Owlswick, and there be many goodly harbours and places for building of ships in Demonland. If they can stop our relieving of Corsus, and prevent Laxus with a fleet at spring, may be we shall be driven to a great calamity."

"How camest thou off?" said the King.

"O King," answered Lord Gro, "after this murther in Owlswick I did daily fear a fig or a knife, so for mine own health and Witchland's devised all the ways I could to come away. And gat at last to the fleet by stealth and there took rede with Laxus, who is most hot upon Corsus for this ill deed of his, whereby all our hopes may end in smoke, and prayed me come to you for him as for myself and for all true hearts of Witchland that do seek your greatness, O King, and not decay, that you might send them succour ere all be shent. For surely in Corsus some wild distraction hath overturned his old condition and spilt the goodness you once did know in him. His luck hath gone from him, and he is now one that would fall on his back and break his nose. I pray you strike, ere Fate strike first and strike us into the hazard."

"Tush!" said the King. "Do not lift me before I fall.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 300]

'Tis supper time. Attend me to the banquet."

By now was Gorice the King in full festival attire, with his doublet of black tiffany slashed with black velvet and broidered o'er with diamonds, black velvet hose cross. gartered with silver-spangled bands of silk, and a great black bear-skin mantle and collar of ponderous gold. The Iron crown was on his head. He took down from his chamber wall, as they went by, a sword hafted of blue steel with a pommel of bloodstone carved like a dead man's skull. This he bare naked in his hand, and they came into the banquet hall.

They that were there rose to their feet in silence, gazing expectant on the King where he stood between the pillars of the door with that sharp sword held on high, and the jewelled crab of Witchland ablaze above his brow. But most they marked his eyes. Surely the light in the eyes of the King under his beetle brows was like a light from the under-skies shed upward from the pit of hell.

He said no word, but with a gesture beckoned Corinius. Corinius stood up and came to the King, slowly, as a night-walker, obedient to that dread gaze. His cloak of sky-blue silk was flung back from his shoulders. His chest, broad as a bull's, swelled beneath the shining silver scales of his byrny, that was short-sleeved, leaving his strong arms bare to view with golden rings about the wrists. Proudly he stood before the King, his head firm planted above his mighty throat and neck; his proud luxurious mouth, made for wine-cups and for ladies' lips, firm set above the square shaven chin and jaw; the thick fair curls of his hair bound with black bryony; the insolence that dwelt in his dark blue eyes tamed for the while in face of that green bale-light that rose and fell in the steadfast gaze of the King.

When they had so stood silent while men might count twenty breaths, the King spake saying: "Corinius, receive the name of the kingdom of Demonland which thy Lord and King give thee, and make homage to me thereof."

The breath of amazement went about the hall. Corinius kneeled. The King gave him that sword which he held in

[p. 301]

his hand, bare for the slaughter, saying, "With this sword, O Corinius, shalt thou wear out this blemish and blot that until now rested upon thee in mine eye. Corsus hath proved haggard. He hath made miss in Demonland. His sottish folly hath shut him up in Owlswick and lost me half his force. His jealousy, too maliciously and bloodily bent against my friends 'stead of mine enemies, hath lost me a good captain. The wonderful disorder and distresses of his army must, if thou amend it not, swing all our fortune at one chop from bliss to bale. If this be rightly handled by thee, one great stroke shall change every deal. Go thou, and prove thy demerits."

The Lord Corinius stood up, holding the sword point-downward in his hand. His face flamed red as an autumn sky when leaden clouds break apart on a sudden westward and the sun looks out between. "My Lord the King," said he, "give me where I may sit down: I will make where I may lie down. Ere another moon shall wax again to the full I will set forth from Tenemos. If I do not shortly remedy for you our fortunes which this bloody fool hath laboured to ruinate, spit in my face, O King, withhold from me the light of your countenance, and put spells upon me shall destroy and blast me for ever."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 302]

 

XIX

 

Thremnir's Heugh

OF THE LORD SPITFIRE'S BESIEGING OF THE WITCHES IN HIS OWN CASTLE OF OWLSWICK; AND HOW HE DID BATTLE AGAINST CORINIUS UNDER THREMNIR'S HEUGH, AND THE MEN OF WITCHLAND WON THE DAY.

Lord Spitfire sat in his pavilion before Owlswick in mickle discontent. A brazier of hot coals made a pleasant warmth within, and lights filled the rich tent with splendour. From without came the noise of rain steadily falling in the dark autumn night, splashing in the puddles, pattering on the silken roof. Zigg sat by Spitfire on the bed, his hawk-like countenance shadowed with an unwonted look of care. His sword stood between his knees point downward on the floor. He tipped it gently with either hand now to the left now to the right, watching with pensive gaze the warm light shift and gleam in the ball of balas ruby that made the pommel of the sword.

"Fell it out so accursedly?" said Spitfire. "All ten, thou saidst, on Rammerick Strands?"

Zigg nodded assent.

[p. 303]

"Where was he that he saved them not?" said Spitfire. "O, it was vilely miscarried!"

Zigg answered, "'Twas a swift and secret landing in the dark a mile east of the harbour. Thou must not blame him unheard."

"What more remain to us?" said Spitfire. "Content: I'll hear him. What ships remain to us, is more to the purpose. Three by Northsands Eres, below Elmerstead: five on Throwater: two by Lychness: two more at Aurwath: six by my direction on Stropardon Firth: seven here on the beach."

"Besides four at the firth head in Westmark," said Zigg. "And order is ta'en for more in the Isles."

"Twenty and nine," said Spitfire, "and those in the Isles beside. And not one afloat, nor can be ere spring. If Laxus smell them out and take them as lightly as these he burned under Volle's nose on Rammerick Strands, we do but plough the desert building them."

He rose to pace the tent. "Thou must raise me new forces for to break into Owlswick. 'Fore heaven!" he said, "this vexes me to the guts, to sit at mine own gate full two months like a beggar, whiles Corsus and those two cubs his sons drink themselves drunk within, and play at cockshies with my treasures."

"O' the wrong side of the wall," said Zigg, "the master-builder may judge the excellence of his own building."

Spitfire stood by the brazier, spreading his strong hands above the glow. After a time he spake more soberly. "It is not these few ships burnt in the north should trouble me; and indeed Laxus hath not five hundred men to man his whole fleet withal. But he holdeth the sea, and ever since his putting out into the deep with thirty sail from Lookinghaven I do expect fresh succours out of Witchland. 'Tis that maketh me champ still on the bit till this hold be won again; for then were we free at least to meet their landing. But 'twere most unfit at this time of the year to carry on a siege in low and watery grounds, the enemy's army being on foot and unengaged. Wherefore, this is my mind, O my friend, that thou go with

[p. 304]

haste over the Stile and fetch me supply of men. Leave force to ward our ships a-building, wheresoever they be; and a good force in Krothering and thereabout, for I will not be found a false steward of his lady sister's safety. And in thine own house make sure. But these things being provided, shear up the war-arrow and bring me out of the west fifteen or eighteen hundred men-at-arms. For I do think that by me and thee and such a head of men of Demonland as we shall then command Owlswick gates may be brast open and Corsus plucked out of Owlswick like a whilk out of his shell."

Zigg answered him, "I'll be gone at point of day."

Now they rose up and took their weapons and muffled themselves in their great campaigning cloaks and went forth with torch-bearers to walk through the lines, as every night' ere he went to rest it was Spitfire's wont to do, visiting his captains and setting the guard. The rain fell gentlier. The night was without a star. The wet sands gleamed with the lights of Owlswick Castle, and from the castle came by fits the sound of feasting heard above the wash and moan of the sullen sleepless sea.

When they had made all sure and were come nigh again to Spitfire's tent and Zigg was upon saying goodnight, there rose up out of the shadow of the tent an ancient man and came betwixt them into the glare of the torches. Shrivelled and wrinkled and bowed he seemed as with extreme age. His hair and his beard hung down in elf-locks adrip with rain. His mouth was toothless, his eyes like a dead fish's eyes. He touched Spitfire's cloak with his skinny hand, saying in a voice like the night-raven's, "Spitfire, beware of Thremnir's Heugh."

Spitfire said, "What have we here? And which way the devil came he into my camp?"

But that aged man still held him by the cloak, saying, "Spitfire, is not this thine house of Owlswick? And is it not the most strong and fair place that ever man saw in this countree?"

"Filth, unhand me," said Spitfire, "else shall I presently thrust thee through with my sword, and send thee to the[paragraph continues] 

[p. 305]

Tartarus of hell, where I doubt not the devils there too long await thee."

But that aged man said again, "Hot stirring heads are too easily entrapped. Hold fast, Spitfire, to that which is thine, and beware of Thremnir's Heugh."

Now was Lord Spitfire wood angry, and because the old carle still held him by the cloak and would not let him go, plucked forth his sword, thinking to have stricken him about the head with the flat of his sword. But with that stroke went a gust of wind about them, so that the torch-flames were nigh blown out. And that was strange, of a still windless night. And in that gust was the old man vanished away like a cloud passing in the night.

Zigg spake: "The thin habit of spirits is beyond the force of weapons."

"Pish!" said Spitfire. "Was this a spirit? I hold it rather a simulacrum or illusion prepared for us by Witchland's cunning, to darken our counsel and shake our resolution."

 

On the morrow while yet sunrise was red, Lord Zigg went down to the sea-shore to bathe in the great rock pools that face southward across the little bay of Owlswick. The salt air was fresh after the rain. The wind that had veered to the east blew in cold and pinching gusts. In a rift between slate-blue clouds the low sun flamed blood-red. Far to the south-east where the waters of Micklefirth open on the main, the low cliffs of Lookinghaven-ness loomed shadowy as a bank of cloud.

Zigg laid down his sword and spear and looked southeast across the firth; and behold, a ship in full sail rounding the ness and steering northward on the larboard tack. And when he had put off his kirtle he looked again, and behold. two more ships a-steering round the ness and sailing hard in the wake of the first. So he donned his kirtle again and took his weapons, and by then were fifteen sail a-steering up the firth in line ahead, dragons of war.

So he fared hastily to Spitfire's tent, and found him yet abed, for sweet sleep yet nursed in her bosom impetuous

[p. 306]

Spitfire; his head was thrown back on the broidered pillow, displaying his strong shaven throat and chin; his fierce mouth beneath his bristling fair moustachios was relaxed in slumber, and his fierce eyes closed in slumber beneath their yellow bristling eyebrows.

Zigg took him by the foot and waked him and told him all the matter: "Fifteen ships, and every ship (as I might plainly see as they drew nigh) as full of men as there be eggs in a herring's roe. So cometh our expectation to the birth."

"And so," said Spitfire, leaping from the couch, "cometh Laxus again to Demonland, with fresh meat to glut our swords withal."

He caught up his weapons and ran to a little knoll that stood above the beach over against Owlswick Castle. And all the host ran to behold those dragons of war sail up the firth at dawn of day.

"They dowse sail," said Spitfire, "and put in for Scaramsey. 'Tis not for nothing I taught these Witchlanders on the Rapes of Brima. Laxus, since he witnessed that down-throw of their army, now accounteth islands more wholesomer than the mainland, well knowing we have nor sails nor wings to strike across the firth at him. Yet scarcely by skulking in the islands shall he break up the siege of Owlswick."

Zigg said, "I would know where be his fifteen other ships."

"In fifteen ships," said Spitfire, "it is not possible he beareth more than sixteen hundred or seventeen hundred men of war. Against so many I am strong enough to-day, should they adventure a landing, to throw 'em into the sea and still contain Corsus if be make a sally. If more be added, I am the less secure. Therefore occasion calleth but the louder for thy purposed faring to the west."

So the Lord Zigg called him out a dozen men-at-arms and went a-horseback. By then were all the ships rowed ashore under the southern spit of Scaramsey, where is good anchorage for ships. They were there hidden from view, all save their masts that showed over the spit, so that

[p. 307]

the Demons might observe nought of their disembarking. Spitfire rode with Zigg three miles or four, as far as the brow of the descent to the fords of Ethreywater, and there bade him farewell. "Lightning shall be slow to my basting," said Zigg, "till I be back again. Meantime, I would have thee be not too scornfully unmindful of that old man."

"Chirking of sparrows!" said Spitfire. "I have forgot his brabble." Nevertheless his glance shifted southward beyond Owlswick to the great bluff of tree-hung precipice that stands like a sentinel above the meadows of Lower Tivarandardale, leaving but a narrow way betwixt its lowest crags and the sea. He laughed: "O my friend, I am yet a boy in thine eyes it seemeth, albeit I am well-nigh twenty-nine years old."

"Laugh at me and thou wilt," said Zigg. "Without this word said I could not leave thee."

"Well," said Spitfire. "to lull thy fears, I'll not go a-birdsnesting on Thremnir's Heugh till thou come back again."

 

Now for a week or more was nought to tell of save that Spitfire's army sat before Owlswick, and they on the island sent ever and again three or four ships to land suddenly about Lookinghaven or at the head of the firth, or southaway beyond Drepaby, as far as the coastlands under Rimon Armon, harrying and burning. And as oft as force was gathered against them, they fared aboard again and sailed back to Scaramsey. In those days came one from the west with an hundred men and joined him with Spitfire.

The eighth day of November the weather worsened, and clouds gathered from the west and south, till all the sky was a welter of huge watery leaden clouds, separated one from another by oily streaks of white. The wind grew fitful as the day wore. The sea was dark like dull iron. Rain began to fall in big drops. The mountains showed monstrous and shadowy: some dark inky blue, others in the west like walls and bastions of clotted

[p. 308]

mist against the hueless mist of heaven behind them. Evening closed with thunder and rain and lightning-torn banks of vapour. All night long the thunder roared in sullen intermission, and all night long new banks of thunder-cloud swung together and parted and swung together again. And the light of the moon was abated, and no light seen save the levin-brand, and the camp-fires before Owlswick, and the light of revelry within. So that the Demons camped before the castle were not ware of those fifteen ships that put out from Scaramsey on that wild sea and landed two or three miles to the southward by the great bluff of Thremnir's Heugh. Nor were they ware at all of them that landed from the ships: fifteen or sixteen hundred men-at-arms with Heming of Witchland and his young brother Cargo for their leaders. And the ships rowed back to Scaramsey through the loud storm and fury of the weather, all save one that foundered in Bothrey Sound.

But on the morn, when the tempest was abated, might all behold the putting forth of fourteen ships of war from Scaramsey, every ship of them laden with men-at-arms. They had passage swiftly over the firth, and came aland two miles south of Owlswick. And the ships stood off again from the land, but the army marshalled for battle on the meads above Mingarn Hope.

Now Lord Spitfire let draw up his men and moved out southward from the lines before Owlswick. When they were come within some half mile's distance of the Witchland army, so that they might see clearly their russet kirtles and their shields and body-armour of bronze, and the dull glint of their sword-blades and the heads of their spears, Volle, that rode by Spitfire, spake and said, "Markest thou him, O Spitfire, that rideth back and forth before their battle, marshalling them? So ever rode Corinius; and well mayst thou know him even afar off by his showiness and jaunting carriage. Yet see a great wonder now: for who ever heard tell of this young hotspur giving back from the fight? And now, or ever we be gotten within spear-shot----"

[p. 309]

"By the bright eye of day," cried Spitfire, "'tis so! Will he baulk me quite of a battle? I'll loose a handful of horse upon them to delay their haste ere they be flown beyond sight and finding."

Therewith he gave command to his horsemen to ride forth upon the enemy. And they rode forth with Astar of Rettray, that was brother-in-law to Lord Zigg, for their leader. But the Witchland horse met them by the shallows of Aron Pow and held them in the shallows while Corinius with his main army won across the river. And when the main body of the Demons were come up and the passage forced, the Witchlanders were gotten clean away across the water-meadows to the pass betwixt the shore and the steeps of Thremnir's Heugh.

Then said Spitfire, "They stay not to form even i' the narrow way 'twixt the sea and the Heugh. And that were their safety, if they had but the heart to turn and stand us." And he shouted with a great shout upon his men to charge the enemy, and suffer not a Witch to overlive that slaughter.

So the footmen caught hold of the stirrup-leathers of the horsemen, and running and riding they poured into the narrow pass; and ever was Spitfire foremost among his men, hewing to left and to right among the press, riding on that whelming battle-tide that seemed to bear him on to triumph.

But now on a sudden was be, who with but twelve hundred men had so hotly followed fifteen hundred into the strait passage under Thremnir's Heugh, made ware too late that he must have to do with three thousand: Corinius rallying his folk and turning like a wolf in the pass, while Corund's sons, that had landed as aforesaid in the storm in the mirk of night, swept down with their battalions from the wooded slopes behind the Heugh. In such wise that Spitfire wist not sooner of any foreshadowing of disaster than of disaster's self: the thunder of the blow in flank and front and rear.

Then befell great manslaying between the sea-cliffs and the sea. The Demons, taken at that advantage, were like

[p. 310]

a man tripped in mid-stride by a rope across the way. By the sore onset of the Witches they were driven down into the shallows of the sea, and the spume of the sea was red with blood. And the Lord Corinius, now that he had done with feigned retreat, fared through the battle like a stream of unquenchable wildfire, that none might sustain his strokes that were about him.

Now was Spitfire's horse slain under him with a spear-thrust, as riding fetlock-deep in the yielding sand he rallied his men to fling back Heming. But Bremery of Shaws brought him another horse, and so mightily went he forth against the Witches that the sons of Corund were fain to give back before his onslaught, and that wing of the Witchland army was pressed back against the broken ground below the Heugh. Yet was that of little avail, for Corinius brake through from the north, thrusting the Demons with great slaughter back from the sea, so that they were penned betwixt him and Heming. Therewith Spitfire turned with some picked companies against Corinius; and well it seemed for awhile that a great force of the Witches must be whelmed or drowned in the salt waves. And Corinius himself stood now in great peril of his life, 'for his horse was bogued in the soft sands and might not win free for all his plunging.

In that nick of time came Spitfire through the stour, with a band of Demons about him, slaying as he came. He shouted with a terrible voice, "O Corinius, hateful to me and mine as are the gates of Hell, now will I kill thee, and thy dead carcase shall fatten the sweet meads of Owlswick."

Corinius answered him, "Bloody Spitfire, last of three whelps, for thy brothers are by now dead and rotten, I shall give thee a choke-pear."

Therewith Spitfire shot a twirl-spear at him. It missed the man but smote the great horse in the shoulder so that he plunged and fell in a heap, hurt to the death. But the Lord Corinius lighting nimbly on his feet caught Spitfire's horse by the bridle rein and smote it on the muzzle, even as he rode at him, so that the horse reared up and

[p. 311]

swerved. Spitfire made a great blow at him with an axe, but it came slantwise on the helmet ridge and glented aside in air. Then Corinius thrust up under Spitfire's shield with his sword, and the point entered the big muscle of the arm near the armpit, and glancing against the bone tore up through the muscles of the shoulder. And that was a great wound.

Nevertheless Spitfire slacked not from the fight, but smote at him again, thinking to have hewn off his arm the hand whereof still clutched the bridle-rein. Corinius caught the axe on his shield, but his fingers loosed the rein, and almost he fell to earth under that mighty stroke, and the good bronze shield was dented and battered in.

Now with the loosing of the reins was Spitfire's horse plunged forward, carrying him past Corinius toward the sea. But he turned and hailed him, crying, "Get thee an horse. For I count it unworthy to fight with thee bearing this advantage over thee, I a-horseback and thou on foot."

Corinius cried out and answered, "Come down from thine horse then, and meet me foot to foot. And know it, my pretty throstle-cock, that I am king in Demonland, which dignity I hold of the King of Kings, Gorice of Witchland, mine only overlord. Meet it is that I show thee in combat singular, that vauntest thyself greatest among the rebels yet left alive in this my kingdom, how much greater is my might than thine."

"These be great and thumping words," said Spitfire. "I shall thrust them down thy throat again."

Therewith he made as if to light down from his horse; but as he strove to light down, a mist went before his eyes and be reeled in his saddle. His men rushed in betwixt him and Corinius, and the captain of his bodyguard bare him up, saying, "You are hurt, my lord. You must not fight no more with Corinius, for your highness is unmeet for fighting and may not stand alone."

So they that were about him bare up great Spitfire. And the mellay that was stayed while those lords dealt together in single combat brake forth afresh in that place. But

[p. 312]

all the while had furious war swung and ravened below Thremnir's Heugh, and wondrous was the valour of the Demons; for many hundred were slain or wounded to the death, and but a small force were they that yet remained to bear up the battle against the Witches.

 

Now those that were with Spitfire departed with him in the secretest manner that they could out of the fight, wrapping about him a watchet-coloured cloak to hide his shining armour. They stanched the blood that ran from the great wound in his shoulder and bound it up carefully, and carried him a-horseback by Volle's command into Tremmerdale by secret mountain paths up to a desolate corrie east of Sterry Gap, under the great scree-shoot that flanks the precipices of the south summit of Dina. A long time he lay there senseless, like to one dead. For many hurts had he taken in the unequal fight, and greatly was he bruised and battered, but worst of all was the sore hurt Corinius gave him ere they parted betwixt the limits of land and sea.

And when night was fallen and all the ways were darkened, came the Lord Volle with a few companions utterly wearied to that lonely corrie. The night was still and cloudless, and the maiden moon walked high heaven, blackening the shadows of the great peaks that were like sharks' teeth against the night. Spitfire lay on a bed of ling and cloaks in the lee of a great boulder. Ghastly pale was his face in the silver moonlight.

Volle leaned upon his spear looking earnestly upon him. They asked him tidings. And Volle answered, "All lost," and still looked upon Spitfire.

They said, "My lord, we have stanched the blood and bound up the wound, but his lordship abideth yet senseless. And greatly we fear for his life, lest this great hurt yet prove his bane-sore."

Volle kneeled beside him on the cold sharp stones and tended him as a mother might her sick child, applying to the wound leaves of black horehound and millefoil and other healing simples, and giving him to drink out of a

[p. 313]

flask of precious wine of Arshalmar, ripened for an age in the deep cellars below Krothering. So that in a while Spitfire opened his eyes and said, "Draw back the curtains of the bed, for 'tis many a day since I woke up in Owlswick. Or is it night indeed? How went the fight, then?"

His eyes stared at the naked rocks and the naked sky beyond them. Then with a great groan be lifted himself on his right elbow. Volle put a strong arm about him, saying, "Drink the good wine, and have patience. There be great doings toward."

Spitfire stared round him awhile, then said violently, "Shall we be foxes and fugitive men to dwell in holes o' the hollow mountain side? So the bright day is done, ha? Then off with these trammels." And he fell a-tearing at the bandage on his wounds.

But Volle prevented him with strong hands, saying, "Bethink thee how on thee alone, O glorious Spitfire, and on thy wise heart and valiant soul that delighteth in furious war, resteth all our hope to ward off from our lady wives and dear children and all our good land and fee the fury of the men of Witchland, and to save alive the great name of Demonland. Let not thy proud heart be capable of despair."

But Spitfire groaned and said, "Certain it was that woe and evil hap must be to Demonland until my kinsmen be gotten home again. And that day I think shall never dawn." And he cried, "Boasted he not that he is king in Demonland? and yet I had not my sword in his umbles. And thou thinkest I'll live in shame?"

Therewithal he strove again to tear off the bandages, but Volle prevented him. And he raved and said, "Who was it forced me from the battle? 'Tis pity of his life, to have abused me so. Better dead than run from Corinius like a beaten puppy. Let me go, false traitors! I will amend this. I will die fighting. Let me go back."

Volle said, "Lift up thine eyes, great Spitfire, and behold the lady moon, how virgin free she walketh the wide fields of heaven, and the glory of the stars of

[p. 314]

heaven which in their multitudes attend her. And as little as earthly mists and storms do dim her, but though she be hid awhile yet when the tempest is abated and the sky swept bare of clouds there she appeareth again in her steadfast course, mistress of tides and seasons and swayer of the fates of mortal men: even such is the glory of sea-girt Demonland, and the glory of thine house, O Spitfire. And as little as commotions in the heavens should avail to remove these everlasting mountains, so little availeth disastrous war, though it be a great fight lost as was to-day, to shake down our greatness, that are mightiest with the spear from of old and able to make all earth bow to our glory."

So said Volle. And the Lord Spitfire looked out across the mist-choked sleeping valley to the great rock-faces dim in the moonlight and the lean peaks grand and. silent beneath the moon. He spake not, whether for strengthlessness or as charmed to silence by the mighty influences of night and the mountain solitudes and by Volle's voice speaking deep and quiet in his ear, like the voice of night herself calming earth-born tumults and despairs.

After a time Volle spake once more: "Thy brethren shall come home again: doubt it not. But till then art thou our strength. Therefore have patience; heal thy wounds; and raise forces again. But shouldst thou in desperate madness destroy thy life, then were we shent indeed."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 315]

 

XX

 

King Corinius

OF THE ENTRY OF THE LORD CORINIUS INTO OWLSWICK AND HOW HE WAS CROWNED IN SPITFIRE'S SAPPHIRE CHAIR AS VICEROY OF GORICE THE KING AND KING IN DEMONLAND: AND HOW ALL THAT WERE IN OWLSWICK CASTLE DID SO RECEIVE AND ACKNOWLEDGE HIM.

Corinius, having completed this great victory, came with his army north again to Owlswick as daylight began to fade. The drawbridge was let down for him and the great gates flung wide, that were studded with silver and ribbed with adamant; and in great pomp rode he and his into Owlswick Castle, over the causey builded of the living rock and great blocks of hewn granite out of Tremmerdale. The more part of his army lay in Spitfire's camp before the castle, but a thousand were with him in his entry into Owlswick with Corund's sons and the lords Gro and Laxus besides, for the fleet had put across to anchor there when they saw the day was won.

Corsus greeted them well, and would have brought them to their lodgings near his own chamber, that they might put off their harness and don clean linen and festival

[p. 316]

garments before supper. But Corinius excused himself, saying he had eat nought since breakfast-time: "Let us therefore not pass for ceremony, but bring us I pray you forthright to the banquet house."

Corinius went in with Corsus before them all, putting lovingly about his shoulder his arm all befouled with dust and clotted blood. For he had not so much as stayed for washing of his hands. And that was scarce good for the broidered cloak of purple taffety the Duke Corsus wore about his shoulders. Howbeit, Corsus made as if he marked it not.

When they were come into the hall, Corsus looked about him and said, "So it is, my Lord Corinius, that this hall is something little for the great press that here befalleth. Many of mine own folk that be of some account should by long custom sit down with us. And here be no seats left for them. Prithee command some of the common sort that came in with thee to give place, that all may be done orderly. Mine officers must not scramble in the buttery."

"I'm sorry, my lord," answered Corinius, "but needs must that we bethink us o' these lads of mine which have chiefly borne the toil of battle, and well I weet thou'lt not deny them this honour to sit at meat with us: these that thou hast most to thank for opening Owlswick gates and raising the siege our enemies held so long against you."

So they took their seats, and supper was set before them: kids stuffed with walnuts and almonds and pistachios; herons in sauce cameline; chines of beef; geese and bustards; and great beakers and jars of ruby-hearted wine. Right fain of the good banquet were Corinius and his folk, and silence was in the hall for awhile save for the clatter of dishes and the champing of the mouths of the feasters.

At length Corinius, quaffing down at one draught a mighty goblet of wine, spake and said, "There was battle in the meads by Thremnir's Heugh to-day, my lord Duke. Wast thou at that battle?"

Corsus's heavy cheeks flushed somewhat red. He answered,

[p. 317]

[paragraph continues] "Thou knowest I was not. And I should account it most blameable hotheadedness to have sallied forth when it seemed Spitfire had the victory."

"O my lord," said Corinius, "think not I made this a quarrel to thee. The rather let me show thee how much I hold thee in honour."

Therewith he called his boy that stood behind his chair, and the boy returned anon with a diadem of polished gold set all about with topazes that had passed through the fire; and on the frontlet of that diadem was the small figure of a crab-fish in dull iron, the eyes of it two green beryls on stalks of silver. The boy set it down on the table before the Lord Corinius, as it had been a dish of meat before him. Corinius took a writing from his purse, and laid it on the table for Corsus to see. And there was the signet upon it of the worm Ouroboros in scarlet wax, and the sign manual of Gorice the King.

"My Lord Corsus," said he, "and ye sons of Corsus, and ye other Witches, I do you to wit that our Lord the King made me by these tokens his viceroy for his province of Demonland, and willed that I should bear a king's name in this land and that under him all should render me obedience."

Corsus, looking on the crown and the royal warrant of the King, waxed in one instant deadly pale, and in the next red as blood.

Corinius said, "To thee, O Corsus, out of all these great ones that here be gathered together in Owlswick, will I submit me for thee to crown me with this crown, as king in Demonland. This, that thou mayst. see and know how most I honour thee."

Now were all silent, waiting on Corsus to speak. But he spake not a word. Dekalajus said privily in his ear, "O my father, if the monkey reigns, dance before him. Time shall bring us occasion to right you."

And Corsus, disregarding not this wholesome rede, for all he might not wholly rule his countenance, yet ruled himself to bite in the injuries he was fain to utter. And

[p. 318]

with no ill grace he did that office, to set on Corinius's head the new crown of Demonland.

Corinius sat now in Spitfire's seat, whence Corsus had moved to make place for him: in Spitfire's high seat of smoke-coloured jade, curiously carved and set with velvet-lustred sapphires, and right and left of him were two high candlesticks of fine gold. The breadth of his shoulders filled all the space between the pillars of the spacious seat. A hard man he looked to deal with, clothed upon with youth and strength and all armed and yet smoking from the battle.

Corsus, sitting between his sons, said under his breath, "Rhubarb! bring me rhubarb to purge away this choler!"

But Dekalajus whispered him, "Softly, tread easy. Let not our counsels walk in a net, thinking they are hidden. Nurse him to security, which shall be our safety and the mean to our wiping out this shaming. Was not Gallandus as big a man?"

Corsus's dull eye gleamed. He lifted a brimming wine-cup to toast Corinius. And Corinius hailed him and said, "My lord Duke, call in thine officers I pray thee and proclaim me, that they in turn may proclaim me king unto all the army that is in Owlswick."

Which Corsus did, albeit sore against his liking, knowing not where to find a reason against it.

When the plaudits were heard in the courts without, acclaiming him as king, Corinius spake again and said, "I and my folk be a-weary, my lord, and would betimes to our rest. Give order, I pray thee, that they make ready my lodgings. And let them be those same lodgings Gallandus had whenas he was in Owlswick."

Whereat Corsus might scarce forbear a start. But Corinius's eye was on him, and he gave the order.

While he waited for his lodgings to be made ready, the Lord Corinius made great good cheer, calling for more wine and fresh dainties to set before those lords of Witchland: olives, and botargoes, and conserves of goose's liver richly seasoned, taken from Spitfire's plenteous store.

[p. 319]

In the meantime Corsus spake softly to his sons: "I like not his naming of Gallandus. Yet seemeth he careless, as one that feareth no guile."

And Dekalajus answered in his ear, "Peradventure the Gods ordained his destruction, to make him choose that chamber."

So they laughed. And the banquet drew to a close with much pleasure and merrymaking.

Now came serving men with torches to light them to their chambers. As they stood up to bid good-night, Corinius said, "I'm sorry, my lord, if, after thy pleasant usage, I should do aught that is not convenable to thee. But I doubt not Owlswick Castle must be irksome to thee and thy sons, that were so long mewed up within it, and I doubt not ye are wearied by this siege and long warfare. Therefore it is my will that you do instantly depart home to Witchland. Laxus hath a ship manned ready to transport you thither. To put a fit and friendly term to our festivities, we'll bring you down to the ship."

Corsus's jaw fell. Yet he schooled his tongue to say, "My lord, so as it shall please thee. Yet let me know thy reasons. Surely the swords of me and my sons avail not so little for Witchland in this country of our evil-willers that we should sheathe 'em and go home. Howbeit, 'tis a matter demandeth no sweaty haste. We will take rede hereon in the morning."

But Corinius answered him, "Cry you mercy, needful it is that this very night you go ashipboard." And he gave him an ill look, saying, "Sith I lie to-night in Gallandus's lodgings, I think it fit my bodyguard should have thy chamber, my lord Duke, which, as I lately learned, adjoineth it."

Corsus said no word. But Gorius, his younger son, that was drunk with wine, leaped up and said, "Corinius, in an evil hour art thou come into this land to demand servitude of us. And thou art informed of my father right maliciously if thou art afeared of us because of Gallandus. 'Tis this viper sitteth beside thee, the Goblin swabber, told thee falsely this bad tale of us. And 'tis pity he is

[p. 320]

still inward with thee, for still he plotteth evil 'gainst Witchland."

Dekalajus thrust him aside, saying to Corinius, "Heed not my brother though he be hasty and rude of speech; for in wine he speaketh, and wine is another man. But most true it is, O Corinius, and this shall the Duke my father and all we swear and confirm to thee with the mightiest oaths thou wilt, that Gallandus sought to usurp authority for this sake only, to betray our whole army to the enemy. And 'twas only therefore Corsus slew him."

"That is a flat lie," said Laxus.

Gro laughed lightly.

But Corinius's sword leaped half naked from the scabbard, and he made a stride toward Corsus and his sons. "Give me the king's name when ye speak to me," he said, scowling upon them. "You sons of Corsus are not men to make me a stalk to catch birds with or to serve your own turn. And thou," he said, looking fiercely on Corsus, "wert best go meekly, and not bandy words with me. Thou fool! think'st thou I am Gallandus come again? Thou that didt murther him shalt not murther me. Or think'st I delivered thee out of the toils thine own folly and thrawart ways had bound thee in, only to suffer thee lord it again here and cast all amiss again by the unquietness of thy malice? Here is the guard to bring you down to the ship. And well it is for thee if I slash not off thy head."

Now Corsus and his sons stood for a little doubting in their hearts whether it were fitter to leap with their weapons upon Corinius, putting their fortunes to the hazard of battle in Owlswick hall, or to embrace necessity and go down to the ship. And this seemed to them the better choice, to go quietly ashipboard; for there stood Corinius and Laxus and their men, and but few to face them of Corsus's own people, that should be sure for his party if it came to fighting; and withal they were not eager to have to do with Corinius, not though it had been on more even terms. So at the last, in anger and bitterness of heart, they submitted them to obey his will; and in that

[p. 321]

same hour Laxus brought them to the ship, and put them across the firth to Scaramsey.

There were they safe as a mouse in a mill. For Cadarus was skipper of that ship, a trusted liegeman of Lord Laxus, and her crew men leal and true to Corinius and Laxus. She lay at anchor as for that night in the lee of the island, and with the first streak of dawn sailed down the firth, bearing Corsus and his sons homeward from Demonland.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 322]

 

XXI

 

The Parley Before Krothering

WHEREIN IS SHOWN HOW WARLIKE POLICY AND A PICTURE PAINTED DREW THE WAR WESTWARD: AND HOW THE LORD GRO WENT ON AN EMBASSAGE TO KROTHERING GATES, AND OF THE ANSWER HE GAT THERE.

Now it is to be said of Zigg that he failed not to fulfil Spitfire's behest, but gathered hastily an army of more than fifteen hundred horse and foot out of the northern dales and the habitations about Shalgreth Heath and the pasture-lands of Kelialand and Switchwater Way and the region of Rammerick, and came in haste over the Stile. But when Corinius knew of this faring from the west, he marched three thousand strong to meet them above Moonmere Head, to deny them the way to Galing. But Zigg, being yet in the upper defiles of Breakingdale, now for the first time had advertisement of the great slaughter at Thremnir's Heugh, and how the forces of Spitfire and Volle were broken and scattered and themselves fled up into the mountains; and, so deeming it small gain with so little an army to give battle to Corinius, he turned back without more ado and returned hastily over the Stile

[p. 323]

whence he came. Corinius sent light forces to harry his retreat, but being not minded as then to follow them into the west country, let build a burg in the throat of the pass in a place of vantage, and stationed there sufficient men to ward it, and so came again to Owlswick.

They that were with Corinius in Demonland numbered now more than five thousand fighting, men: a great and redoubtable army. With these, the weather being fine and open, he in a short time laid under him all eastern Demonland, save Galing alone. Bremery of Shaws with but seventy men held Galing for Lord Juss against all assaults. So that Corinius, thinking this fruit should ripen later and drop into his hand when the rest had been gathered, resolved at winter's end to march with his main army into the west country, leaving a small force to hold down the eastlands and contain Bremery in Galing. To this determination he was led by all arguments of sound soldiership, most happily seconding his own inclinations. For besides this of warlike policy two scarce weaker lodestones drew him westward: first the old cankered malice he bare in his heart against the Lord Brandoch Daha, that made Krothering his dearest prey; and next, his own lustful desires most outrageously burning for the Lady Mevrian. And this only for the sight of her picture, found by him in Spitfire's closet among his pens and inkstands and other trinkets, which once looked on he swore that with Heaven's will (ay, or without if so it must be) she should be his paramour.

So on the fourteenth day of March, of a bright frosty morn, he with his main army marched up Breakingdale and over the Stile, by that same road that Lord Juss fared by and Lord Brandoch Daha, that summer's day when they went to take counsel in Krothering before the Impland expedition. So came the Witches down to the watersmeet and turned aside to Many Bushes. There they found not Zigg nor his lady wife nor any of his folk, but found the house desolate. So they robbed and burned and went their way. And a famous castle of Juss's they sacked and burned in the confines of Kelialand, and an

[p. 324]

other on Switchwater Way, and a summer palace of Spitfire's on a little hill above Rammerick Mere. In such wise they marched victoriously down Switchwater Way, and there was none to dispute their progress but all fled at the approach of that great army and hid themselves in the secret places of the mountains, avoiding death and fate.

When he was come through the straits of Gashterndale up on to Krothering Side, Corinius let pitch his camp under Erngate End, at the foot of the scree-strewn slopes that rise steeply to the high western face of the mountain, where the lean embattled crags far aloft stand like a wall against high heaven.

Corinius came to Lord Gro and said to him, "To thee will I entrust mine embassage to this Mevrian. Thou shalt go with a flag of truce to gain thee entry to the castle; or if they will not admit thee, then bid her parley with thee without the wall. Then shalt thou use what fantastic courtier's jargon nature and thine invention shall lightliest counsel thee, and say, 'Corinius, by the grace of the great King and the might of his own hand king of Demonland, sitteth as thou well mayst see in power invincible before this castle. But he willed me let thee know that he is not come for to make war against ladies and damosels, and be thou of this sure, that neither to thee nor to none of thy fortress he will nought say nor hurt. Only this honour he proffereth thee, to wed thee in sweet marriage and make thee his queen in Demonland.' Whereto if she say yea, well and good, and we will go up peaceably into Krothering and possess it and the woman. But if she deny me this, then shalt thou say unto her right fiercely that I will set on against the castle like a lion, and neither rest nor give over until I have beaten it all to a ruin about her ears and slain the folk with the edge of the sword. And that which she refuseth me to have in peaceful love and kindness I will have of my own violent deed, that she and her stiff-necked Demons may know that I am their king, and master of all that is theirs, and their own bodies but chattels to serve my pleasure."

[p. 325]

Gro said, "My Lord Corinius, choose I pray thee another who shall be fitter than I to do this errand for thee;" and so for a long time most earnestly besought him. But Corinius, the more he perceived the duty hateful to Gro, the firmer became his resolution that none but Gro should undertake it. So that in the end Gro perforce consented, and in the same hour went with eleven up to the gates of Krothering, and a white flag of truce was borne before him.

He sent his herald up to the gate to desire speech of the Lady Mevrian. And in a while the gates were opened, and she came down attended to meet Lord Gro in the open garden before the bridge-gate. It was by then late afternoon, and the burning sun swam low amid streaked level clouds incarnadine, setting aflame the waters of Thunderfirth with the reflection of his beams. From the horizon, high beyond the pine-clad hills of Westmark, a range of clouds reared themselves, solid and of an iron hue; so hard-edged against the vapoury sky of sunset, that they seemed substantial mountains, not clouds: unearthly mountains (a man might fancy) divinely raised up for Demonland, for whom not all her ancient hills gave any longer refuge against her enemies. Here, in Krothering gates, wintersweet and the little purple daphne bush that blooms before the leaf breathed fragrance abroad. Yet was it not this sweetness in the air that troubled the Lord Gro, nor that western glory burning that dazzled his eyes; but to look upon that lady standing in the gate, white-skinned and dark, like the divine Huntress, tall and proud and lovely.

Mevrian, seeing him speechless, said at last, "My lord, I heard thou hadst some errand to declare unto me. And seeing a great camp of war gathered under Erngate End, and having heard of robbers and evil-doers rife about the land these many moons, I look not for soft speech. Take heart, therefore, and declare plainly what ill thou meanest."

Gro answered and said, "Tell me first if thou that speakest art in truth the Lady Mevrian, that I may know

[p. 326]

whether to human kind I speak or to some Goddess come down from the shining floor of heaven."

She answered, "Of thy compliments I have nought to do. I am she thou namest."

"Madam," said Lord Gro, "I would not have brought your highness this message nor delivered it, but that I know full well that did I refuse it another should bear it thee full speedily, and with less compliment and less sorrow than I."

She nodded gravely, as who should say, Proceed. So, with what countenance he might, he rehearsed his message, saying when it was ended, "Thus, madam, saith Corinius the king: and thus he charged me deliver it unto your highness."

Mevrian heard him attentively with head erect. When he had done she was silent a little, still studying him. Then she spake: "Methinks I know thee now. Thou art Lord Gro of Goblinland that bearest me this message."

Gro answered, "Madam, he thou namest went years ago from this earth. I am Lord Gro of Witchland."

"So it seemeth, from thy talk," said she; and was silent again.

The steady contemplation from that lady's eyes was like a knife scraping his tender skin, so that he was ill at ease well nigh past bearing.

After a little she said, "I remember thee, my lord. Let me stir thy memory. Eleven years ago, my brother went to war in Goblinland against the Witches, and overcame them on Lormeron field. There slew he the great King of Witchland in single combat, Gorice X., that until that day was held for the mightiest man-at-arms in all the world. My brother was as then but eighteen winters old, and that was the first blazing up of his great fame and glory. So King Gaslark made great feasting and great rejoicing in Zaje Zaculo because of the ridding of his land of the oppressors. I was at those revels. I saw thee there, my lord; and being but a little maid of eleven summers, sat on thy knee in Gaslark's halls. Thou didst show me books, with pictures in strange colours of gold and green and

[p. 327]

scarlet, of birds and beasts and distant countries and wonders of the world. And I, being a little harmless maid, thought thee good and kind of heart, and loved thee."

She ceased, and Gro, like a man hath taken some drowsy drug, stood looking on her confounded.

"Tell me," said she, "of this Corinius. Is he such a fighter as men say?"

"He is," said Gro, "one of the most famousest captains that ever was. That might not his worst enemies gainsay."

Mevrian said, "A likely consort, think'st thou, for a lady of Demonland? Remember, I have said nay to crowned kings. I would know thy mind, for doubtless he is thy very familiar friend, since he made thee his go-between."

Gro saw that she mocked, and be was troubled at heart. "Madam," said he, and his voice shook somewhat, "take not in too great scorn this vile part in me. Verily this I brought thee is the most shamefullest message, and flatly against my will did I deliver it unto thee. Yet with such constraint upon me, how could I choose but strike my forehead into dauntless marble and word by word deliver my charge?"

"Thy tongue," said Mevrian, "hath struck hot irons in my face. Go back to thy master. If he look for an answer, tell him he may read it in letters of gold above the gates."

"Thy noble brother, madam," said Gro, "is not here to make good that answer." And he came near to her, saying in a low voice so that only they two should hear it, "Be not deceived. This Corinius is a naughty, wicked, and luxurious youth, that will use thee without any respect if once he break in by force into Krothering Castle. It were wiselier carried to make some open show to receive him; so by fair words and putting of him off thou mayst yet escape."

But Mevrian said, "Thou hast mine answer. I have no ears to his request. Say too that my cousin the Lord Spitfire hath healed his wounds, and hath an army afoot

[p. 328]

shall whip these Witches from my gates ere many days be passed by."

So saying she returned in great scorn within the castle.

But the Lord Gro returned again to the camp and to Corinius, who asked him how he had sped.

He answered, she did utterly refuse it.

"So," said Corinius; "doth the puss thump me off? Then pause my hot desires an instant, only the more thunderingly to clap it on. For I will have her. And this coyness and pert rejection hath the more fixedly confirmed me."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 329]

 

XXII

 

Aurwath and the Switchwater

HOW THE LADY MEVRIAN BEHELD FROM KROTHERING WALLS THE WITCHLAND ARMY AND THE CAPTAINS THEREOF: AND OF THE TIDINGS BROUGHT HER THERE OF THE WAR IN THE WEST COUNTRY, OF AURWATH FIELD AND THE GREAT SLAUGHTER ON SWITCHWATER WAY.

THE fourth day after these doings aforewrit, the Lady Mevrian walked on the battlements of Krothering keep. A blustering wind blew from the north-west. The sky was cloudless: clear blue overhead, all else pearl-gray, and the air a little misty. Her old steward, stalwart and soldier-like, greaved and helmed and clad in a plated jerkin of bull's hide, walked with her.

"The hour should be about striking," said she. "'Tis to-day or to-morrow my Lord Zigg named to me when they were here a-guesting. If but Goblinland keep tryst it were the prettiest feat, to take them so pat."

"As your ladyship might clap a gnat 'twixt the palms of your two hands," said the old man; and he gazed again southward over the sea.

Mevrian set her gaze in the same quarter. "Nothing but

[p. 330]

mist and spray," she said after a few minutes' searching. "I'm glad I sent Lord Spitfire those two hundred horse. He must have every man can be scraped up, for such a day. How thinkest thou, Ravnor: if King Gaslark come not, hath Lord Spitfire force enow to cope them alone?"

Ravnor chuckled in his beard. "I think and my lord your brother were here be should tell your highness 'ay' to that. Since first I bowled a hoop, they taught me a Demon was under-matched against five Witches."

She looked at him a little wistfully. "Ah," she said, "were he at home. And were Juss at home." Then on a sudden she faced round northward, pointing to the camp. "Were they at home," she cried, "thou shouldst not see outlanders insulting in arms on Krothering Side, sending me shameful offers, caging me like a bird in this castle. Have such things been in Demonland, until now?"

Now came a boy running along the battlements from the far side of the tower, crying that ships were hove in sight sailing from the south and east, "And they make for the firth."

"Of what land?" said Mevrian, while they hastened back to look.

"What but Goblinland?" said Ravnor.

"O say not so too hastily!" cried she. They came round the turret wall, and the sea and Stropardon Firth opened wide and void before them. "I see nought," she said; "or is yon flight of sea-mews the fleet thou sawest?"

"He meaneth Thunderfirth," said Ravnor, who had gone on ahead, pointing to the west. "They shape their course toward Aurwath. 'Tis King Gaslark for sure. Mark but the blue and gold of his sails."

Mevrian watched them, her gloved hand drumming nervously on the marble battlement. Very stately she seemed, muffled in a flowing cloak of white watered silk collared and lined with ermine. "Eighteen ships!" she said. "I dreamed not Goblinland might make so great a force."

"Your ladyship may see," said Ravnor, walking back

[p. 331]

along the wall, "whether the Witchlanders have slept while these ships sailed to port."

She followed and looked. Great stir there was in the Witchland army, marshalling before the camp; there was coming and going and leaping on horseback, and faintly on the wind their trumpets' blare was borne to Mevrian's ears as she beheld them from her high watch-tower. The host moved forth down the meadows, all orderly, aglitter with bronze and steel. Southward they came, passing at length through the home-meads of Krothering, so near that each man was plainly seen from the battlements, as they rode beneath.

Mevrian leaned forward in an embrasure, one hand on either battlement at her left and right. "I would know their names," said she. "Thou, that hast oft fared to the wars, mayst teach me. Gro I know, with a long beard; and heart-heaviness it is to see a lord of Goblinland in such a fellowship. What's he beside him, yon bearded gallant, with a winged helm and a diadem about it, like a king's, and beareth a glaive crimson-hafted? He looketh a proud one."

The old man answered, "Laxus of Witchland: the same that was admiral of their fleet against the Ghouls."

"'Tis a brave man to look on, and worthy a better cause. What's he rideth now below us, heading their horse: ruddy and swarthy and light of build, hath a brow like the thunder-cloud, and weareth armour from neck to toe?"

Ravnor answered, "Highness, I know him not certainly, the sons of Corund so favour one another. But methinks 'tis the young prince Heming."

Mevrian laughed. "Prince quotha?"

"So moveth the world, your highness. Since Gorice set Corund in kingdom in Impland----"

Said Mevrian, "Name him prithee Heming Faz: I warrant they trap them now with barbarous additions. Heming Faz, good lack! lording it now in Demonland.

"The prime huff-cap of all," said she after a little, "holdeth aback it seemeth. O here he comes. Sweet heaven,

[p. 332]

what furious horsemanship! Troth, and he can sit a horse, Raynor, and hath the great figure of an athlete. Look where he gallopeth bare-headed down the line. I ween he'll need more than golden curls to keep his head whole ere he have done with Gaslark, ay, and our own folk gathering from the north. I see he beareth his helm at the saddle-bow. To ape us so!" she cried as he drew nearer. "All silks and silver. Thou'dst have sworn none but a Demon went to battle so costly apparelled. O, for a scissors to cut his comb withal!"

So speaking she leaned forward all she might, to watch him. And he, galloping by below, looked up; and marking her so watching, reined mightily his great chestnut horse, throwing him with the check well nigh on his haunches. And while the horse plunged and reared, Corinius hailed her in a great voice, crying, "Mistress, good-morrow!" crying, "Wish me victory, and swift to thine arms!"

So near below was he a-riding, she might scan the very lineaments of his face and read it as he looked up and shouted to her that greeting. He saluted with his sword, and spurred onward to overtake Gro and Laxus in the van.

As if sickened on a sudden, or as if she had been ready to tread on a deadly stinging adder, the Lady Mevrian leaned against the marble of the battlements. Ravnor stepped towards her: "Is your ladyship ill? Why, what's the matter?"

"A silly qualm," said Mevrian faintly. "If thou'dst medicine it, show me the sheen of Spitfire's spears to the northward. The blank land dazzles me."

So wore the afternoon. Twice and thrice Mevrian went upon the walls, but could see nought save the sea and the firths and the mountain-bosomed plain fair and peaceful in the spring-time: no sign of men or of war's alarums, save only the masts of Gaslark's ships seen over the land's brow three miles or more to the south-west. Yet she knew surely that near those ships beside Aurwath harbour must be desperate fighting toward, Gaslark the

[p. 333]

king engaged at heavy odds against Laxus and Corinius and the spears of Witchland. And the sun wheeled low over the dark pines of Westmark, and still no sign from the north.

"Thou didst send one forth for tidings?" she said to Ravnor, the third time she went on the wall.

He answered, "Betimes this morning, your highness. But 'tis slow faring until a be a mile or twain clear of the castle, for a must elude their small bands that go up and down guarding the countryside."

"Bring him to me o' the instant of his return," said she.

With a foot on the stair, she turned back. "Ravnor," she said.

He came to her.

"Thou," she said, "hast been years enow my brother's steward in Krothering, and our father's before him, to know what mind and spirit dwelleth in them of our line. Tell me, truly and sadly, what thou makest of this. Lord Spitfire is too late: other else, Goblinland too sudden-early (and that was his fault from of old). What seest thou in it? Speak to me as thou shouldst to my Lord Brandoch Daha were it he that asked thee."

"Highness," said the old man Ravnor, "I will answer you my very thought: and it is, woe to Goblinland. Since my Lord Spitfire cometh not yet from the north, only the deathless Gods descending out of heaven can save the king. The Witches number at an humble reckoning twice his strength; and man to man you were as well pit a hound against a bear, as against Witches Goblins. For all that these be fierce and full of fiery courage, the bear hath it at the last."

Mevrian listened, looking on him with sorrowful steady eyes. "And he so generous-noble flown to comfort Demonland in the blackness of her days," she said at last. "Can fate be so ungallant? O Ravnor, the shame of it! First La Fireez, now Gaslark. How shall any love us any more? The shame of it, Ravnor!"

"I would not have your highness," said Ravnor, "too hasty to blame us. If their plan and compact have gone

[p. 334]

amiss, 'tis likelier King Gaslark's misprision than Lord Spitfire's. We know not for sure which day was set for this landing."

While he so spake, he was looking past her seaward, a little south of the reddest part of the sunset. His eyes widened. He touched her arm and pointed. Sails were hoisted among the masts at Aurwath. Smoke, as of burning, reeked up against the sky. As they watched, the most part of the ships moved out to sea. From those that remained, some five or six, fire leaped and black clouds of smoke. The rest as they came out of the lee of the land, made southward for the open sea under oar and sail.

Neither spake; and the Lady Mevrian leaning her elbows on the parapet of the wall hid her face in her hands.

Now came Ravnor's messenger at length back from his faring, and the old man brought him in to Mevrian in her bower in the south part of Krothering. The messenger said, "Highness, I bring no writing, since that were too perilous had I fallen in my way among Witches. But I had audience of my Lord Spitfire and my Lord Zigg in the gates of Gashterndale. And thus their lordships commanded me deliver it unto you, that your highness should be at ease and secure, seeing that they do in such sort hold all the ways to Krothering, that the Witchland army cannot escape out of this countryside that is betwixt Thunderfirth and Stropardon Firth and the sea, but and if they will give battle unto their lordships. But if they choose rather to abide here by Krothering, then may our armies close on them and oppress them, since our forces do exceed theirs by near a thousand spears. Which to-morrow will be done whate'er betide, since that is the day appointed for Gaslark the king to land with a force at Aurwath."

Mevrian said, "They know nought then of this direful miscarriage. and Gaslark here already before his time and thrown back into the sea?" And she said, "We must apprise them on't, and that hastily and to-night."

[p. 335]

When the man understood this, he answered, "Ten minutes for a bite and a stirrup-cup, and I am at your ladyship's service."

And in a short while, that man went forth again secretly out of Krothering in the dusk of night to bring word to Lord Spitfire of what was befallen. And the watchmen watching in the night from Krothering walls beheld northward under Erngate End the camp-fires of the Witches like the stars.

 

Night passed and day dawned, and the camp of the Witches showed empty as an empty shell.

Mevrian said, "They have moved in the night."

"Then shall your highness hear great tidings ere long," said Ravnor.

"'Tis like we may have guests in Krothering to-night," said Mevrian. And she gave order for all to be made ready against their coming, and the choicest bed-chambers for Spitfire and Zigg to welcome them. So, with busy preparations, the day went by. But as evening came, and still no riding from the north, some shadows of impatience and anxious doubt crept with night's shades creeping across heaven across their eager expectancy in Krothering. For Mevrian's messenger returned not. Late to rest went the Lady Mevrian; and with the first peeping light she was abroad, muffled in her great mantle of velvet and swansdown against the eager winds of morning. Up to the battlements she went, and with old Ravnor searched the blank prospect. For pale morning rose on an empty landscape; and so all day until the evening: watching, and waiting, and questioning in their hearts.

So went they at length to supper on this third night after Aurwath field. And ere supper was half done was a stir in the outer courts, and the rattle of the bridge let down, and a clatter of horse-hooves on the bridge and the jasper pavements. Mevrian sate erect and expectant. She nodded to Ravnor who wanting no further sign went hastily out, and returned in an instant hastily and with heavy brow. He spake in her ear, "News, my Lady. It

[p. 336]

were well you bade him to private audience. Drink this cup first," pouring out some wine for her.

She rose up, saying to the steward, "Come thou, and bring him with thee."

As they went he whispered her, "Astar of Rettray, sent by the Lord Zigg with matter of urgent import for your highness's ear."

The Lady Mevrian sat in her ivory chair cushioned with rich stuffed silks of Beshtria, with little golden birds and strawberry leaves with the flowers and rich red fruits all figured thereon in gorgeous colours of needlework. She reached out her hand to Astar who stood before her in his battle harness, muddy and bebloodied from head to foot. He bowed and kissed her hand: then stood silent. He held his head high and looked her in the face, but his eyes were bloodshed and his look was ghastly like a messenger of ill.

"Sir," said Mevrian, "stand not in doubt, but declare all. Thou knowest it is not in our blood to quail under dangers and misfortune."

Astar said, "Zigg, my brother-in-law, gave me this in charge, madam, to tell thee all truly."

"Proceed," said she. "Thou knowest our last news. Hour by hour since then, we watched on victory. I have no mean welcome feast prepared against your coming."

Astar groaned. "My Lady Mevrian," said he, "you must now prepare a sword, not a banquet. You did send a runner to Lord Spitfire."

"Ay," said she.

"He brought us advertisement that night," said Astar, "of Gaslark's overthrow. Alas, that Goblinland was a day too soon, and so bare alone the brunt. Yet was vengeance ready to our hand, as we supposed. For every pass and way was guarded, and ours the greater force. So for that night we waited, seeing Corinius's fires alight in his camp on Krothering Side, meaning to smite him at dawn of day. Now in the night were mists abroad, and the moon early sunken. And true it is as ill it is, that the whole Witchland army marched away past us in the dark."

[p. 337]

"What?" cried Mevrian, "and slept ye all to let them by?"

"In the middle night," answered he, "we had sure tidings he was afoot, and the fires yet burning in his camp a show to mock us withal. By all sure signs, we might know he was broke forth north-westward, where he must take the upper road into Mealand over Brocksty Hause. Zigg with seven hundred horse galloped to Heathby to head him off, whiles our main force fared their swiftest up Little Ravendale. Thou seest, madam, Corinius must march along the bow and we along the bowstring."

"Yes," said Mevrian. "Ye had but to cheek him with the horse at Heathby, and he must fight or fall back toward Justdale where he was like to lose half his folk in Memmery Moss. Outlanders shall scarce find a firm way there in a dark night."

"Certain it is we should have had him," said Astar. "Yet certain it is he doubled like a hare and fooled us all to the top of our bent: turned in his tracks, as later we concluded, somewhere by Goosesand, and with all his army slipped back eastward under our rear. And that was the wonderfullest feat heard tell of in all chronicles of war."

"Tush, noble Astar," said Mevrian. "Labour not Witchland's praises, nor imagine not I'll deem less of Spitfire's nor Zigg's generalship because Corinius, by art or fortune's favour, dodged 'em in the dark."

"Dear Lady," said he, "even look for the worst and prepare yourself for the same."

Her gray eyes steadily beheld him. "Certain intelligence,"' said he, "was brought us of their faring with all speed they might eastaway past Switchwater; and ere the sun looked well over Gemsar Edge we were hot on the track of them, knowing our force the stronger and our only hope to bring them to battle ere they reached the Stile, where they have made a fortress of great strength we might scarce hope to howster them out from if they should win thither."

He paused. "Well," said she.

[p. 338]

"Madam," he said, "that we of Demonland are great and invincible in war, 'tis most certain. But in these days fight we as a man that fighteth hobbled, or with half his gear laid by, or as a man half roused from Sleep. For we be reft of our greatest. Bereft of these, such sorrows befall us and such doom as at Thremnir's Heugh last autumn shattered our strength in pieces, and now this very day yet more terribly hath put us down on Switchwater Way."

Mevrian's cheek turned white, but she said no word, waiting.

"We were eager in the chase," said Astar. "I have told thee why, madam. Thou knowest how near to the mountains runneth the road past Switchwater, and the shores of the lake hem in the way for miles against the mountain spurs, and woods clothe the lower slopes, and dells and gorges run up betwixt the spurs into the mountain side. The day was misty, and the mists hung by the shores of Switchwater. When we had marched so far that our van was about over against the stead of Highbank that stands on the farther shore, the battle began: greatly to their advantage, since Corinius had placed strong forces in the hills on our right flank, and so ambushed us and took us at unawares. Not to grieve thee with a woful tale, madam, we were most bloodily overthrown, and our army merely brought to not-being. And in the mid rout, Zigg stole an instant to charge me by my love for him ride to Krothering as if my life lay on it and the weal of all of us, and bid you fly hence to Westmark or the isles or whither you will, ere the Witches come again and here entrap you. Since save for these walls and these few brave soldiers you have to ward them, no help standeth any more 'twixt you and these devilish Witches."

Still she was silent. He said, "Let me not be too hateful to you, most gracious Lady, for this rude tale of disaster. The suddenness of the times bar any pleasant glozing. And indeed I thought I should satisfy you more with plainness, than should opinion of I know not what

[p. 339]

false courtliness bind me to show you comfort where comfort is not."

The Lady Mevrian stood up and took him by both hands. Surely the light of that lady's eyes was like the new light of morning glancing through mists on the gray still surface of a mountain tarn, and the accent of her voice sweet as the voices of the morning as she said, "O Astar, think me not so unhandsome, nor yet so foolish. Thanks, gentle Astar. But thou hast not supped, and sure in a great soldier battle and swift far riding should breed hunger, how ill soever the news he beareth. Thy welcome shall not be the colder because we looked for more than thee, alas, and for far other tidings. A chamber is prepared for thee. Eat and drink; and when night is done is time enough to speak more of these things."

"Madam," he said, "you must come now or 'tis too late."

But she answered him, "No, noble Astar. This is my brother's house. So long as I may keep it for him against his coming home I will not creep out of Krothering like a rat, but stand to my watch. And this is certain, I shall not open Krothering gates to Witches whiles I and my folk yet live to bar them against them."

 

So she made him go to supper; but herself sat late that night alone in the Chamber of the Moon, that was in the donjon keep above the inner court in Krothering. This was Lord Brandoch Daha's banquet chamber, devised and furnished by him in years gone by; and here he and she commonly sat at meat, using not the banquet hall across the court save when great company was present. Round was that chamber, following the round walls of the tower that held it. All the pillars and the walls and the vaulted roof were of a strange stone, white and smooth, and yielding such a glistering show of pallid gold in it as was like the golden sheen of the full moon of a warm night in midsummer. Lamps that were milky opals self-effulgent filled all the chamber with a soft radiance, in which the bas-reliefs of the high dado, delicately

[p. 340]

carved, portraying those immortal blooms of amaranth and nepenthe and moly and Elysian asphodel, were seen in all their delicate beauty, and the fair painted pictures of the Lord of Krothering and his lady sister, an d of Lord Juss above the great open fireplace with Goldry and Spitfire on his left and right. A few other pictures there were, smaller than these: the Princess Armelline of Goblinland, Zigg and his lady wife, and others; wondrous beautiful.

Here a long while sat the Lady Mevrian. She had a little lute wrought of sweet sandalwood and ivory inlaid with gems. While she sat a-thinking, her fingers strayed idly on the strings, and she sang in a low sweet voice:

	 
		There were three ravens sat on a tree,
		 They were as black as they might be.
		     With a downe, derrie down.
		
		The one of them said to his make,
		 Where shall we our breakefast take?
		
		Downe in yonder greene field,
		 There lies a knight slain under his shield.
		
		His hounds they lie downe at his feete,
		 So well they can their master keepe.
		
		His haukes they flie so eagerly,
		 There's no fowle dare him come nie.
		
		Downe there comes a fallow doe
		 As great with yong as she might goe.
		
		She lift up his bloudy hed,
		 And kist his wounds, that were so red.
		
		She gat him up upon her backe,
		 And carried him to earthen lake.
		
		She buried him before the prime;
		 She was dead herselfe ere even-song time.
		
		God send every gentleman [p. 341]
		 Such haukes, such hounds, and such a leman.
		     With a downe, derrie down.
		
		 With the last sighing sweetness trembling from the strings, she laid aside the lute, saying, "The discord of my thoughts, my lute, doth ill agree with the harmonies of thy strings. Put it by."

She fell to gazing on her brother's picture, the Lord Brandoch Daha, standing in his jewelled hauberk laced about with gold, his hand upon his sword. And that lazy laughter-loving yet imperious look of the eyes which in life he had was there, wondrous lively caught by the painter's art, and the lovely lines of his brow and lip and jaw, where power and masterful determination slumbered, as brazen Ares might slumber in the arms of the Queen of Love.

A long while Mevrian looked on that picture, musing. Then, burying her face in the cushions of the long low seat she sat on, she burst into a great passion of tears.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 342]

 

XXIII

 

The Weird Begun of Ishnain Nemartra

OF THE COUNSEL TAKEN BY THE WITCHES TOUCHING THE CONDUCT OF THE WAR: WHEREAFTER IN THE FIFTH ASSAULT THE CASTLE OF LORD BRANDOCH DAHA WAS MADE A PREY UNTO CORINIUS.

Now was little time for debate or conjecture, but with the morrow's morn came the Witchland army once more before Krothering, and a herald sent by Corinius to bid Mevrian yield up the castle and her own proper person lest a worse thing befall them. Which she stoutly refusing, Corinius let straight assault the castle, but won it not. And in the next three days following he thrice assaulted Krothering, and, failing with some loss of men to win an entry, closely invested it.

And now summoned he those other lords of Witchland to talk with him. "How say ye? Or what rede shall we take? They be few only within to man the walls; and great shame it is to us and to all Witchland if we get not this hold taken, so many as we be here gone up against it, and so great captains."

Laxus said, "Thou art king in Demonland. Thine it is to

[p. 343]

take order what shall be done. "But if thou desire my rede, then shall I give it thee."

"I desire each one of you," said Corinius, "to show forth to me frankly and freely his rede. And well ye know I strive for nought else but for Witchland's glory and to make firm our conquest here."

"Well," said Laxus, "I told thee once already my counsel, and thou wast angry with me. Thou madest a mighty victory on Switchwater Way; which had we followed up, pushing home the sword of our advantage till the hilts came clap against the breastplate of our adversary, we might now have exterminated from the land the whole nest of them, Spitfire, Zigg, and Volle. But now are they gotten away the devil knows whither, for the preparing of fresh thorns to prick our sides withal."

Corinius said, "Claim not wisdom after the event, my lord. 'Twas not so thou didst advise. Thou didst bid me let go Krothering: a thing I will not do, once I have set mine hand to it."

Laxus answered him, "Not only did I so advise thee as I have said, but Heming was by, and will hear me out, that I did offer that he or I with a small force should keep this comfit-box shut for thee till thou shouldst have done the main business."

"'Tis so," said Heming.

But Corinius said, "'Tis not so, Heming. And were it so, 'tis easily seen why he or thou shouldst hanker for first suck at this luscious fruit. Yet not so easy to see why I should yield it you."

"That," said Laxus, "is very ill said. I see thy memory needs jogging, and thou art sliding into ingratitude. How many such like fruits hast thou enjoyed since we came out hither, that we had all the pains and plucking of?"

"O cry thee mercy, my lord," said Corinius, "I should have remembered, dreams of Sriva's moist lips keep thee from straying. But enough of this fooling: to the matter." Lord Laxus flushed. "By my faith," said he, "this is very much to the matter. 'Twere well, Corinius, if thy loose thoughts were kept from straying. Spend men on a

[p. 344]

fortress? Better assay Galing, then: that were a prize worth more to our safety and our lordship here."

"Ay," said Heming. "Seek out the enemy. 'Tis therefore we came hither: not to find women for thee."

Thereupon the Lord Corinius struck him across the table a great buffet in the face. Heming, mad wroth, snatched out a dagger; but Gro and Laxus catching him one by either hand restrained him. Gro said, "My fords, my lords, you must not word it so dangerous ill. We have but one heart and mind here, to magnify our Lord the King and his glory. Thou, Heming, forget not the King hath put authority in the hand of Corinius, so that thy dagger set against him setteth most treasonably against the King's majesty. And thou, my lord, I pray be temperate in thy power. Sure, for want of open war it is that our hands be so ready for these private brawls."

When by fair words this stew was cooled again, Corinius bade Gro say forth his mind, what he thought lay next to do. Gro answered, "My lord, I am of Laxus's opinion. Abiding here by Krothering, we fare as idle cooks toying with sweetmeats while the roast spoils. We should seek out power and destroy it where still it fareth free, lest it swell again to a growth may danger us: wheresoever these lords be fled, think not they'll be slack to prepare a mischief for us."

"I see," said Corinius, "ye be all three of an accord against me. But there is no one beam of these thoughts your discourse hath planted in me, but is able to discern a greater cloud than you do go in."

"It is very true," said Laxus, "that we do think somewhat scornfully of this war against women."

"Ay, there's the cover off the dish!" said Corinius, "and a pretty mess within. Y'are woman-mad, every jack of you, and this blears your eyes to think me sick o' the same folly. Thou and thy little dark-eyed baggage, that I dare swear hath months ago forgot thee for another. Heming here and I know not what sweet maid his young heart doteth on. Gro, ha! ha!" and he fell a-laughing. "Wherefore the King saddled me with this Goblin, he

[p. 345]

only knoweth, and his secretary the Devil: not I. By Satan, thou hast a starved look i' the eyes giveth me to think the errand I sent thee to Krothering gates did thee no good. My cat's leering look showeth me that my cat goeth a catterwawing. Dost now find the raven's wing a seemlier hue In a wench's hair to set thy cold blood a-leaping than tawny red? Or dost think this one hath a softer breast than thy Queen's to cushion thy perfumed locks?"

With that word spoken, all three of them leaped from their seats. Gro, with a face ashen gray, said, "At me thou mayst spit what filth thou wilt. I am schooled to bear with it for Witchland's sake and until thine own venom choke thee. But this shalt thou not do whiles I live, thou or any other: to let thy bawdy tongue meddle with Queen Prezmyra's name."

Corinius sat still in his chair in a posture of studied ease, but his sword was ready. His great jowl was set, his insolent blue eyes scornfully looked from one to another of those lords where they stood menacing him. "Pshaw!" said he, at fast. "Who brought her name into it but thyself, my Lord Gro? not I."

"Thou wert best not bring it in again, Corinius," said Heming. "Have we not well followed thee and upheld thee? And so shall we do henceforth. But remember, I am King Corund's son. And if thou speak this wicked lie again, it shall cost thee thy life if I may."

Corinius threw out his arms and laughed. "Come," said he, standing up, with much show of jolly friendliness, "'twas but a jest; and, I freely acknowledge, an ill. jest. I'm sorry for it, my lords.

"And now," said he, "come we again to the matter. Krothering Castle will I not forgo, since 'tis not my way to turn back for any man on earth, no not for the Gods almighty, once I have ta'en my course. But I will make a bargain with you, and this it is: that we to-morrow do assault the hold a last time, using all our men and all our might. And if, as I think is most unlikely and most

[p. 346]

shameful, we get it not, then shall we fare away and do according to thy counsel, O Laxus."

"'Tis now four days lost," said Laxus. "Thou canst not retrieve them. Howso, be it as thou wilt."

So brake up their council. But the mind and heart of the Lord Gro was nought peaceful within him, but tumultuous with manifold imaginings of hopes and fears and old desires, that intertwined like serpents twisting and contending. So that nought was clear to him save the unclear trouble of his discontent; and it was as if the conscience of a secret grant his inward mind made had suddenly cast a vail betwixt his thoughts and him that he durst not pluck aside.

 

Betimes on the morrow Corinius let fare against Krothering with all his host, Laxus from the south, Heming and Cargo from the east against the main gates, and himself from the west where the walls and towers showed strongest but the natural strength of the place weaker than elsewhere. Now they within were few, because of Mevrian's sending of those two hundred horse to follow Zigg and those came not back after Switchwater; and as the day wore, and still the battle went forward, and still were wounds given and taken, the odds swung yet heavier against them of Demonland, and more and more must the castle hold of its own strength only, for there were not whole men left enow to man the walls. And now had Corinius well nigh won the castle, faring up on the walls west of the donjon tower where he and his fell to clearing the battlements, rushing on like wolves. But Astar of Rettray stayed him there with so great a sword-stroke on the helm that he overthrew him all astonied down without the wall and into the ditch; but his men drew him forth and saved him. So was the Lord Corinius put out of the fight; but greatly still he egged on his men. And about the fifth hour after noon the sons of Corund gat the main gate.

Lady Mevrian bare in that hour with her own hand a stoup of wine to Astar in a lull of the battle. While he

[p. 347]

drank, she said, "Astar, the hour demandeth that I pledge thee to obedience, even as I pledged mine own folk and Ravnor that here commandeth my garrison in Krothering."

"My Lady Mevrian," answered he, "under your safety, I shall obey you."

She said, "No conditions, sir. Harken and know. First I will thank thee and these valiant men that so mightily warded us and golden Krothering against our enemies. This was my mind, to ward it unto the last, because it is my dear brother's house, and I count it unworthy Corinius should stable his horses in our chambers, and carousing amid his drunkards do hurt to our fair banquet hall. But now, by hard necessity of disastrous war, hath this thing come to pass, and all fallen into his hand save only this keep alone."

"Alas, madam," said he, "to our shame I may not deny it."

"O trample out any thought of shame," said she. "A score of them against every one of us: the glory of our defence shall be for ever. But now 'tis for me mainly he still beareth against Krothering so great and peisant strokes as thick as rain falleth from the sky. And now must ye obey me and do my commandment; else must we perish, for even this tower we are not enough to hold against him many days."

"Divine Lady," said Astar, "but once shall one pass the cruel pass of death. I and your folk will defend you unto that end."

"Sir," said she, standing like a queen before him, "I shall now defend myself and our precious things in Krothering more certainly than ye men of war may do." And she showed him shortly that this was her design, to yield up the keep unto Corinius under promise of a safe conduct for Astar and Ravnor and all her men.

"And submit thee to this Corinius?" said Astar. But she answered, "Thy sword hath likely cut his claws for awhile. I fear him not."

Of all this would Astar at first have nought to do, and

[p. 348]

the old steward withal was well nigh mutinous. But so firm of purpose was she, and withal showed them so plainly that this was the only hope to save herself and Krothering, and the Witches must else sack the house of Krothering and in a few days win the keep, "and then, snaky despair; and the fault on't not in fortune but in ourselves, that could not frame ourselves to our fortune"; that at last with heavy hearts they consented to do her bidding.

Without more ado, was a parley called,  speaking for herself from a high window opening on the court and Gro for Corinius. In which parley it was articled that she should render up the tower; and that the fighting men which were within should have peace and safe passage whither they would; and that there should be no scathe nor outrage done to Krothering neither to the lands thereof; and that all this should be writ down and sealed under the hands of Corinius, Gro, and Laxus, and the gates opened to the Witches and all keys delivered up within an half hour of the giving of the sealed writing into Mevrian's hand.

Now was all this performed accordingly, and Krothering keep rendered to the Lord Corinius. Astar and Ravnor and their men would have abided as prisoners for Mevrian's sake, but Corinius would not suffer it, vowing with bloody imprecations that he would let slay out of hand any man of them he should take after an hour's space within three miles of Krothering. So, under Mevrian's strait commands, they departed.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 349]

 

XXIV

 

A King in Krothering

HOW THE LORD CORINIUS WOULD TAKE UNTO HIMSELF A QUEEN IN DEMONLAND, AND MADE HIM A BRIDAL FEAST THERETO: WHEREIN IS A NOTABLE INSTANCE HOW UNTO THEM WHICH THE GODS DO LOVE HELPERS ARE RAISED UP AND COMFORTERS EVEN IN THE MIDST OF THEIR ENEMIES.

That same evening Corinius let dight a banquet in the Chamber of the Moon for some two score of his chiefest men, a very pompous and kingly entertainment; and conceiving that he might now very well avail to accomplish his pleasure touching the Lady Mevrian, he sent her word by one of his gentlemen that she should attend him there. And she sending answer to tell him gently all else in the castle was at his service, but for herself she was quite fordone and greatly desired rest and sleep that night, he fell a-laughing immoderately and saying, "A most unseasonable desire, and one that smacketh besides of mockery, since well she knoweth what this night I do intend. Wish her to repair to us, and that right swiftly, lest I fetch her."

[p. 350]

To that message sent her came she in a short while herself to answer, dressed all in funereal black, her gown and close-fitting bodice of black sendal slashed with black sarcenett, and about her throat a chain of sapphires darkly lustrous. Very nobly she carried her head. Framed with the piled and braided masses of her night-dark hair, her face showed pale indeed, but unruffled and undismayed.

All at her coming in stood up to greet her; and Corinius said, "Lady, thou didst change thy mind quickly since thou didst first affirm thou never wouldst yield up Krothering unto me."

"As quickly as I might, my lord," said she, "for I saw I was wrong."

He abode silent a minute. his eyes like amorous surfeiters over-running her fair form. Then said he, "Thou didst wish to purchase safety for thy friends?"

She answered, "Yes."

"For thine own self," said Corinius, "it had made no jot of difference. Be witness unto me the omnisciency of the Gods, whereunto is nothing concealable, I mean thee only good."

"My lord," said she, "I embrace the comfort of that word. And know that good to me is mine own freedom: not conditions of any man's choosing."

Whereto be, being well tippled with wine, framing the most lovely countenance he might, made answer, "I doubt not but to-night, madam, thou shalt be well advised to choose that highest condition, and till to-day unknown, which I shall proffer thee: to be Queen of Demonland."

She thanked him in her best manner, but said she was minded to forgo that supposedly pleasing eminence.

"How?" said he. "Is it too little a thing for thee? Or is it as I think, that thou laughest?"

She said, "My lord, it should little beseem me that am of the seed of men of war since long generations to trap my mind with the false shows of a greatness that is gone. Yet I pray you forget not this: the dominion of the Demons

[p. 351]

hath used to soar a pitch above common royalty, and like the eye of day regarded kings from above. And for this style of Queen thou offerest me, I say unto thee it is an addition I desire not, who am sister unto him that writ that writing above the gate that all ye had tasted the truth thereof had he been here to meet with you."

Corinius said, "True it is, some have out-bragged the world, yet I ere this have used them like knaves. My jackboot hath known things in Carce, madam, I'll not gall thy heart to tell thee of." But perceiving a great lowe of disdainful anger blaze in Mevrian's eye, "Cry you mercy," said he, "incomparable lady; this was beside the mark. I would not sully our new friendship with memories of----- Ho there! a chair beside me for the Queen."

But Mevrian made them set it on the far side of the board, and there sat her down, saying, "I pray thee, my Lord Corinius, unsay that word. Thou knowest it dislikes me."

He looked on her in silence for a minute, leaned forward across the board, his lips parted a little and between them his breath coming and going thick and swift. "Well," he said, "sit there, and it like thee, madam, and manage my delights by stages. Last year the wide world betwixt us: this year the mountains: yestereve Krothering walls: to-night a table's breadth: and ere night be done, not so much as-----"

Gro saw the wild-deer look in Lady Mevrian's eyes. She said, "This is talk I have not learned to understand, my lord. "

"I shall learn it thee," said Corinius, his face aflame. "Lovers live by love as larks by leeks. By Satan, I do love thee as thou wert the heart out of my body."

"My Lord Corinius," said she, "we ladies of the north have little stomach for these fashions, howe'er they commend them in waterish Witchland. If thou'lt have my friendship, bring me service therefor, and that in season. This is no fit table-talk."

"Why there," said he, "we're in fast agreement. I'll blithely show thee all this, and a quainter thing beside, in

[p. 352]

thine own chamber. But 'twas beyond my hopes thou'dst grant me that so suddenly. Are we so happy?"

In great shame and anger the Lady Mevrian stood up from the table. Corinius, something unsteadily, leaped to his feet. For all his bigness, so tall she was she looked him level in the eye. And he, as when in the face of a night-ranging beast suddenly a man brandishes a bright light, stood stupid under that gaze, the springs of action strangely frozen in him on a sudden, and said sullenly, "Madam, I am a soldier. Truly mine affection standeth not upon compliment. That I am impatient, put the wite on thy beauty not on me. Pray you, be seated."

But Mevrian answered, "Thy language, my lord, is too bold and vicious. Come to me to-morrow if thou wilt; but I'll have thee know, patience only and courtesy shall get good of me."

She turned to the door. He, as if with the turning away of that lady's eyes the spell was broke, cried loudly upon his folk to stay her. But there was none stirred. Therewith he, as one that cannot command his own indecent appetites, o'ersetting bench and board in eager haste to lay hands on her, it so betided that he tripped up with one of these and fell a-sprawling. And ere he was gotten again on his feet, the Lady Mevrian was gone from the hall.

He rose up painfully, proffering from his lips a mudspring of barbarous and filthy imprecations; so that Laxus who helped raise him up was fain to chide him, saying, "My lord, unman not thyself by such a bestial transformation. Are not we yet with harness on our backs in a kingdom newly gained, the old lords thereof discomfited in deed but not yet taken nor slain, studying belike to raise new powers against us? And above such and so many affairs wilt thou make place for the allurements of love"

"Ay!" answered he. "Nor shall such a sapless ninny as thou avail to cross me therein. Ask thy little gamesome Sriva, when thou comest home to wed her, if I be not better able than thou to please a woman. She'll tell

[p. 353]

thee! I' the main season meddle not in matters that be too high for such as thou."

Both Gro and the sons of Corund were by and heard those words. The Lord Laxus schooled himself to laugh. He turned toward Gro, saying, "The general is far gone in wine."

Gro, marking Laxus's face flushed red to the ears for all his studied carelessness, answered him softly, "'Tis so, my lord. And in wine is truth."

Now Corinius, bethinking him that it was yet early and the feast barely well begun, let set a guard on all the passages which led to Mevrian's lodgings, to the end that she might not issue therefrom but there wait on his pleasure. That done, he bade renew their feasting.

No stint of luscious meats and wines was there, and the lords of Witchland sat them down again right eagerly to the good banquet. Laxus spoke secretly to Gro: "I wot well thou takest in very ill part these doings. Let it stand firm in thy mind that if thou shouldst deem it fitting to play him a trick and steal the lady from him, I'll not stand i' the way on't."

"In a bunch of cards," said Gro, "knaves wait upon the kings. It were not so ill done and we made it so here. I heard a bird sing lately thou hadst a quarrel to him."

"Thou must not think so," answered Laxus. "I'll give thee still a Roland for thine Oliver, and tell thee 'tis most apparent thyself dost love this lady."

Gro said, "Thou chargest me with a sweet folly is foreign to my nature, being a grave scholar that if ever I did frequent such toys have long eschewed them. Only meseems 'tis an ill thing if she must be given over unto him against her will. Thou knowest him of a rough and mere soldierly mind, besides his dissolute company with other women."

"Tush," said Laxus, "he may go his gate for me, and be as close as a butterfly with the lady. But out of policy, 'twere best rid her hence. I'd not be seen in't. That provided, I'll second thee all ways. If he lie here the summer long in amorous dalliance, justly might the King abraid

[p. 354]

us that midst o' the day's sport we gave his good hawk a gorge, and so lost him the game."

"I see," said Gro, smiling in himself, "thou art a man of sober government and understanding, and thinkest first of Witchland. And that is both just and right."

Now went the feast forward with great surfeiting and swigging of wine. Mevrian's women that were there, much against their own good will, to serve the banquet, set ever fresh dishes before the feasters and poured forth fresh wines, golden and tawny and ruby-red, in the goblets of jade and crystal and hammered gold. The air in the fair chamber was thick with the steam of bake-meats and the vinous breath of the feasters, so that the lustre of the opal lamps burned coppery, and about each lamp was a bush of coppery beams like the beams about a torch that burns in a fog. Great was the clatter of cups, and great the clinking of glass as in their drunkenness the Witches cast down the priceless beakers on the floor, smashing them in shivers. And huge din there was of laughter and song; and amidst of it, women's voices singing, albeit near drowned in the hurly burly. For they constrained Mevrian's damosels in Krothering to sing and dance before them, howsoever woeful at heart. And to other entertainment than this of dance and song was many a black-bearded reveller willing to constrain them; and sought occasion thereto, but this by stealth only, and out of eye-shot of their general. For heavily enow was his wrath fallen on some who rashly flaunted in his face their light disports, presuming to hunt in such fields while their lord went still a-fasting.

After a while Heming, who sat next to Gro, began to say to him in a whisper, "This is an ill banquet."

"Meseems rather 'tis a very good banquet," said Gro.

"Would I saw some other issue thereof," said Heming, "than that he purposeth. Or how thinkest thou?"

"I scarce can blame him," answered Gro. "'Tis a most lovesome lady."

"Is not the man a most horrible open swine? And is it

[p. 355]

to be endured that he should work his lewd purpose on so sweet a lady?"

"What have I to do with it?" said Gro.

"What less than I?" said Heming.

"It dislikes thee?" said Gro.

"Art thou a man?" said Heming. "And she that hateth him besides as bloody Atropos!"

Gro looked him a swift searching look in the eye. Then he whispered, his head bowed over some raisins he was a-picking: "If this is thy mind, 'tis well." And speaking softly, with here and there some snatch of louder discourse or jest between whiles lest he should seem too earnestly engaged in secret talk, he taught Heming orderly and clearly what he had to do, discovering to him that Laxus also, being bit with jealousy, was of their accord. "Thy brother Cargo is aptest for this. He standeth about her height, and by reason of his youth is yet beardless. Go find him out. Rehearse unto him word by word all this talking that hath been between me and thee. Corinius holdeth me too deep suspect to suffer me out of his eye to-night. Unto you sons of Corund therefore is the task; and I biding at his elbow may avail to hold him here i' the hall till it be performed. Go; and wise counsel and good speed wait on your attempts."

 

The Lady Mevrian, being escaped to her own chamber in the south tower, sat by an eastern window that looked across the gardens and the lake, past the sea-lochs of Stropardon and the dark hills of Eastmark, to the stately ranges afar which overhang in mid-air Mosedale and Murkdale and Swartriverdale and the inland sea of Throwater. The last lights of, day still lingered on their loftier summits: on Ironbeak, on the gaunt wall of Skarta, and on the distant twin towers of Dina seen beyond the lower Mosedale range in the depression of Neverdale Hause. Behind them rolled up the ascent of heaven the wheels of quiet Night: holy Night, mother of the Gods, mother of sleep, tender nurse of all little birds and beasts that dwell in the field and all tired hearts and weary

[p. 356]

mother besides of strange children, affrights, and rapes, and midnight murders bold.

Mevrian sat there till all the earth was blurred in darkness and the sky a-throb with starlight, for it was yet an hour until the rising of the moon. And she prayed to Lady Artemis, calling her by her secret names and saying, "Goddess and Maiden chaste and holy; triune Goddess, Which in heaven art, and on the earth Huntress divine, and also hast in the veiled sunless places below earth Thy dwelling, viewing the large stations of the dead: save me and keep me that am Thy maiden still."

She turned the ring upon her finger and scanned in the gathering gloom the bezel thereof, which was of that chrysoprase that is hid in light and seen in darkness, being as a flame by night but in the day-time yellow or wan. And behold, it palpitated with splendour from withinward, and was as if a thousand golden sparks danced and swirled within the stone.

While she pondered what interpretation lay likeliest on this sudden flowering of unaccustomed splendour within the chrysoprase, behold one of her women of the bedchamber who brought lights, and said, standing before her, "Twain of those lords of Witchland would speak with your ladyship in private."

"Two?" said Mevrian. "There's safety yet in numbers. Which be they?"

"Highness, they be tall and slim of body. They be black-advised. They bear them discreet as dormice, and most commendably sober."

Mevrian asked, "Is it the Lord Gro? Hath he a great black beard, much curled and perfumed?"

"Highness, I marked not that either weareth a beard," said the woman, "nor their names I know not."

"Well," said Mevrian, "admit them. And do thou and thy fellows attend me whiles I give them audience."

So it was done according to her bidding. And there entered in those two sons of Corund.

They greeted her with respectful salutations, and Heming

[p. 357]

said, "Our errand, most worshipful lady, was for thine own ear only if it please thee."

Mevrian said to her women, "Make fast the doors, and attend me in the ante-chamber. And now, my lords," said she, and waited for them to begin.

She was seated sideways in the window, betwixt the light and the dark. The crystal lamps shining from within the room showed deeper darknesses in her hair than night's darkness without. The curve of her white arms resting in her lap was like the young moon cradled above the sunset. A falling breeze out of the south came laden with the murmur of the sea, far away beyond fields and vineyards, restlessly surging even in that calm weather amid the sea-caves of Stropardon. It was as if the sea and the night enfolding Demonland gasped in indignation at such things as Corinius, holding himself already an undoubted possessor of his desires, devised for that night in Krothering.

Those brethren stood abashed in the presence of such rare beauty. Heming with a deep breath spake and said, "Madam, what slender opinion soever thou hast held of us of Witchland, I pray thee be satisfied that I and my kinsman have sought to thee now with a clean heart to do thee service."

"Princes," said she, "scarce might ye blame me did I misdoubt you. Yet, seeing that my life's days have been not among ambidexters and coney-catchers but lovers of clean hands and open dealing, not even after that which I this night endured will mine heart believe that all civility is worn away in Witchland. Did I not freely receive Corinius's self when I did open my gates to him, firmly believing him to be a king and not a ravening wolf?"

Then said Heming, "Canst thou wear armour, madam?" Thou art something of an height with my brother. To bring thee past the guard, if thou go armed, as I shall conduct thee, the wine they have drunken shall be thy minister. I have provided an horse. In the likeness of my young brother mayst thou ride forth to-night out of this castle, and win clean away. But in thine own shape thou

[p. 358]

mayst never pass from these thy lodgings, for he hath set a guard thereon; being resolved, come thereof what may, to visit thee here this night: in thine own chamber, madam.

The sounds of furious revelry floated up from the banquet chamber. Mevrian heard by snatches the voice of Corinius singing an unseemly song. As in the presence of some dark influence that threatened an ill she might not comprehend, yet felt her blood quail and her heart grow sick because of it, she looked on those brethren.

She said at last, "Was this your plan?"

Heming answered, "It was the Lord Gro did most ingenuously conceive it. But Corinius, as he hath ever held him in distrust, and most of all when he hath drunken overmuch, keepeth him most firmly at his elbow."

Cargo now did off his armour, and Mevrian calling in her women to take this and other gear fared straightway to an inner chamber to change her fashion.

Heming said to his brother, "Thou shalt need to go about it with great circumspection, to come off when we are gone so as thou be not aspied. Were I thou, I should be tempted for the rareness of the jest to await his coming, and assay whether thou couldst not make as good a counterfeit Mevrian as she a counterfeit Cargo."

"Thou," said Cargo, "mayst well laugh and be gay, thou that must conduct her. And art resolved, I dare lay my head to a turnip, to do thy utmost endeavour to despoil Corinius of that felicity he hath to-night decreed him, and bless thyself therewith."

"Thou hast fallen," answered Heming, "into a most barbarous thought. Shall my tongue be so false a traitor to mine heart as to say I love not this lady? Compare but her beauty and my youth together, how should it other be? But with such a height of fervour I do love her that I'd as lief offer violence to a star of heaven, as require of her aught but honest."

Said Cargo, "What said the wise little boy to's elder brother? 'Sith thou'st gotten the cake, brother, I must e'en make shift with the crumbs.' When you are gone,

[p. 359]

and all whisht and quiet, and I left here amid the waiting women, it shall go hard but I'll teach 'em somewhat afore good-night."

Now opened the door of the inner chamber, and there stood before them the Lady Mevrian armed and helmed. She said, "'Tis no light matter to halt before a cripple. Think you this will pass i' the dark, my lords?"

They answered, 'twas beyond all commendation excellent.

"I'll thank thee now, Prince Cargo," said she, stretching out her hand. He bowed and kissed it in silence. "This harness," she said, "shall be a keepsake unto me of a noble enemy. Would someday I might call thee friend, for suchwise hast thou borne thee this night."

Therewith, bidding young Cargo adieu, she with his brother went forth from the chamber and through the ante-chamber to that shadowy stairway where Corinius's soldiers stood sentinel. These (as many more be drowned in the beaker than in the ocean), not over-heedful after their tipplings, seeing two go by together with clanking armour and knowing Heming's voice when he answered the challenge, made no question but here were Corund's sons returning to the banquet.

So passed he and she lightly by the sentinels. But as they fared by the lofty corridor without the Chamber of the Moon, the doors of that chamber opening suddenly left and right there came forth torch-bearers and minstrels two by two as in a progress, with cymbals clashing and flutes and tambourines, so that the corridor was fulfilled with the flare of flamboys and the din. In the midst walked the Lord Corinius. The lusty blood within him burned scarlet in all his shining face, and made stand the veins like cords on the strong neck and arms and hands of him. The thick curls above his brow where they strayed below his coronal of sleeping nightshade were a-drip with sweat. Plain it was he was in no good trim, after that shrewd knock on the head Astar that day had given him, to withstand deep quaffings. He went between Gro and Laxus, swaying heavily now on

[p. 360]

the arm of this one now of the other, his right hand beating time to the music of the bridal song.

Mevrian whispered to Heming, "Let us bear out a good face so long as we be alive."

They stood aside, hoping to be passed by unnoticed, for retreat nor concealment was there none. But Corinius his eye lighting on them stopped and hailed them, catching them each by an arm, and crying, "Heming, thou'rt drunk! Cargo, thou'rt drunk, sweet youth! 'Tis a damnable folly, drink as drunk as you be, and these bonny wenches I've provided you. How shall I satisfy 'em, think ye, when they come to me with their plaints to-morn, that each must sit with a snoring drunkard's head in her lap the night long?"

Mevrian, as if she had all her part by rote, was leaned this while heavily upon Heming, hanging her head.

Heming could think on nought likelier to say, than, "Truly, O Corinius, we be sober."

"Thou liest," said Corinius. "'Twas ever sign manifest of drunkenness to deny it. Look you, my lords, I deny not I am drunk. Therefore is sign manifest I am drunk, I mean, sign manifest I am sober. But the hour calleth to other work than questioning of these high matters. Set on!"

So speaking he reeled heavily against Gro, and (as if moved by some airy influence that, whispering him of schemings afoot, yet conspired with the wine that he had drunken to make him look all otherwhere for treason than where it lay under his hand to discover it) gripped Gro by the arm, saying, "Bide by me, Goblin, thou wert best. I do love thee very discreetly, and will still hold thee by the ears, to see thou bite me not, nor go no more a-gadding."

Being by such happy fortune delivered out of this peril, Heming and Mevrian with what prudent haste they might, and without mishap or hindrance, got them their horses and fared forth of the main gate between the marble hippogriffs, whose mighty forms shone above them stark in the low beams of the rising moon. So they rode

[p. 361]

silently through the gardens and the home-meads and thence to the wild woods beyond, quickening now their pace to a gallop on the yielding turf. So hard they rode, the air of the windless April night was lashed into storm about their faces. The trample and thunder of hoofbeats and the flying glimpses of the trees were to young Heming but an undertone to the thunder of his blood which night and speed and that lady galloping beside him knee to knee set a-gallop within him. But to Mevrian's soul, as she galloped along those woodland rides, those moonlight glades, these things and night and the steadfast stars attuned a heavenlier music; so that she waxed momently wondrous peaceful at heart, as with the most firm assurance that not without the abiding glory of Demonland must the great mutations of the world be acted, and but for a little should their evil-willers usurp her dear brother's seat in Krothering.

They drew rein in a clearing beside a broad stretch of water. Pine-woods rose from its further edge, shadowy in the moonshine. Mevrian rode to a little eminence that stood above the water and turned her eyes toward Krothering. Save by her instructed and loving eye scarce might it be seen, many miles away be-east of them, dimmed in the obscure soft radiance under the moon. So sat she awhile looking on golden Krothering, while her horse grazed quietly, and Heming at her elbow held his peace, only beholding her.

At last, looking back and meeting his gaze, "Prince Heming," she said, "from this place goeth a hidden path north-about beside the firth, and a dry road over the marsh, and a ford and an upland horse-way leadeth into Westmark. Here and all-wheres in Demonland I might fare blindfold. And here I'll say farewell. My tongue is a poor orator. But I mind me of the words of the poet where he saith:

	 
		My mind is like to the asbeston stone,
		 Which if it once be heat in flames of fire,
		 Denieth to becomen cold again.
		
		 [p. 362]

[paragraph continues] Be the latter issue of these wars in my great kinsmen's victory, as I most firmly trow it shall be, or in Gorice's his, I shall not forget this experiment of your nobility manifested unto me this night."

But Heming, still beholding her, answered not a word.

She said, "How fares the Queen thy step-mother? Seven summers ago this summer I was in Norvasp at Lord Corund's wedding feast, and stood by her at the bridal. Is she yet so fair?"

He answered, "Madam, as June bringeth the golden rose unto perfection, so waxeth her beauty with the years."

"She and I," said Mevrian, "Were playmates, she the elder by two summers. Is she yet so masterful?"

"Madam, she is a Queen," said Heming, nailing his very eyes on Mevrian. Her face half turned towards him, sweet mouth half closed, clear eyes uplifted toward the east, showed dim in the glamour of the moon, and the lilt of her body was as a lily fallen a-dreaming beside some enchanted lake at midnight. With a dry throat he said, "Lady, until to-night I had not supposed there lived on earth a woman more beautiful than she."

Therewith the love that was in him went like a wind and like an up-swooping darkness athwart his brain. As one who has too long, unbold, unresolved, delayed to lift that door's latch which must open on his heart's true home, he caught his arms about her. Her cheek was soft to his kiss, but deadly cold: her eyes like a wild bird's caught in a purse-net. His brother's armour that cased her body was not so dead nor so hard under his hand, as to his love that yielding cheek, that alien look. He said, as one a-stagger for his wits in the presence of some unlooked-for chance, "Thou dost not love me?"

Mevrian shook her head, putting him gently away.

Like the passing of a fire on a dry heath in summer the flame of his passion was passed by, leaving but a smouldering desolation of scornful sullen wrath: wrath at himself and fate.

He said, in a low shamed voice, 'I pray you forgive me, madam."

[p. 363]

Mevrian said, "Prince, the Gods give thee good-night. Be kind to Krothering. I have left there an evil steward."

So saying, she reined up her horse's head and turned down westward towards the firth. Heming watched her an instant, his brain a-reel. Then, striking spurs to his horse's flanks so that the horse reared and plunged, he rode away at a great pace east again through the woods to Krothering.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 364]

 

XXV

 

Lord Gro and the Lady Mevrian

HOW THE LORD GRO, CONDUCTED BY A STRANGE ENAMOURMENT WITH LOST CAUSES, FARED WITH NONE SAVE THIS TO BE HIS GUIDE INTO THE REGIONS OF NEVERDALE, AND THERE BEHELD WONDERS, AND TASTED AGAIN FOR A SEASON THE GOODNESS OF THOSE THINGS HE DID MOST DESIRE.

Ninety days and a day after these doings aforesaid, in the last hour before the dawn, was the Lord Gro a-riding toward the paling east down from the hills of Eastmark to the fords of Mardardale. At a walking pace his horse came down to the water-side, and halted with fetlocks awash: his flanks were wet and his wind gone, as from swift faring on the open fell since midnight. He stretched down his neck, sniffed the fresh river-water, and drank. Gro turned in the saddle, listening, his left hand thrown forward to slack the reins, his right flat-planted on the crupper. But nought there was to hear save the babble of waters in the shallows, the sucking noise of the horse drinking, and the plash and crunch of his hooves when he shifted feet among the pebbles. Before and behind

[p. 365]

and on either hand the woods and strath and circling hills showed dim in the obscure gray betwixt darkness and twilight. A light mist hid the stars. Nought stirred save an owl that flitted like a phantom out from a holly-bush in a craggy bluff a bow-shot or more down stream, crossing Gro's path and lighting on a branch of a dead tree above him on the left, where she sat as if to observe the goings of this man and horse that trespassed in this valley of quiet night.

Gro leaned forward to pat his horse's neck. "Come, gossip, we must on," he said; "and marvel not if thou find no rest, going with me which could never find any steadfast stay under the moon's globe." So they forded that river, and fared through low rough grass-lands beyond, and by the skirts of a wood up to an open heath, and so a mile or two, still eastward, till they turned to the right down a broad valley and crossed a river above a watersmeet, and so east again up the bed of a stony stream and over this to a rough mountain track that crossed some boggy ground and then climbed higher and higher above the floor of the narrowing valley to a pass between the hills. At length the slope slackened, and they passing, as through a gateway, between two high mountains which impended sheer and stark on either hand, came forth upon a moor of ling and bog-myrtle, strewn with lakelets and abounding in streams and moss-hags and outcrops of the living rock; and the mountain peaks afar stood round that moorland waste like warrior kings. Now was colour waking in the eastern heavens, the bright shining morning beginning to clear the earth. Conies scurried to cover before the horse's feet: small birds flew up from the heather: some red deer stood at gaze in the fern, then tripped away southward: a moor-cock called.

Gro said in himself, "'How shall not common opinion account me mad, so rash and presumptuous dangerously to put my life in hazard? Nay, against all sound judgement; and this folly I enact in that very season when by patience and courage and my politic wisdom I had won

[p. 366]

that in despite of fortune's teeth which obstinately hitherto she had denied me: when after the brunts of divers tragical fortunes I had marvellously gained the favour and grace of the King, who very honourably placed me in his court, and tendereth me, I well think, so dearly as he doth the balls of his two eyes."

He put off his helm, baring his white forehead and smooth black curling locks to the airs of morning, flinging back his head to drink deep through his nostrils the sweet strong air and its peaty smell. "Yet is common opinion the fool, not I," he said. "He that imagineth after his labours to attain unto lasting joy, as well may he beat water in a mortar. Is there not in the wild benefit of nature instances enow to laugh this folly out of fashion? A fable of great men that arise and conquer the nations: Day goeth up against the tyrant night. How delicate a spirit is she, how like a fawn she footeth it upon the mountains: pale pitiful light matched with the primeval dark. But every sweet hovers in her battalions; and every heavenly influence: coolth of the wayward little winds of morning, flowers awakening, birds a-carol, dews a-sparkle on the fine-drawn webs the tiny spinners hang from fern-frond to thorn, from thorn to wet dainty leaf of the silver birch; the young day laughing in her strength, wild with her own beauty; fire and life and every scent and colour born anew to triumph over chaos and slow darkness and the kinless night.

"But because day at her dawning hours hath so bewitched me, must I yet love her when glutted with triumph she settles to garish noon? Rather turn as now I turn to Demonland, in the sad sunset of her pride. And who dares call me turncoat, who do but follow now as I have followed this rare wisdom all my days: to love the sunrise and the sundown and the morning and the evening star? since there only abideth the soul of nobility, true love, and wonder, and the glory of hope and fear."

So brooding he rode at an easy pace bearing east and a little north across the moor, falling because of the strange harmony that was between outward things and

[p. 367]

the inward thoughts of his heart into a deep study. So came he to the moor's end, and entered among the skirts of the mountains beyond, crossing low passes, threading a way among woods and water-courses, up and down, about and about. The horse led him which way that he would, for no heed nor advice had he of aught about him, for cause of the deep contemplation that he had within himself.

It was now high noon. The horse and his rider were come to a little dell of green grass with a beck winding in the midst with cool water flowing over a bed of shingle. About the dell grew many trees both tall and straight. Above the trees high mountain crags a-bake in the sun showed ethereal through the shimmering heat. A murmur of waters, a hum of tiny wings flitting from flower to flower, the sound of the horse grazing on the lush pasture: there was nought else to hear. Not a leaf moved, not a bird. The hush of the summer noon-day, breathless, burnt through with the sun, more awful than any shape of night, paused above that lonely dell.

Gro, as if waked by the very silence, looked quickly about him. The horse felt belike in his bones his rider's unease; he gave over his feeding and stood alert with wild eye and quivering flanks. Gro patted and made much of him; then, guided by some inward prompting the reason whereof he knew not, turned west by a small tributary beck and rode softly toward the wood. Here he was stopped with a number of trees so thickly placed together that he was afraid he should with riding through be swept from the saddle. So he lighted down, tied his horse to an oak, and climbed the bed of the little stream till he was come whence he might look north over the tree-tops to a green terrace about at a level with him and some fifty paces distant along the hillside, shielded from the north by three or four great rowan trees on the far side of it, and on the terrace a little tarn or rock cistern of fair water very cool and deep.

He paused, steadying himself with his left hand by a

[p. 368]

jutting rock overgrown with rose-campion. Surely no children of men were these, footing it on that secret lawn beside that fountain's brink, nor no creatures of mortal kind. Such it may be were the goats and kids and soft-eyed does that on their hind-legs merrily danced among them; but never such those others of manly shape and with pointed hairy ears, shaggy legs, and cloven hooves, nor those maidens white of limb beneath the tread of whose feet the blue gentian and the little golden cinquefoil bent not their blossoms, so airy-light was their dancing. To make them music, little goat-footed children with long pointed ears sat on a hummock of turf-clad rock piping on pan-pipes, their bodies burnt to the hue of red earth by the wind and the sun. But, whether because their music was too fine for mortal ears, or for some other reason, Gro might hear no sound of that piping. The heavy silence of the waste white noon was lord of the scene, while the mountain nymphs and the simple genii of sedge and stream and crag and moorland solitude threaded the mazes of the dance.

The Lord Gro stood still in great admiration, saying in himself, "What means my drowsy head to dream such fancies? Spirits of ill have I heretofore beheld in their manifestations; I have seen fantasticoes framed and presented by art magic; I have dreamed strange dreams a-nights. But till this hour I did account it an idle tale of poets' faining, that amid woods, forests, fertile fields, sea-coasts, shores of great rivers and fountain brinks, and also upon the tops of huge and high mountains, do still appear unto certain favoured eyes the sundry-sorted nymphs and fieldish demigods. Which thing if I now verily behold, 'tis a great marvel, and sorteth well with the strange allurements whereby this oppressed land hath so lately found a means to govern mine affections." And he thought awhile, reasoning thus in his mind: "If this be but an apparition, it hath no essence to do me a hurt. If o' the contrary these be very essential beings, needs must they joyfully welcome me and use me well, being themselves the true vital spirits of many-mountained[paragraph continues] 

[p. 369]

Demonland; unto whose comfort and the restorement of her old renown and praise I have with such a strange determination bent all my painful thoughts and resolution."

So on the motion he discovered himself and hailed them. The wild things bounded away and were lost among the flanks of the hill. The capripeds, leaving on the instant their piping or their dancing, crouched watching him with distrustful startled eyes. Only the Oreads still in a dazzling drift pursued their round: quiet maiden mouths, beautiful breasts, slender lithe limbs, hand joined to delicate hand, parting and closing and parting again, in rhythms of unstaled variety; here one that, with white arms clasped behind her head where her braided hair was as burnished gold, circled and swayed with a languorous motion; here another, that leaped and paused hovering a-tiptoe, like an arrow of the sun shot through the leafy roof of an old pine-forest when the warm hill-wind stirs the tree-tops and opens a tiny window to the sky.

Gro went toward them along the grassy hillside. When he was come a dozen paces the strength was gone from his limbs. He kneeled down crying out and saying, "Divinities of earth! deny me not, neither reject me, albeit cruelly have I till now oppressed your land, but will do so no more. The footsteps of mine overtrodden virtue lie still as bitter accusations unto me. Bring me of your mercy where I may find out them that possessed this land and offer them atonement, who were driven forth because of me and mine to be outlaws in the woods and mountains."

So spake he, bowing his head in sorrow. And he heard, like the trembling of a silver lute-string, a voice in the air that cried:

	 
		North 'tis and north 'tis!
		 Why need we further?
		
		 He raised his eyes. The vision was gone. Only the noon

[p. 370]

and the woodland, silent, solitary, dazzling, were about and above him.

Lord Gro came now to his horse again, and mounted and rode northaway through the fells all that summer afternoon, full of cloudy fancies. When it was eventide his way was high up along the steep side of a mountain between the screes and the grass, following a little path made by the wild sheep. Far beneath in the valley was a small river tortuously flowing along a bouldery bed amid hillocks of old moraines which were like waves of a sea of grass-clad earth. The July sun wheeled low, flinging the shadows of the hills far up the westward-facing slopes where Gro was a-riding, but where he rode and above him the hillside was yet aglow with the warm low sunshine; and the distant peak that shut in the head of the valley, rearing his huge front like the gable of a house, with sweeping ribs of bare rock and scree and a crest of crag like a great breaker frozen to stone in mid career, bathed yet in a radiance of opalescent light.

Turning the shoulder of the hillside at a place where the hill was cut by a shallow gully, he saw before him a hollow or sheltered nook. There, protected by the great body Of the hill from the blasts of the east and north, two rowan trees and some hollies grew in the clefts of the rock above the watercourse. Under their shadow was a cave, not large but so big as a man might well abide in and be dry in wild weather, and beyond it on the right a little waterfall, so beautiful it was a wonder to behold. This was the fashion of it: a slab of rock, twice a man's height, tilted a little forward from the hill, so that the water fell clear from its upper edge in a thin stream into a rocky basin. The water in the basin was clear and deep, but a-churn always with bubbles from the plunging jet from above; and over all the rocks about it grew mosses and lichens and little water-flowers, nourished by the stream at root and refreshed by the spray.

The Lord Gro said in his heart, "Here would I dwell for ever had I but the art to make myself little as an eft. And I would build me an house a span high beside yonder

[p. 371]

cushion of moss emerald-hued, with those pink foxgloves to shade my door which balance their bells above the foaming waters. This shy grass of Parnassus should be my drinking cup, with pure white chalice poised on a hair-thin stem; and the curtains of my bed that little thirsty sandwort which, like a green heaven sown with milk-white stars, curtains the shady sides of these rocks."

Resting in this imagination he abode long time looking on that fairy place, so secretly bestowed in the fold of the naked mountain. Then, unwilling to depart from so fair a spot, and bethinking him, besides, that after so many hours his horse was weary, he dismounted and lay down beside the stream. And in a short while, having his spirits sublimed with the sweet imagination of those wonders he had beheld, he was fain to suffer the long dark lashes to droop over his large and liquid eyes. And deep sleep overcame him.

 

When he awoke, all the sky was afire with the red of sunset. A shadow was betwixt him and the western light: the shape of one bending over him and saying in masterful wise, yet in accents wherein the echoes and memories of all sweet sounds seemed mingled and laid up at rest for ever, "Lie still, my lord, nor cry not a rescue. Behold, thine own sword; and I took it from thee sleeping." And he was ware of a sharp sword pointed against his throat where the big veins lie beneath the tongue.

He stirred not at all, neither spake aught, only looking up at her as at some vision of delight strayed from the fugitive flock of dreams.

The lady said, "Where be thy company? And how many? Answer me swiftly."

He answered her like a dreamer, "How shall I answer thee? How shall I number them that be beyond all count? Or how name unto your grace their habitation which are even very now closer to me than hand or feet, yet o' the next instant are able to transcend a main wilder belike than even a starbeam hath journeyed o'er?'

[p. 372]

She said, "Riddle me no riddles. Answer me, thou wert best."

"Madam," said Gro, "these that I told thee of be the company of mine own silent thoughts. And, but for mine horse, this is all the company that came hither with me."

"Alone?" said she. "And sleep so securely in thine enemies' country? That showed a strange confidence."

"Not enemies, if I may," said he.

But she cried, "And thou Lord Gro of Witchland?"

"That one sickened long since," he answered, "of a mortal sickness; and 'tis now a day and a night since he is dead thereof."

"What art thou, then?" said she.

He answered, "If your grace would so receive me, Lord Gro of Demonland."

"A very practised turncoat," said she. "Belike they also are wearied of thee and thy ways. Alas," she said in an altered voice, "thy gentle pardon! when doubtless it was for thy generous deeds to me-ward they fell out with thee, when thou didst so nobly befriend me."

"I will tell your highness," answered he, "the pure truth. Never stood matters better 'twixt me and all of them than when yesternight I resolved to leave them."

The Lady Mevrian was silent, a cloud in her face. Then, "I am alone," she said. "Therefore think it not little-hearted in me, nor forgetful of past benefits, if I will be further certified of thee ere I suffer thee to rise. Swear to me thou wilt not betray me."

But Gro said, "How should an oath from me avail thee, madam? Oaths bind not an ill man. Were I minded to do thee wrong, lightly should I swear thee all oaths thou mightest require, and lightly o' the next instant be forsworn."

"That is not well said," said Mevrian. "Nor helpeth not thy safety. You men do say that women's hearts be faint and feeble, but I shall show thee the contrary is in me. Study to satisfy me. Else will I assuredly smite thee to death with thine own sword."

The Lord Gro lay back, clasping his slender hands behind

[p. 373]

his head. "Stand, I pray thee," said he, "o' the other side of me, that I may see thy face."

She did so, still threatening him with the sword. And he said smiling, "Divine lady, all my days have I had danger for my bedfellow, and peril of death for my familiar friend; whilom leading a delicate life in princely court, where murther sitteth in the wine-cup and in the alcove; whilom journeying alone in more perilous lands than this, as witness the Moruna, where the country is full of venomous beasts and crawling poisoned serpents, and the divels be as abundant there as grasshoppers on a hot hillside in summer. He that feareth is a slave, were he never so rich, were he never so powerful. But he that is without fear is king of all the world. Thou hast my sword. Strike. Death shall be a sweet rest to me. Thraldom, not death, should terrify me."

She paused awhile, then said unto him, "My Lord Gro, thou didst do me once a right great good turn. Surely I may build my safety on this, that never yet did kite bring forth a good flying hawk." She shifted her hold on his sword, and very prettily gave it him hilt-foremost, saying, "I give it thee back, my lord, nothing doubting that that which was given in honour thou wilt honourably use."

But he, rising up, said, "Madam, this and thy noble words hath given such rootfastness to the pact of faith betwixt us that it may now unfold what blossom of oaths thou wilt; for oaths are the blossom of friendship, not the root. And thou shalt find me a true holder of my vowed amity unto thee without spot or wrinkle."

 

For sundry nights and days abode Gro and Mevrian in that place, hunting at whiles to get their sustenance, drinking of the sweet spring-water, sleeping a-nights she in her cave beneath the holly bushes and the rowans beside the waterfall, he in a cleft of the rocks a little below in the gully, where the moss made cushions soft and resilient as the great stuffed beds in Carce. In those days she told him of her farings since that night of April when she escaped out of Krothering: how first she found

[p. 374]

harbourage at By in Westmark, but hearing in a day or two of a hue and cry fled east again, and sojourning awhile beside Throwater came at length about a month ago upon this cave beside the little fountain, and here abode. Her mind had been to win over the mountains to Galing, but she had after the first attempt given over that design, for fear of companies of the enemy whose hands she barely escaped when she came forth into the lower valleys that open on the eastern coast-lands. So she had turned again to this hiding place in the hills, as secret and remote as any in Demonland. For this dale she let him know was Neverdale, where no road ran save the way of the deer and the mountain goats, and no garth opened on that dale, and the reek of no man's hearthstone burdened the winds that blew thither. And that gable-crested peak at the head of the dale was the southernmost of the Forks of Nantreganon, nursery of the vulture and the eagle. And a hidden way was round the right shoulder of that peak, over the toothed ridge by Neverdale Hause to the upper waters of Tivarandardale.

On an afternoon of sultry summer heat it so befell that they rested below the hause on a bastion of rock that jutted from the south-western slope. Beneath their feet precipices fell suddenly away from a giddy verge, sweeping round in a grand cirque above which the mountain rose like some Tartarian fortress, ponderous, cruel as the sea and sad, scarred and gashed with great lines of cleavage as though the face of the mountain had been slashed away by the axe-stroke of a giant. In the depths the waters of Dule Tarn slept placid and fathomless.

Gro was stretched on the brink of the cliff, face downward, propped on his two elbows, studying those dark waters. "Surely," he said, "the great mountains of the world are a present remedy if men did but know it against our modern discontent and ambitions. In the hills is wisdom's fount. They are deep in time. They know the ways of the sun and the wind, the lightning's fiery feet, the frost that shattereth, the rain that shroudeth, the snow that putteth about their nakedness a softer coverlet than

[p. 375]

fine lawn: which if their large philosophy question not if it be a bridal sheet or a shroud, hath not this unpolicied calm his justification ever in the returning year, and is it not an instance to laugh our carefulness out of fashion? of us, little children of the dust, children of a day, who with so many burdens do burden us with taking thought and with fears and desires and devious schemings of the mind, so that we wax old before our time and fall weary ere the brief day be spent and one reaping-hook gather us home at last for all our pains."

He looked up and she met the gaze of his great eyes; deep pools of night they seemed, where strange matters might move unseen, disturbing to look on, yet filled with a soft slumbrous charm that lulled and soothed.

"Thou'st fallen a-dreaming, my lord," said Mevrian. "And for me 'tis a hard thing to walk with thee in thy dreams, who am awake in the broad daylight and would be a-doing."

"Certes it is an ill thing," said Lord Gro, "that thou, who hast not been nourished in mendicity or poverty but in superfluity of honour and largesse, shouldst be made fugitive in thine own dominions, to lodge with foxes and beasts of the wild mountain."

Said she, "It is yet a sweeter lodging than is to-day in Krothering. It is therefore I chafe to do somewhat. To win through to Galing, that were something."

'What profit is in Galing," said Gro, "without Lord Juss?"

She answered, "Thou wilt tell me it is even as Krothering without my brother."

Looking sidelong up at her, where she sat armed beside him, he beheld a tear a-tremble on her eyelid. He said gently, "Who shall foreknow the ways of Fate? Your highness is better here belike."

Lady Mevrian stood up. She pointed to a print in the living rock before her feet. "The hippogriff's hoofmark!" she cried, "stricken in the rock ages ago by that high bird which presideth from of old over the predestined glory of our line, to point us on to a fame advanced above the

[p. 376]

region of the glittering stars. True is the word that that land which is in the governance of a woman only is not surely kept. I will abide idly here no more."

Gro, beholding her so stand all armed on that high brink of crag, setting with so much perfection in womanly beauty manlike valour, bethought him that here was that true embodiment of morn and eve, that charm which called him from Krothering, and for which the prophetic spirits of mountain and wood and field had pointed his path with a heavenly benison, meaning to bid him go northward to his heart's true home. He kneeled down and caught her hand in his, embracing and kissing it as of her in whom all his hopes were placed, and saying passionately, "Mevrian, Mevrian, let me but be armed in thy good grace and I defy whatever there is or can be against me. Even as the sun lighteth broad heaven at noon-day, and that giveth light unto this dreary earth, so art thou the true light of Demonland which because of thee maketh the whole world glorious. Welcome unto me be all miseries, so only unto thee I may be welcome."

She sprang back, snatching away her hand. Her sword leapt singing from the scabbard. But Gro, that was so ravished and abused that he remembered of nothing worldly but only that he beheld his lady's face, abode motionless. She cried, "Back to back! Swift, or 'tis too late!"

He leaped up, barely in time. Six stout fellows, soldiers of Witchland stolen softly upon them at unawares, closed now upon them. No breath to waste in parley, but the clank of steel: he and Mevrian back to back on a table of rock, those six setting on from either side. "Kill the Goblin," said they. "Take the lady unhurt: 'tis death to all if she be touched."

So for a time those two defended them of all their power. Yet at such odds could not the issue stand long in doubt, nor Gro's high mettle make up what he lacked of strength bodily and skill in arms. Cunning of fence indeed was the Lady Mevrian, as they guessed not to their hurt; for the first of them, a great chuff-headed

[p. 377]

fellow that thought to bear her down with rushing in upon her, she with a deft thrust passing his guard ran clean through the throat; by whose taking off, his fellows took some lesson of caution. But Gro being at length brought to earth with many wounds, they had the next instant caught Mevrian from behind whiles others engaged her in the face, when in the nick of time as by the intervention of heaven was all their business taken in reverse, and all five in a moment laid bleeding on the stones beside their fellows.

Mevrian, looking about and seeing what she saw, fell weak and faint in her brother's arms, overcome with so much radiant joy after that stress of action and peril; beholding now with her own eyes that home-coming whereof the genii of that land had had foreknowledge and in Gro's sight shown themselves wild with joy thereof: Brandoch Daha and Juss come home to Demonland, like men arisen from the dead.

"Not touched," she answered them. "But look to my Lord Gro: I fear he be hurt. Look to him well, for he hath approved him our friend indeed."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 378]

 

XXVI

 

The Battle of Krothering Side

HOW WORD WAS BROUGHT UNTO THE LORD CORINIUS THAT THE LORDS JUSS AND BRANDOCH DAHA WERE COME AGAIN INTO THE LAND, AND HOW HE RESOLVED TO GIVE THEM BATTLE ON THE SIDE, UNDER ERNGATE END; AND OF THE GREAT FLANK MARCH OF LORD BRANDOCH DAHA OVER THE MOUNTAINS FROM TRANSDALE; AND OF THE GREAT BATTLE, AND OF THE ISSUE THEREOF.

Laxus and those sons of Corund walked on an afternoon in Krothering home mead. The sky above them was hot and coloured of lead, presaging thunder. No wind stirred in the trees that were livid-green against that leaden pall. The noise of mattock and crow-bar came without intermission from the castle. Where gardens had been and arbours of shade and sweetness, was now but wreck: broken columns and smashed porphyry vases of rare workmanship, mounds of earth and rotting vegetation. And those great cedars, emblems of their lord's estate and pride, lay prostrate now with their roots exposed, a tangle of sere foliage and branches broken, withered and

[p. 379]

lifeless. Over this death-bed of ruined loveliness the towers of onyx showed ghastly against the sky.

"Is there not a virtue in seven?" said Cargo. "Last week was the sixth time we thought we had gotten the eel by the tail in yon fly-blown hills of Mealand and came empty home. When think'st, Laxus, shall's run 'em to earth indeed?"

"When egg-pies shall grow on apple-trees," answered Laxus. "Nay, the general setteth greater store by his proclamations concerning the young woman (who likely never heareth of them, and assuredly will not be by them 'ticed home again), and by these toys of revenge, than by sound soldiership. Hark! there goeth this day's work."

They turned at a shout from the gates, to behold the northern of those two golden hippogriffs totter and crash down the steeps into the moat, sending up a great smoke from the stones and rubble which poured in its wake.

Lord Laxus's brow was dark. He laid hand on Heming's arm, saying, "The times need all sage counsel we can reach unto, O ye sons of Corund, if our Lord the King shall have indeed from this expedition into Demonland the victory at last of all his evil-willers. Remember, that was a great miss to our strength when the Goblin went."

"Out upon the viper!" said Cargo. "Corinius was right in this, not to warrant him the honesty of such slippery cattle. He had not served above a month or two, but that he ran to the enemy."

"Corinius," said Laxus, "is yet but green in his estate. Doth he suppose the rest of his reign shall be but play and the enjoying of a kingdom? Those left-handed strokes of fortune may yet o'erthrow him, the while that he streameth out his youth in wine and venery and manageth his private spite against this lady. Slipper youth must be under-propped with elder counsel, lest all go miss."

"A most reverend old counsellor art thou!" said Cargo; "of six-and-thirty years of age."

[p. 380]

Said Heming, "We be three. Take command thyself. I and my brother will back thee."

"I will that thou swallow back those words," said Laxus, "as though they had never been spoke. Remember Corsus and Gallandus. Besides, albeit he seemeth now rather to be a man straught than one that hath his wits, yet is Corinius in his sober self a valiant and puissant soldier, a politic and provident captain as is not found besides in Demonland, no, nor in Witchland neither, and it were not your noble father; and this one in his youthly age."

"That is true," said Heming. "Thou hast justly reproved me."

Now while they were a-talking, came one from the castle and made obeisance unto Laxus saying, "You are inquired for, O king, so please you to walk into the north chamber."

Said Laxus, "Is it he that was newly ridden from the east country?"

"So it is, so please you," with a low leg he made answer.

"Hath he not had audience with King Corinius?"

"He hath sought audience," said the man, "but was denied. The matter presseth, and he urged me therefore seek unto your lordship."

As they walked toward the castle Heming said in Laxus's ear, "Knowest thou not this brave new piece of court ceremony? O' these days, when he hath 'stroyed an hostage to spite the Lady Mevrian, as to-day was 'stroyed the horse-headed eagle, he giveth not audience till sundown. For, the deed of vengeance done, a retireth himself to his own chamber and a wench with him, the daintiest and gamesomest he may procure; and so, for two hours or three drowned in the main sea of his own pleasures, he abateth some little deal for a season the pang of love."

Now when Laxus was come forth from talking with the messenger from the east, he fared without delay to Corinius's chamber. There, thrusting aside the guards, he

[p. 381]

flung wide the shining doors, and found the Lord Corinius merrily disposed. He was reclined on a couch deep-cushioned with dark green three-pile velvet. An ivory table inlaid with silver and ebony stood at his elbow bearing a crystal flagon already two parts emptied of the foaming wine, and a fair gold goblet beside it. He wore a long loose sleeveless gown of white silk edged with a gold fringe; this, fallen open at the neck, left naked his chest and one strong arm that in that moment when Laxus entered reached out to grasp the wine cup. Upon his knee he held a damosel of some seventeen years, fair and fresh as a rose, with whom he was plainly on the point to pass from friendly converse to amorous privacy. He looked angrily upon Laxus, who without ceremony spoke and said, "The whole east is in a tumult. The burg is forced which we built astride the Stile. Spitfire hath passed into Breakingdale to victual Galing, and hath overthrown our army that sat in siege thereof."

Corinius drank a draught and spat. "Phrut!" said he. "Much bruit, little fruit. I would know by what warrant thou troublest me with this tittle-tattle, and I pleasantly disposing myself to mirth and recreation. Could it not wait till supper time?"

Ere Laxus might say more, was a great clatter heard without on the stairs, and in came those sons of Corund.

"Am I a king?" said Corinius, gathering his robe about him, "and shall I be forced? Avoid the chamber." Then marking them stand silent with disordered looks, "What's the matter?" be said. "Are ye ta'en with the swindle or the turn-sickness? Or are ye out of your wits?"

Heming answered and said, "Not mad, my lord. Here's Didarus that held the Stile-burg for us, ridden from the east as fast as his horse might wallop, and gotten here hard o' the heels of the former messenger with fresh and more certain advertisement, fresher by four days than that one's. I pray you hear him."

"I'll hear him," said Corinius, "at supper time. Nought sooner, if the roof were afire."

"The land beneath thy feet's afire!" cried Heming. "Juss

[p. 382]

and Brandoch Daha home again, and half the country lost thee ere thou heard'st on't. These devils are home again! Shall we hear that and still be swill-bowls?"

Corinius listened with folded arms. His great jaw was lifted up. His nostrils widened. For a minute he abode in silence, his cold blue eyes fixed as it were on somewhat afar. Then, "Home again?" said he. "And the east in a hubbub? And not unlikely. Thank Didarus for his tidings. He shall sweeten mine ears with some more at supper. Till then, leave me, unless ye mean to be stretched."

But Laxus, with sad and serious brow, stood beside him and said, "My lord, forget not that you are here the vicar and legate of the King. Let the crown upon your head put perils in your thoughts, so as you may harken peaceably to them that are willing to lesson you with sound and sage advice. If we take order to-night to march by Switchwater, we may very well shut back this danger and stifle it ere it wax to too much bigness. If o' the contrary we suffer them to enter into these western parts, like enough without let or stay they will overrun the whole country."

Corinius rolled his eye upon him. "Can nothing," he said, "prescribe unto thee obedience? Look to thine own charge. Is the fleet in proper trim? For there's the strength, ease, and anchor of our power, whether for victualling, or to shift our weight against 'em which way we choose, or to give us sure asylum if it were come to that. What ails thee? Have we not these four months desired nought better than that these Demons should take heart to strike a field with us? If it be true that Juss himself and Brandoch Daha have thrown down the castles and strengths which I had i' the east and move with an army against us, why then I have them in the forge already, and shall now bring them to the hammer. And be satisfied, I'll choose mine own ground to fight them."

"There's yet matter for haste in this," said Laxus. "A day's march, and we oppose 'em not, will bring them before Krothering."

"That," answered Corinius, "jumpeth pat with mine

[p. 383]

own design. I'll not go a league to bar their way, but receive 'em here where the ground lieth most favourable to meet an enemy. Which advantage I'll employ to the greatest stretch of service, standing on Krothering Side, resting my flank against the mountain. The fleet shall ride in Aurwath haven."

Laxus stroked his beard and was silent a minute, considering this. Then he looked up and said, "This is sound generalship, I may not gainsay it."

"It is a purpose, my lord," said Corinius, "I have long had in myself, stored by for the event. Let me alone, therefore, to do that my right is. There's this good in it, too, as it befalleth: 'twill suffer that dive-dapper to behold his home again afore I kill him. A shall find it a sight for sore eyes, I think, after my tending on't."

 

The third day after these doings, the farmer at Holt stood in his porch that opened westward on Tivarandardale. An old man was he, crooked like a mountain thorn. But a bright black eye he had, and the hair curled crisp yet above his brow. It was late afternoon and the sky overcast. Tousle-haired sheep-dogs slept before the door. Swallows gathered in the sky. Near to him sat a damosel, dainty as a meadow-pipit, lithe as an antelope; and she was grinding grain in a hand-mill, singing the while:

	 
		      Grind, mill, grind,
		       Corinius grinds us all;
		 Kinging it in widowed Krothering.
		
		 The old man was furbishing a shield and morion-cap, and other tackle of war lay at his feet.

"I wonder thou wilt still be busy with thy tackle, O my father," said she, looking up from her singing and grinding. "If ill tide ill again what should an old man do but grieve and be silent?"

"There shall be time for that hereafter," said the old man. "But a little while is hand fain of blow."

[p. 384]

"They'll be for firing the roof-tree, likely, if they come back," said she, still grinding.

"Thou'rt a disobedient lass. If thou'dst but flit as I bade thee to the shiel-house up the dale, I'd force not a bean for their burnings."

"Let it burn," said she, "if he be taken. What avail then for thee or for me to be a-tarrying? Thou that art an old man and full of good days, and I that will not be left so."

A great dog awoke beside her and shook himself, then drew near and laid his nose in her lap, looking up at her with kind solemn eyes.

The old man said, "Thou'rt a disobedient lass, and but for thee, come sword, come fire, not a straw care I; knowing it shall be but a passing storm, now that my Lord is home again."

"They took the land from Lord Spitfire," said she.

"Ay, hinny," said the old man, "and thou shalt see my Lord shall take it back again."

"Ay?" said she. And still she ground and still she sang:

	 
		Grind, mill, grind,
		 Corinius grinds us all.
		
		 After a time, "Hist!" said the old man, "was not that a horse-tread i' the lane? Get thee within-doors till I know if all be friendly." And he stooped painfully to take up his weapon. Woefully it shook in his feeble hand.

But she, as one that knew the step, heeding nought else, leapt up with face first red then pale then flushed again, and ran to the gate of the garth. And the sheepdogs bounded before her. There in the gate she was met with a young man riding a weary horse. He was garbed like a soldier, and horse and man were so bedraggled with mire and dust and all manner of defilement they were a sorry sight to see, and so jaded both that scarce it seemed they had might to journey another furlong. They halted within the gate, and all those dogs jumped up upon them, whining and barking for joy.

[p. 385]

Ere the soldier was well down from the saddle he had a sweet armful. "Softly, my heart," said he, "my shoulder's somewhat raw. Nay, 'tis nought to speak on. I've brought thee all my limbs home."

"Was there a battle?" said the old man.

"Was there a battle, father?" cried he. "I'll tell thee, Krothering Side is thicker with dead men slain than our garth with sheep i' the shearing time."

"Alack and alack, 'tis a most horrid wound, dear," said the girl. "Go in, and I'll wash it and lay to it millefoil pounded with honey; 'tis most sovran against pain and loss of blood, and drieth up the lips of the wound and maketh whole thou'dst no credit how soon. Thou hast bled over-much, thou foolish one. And how couldst thou thrive without thy wife to tend thee?"

The farmer put an arm about him, saying, "Was the field ours, lad?"

"I'll tell you all orderly, old man," answered he, "but I must stable him first," and the horse nuzzled his breast. "And ye must ballast me first. God shield us, 'tis not a tale for an empty man to tell."

"'Las, father," said the damosel, "have we not one sweet sippet i' the mouth, that we hold him here once more? And, sweet or sour, let him take his time to fetch us the next."

So they washed his hurt and laid kindly herbs thereto, and bound it with clean linen, and put fresh raiment upon him, and made him sit on the bench without the porch and gave him to eat and drink: cakes of barley meal and dark heather-honey, and rough white wine of Tivarandardale. The dogs lay close about him as if there was warmth there and safety whereas he was. His young wife held his hand in hers, as if that were enough if it should last for aye. And that old man, eating down his impatience like a schoolboy chafing for the bell, fingered his partisan with trembling hand.

"Thou hadst the word I sent thee, father, after the fight below Galing?"

"Ay. 'Twas good."

[p. 386]

"There was a council held that night," said the soldier. "All the great men together in the high hall in Galing, so as it was a heaven to see. I was one of their cupbearers, 'cause I'd killed the standard-bearer of the Witches, in that same battle below Galing. Methought 'twas no great thing I did; till after the battle, look you, my Lord's self standing beside me; and saith he, 'Arnod' (ay, by my name, father), 'Arnod,' a saith, 'thou'st done down-the pennon o' Witchland that 'gainst our freedom streamed so proud. 'Tis thy like shall best stead Demonland i' these dog-days,' saith he. 'Bear my cup to-night, for thine honour.' I would, lass, thou'dst seen his eyes that tide. 'Tis a lord to put marrow in the sword-arm, our Lord.

"They had forth the great map o' the world, of this Demonland, to study their business. I was by, pouring the wine, and I heard their disputations. 'Tis a wondrous map wrought in crystal and bronze, most artificial, with waters a-glistering and mountains standing substantial to the touch. My Lord points with's sword. 'Here,' a saith, 'standeth Corinius, by all sure tellings, and budgeth not from Krothering. And, by the Gods, 'a saith, '`tis a wise disposition. For, mark, if we go by Gashterndale, as go we must to come at him, he striketh down on us as hammer on anvil. And if we will pass by toward the head of Thunderfirth,' and here a pointeth it out with's sword, 'down a cometh on our flank; and every-gate the land's slope serveth his turn and fighteth against us.'

"I mind me o' those words," said the young man, "'cause my Lord Brandoch Daha laughed and said, 'Are we grown so strange by our travels, our own land fighteth o' the opposite party? Let me study it again.'

"I filled his cup. Dear Gods, but I'd fill him a bowl of mine own heart's blood if he required it of me, after our times together, father. But more o' that anon. The stoutest gentleman and captain without peer.

"But Lord Spitfire, that was this while vaunting up and down the chamber, cried out and said, "Twere folly to travel his road prepared us. Take him o' that side he

[p. 387]

looketh least to see us: south through the mountains, and upon him in his rear up from Mardardale.'

"'Ah,' saith my Lord, 'and be pressed back into Murkdale Hags if we miss of our first spring. 'Tis too perilous. `Tis worse than Gashterndale.'

"So went it: a nay for every yea, and nought to please 'em. Till i' the end my Lord Brandoch Daha, that had been long time busy with the map, said: 'Now that y' have threshed the whole stack and found not the needle, I will show you my rede, 'cause ye shall not say I counselled you rashly.'

"So they bade him say his rede. And he said unto my Lord, 'Thou and our main power shall go by Switchwater Way. And let the whole land's face blaze your coming before you. Ye shall lie to-morrow night in some good fighting-stead whither it shall not be to his vantage to move against you: haply in the old shielings above Wrenthwaite, or at any likely spot afore the road dippeth south into Gashterndale. But at point of day strike camp and go by Gashterndale and so up on to the Side to do battle with him. So shall all fall out even as his own hopes and expectations do desire it. But I,' saith my Lord Brandoch Daha, 'with seven hundred chosen horse, will have fared by then clean along the mountain ridge from Transdale even to Erngate End; so as when he turneth all his battle northward down the Side to whelm you, there shall hang above the security of his flank and rear that which he ne'er dreamed on. If he support my charging of his flank at unawares, with you in front to cope him, and he with so small an advantage upon us in strength of men: if he stand that, why then, good-night! the Witches are our masters in arms, and we may off cap to 'em and strive no more to right us.'

"So said my Lord Brandoch Daha. But all called him daft to think on't. Carry an army a-horseback in so small time 'cross such curst ground? It might not be. 'Well,' quoth he, 'sith you count it not possible, so much the more shall he. Cautious counsels never will serve us this tide. Give me but my pick of man and horse to the number

[p. 388]

of seven hundred, and I'll so set this masque you shall not desire a better master of the revels.'

"So i' the end he had his way. And past midnight they were at it, I wis, planning and studying.

"At dawn was the whole army marshalled in the meadows below Moonmere, and my Lord spake among them and told us he was minded to march into the west country and exterminate the Witches out of Demonland; and he bade any man that deemed be had now his fill of furious war and deemed it a sweeter thing to go home to his own place, say forth his mind without fear, and he would let him go, yea, and give him good gifts thereto, seeing that all had done manful service; but he would have no man in this enterprise who went not to it with his whole heart and mind."

The damosel said, "I wis there was not a man would take that offer."

"There went up," said the soldier, "such a shout, with such a stamping, and such a clashing together of weapons, the land shook with't, and the echoes rolled in the high corries of the Scarf like thunder, of them shouting 'Krothering!' 'Juss!' 'Brandoch Daha!' 'Lead us to Krothering!' Without more ado was the stuff packed up, and ere noon was the whole army gotten over the Stile. While we halted for daymeal hard by Blackwood in Amadardale, came my Lord Brandoch Daha a-riding among the ranks for to take his pick of seven hundred of our ablest horse. Nor a would not commit this to his officer, but himself called on each lad by name whenso he saw a likely one, and speered would a ride with him. I trow he gat never a nay to that speering. My heart was a-cold lest he'd o'erlook me, watching him ride by as jaunty as a king. But a reined in's horse and saith, 'Arnod, 'tis a bonny horse thou ridest. Could he carry thee to a swine-hunt down from Erngate End i' the morning?' I saluted him and said, 'Not so far only, Lord, but to burning Hell so thou but lead us.' 'Come on,' saith he. "Tis a better gate I shall lead thee: to Krothering hall ere eventide.'

[p. 389]

"So now was our strength sundered, and the main army made ready to march westward down Switchwater Way; with the Lord Zigg to lead the horse, and the Lord Volle and my Lord's self and his brother the Lord Spitfire faring in the midst amongst 'em all. And with them yonder outland traitor, Lord Gro; but I do think him more a stick of sugar-paste than a man of war. And many gentlemen of worth went with them: Gismor Gleam of Justdale, Astar of Rettray, and Bremery of Shaws, and many more men of mark. But there abode with my Lord Brandoch, Daha, Arnund of By, and Tharmrod of Kenarvey, Kamerar of Stropardon, Emeron Galt, Hesper Golthring of Elmerstead, Styrkmir of Blackwood, Melchar of Strufey, Quazz's three sons from Dalney, and Stypmar of Failze: fierce and choleric young gentlemen, after his own heart, methinks; great horsemen, not very forecasting of future things afar off but entertainers of fortune by the day; too rash to govern an army, but best of all to obey and follow him in so glorious an enterprise.

"Ere we parted, came my Lord to speak with my Lord Brandoch Daha. And my Lord looked into the lift that was all dark cloud and wind; and quoth he, 'Fail not at the tryst, cousin. 'Tis thy word, that thou and I be finger and thumb; and never more surely than to-morrow shall this be seen.'

"'O friend of my heart, content thee,' answereth my Lord Brandoch Daha. 'Didst ever know me neglect my guests? And have I not bidden you to breakfast with me to-morrow mom in Krothering meads?'

"Now we of the seven hundred turned leftward at the watersmeet up Transdale into the mountains. And now came ill weather upon us, the worst that ever I knew. 'Tis soft enow and little road enow in Transdale, as thou knowest, father, and weary work it was with every deer-track turned a water-course and underfoot all slush and mire, and nought for a man to see save white mist and rain above and about him, and soppy bent and water under's horse-hooves. Little there was to tell us we were won at last to the top of the pass, and 'twere not

[p. 390]

the cloud blew thicker and the wind wilder about us. Every man was wet to the breech, and bare a pint o' water in's two shoes.

"Whiles we were halted on the Saddle my Lord Brandoch Daha rested not at all, but gave his horse to his man to hold and himself fared back and forth among us. And for every man he had a jest or a merry look, so as 'twas meat and drink but to hear or to behold him. But a little while only would he suffer us to halt; then right we turned, up along the ridge, where the way was yet worse than in the dale had been, with rocks and pits hidden in the heather, and slithery slabs of granite. By my faith, I think no horse that was not born and bred to't might cross such country, wet or fine; he should be foundered or should break his legs and his rider's neck ere he should be gotten two hours' journey along those ridges; but we that rode with my Lord Brandoch Daha to Krothering Side were ten hours riding so, besides our halts to water our horses and longer halts to feed 'em, and the last part o' the way through murk night, and all the way i' the wind's teeth with rain blown on the wind like spray, and hail at whiles. And when the rain was done, the wind veered to the north-west and blew the ridges dry. And then the little bits of rotten granite blew in our faces like hailstones on the wind. There was no shelter, not o' the lee side of the rocks, but everywhere the storm-wind baffled and buffeted us, and clapped his wings among the crags like thunder. Dear Heaven, weary we were and like to drop, cold to the marrow, nigh blinded man and horse, yet with a dreadful industry pressed on. And my Lord Brandoch Daha was now in the van now in the rear-guard, cheering men's hearts who marked with what blithe countenance himself did suffer the same hardships as his meanest trooper: like to one riding at ease to some great wedding-feast; crying, 'What, lads, merrily on! These fen-toads of the Druima shall learn too late what way our mountain ponies do go like stags upon the mountain.'

"When it began to be morning we came to our last halt, and there was our seven hundred horse hid in the corrie

[p. 391]

under the tall cliffs of Erngate End. I warrant you we went carefully about it, so as no prying swine of Witchland looking up from below should aspy a glimpse of man or horse o' the skyline. His highness first set his sentinels and let call the muster, and saw that every man had his morning meal and every horse his feed. Then he took his stand behind a crag of rock whence he could overlook the land below. He had me by him to do his errands. In the first light we looked down westward over the mountain's edge and saw Krothering and the arms of the sea, not so dark but we might behold their fleet at anchor in Aurwath roads, and their camp like a batch of beehives so as a man might think to cast a stone into't below us. That was the first time I'd e'er gone to the wars with him. Faith, he's a pretty man to see: leaned forward there on the heather with's chin on his folded arms, his helm laid aside so they should not see it glint from below; quiet like a cat: half asleep you'd say; but his eyes were awake, looking down on Krothering. 'Twas well seen even from so far away how vilely they had used it.

"The great red sun leaped out o' the eastern cloudbanks. A stir began in their camp below: standards set up, men gathering thereto, ranks forming, bugles sounding; then a score of horse galloping up the road from Gashterndale into the camp. His highness, without turning his head, beckoned with's hand to me to call his captains. I ran and fetched 'em. He gave 'em swift commands, pointing down where the Witchland swine rolled out their battle; thieves and pirates who robbed his highness' subjects within his streams; with standard and pennons and glistering naked spears, moving northward from the tents. Then in the quiet came a sound made a man's heart leap within him: faint out of the far hollows of Gashterndale, the trumpet of my Lord Juss's battle-call.

"My Lord Brandoch Daha paused a minute, looking down. Then a turned him about with face that shone like the morning. 'Fair lords,' a saith, 'now lightly on horseback, for Juss fighteth against his enemies.' I think he was

[p. 392]

well content. I think he was sure he would that day get his heart's syth of every one that had wronged him.

"That was a long ride down from Erngate End. With all our hearts' blood drumming us to haste, we must yet go warily, picking our way i' that tricky ground, steep as a roof-slope, uneven and with no sure foothold, with sikes in wet moss and rocks outcropping and shifting screes. There was nought but leave it to the horses, and bravely they brought us down the steeps. We were not half way down ere we heard and saw how battle was joined. So intent were the Witchlanders on my Lord's main army, I think we were off the steep ground and forming for the charge ere they were ware of us. Our trumpeters sounded his battle challenge, Who meddles wi' Brandoch Daha? and we came down on to Krothering Side like a rock-fall.

"I scarce know what way the battle went, father. 'Twas like a meeting of streams in spate. I think they opened to us right and left to ease the shock. They that were before us went down like standing corn under a hailstorm. We wheeled both ways, some 'gainst their right that was thrown back toward the camp, the more part with my Lord Brandoch Daha to our own right. I was with these in the main battle. His highness rode a hot stirring horse very fierce and dogged; knee to knee with him went Styrkmir of Blackwood o' the one side and Tharmrod o' the other. Neither man nor horse might stand up before 'em, and they faring as in a maze now this way now that, amid the thrumbling and thrasting o' the footmen, heads and arms smitten off, men hewn in sunder from crown to belly, ay, to the saddle, riderless horses maddened, blood splashed up from the ground like the slush from a marsh.

"So for a time, till we had spent the vantage of our onset and felt for the first time the weight of their strength. For Corinius, as it appeareth, was now himself ridden from the vanward where he had beat back for a time our main army, and set on against my Lord Brandoch Daha with horsemen and spearmen; and commanded his sling-casters besides to let freely at us and drive us toward the camp.

"And now in the great swing of the battle were we

[p. 393]

 

Click to enlarge
SOLDIERS OF DEMONLAND.

 

[p. 394]

carried back to the camp again; and there was a sweet devils' holiday: horses and men tripping over tent-ropes, tents torn down, crashes of broken crockery, and King Laxus come thither with sailors from the fleet, hamstringing our horses while Corinius charged us from the north and east. That Corinius beareth him in battle more like a devil from Hell than a mortal man. I' the first two strokes of's sword he overthrew two of our best captains, Romenard of Dalney and Emeron Galt. Styrkmir, that stood in's way to stop him, a flung down with's spear, horse and man. They say he met twice with my Lord Brandoch Daha that day, but each time were they parted in the press ere they might rightly square together.

"I have stood in some goodly battles, father, as well thou knowest: first following my Lord and my Lord Goldry Bluszco in foreign parts, and last year in the great rout at Crossby Outsikes, and again with my Lord Spitfire when he smote the Witches on Brima Rapes, and in the murthering great battle under Thremnir's Heugh. But never was I in fight like to this of yesterday.

"Never saw I such feats of arms. As witness Kamerar of Stropardon, who with a great two-handed sword hewed off his enemy's leg close to the hip, so huge a blow the blade sheared through leg and saddle and horse and all. And Styrkmir of Blackwood, rising like a devil out of a heap of slain men, and though's helm was lossen and a was bleeding from three or four great wounds a held off a dozen o' the Witches with's deadly thrusts and sword-strokes, till they had enough and gave back before him: twelve before one, and he given over for dead a while before. But all great deeds seemed trash beside the deeds of my Lord Brandoch Daha. In one short while had he three times a horse slain stark dead under him, yet gat never a wound himself, which was a marvel. For without care he rode through and about, smiting down their champions. I mind me of him once, with's horse ripped and killed under him, and one of those Witchland lords that tilted at him on the ground as he leaped to's feet again; how a caught the spear with's two hands and by main strength yerked his enemy out o' the saddle. Prince Cargo

[p. 395]

it was, youngest of Corund's sons. Long may the Witchland ladies strain their dear eyes, they'll ne'er see yon hendy lad come sailing home again. His highness swapt him such a swipe o' the neck-bone as he pitched to earth, the head of him flew i' the air like a tennis ball. And i' the twinkling of an eye was my Lord Brandoch Daha horsed again on's enemy's horse, and turned to charge 'em anew. You'd say his arm must fail at last for weariness, of a man so lithe and jimp to look on. Yet I think his last stroke i' that battle was not lighter than the first. And stones and spears and sword-strokes seemed to come upon him with no more impression than blows with a straw would give to an adamant.

'I know not how long was that fight among the tents. Only 'twas the best fight I ever was at, and the bloodiest. And by all tellings 'twas as great work o' the other part, where my Lord and his folk fought their way up on to the Side. But of that we knew nothing. Yet certain it is we had all been dead men had my Lord not there prevailed, as certain 'tis he had never so prevailed but for our charging of their flank when they first advanced against him. But in that last hour all we that fought among the tents thought each man only of this, how he might slay yet one more Witch, and yet again one more, afore he should die. For Corinius in that hour put forth his might to crush us; and for every enemy there felled to earth two more seemed to be raised up against us. And our own folk fell fast, and the tents that were so white were one gore of blood.

"When I was a little tiny boy, father, we had a sport, swimming in the deep pools of Tivarandarwater, that one boy would catch 'tother and hold him under till he could no more for want of breath. Methinks there's no longing i' the world so sore as the longing for air when he that is stronger than thou grippeth thee still under the water, nor no gladness j' the world like the bonny sweet air i' thy lungs again when a letteth thee shoot up to the free daylight. 'Twas right so with us, who had now said adieu to hope and saw all lost save life itself, and that not like to tarry long; when we heard suddenly

[p. 396]

the thunder of my Lord's trumpet sounding to the charge. And ere our startled wits might rightly think what that portended, was the whole surging battle whipped and scattered like the water of a lake caught up in a white squall; and that massed strength of the enemy which had invested us round with so great a stream of shot and steel reeled first forward then backward then forward again upon us, confounded in a vast confusion. I trow new strength came to our arms; I trow our swords opened their mouths. For northward we beheld the ensign of Galing streaming like a blazing star; and my Lord's self in a moment, high advanced above the rout, and Zigg, and Astar, and hundreds of our horse, hewing their way toward us whiles we hewed towards them. And now was reaping time for us, and time of payment for all those weary bloody hours we had held on to life with our teeth among the tents on Krothering Side, while they o' the other part, my Lord and his, had with all the odds of the ground against them painfully and yard by yard fought out the fight to victory. And now, ere we well wist of it, the day was won, and the victory ours, and the enemy broken and put to so great a rout as hath not been seen by living man.

"That false king Corinius, after he had tarried to see the end of the battle, fled with a few of his men out of the great slaughter, and as it later appeared gat him ashipboard in Aurwath harbour and with three ships or four escaped to sea. But the most of their fleet was burned there in the harbour to save it from our hands.

"My Lord gave command to take up the wounded and tend 'em, friend and foe alike. Among them was King Laxus ta'en up, stunned with a mace-blow or some such. So they brought him before the lords where they rested a little way down the Side above the home meads of Krothering.

"He looked 'em all in the eye, most proud and soldier-like. Then a saith unto my Lord, 'It may be pain, but no shame to us to be vanquished after so equal

[p. 397]

and so great a fight. Herein only do I blame my ill luck, that it denied me fall in battle. Thou mayst now, O Juss, strike off my head for the treason I wrought you three years ago. And since I know thee of a courteous and noble nature, I'll not scorn to ask of thee this courtesy, not to tarry but take it now.'

"My Lord stood there like a war-horse after a breather. He took him by the hand. 'O Laxus,' saith he, 'I give thee not thy head only, but thy sword;' and here a gave it him hilt-foremost. 'For thy dealings with us in the battle of Kartadza, let time that hath an art to make dust of all things so do with the memory of these. Since then, thou hast shown thyself still our noble enemy; and so shall we account thee still.'

"Therewith my Lord commanded bring King Laxus down to the sea, and ship him aboard of a boat, for Corinius still held off the land with his ships, waiting no doubt to see if he or any other of his folk could yet be saved.

"But as King Laxus was upon parting, my Lord Brandoch Daha, speaking with great show of carelessness as of some trifling matter a had by chance called to mind, 'My lord,' saith he, 'I ne'er ask favour of any man. Only in a manner of return of courtesies, methought thou mightest be willing to hear my salutations to Corinius, sith I've no other messenger.'

"Laxus answereth he would freely do it. Then saith his highness, 'Say to him I will not blame him that he abode us not i' the field after the battle was lost, for that had been a simple part, flatly 'gainst all maxims of right soldiership, and but to cast his life away. But freakish Fortune I blame, that twined us one from the other when we should have dealt together this day. He hath borne him in my halls, I am let to know, more i' the fashion of a swine or a beastly ape than a man. Pray him come ashore ere you sail home, that I and he, with no man else to make betwixt us, may cast up our account. We swear him peace and grith and a safe conduct back to's ships if he prevail against me or if I so use him that he cry for mercy. If he'll not take this offer, then is he a

[p. 398]

dastard; and the whole world shall so acclaim him.'

"'Sir,' saith Laxus, 'I'll punctually discharge thy message.'

"Whether he did so or no, father, I know not. But if he did, it seemeth it was little to Corinius's liking. For no sooner had his ship ta'en Laxus aboard, than she hoised sail and put out into the deep, and so good-bye."

 

The young man ceased, and they were all three silent awhile. A faint breeze rippled the foliage of the oakwoods of Tivarandardale. The sun was down behind the stately Thornbacks, and the whole sky from bourne to bourne was alight with the sunset glory. Dappled clouds, with sky showing here and there between, covered the heavens, save in the west where a great archway of clear air opened between clouds and earth: air of an azure that seemed to burn, so pure it was, so deep, so charged with warmth: not the harsh blue of noon-day nor the sumptuous deep eastern blue of approaching night, but a bright heavenly blue bordering on green, deep, tender, and delicate as the spirit of evening. Athwart the midst of that window of the west a blade of cloud, hard-edged and jagged with teeth coloured as of live coals and dead, fiery and iron-dark in turn, stretched like a battered sword. The clouds above the arch were pale rose: the zenith like black opal, dark blue and thunderous gray dappled with fire.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 399]

 

XXVII

 

The Second Expedition to Impland

HOW THE LORD JUSS, NOT TO BE PERSUADED FROM HIS SET PURPOSE, FOUND, WHERE LEAST IT WAS TO BE LOOKED FOR, UPHOLDING IN THAT RESOLVE; AND OF THE SAILING OF THE ARMAMENT TO MUELVA BY WAY OF THE STRAITS OF MELIKAPHKHAZ.

That was the last ember of red summer burning when they cut them that harvest on Krothering Side. Autumn came, and winter months, and the lengthening days of the returning year. And with the first breath of spring were the harbours filled with ships of war, so many as had never in former days been seen in the land, and in every countryside from the western Isles to Byland, from Shalgreth and Kelialand to the headlands under Rimon Armon, were soldiers gathered with their horses and all instruments of war.

Lord Brandoch Daha rode from the west, the day the Pasque flowers first opened on the bluffs below Erngate End and primroses made sweet the birch-forests in Gashterndale. He set forth betimes, and hard he rode, and he

[p. 400]

rode into Galing by the Lion Gate about the hour of noon. There was Lord Juss in his private chamber, and greeted him with great joy and love. So Brandoch Daha asked, "What speed?" And Juss answered, "Thirty ships and five afloat in Lookinghaven, whereof all save four be dragons of war. Zigg I expect tomorrow with the Kelialand levies; Spitfire lieth at Owlswick with fifteen hundred men from the southlands; Volle came in but three hours since with four hundred more. In sum, I'll have four thousand, reckoning ships' companies and our own bodyguards."

"Eight ships of war have I," said Lord Brandoch Daha, "in Stropardon Firth, all busked and boun. Five more at Aurwath, five at Lornagay in Morvey, and three on the Mealand coast at Stackray Oyce, besides four more in the Isles. And I have sixteen hundred spearmen and six hundred horse. All these shall come together to join with thine in Lookinghaven at the snapping of my fingers, give me but seven days' notice."

Juss gripped him by the hand. "Bare were my back without thee," he said.

"In Krothering I've shifted not a stone nor swept not a chamber clean," said Brandoch Daha. "'Tis a muck-pit. Every man's hand I might command I set only to this. And now 'tis ready." He turned sharp toward Juss and looked at him a minute in silence. Then with a gravity that sat not often on his lips he said, "Let me be urgent with thee once more: strike and delay not. Do him not again that kindness we did him aforetime, fribbling our strength away on the cursed shores of Impland, and by the charmed waters of Ravary, so as he might as secure as sleep send Corsus hither and Corinius to work havoc i' the land; and so put on us the greatest shame was ever laid on mortal men, and we not bred up to suffer shame."

"Thou saidst seven days," said Juss. "Snap thy fingers and call up thy armies. I'll delay thee not an hour."

[p. 401]

"Ay, but I mean to Carce," said he.

"To Carce, whither else?" said Juss. "But I'll take my brother Goldry with us."

"But I mean first to Carce," said Brandoch Daha. "Let my opinion sway thee once. Why, a schoolboy should tell thee, clear thy flank and rear ere thou go forward."

Juss smiled. "I love this new garb of caution, cousin," said he; "it doth most prettily become thee. I question though whether this be not the true cause: that Corinius took not up thy challenge last summer, but let it lie, and that hath left thee hungry still."

Brandoch Daha looked him sidelong in the eye, and laughed. "O Juss," he said, "thou hast touched me near. But 'tis not that. That was in the weird that bright lady laid on me, in the sparrow-hawk castle in Impland forlorn: that he I held most in hate should ruin my fair lordship, and that to my hand should vengeance be denied. That I e'en must brook. O no. Think only, delays are dangerous. Come, be advised. Be not mulish."

But the Lord Juss's face was grave. "Urge me no more, dear friend," said he. "Thou sleep'st soft. But to me, when I am cast in my first sleep, cometh many a time the likeness of Goldry Bluszco, held by a maleficial charm on the mountain top of Zora Rach, that standeth apart, out of the sunlight, out of all sound or warmth of life. Long ago I made vow to turn neither to the right nor to the left, until I set him free."

"He is thy brother," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "Also, is he mine own familiar friend, whom I love scarce less than thee. But when thou speakest of oaths, remember there's La Fireez too. What shall he think on us after our oaths to him three years ago, that night in Carce? Yet. this one blow should right him too."

"He will understand," said Juss.

"He is to come with Gaslark, and thou told'st me thou

[p. 402]

dost e'en now expect them," said Brandoch Daha. "I'll leave you. I cannot for shame say to him, 'Patience, friend, truly 'tis not to-day convenient. Thou shalt be paid in time.' By heavens, I'd scorn to entreat my mantle-maker so. And this our friend that lost all and languisheth in exile because he saved our lives."

So saying, he stood up in great discontent and ire as if to leave the chamber. But Juss caught him by the wrist. "Thou dost upbraid me most unjustly, and well thou knowest it in thy heart, and 'tis that makes thee so angry. Hark, the horn soundeth at the gate, and 'tis for Gaslark. I'll not let thee go."

"Well," said Lord Brandoch Daha, "have thy will. Only ask not me to plead thy rotten case to them. If I speak it shall be to shame thee. Now thou'rt warned."

Now went they into the high presence chamber, where were bright ladies not a few, and captains and noble persons from up and down the land, and stood on the dais. Gaslark the king walked up the shining floor, and behind him his captains and councillors of Goblinland walked two by two. The Prince La Fireez strode at his elbow, proud as a lion.

Blithely they greeted those lords of Demonland that rose up to greet them beneath the starry canopy, and the Lady Mevrian that stood betwixt her brother and Lord Juss so as 'twere hard to say which of the three was fairest to look on, so much they differed in their beauty's glory. Gro, standing near, said in himself, "I know a fourth. And were she but joined with these, then were the crown of the whole earth's loveliness fitted in this one chamber: in a right casket surely. And the Gods in heaven (if there be Gods indeed) should go pale for envy, having in their starry gallery no fair to match with these; not Phoebus Apollo, not the chaste Huntress, nor the foam-born Queen herself."

[p. 403]

But Gaslark, when his eye lighted on the long black beard, the lean figure slightly stooping, the pallid brow, the curls smoothed with perfumed unguents, the sickle-like nose, the great liquid eyes, the lily hand; he, beholding and knowing these of old, waxed in a moment dark as thunder with the blood-rush beneath his sun-browned skin, and with a great sweep snatched out his sword, as if without gare or beware to thrust him through. Gro stepped hastily back. But the Lord Juss came between them.

"Let alone, Juss," cried Gaslark. "Know'st not this fellow, what a vile enemy and viper we have here? A pretty perfumed villain! who for so many years did spin me a thread of many seditions and troubles, while his smooth tongue gat money from me still. Blessed occasion! Now will I let his; soul out."

But the Lord Juss laid his hand on Gaslark's sword-arm. "Gaslark," said he, "leave off thy rages, and put up thy sword. A year ago thou'dst done me no wrong. But to-day thou'dst have slain me a man of mine own men, and a lord of Demonland."

Now when they had done their greetings, they washed their hands and sate at dinner and were nobly served and feasted. And the Lord Juss made peace betwixt Gro and Gaslark, albeit 'twas no light task to prevail upon Gaslark to forgive him. Thereafter they retired them with Gaslark and La Fireez into a chamber apart.

Gaslark the king spake and said, "None can gainsay it, O Juss, that this fight ye won last harvest tide was the greatest seen on land these many years, and of greatest consequence. But I have heard a bird sing there shall be yet greater deeds done ere many moons be past. Therefore it is we came hither to thee, I and La Fireez that be your friends from of old, to pray thee let us go with thee on thy quest across the world after thy brother, for

[p. 404]

sorrow of whose loss the whole world languisheth; and thereafter let us go with you on your going up to Carce."

"O Juss," said the Prince, "we would not in after-days that men should say, On such a time fared the Demons into perilous lands enchanted and by their strength and valorousness set free the Lord Goldry Bluszco (or haply, there ended their life's days in that glorious quest); but Gaslark and La Fireez were not in it, they bade their friends farewell, hung up their swords, and lived a quiet and merry life in Zaje Zaculo. So let their memory be forgot."

Lord Juss sat silent a minute, as one much moved. "O Gaslark," he said at length, "I'll take thine offer without another word. But unto thee, dear Prince, I must bare mine heart somewhat. For thou here art come not strest in our quarrel to spend thy blood, only to put us yet deeper in thy debt. And yet small blame it were to thee shouldst thou in dishonourable sort revile me, as many shall cry out against me, for a false friend into thee and a friend forsworn."

But the Prince La Fireez brake in upon him, saying, "I prithee have done, or thou'lt shame me quite. Whate'er I did in Carce, 'twas but equal payment for your saving of my life in Lida Nanguna. So was all evened up betwixt us. Think then no more on't, but deny me not to go with you to Impland. But up to Carce I'll not go with you: for albeit I am clean broke with Witchland, against Corund and his kin I will not draw sword nor against my lady sister. A black curse on the day I gave her white hand to Corund! She holdeth too much of our stock, methinks: her heraldry is hearts not hands. And giving her hand she gave her heart. 'Tis a strange world."

"La Fireez," said Juss, "we weigh not so lightly our obligation unto thee. Yet must I hold my course; having sworn a strong oath that I would turn aside neither to the

[p. 405]

right nor to the left until I had delivered my dear brother Goldry out of bondage. So sware I or ever I went that ill journey to Carce and was closed in prison fast and by thee delivered. Nor shall blame of friends nor wrongful misprision nor any power that is shake me in this determination. But when that is done, no rest remaineth unto us till we win back for thee thy rightful realm of Pixyland, and many good things besides to be a token of our love."

Said the Prince, "Thou doest right. If thou didst other thou'dst have my blame."

"And mine thereto," said Gaslark. "Do not I grieve, think'st thou, to see the Princess Armelline, my sweet young cousin, grow every day more wan o' the check and pale? And all for sorrow and teen for her own true love, the Lord Goldry Bluszco. And she so carefully brought up by her mother as nothing was too dear or hard to be brought to pass for her desire, thinking that a creature so noble and perfect could not be trained up too delicately. I deem to-day better than to-morrow, and to-morrow better than his morrow, to set sail for wide-fronted Impland."'

All this while the Lord Brandoch Daha said never a word. He sat back in his chair of ivory and chrysoprase, now toying with his golden finger-rings, now twisting and untwisting the yellow curls of his moustachios and beard. In a while he yawned, rose from his seat and fell to pacing lazily up and down. He had hitched up his sword across his back under his two elbows, so that the shoe of the scabbard stood out under one arm and the jewelled hilt under the other. His fingers strummed little tunes on the front of the rich rose velvet doublet that cased his chest. The spring sunlight as he paced from shine to shade and to shine again, passing the tall windows, seemed to caress his face and form. It was as if spring laughed for joy beholding

[p. 406]

in him one that was her own child, clothed to outward view with so much loveliness and grace, but full besides to the eyes and finger-tips with fire and vital sap, like her own buds bursting in the Brankdale coppices.

In a while he ceased his walking, and stood by the Lord Gro who sat a little part from the rest. "How thinkest thou, Gro, of our counsels? Art thou for the straight road or the crooked? For Carce or Zora Rach?"

"Of the roads," answered Gro, "a wise man will choose ever that one which is indirect. For but consider the matter, thou that art a great cragsman: think our life's course a lofty cliff. I am to climb it, sometime up, sometime down. I pray, whither leadeth the straight road on such a cliff? Why, nowhither. For if I will go up by the straight way, 'tis not possible; I am left gaping whiles thou by crooked courses hast gained the top. Or if down, why 'tis easy and swift; but then, no more climbing ever more for me. And thou, clambering down by the crooked way, shalt find me a dead and unsightly corpse at the bottom."

"Grammercy for thy me's and thee's," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "Well, 'tis a most weighty principle, backed with a most just and lively exposition. How dost thou interpret thy maxim in our present question?"

Lord Gro looked up at him. "My lord, you have used me well, and to deserve your love and advance your fortunes I have pondered much how you of Demonland might best obtain revenge upon your enemies. And I daily thinking hereupon, and conceiving in my head divers imaginations, can devise no means but one that in my fancy seemeth best, which is this."

"Let me hear it," said Lord Brandoch Daha.

Said Gro, "'Twas ever a fault in you Demons that you would not perceive how 'tis oft-times good to draw the snake from her hole by another man's hand. Consider now your matter. You have a great force both for land and

[p. 407]

sea. Trust not too much in that. Oft hath he of the little force o'ercome most powerful enemies, going about to entrap them by sleight and policy. But consider yet again. You have a thing is mightier far than all your horses and spearmen and dragons of war, mightier than thine own sword, my lord, and thou accounted the best swordsman in all the world."

"What thing is that?" asked he.

Gro answered, "Reputation, my Lord Brandoch Daha. This reputation of you Demons for open dealings even to your worst enemies."

"Tush," said he. "'Tis but our way i' the world. Moreover, 'tis, I think, a thing natural in great persons, of whatsoever country they be born. Treachery and double dealing proceed commonly from fear, and that is a thing which I think no man in this land comprehendeth. Myself, I do think that when the high Gods made a person of my quality they traced tween his two eyes something, I know not what, which the common sort durst not look upon without trembling."

"Give me but leave," said Lord Gro, "and I'll pluck you a braver triumph in a little hour than your swords should win you in two years. Speak smooth words to Witchland, offer him composition, bring him to a council and all his great men along with him. I'll so devise it, they shall all be suddenly taken off in a night, haply by setting upon them in their beds, or as we may find most convenient. All save Corund and his sons; them we may wisely spare, and conclude peace with them. It shall not by ten days delay your sailing to Impland, whither you might then proceed with light hearts and minds sat ease."

"Very prettily conceived, upon my soul," said Brandoch Daha. "Might I advise thee, thou'dst best not talk to Juss i' this manner. Not now, I mean, while his mind's so bent on matters of weight and moment. Nor I should

[p. 408]

not say it to my sister Mevrian. Women will oft-times take in sad earnest such a conceit, though it be but talk and discourse. With me 'tis otherwise. I am something of a philosopher myself, and thy jest ambleth with my humour very pleasantly."

"Thou art pleased to be merry," said Lord Gro. "Many ere now, as the event hath proved, rejected my wholesome counsels to their own great hurt."

But Brandoch Daha said lightly, "Fear not, my Lord Gro, we'll reject no honest redes of so wise a counsellor as thou. But," and here was a light in the eye of him made Gro startle, "did any man with serious intent dare bid me do a dastard deed, he should have my sword through the dearest part of's body."

Lord Brandoch Daha now turned him to the rest of them. "Juss," said he, "friend of my heart, meseemeth y'are all of one mind, and none of my mind. I'll e'en bid you farewell. Farewell, Gaslark; farewell, La Fireez."

"But whither away?" said Juss, standing up from his chair. "Thou must not leave us."

"Whither but to mine own place?" said he, and was gone from the chamber.

Gaslark said, "He's much incensed. What hast thou done to anger him?"

Mevrian said to Juss, "I'll follow and cool him." She went, but soon returned saying, "No avail, my lords. He is ridden forth from Galing and away as fast as his horse might carry him."

Now were they all in a great stew, some conjecturing one thing and some another. Only the Lord Juss kept silence and a calm countenance, and the Lady Mevrian. And Juss said at length to Gaslark, "This it is, that he chafeth at every day's delay that letteth him from having at Corinius. Certes, I'll not blame him, knowing the vile injuries the fellow did him and his insolence toward thee,

[p. 409]

madam. Be not troubled. His own self shall bring him back to me when time is, as no other power should do 'gainst his good will; he whose great heart Heaven cannot force with force."

And even so, the next night after, when folk were abed and asleep, Juss, in his high bed-chamber sitting late at his book, heard a bridle ring. So he called his boys to go with him with torches to the gate. And there in the dancing torch-light came the Lord Brandoch Daha a-riding into Galing Castle, and somewhat of the bigness of a great pumpkin tied in a silken cloth hung at his saddle-bow. Juss met him in the gate alone. "Let me down from my horse," he said, "and receive from me thy bedfellow that thou must sleep with by the Lake of Ravary."

"Thou hast gotten it?" said Juss. "The hippogriff's egg, out of Dule Tarn, by thyself alone?" and he took the bundle right tenderly in his two hands.

"Ay," answered he. "'Twas where thou and I made sure of it last summer, according to the word of her little martlet that first found it for us. The tarn was frozen and 'twas tricky work diving and most villanous cold. It is small marvel thou'rt a lucky man in thine undertakings, O Juss, when thou hast such an art to draw thy friends to second thee."

"I thought thou'dst not leave me," said Juss.

"Thought?" cried Brandoch Daha. "Didst ever dream I'd suffer thee to do thy foolishnesses alone? Nay, I'll come first to the enchanted lake with thee, and let be Carce i' the meantime. Howbeit I'll do it 'gainst the stream of my resolution quite."

 

Now was but six days more of preparation, and on the second day of April was all ready in Lookinghaven for the sailing of that mighty armament: fifty and nine ships of war and five ships of burthen and thrice two thousand fighting men.

[p. 410]

Lady Mevrian sat on her milk-white mare overlooking the harbour where the ships all orderly rode at anchor, shadowy gray against the sun-bright shimmer of the sea, with here and there a splash of colour, crimson or blue or grass-green, from their painted hulls or a beam of the sun glancing from their golden masts or figureheads. Gro stood at her bridle-rein. The Galing road, winding down from Havershaw Tongue, ran close below them and so along the sea-shore to the quays at Lookinghaven. Along that road the hard earth rang with the tramp of armed men and the tramp of horses, and the light west wind wafted to Gro and Mevrian on their grassy hill snatches of deep-voiced battle-chants or the galloping notes of trumpet and pipe and the drum that sets men's hearts a-throb.

In the van rode the Lord Zigg, four trumpeters walking before him in gold and purple. His armour from chin to toe shone with silver, and jewels blazed on his gorget and baldrick and the hilt of his long straight sword. He rode a black stallion savage-eyed with ears laid back and a tail that swept the earth. A great company of horse followed him, and half as many tall spearmen, in russet leather jerkins plated with brass and silver. "These," said Mevrian, "be of Kelialand and the shore-steads of Arrowfirth, and his own vassalage from Rammerick and Amadardale. That is Hesper Golthring rideth a little behind him on his right hand; he loveth two things in this world, a good horse and a swift ship. He on the left, he o' the helm of dull silver set with raven's wings, so long of the leg thou'dst say if he rode a little horse he might straddle and walk it: Styrkmir of Blackwood. He is of our kin; not yet twenty years old, yet since Krothering Side accounted one of our ablest."

So she showed him all as they rode by, Peridor of Sule, captain of the Mealanders, and his nephew Stypmar. Fendor of Shalgreth with Emeron Galt his young brother,

[p. 411]

that was newly healed from the great wound Corinius gave him at Krothering Side; these leading the shepherds and herdsmen from the great heaths north of Switchwater, who will hold by the stirrup and so with their light bucklers and little brown swords go into battle with the horsemen full gallop against the enemy. Bremery in his ram's-horn helm of gold and broidered surcoat of scarlet velvet, leading the dalesmen from Onwardlithe and Tivarandardale. Trentmar of Scorradale with the northeastern levies from Byland and the Strands and Breakingdale. Astar of Rettray, lean and lithe, bony-faced, gallant-eyed, white of skin, with bright red hair and beard, riding his lovely roan at the head of two companies of spearmen with huge iron-studded shields: men from about Drepaby and the south-eastern dales, landed men and home-men of Lord Goldry Bluszco. Then the island dwellers from the west, with old Quazz of Dalney riding in the place of honour, noble to look on with his snowy beard and shining armour, but younger men their true leaders in war: Melchar of Strufey, great-chested, fierce-eyed, with thick brown curling hair, horsed on a plunging chestnut, his byrny bright with gold, a rich mantle of creamy silk brocade flung about his ample shoulders, and Tharmrod on his little black mare with silver byrny and bats-winged helm, he that held Kenarvey in fee for Lord Brandoch Daha, keen and ready like an arrow drawn to the barbs. And after them the Westmark men, with Arnund of By their captain. And after them, four hundred horse, not to be surpassed for beauty or ordered array by any in that great army, and young Kamerar riding at their head, burly as a giant, straight as a lance, apparelled like a king, bearing on his mighty spear the pennon of the Lord of Krothering.

"Look well on these," said Mevrian as they passed by. "Our own men of the Side and Thunderfirth and Stropardon. Thou may'st search the wide world and not find their like for speed and fire and all warlike goodliness and

[p. 412]

readiness to the word of command. Thou look'st sad, my lord."

"Madam," said Lord Gro, "to the ear of one that useth, as I use, to consider the vanity of all high earthly pomps, the music of these powers and glories hath a deep under-drone of sadness. Kings and governors that do exult in strength and beauty and lustihood and rich apparel, showing themselves for awhile upon the stage of the world and open dominion of high heaven, what are they but the gilded summer fly that decayeth with the dying day?"

"My brother and the rest must not stay for us," said the lady. "They meant to go aboard as soon as the army should be come down to the harbour, for their ships be to sail out first down the firth. Is it determined indeed that thou goest with them on this journey?"

"I had so determined, madam," answered he. She was beginning to move down towards the road and the harbour, but Gro put a hand on the rein and stopped her. "Dear lady," he said, "these three nights together I have dreamed a dream: a strange dream, and all the particulars thereof betokening heavy anxiety, increase of peril, and savage mischief; promising some terrible issue. Methinks if I go on this journey thou shalt see my face no more."

"O fie, my lord," cried she, reaching him her hand, "give never a thought to such fond imaginings. 'Twas the moon but glancing in thine eye. Or if not, stay with us here and cheat Fate."

Gro kissed her hand, and kept it in his. "My Lady Mevrian," he said, "Fate will not be cheated, cog we never so wisely. I do think there be not many extant that in a noble way fear the face of death less than myself. I'll go o' this journey. There is but one thing should turn me back."

"And 'tis?" said she, for he fell silent on a sudden.

He paused, looking down at her gloved hand resting in his. "A man becometh hoarse and dumb," said he, "if a wolf hath the advantage first to eye him. Didst thou procure

[p. 413]

thee a wolf to dumb me when I would tell thee? But I did once; enough to let thee know. O Mevrian, dost thou remember Neverdale?"

He looked up at her. But Mevrian sat with head erect, like her Patroness divine, with sweet cool lips set firm and steady eyes fixed on the haven and the riding ships. Gently she drew her hand from Gro's, and he strove not to retain it. She eased forward the reins. Gro mounted and followed her. They rode quietly down to the road and so southward side by side to the harbour. Ere they came within earshot of the quay, Mevrian spake and said, "Thou'lt not think me graceless nor forgetful, my lord. All that is mine, O ask it, and I'll give it thee with both hands. But ask me not that I have not to give, or if I gave should give but false gold. For that's a thing not good for thee nor me, nor I would not do it to an enemy, far less to thee my friend."

 

Now was the army all gotten ashipboard, and farewells said to Volle and those who should abide at home with him. The ships rowed out into the firth all orderly, their silken sails unfurled, and that great armament sailed southward into the open seas under a clear sky. All the way the wind favoured them, and they made a swift passage, so that on the thirtieth morning from their sailing out of Lookinghaven they sighted the long gray cliff-line of Impland the More dim in the low blown spray of the sea, and sailed through the Straits of Melikaphkhaz in column ahead, for scarce might two ships pass abreast through that narrow way. Black precipices shut in the straits on either hand, and the sea-birds in their thousands whitened every little ledge of those cliffs like snow. Great flights of them rose and circled overhead as the ships sped by, and the air was full of their plaints. And right and left, as of young whales blowing, columns of white spray shot up continually from the surface of the sea. For these were the stately-winged gannets fishing that sea-strait. By threes and fours they flew, each following

[p. 414]

other in ordered line, many mast-heights high; and ever and anon one checked in her flight as if a bolt had smitten her, and swooped head-foremost with wings half-spread, like a broad-barbed dart of dazzling whiteness, till at a few feet above the surface she clapped close her wings and cleft the water with a noise as of a great stone cast into the sea. Then in a moment up she bobbed, white and spruce with her prey in her gullet; rode the waves a minute to rest and consider; then with great sweeping wing-strokes up again to resume her flight.

After a mile or two the narrows opened and the cliffs grew lower, and the fleet sped past the red reefs of Uaimnaz and the lofty stacks of Pashnemarthra white with sea-gulls on to the blue solitude of the Didornian Sea. All day they sailed south-east with a failing wind. The coastline of Melikaphkhaz fell away astern, paled in the mists of distance, and was lost to sight, until only the square cloven outline of the Pashnemarthran islands broke the level horizon of the sea. Then these too sank out of sight, and the ships rowed on south-eastward in a dead calm. The sun stooped to the western waves, entering his bath of blood-red fire. He sank, and all the ways were darkened. All night they rowed gently on under the strange southern stars, and the broken waters of that sea at every oar-stroke were like fire burning. Then out of the sea to eastward came the day-star, ushering the dawn, brighter than all night's stars, tracing a little path of gold a-long the waters. Then dawn, filling the low eastern skies with a fleet of tiny cockle-shells of bright gold fire; then the great face of the sun ablaze. And with the going up of the sun a light wind sprang up, bellying their sails on the starboard tack; so that ere day declined the sea-cliffs of Muelva hung white above the spray-mist on their larboard bow. They beached the ships on a white shell-strand behind a headland that sheltered it from the east and north. Here the barrier of cliffs stood back a little from the shore, giving place for a fertile dell of green

[p. 415]

pasture, and woods clustering at the foot of the cliffs, and a little spring of water in the midst.

So for that night they slept on board, and next day made their camp, discharging the ships of burthen that were laden with the horses and stuff. But the Lord Juss was minded not to tarry an hour more in Muelva than should suffice to give all needful orders to Gaslark and La Fireez what they should do and when expect him again, and to make provision for himself and those who must fare with him beyond these shadowing cliffs into the haunted wastes of the Moruna. Ere noon was all this accomplished and farewells said, and these lords, Juss, Spitfire, and Brandoch Daha, set forth along the beach southward towards a point where it seemed most hopeful to scale the cliffs. With them went the Lord Gro, both by his own wish and because be had known the Moruna aforetime and these particular parts thereof; and with them went besides those two brothers-in-law, Zigg and Astar, bearing the precious burden of the egg, for that honour and trust had Juss laid on them at their earnest seeking. So with some pains after an hour or more they won up the barrier, and halted for a minute on the cliff's edge.

The skin of Gro's hands was hurt with the sharp rocks. Tenderly he drew on his lambswool gloves, and shivered a little; for the breath of that desert blew snell and frore and there seemed a shadow in the air southward, for all it was bright and gentle weather below whence they were come. Yet albeit his frail body quailed, even so were his spirits within him raised with high and noble imaginings as he stood on the lip of that rocky cliff. The cloudless vault of heaven; the unnumbered laughter of the sea; that quiet cove beneath, and those ships of war and that army camping by the ships; the emptiness of the blasted wolds to southward, where every rock seemed like a dead man's skull and every rank tuft of grass hag-ridden; the bearing of those lords of Demonland who stood beside him, as if nought should be of commoner course to them

[p. 416]

pursuing their resolve than to turn their backs on living land and enter those regions of the dead; these things with a power as of a mighty music made Gro's breath catch in his throat and the tear spring in his eye.

In such wise after more than two years did Lord Juss begin his second crossing of the Moruna in quest of his dear brother the Lord Goldry Bluszco.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 417]

 

XXVIII

 

Zora Rach Nam Psarrion

OF THE LORD JUSS'S RIDING OF THE HIPPOGRIFF TO ZORA RACH, AND OF THE ILLS ENCOUNTERED BY HIM IN THAT ACCURSED PLACE, AND THE MANNER OF HIS PERFORMING HIS GREAT ENTERPRISE TO DELIVER HIS BROTHER OUT OF BONDAGE.

Lulled with light-stirring airs too gentle-soft to ruffle her glassy surface, warm incense-laden airs sweet with the perfume of immortal flowers, the charmed Lake of Ravary dreamed under the moon. It was the last hour before the dawn. Enchanted boats, that seemed builded of the glowworm's light, drifted on the starry bosom of the lake. Over the sloping woods the limbs of the mountains lowered, unmeasured, vast, mysterious in the moon's glamour. In remote high spaces of night beyond glimmered the spires of Koshtra Pivrarcha and the virgin snows of Romshir and Koshtra Belorn. No bird or beast moved in the stillness: only a nightingale singing to the stars from a coppice of olive-trees near the Queen's pavilion on the eastern shore. And that was a note not like

[p. 418]

a bird's of middle earth, but a note to charm down spirits out of the air, or to witch the imperishable senses of the Gods when they would hold communion with holy Night and make her perfect, and all her lamps and voices perfect in their eyes.

The silken hangings of the pavilion door, parting as in the portal of a vision, made way for that Queen, fosterling of the most high Gods. She paused a step or two beyond the threshold, looking down where those lords of Demonland, Spitfire and Brandoch Daha, with Gro and Zigg and Astar, wrapped in their cloaks, lay on the gowany dewy banks that sloped down to the water's edge.

"Asleep," she whispered. "Even as he within sleepeth against the dawn. I do think it is only in a great man's breast sleep hath so gentle a bed when great events are toward."

Like a lily, or like a moonbeam strayed through the leafy roof into a silent wood, she stood there, her face uplifted to the starry night where all the air was drenched with the silver radiance of the moon. And now in a soft voice she began supplication to the Gods which are from everlasting, calling upon them in turn by their holy names, upon gray-eyed Pallas, and Apollo, and Artemis the fleet Huntress, upon Aphrodite, and Here, Queen of Heaven, and Ares, and Hermes, and the dark-tressed Earthshaker. Nor was she afraid to address her holy prayers to him who from his veiled porch beside Acheron and Lethe Lake binds to his will the devils of the under-gloom, nor to the great Father of All in Whose sight time from the beginning until to-day is but the dipping of a wand into the boundless ocean of eternity. So prayed she to the blessed Gods, most earnestly requiring them that under their countenance might be that ride, the like whereof earth had not known: the riding of the hippogriff, not rashly and by an ass as heretofore to his own destruction, but by the man of men who with clean purpose and resolution undismayed should enforce it carry him to his heart's desire.

Now in the east beyond the feathery hilltops and the

[p. 419]

great snow wall of Romshir the gates were opening to the day. The sleepers wakened and stood up. There was a great noise from within the pavilion. They turned wide-eyed, and forth of the hangings of the doorway came that young thing new-hatched, pale and doubtful as the new light which trembled in the sky. Juss walked beside it, his hand on the sapphire mane. High and resolute was his look, as he gave good-morrow to the Queen, to his brother and his friends. No word they said, only in turn gripped him by the hand. The hour was upon them. For even as day striding on the eastern snow-fields stormed night out of high heaven, so and with such swift increase of splendour was might bodily and the desire of the upper air born in that wild steed. It shone as if lighted by a moving lamp from withinward, sniffed the sweet morning air and whinnied, pawing the grass of the waterside and tearing it up with its claws of gold. Juss patted the creature's arching neck, looked to the bridle he had fitted to its mouth, made sure of the fastenings of his armour, and loosened in the scabbard his great sword. And now up sprang the sun.

The Queen said, "Remember: when thou shalt see the lord thy brother in his own shape, that is no illusion. Mistrust all else. And the almighty Gods preserve and comfort thee."

Therewith the hippogriff, as if maddened with the day-beams, plunged like a wild horse, spread wide its rainbow pinions, reared, and took wing. But the Lord Juss was sprung astride of it, and the grip of his knees on the ribs of it was like brazen clamps. The firm land seemed to rush away beneath him to the rear; the lake and the shore and islands thereof showed in a moment small and remote, and the figures of the Queen and his companions like toys, then dots, then shrunken to nothingness, and the vast silence of the upper air opened and received him into utter loneliness. In that silence earth and sky swirled like the wine in a shaken goblet as the wild steed rocketed higher and higher in great spirals. A cloud billowy-white shut in the sky before them; brighter and brighter it

[p. 420]

grew in its dazzling whiteness as they sped towards it, until they touched it and the glory was dissolved in a gray mist that grew still darker and colder as they flew till suddenly they emerged from the further side of the cloud into a radiance of blue and gold blinding in its glory. So for a while they flew with no set direction, only ever higher, till at length obedient to Juss's mastery the hippogriff ceased from his sports and turned obediently westward, and so in a swift straight course, mounting ever, sped over Ravary towards the departing night. And now indeed it was as if they had verily overtaken night in her western caves. For the air waxed darker about them and always darker, until the great peaks that stood round Ravary were hidden, and all the green land of Zimiamvia, with its plains and winding waters and hills and uplands and enchanted woods, hidden and lost in an evil twilight. And the upper heaven was ateem with portents: whole armies of men skirmishing in the air, dragons, wild beasts, bloody streamers, blazing comets, fiery strakes, with other apparitions innumerable. But all silent, and all cold, so that Juss's hands and feet were numbed with the cold and his moustachios stiff with hoar-frost.

[p. 421]

 

Click to enlarge
HIPPOGRIFF IN FLIGHT

 

[p. 422]

Before them now, invisible till now, loomed the gaunt peak of Zora Rach, black, wintry, and vast, still towering above them for all they soared even higher, grand and lonely above the frozen wastes of the Psarrion Glaciers. Juss stared at that peak till the wind of their flight blinded his eyes with tears; but it was yet too far for any glimpse of that which he hungered to behold: no brazen citadel, no coronal of flame, no watcher on the heights. Zora, like some dark queen of Hell that disdains that presumptuous mortal eyes should dare to look lovely on her dread beauties, drew across her brow a veil of thundercloud. They flew on, and that steel-blue pall of thunderous vapour rolled forth till it canopied all the sky above them. Juss tucked his two hands for warmth into the feathery armpits of the hippogriff's wings where the wings joined the creature's body. So bitter cold it was, his very eyeballs were frozen and fixed; but that pain was a light thing beside somewhat he now felt within him the like whereof he never before bad known: a death-like horror as of the houseless loneliness of naked space, which gripped him at the heart.

They landed at last on a crag of black obsidian stone a little below the cloud that bid the highest rocks. The hippogriff, crouched on the steep slope, turned its head to look on Juss. He felt the creature's body beneath him quiver. Its ears were laid back, its eye wide with terror. "Poor child," he said. "I have brought thee an ill journey, and thou but one hour hatched from the egg."

He dismounted; and in that same instant was bereaved. For the hippogriff with a horse-scream of terror took wing and vanished down the mirk air, diving headlong away to eastward, back to the world of life and sunlight.

And the Lord Juss stood alone in that region of fear and frost and the soul-quailing gloom, under the black summit-rocks of Zora Rach.

Setting, as the Queen had counselled him to do, his whole heart and mind on the dread goal he intended, he turned to the icy cliff. As he climbed the cold cloud covered him, yet not so thick but he might see ten paces'

[p. 423]

distance before and about him as he went. Ill sights enow, and enow to quail a strong man's resolution, showed in his path: shapes of damned fiends and gorgons of the pit running in the way, threatening him with death and doom. But Juss, gritting his teeth, climbed on and through them, they being unsubstantial. Then up rose an eldritch cry, "What man of middle-earth is this that troubleth our quiet? Make an end! Call up the basilisks. Call up the Golden Basilisk, which bloweth upon and setteth on fire whatsoever he seeth. Call up the Starry Basilisk, and whatso he seeth it immediately shrinks up and perisheth. Call up the Bloody Basilisk, who if he see or touch any living thing it floweth away so that nought there remaineth but the bones!"

That was a voice to freeze the marrow, yet he pressed on, saying in himself, "All is illusion, save that alone she told me of." And nought appeared: only the silence and the cold, and the rocks grew ever steeper and their ice-glaze more dangerous, and the difficulty like the difficulty of those Barriers of Emshir, up which more than two years ago he had followed Brandoch Daha and on which he had encountered and slain the beast mantichora. The leaden hours drifted by, and now night shut down, bitter and black and silent. Sore weariness bodily was come upon Juss, and his whole soul weary withal and near to death as he entered a snow-bedded gully that cut deep into the face of the mountain, there to await the day. He durst not sleep in that freezing night; scarcely dared he rest lest the cold should master him, but must keep for ever moving and stamping and chafing hands and feet. And yet, as the slow night crept by, death seemed a desirable thing that should end such utter weariness.

Morning came with but a cold alteration of the mist from black to gray, disclosing the snow-bound rocks silent, dreary, and dead. Juss, enforcing his half frozen limbs to resume the ascent, beheld a sight of woe too terrible for the eye: a young man, helmed and graithed in dark iron, a black-a-moor with goggle-eyes and white teeth agrin, who held by the neck a fair young lady kneeling

[p. 424]

on her knees and clasping his as in supplication, and he most bloodily brandishing aloft his spear of six foot of length as minded to reave her of her life. This lady, seeing the Lord Juss, cried out on him for succour very piteously, calling him by his name and saying, "Lord Juss of Demonland, have mercy, and in your triumph over the powers of night pause for an instant to deliver me, poor afflicted damosel, from this cruel tyrant. Can your towering spirit, which hath quarried upon kingdoms, make a stoop at him? O that should approve you noble indeed, and bless you for ever!"

Surely the very heart of him groaned, and he clapped hand to sword wishing to right so cruel a wrong. But on the motion he bethought him of the wiles of evil that dwelt in that place, and of his brother, and with a great groan passed on. In which instant he beheld sidelong how the cruel murtherer smote with his spear that delicate lady, and detrenched and cut the two master-veins of her neck, so as she fell dying in her blood. Juss mounted with a great pace to the head of the gully, and looking back beheld how black-a-moor and lady both were changed to two coding serpents. And he laboured on, shaken at heart, yet glad to have so escaped the powers that would have limed him so.

Darker grew the mist, and heavier the brooding dread which seemed elemental of the airs about that mountain. Pausing well nigh exhausted on a small stance of snow Juss beheld the appearance of a man armed who rolled prostrate in the way, tearing with his nails at the hard rock and frozen snow, and the snow was all one gore of blood beneath the man; and the man besought him in a stifled voice to go no further but raise him up and bring him down the mountain. And when Juss, after an instant's doubt betwixt pity and his resolve, would have passed by, the man cried and said, "Hold, for I am thy very brother thou seekest, albeit the King hath by his art framed me to another likeness, hoping so to delude thee. For thy love sake be not deluded!" Now the voice was like to the voice of his brother Goldry, howbeit weak.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 425]

But the Lord Juss bethought him again of the words of Sophonisba the Queen, that he should see his brother in his own shape and nought else must he trust; and he thought, "It is an illusion, this also." So he said, "If that thou be truly my dear brother, take thy shape." But the man cried as with the voice of the Lord Goldry Bluszco, "I may not, till that I be brought down from the mountain. Bring me down, or my curse be upon thee for ever."

The Lord Juss was torn with pity and doubt and wonder, to hear that voice again of his dear brother so beseeching him. Yet he answered and said, "Brother, if that it be thou indeed, then bide till I have won to this mountain top and the citadel of brass which in a dream I saw, that I may know truly thou art not there, but here. Then will I turn again and succour thee. But until I see thee in thine own shape I will mistrust all. For hither I came from the ends of the earth to deliver thee, and I will set my good on no doubtful cast, having spent so much and put so much in danger for thy dear sake."

So with a heavy heart he set hand again to those black rocks, iced and slippery to the touch. Therewith up rose an eldritch cry, "Rejoice, for this earth-born is mad! Rejoice, for that was not perfect friend, that relinquished his brother at his need!" But Juss climbed on, and by and by looking back beheld how in that seeming man's place writhed a grisful serpent. And he was glad, so much as gladness might be in that mountain of affliction and despair.

Now was his strength near gone, as day drew again toward night and he climbed the last crags under the peak of Zora. And he, who had all his days drunk deep of the fountain of the joy of life and the glory and the wonder of being, felt ever deadlier and darker in his soul that lonely horror which he first had tasted the day before at his first near sight of Zora, while he flew through the cold air portent-laden; and his whole heart grew sick because of it.

And now he was come to the ring of fire that was about the summit of the mountain. He was beyond terror

[p. 426]

or the desire of life, and trod the fire as it had been his own home's threshold. The blue tongues of flame died under his foot-tread, making a way before him. The brazen gates stood wide. He entered in, he passed up the brazen stair, he stood on that high roof-floor which he had beheld in dreams, he looked as in a dream on him he had crossed the confines of the dead to find: Lord Goldry Bluszco keeping his lone watch on the unhallowed heights of Zora. Not otherwise was the Lord Goldry, not by an hairsbreadth, than as Juss had aforetime seen him on that first night in Koshtra Belorn, so long ago. He reclined propped on one elbow on that bench if brass, his head erect, his eyes fixed as on distant space, viewing the depths beyond the star-shine, as one waiting till time should have an end.

He turned not at his brother's greeting. Juss went to him and stood beside him. The Lord Goldry Bluszco moved not an eyelid. Juss spoke again, and touched his hand. It was stiff and like dank earth. The cold of it struck through Juss's body and smote him at the heart. He said in himself, "He is dead."

With that, the horror shut down upon Juss's soul like madness. Fearfully he stared about him. The cloud had lifted from the mountain's peak and hung like a pall above its nakedness. Chill air that was like the breath of the whole world's grave: vast blank cloud-barriers: dim far forms of snow and ice, silent, solitary, pale, like mountains of the dead: it was as if the bottom of the world were opened and truth laid bare: the ultimate Nothing.

To hold off the horror from his soul, Juss turned in memory to the dear life of earth, those things he had most set his heart on, men and women he loved dearest in his life's days; battles and triumphs of his opening manhood, high festivals in Galing, golden summer noons under the Westmark pines, hunting morns on the high heaths of Mealand; the day he first backed a horse, of a spring morning in a primrose glade that opened on Moonmere, when his small brown legs were scarce the length

[p. 427]

of his fore-arm now, and his dear father held him by the foot as he trotted, and showed him where the squirrel had her nest in the old oak tree.

He bowed his head as if to avoid a blow, so plain he seemed to hear somewhat within him crying with a high voice and loud, "Thou art nothing. And all thy desires and memories and loves and dreams, nothing. The little dead earth-louse were of greater avail than thou, were it not nothing as thou art nothing. For all is nothing: earth and sky and sea and they that dwell therein. Nor shall this illusion comfort thee, if it might, that when thou art abolished these things shall endure for a season, stars and months return, and men grow old and die, and new men and women live and love and die and be forgotten. For what is it to thee, that shalt be as a blown-out flame? and all things in earth and heaven, and things past and things for to come, and life and death, and the mere elements of space and time, of being and not being, all shall be nothing unto thee; because thou shalt be nothing, for ever."

And th e Lord fuss cried aloud in his agony, "Fling me to Tartarus, deliver me to the black infernal Furies, let them blind me, seethe me in the burning lake. For so should there yet be hope. But in this horror of Nothing is neither hope nor life nor death nor sleep nor waking, for ever. For ever."

In this black mood of horror he abode for awhile, until a sound of weeping and wailing made him raise his head, and he beheld a company of mourners walking one behind another about the brazen floor, all cloaked in funeral black, mourning the death of Lord Goldry Bluszco. And they rehearsed his glorious deeds and praised his beauty and prowess and goodliness and strength: soft women's voices lamenting, so that the Lord Juss's soul seemed as be listened to arise again out of annihilation's Waste, and his heart grew soft again, even unto tears. He felt a touch on his arm and looking up met the gaze of two eyes gentle as a dove's, suffused with tears, looking into his from under the darkness of that hood of

[p. 428]

mourning; and a woman's voice spake and said, "This is the observable day of the death of the Lord Goldry Bluszco, which hath been dead now a year; and we his fellows in bondage do bewail him, as thou mayst see, and shall so bewail him again year by year whiles we are on life. And for thee, great lord, must we yet more sorrowfully lament, since of all thy great works done this is the empty guerdon, and this the period of thine ambition. But come, take comfort for a season, since unto all dominions Fate hath set their end, and there is no king on the road of death."

So the Lord Juss, his heart dead within him for grief and despair, suffered her take him by the hand and conduct him down a winding stairway that led from that brazen floor to an inner chamber fragrant and delicious, lighted with dickering lamps. Surely life and its turmoils seemed faded to a distant and futile murmur, and the horror of the void seemed there but a vain imagination, under the heavy sweetness of that chamber. His senses swooned; he turned towards his veiled conductress. She with a sudden motion cast off her mourning cloak, and stood there, her whole fair body bared to his gaze, open-armed, a sight to ravish the soul with love and all delight.

Well nigh had he clasped to his bosom that vision of dazzling loveliness. But fortune, or the high Gods, or his own soul's might, woke yet again in his drugged brain remembrance of his purpose, so that he turned violently from that bait prepared for his destruction, and strode from the chamber up to that roof where his dear brother sat as in death. Juss caught him by the hand: "Speak to me, kinsman. It is I, Juss. It is Juss, thy brother."

But Goldry moved not neither answered any word.

Juss looked at the hand resting in his, so like his own to the very shape of the finger nails and the growth of the hairs on the back of the hand and fingers. He let it go, and the arm dropped lifeless. "It is very certain," said he, "thou art in a manner frozen, and thy spirits and understanding frozen and congealed within thee."

So saying, he bent to gaze close in Goldry's eyes, touching

[p. 429]

his arm and shoulder. Not a limb stirred, not an eyelid flickered. He caught him by the hand and sleeve as if to force him up from the bench, calling him loudly by his name, shaking him roughly, crying, "Speak to me, thy brother, that crossed the world to find thee;" but he abode a dead weight in Juss's grasp.

"If thou be dead," said Juss, "then am I dead with thee. But till then I'll ne'er think thee dead." And be sat down on the bench beside his brother, taking his hand in his, and looked about him. Nought but utter silence. Night had fallen, and the moon's calm radiance and the twinkling stars mingled with the pale fires that hedged that mountain top in an uncertain light. Hell loosed no more her denizens in the air, and since the moment when Juss had in that inner chamber shaken himself free of that last illusion no presence had he seen nor simulacrum of man or devil save only Goldry his brother; nor might that horror any more master his high heart, but the memory of it was but as the bitter chill of a winter sea that takes the swimmer's breath for an instant as he plunges first into the icy waters.

So with a calm and a steadfast mind the Lord Juss abode there, his second night without sleep, for sleep he dared not in that accursed place. But for joy of his found brother, albeit it seemed there was in him neither speech nor sight nor hearing, Juss scarce wist of his great weariness. And he nourished himself with that ambrosia given him by the Queen, for well he thought the uttermost strength of his body should now be tried in the task he now decreed him.

When it was day, he arose and taking his brother Goldry bodily on his back set forth. Past the gates of brass Juss bore him, and past the barriers of flame, and painfully and by slow degrees down the long northern ridge which overhangs the Psarrion Glaciers. All that day, and the night following, and all the next day after were they on the mountain, and well nigh dead was Juss for weariness when on the second day an hour or two before sun-down they reached the moraine. Yet was triumph

[p. 430]

in his heart, and gladness of a great deed done. They lay that night in a grove of strawberry trees under the steep foot d a mountain some ten miles beyond the western shore of Ravary, and met Spitfire and Brandoch Daha who had waited with their boat two nights at the appointed spot, about eventide of the following day.

Now as soon as Juss had brought him off the mountain, this frozen condition of the Lord Goldry was so far thawed that he was able to stand upon his feet and walk; but never a word might he speak, and never a look they gat from him, but still his gaze was set and unchanging, seeming when it rested on his companions to look through and beyond them as at some far thing seen in a mist. So that each was secretly troubled, fearing lest this condition of the Lord Goldry Bluszco should prove remediless, and this that they now received back from prison but the poor remain of him they had so much desired.

They came aland and brought him to Sophonisba the Queen where she made haste to meet them on the fair lawn before her pavilion. The Queen, as if knowing beforehand both their case and the remedy thereof, took by the hand the Lord Juss and said, "O my lord, there yet remaineth a thing for thee to do to free him throughly, that hast outfaced terrors beyond the use of man to bring him back: a little stone indeed to crown this building of thine, and yet without it all were in vain, as itself were vain without the rest that was all thine: and mine is this last, and with a pure heart I give it thee."

So saving she made the Lord Juss bow down till she might kiss his mouth, sweetly and soberly one light kiss. And she said, "This give unto the lord thy brother." And Juss did so, kissing his dear brother in like manner on the mouth; and she said, "Take him, dear my lords. And I have utterly put out the remembrance of these things from his heart. Take him, and give thanks unto the high Gods because of him."

Therewith the Lord Goldry Bluszco looked upon them and upon that fair Queen and the mountains and the

[p. 431]

woods and the cool lake's loveliness, as a man awakened out of a deep slumber.

Surely there was joy in all their hearts that day.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 432]

 

XXIX

 

The Fleet at Muelva

HOW THE LORDS OF DEMONLAND CAME AGAIN TO THEIR SHIPS AT MUELVA, AND THE TIDINGS THEY LEARNED THERE

FOR nine days' space the lords of Demonland abode with Queen Sophonisba in Koshtra Belorn and beside the Lake of Ravary tasting such high and pure delights as belike none else hath tasted, if it were not the spirits of the blest in Elysium, When they bade her farewell, the Queen said, "My little martlets shall bring me tidings of you. And when you shall have brought to mere perdition the wicked regiment of Witchland and returned again to your dear native land, then is my time for that, my Lord Juss, whereof I have often talked to thee and often gladded my dreams with the thought thereof: to visit earth again and the habitations of men, and be your guest in many-mountained Demonland."

Juss kissed her hand and said, "Fail not in this, dear Queen, whatsoe'er betide."

So the Queen let bring them by a secret way out upon

[p. 433]

the high snow-fields that are betwixt Koshtra Belorn and Romshir, whence they came down into the glen of the dark water that descends from the glacier of Temarm, and so through many perilous scapes after many days back by way of the Moruna to Muelva and the ships.

There Gaslark and La Fireez, when their greetings were done and their rejoicings, said to the Lord Juss, "We abide too long time here. We have entered the barrel and the bung-hole is stopped." Therewithal they brought him Hesper Golthring, who three days ago sailing to the Straits for forage came back again but yesterday with a hot alarum that he met certain ships of Witchland: and brought them to battle: and gat one sunken ere they brake off the fight: and took up certain prisoners. "By whose examination," saith be, "as well as from mine own perceiving and knowing, it appeareth Laxus holdeth the Straits with eight score ships of war, the greatest ships that ever the sea bare until this day, come hither of purpose to destroy us."

"Eight score ships?" said Lord Brandoch Daha. "Witchland commandeth not the half, nor the third part, of such a strength since we did them down last harvest-tide in Aurwath haven. It is not leveable, Hesper."

Hesper answered him, "Your highness shall find it truth; and more the sorrow on't and the wonder."

'Tis the scourings of his subject-allies," said Spitfire. "We shall find them no such hard matter to dispatch after the others."

Juss said to the Lord Gro, "What makest thou of these news, my lord?"

"I think no wonder in it," answered be. "Witchland is of good memory and mindeth him of your seamanship off Kartadza. He useth not to idle, nor to set all on one hazard. Nor comfort not thyself, my Lord Spitfire, that these be pleasure-galleys borrowed from the soft Beshtrians or the simple Foliots. They be new ships builded for us, my lords, and our undoing: it is by no conjecture[paragraph continues] 

[p. 434]

I say it unto you, but of mine own knowledge, albeit the number appeareth far greater than ere I dreamed of. But or ever I sailed with Corinius to Demonland, great buildings of an army naval was begun at Tenemos."

"I do very well believe," said King Gaslark, "that none knoweth all this better than thou, because thyself didst counsel it."

"O Gaslark," said Lord Brandoch Daha, "must thou still itch to play at chop-cherry when cherry-time is past? Let him alone. He is our friend now."

"Eight score ships i' the Straits," said Juss. "And ours an hundred. 'Tis well seen what great difference and odds there is betwixt us. Which we must needs encounter, or else ne'er sail home again, let alone to Carce. For out of this sea is no sea-way for ships, but only by these Straits of Melikaphkhaz."

"We shall do of Laxus," said Lord Brandoch Daha, "that he troweth to do of us."

But Juss was fallen silent, his chin in his hand.

Goldry Bluszco said, "I would allow him odds and beat him."

"It is a great shame in thee, O Juss," said Brandoch Daha, "if thou wilt be abashed at this. If that they be in number more than we, what then? They are in hope, quarrel, and strength far inferior."

But Juss, still in a study, reached out and caught him by the sleeve, holding him so a moment or two, and then looked up at him and said, "Thou art the greatest quarreller, of a friend, that ever I knew, and if I were an angry man I could not abear thee. May I not three minutes study the means, but thou shalt cry out upon me for a milksop?"

They laughed, and the Lord Juss rose up and said, "Call we a council of war, And let Hesper Golthring be at it, and his skippers that were with him o' that voyage. And pack up the stuff, for we will away o' the morn. If we like not these lettuce, we may pull back our lips.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 435]

But no choice remaineth. If Laxus will deny us sea-room through Melikaphkhaz Straits, I trow there shall go up thence a crash which when the King heareth it he shall know it for our first banging on the gates of Carce."

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 436]

 

XXX

 

Tidings of Melikaphkhaz

OF NEWS BROUGHT UNTO GORICE THE KING IN CARCE OUT OF THE SOUTH, WHERE THE LORD LAXUS LYING IN THE STRAITS WITH HIS ARMADA HELD THE FLEET OF DEMONLAND PRISONED IN THE MIDLAND SEA.

ON a night of late summer leaning towards autumn, eight weeks after the sailing of the Demons out of Muelva as is aforewrit, the Lady Prezmyra sate before her mirror in Corund's lofty bed-chamber in Carce The night without was mild and full of stars. Within, yellow flames of candles burning steadily on either side of the mirror rayed forth tresses of tinselling brightness in twin glories or luminous spheres of warmth. In that soft radiance grains as of golden fire swam and circled, losing themselves on the confines of the gloom where the massy furniture and the arras and the figured hangings of the bed were but cloudier divisions and congestions of the general dark. Prezmyra's hair caught the beams and imprisoned them in a tawny tangle of splendour that swept about her head and shoulders down to the emerald clasps of her girdle. Her eyes resting idly on her own fair image

[p. 437]

in the shining mirror, she talked light nothings with her woman of the bed-chamber who, plying the comb, stood behind her chair of gold and tortoise-shell.

"Reach me yonder book, nurse, that I may read again the words of that serenade the Lord Gro made for me, the night when first we had tidings from my lord out of Impland of his conquest of that land, and the King did make him king thereof."

The old woman gave her the book, that was bound in goat-skin chiselled and ornamented by the gilder's art, fitted with clasps of gold, and enriched with little gems, smaragds and margery-pearls, inlaid in the panels of its covers. Prezmyra turned the page and read:

	 
		You meaner Beauties of the Night,
		   That poorly satisfie our Eies,
		 More by your number then your light,
		   You Common-people of the Skies;
		   What are you when the Moone shall rise?
		
		You Curious Chanters of the Wood,
		   That warble forth Dame Natures layes,
		 Thinking your Passions understood
		   By your weake accents; what's your praise
		   When Philomell her voyce shall raise?
		
		You Violets that first apeare,
		   By your pure purpel mantles knowne,
		 Like the proud Virgins of the yeare,
		   As if the Spring were all your own;
		   What are you when the Rose is blowne?
		
		So, when my Princess shall be seene
		   In form and Beauty of her mind,
		 By Vertue first, then Choyce a Queen,
		   Tell me, if she were not design'd
		   Th' Eclypse and Glory of her kind.
		
		 She abode silent awhile. Then, in a low sweet voice

[p. 438]

where all the chords of music seemed to slumber: "Three years will be gone next Yule-tide," she said, "since first I heard that song. And not yet am I grown customed to the style of Queen."

"'Tis pity of my Lord Gro," said the nurse.

"Thou thinkest?"

"Mirth sat oftener on your face, O Queen, when he was here, and you were used to charm his melancholy and make a pish of his phantastical humorous forebodings."

"Oft doubting not his forejudgement," said Prezmyra, "even the while I thripped my fingers at it. But never saw I yet that the louring thunder hath that partiality of a tyrant, to blast him that faced it and pass by him that quailed before it."

"He was most deeply bound servant to your beauty," said the old woman. "And yet," she said, viewing her mistress sidelong to see how she would receive it, "that were a miss easily made good."

She busied herself with the comb awhile in silence. After a time she said, "O Queen, mistress of the hearts of men, there is not a lord in Witchland, nor in earth beside, you might not bind your servant with one thread of this hair of yours. The likeliest and the goodliest were yours at an eye-glance."

The Lady Prezmyra looked dreamily into her own sea-green eyes imaged in the glass. Then she smiled mockingly and said, "Whom then accountest thou the likeliest and the goodliest man in all the stablished earth?"

The old woman smiled. "O Queen," answered she, "this was the very matter in dispute amongst us at supper only this evening."

"A pretty disputation!" said Prezmyra. "Let me be merry. Who was adjudged the fairest and gallantest by your high court of censure?"

"It was not generally determined of, O Queen. Sonic would have my Lord Gro."

"Alack, he is too feminine," said Prezmyra.

"Others our Lord the King."

[p. 439]

"There is none greater," said Prezmyra, "nor more worshipful. But for an husband, thou shouldst as well wed with a thunder-storm or the hungry sea. Give me some more."

"Some chose the lord Admiral."

"That," said Prezmyra., "was a nearer stroke. No skip-jack nor soft marmalady courtier, but a brave, tall, gallant gentleman. Ay, but too watery a planet burned at his nativity. He is too like a statua of a man. No, nurse, thou must bring me better than be."

The nurse said, "True it is, O Queen, that most were of my thinking when I gave 'em my choice: the king of Demonland."

"Fie on thee!" cried Prezmyra. "Name him not so that was too unmighty to hold that land against our enemies."

"Folk say it was by foxish arts and practices magical a was spilt on Krothering Side. Folk say 'twas divels and not horses carried the Demons down the mountain at us."

"They say!" cried Prezmyra. "I say to thee, he hath found it apter to his bent to flaunt his crown in Witchland than make 'em give him the knee in Galing. For a true king both knee and heart do truly bow before him. But this one, if he had their knee 'twas in the back side of him he had it, to kick him home again."

"Fie, madam?" said the nurse.

"Hold thy tongue, nurse," said Prezmyra. "It were good ye were all well whipped for a bunch of silly mares that know not a horse from an ass."

The old woman watching her in the glass counted it best keep silence. Prezmyra said under her breath as if talking to herself, "I know a man, should not have miscarried it thus." The old nurse that loved not Lord Corund and his haughty fashions and rough speech and Wine-bibbing, and was besides jealous that so rude a stock should wear so rich a jewel as was her mistress,  not her meaning.

After some time, the old woman spake softly and said, "You are full of thoughts to-night, madam."

[p. 440]

Prezmyra's eyes met hers in the mirror. "Why may I not be so and it likes me?" said she.

That stony look of the eyes struck like a gong some twenty-year-old memory in the nurse's heart: the little wilful maiden, ill to goad but good to guide, looking out from that Queen's face across the years. She knelt down suddenly and caught her arms about her mistress's waist. "Why must you wed then, dear heart?" said she, "if you were minded to do what likes you? Men love not sad looks in their wives. You may ride a lover on the curb, madam, but once you wed him 'tis all t'other way: all his way, madam, and beware of 'had I wist."'

Her mistress looked down at her mockingly. "I have been wed seven years to-night. I should know these things."

"And this night!" said the nurse. "And but an hour till midnight, and yet he sitteth at board."

The Lady Prezmyra leaned back to look again on her own mirrored loveliness. Her proud mouth sweetened to a smile. "Wilt thou learn me common women's wisdom?" said she, and there was yet more voluptuous sweetness trembling in her voice. "I will tell thee a story, as thou hast told them me in the old days in Norvasp to wile me to bed. Hast thou not heard tell how old Duke Hilmanes of Maltraeny, among some other fantasies such as appear by night unto many in divers places, had one in likeness of a woman with old face of low and little stature or body, which did scour his pots and pans and did such things as a maid servant ought to do, liberally and without doing of any harm? And by his art he knew this thing should be his servant still, and bring unto him whatsoever he would, so long time as he should be glad of the things it brought him. But this duke, being a foolish man and a greedy, made his familiar bring him at once all the year's seasons and their several goods and pleasures, and all good things of earth at one time. So as in six months' space, he being sated with these and all good things, and having no good thing remaining unto him to expect or to desire, for very weariness

[p. 441]

did hang himself. I would never have ta'en me an husband, nurse, and I had not known that I was able to give him every time I would a new heaven and a new earth, and never the same thing twice."

She took the old woman's hands in hers and gathered them to her breast, as if to let them learn, rocked for a minute in the bountiful infinite sweetness of that place, what foolish fears were these. Suddenly Prezmyra clasped the hands tighter in her own, and shuddered a little. She bent down to whisper in the nurse's ear, "I would not wish to die. The world without me should be summer without roses. Carce without me should be a night without the star-shine."

Her voice died away like the night breeze in a summer garden. In the silence they heard the dip and wash of oar-blades from the river without; the sentinel's challenge, the answer from the ship.

Prezmyra stood up quickly and went to the window. She could see the ship's dark bulk by the water-gate, and comings and goings, but nought clearly. "Tidings from the fleet," she said. "Put up my hair."

And ere that was done, came a little page running to her chamber door, and when it was opened to him, stood panting from his running and said, "The king your husband bade me tell you, madam, and pray you go down to him i' the great hall. It may be ill news, I fear."

"Thou fearest, pap-face?" said the Queen. "I'll have thee whipped if thou bringest thy fears to me. Dost know aught? What's the matter?"

"The ship's much battered, O Queen. He is closeted with our Lord the King, the skipper. None dare speak else. 'Tis feared the high Admiral-----"

"Feared!" cried she, swinging round for the nurse to put about her white shoulders her mantle of sendaline and cloth of silver, that shimmered at the collar with purple amethysts and was scented with cedar and galbanum and myrrh. She was forth in the dark corridor, down by the winding marble stair, through the mid-court, hasting to the banquet hall. The court was full of folk talking;

[p. 442]

but nought certain, nought save suspense and wonder; rumour of a great sea-fight in the south, a mighty victory won by Laxus upon the Demons: Juss and those lords of Demonland dead and gone, the captives following with the morning's tide. And here and there like an undertone to these triumphant tidings, contrary rumours, whispered low, like the hissing of an adder from her shadowy lair: all not well, the lord Admiral wounded, half his ships lost, the battle doubtful, the Demons escaped. So came that lady into the great hall; and there were the lords and captains of the Witches all in a restless quiet of expectation. Duke Corsus lolled forward in his seat down by the cross-bench, his breath stertorous, his small eyes fixed in a drunken stare. On the other side Corund sate huge and motionless, his elbow propped on the table, his chin in his hand, sombre and silent, staring at the wall. Others gathered in knots, talking in low tones. The Lord Corinius walked up and down behind the cross-bench, his hands clasped behind him, his fingers snapping impatiently at whiles, his heavy jaw held high, his glance high and defiant. Prezmyra came to Heming where he stood among three or four and touched him on the arm. "We know nothing, madam," he said. "He is with the King."

She came to her lord. "Thou didst send for me."

Corund looked up at her. "Why, so I did, madam. Tidings from the fleet. Maybe somewhat, maybe nought. But thou'dst best be here for't."

"Good tidings or ill: that shaketh not Carce walls," said she.

Suddenly the low buzz of talk was hushed. The King stood in the curtained doorway. They rose up all to meet him, all save Corsus that sat drunk in his chair. The crown of Witchland shed baleful sparkles above the darkness of the dark fortress-face of Gorice the King, the glitter of his dread eyeballs, the deadly line of his mouth, the square black beard jutting beneath. Like a tower he stood, and behind him in the shadow was the messenger from the fleet with countenance the colour of wet mortar.

[p. 443]

The King spake and said, "My lords, here's tidings touching the truth whereof I have well satisfied myself. And it importeth the mere perdition of my fleet. There hath been battle off Melikaphkhaz in the Impland seas. Juss hath sunken our ships, every ship save that which brought the tidings, sunk, with Laxus and all his men that were with him." He paused: then, "These be heavy news," he said, "and I'll have you bear 'em in the old Witchland fashion: the heavier hit the heavier strike again."

In the strange deformed silence came a little gasping cry, and the Lady Sriva fell a-swooning.

The King said, "Let the kings of Impland and of Demonland attend me. The rest, it is commanded that all do get them to bed o' the instant."

The Lord Corund said in his lady's ear as he went by, taking her with his hand about the shoulder. "What, lass? if the broth's split, the meat remaineth. To bed with thee, and never doubt we'll pay them yet."

And he with Corinius followed the King.

It was past middle night when the council brake up, and Corund sought his chamber in the eastern gallery above the inner court. He found his lady sitting yet at the window, watching the false dawn over Pixyland. Dismissing his lamp-bearers that lighted him to bed, he bolted and barred the great iron-studded door. The breadth of his shoulders when he turned filled the shadowy doorway; his head well nigh touched the lintel. It was hard to read his countenance in the uncertain gloom where he stood beyond the bright region made by the candle-light, but Prezmyra's eyes could mark how care sat on his brow, and there was in the carriage of his ponderous frame kingliness and the strength of some strong determination.

She stood up, looking up at him as on a mate to whom she could be true and be true to her own self. "Well?" she said.

"The tables are set," said he, without moving.

[p. 444]

"The King hath named me his captain general in Carce." "Is it come to that?" said Prezmyra.

"They have hewn a limb from us," answered he. "They have wit to know the next stroke should be at the heart."

"Is it truly so?" said she. "Eight thousand men? twice thine army's strength that won Impland for us? all drowned?"

"'Twas the devilish seamanship of these accursed Demons," said Corund. "It appeareth Laxus held the Straits where they must go if ever they should win home again, meaning to fight 'em in the narrows and so crush 'em with the weight of's ships as easy as kill flies, having by a great odds the bigger strength both in ships and men. They o' their part kept the sea without, trying their best to 'tice him forth so they might do their sailor tricks i' the open. A week or more he withstood it, till o' the ninth day (the devil curse him for a fool, wherefore could a not have had patience?) o' the ninth morning, weary of inaction and having wind and tide something in his favour"; the Lord Corund groaned and snapped his fingers contemptuously. "O I'll tell thee the tale to-morrow, madam. I'm surfeited with it to-night. The sum is, Laxus drownded and all that were with him, and Juss with his whole great armament northward bound for Witchland."

"And the wide seas his. And we expect him, any day?"

"The wind hangeth easterly. Any day," said Corund.

Prezmyra said, "That was well done to rest the command in thee. But what of our qualified young gentleman who had that office aforetime. Will he play o' these terms?"

Corund answered, "Hungry dogs will eat dirty puddings. I think he'll play, albeit he showed his teeth i' the first while."

"Let him keep his teeth for the Demons," said she.

"This very ship was ta'en," said Corund, "and sent home by them in a bravado to tell us what betid: a stupid insolent part, shall cost 'em dear, for it hath forewarned us. The skipper had this letter for thee: gave it me monstrous secretly."

[p. 445]

Prezmyra took away the wax and opened the letter, and knew the writer of it. She held it out to Corund: "Read it to me, my lord. I am tired with watching; I read ill by this flickering candle-light."

But he said, "I am too poor a scholar, madam. I prithee read it."

And in the light of the guttering candles, vexed with an east wind that blew before the dawn, she read this letter, that was conceived in manner following:

 

"Unto the right high mighti and doubtid Prynsace the Quen of Implande, one that was your Servaunt but now beinge both a Traitor and a manifiald parjured Traitor, which Heaven above doth abhorre, the erth below detest, the sun moone and starres be eschamed of, and all Creatures doo curse and ajudge unworthy of breth and life, do wish onelie to die your Penytent. In hevye sorrowe doo send you these advisoes which I requyre your Mageste in umblest manner to pondur wel, seeinge ells your manyfest Overthrowe and Rwyn att hand. And albeit in Carcee you reste in securitie, it is serten you are there as saife as he that hingeth by the Leves of a Tree in the end of Autumpne when as the Leves begin to fall. For in this late Battaile in Mellicafhaz Sea hath the whole powre of Wychlande on the sea been beat downe and ruwyned, and the highe Admirall of our whole Navie loste and ded and the names of the great men of accownte that were slayen at the battaile I may not numbre nor the common sorte much lesse by reaisoun that the more part were dround in the sea which came not to Syght. But of Daemounlande not ij schips companies were lossit, but with great puissaunce they doo buske them for Carsee. Havinge with them this Gowldri Bleusco, strangely reskewed from his preassoun-house beyond the toombe, and a great Armey of the moste strangg and fell folke that ever I saw or herd speke of. Such is the Die of Warre. Most Nowble Prynsace I will speke unto you not by a Ryddle or Darck Fygure but playnly that you let not slipp this Occasioun. For I have

[p. 446]

drempt an evill Dreeme and one pourtending ruwyn unto Wychlande, beinge in my slepe on the verie eve of this same bataille terrified and smytten with an appeering schape of Laxus armde cryinge in an hyghe voise and lowd, An Ende an Ende an ende of All. Therefore most aernestly I do beseek your Magestie and your nowble Lorde that was my Frend before that by my venemous tresun I loste both you and him and alle, take order for your proper saffetie, and the thinge requyers Haste of your Magestes. And this must you doo, to fare strayght way into your owne cuntrie of Picselande and there raise Force. Be you before these rebalds and obstynates of Demounlande in their Prowd Attempts, to strike at Wychlande and so purchas their Frenshyp who it is verie sertan will in powre invintiable stand before Carsee or ever Wychlande shall have time to putt you downe. This Counsell I give you knowinge full well that the Power and Domynyon of the Demouns standeth now preheminent and not to be withstode. So tarry not by a Sinckinge Schippe, but do as I saye lest all bee loste.

"One thinge more I telle you, that shall haply enforce my counsell unto you, the hevyeste Newes of alle."

 

"'Tis heavy news that such a false troker as he is should yet supervive so many honest men," said Corund.

The Lady Prezmyra held out the letter to her lord. "Mine eyes dazzle," she said. "Read thou the rest." Corund put his great arm about her as he sat down to the table before the mirror and pored over the writing, spelling it out with one finger. He had little book-learning, and it was some time ere he had the meaning clear. He did not read it out; his lady's face told him she had read all ere he began.

This was the last news Gro's letter told her: the Prince her brother dead in the sea-fight, fighting for Demonland; dead and drowned in the sea off Melikaphkhaz.

Prezmyra went to the window. Dawn was beginning, bleak and gray. After a minute she turned her head.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 447]

Like a she-lion she looked, proud and dangerous-eyed. She was very pale. Her accents, level and quiet, called to the blood like the roll of a distant drum, as she said, "Succours of Demonland: late or never."

Corund beheld her uneasily.

"Their oaths to me and to him!" said she, "sworn to us that night in Carce. False friends! O, I could eat their hearts with garlic."

He put his great hands on her two shoulders. She threw them off. "In one thing," she cried, "Gro counselleth us well: to tarry no more on this sinking ship. We must raise forces. But not as he would have it, to uphold these Demons, these oath-breakers. We must away this night."

Her lord had cast aside his great wolfskin mantle. "Come, madam," said he, "to bed's our nearest journey."

Prezmyra answered, "I'll not to bed. It shall be seen now, O Corund, if that thou be a king indeed."

He sat down on the bed's edge and fell to doing off his boots. "Well," he said, "every one as he likes, as the goodman said when he kissed his cow. Day's near dawning; I must be up betimes, and a sleepless night's a poor breeder of invention."

But she stood over him, saying, "It shall be seen if thou be a true king. And be not deceived: if thou fail me here I'll have no more of thee. This night we must away. Thou shalt raise Pixyland, which is now mine by right: raise power in thine own vast kingdom of Impland. Fling Witchland to the winds. What care I if she sink or swim? This only is the matter: to punish these vile perjured Demons, enemies of ours and enemies of all the world."

"We need ride o' no journey for that," said Corund, still putting off his boots. "Thou shalt shortly see Juss and his brethren before Carce with three score hundred fighting men at's back. Then cometh the metal to the anvil. Come, come, thou must not weep."

[p. 448]

"I do not weep," said she. "Nor I shall not weep. But I'll not be ta'en in Carce like a mouse in a trap."

"I'm glad thou'lt not weep, madam. It is as great pity to see a woman weep as a goose to go barefoot. Come, be not foolish. We must not part forces now. We must bide this storm in Carce."

But she cried, "There is a curse on Carce. Gro is lost to us and his good counsel. Dear my lord, I see something wicked that like a thick dark shadow shadoweth all the sky above us. What place is there not subject to the power and regiment of Gorice the King? but he is too proud: we be all too insolent overweeners of our own works. Carce hath grown too great, and the Gods be offended at us. The insolent vileness of Corinius, the old dotard Corsus that must still be at his boosing-can, these and our own private quarrels in Carce must be our bane. Repugn not therefore against the will of the Gods, but take the helm in thine own hand ere it be too late."

"Tush, madam," said he, "these be but fray-bugs. Daylight shall make thee laugh at 'em."

But Prezmyra, queening it no longer, caught her arms about his neck. "The odd man to perform all perfectly is thou. Wilt thou see us rushing on this whirlpool and not swim for it ere it be too late?" And she said in a choked voice, "My heart is near broke already. Do not break it utterly. Only thou art left now."

The chill dawn, the silent room, the guttering candles, and that high-hearted lady of his, daunted for an instant from her noble and equal courage, cowering like a bird in his embrace: these things were like an icy breath that passed by and quailed him for a moment. He took her by her two hands and held her off from him. She held her head high again, albeit her cheek was blanched; he felt the brave comrade-grip of her hands in his.

"Dear lass," he said, "I cast me not to be odd with none of these spawn of Demonland. Here is my hand, and the hand of my sons, heavy while breath remaineth us against Demonland for thee and for the King. But sith our lord the King hath made me a king, come wind, come

[p. 449]

weet, we must weather it in Carce. True is that saw, 'For fame one maketh a king, not for long living.'"

Prezmyra thought in her heart that these were fey words. But having now put behind her hope and fear, she was resolved to kick against the wind no more, but stand firm and see what Destiny would do.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 450]

 

XXXI

 

The Demons Before Carce

HOW GORICE THE KING, ALBEIT SO STRONG A SORCERER, ELECTED THAT BY THE SWORD, AND CHIEFLY BY THE LORD CORUND HIS CAPTAIN GENERAL, SHOULD BE DETERMINED AS FOR THIS TIME THE EVENT OF THESE HIGH MATTERS; AND HOW THOSE TWAIN, THE KING AND THE LORD JUSS, SPAKE FACE TO FACE AT LAST; AND OF THE BLOODY BATTLE BEFORE CARCE, AND WHAT FRUIT WAS GARNERED THERE AND WHAT MADE RIPE AGAINST HARVEST.

Gorice the king sate in his chamber the thirteenth morning after these tidings brought to Carce. On the table under his hand were papers of account and schedules of his armies and their equipment. Corund sate at the King's right hand, and over against him Corinius.

Corund's great hairy hands were clasped before, him on the table. He spoke without book, resting his gaze on the steady clouds that sailed across the square of sky seen through the high window that faced him. "Of Witchland and the home provinces, O King, nought but good. All

[p. 451]

the companies of soldiers which were appointed to repair to this part by the tenth of the month are now come hither, save some bands of spearmen from the south, and some from Estreganzia. These last I expect to-day; Viglus writeth they come with him with the heavy troops from Baltary I sent him to assemble. So is the muster full as for these parts: Thramne, Zorn, Permio, the land of Ar, Trace, Buteny, and Estremerine. Of the subject allies, there's less good there. The kings of Mynia and Gilta: Olis of Tecapan: County Escobrine of Tzeusha: the king of Ellien: all be here with their contingents. But there's mightier names we miss. Duke Maxtlin of Azumel hath flung off's allegiance and cut off your envoy's ears, O King; 'tis thought for some supposed light part of the sons of Corsus done to his sister. That docketh us thirty score stout fighters. The lord of Eushtlan sendeth no answer, and now are we advertised by Mynia and Gilta of his open malice and treason, who did stubbornly let them the way hither through his country while they hastened to do your majesty's commands. Then there's the Ojedian levies, should be nigh a thousand spears, ten days overdue. Heming, that raiseth Pixyland in Prezmyra's name, will bring them in if he may. Who also hath order, being on his way, to rouse Maltraeny to action, from whom no word as yet; and I do fear treachery in 'em, Maltraeny and Ojedia both, they have been so long of coming. King Barsht of Toribia sendeth flat refusal."

"It is known to you besides, O King," said Corinius, "that the king of Nevria came in last night, many days past the day appointed, and but half his just complement."

The King drew back his lips. "I will not dash his spirits by blaming him at this present. Later, I'll have that king's head for this."

"This is the sum," said Corund. "Nay, then, I had forgot the Red Foliot with's folk, three hundred perchance, came in this morning."

Corinius thrust out his tongue and laughed: "One hen-lobster such as he shall scarce afford a course for this banquet."

[p. 452]

"He keepeth faith," said Corund, "where bigger men turn dastards. 'Tis seen now that these forced leagues be as sure as they were sealed with butter. Your majesty will doubtless give him audience."

The King was silent awhile, studying his papers. "What strength to-day in Carce?" he asked.

Corund answered him, "As near as may be two score hundred foot and fifty score horse: five thousand in all. And, that I weigh most, O King, big broad strong set lads of Witchland nigh every jack of 'em."

The King said, "'Twas not well done, O Corund, to bid thy son delay for Ojedia and Maltraeny. He might else have been in Carce now with a thousand Pixylanders to swell our strength."

"I did that I did," answered Corund, "seeking only your good, O King. A few days' delay might buy us a thousand spears."

"Delay," said the King, "hath favoured mine enemy. This we should have done: at his first landing give him no time but wink, set on him with all our forces, and throw him into the sea."

"If luck go with us that may yet be," said Corund.

The King's nostrils widened. He crouched forward, glaring at Corund and Corinius, his jaw thrust out so that the stiff black beard on it brushed the papers on the table before him. "The Demons," said be, "landed i' the night at Ralpa. They come on with great journeys northward. Will be here ere three days be spent."

Both they grew red as blood. Corund spake: "Who told you these tidings, O King?"

"Care not thou for that," said the King. "Enough for thee, I know it. Hath it ta'en you napping?"

"No," answered he. "These ten days past we have been ready, with what strength we might make, to receive 'em, come they from what quarter they will. So it is, though, that while we lack the Pixyland succours Juss hath by some odds the advantage over us, if, as our intelligence saith, six thousand fighting men do follow him; and these forced besides with some that should be ours.'

"Thou wouldst," said the King, "await these out of[paragraph continues] 

[p. 453]

Pixyland, with that else Heming may gather, afore we offer them battle?"

Said Corund, "That would I. We must look beyond the next turn of the road, O my Lord the King."

"That would not I," said Corinius.

"That is stoutly said, Corinius," said the King. "Yet remember, thou hadst the greater force on Krothering Side, yet wast overborne."

"'Tis that standeth in my mind, Lord," said Corund. "For well I know, had I been there I'd a fared no better."

The Lord Corinius, whose brow had darkened with the naming of his defeat, looked cheerfully now and said, "I pray you but consider, O my Lord the King, that here at home is no room for such a sleight or gin as that whereby in their own country they took me. When Juss and Brandoch Daha and their stinking gaberlunzies do cry huff at us on Witchland soil, 'tis time to give 'em a choke-pear. Which with your leave, Lord, I will promise now to do, other else to lose my life."

"Give me thy hand," said Corund. "Of all men else would I a chosen thee for such a day as this, and (were't to-day to meet the whole power of Demonland in arms) to stand perdue with thee for this bloody service. But let us hear the King's commands: which way soe'er he choose, we shall do it right gladly."

Gorice the King sat silent. One lean hand rested on the iron serpent-head of his chair's arm, the other, with finger outstretched against the jutting cheekbone, supported his chin. Only in the deep shadow of his eye-sockets a lambent light moved. At length he started, as if the spirit, flown to some unsounded gulfs of time or space, had in that instant returned to its mortal dwelling.

He gathered the papers in a heap and tossed them to Corund.

"Too much lieth on it," said he. "He that hath many peas may put more in the pot. But now the day approacheth when I and Juss must cast up our account together, and one or all shall be brought to death and bane." He stood up from his chair and looked down on those two, his chosen captains, great men of war raised

[p. 454]

up by him to be kings over two quarters of the world. They watched him like little birds under the eye of a snake. "The country hereabout," said the King, "is not good for horsemanship, and the Demons be great horsemen. Carce is strong, and never can it be forced by assault. Also under mine eye should my men of Witchland acquit themselves to do the greatest deeds. Therefore will we abide them here in Carce, until young Heming come and his levies out of Pixyland. Then shall ye fall upon them and never make an end till the land be utterly purged of them, and all the lords of Demonland be slain."

Corinius said, "To hear is to obey, O King. Howsoever, not to dissemble with you, I'd liever at 'em at once, 'stead of let them sit awhile and refresh their army. Occasion is a wanton wench, O King, that is quick to beckon another man if one look coldly on her. Moreover, Lord, could you not by your art, in small time, with certain compositions?-----"

But the King brake in upon him saying, "Thou knowest not what thou speakest. There is thy sword; there thy men; these my commands. See thou perform them punctually when time shall come."

"Lord," said Corinius, "you shall not find me wanting." Therewith he did obeisance and went forth from before the King.

The King said unto Corund, "Thou hast manned him well, this tassel-gentle. There was some danger he should so mislike subjection unto thee in these acts martial as it should breed some quarrel should little speed our enterprise."

"Think not you that, O King," answered Corund. "'Tis grown like an almanac for the past year, past date. A will feed out of my hand now."

"Because thou hast carried it with him," said the King, "in so honourable and open plainness. Hold on the road thou hast begun, and be mindful still that into thine hand is given the sword of Witchland, and therein have I put my trust for this great hour."

Corund looked upon the King with gray and quick eyes

[p. 455]

shining like unto the eagle's. He slapped his heavy sword with the flat of his hand: "'Tis a tough fox, O my Lord the King; will not fail his master."

Therewith, glad at the King's gracious words, he did obeisance unto the King and went forth from the chamber.

 

The same night there appeared in the sky impending over Carce a blazing star with two bushes. Corund beheld it in an open space betwixt the clouds as he went to his chamber. He said nought of it to his lady wife, lest it should trouble her; but she too had from her window seen that star, yet spake not of it to her lord for a like reason.

And King Gorice, sitting in his chamber with his baleful books, beheld that star and its fiery streamers, which the King rather noted than liked. For albeit he might not know of a certain what way that sign intended, yet was it apparent to one so deeply learned in nigromancy and secrets astronomical that this thing was fatal, being of those prodigies and ominous prognosticks which fore-run the tragical ends of noble persons and the ruins of states.

 

The third day following, watchmen beheld from Carce walls in the pale morning the armies of the Demons that filled the whole plain to southward. But of the succours cut of Pixyland was as yet no sign at all. Gorice the King, according as he had determined, held all his power quiet within the fortress. But for passing of the time, and because it pleased his mind to speak yet face to face with the Lord Juss before this last mortal trial in arms should be begun betwixt them, the King sent Cadarus as his herald with flags of truce and olive-branches into the Demons' lines. By which mission it was concluded that the Demons should withdraw their armies three bowshots from the walls, and they of Witchland should abide all within the hold; only the King with fourteen of his folk unarmed and Juss with a like number unarmed should come forth into the midst of the bateable ground and

[p. 456]

there speak together. And this meeting must be at the third hour after noon.

So either party came to this parley at the hour appointed. Juss went bare-headed but, save for that, all armed in his shining byrny with gorget and shoulder-plates demasked and embossed with wires of gold, and golden leg-harness, and rings of red gold upon his wrists. His kirtle was of wine-dark silken tissue, and he wore that dusky cloak the sylphs had made for him, the collar whereof was stiff with broidery and strange beasts worked thereon in silver thread. According to the compact he bare no weapon; only in his hand a short ivory staff inlaid with precious stones, and the head of it a ball of that stone which men call Belus' eye, that is white and hath within it a black apple, the midst whereof a man shall see to glitter like gold. Very masterful and proud he stood before the King, carrying his head like a stag that sniffs the morning. His brethren and Brandoch Daha remained a pace or two behind him, with King Gaslark and the lords Zigg and Gro, and Melchar and Tharmrod and Styrkrnir, Quazz with his two sons, and Astar, and Bremery of Shaws: goodly men and lordly to look on, unweaponed all; and wondrous was the sparkle of their jewels that were on them.

Over against them, attending on the King, were these: Corund king of Impland, and Corinius called king of Demonland, Hacmon and Viglus Corund's sons, Duke Corsus and his sons Dekalajus and Gorius, Eulien king of Mynia, Olis lord of Tecapan, Duke Avel of Estreganzia, the Red Foliot, Erp the king of Ellien, and the counts of Thramne and Tzeusha; unweaponed, but armoured to the throat, big men and strong the most of them and of lordly bearing, yet none to match with Corinius and Corund.

The King, in his mantle of cobra-skins, his staff-royal in his hand, topped by half a head all those tall men about him, friend and foe alike. Lean and black he towered amongst them, like a thunder-blasted pine-tree seen against the sunset.

So, in the golden autumn afternoon, in the midst of that

[p. 457]

sad main of sedgelands where between slimy banks the weed-choked Druima deviously winds toward the sea, were those two men met together for whose ambition and their pride the world was too little a place to contain them both and peace lying between them. And like some drowsy dragon of the elder slime, squat, sinister, and monstrous, the citadel of Carce slept over all.

By and by the King spake and said: "I sent for thee because I think it good I and thou should talk together while yet is time for talking."

Juss answered, "I quarrel not with that, O King."

"Thou," said the King, bending his brow upon him, "art a man wise and fearless. I counsel thee, and all these that be with thee, turn back from Carce. Well I see the blood thou didst drink in Melikaphkhaz will not allay thy thirst, and war is to thee thy pearl and thy paramour. Yet, if it be, turn back from Carce. Thou standest now on the pinnacle of thine ambition; wilt leap higher, thou fall'st in the abyss. Let the four corners of the earth be shaken with our wars, but not this centre. For here shall no man gather fruit, but and if it be death he gather; or if, then this fruit only, that Zoacum, that fruit of bitterness, which when he shall have tasted of, all the bright lights of heaven shall become as darkness and all earth's goodness as ashes in his mouth all his life's days until he die."

He paused. The Lord Juss stood still, quailing not at all beneath that dreadful gaze. His company behind him stirred and whispered. Lord Brandoch Daha, with mockery in his eye, said somewhat to Goldry Bluszco under his breath.

But the King spake again to the Lord Juss, "Be not deceived. These things I say unto thee not as labouring to scare you from your set purpose with frights and fairy-babes: I know your quality too well. But I have read signs in heaven: nought clear, but threatful unto both you and me. For thy good I say it, O Juss, and again (for that our last speech leaveth the firmest print) be advised: turn back from Carce or it be too late."

Lord Juss harkened attentively to the words of Gorice

[p. 458]

the King, and when he had ended, answered and said, "O King, thou hast given us terrible good counsel. But it was riddlewise. And hearing thee, mine eye was still on the crown thou wearest, made in the figure of a crab-fish, which, because it looks one way and goes another, methought did fitly pattern out thy looking to our perils but seeking the while thine own advantage."

The King gave him an ill look, saying, "I am thy lord paramount. With subjects it sits not to use this familiar style unto their King."

Juss answered, "Thou dost thee and thou me. And indeed it were folly in either of us twain to bend knee to t'other, when the lordship of all the earth waiteth on the victor in our great contention. Thou hast been open with me, Witchland, to let me know thou art uneager to strike a field with us. I will be open too, and I will make an offer unto thee, and this it is: that we will depart out of thy country and do no more unpeaceful deeds against thee (till thou provoke us again); and thou, of thy part, of all the land of Demonland shalt give up thy quarrel, and of Pixyland and Impland beside, and shalt yield me up Corsus and Corinius thy servants that I may punish them for the beastly deeds they did in our land whenas we were not there to guard it."

He ceased, and for a minute they beheld each other in silence. Then the King lifted up his chin and smiled a dreadful smile.

Corinius whispered mockingly in his ear, "Lord, you may lightly give 'em Corsus. That were easy composition, and false coin too methinks."

"Stand back i' thy place," said the King, "and hold thy peace." And unto Lord Juss he said, "Of all ensuing harm the cause is in thee; for I am now resolved never to put up my sword until of thy bleeding head I may make a football. And now, let the earth be afraid, and Cynthia obscure her shine: no more words but mum. Thunder and blood and night must usurp our parts, to complete and make up the catastrophe of this great piece."

 

That night the King walked late in his chamber in the

[p. 459]

Iron Tower alone. These three years past be had seldom resorted thither, and then commonly but to bear away some or other of his books to study in his own lodging. His jars and flasks and bottles of blue and green and purple glass wherein he kept his cursed drugs and electuaries of secret composition, his athals and athanors, his crucibles, his horsebellied retorts and alembics and bainsmaries, stood arow on shelves coated with dust and hung about with the dull spider's weavings; the furnace was cold; the glass of the windows was clouded with dirt; the walls were mildewed; the air of the chamber fusty and stagnant. The King was deep in his contemplation, with a big black book open before him on the six-sided reading-stand: the damnablest of all his books, the same which had taught him aforetime what he must do when by the wicked power of enchantment he had wanted but a little to have confounded Demonland and all the lords thereof in death and ruin.

The open page under his hand was of parchment discoloured with age, and the writing on the page was in characters of ancient out-of-fashion crabbedness, heavy and black, and the great initial letters and the illuminated borders were painted and gilded in dark and fiery hues with representations of dreadful faces and forms of serpents and toad-faced men and apes and mantichores and succubi and incubi and obscene representations and figures of unlawful meaning. These were the words of the writing on the page which the King conned over and over, falling again into a deep study betweenwhiles, and then conning these words again of an age-old prophetic writing touching the preordinate destinies of the royal house of Gorice in Carce:

	 
		Soo schel your hous stonde and bee
		 Unto eternytee
		 Yet walke warilie
		 Wyttinge ful sarteynlee
		 That if impiouslie
		 The secounde tyme in the bodie[p. 460]
		 Practisinge grammarie
		 One of ye katched shulle be
		 By the feyndis subtiltee
		 And hys liffe lossit bee
		 Broke ys thenne this serye
		 Dampned are you thenne eternallie
		 Yerth shuldestow thenne never more se
		 Scarsly the Goddes mought reskue ye
		 Owt of the Helle where you woll lie
		 Unto eternytee
		 The sterres tealde hit mee.
		
		 Gorice the King stood up and went to the south window. The casement bolts were rusted: he forced them and they flew back with a shriek and a clatter and a thin shower of dust and grit. He opened the window and looked out. The heavy night grew to her depth of quiet. There were lights far out in the marshes, the lights of Lord Juss's camp-fires of his armies gathered against Carce. Scarcely without a chill might a man have looked upon that King standing by the window; for there was in the tall lean frame of him an iron aspect as of no natural flesh and blood but some harder colder element; and his countenance, like the picture of some dark divinity graven ages ago by men long dead, bore the imprint of those old qualities of unrelenting power, scorn, violence, and oppression, ancient as night herself yet untouched by age, young as each night when it shuts down and old and elemental as the primaeval dark.

A long while he stood there, then came again to his book. "Gorice VII.," he said in himself. "That was once in the body. And I have done better than that, but not yet well enough. 'Tis too hazardous, the second time, alone. Corund is a man undaunted in war, but the man is too superstitious and quaketh at that which hath not flesh and blood. Apparitions and urchin-shows can quite unman him. There's Corinius, careth not for God or man a point. But he is too rash and unadvised: I were mad to trust him in it. Were the Goblin here, it might be carried. Damnable both-sides villain, he's cast off from me."[paragraph continues] 

[p. 461]

He scanned the page as if his piercing eyes would thrust beyond the barriers of time and death and discover some new meaning in the words which should agree better with the thing his mind desired while his judgement forbade it. "He says 'damned eternally:' he says that breaketh the series, and 'earth shouldst thou then never more see.' Put him by."

And the King slowly shut up his book, and locked it with three padlocks, and put back the key in his bosom. "The need is not yet," he said. "The sword shall have his day, and Corund. But if that fail me, then even this shall not turn me back but I will do that I will do."

 

In the same hour when the King was but now entered again into his own lodgings, came through a runner of Heming's to let them know that be, fifteen hundred strong, marched down the Way of Kings from Pixyland. Moreover they were advertised that the Demon fleet lay in the river that night, and it was not unlike the attack should be in the morning by land and water.

All night the King sate in his chamber holding council with his generals and ordering all things for the morrow. All night long he closed not his eyes an instant, but the others he made sleep by turns because they should be brisk and ready for the battle. For this was their counsel, to draw out their whole army on the left bank before the bridge-gate and there offer battle to the Demons at point of day. For if they should abide within doors and suffer the Demons to cut young Heming off from the bridge-gate, then were he lost, and if the bridge-house should fall and the bridge, then might the Demons lightly ship what force they pleased to the right bank and so closely invest them in Carce. Of an attack on the right bank to sit they had no fear, well knowing themselves able I within doors and laugh at them, since the walls were there inexpugnable. But if a battle were now brought about before the bridge-gate as they were minded, and Heming should join in the fight from the eastward, there was good hope that they should be able to crumple up the battle of the Demons, driving them in upon their centre

[p. 462]

from the west whilst Heming smote them on the other part. Whereby these should be cast into a great rout and confusion and not be able to escape away to their ships, but there in the fenlands before Carce should be made a prey unto the Witches.

When it was the cold last hour before the dawn the generals took from the King their latest commands ere they drew forth their armies. Corinius came forth first from the King's chamber a little while before the rest. In the draughty corridor the lamps swung and smoked, making an uncertain windy light. Corinius espied by the stair-head the Lady Sriva standing, whether watching to bid her father adieu or but following idle curiosity. Whichever it were, not a fico gave he for that, but coming swiftly upon her whisked her aside into an alcove where the light was barely enough to let him see the pale shimmer of her silken gown, dark hair pinned loosely up in deep snaky coils, and dark eyes shining. "My witty false one, have I caught thee? Nay, fight not. Thy breath smells like cinnamon. Kiss me, Sriva."

"I'll not!" said she, striving to escape. "Naughty man, am I used thus?" But finding she got nought by struggling, she said in a low voice, "Well, if thou bring back Demonland to-night, then, let's hold more chat."

"Harken to the naughty traitress," said he, "that but last night didst do me some uncivil discourtesies, and now speaketh me fair: and what a devil for? if not 'cause herseemeth I'll likely not come back after this day's fight. But I'll come back, mistress kiss-and-be-gone; ay, by the Gods, and I'll have my payment too."

His lips fed deep on her lips, his strong and greedy hands softly mastered her against her will, till with a little smothered cry she embraced him, bruising her tender body against the armour he was girt withal. Between the kisses she whispered, "Yes, yes, to-night." Surely he damned spiteful fortune, that sent him not this encounter by an half-hour sooner.

When he was departed, Sriva remained in the shadow of the alcove to set in order her hair and apparel, not a little disarrayed in that hot wooing. Out of which darkness

[p. 463]

she had convenience to observe the leave-taking of Prezmyra and her lord as they came down that windy corridor and paused at the head of the stairs.

Prezmyra had her arm in his. "I know where the Devil keepeth his tail, madam," said Corund. "And I know a very traitor when I see him."

"When didst thou ever yet fare ill by following of my counsel, my lord?" said Prezmyra. "Or did I refuse thee ever any thing thou didst require me of? These seven years since I put off my maiden zone for thee; and twenty kings sought me in sweet marriage, but thee I preferred before them all, seeing the falcon shall not mate with popinjays nor the she-eagle with swans and bustards. And will you say nay to me in this?"

She stood round to face him. The pupils of her great eyes were large in the doubtful lamplight, swallowing their green fires in deep pools of mystery and darkness. The rich and gorgeous ornaments of her crown and girdle seemed but a poor casket for that matchless beauty which was hers: her face, where every noble and sweet quality and every thing desirable of earth or heaven had framed each feature to itself: the glory of her hair, like the red sun's glory: her whole body's poise and posture, like a stately bird's new-lighted after flight.

"Though it be very rhubarb to me," said Corund, "shall I say nay to thee this tide? Not this tide, my Queen."

"Thanks, dear my lord. Disarm him and bring him in if you may. The King shall not refuse us this to pardon his folly, when thou shalt have obtained this victory for him upon our enemies."

The Lady Sriva might hear no more, harkened she never so curiously. But when they were now come to the stair foot, Corund paused a minute to try the buckles of his harness. His brow was clouded. At length he spake. "This shall be a battle mortal fierce and doubtous for both parties. 'Gainst such mighty opposites as here we have, 'tis possible: No more; but kiss me, dear lass. And if: tush, 't will not be; and yet, I'd not leave it unsaid: if ill tide ill, I'd not have thee waste all thy days a-grieving. Thou knowest I am not one of your sour envious

[p. 464]

jacks, bear so poor a conceit o' themselves they begrudge their wives should wed again lest the next husband should prove the better man."

But Prezmyra came near to him with good and merry countenance: "Let me stop thy mouth, my lord. These be foolish thoughts for a great king going into battle. Come back in triumph, and i' the mean season think on me that wait for thee: as a star waits, dear my lord. And never doubt the issue."

"The issue," answered he, "I'll tell thee when 'tis done. I'm no astronomer. I'll hew with my sword, love; spoil some of their guesses if I may."

"Good fortune and my love go with thee," she said.

Sriva coming forth from her hiding hastened to her mother's lodging, and there found her that had just bid adieu to her two sons, her face all blubbered with tears. In the same instant came the Duke her husband to change his sword, and the Lady Zenambria caught him about the neck and would have kissed him. But he shook her off, crying out that he was weary of her and her slobbering mouth; menacing her besides with filthy imprecations, that he would drag her with him and cast her to the Demons, who, since they had a strong loathing for such ugly tits and stale old trots, would no doubt hang her up or disembowel her and so rid him of his lasting consumption. Therewith he went forth hastily. But his wife and daughter, either weeping upon other, came down into the court, meaning to go up to the tower above the water-gate to see the army marshalled beyond the river. And on the way Sriva related all she had heard said betwixt Corund and Prezmyra.

In the court they met with Prezmyra's self, and she going with blithe countenance and light tread and humming a merry tune bade them good-morrow.

"You can bear these things more bravelier than we, madam," said Zenambria. "We be too gentle-hearted methinks and pitiful."

Prezmyra replied upon her, "'Tis true, madam, I have not the weak sense of some of you soft-eyed whimpering ladies. And by your leave I'll keep my tears (which

[p. 465]

be great spoilers of the cheeks beside) until I need 'em." When they were passed by, "Is it not a stony-livered and a shameless hussy, O my mother?" said Sriva. "And is it not scandalous her laughing and jesting, as I have told it thee, when she did bid him adieu, devising only how best she might coax him to save the life of yonder chambering traitorous hound?"

"With whom," said Zenambria, "she wont to do the thing I'd think shame to speak on. Truly this foreign madam with her loose and wanton ways doth scandal the whole land for us."

But Prezmyra went her way, glad that she had not by an eyelid's flicker let her lord guess what a dread possessed her mind, who had in all the bitter night seen strange and cruel visions portending loss and ruin of all she held dear.

Now, when dawn appeared, was the King's whole army drawn out in battle array before the bridge-house. Corinius held command on the left. There followed him fifteen hundred chosen troops of Witchland, with the Dukes of Trace and Estreganzia, besides these kings and princes with their outlandish levies: the king of Mynia, Count Escobrine of Tzeusha, and the Red Foliot. Corsus led the centre, and with him went King Erp of Ellien and his green-coated sling-casters, the king of Nevria, Axtacus lord of Permio, the king of Gilta, Olis of Tecapan, and other captains: seventeen hundred men in all. The right the Lord Corund had chosen for himself. Two thousand Witchland troops, the likeliest and best, hardened to war in Impland and Demonland and the southeastern borders, followed his standard, beside the heavy spearmen of Baltary and swordsmen of Buteny and Ar. Viglus his son was there, and the Count of Thramne, Cadarus, Didarus of Largos, and the lord of Estremerine.

But when the Demons were ware of that great army standing before the bridge-gate, they put themselves in array for battle. And their ships made ready to move up the river under Carce, if by any means they might attack

[p. 466]

the bridge by water and so cut off for the Witches their way of retreat.

It was bright low sunshine, and the splendour of the jewelled armour of the Demons and their many-coloured kirtles and the plumes that were in their helms was a wonder to behold. This was the order of their battle. On their left nearest the river was a great company of horse, and the Lord Brandoch Daha to lead them on a great golden dun with fiery eyes. His island men, Melchar and Tharmrod, with Kamerar of Stropardon and  and Stypmar, were the chief captains that rode with him to that battle. Next to these came the heavy troops from the east, and the Lord Juss himself their leader on a tall fierce big-boned chestnut. About him was his picked bodyguard of horse, with Bremery of Shaws their captain; and in his battle were these chiefs besides: Astar of Rettray and Gismor Gleam of Justdale and Peridor of Sule. Lord Spitfire led the centre, and with him Fendor of Shalgreth, and Emeron, and the men of Dalney, great spearmen; also the Duke of Azumel, sometime allied with Witchland. There went also with him the Lord Gro, that scanned still those ancient walls with a heavy heart, thinking on the great King within, and with what mastery of intellect and will he ruled those dark turbulent and bloody men who bare sway under him; thinking on Queen Prezmyra. To his sick imagining, the blackness of Carce which no bright morning light might lighten seemed not as of old the image and emblem of the royal house of Witchland and their high magnificency and power on earth, but rather the shadow thrown before of destiny and death ready to put down that power for ever. Which whether it should so befall or no he did not greatly care, being aweary of life and life's fevers, wild longings, and exorbitant affects, whereof he thought he had now learned much: that to him, who as it seemed must still adhere to his own foes abandoning the others' service, fortune through whatever chop could bring no peace at last. On the Demon right the Lord Goldry Bluszco streamed his standard, leading to battle the south-firthers and the heavy spearmen of Mardardale and Throwater.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 467]

With him was King Gaslark and his army of Goblinland, and levies from Ojedia and Eushtlan, lately revolted from their allegiance to King Gorice. The Lord Zigg, with his light horse of Rammerick and Kelialand and the northern dales, covered their flank to the eastward.

Gorice the King beheld these dispositions from his tower above the water-gate. He beheld, besides, a thing the Demons might not see from below, for a little swelling of the ground that cut off their view: the marching of men far away along the Way of Kings from the eastward: young Heming with the vassalry of Pixyland and Maltraeny. He sent a trusty man to apprise Corund of it.

Now Lord Juss let blow up the battle call, and with the loud braying of the trumpets the hosts of the Demons swung forth to battle. And the clash of those armies when they met before Carce was like the bursting of a thundercloud. But like a great sea-cliff patient for ages under the storm-winds' furies, that not one night's loud wind and charging breakers can wear away, nor yet a thousand thousand nights, the embattled strength of Witchland met their onset, mixed with them, flung them back, and stood unremoved. Corund's iron battalions bare in this first brunt the heaviest load, and bare it through. For the ships, with young Hesper Golthring in command most fiercely urging them, ran up the river to force the bridge, and Corund whiles he met on his front the onset of the flower of Demonland must still be shot at by these behind. Hacmon and Viglus, those young princes his sons, were charged with the warding of the bridge and walls to burn and break up their ships. And they of all hands bestirring them twice and thrice threw back the Demons when they had gotten a footing on the bridge; until in fine, both sides for a long space fighting very cruelly, it fell out very fatally against Hesper and his power, his ships all lighted in a lowe and the more part of his folk burned or drowned or slain with the sword; and himself after many and grievous wounds in his last attempt left alone on the bridge, and crawling to have got away was stabbed in with a dagger and died.

[p. 468]

After this the ships fell back down the river, so many as might avail thereto, and those sons of Corund, their task manfully fulfilled, came forth with their folk to join in the main battle. And the smoke of the burning ships was like incense in the nostrils of the King watching these things from his tower above the water-gate.

Little pause was there betwixt this first brunt and the next, for Heming now bare down from the east, drave in Zigg's horsemen that were hampered in the heavy ground, and pressed his onset home on the Demon right. Along the whole line from Corund's post beside the river to the eastern flank where Heming joined Corinius the Witches now set on most fiercely; and now were the odds of numbers, which were at first against them, swung mightily in their favour, and under this great side-blow on his flank not all the Lord Goldry Bluszco's soldiership nor all the terror of his might in arms could uphold the Demons' battle-line. Yard by yard they fell back before the Witches, most gloriously maintaining their array unbroken, though the outland allies broke and fled. Meantime on the Demon left Juss and Brandoch Daha most stubbornly withstood that onslaught, albeit they had to do with the first and chosen troops of Witchland. In which struggle befell the most bloody fighting that was yet seen that day, and the stour of battle so asper and so mortal that it was hard to see how any man should come out from it with life, since not a man of either side would budge an inch but die there in his steps if he might not rather slay the foe before him. So the armies swayed for an hour like wrastlers locked, but in the end the Lord Corund had his way and held his ground before the bridge-gate.

Romenard of Dalney, galloping to Lord Juss where he paused a while panting from violence of the battle brought him by Spitfire's command tidings from the right: telling him Goldry's self could hold no longer against such odds: that the centre yet held, but at the next onset was like to break, or the right wing else be driven in upon their rear and all overwhelmed: "If your highness cannot throw back Corund, all is lost."

[p. 469]

In these short minutes' lull (if lull it were when all the time the battle like a sounding sea rolled on with a ceaseless noise of riding and slaying and the clang of arms), Juss chose. Demonland and the whole world's destinies hung on his choice. He had no counsellor. He had no time for slow deliberation. In such a moment imagination, resolution. swift decision, all high gifts of nature, are nought: swift horses gulfed and lost in the pit which fate the enemy digged in the way before them; except painful knowledge, stored up patiently through years of practice, shall have prepared a road sure and clean for their flying hooves to bear them in the great hour of destiny. So it was from the beginning with all great captains: so with the Lord Juss in that hour when ruin swooped upon his armies. For two minutes' space he stood silent; then sent Bremery of Shaws galloping westward like one minded to break his neck with his orders to Lord Brandoch Daha, and Romenard eastward again to Spitfire. And Juss himself riding forward among his soldiers shouted among them in a voice that was like a trumpet thundering, that they should now make ready for the fiercest trial of all.

"Is my cousin mad?" said Lord Brandoch Daha, when he saw and understood the whole substance and matter of it. "Or hath he found Corund so tame to deal with he can make shift without me and well nigh half his strength, and yet withstand him?"

"He looseth this hold," answered Bremery, "to snatch at safety. 'Tis desperate, but all other ways we but wait on destruction. Our right is clean driven in, the left holdeth but hardly. He chargeth your highness break their centre if you may. They have somewhat dangerously advanced their left, and therein is their momentary peril if we be swift enough. But remember that here, o' this side is their greatest power before us, and if we be 'whelmed ere you can compass it----"

"No more but Yes," said Lord Brandoch Daha. "Time gallopeth: so must we."

Even so in that hour when Goldry and Zigg, giving way step by step before superior odds, were bent back well

[p. 470]

nigh with their backs to the river, and Corund on the Demons' left had after a bitter battle checked and held them and threatened now to complete in one more great blow the ruin of them all, Juss, choosing a desperate expedient to meet a danger that else must destroy him, weakened his hard-pressed left to throw Brandoch Daha and well nigh eight hundred horse into Spitfire's battle to drive a wedge betwixt Corsus and Corinius.

It was now long past noon. The tempest of battle that had quietened awhile for utter weariness roared forth anew from wing to wing as Brandoch Daha hurled his horsemen upon Corsus and the subject allies, while all along the battle-line the Demons rallied to fling back the enemy. For a breathless while, the issue hung in suspense: then the men of Gilta and Nevria broke and fled, Brandoch Daha and his cavalry swept through the gap, wheeled right and left and took Corsus and Corinius in Rank and rear.

There fell in this onset Axtacus lord of Permio, the kings of Ellien and Gilta, Gorius the son of Corsus, the Count of Tzeusha, and many other noblemen and men of mark. Of the Demons many were hurt and many slain, but none of great note save Kamerar of Stropardon, whose head Corinius swapt off clean with a blow of his battle-axe, and Trentmar whom Corsus smote full in the stomach with a javelin so that he fell down from his horse and was dead at once. Now was all the left and centre of the Witches' battle thrown into great confusion, and the allies most of all fallen into disorder and fain to yield themselves and pray for mercy. The King, seeing the extent of this disaster, sent a galloper to Corund, who straightway sent to Corsus and Corinius commanding them get them at their speediest with all their folk back into Carce while time yet served. Himself in the meantime, showing now, like the sun, his greatest countenance in his lowest estate, set on with his weary army to stem the advance of Juss, who now momently gathered fresh force against him, and to keep open for the rest of the King's forces their way by the bridge-gate into Carce. Corinius, when he understood it, galloped

[p. 471]

thither with a band of men to aid Corund, and this did likewise Heming and Dekalajus and other captains of the Witches. But Corsus himself, counting the day lost and considering that he was an old man and had fought now long enough, gat him privily back into Carce as quickly as he was able. And truly he was bleeding from many wounds.

By this great stand of Corund and his men was time won for a great part of the residue of the army to escape into Carce. And ever the Witches were put aback and lost much ground, yet ever the Lord Corund by his great valiance and noble heart recomforted his folk, so that they gave back very slowly, most bloodily disputing the ground foot by foot to the bridge-gate, that they also might win in again, so many as might. Juss said, "This is the greatest deed of arms that ever I in the days of my life did see, and I have so great an admiration and wonder in my heart for Corund that almost I would give him peace. But I have sworn now to have no peace with Witchland."

Lord Gro was in that battle with the Demons. He ran Didarus through the neck with his sword, so that he fell down and was dead.

Corund, when he saw it, heaved up his axe, but changed his intention in the manage, saying, "O landskip of iniquity, shalt thou kill beside me the men of mine household? But my friendship sitteth not on a weather vane. Live, and be a traitor."

But Gro, being mightily moved with these words, and staring at great Corund wide-eyed like a man roused from a dream, answered, "Have I done amiss? 'Tis easy remedied." Therewith he turned about and slew a man of Demonland. Which Spitfire seeing, he cried out upon Gro in a great rage for a most filthy traitor, and bloodily rushing in thrust him through the buckler into the brain.

In such wise and by such a sudden vengeance did the Lord Gro most miserably end his life-days. Who, being a philosopher and a man of peace, careless of particular things of earth, had followed and observed all his days steadfastly one heavenly star; yet now in the bloody battle

[p. 472]

before Carce died in the common opinion of men a manifold perjured traitor, that had at length gotten the guerdon of his guile.

Now came the Lord Juss with a great rout of men armed on his great horse with his sword dripping with blood, and the battle sprang up into yet more noise and fury, and great man-slaying befell, and many able men of Witchland fell in that stour and the Demons had almost put them from the bridge-gate. But the Lord Corund, rallying his folk, swung back yet again the battle-tide, albeit he was by a great odds outnumbered. And he sought none but Juss himself in that deadly mellay; who when he saw him coming he refused him not but made against him most fiercely, and with great clanging blows they swapped together awhile, until Corund hewed Juss's shield asunder and struck him from his horse. Juss, leaping up again, thrust up at Corund with his sword and with the violence of the blow brake through the rings of his byrny about his middle and drave the sword into his breast. And Corund felled him to earth with a great down-stroke on the helm, so that he lay senseless.

Still the battle raged before the bridge-gate, and great wounds were given and taken of either side. But now the sons of Corund saw that their father had lost much of his blood and waxed feeble, and the residue of his folk seeing it too, and seeing themselves so few against so many, began to be abashed. So those sons of Corund, riding up to him on either side with a band of men, made him turn back with them and go with them in by the gate to Carce, the which he did like a man amazed and knowing not what he doeth. And indeed it was a great marvel how so great a lord, wounded to the death, might sit on horseback.

In the great court he was gotten down from his horse. The Lady Prezmyra, when she perceived that his harness was all red with blood, and saw his wound, fell not down in a swoon as another might, but took his arm about her shoulder and so supported, with her step-sons to help her, that great frame which could no more support itself yet had till that hour borne up against the whole

[p. 473]

world's strength in arms. Leeches came that she had called for, and a litter, and they brought him to the banquet hall. But after no long while those learned men confessed his hurt was deadly, and all their cunning nought. Whereupon, much disdaining to die in bed, not in the field fighting with his enemies, the Lord Corund caused himself, completely armed and weaponed, with the stains and dust of the battle yet upon him, to be set in his chair, there to await death.

Heming, when this was done, came to tell it to the King, where from the tower above the water-gate he beheld the end of this battle. The Demons held the bridge-house. The fight was done. The King sat in his chair looking down to the battle-field. His dark mantle was about his shoulders. He leaned forward resting his chin in his hand. They of his bodyguard, nine or ten, stood huddled together some yards away as if afraid to approach him. As Heming came near, the King turned his head slowly to look at him. The low sun, swinging blood-red over Tenemos, shone full on the King's face. And as Heming looked in the face of the King fear gat hold upon him, so that he durst not speak a word to the King, but made obeisance and departed again, trembling like one who has seen a sight beyond the veil.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 474]

 

XXXII

 

The Latter End of All the Lords of Witchland

OF THE COUNCIL OF WAR; AND HOW THE LORD CORSUS, BEING REJECTED OF THE KING, TURNED HIS THOUGHTS TO OTHER THINGS; AND OF THE LAST CONJURING THAT WAS IN CARCE AND THE LAST WINE-BIBBING; AND HOW YET ONCE AGAIN THE LADY PREZMYRA SPAKE WITH THE LORDS OF DEMONLAND IN CARCE.

Gorice the King held in his private chamber a council of war on the morrow of the battle before Carce. The morning was over-cast with sullen cloud, and though all the windows were thrown wide the sluggish air hung heavy in the room, as if it too were pervaded by the cold dark humour that clogged the vitals of those lords of Witchland like a drowsy drug, or as if the stars would breathe themselves for a greater mischief. Pale and drawn were those lords' faces; and, for all they strove to put on a brave countenance before the King, clean gone was the vigour and war-like mien that clothed them but yesterday. Only Corinius kept some spring of his old valiancy and portly bearing, seated with arms akimbo over against the King, his heavy under-jaw set forward and his nostrils wide. He had slept ill or watched late, for his eyes

[p. 475]

were blood-shotten, and the breath of his nostrils was heavy with wine.

"We tarry for Corsus," said the King. "Had he not word of my bidding?"

Dekalajus said, "Lord, I will summon him again. These misfortunes I fear me hang heavy on his mind, and, by your majesty's leave, he is scarce his own man since yesterday."

"Do it straight," said the King. "Give me thy papers, Corinius. Thou art my general since Corund gat his death. I will see what yesterday hath cost us and what power yet remaineth to crush me these snakes by force of arms."

"These be the numbers, O King," said Corinius. "But three thousand and five hundred fighting men, and well nigh half of these over much crippled with wounds to do aught save behind closed walls. It were but to give the Demons easy victory to adventure against them, that stand before Carce four thousand sound men in arms."

The King blew scornfully through his nostrils. "Who told thee their strength?" said he.

"It were dangerous to write them down a man fewer," answered Corinius. And Hacmon said, "My Lord the King, I would adventure my head they have more. And your majesty will not forget they be all flown with eagerness and pride after yesterday's field, whereas our men-----"

"Were ye sons of Corund," said the King, breaking in quietly on his speech and looking dangerously upon him, "but twigs of your father's tree, that he being cut down ye have no manhood left nor vital sap, but straight wither in idiotish dotage? I will not have these womanish counsels spoke in Carce; no, nor thought in Carce."

Corinius said, "We had sure intelligence, O King, whenas they landed that their main army was six thousand fighting men; and last night myself spake with full a score of our officers, and had a true tale of some few of the Demons captured by us before they were slain with the sword. When I say to you Juss standeth before Carce four thousand strong, I swell not the truth. His losses yesterday were but a flea-biting 'gainst ours."

[p. 476]

The King nodded a curt assent.

Corinius proceeded, "If we might contrive indeed to raise help from without Carce, were it but five hundred spears to distract his mind some part from usward, nought but your majesty's strict command should stay me but I should assault him. It were perilous even so, but never have you known me leave a fruit unplucked at for fear of thorns. But until that time, nought but your straight command might win me to essay a sally. Since well I wot it were my death, and the ruin of you, O King, and of all Witchland."

The King listened with unmoved countenance, his shaven lip set somewhat in a sneer, his eyes half closed like the eyes of a cat couched sphinx-like in the sun. But no sun shone in that council chamber. The leaden pall hung darker without, even as morning grew toward noon. "My Lord the King," said Heming, "send me. To overslip their guards i' the night, 'tis not a thing beyond invention. That done, I'd gather you some small head of men, enough to serve this turn, if I must rake the seven kingdoms to find 'em."

While Heming spoke, the door opened and the Duke Corsus entered the chamber. An ill sight was he, flabbier of cheek and duller of eye than was his wont. His face was bloodless, his great paunch seemed shrunken, and his shoulders yet more hunched since yesterday. His gait was uncertain, and his hand shook as he moved the chair from the board and took his seat before the King. The King looked on him awhile in silence, and under that gaze beads of sweat stood on Corsus's brow and his under-lip twitched.

"We need thy counsel, O Corsus," said the King. "Thus it is: since our ill-faced stars gave victory to the Demon rebels in yesterday's battle, Juss and his brethren front us with four thousand men, whiles I have not two thousand soldiers unhurt in Carce. Corinius accounteth us too weak to risk a sally but and if we might contrive some diversion from without. And that (after yesterday) is not to be thought on. Hither and to Melikaphkhaz; did we

[p. 477]

draw all our powers, and the subject allies not for our love but for fear sake and for lust of gain flocked to our standard. These caterpillars drop off now. Yet if we fight not, then is our strength in arms clean spent, and our enemies need but to sit before Carce till we be starved. 'Tis a point of great difficulty and knotty to solve."

"Difficult indeed, O my Lord the King," said Corsus. His glance shifted round the board, avoiding the steady gaze bent on him from beneath the eaves of King Gorice's brow, and resting at last on the jewelled splendour of the crown of Witchland on the King's head. "O King," he said, "you demand my rede, and I shall not say nor counsel you nothing but that good and well shall come thereof, as much as yet may be in this pass we stand in. For now is our greatness turned in woe, dolour, and heaviness. And easy it is to be after-witted."

He paused, and his under-jaw wobbled and twitched. "Speak on," said the King. "Thou stutterest forth nothings by fits and girds, as an ague taketh a goose. Let me know thy rede."

Corsus said, "You will not take it, I know, O King. For we of Witchland have ever been ruled by the rock rather than by the rudder. I had liever be silent. Silence was never written down."

"Thou wouldst, and thou wouldst not!" said the King. "Whence gottest thou this look of a dish of whey with blood spit in it? Speak, or thou'lt anger me."

"Then blame me not, O King," said Corsus. "Thus it seemeth to me, that the hour hath struck whenas we of Witchland must needs look calamity in the eye and acknowledge we have thrown our last, and lost all. The Demons, as we have seen to our undoing, be unconquerable in war. Yet are their minds pranked with many silly phantasies of honour and courtesy which may preserve us the poor dregs yet unspilt from the cup of our fortune, if we but leave unseasonable pride and see where our advantage lieth."

"Chat, chat, chat!" said the King. "Perdition catch me if I can find a meaning in it! What dost thou bid me do?"

[p. 478]

Corsus met the King's eye at last. He braced himself as if to meet a blow. "Throw not your cloak in the fire because your house is burning, O King. Surrender all to Juss at his discretion. And trust me the foolish softness of these Demons will leave us freedom and the wherewithal to live at ease."

The King was leaned a little forward as Corsus, somewhat dry-throated but gathering heart as he spake, blurted forth his counsel of defeat. No man among them looked on Corsus, but all on the King, and for a minute's space was no sound save the sound of breathing in that chamber. Then a puff of hot air blew a window to with a thud, and the King without moving his head rolled his awful glance forth and back over his council slowly, fixing each in his turn. And the King said, "Unto which of you is this counsel acceptable? Let him speak and instruct us."

All did sit mum like beasts. The King spake again, saying, "It is well. Were there of my council such another vermin, so sottish, so louse-hearted, as this one hath proclaimed himself, I had been persuaded Witchland was a sleepy pear, corrupted in her inward parts. And that were so, I bad given order straightway for the sally; and, for his chastening and your dishonour, this Corsus should have led you. And so an end, ere the imposthume of our shame brake forth too foul before earth and heaven."

"I admire not, Lord, that you do strike at me," said Corsus. "Yet I pray you think how many Kings in Carce have heaped with injurious indignities them that were so hardy as give them wholesome counsel afore their fall. Though your majesty were a half-god or a Fury out of the pit, you could not by further resisting deliver us out of this net wherein the Demons have gotten us caught and tied. You can keep geese no longer, O King. Will you rend me because I bid you be content to keep goslings?"

Corinius smote the table with his fist. "O monstrous vermin!" he cried, "because thou wast scalded, must all we be afeared of cold water?"

But the King stood up in his majesty, and Corsus

[p. 479]

shrank beneath the flame of his royal anger. And the King spake and said, "The council is up, my lords. For thee, Corsus, I dismiss thee from my council. Thou art to thank my clemency that I take not thy head for this. It were for thy better safety, which well I know thou prizest dearer than mine honour, that thou show not in my path till these perilous days be overpast." And unto Corinius he said, "On thy head it lieth that the Demons storm not the hold, as haply their hot pride may incense them to attempt. Expect me not at supper. I lie in the Iron Tower to-night, and let none disturb me there at peril of his head. You of my council must attend me here four hours ere to-morrow's noon. Look to it well, Corinius, that nought shalt thou do nor in any wise adventure our forces against the Demons till thou receive my further bidding, save only to hold Carce against any assault if need be. For this thy life shall answer. For the Demons, they were wisest praise a fair day at night. If mine enemy uproot a boulder above my dwelling, so I be mighty enow of mine hands I may, even in the nick of time that it tottereth to leap and crush mine house, o'erset it on him and pash him to a mummy."

So speaking, the King moved resolute with a great strong step toward the door. There paused he, his hand upon the silver latch, and looking tigerishly on Corsus, "Be advised," he said, "thou. Cross not my path again. Nor, while I think on't, send me not thy daughter again, as last year thou didst. Apt to the sport she is, and well enow she served my turn aforetime. But the King of Witchland suppeth not twice of the same dish, nor lacketh he fresh wenches if he need them."

Whereat all they laughed. But Corsus's face grew red as blood.

 

On such wise brake up the council. Corinius with the sons of Corund and of Corsus went upon the walls ordering all in obedience to the word of Gorice the King. But that old Duke Corsus betook him to his chamber in the north gallery. Nor might he abide even a small while at

[p. 480]

ease, but sate now in his carven chair, now on the windowsill, now on his broad-canopied bed, and now walked the chamber floor twisting his hands and gnawing his lip. And if he were distraught in mind, small wonder it were, set as he was betwixt hawk and buzzard, the King's wrath menacing him in Carce and the hosts of Demonland without.

So wore the day till supper-time. And at supper was Corsus, to their much amaze, sitting in his place, and the ladies Zenambria and Sriva with him. He drank deep, and when supper was done he filled a goblet saying, "My lord the king of Demonland and ye other Witches, good it is that we, who stand as now we stand with one foot in the jaws of destruction, should bear with one another. Neither should any hide his thought from other, but say openly, even as I this morning before the face of our Lord the King, his thought and counsel. Wherefore without shame do I confess me ill-advised to-day, when I urged the King to make peace with Demonland. I wax old, and old men will oft embrace timorous counsels which, if there be wisdom and valiancy left in them, they soon renounce when the stress is overpast and they have leisure to afterthink them with a sad mind. And clear as day it is that the King was right, both in his chastening of my faint courage and in his bidding thee, O King Corinius, stand to thy watch and do nought till this night be worn. For went he not to the Iron Tower? And to what end else spendeth he the night in yonder chamber of dread than to do sorcery or his magic art, as aforetime he did, and in such wise blast these Demons to perdition even in the spring-tide of their fortunes? At no point of time hath Witchland greater need of our wishes than at this coming midnight, and I pray you, my lords, let us meet a little before in this hall that we with one heart and mind may drink fair fortune to the King's enchantery."

With such pleasant words and sympathetical insinuations, working at a season when the wine-cup had caused unfold some gayness in their hearts that were fordone with the hard scapes and chances of disastrous war, was[paragraph continues] 

[p. 481]

Corsus grown to friendship again with the lords of Witchland. So, when the guard was set and all made sure for the night, they came together in the great banquet hall, whereas more than three years ago the Prince La Fireez had feasted and after fought against them of Witchland. But now was he drowned among the shifting tides in the Straits of Melikaphkhaz. And the Lord Corund, that fought that night in such valiant wise, now in that same hall, armed from throat to foot as becometh a great soldier dead, lay in state, crowned on his brow with the amethystine crown of Impland. The spacious side-benches were untenanted and void their high seats, and the cross-bench was removed to make place for Corund's bier. The lords of Witchland sate at a small table below the dais: Corinius in the seat of honour at the end nearest the door, and over against him Corsus, and on Corinius's left Zenambria, and on his right Dekalajus son to Corsus, and then Heming; and on Corsus's left his daughter Sriva, and those two remaining of Corund's sons on his right. All were there save Prezmyra, and her had none seen since her lord's death, but she kept her chamber. Flamboys stood in the silver stands as of old, lighting the lonely spaces of the hall, and four candles shivered round the bier where Corund slept. Fair goblets stood on the board brimmed with dark sweet Thramnian wine, one for each feaster there, and cold bacon pies and botargoes and craw-fish in hippocras sauce furnished a light midnight meal.

Now scarce were they set, when the flamboys burned pale in a strange light from without doors: an evil, pallid, bale-like lowe, such as Gro had beheld in days gone by when King Gorice XII. first conjured in Carce. Corinius paused ere taking his seat. Goodly and stalwart he showed in his blue silk cloak and silvered byrny. The fair crown of Demonland, wherewith Corsus had been enforced to crown him on that great night in Owlswick, shone above his light brown curling hair. Youth and lustihood stood forth in every line of his great frame, and on his bare arms smooth and brawny, with their wristlets of

[p. 482]

gold; but somewhat ghastly was the corpse-like pallor of that light on his shaven jowl, and his thick scornful lips were blackened, like those of poisoned men, in that light of bale.

"Saw ye not this light aforetime?" he cried, "and 'twas the shadow before the sun of our omnipotence. Fate's hammer is lifted up to strike. Drink with me to our Lord the King that laboureth with destiny."

All drank deep, and Corinius said, "Pass we on the cups that each may drain his neighbour's. 'Tis an old lucky custom Corund taught me out of Impland. Swift, for the fate of Witchland is poised in the balance." Therewith he passed his cup to Zenambria, who quaffed it to the dregs. And all they, passing on their cups, drank deep again; all save Corsus alone. But Corsus's eyes were big with terror as he looked on the cup passed on to him by Corund's son.

"Drink, O Corsus," said Corinius; and seeing him still waver, "What ails the old doting disard?" he cried. "He stareth on good wine with an eye as ghastly as a mad dog's beholding water."

In that instant the unearthly glare went out as a lamp in a gust of wind, and only the flamboys and the funeral candles flickered on the feasters with uncertain radiance. Corinius said again, "Drink."

But Corsus set down the cup untasted, and stayed irresolute. Corinius opened his mouth to speak, and his jaw fell, as of a man that conceiveth suddenly some dread suspicion. But ere he might speak word, a blinding flash went from earth to heaven, and the firm floor of the banquet hall rocked and shook as with an earthquake. All save Corinius fell back into their seats, clutching the table, amazed and dumb. Crash after crash, after the listening ear was well nigh split by the roar, the horror broken out of the bowels of night thundered and ravened in Carce. Laughter, as of damned souls banqueting in Hell, rode on the tortured air. Wildfire tore the darkness asunder, half blinding them that sat about that table, and Corinius gripped the board with either hand as a

[p. 483]

last deafening crash shook the walls, and a flame rushed up the night, lighting the whole sky with a livid glare. And in that trisulk flash Corinius beheld through the south-west window the Iron Tower blasted and cleft asunder, and the next instant fallen in an avalanche of red-hot ruin.

"The keep hath fallen!" he cried. And, deadly wearied on a sudden, he sank heavily into his seat. The cataclysm was passed by like a wind in the night; but now was heard a sound as of the enemy rushing to the assault. Corinius strove to rise, but his legs were over feeble. His eye fit on Corsus's untasted cup, that which was passed on to him by Viglus Corund's son, and he cried, "What devil's work is this? I have a strange numbness in my bones. By heavens, thou shalt drink that cup or die."

Viglus, his eyes protruding, his hand clutching at his breast, struggled to rise but could not.

Heming half staggered up, fumbling for his sword, then pitched forward on the table with a horrid rattle of the throat.

But Corsus leaped up trembling, his dull eyes aflame with triumphant malice. "The King hath thrown and lost," he cried, "as well I foresaw it. And now have the children of night taken him to themselves. And thou, damned Corinius, and you sons of Corund, are but dead swine before me. Ye have all drunk venom, and ye are dead. Now will I deliver up Carce to the Demons. And it, and your bodies, with mine electuary rotting in your vitals, shall buy me peace from Demonland."

"O horrible! Then I too am poisoned," cried the Lady Zenambria, and she fell a-swooning.

"'Tis pity," said Corsus. "Blame the passing of the cups for that. I might not speak ere the poison had chained me the limbs of these cursed devils, and made 'em harmless."

Corinius's jaw set like a bulldog's. Painfully gritting his teeth he rose from his seat, his sword naked in his hand. Corsus, that was now passing near him on his way to the door, saw too late that he had reckoned without his host. Corinius, albeit the baneful drug bound his legs as

[p. 484]

 

Click to enlarge
THE LAST CONJURING IN CARCE.

 

[p. 485]

with a cere-cloth, was yet too swift for Corsus, who, fleeing before him to the door, had but time to clutch the heavy curtains ere the sword of Corinius took him in the back. He fell, and lay a-writhing lumpishly, like a toad spitted on a skewer. And the floor of steatite was made slippery with his blood.

"'Tis well. Through the guts," said Corinius. No might he had to draw forth the sword, but staggered as one drunken, and fell to earth, propped against the jambs of the lofty doorway.

Some while he lay there, harkening to the sounds of battle without; for the Iron Tower was fallen athwart the outer wall, making a breach through all lines of defence. And through that breach the Demons stormed the hold of Carce, that never unfriendly foot had entered by force in all the centuries since it was builded by Gorice I. An ill watch it was for Corinius to lie harkening to that unequal fight, unable to stir a hand, and all they that should have headed the defence dead or dying before his eyes. Yet was his breath lightened and his pain some part eased when his eye rested on the gross body of Corsus twisting in the agony of death upon his sword.

In such wise passed well nigh an hour. The bodily strength of Corinius and his iron heart bare up against the power of the venom long after those others had breathed out their souls in death. But now was the battle done and the victory with them of Demonland, and the lords Juss and Goldry Bluszco and Brandoch Daha with certain of their fighting men came into the banquet hall. Smeared they were with blood and the dust of battle, for not without great blows and the death of many a stout lad had the hold been won. Goldry said as they paused at the threshold, "This is the very banquet house of death. How came these by their end?"

Corinius's brow darkened at the sight of the lords of Demonland, and mightily he strove to raise himself, but sank back groaning, "I have gotten an everlasting chill o' the bones," he said. "Yon hellish traitor murthered

[p. 486]

us all by poison; else should some of you have gotten your deaths by me or ever ye won up into Carce."

"Bring him some water," said Juss. And he with Brandoch Daha gently lifted Corinius and bare him to his chair where he should be more at ease.

Goldry said, "Here is a lady liveth." For Sriva, that sitting on her father's left hand had so escaped a poisoned draught at the passing of the cups, rose from the table where she had cowered in fearful silence, and cast herself in a flood of tears and terrified supplications about Goldry's knees. Goldry bade guard her to the camp and there bestow her in safe asylum until the morning.

Now was Corinius near his end, but he gathered strength to speak, saying, "I do joy that not by your sword were we put down, but by the unequal trumpery of Fortune, whose tool was this Corsus' and the King's devilish pride, that desired to harness Heaven and Hell to his chariot. Fortune's a right strumpet, to fondle me in the neck and now yerk me one thus i' the midriff."

"Not Fortune, my Lord Corinius, but the Gods," said Goldry, "whose feet be shod with wool."

By then was water brought in, and Brandoch Daha would have given him to drink. But Corinius would have none of it, but jerked his head aside and o'erset the cup, and looking fiercely on Lord Brandoch Daha, "Vile fellow," he said, "so thou too art come to insult on Witchland's grave? Thou'dst strike me now into the centre, and thou wert not more a dancing madam than a soldier."

"How?" said Brandoch Daha. "Say a dog bite me in the ham: must I bite him again i' the same part?"

Corinius's eyelids closed, and he said weakly, "How look thy womanish gew-gaws in Krothering since I towsed 'em?" And therewith the creeping poison reached his strong heart-strings, and he died.

 

Now was silence for a space in that banquet hall, and in the silence a step was heard, and the lords of Demonland

[p. 487]

turned toward the lofty doorway, that yawned as an arched cavern-mouth of darkness; for Corsus had torn down the arras curtains in his death-throes, and they lay heaped athwart the threshold with his dead body across them, Corinius's sword-hilts jammed against his ribs and the blade standing a foot's length forth from his breast. And while they gazed, there walked into the shifting light of the flamboys over that threshold the Lady Prezmyra, crowned and arrayed in her rich robes and ornaments of state. Her countenance was bleak as the winter moon flying high amid light clouds on a windy midnight settling towards rain, and those lords, under the spell of her sad cold beauty, stood without speech.

In a while Juss, speaking as one who needeth to command his voice, and making grave obeisance to her, said, "O Queen, we give you peace. Command our service in all things whatsoever. And first in this, which shall be our earliest task ere we sail homeward, to stablish you in your rightful realm of Pixyland. But this hour is overcharged with fate and desperate deeds to suffer counsel. Counsel is for the morning. The night calleth to rest. I pray you give us leave."

Prezmyra, looked upon Juss, and there was eye-bite in her eyes, that glinted with green metallic lustre like those of a she-lion brought to battle.

"Thou dost offer me Pixyland, my Lord Juss," said she, "that am Queen of Impland. And this night, thou thinkest, can bring me rest. These that were dear to me have rest indeed: my lord and lover Corund; the Prince my brother; Gro, that was my friend. Deadly enow they found you, whether as friends or foes."

Juss said, "O Queen Prezmyra, the nest falleth with the tree. These things hath Fate brought to pass, and we be but Fate's whipping-tops bandied what way she will. Against thee we war not, and I swear to thee that all our care is to make thee amends."

"O, thine oaths!" said Prezmyra. "What amends canst thou make? Youth I have and some poor beauty. Wilt thou conjure those three dead men alive again that ye

[p. 488]

have slain? For all thy vaunted art, I think this were too hard a task."

All they were silent, eyeing her as she walked delicately past the table. She looked with a distant and, to outward seeming, uncomprehending eye on the dead feasters and their empty cups. Empty all, save that one passed on by Viglus, whereof Corsus would not drink; and it stood half drained. Of curious workmanship it was, of pale green glass, its stand formed of three serpents intertwined, the one of gold, another of silver, the third of iron. Fingering it carelessly she raised her glittering eyes once more on the Demons, and said, "It was ever the wont of you of Demonland to eat the egg and give away the shell in alms." And pointing at the lords of Witchland dead at the feast, she asked, "Were these also your victims in this day's hunting, my lords?"

"Thou dost us wrong, madam," cried Goldry. "Never hath Demonland used suchlike arts against her enemies."

Lord Brandoch Daha looked swiftly at him, and stepped idly forward, saying, "I know not what art hath wrought yon goblet, but 'tis strangely like to one I saw in Impland. Yet fairer is this, and of more just proportions." But Prezmyra forestalled his out-stretched hand, and quietly drew the cup towards her out of reach. As sword crosses sword, the glance of her green eyes crossed his, and she said, "Think not that you have a worse enemy left on earth than me. I it was that sent Corsus and Corinius to trample Demonland in the mire. Had I but some spark of masculine virtue, some soul at least of you should yet be loosed squealing to the shades to attend my dear ones ere I set sail. But I have none. Kill me then, and let me go."

Juss, whose sword was bare in his hand, smote it home in the scabbard and stepped towards her. But the table was betwixt them, and she drew back to the dais where Corund lay in state. There, like some triumphant goddess, she stood above them, the cup of venom in her

[p. 489]

hand. "Come not beyond the table, my lords," she said, "or I drain this cup to your damnation."

Brandoch Daha said, "The dice are thrown, O Juss. And the Queen hath won the hazard."

"Madam," said Juss, "I swear to you there shall no force nor restraint be put upon you, but honour only and worship shown you, and friendship if you will. That surely mightest thou take of us for thy brother's sake." Thereat she looked terribly upon him, and he said, "Only on this wild night lay not hands upon yourself. For their sake, that even now haply behold us out of the undiscovered barren lands, beyond the dismal lake, do not this."

Still facing them, the cup still aloft in her right hand, Prezmyra laid her left hand lightly on the brazen plates of Corund's byrny that cased the mighty muscles of his breast. Her hand touched his beard, and drew back suddenly; but in an instant she laid it gently again on his breast. Somewhat her orient loveliness seemed to soften for a passing minute in the altering light, and she said, "I was given to Corund young. This night I will sleep with him, or reign with him, among the mighty nations of the dead."

Juss moved as one about to speak, but she stayed him with a look, and the lines of her body hardened again and the lioness looked forth anew in her peerless eyes. "Hath your greatness," she said, "so much outgrown your wit, that you think I will abide to be your pensioner, that have been a Princess in Pixyland, a Queen of far-fronted Impland, and wife to the greatest soldier in this bold of Carce, which till this day hath been the only scourge and terror of the world? O my lords of Demonland, good comfortable fools, speak to me no more, for your speech is folly. Go, doff your hats to the silly hind that runneth on the mountain; pray her gently dwell with you amid your stalled cattle, when you have slain her mate. Shall the blackening frost, when it hath blasted

[p. 490]

and starved all the sweet garden flowers, say to the rose, Abide with us; and shall she harken to such a wolfish suit?"

So speaking she drank the cup; and turning from those lords of Demonland as a queen turneth her from the unregarded multitude, kneeled gently down by Corund's bier, her white arms clasped about his head, her face pillowed on his breast.

 

When Juss spake, his voice was choked with tears. He commanded Bremery that they should take up the bodies of Corsus and Zenambria and those sons of Corund and of Corsus that lay poisoned and dead in that hall and on the morrow give them reverent burial. "And for the Lord Corinius I will that ye make a bed of state, that he may lie in this hall to-night, and to-morrow will we lay him in howe before Carce, as is fitting for so renowned a captain. But great Corund and his lady shall none depart one from the other, but in one grave shall they rest, side by side, for their love sake. Ere we be gone I will rear them such a monument as beseemeth great kings and princes when they die. For royal and lordly was Corund, and a mighty man at arms, and a fighter clean of hand, albeit our bitter enemy. Wondrous it is with what cords of love he bound to him this unparagoned Queen of his. Who hath known her like among women for trueness and highness of heart? And sure none was ever more unfortunate."

Now went they forth into the outer ward of Carce The night bore still some signs of that commotion of the skies that had so lately burst forth and passed away, and some torn palls of thundercloud yet hung athwart the face of heaven. Betwixt them in the swept places of the sky a few stars shivered, and the moon, more than half waxen towards her full, was sinking over Tenemos. Some faint breath of autumn was abroad, and the Demons shuddered a little, fresh from the heavy air of the great

[p. 491]

banquet hall. The ruins of the Iron Tower smoking to the sky, and the torn and tumbled masses of masonry about it, showed monstrous in the gloom as fragments of old chaos; and from them and from the riven earth beneath steamed up pungent fumes as of brimstone burning. Ever busily, back and forth through those sulphurous vapours, obscene birds of the night flitted a weary round, and bats on leathern wing, fitfully and dimly seen in the uncertain mirk, save when their passage brought them dark against the moon. And from the solitudes of the mournful fen afar voices of lamentation floated on the night: wild wailing cries and sobbing noises and long moans rising and falling and quivering down to silence.

Juss laid his hand on Goldry's arm, saying, "There is nought earthly in these laments, nor be those that thou seest circling in the reek very bats or owls. These be his masterless familiars wailing for their Lord. Many such served him, simple earthy divels and divels of the air and of the water, held by him in thrall by sorcerous and artificial practices, coming and going and doing his will."

"These availed him not," said Goldry, "nor the sword of Witchland against our might and main, that brake it asunder in his hand and slew his mighty men of valour."

"Yet true it is," said Lord Juss, "that none greater hath lived on earth than King Gorice XII. When after these long wars we held him as a stag at bay, he feared not to assay a second time, and this time unaided and alone, what no man else hath so much as once performed and lived. And well he knew that that which was summoned by him out of the deep must spill and blast him utterly if he should slip one whit, as slip he did in former days, but his disciple succoured him. Behold now with what loud striking of thunder, unconquered by any earthly power, he hath his parting: with this Carce black and smoking in ruin for his monument, these lords of Witchland and hundreds besides of our soldiers and of the Witches for his funeral bake-meats, and spirits weeping in the night for his chief mourners."

[p. 492]

So came they again to the camp. And in due time the moon set and the clouds departed and the quiet stars pursued their eternal way until night's decline; as if this night had been but as other nights: this night which had beheld the power and glory that was Witchland by such a hammer-stroke of destiny smitten in pieces.

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 493]

 

XXXIII

 

Queen Sophonisba in Galing

OF THE ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY LORD JUSS IN DEMONLAND TO QUEEN SOPHONISBA, FOSTERLING OF THE GODS, AND OF THAT CIRCUMSTANCE WHICH, BEYOND ALL THE WONDERS FAIR AND LOVELY TO BEHOLD SHOWN HER IN THAT COUNTRY, MADE HER MOST TO MARVEL: WHEREIN IS A RARE EXAMPLE HOW IN A FORTUNATE WORLD, OUT OF ALL EXPECTATION, IN THE SPRING OF THE YEAR, COMETH A NEW BIRTH.

Now the returning months brought the season of the year when Queen Sophonisba should come according to her promise to guest with Lord Juss in Galing. And so it was that in the hush of a windless April dawn the Zimiamvian caravel that bare the Queen to Demonland rowed up the firth to Lookinghaven.

All the east was a bower for the golden dawn. Kartadza, sharp-outlined as if cut in bronze, still hid the sun; and in the great shadow of the mountain the haven and the low hills and the groves of holm-oak and strawberry tree slumbered in a deep obscurity of blues and purples, against which the avenues of pink almond blossom and the white marble quays were bodied

[p. 494]

forth in pale wakening beauty, imaged as in a looking-glass in that tranquillity of the sea. Westward across the firth all the land was aglow with the opening day. Snow lingered still on the higher summits. Cloudless, bathing in the golden light, they stood against the blue: Dina, the Forks of Nantreganon, Pike o' Shards, and all the peaks of the Thornback range and Neverdale. Morning laughed on their high ridges and kissed the woods that clung about their lower limbs: billowy woods, where rich hues of brown and purple told of every twig on all their myriad branches thick and afire with buds. White mists lay like coverlets on the water-meadows where Tivarandardale opens to the sea. On the shores of Bothrey and Scaramsey, and on the mainland near the great bluff of Thremnir's Heugh and a little south of Owlswick, clear spaces among the birchwoods showed golden yellow. daffodils abloom in the spring.

They rowed in to the northernmost berth and made fast the caravel. The sweetness of the almond trees was the sweetness of spring in the air, and spring was in the face of that Queen as she came with her attendants up the shining steps, her little martlets circling about her or perching on her shoulders: she to whom the Gods of old gave youth everlasting, and peace everlasting in Koshtra Belorn.

Lord Juss and his brethren were on the quay to meet her, and the Lord Brandoch Daha. They bowed in turn, kissing her hands and bidding her welcome to Demonland. But she said, "Not to Demonland alone, my lords, to the world again. And toward which of all earth's harbours should I steer, and toward which land if not to this land of yours, who have by your victories brought peace and joy to all the world? Surely peace slept not more softly on the Moruna in old days before the names of Gorice and Witchland were heard in that country, than she shall sleep for us on this new earth and Demonland, now that those names are drowned for ever under the whirlpools of oblivion and darkness."

Juss said, "O Queen Sophonisba, desire not that the

[p. 495]

names of great men dead should be forgot for ever. So should these wars that we last year brought to so mighty a conclusion to make us undisputed lords of the earth go down to oblivion with them that fought against us. But the fame of these things shall be on the lips and in the songs of men from one generation to another, so long as the world shall endure."

They took horse and rode up from the harbour to the upper road, and so through open pastures on to Havershaw Tongue. Lambs frisked on the dewy meadows beside the road; blackbirds flew from bush to bush; larks trilled in the sightless sky; and as they came down through the woods to Beckfoot wood-pigeons cooed in the trees, and squirrels peeped with beady eyes. The Queen spoke little. These and all shy things of the woods and field held her in thrall, charming her to a silence that was broken only now and then by a little exclamation of joy. The Lord Juss, who himself also loved these things, watched her delight.

Now they wound up the steep ascent from Beckfoot, and rode into Galing by the Lion Gate. The avenue of Irish yews was lined by soldiers of the bodyguards of Juss, Goldry, and Spitfire, and Brandoch Daha. These, in honour of their great masters and of the Queen, lifted their spears aloft, while trumpeters blew three fanfares on silver trumpets. Then to an accompaniment of lutes and theorbos and citherns moving above the pulse of muffled drums, a choir of maidens sang a song of welcome, strewing the path before the lords of Demonland and the Queen with sweet white hyacinths and narcissus blooms, while the ladies Mevrian and Armelline, more lovely than any queens of earth, waited at the head of the golden staircase above the inner court to greet Queen Sophonisba come to Galing.

 

A hard matter it were to tell of all the pleasures prepared for Queen Sophonisba and for her delight by the lords of Demonland. The first day she spent among the parks and pleasure gardens of Galing, where Lord Juss

[p. 496]

showed her his great lime avenues, his yew-houses, hie fruit gardens and sunk gardens and his private walks and bowers; his walks of creeping thyme which being trodden on sends up sweet odours to refresh the treader; his ancient water-gardens beside the Brankdale Beck, whither the water nymphs resort in summer and are seen under. the moon singing and combing their hair with combs of gold.

On the second day he showed her his herb gardens, disclosing to her the secret properties of herbs, wherein he was deeply learned. There grew that Zamalenticion, which being well beaten up with fat without salt is sovran for all wounds. And Dittany, which if eaten soon puts out the arrow and healeth the wounds; and not only by its presence stayeth snakes wheresoever they be handy to it, but by reason of its smell carried by wind and they smell it they die. And Mandragora, which being taken into the middle of an house compelleth all evils out of the house, and relieveth also headaches and produceth sleep. Also he showed her Sea Holly in his garden, that is born in secret places and in wet ones, and the root of it is as the head of that monster which men name the Gorgon, and the root-twigs have both eyes and nose and colour of serpents. Of this he told her how when taking up the root, a man must see to it that no sun shine on it, and he who would carve it must avert his head, for it is not permitted that man may see that root unharmed.

The third day Juss showed the Queen his stables, where were his war-horses and horses for the chase and for chariot racing stabled in stalls with furniture of silver, and much she marvelled at his seven white mares, sisters, so like that none might tell one from another, given him in days gone by by the priests of Artemis in the lands beyond the sunset. They were immortal, bearing, ichor in their veins, not blood; and the fire of it showed in their eyes like lamps burning.

The fourth night and the fifth the Queen was at Drepaby, guesting with Lord Goldry Bluszco and the[paragraph continues] 

[p. 497]

Princess Armelline, that were wedded in Zaje Zaculo, last Yule; and the sixth and seventh nights at Owlswick, and there Spitfire made her lordly entertainment. But Lord Brandoch Daha would not have the Queen go yet to Krothering, for he had not yet made fair again his gardens and pleasaunces and restored his rich and goodly treasures to his mind after their ill handling by Corinius. And it was not his will that she should look on Krothering Castle until all was there stablished anew according to its ancient glory.

The eighth day she came again to Galing, and now Lord Juss showed her his study, with his astrolabes of orichalc, figured with all the signs of the Zodiac and the mansions of the moon, standing a tall man's height above the floor, and his perspectives and gloves and crystals and hollow looking-glasses; and great crystal globes where he kept homunculi whom he had made by secret processes of nature, both men and women, less than a span long, as beautiful as one could wish to see in their little coats, eating and drinking and going their ways in those mighty globes of crystal where his art had given them being.

Every night, whether at Galing, Owlswick, or Drepaby Mire, was feasting held in her honour, with music and dancing and merry-making and all delight, and poetical recitations and feats of arms and horsemanship, and masques and interludes the like whereof hath not been seen on earth for beauty and wit and all magnificence.

 

Now was the ninth day come of the Queen's guesting in Demonland, and it was the eve of Lord Juss's birthday, when all the great ones in the land were come together, as four years ago they came, to do honour on the morrow unto him and unto his brethren as was their wont aforetime. It was fine bright weather, with every little while a shower to bring fresh sweetness to the air, colour and refreshment to the earth, and gladness to the sunshine. Juss walked with the Queen in the morning in the woods of Moongarth Bottom, now bursting into leaf; and after their mid-day meal showed her his treasuries cut in the

[p. 498]

live rock under Galing Castle, where she beheld bars of gold and silver piled like trunks of trees; unhewn crystals of ruby, chrysoprase, or hyacinth, so heavy a strong man might not lift them; stacks of ivory in the tusk, piled to the ceiling; chests and jars filled with perfumes and costly spices, ambergris, frankincense, sweet-scented sandalwood and myrrh and spikenard; cups and beakers and cared wine-jars and lamps and caskets made of pure gold, worked and chased with the forms of men and women and birds and beasts and creeping things, and ornamented with jewels beyond price, margarites and pink and yellow sapphires, smaragds and chrysoberyls and yellow diamonds.

When the Queen had had her fill of gazing on these, he carried her to his great library where statues stood of the nine Muses about Apollo, and all the walls were hidden with books: histories and songs of old days, books of philosophy, alchymy and astronomy and art magic, romances and music and lives of great men dead and great treatises of all the arts of peace and war, with pictures and illuminated characters. Great windows opened southward on the garden from the library, and climbing rose-trees and plants of honeysuckle and evergreen magnolia clustered about the windows. Great chairs and couches stood about the open hearth where a fire of cedar logs burned in winter time. Lamps of moonstones self-effulgent shaded with cloudy green tourmaline stood on silver stands on the table and by each couch and chair, to give light when the day was over; and all the air was sweet with the scent of dried rose-leaves kept in ancient bowls and vases of painted earthenware.

Queen Sophonisba said, "My lord, I love this best of all the fair things thou hast shown me in thy castle of Galing: here where all trouble seems a forgotten echo of an ill world left behind. Surely my heart is glad, O my friend, that thou and these other lords of Demonland shall now enjoy your goodly treasures and fair days in your dear native land in peace and quietness all your lives."

The Lord Juss stood at the window that looked westward

[p. 499]

across the lake to the great wall of the Scarf. Some shadow of a noble melancholy hovered about his sweet dark countenance as his gaze rested on a curtain of rain that swept across the face of the mountain wall, half veiling the high rock summits. "Yet think, madam," said he, "that we be young of years. And to strenuous minds there is an unquietude in over-quietness."

Now he conducted her through his armouries where he kept his weapons and weapons for his fighting men and all panoply of war. There he showed her swords and spears, maces and axes and daggers, orfreyed and damascened and inlaid with jewels; byrnies and baldricks and shields; blades so keen, a hair blown against them in a wind should be parted in twain; charmed helms on which no ordinary sword would bite. And Juss said unto the Queen, "Madam, what thinkest thou of these swords and spears? For know well that these be the ladder's rungs that we of Demonland climbed up by to that signiory and principality which now we hold over the four corners of the world."

She answered, "O my lord, I think nobly of them. For an ill part it were while we joy in the harvest, to contemn the tools that prepared the land for it and reaped it."

While she spoke, Juss took down from its hook a great sword with a haft bound with plaited cords of gold and silver wire and cross-hilts of latoun set with studs of amethyst and a drake's head at either end of the hilt with crimson almandines for his eyes, and the pommel a ball of deep amber-coloured opal with red and green flashes.

"With this sword," said he, "I went up with Gaslark to the gates of Carce, four years gone by this summer, being clouded in my mind by the back-wash of the sending of Gorice the King. With this sword I fought an hour back to back with Brandoch Daha, against Corund and Corinius and their ablest men: the greatest fight that ever I fought, and against the fearfullest odds. Witchland himself beheld us from Carce walls through the watery

[p. 500]

mist and glare, and marvelled that two men that are born of woman could perform such deeds."

He untied the bands of the sword and drew it singing from its sheath. "With this sword," he said, looking lovingly along the blade, "I have overcome hundreds of mine enemies: Witches, and Ghouls, and barbarous people out of Impland and the southern seas, pirates of Esamocia and princes of the eastern main. With this sword I gat the victory in many a battle, and most glorious of all in the battle before Carce last September. There, fighting against great Corund in the press of the fight I gave him with this sword the wound that was his death-wound."

He put up the sword again in its sheath: held it a minute as if pondering whether or no to gird it about his waist: then slowly turned to its place on the wall and hung it up again. He carried his head high like a war-horse, keeping his gaze averted from the Queen as they went out from the great armoury in Galing; yet not so skilfully but she marked a glistening in his eye that seemed a tear standing above his lower eyelash.

 

That night was supper set in Lord Juss's private chamber: a light regale, yet most sumptuous. They sat at a round table, nine in company: the three brethren, the Lords Brandoch Daha, Zigg, and Volle, the Ladies Armelline and Mevrian, and the Queen. Brightly flowed the wines of Krothering and Norvasp and blithely went the talk to outward seeming. But ever and again silence swung athwart the board, like a gray pall, till Zigg broke it with a jest, or Brandoch Daha or his sister Mevrian. The Queen felt the chill behind their merriment. The silent fits came oftener as the feast went forward, as if wine and good cheer had lost their native quality and turned fathers of black moods and gloomy meditations.

The Lord Goldry Bluszco, that till now had spoke little, spake now not at all, his proud dark face fixed in staid pensive lines of thought. Spitfire too was fallen silent, his face leaned upon his hand, his brow bent; and whiles he drank amain, and whiles he drummed his fingers

[p. 501]

on the table. The Lord Brandoch Daha leaned back in his ivory chair, sipping his wine. Very demure, through half-closed eyes, like a panther dozing in the noon-day, he watched his companions at the: feast. Like sunbeams chased by cloud-shadows across a mountain-side in windy weather, the lights of humorous enjoyment played across his face.

The Queen said, "O my lords, you have promised me I should hear the full tale of your wars in Impland and the Impland seas, and how you came to Carce and of the great battle that there befell, and of the latter end of all the lords of Witchland and of Gorice XII. of memory accursed. I pray you let me hear it now, that our hearts may be gladdened by the tale of great deeds the remembrance whereof shall be for all generations, and that we may rejoice anew that all the lords of Witchland are dead and gone because of whom and their tyranny earth hath groaned and laboured these many years."

Lord Juss, in whose face when it was at rest she had beheld that same melancholy which she had marked in him in the library that same day, poured forth more wine, and said, "O Queen Sophonisba, thou shalt hear it all." Therewith he told all that had befallen since they last bade her adieu in Koshtra Belorn: of the march to the sea at Muelva; of Laxus and his, great fleet destroyed and sunk off Melikaphkhaz; of the battle before Carce and its swinging fortunes; of the unhallowed light and flaring signs in heaven whereby they knew of the King's conjuring again in Carce; of their waiting in the night, armed at all points, with charms and amulets ready against what dreadful birth might be from the King's enchantments; of the blasting of the Iron Tower, and the storming of the hold in pitch darkness; of the lords of Witchland murthered at the feast, and nought left at last of the power and pomp and terror that was Witchland save dying embers of a funeral fire and voices wailing in the wind before the dawn.

When he had done, the Queen said, as if talking in a

[p. 502]

dream, "Surely it may be said of these kings and lords of Witchland dead--

	 
		   These wretched eminent things
		 Leave no more fame behind 'em than should one
		 Fall in a frost, and leave his print in snow;
		 As soon as the sun shines, it ever melts
		 Both form and matter."
		
		 With those words spoken dropped silence again like a pall athwart that banquet table, more tristful than before and full of heaviness.

On a sudden Lord Brandoch Daha stood up, unbuckling from his shoulder his golden baldrick set with apricot-coloured sapphires and diamonds and fire-opals that imaged thunderbolts. He threw it before him on the table, with his sword, clattering among the cups. "O Queen Sophonisba," said he, "thou hast spoken a fit funeral dirge for our glory as for Witchland's. This sword Zeldornius gave me. I bare it at Krothering Side against Corinius, when I threw him out of Demonland. I bare it at Melikaphkhaz. I bare it in the last great fight in Witchland. Thou wilt say it brought me good luck and victory in battle. But it brought not to me, as to Zeldornius, this last best luck of all: that earth should gape for me when my great deeds were ended."

The Queen looked at him amazed, marvelling to see him so much moved that she had known until now so lazy mocking and so debonair.

But the other lords of Demonland stood up and flung down their jewelled swords on the table beside Lord Brandoch Daha's. And Lord Juss spake and said, "We may well cast down our swords as a last offering on Witchland's grave. For now must they rust: seamanship and all high arts of war must wither: and, now that our great enemies are dead and gone, we that were lords of all the world must turn shepherds and hunters, lest we become mere mountebanks and fops, fit fellows for the chambering Beshtrians or the Red Foliot. O Queen Sophonisba,

[p. 503]

and you my brethren and my friends, that are come to keep my birthday with me to-morrow in Galing, what make ye in holiday attire? Weep ye rather, and weep again, and clothe you all in black, thinking that our mightiest feats of arms and the high southing of the bright star of our magnificence should bring us unto timeless ruin. Thinking that we, that fought but for fighting's sake, have in the end fought so well we never may fight more; unless it should be in fratricidal rage each against each. And ere that should betide, may earth close over us and our memory perish."

Mightily moved was the Queen to behold such a violent sorrow, albeit she could not comprehend the roots and reason of it. Her voice shook a little as she said, "My Lord Juss, my Lord Brandoch Daha, and you other lords of Demonland, it was little in mine expectation to find in you such a passion of sour discontent. For I came to rejoice with you. And strangely it soundeth in mine ear to hear you mourn and lament your worst enemies, at so great hazard of your lives and all you held dear, struck down by you at last. I am but a maid and young in years, albeit my memory goeth back two hundred springs, and ill it befitteth me to counsel great lords and men of war. Yet strange it seemeth if there be not peaceful enjoyment and noble deeds of peace for you all your days, who are young and noble and lords of all the world and rich in every treasure and high gifts of learning, and the fairest country in the world for your dear native land. And if your swords must not rust, ye may bear them against the uncivil races of Impland and other distant countries to bring them to subjection."

But Lord Goldry Bluszco laughed bitterly. "O Queen," he cried, "shall the correction of feeble savages content these swords, which have warred against the house of Gorice and against all his chosen captains that upheld the great power of Carce and the glory and the fear thereof?"

And Spitfire said, "What joy shall we have of soft beds and delicate meats and all the delights that be in many-mountained[paragraph continues] 

[p. 504]

Demonland, if we must be stingless drones, with no action to sharpen our appetite for ease?"

All were silent awhile. Then the Lord Juss spake saying, "O Queen Sophonisba, hast thou looked ever, on a showery day in spring, upon the rainbow flung across earth and sky, and marked how all things of earth beyond it, trees, mountain-sides, and rivers, and fields, and woods, and homes of men, are transfigured by the colours that are in the bow?"

"Yes," she said, "and oft desired to reach them."

"We," said Juss, "have flown beyond the rainbow. And there we found no fabled land of heart's desire, but wet rain and wind only and the cold mountain-side. And our hearts are a-cold because of it."

The Queen said, "How old art thou, my Lord Juss, that thou speakest as an old man might speak?"

He answered, "I shall be thirty-three years old tomorrow, and that is young by the reckoning of men. None of us be old, and my brethren and Lord Brandoch Daha younger than I. Yet as old men may we now look forth on our lives, since the goodness thereof is gone by for us." And he said, "Thou O Queen canst scarcely know our grief; for to thee the blessed Gods gave thy heart's desire: youth for ever, and peace. Would they might give us our good gift, that should be youth for ever, and war; and unwaning strength and skill in arms. Would they might but give us our great enemies alive and whole again. For better it were we should run hazard again of utter destruction, than thus live out our lives like cattle fattening for the slaughter, or like silly garden plants."

The Queen's eyes were large with wonder. "Thou couldst wish it?" she said.

Juss answered and said, "A true saying it is that 'a grave is a rotten foundation.' If thou shouldst proclaim to me at this instant the great King alive again and sitting again in Carce, bidding us to the dread arbitrament of war, thou shouldst quickly see I told thee truth."

While Juss spake, the Queen turned her gaze from one

[p. 505]

to another round the board. In every eye, when he spake of Carce, she saw the lightning of the joy of battle as of life returning to men held in a deadly trance. And when he had done, she saw in every eye the light go out. Like Gods they seemed, in the glory of their youth and pride, seated about that table; but sad and tragical, like Gods exiled from wide Heaven.

None spake, and the Queen cast down her eyes, sitting as if wrapped in thought. Then the Lord Juss rose to his feet, and said, "O Queen Sophonisba, forgive us that our private sorrows should make us so forgetful of our hospitality as weary our guest with a mirthless feast. But think 'tis because we know thee our dear friend we use not too much ceremony. To-morrow we will be merry with thee, whate'er betide thereafter."

So they bade good-night. But as they went out into the garden under the stars, the Queen took Juss aside privately and said to him, "My lord, since thou and my Lord Brandoch Daha came first of mortal men into Koshtra Belorn, and fulfilled the weird according to preordainment, this only hath been my desire: to further you and to enhance you and to obtain for you what you would, so far as in me lieth. Though I be but a weak maid, yet hath it seemed good to the blessed Gods to show kindness unto me. One holy prayer may work things we scarce dream of. Wilt thou that I pray to Them to-night?"

"Alas, dear Queen," said he, "shall those estranged and divided ashes unite again? Who shall turn back the floodtide of unalterable necessity?"

But she said, "Thou hast crystals and perspectives can show thee things afar off. I pray bring them, and row me in thy boat up to Moonmere Head that we may land there about midnight. And let my Lord Brandoch Daha come with us and thy brothers. But let none else know of it. For that were but to mock them with a false dawn, if it should prove at last to be according to thy wisdom, O my lord, and not according to my prayers."

So the Lord Juss did according to the word of that fair Queen, and they rowed her up the lake by moonlight.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 506]

None spake, and the Queen sate apart in the bows of the boat, in earnest supplication to the blessed Gods. When they were come to the head of the lake they went ashore on a little spit of silver sand. The April night was above them, mild with moonlight. The shadows of the fells rose inky black and beyond imagination huge against the sky. The Queen kneeled awhile in silence on the cold ground, and those lords of Demonland stood together in silence watching her.

In a while she raised her eyes to heaven; and behold, between the two main peaks of the Scarf, a meteor crept slowly out of darkness and across the night-sky, leaving a trail of silver fire, and silently departed into darkness. They watched, and another came, and yet another, until the western sky above the mountain was ablaze with them. From two points of heaven they came, one betwixt the foreclaws of the Lion and one in the dark sign of Cancer. And they that came from the Lion were sparkling like the white fires of Rigel or Altair, and they that came from the Crab were haughty red, like the lustre of Antares. The lords of Demonland, leaning on their swords, watched these portents for a long while in silence. Then the travelling meteors ceased, and the steadfast stars shone lonely and serene. A soft breeze stirred 'among the alders and willows by the lake. The lapping waters lapping the shingly shore made a quiet tune. A nightingale in a coppice on a little hill sang so passionate sweet it seemed some spirit singing. As in a trance they stood and listened, until that singing ended, and a hush fell on water and wood and lawn. Then all the east blazed up for an instant with sheet lightnings, and thunder growled from the east beyond the sea.

The thunder took form so that music was in the heavens, filling earth and sky as with trumpets calling to battle, first high, then low, then shuddering down to silence. Juss and Brandoch Daha knew it for that great call to battle which had preluded that music in the dark night without her palace, in Koshtra Belorn, when first they stood before her portal divine. The great call went

[p. 507]

again through earth and air, sounding defiance; and in its train new voices, groping in darkness, rising to passionate lament, hovering, and dying away on the wind, till nought remained but a roll of muffled thunder, long, low, quiet, big with menace.

The Queen turned to Lord Juss. Surely her eyes were like two stars shining in the gloom. She said in a drowned voice, "Thy perspectives, my lord."

So the Lord Juss made a fire of certain spices and herbs, and smoke rose in a thick cloud full of fiery sparks, with a sweet sharp smell. And he said, "Not we, O my Lady, lest our desires cheat our senses. But look thou in my perspectives through the smoke, and say unto us what thou shalt behold in the east beyond the unharvested sea."

The Queen looked. And she said, "I behold a harbour town and a sluggish river coming down to the harbour through a mere set about with mud flats, and a great waste of fen stretching inland from the sea. Inland, by the river side, I behold a great bluff standing above the fens. And walls about the bluff, as it were a citadel. And the bluff and the walled hold perched thereon are black like old night, and like throned iniquity sitting in the place of power, darkening the desolation of that fen."

Juss said, "Are the walls thrown down? Or is not the great round tower south-westward thrown down in ruin athwart the walls?"

She said, "All is whole and sound as the walls of thine own castle, my lord."

Juss said, "Turn the crystal, O Queen, that thou mayest see within the walls if any persons be therein, and tell us their shape and seeming."

The Queen was silent for a space, gazing earnestly in the crystal. Then she said, "I see a banquet hall with walls of dark green jasper speckled with red, and a massy cornice borne up by giants three-headed carved in black serpentine; and each giant is; bowed beneath the weight of a huge crab-fish. The hall is seven-sided. Two long tables there be and a cross-bench. There be iron

[p. 508]

braziers in the midst of the hall and flamboys burning in silver stands, and revellers quaffing at the long tables. Some dark young men black of brow and great of jaw, most soldier-like, brothers mayhap. Another with them, ruddy of countenance and kindlier to look on, with long brown moustachios. Another that weareth a brazen byrny and sea-green kirtle; an old man he, with sparse gray whiskers and flabby cheeks; fat and unwieldy; not a comely old man to look upon."

She ceased speaking, and Juss said, 'Whom seest thou else in the banquet hall, O Queen?"

She said, "The flare of the flamboys hideth the cross-bench. I will turn the crystal again. Now I behold two diverting themselves with dice at the table before the cross-bench. One is well-looking enough, well knit, of a noble port, with curly brown hair and beard and keen eyes like a sailor. The other seemeth younger in years, younger than any of you, my lords. He is smooth shaved, of a fresh complexion and fair curling hair, and his brow is wreathed with a festal garland. A most big broad strong and seemly young man. Yet is there a somewhat maketh me ill at ease beholding him; and for all his fair countenance and royal bearing he seemeth displeasing in mine eyes.

"There is a damosel there too, watching them while they play. Showily dressed she is, and hath some beauty. Yet scarce can I commend her----" and, ill at ease on a sudden, the Queen suddenly put down the crystal.

The eye of Lord Brandoch Daha twinkled, but he kept silence. Lord Juss said, "More, I entreat thee, O Queen, ere the reek be gone and the vision fade. If this be all within the banquet hall, seest thou nought without?"

Queen Sophonisba looked again, and in a while said, "There is a terrace facing to the west under the inner wall of that fortress of old night, and walking on it in the torchlight a man crowned like a King. Very tall he is: lean of body, and long of limb. He weareth a black doublet bedizened o'er with diamonds, and his crown is in the figure of a crab-fish, and the jewels thereof out-face the

[p. 509]

sun in splendour. But scarce may I mark his apparel for looking on the face of him, which is more terrible than the face of any man that ever I saw. And the whole aspect of the man is full of darkness and power and terror and stern command, that spirits from below earth must tremble at and do his bidding."

Juss said, "Heaven forfend that this should prove but a sweet and golden dream, and we wake to-morrow to find it flown."

"There walketh with him," said the Queen, "in intimate converse, as of a servant talking to his lord, one with a long black beard curly as the sheep's wool and glossy as the raven's wing. Pale he is as the moon in daylight hours, slender, with fine-cut features and great dark eyes, and his nose hooked like a reaping-hook; gentle-looking and melancholy-looking, yet noble."

Lord Brandoch Daha said, "Seest thou none, O Queen, in the lodgings that be in the eastern gallery above the inner court of the palace?"

The Queen answered, "I see a lofty bed-chamber hung with arras. It is dark, save for two branching candlesticks of lights burning before a great mirror. I see a lady standing before the mirror, crowned with a queen's crown of purple amethysts on her deep hair that hath the colour of the tipmost tongues of a flame. A man cometh through the door behind her, parting the heavy hangings left and right. A big man he is, and looketh like a king, in his great wolf-skin mantle and his kirtle of russet velvet with ornaments of gold. His bald head set about with grizzled curls and his bushy beard flecked with gray speak him something past his prime; but the fight of youth burns in his eager eyes and the vigour of youth is in his tread. She turneth to greet him. Tall she is, and young she is, and beautiful, and proud-faced, and sweet-faced, and most gallant-hearted too, and merry of heart too, if her looks belie her not."

Queen Sophonisba covered her eyes, saying, "My lords, I see no more. The crystal curdles within like foam in a whirlpool under a high force in rainy weather.[paragraph continues] 

[p. 510]

Mine eyes grow sore with watching. Let us row back, for the night is far spent and I am weary."

But Juss stayed her and said, "Let me dream yet awhile. The double pillar of the world, that member thereof which we, blind instruments of inscrutable Heaven, did shatter, restored again? From this time forth to maintain, I and he, his and mine, ageless and deathless for ever, for ever our high contention whether he or we should be great masters of all the earth? If this he but phantoms, O Queen, thou'st 'ticed us to the very heart of bitterness. This we could have missed, unseen and unimagined: but not now. Yet how were it possible the Gods should relent and the years return?"

But the Queen spake, and her voice was like the falling shades of evening, pulsing with hidden splendour, as of a sense of wakening starlight alive behind the fading blue. "This King," she said, "in the wickedness of his impious pride did wear on his thumb the likeness of that worm Ouroboros, as much as to say his kingdom should never end. Yet was he, when the appointed hour did come, thundered down into the depths of Hell. And if now he be raised again and his days continued, 'tis not for his virtue but for your sake, my lords, whom the Almighty Gods do love. Therefore I pray you possess your hearts awhile with humility before the most high Gods, and speak no unprofitable words. Let us row back."

 

Dawn came golden-fingered, but the lords of Demonland lay along abed after their watch in the night. About the third hour before noon, the presence was filled in the high presence chamber, and the three brethren sat upon their thrones, as four years ago they sat, between the golden hippogriffs, and beside them were thrones set for Queen Sophonisba and Lord Brandoch Daha. All else of beauty and splendour in Galing Castle had the Queen beheld, but not till now this presence chamber; and much she marvelled at its matchless beauties and rarities, the hangings and the carvings on the walls, the fair pictures, the lamps of moonstone and escarbuncle self-effulgent,

[p. 511]

the monsters on the four-and-twenty pillars, carved in precious stones so great that two men might scarce circle them with their arms, and the constellations burning in that firmament of lapis lazuli below the golden canopy. And when they drank unto Lord Juss the cup of glory to be, wishing him long years and joy and greatness for ever more, the Queen took a little cithern saying, "O my lord, I will sing a sonnet to thee and to you my lords and to sea-girt Demonland." So saying, she smote the strings, and sang in that crystal voice of hers, so true and delicate that all that were in that hall were ravished by its beauty:

	 
		Shall I compare thee to a Summers day?
		   Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
		 Rough windes do shake the darling buds of Maie,
		   And Sommers lease hath all too short a date:
		 Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
		   And often is his gold complexion dimn'd;
		 And every faire from faire some-time declines,
		   By chance or natures changing course untrim'd;
		     But thy eternall Sommer shall not fade
		       Nor loose possession of that faire thou ow'st;
		     Nor shall Death brag thou wandr'st in his shade,
		       When in eternall lines to time thou grow'st:
		 So long as men can breath, or eyes can see,
		 So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
		
		 When she had done, Lord Juss rose up very nobly and kissed her hand, saying, "O Queen Sophonisba, fosterling of the Gods, shame us not with praises that be too high for mortal men. For well thou knowest what thing alone might bring us content. And 'tis not to be thought that that which was seen at Moonmere Head last night was very truth indeed, but rather the dream of a night vision."

But Queen Sophonisba answered and said, "My Lord Juss, blaspheme not the bounty of the blessed Gods, lest They be angry and withdraw it, Who have granted

[p. 512]

unto you of Demonland from this day forth youth everlasting and unwaning strength and skill in arms, and--but hark!" she said, for a trumpet sounded at the gate, three strident blasts.

At the sound of that trumpet blown, the lords Goldry and Spitfire sprang from their seats, clapping hand to sword. Lord Juss stood like a stag at gaze. Lord Brandoch Daha sat still in his golden chair, scarce changing his pose of easeful grace. But all his frame seemed alight with action near to birth, as the active principle of light pulses and grows in the sky at sunrise. He looked at the Queen, his eyes filled with a wild surmise. A serving man, obedient to Juss's nod, hastened from the chamber.

No sound was there in that high presence chamber in Galing till in a minute's space the serving man returned with startled countenance, and, bowing before Lord Juss, said, "Lord, it is an Ambassador from Witchland and his train. He craveth present audience."

THE WORM

OUROBOROS

 

     
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 513]

 

Argument: with Dates

[Dates Anno Carces Conditae. The action of the story covers exactly four years; from the 22nd April 399 to 22nd April 403 A.C.C.]

   Year
 A.C.C.    
  171.  Queen Sophonisba born in Morna Moruna. 
  187.  Gorice III. eat up with mantichores beyond the Bhavinan. 
  188.  Morna Moruna sacked by Gorice IV. Queen Sophonisba lodged by divine agency in Koshtra Belorn. 
  337.  Gorice VII., conjuring in Carce, slain by evil spirits. 
  341.  Birth of Zeldornius. 
  344.  Birth of Corsus in Tenemos. 
  353.  Corund born in Carce. 
  354.  Birth of Zenambria, duchess to Corsus. 
  357.  Birth of Helteranius. 
  360.  Volle born at Darklairstead in Demonland. 
  361.  Birth of Jalcanaius Fostus. 
  363.  Birth of Vizz at Darklairstead. 
  364.  Gro born in Goblinland at the court of Zaje Zaculo, the foster-brother of Gaslark the King.
 Gaslark born in Zaje Zaculo. 
  366.  Laxus, high Admiral of Witchland and after king of Pixyland, born in Estremerine. 
  367.  Birth of Gallandus in Buteny. 
  369.  Zigg born at Many Bushes in Amadardale. 
  370.  Juss born at Galing. 
  371.  Goldry Bluszco born in Galing.
 Dekalajus, eldest of the sons of Corsus, born in Witchland. 
  372.  Spitfire born in Galing.
 Brandoch Daha born in Krothering. 
  374.  La Fireez born in Norvasp of Pixyland. [p. 514]
 Gorius, second of Corsus's sons, born in Witchland. 
  375.  Corinius born in Carce. 
  376.  Prezmyra, sister to the Prince La Fireez, second wife to Corund, and after Queen of Impland, born in Norvasp. 
  379.  Birth of Hacmon, eldest of the sons of Corund.
 Mevrian, sister to Lord Brandoch Daha, born in Krothering. 
  380.  Heming born, second of Corund's sons. 
  381.  Dormanes born, third of Corund's sons. 
  382.  Birth of Viglus, Corund's fourth son, in Carce.
 Recedor, King of Goblinland, privily poisoned by Corsus:
 Gaslark reigns in his stead in Zaje Zaculo.
 Sriva, daughter to Corsus and Zenambria, born in Carce. 
  383.  Armelline, cousin-german to King Gaslark, after bethrothed and wed to Goldry Bluszco, born in Carce. 
  384.  Cargo, youngest of the sons of Corund, born in Carce. 
  388.  Goblinland invaded by the Ghouls: the flight out of Zaje Zaculo: Tenemos burnt: the power of the Ghouls crushed by Corsus. 
  389.  Zeldornius, Helteranius, and Jalcanaius Fostus sent by Gaslark with an armament into Impland, and there ensorcelled. 
  390.  The Witches harry in Goblinland: their defeat by the help of Demonland on Lormeron field: the slaying of Gorice X. by Brandoch Daha: Corsus taken captive and shamed by the Demons: Gro, abandoning the Goblin cause, dwells in exile at the court of Witchland. 
  393.  La Fireez, besieged by Fax Fay Faz at Lida Nanguna in Outer Impland, delivered by the Demons: Goldry Bluszco repulsed by Corsus before Harquem. 
  395.  Corund weds in Norvasp with the Princess Prezmyra.[p. 515] 
  398.  The Ghouls burst forth in unimagined ferocity: their harrying in Demonland and burning of Goldry's house at Drepaby. 
  399.  Holy war of Witchland, Demonland, Goblinland, and other polite nations against the Ghouls: Laxus, with the countenance of his master Gorice XI. and by the counsel of Gro, deserts with all his fleet in the battle off Kartadza (eastern seaboard of Demonland): the Ghouls nevertheless overwhelmed by the Demons in Kartadza Sound, and their whole race exterminated: Gorice XI. demands homage of Demonland, wrastles with Goldry Bluszco, and is in that encounter slain. Gorice XII., renewing with happier fortune the artificial practices of Gorice VII. in Carce, takes Goldry with a sending magical: Juss and Brandoch Daha, partly straught of their wits, unadvisedly go up with Gaslark against Carce and are there clapped up: their delivery by the agency of La Fireez, and return to their own country: Juss's dream: the council in Krothering: the first expedition to Impland. The King's revenge on Pixyland executed by Corinius, and La Fireez dispossessed and driven into exile: Corund's great march over Akra Skabranth, sudden irruption into Outer Impland, and conquest of that country: shipwreck of the Demon fleet: carnage at Salapanta: march of the Demons into Upper Impland: amorous commerce of Brandoch Daha with the Lady of Ishnain Nemartra, who lays a weird upon him: Corund besieges and captures Eshgrar Ogo: Juss and Brandoch Daha escape across the Moruna and winter by the Bhavinan. 
  400.  News of Eshgrar Ogo brought to Carce: Corund honoured by the King therefor with the style of king of Impland. Juss and Brandoch Daha cross the Zia Pass: fight with the mantichore: ascent of Koshtra Pivrarcha, entrance into Koshtra Belorn, and entertainment by Queen Sophonisba: [p. 516] Juss's vision of Goldry bound on Zora: the Queen's furtherance of their designs: the hippogriff hatched beside the Lake of Ravary: the fatal folly of Mivarsh: Juss in despite of the Queen's admonitions assays Zora Rach on foot and comes within a little of losing his life. Prezmyra Queen of Impland and Laxus king of Pixyland crowned in Carce: the King sends an expedition to put down Demonland, setting Corsus in chief command thereof: Laxus defeats Volle by sea off Lookinghaven, and Corsus Vizz by land at Crossby Outsikes, Vizz slain on the field: cruel and despiteful policy of Corsus: dissensions betwixt him and Gallandus: great reversal of these disasters by Spitfire, Corsus's army cut in pieces by him on the Rapes of Brima and the survivors besieged in Owlswick: discontent of the army: Corsus with his own hands murthers Gallandus in Owlswick: tidings brought by Gro to Carce: Corsus degraded by the King, who commissions Corinius as king of Demonland to retrieve the matter: battle of Thremnir's Heugh, with the overthrow of Spitfire's power: Corinius crowned in Owlswick: arrest of Corsus and his sons and their despatch home to Witchland. 
  401.  Reduction of eastern Demonland by Corinius, save only Galing which Bremery holds with seventy men: Corinius moves west over the Stile: his insolent demands to Mevrian: miscarriage of Gaslark's expedition to the relief of Krothering, his defeat at Aurwath: masterly retreat of Corinius from Krothering before superior numbers: his ambushing and destroying of Spitfire's army on the shores of Switchwater: fall of Krothering and surrender of Mevrian: her escape by the counsel of Gro, the help of Corund's sons, and the connivance of Laxus: her flight to Westmark and thence east again into Neverdale: Gro abandons the cause of Witchland for that of Demonland: [p. 517] his and Mevrian's meeting with Juss and Brandoch Daha on their return home after two years: revolt of the east and relief of Galing: masterly dispositions both by Corinius and by the Demons for a decisive encounter: battle of Krothering Side and expulsion of the Witches from Demonland. 
  402.  Second expedition to Impland, in which Gaslark and La Fireez join the Demons, lands at Muelva on the Didornian Sea: Juss, Spitfire, Brandoch Daha, Gro, Zigg, and Astar cross the Moruna: Juss's riding of the hippogriff to Zora Rach and deliverance of Goldry: Laxus sent by the King with an overwhelming power of ships to close Melikaphkhaz Straits against the Demons on their homeward voyage: battle off Melikaphkhaz: destruction of the Witchland armada: Laxus and La Fireez slain: a single surviving ship brings the tidings to Carce: Corund called captain  in Carce: gathering of the Witchland armies and their subject allies: landing of the Demons in the south: parley before Carce: the King's warning to Juss: implacable enmity between them: signs and prognosticks in the heavens: the King's desperate resolution if the fight should go against him: battle before Carce: slaying of Gro and Corund: defeat of the King's forces: council of war in Carce, Corinius the second time captain general: Corsus, counselling surrender, falls greatly into the King's displeasure and is by him shamed and dismissed: in despair he compasses the taking off of Corinius and the sons of Corund, and unhappily of his own son too and his duchess, by poison, but is himself slain by Corinius: blasting of the Iron Tower in the miscarriage of the King's last conjuring: the Demons enter into Carce: their encounter there with Queen Prezmyra: her tragical end and triumph: in all of which is completed the fall of [p. 518] the empire and kingdom of the house of Gorice in Carce. 
  403.  Queen Sophonisba in Demonland: the marvel of marvels that restored the world on Lord Juss's natal day, the thirty-third year of his life in Galing. 
  

    
The Worm Ouroboros, by E. R. Eddison, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 519]

 

Bibliographical Note on the Verses

   CHAP.       
  III.  The Funeral dirge on King Gorice XI.  William Dunbar (late 15th century) "Lament for the Makaris: quhen he wes seik." 
  "  Lampoon on Gro  Epigram in memory of William Parrie, "a capital traitor," executed for treason in 1584: quoted by Holinshed. 
  IV.  Prophecy concerning the last three Kings of the house of Gorice in Carce  -------- 
  VII.  Song in praise of Prezmyra  Thomas Carew (1598-1639). 
  "  Corund's Song of the Chine  "An Antidote against Melancholy" (1661). 
  "  Corsus's "Whene'er I bib the wine down"  Anacreonta xxv.; transl. from the Greek, E. R. E. 
  "  Corsus's other ditties  From the "Roxburgh Ballads" (collected 1774). 
  IX.  Mivarsh's staves on Salapanta  Herrick (1591-1674), "Hesperides." 
  XV.  Prezmyra's song of Lovers.  Donne (1573-1631) 
  "  Corinius's love ditty: "What an Ass is he"  "Merry Drollerie" (1691). 
  "  Corinius's song on his Mistress   Ibid. 
  XVI.  Laxus's Serenade  Anacreonta ii.; transl. from the Greek, E. R. E. 
  XVII.  March of Corsus's veterans  -------- 
  XXII.  Mevrian's ballad of the Ravens  Old Ballad: "The Three Ravens." 
  XXIV.  Mevrian's quotation on the asbeston stone.  Robert Greene (156092), "Alphonsus, King of Arragon." 
  [p. 520]       
  XXX.  Gro's serenade to Prezmyra.  Sir Henry Wotton (1568-1639), verses to Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia. 
  XXXI.  Prophecy concerning conjuring  -------- 
  XXXIII.  Lines quoted by Queen Sophonisba on the fall of Witchland  Webster (beginning of 17th century); The Duchess of Malfi," Act V. v. 
  "  Queen Sophonisba's Sonnet  Shakespeare, Sonnet xviii. 
  

The text here printed of Wotton's poem is that of "Reliquiae Wottonianae," 1st ed., 1651, edited by Izaak Walton; except that I read (with the earlier texts) 1. 5 Moone, 1. 8 Passions, 1. 16 Princess, instead of Sun, Voyces, Mistris of the 1651 edition.

Shakespeare's Sonnet is from the Quarto of 1609

The passage from Njal's Saga in the Induction is quoted from the late Sir George Dasent's classic translation.




===== BOOK: ulh.txt =====


    
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
FEMALE DANCING IN HULA COSTUME

  

UNWRITTEN LITERATURE OF HAWAII

  

The Sacred Songs of the Hula

  

collected and translated, with notes and an account of the Hula

  

by Nathaniel B. Emerson, A.M., M.D.

  

Smithsonian Institution

  

Bulletin of the Bureau of American Ethnology, no. 38

  

Washington, D.C.

  

Government Printing Office

  

[1909]

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, February 2003 and May 2005. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

  

PREFATORY NOTE

Previous to the year 1906 the researches of the Bureau were restricted to the American Indians, but by act of Congress approved June 30 of that year the scope of its operations was extended to include the natives of the Hawaiian islands. Funds were not specifically provided, however, for prosecuting investigations among these people, and in the absence of an appropriation for this purpose it was considered inadvisable to restrict the systematic investigations among the Indian tribes in order that the new field might be entered. Fortunately the publication of valuable data pertaining to Hawaii is already provided for, and the present memoir by Doctor Emerson is the first of the Bureau's Hawaiian series. It is expected that this Bulletin will be followed shortly by one comprising an extended list of works relating to Hawaii, compiled by Prof. H. M. Ballou and Dr. Cyrus Thomas.

W. H. Holmes,      

Chief.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

CONTENTS

         

        

       Page

     
       

       Introduction

       <page 7>

     
      I.

       The hula

       <page 11>

     
      II.

       The halau; the kuahu--their decoration and consecration

       <page 14>

     
      III.

       The gods of the hula

       <page 23>

     
      IV.

       Support and organization of the hula

       <page 26>

     
      V.

       Ceremonies of graduation; debut of a hula dancer

       <page 31>

     
      VI.

       The password--the song of admission

       <page 38>

     
      VII.

       Worship at the altar of the halau

       <page 42>

     
      VIII.

       Costume of the hula dancer

       <page 49>

     
      IX.

       The hula ala'a-papa

       <page 57>

     
      X.

       The hula pa-ipu, or kuolo

       <page 73>

     
      XI.

       The hula ki'i

       <page 91>

     
      XII.

       The hula pahu

       <page 103>

     
      XIII.

       The hula uliuli

       <page 107>

     
      XIV.

       The hula puili

       <page 113>

     
      XV.

       The hula ka-laau

       <page 116>

     
      XVI.

       The hula ili-ili

       <page 120>

     
      XVII.

       The hula kaekeeke

       <page 122>

     
      XVIII.

       An intermission

       <page 126>

     
      XIX.

       The hula niau-kani

       <page 132>

     
      XX.

       The hula ohe

       <page 135>

     
      XXI.

       The music and musical instruments of the Hawaiians

       <page 138>

     
      XXII.

       Gesture

       <page 176>

     
      XXIII.

       The hula pa-hua

       <page 183>

     
      XXIV.

       The hula Pele

       <page 186>

     
      XXV.

       The hula pa'i-umauma

       <page 202>

     
      XXVI.

       The hula ku'i Molokai

       <page 207>

     
      XXVII.

       The hula kielei

       <page 210>

     
      XXVIII.

       The hula mu'u-mu'u

       <page 212>

     
      XXIX.

       The hula kolani

       <page 216>

     
      XXX.

       The hula kolea

       <page 219>

     
      XXXI.

       The hula mano

       <page 221>

     
      XXXII.

       The hula ilio

       <page 223>

     
      XXXIII.

       The hula pua'a

       <page 228>

     
      XXXIV.

       The hula ohelo

       <page 233>

     
      XXXV.

       The hula kilu

       <page 235>

     
      XXXVI.

       The hula hoonana

       <page 244>

     
      XXXVII.

       The hula ulili

       <page 246>

     
      XXXVIII.

       The hula o-niu

       <page 248>

     
      XXXIX.

       The hula ku'i

       <page 250>

     
      XL.

       The oli

       <page 254>

     
      XLI.

       The water of Kane

       <page 257>

     
      XLII.

       General review

       <page 260>

     
       

       Glossary

       <page 265>

     
       

       Index

       271

     
  

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

ILLUSTRATIONS

         

        

       Page

     
      PLATE I.

       Female dancing in hula costume

       Frontispiece

     
      II.

       Ie-ie (Freycinetia arnotti) leaves and fruit

       19

     
      III.

       Hala-pepe (Draesena aurea)

       24

     
      IV

       Maile (Alyxia myrtillifolia) wreath

       32

     
      V.

       Ti (Dracaeria terminalis)

       44

     
      VI.

       Ilima (Sida fallax), lei and flowers

       56

     
      VII.

       Ipu hula, gourd drum

       73

     
      VIII.

       Marionettes (Maile-pakaha, Nihi-au-moe)

       91

     
      IX.

       Marionette (Maka-ku)

       93

     
      X.

       Pahu hula, hula drum

       103

     
      XI.

       Uli-uli, a gourd rattle

       107

     
      XII.

       Hawaiian tree-shells (Achatinella * * *)

       120

     
      XIII.

       Lehua (Metrosideros polymorpha) flowers and leaves

       126

     
      XIV.

       Hawaiian trumpet, pu (Cassis madagascarensis)

       131

     
      XV.

       Woman playing on the nose-flute (ohe-hano-ihu)

       135

     
      XVI.

       Pu-niu, a drum

       142

     
      XVII.

       Hawaiian musician playing on the uku-lele

       164

     
      XVIII.

       Hala fruit bunch and drupe with a "lei"

       170

     
      XIX.

       Pu (Triton tritonis)

       172

     
      XX.

       Phyllodia and true leaves of the koa (Acacia koa)

       181

     
      XXI.

       Pala-palai ferns

       194

     
      XXII.

       Awa-puhi, a Hawaiian ginger

       210

     
      XXIII.

       Hinano hala

       235

     
      XXIV.

       Lady dancing the hula ku'i

       250

     
      FIGURE 1.

       Puili, bamboo rattle

       113

     
      2.

       Ka, drumstick for pu-niu

       142

     
      3.

       Ohe-hano-ihu, Nose-flute

       145

     
  

  

MUSICAL PIECES

        I.

       Range of the nose-flute--Elsner

       146

     
      II.

       Music from the nose-flute--Elsner

       146

     
      III.

       The ukeke (as played by Keaonaloa)-Elsner

       149

     
      IV.

       Song from the hula pa'i-umauma--Berger

       153

     
      V.

       Song from the hula pa-ipu-Berger

       153

     
      VI.

       Song for the hula Pele--Berger

       154

     
      VII.

       Oli and mele from the hula ala'a-papa--Yarndley

       156

     
      VIII.

       He Inoa no Kamehameha--Byington

       162

     
      IX.

       Song, Poli Anuanu--Yarndley

       164

     
      X.

       Song, Hua-hua'i--Yarndley

       166

     
      XI.

       Song, Ka Mawae--Berger

       167

     
      XII.

       Song, Like no a Like--Berger

       168

     
      XIII.

       Song, Pili Aoao--Berger

       169

     
      XIV.

       Hawaii Ponoi--Berger

       172

     
  

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

INTRODUCTION

This book is for the greater part a collection of Hawaiian songs and poetic pieces that have done service from time immemorial as the stock supply of the hula. The descriptive portions have been added, not because the poetical parts could not stand by themselves, but to furnish the proper setting and to answer the questions of those who want to know.

Now, the hula stood for very much to the ancient Hawaiian; it was to him in place of our concert-hall and lecture-room, our opera and theater, and thus become one of his chief means of social enjoyment. Besides this, it kept the communal imagination in living touch with the nation's legendary past. The hula had songs proper to itself, but it found a mine of inexhaustible wealth in the epics and wonder-myths that celebrated the doing of the volcano goddess Pele and her compeers. Thus in the cantillations of the old-time hula, we find a ready-made anthology that includes every species of composition in the whole range of Hawaiian poetry. This epic [*a] of Pele was chiefly a more or less detached series of poems forming a story addressed not to the closet-reader, but to the eye and ear and heart of the assembled chiefs and people; and it was sung. The Hawaiian song, its note of joy par excellence, was the oli; but it must be noted that in every species of Hawaiian poetry, mele--whether epic or eulogy or prayer, sounding through them all we shall find the lyric note.

The most telling record of a people's intimate life is the record which it unconsciously makes in its songs. This record which the Hawaiian people have left of themselves is full and specific. When, therefore, we ask what emotions stirred the heart of the old-time Hawaiian as he approached the great themes of life and death, of ambition and jealousy, of sexual passion, of romantic love, of conjugal love, and parental love, what his attitude toward nature and the dread forces of earthquake and storm, and the mysteries of spirit and the hereafter, we shall find our answer in the songs and prayers and recitations of the hula.

The hula, it is true, has been unfortunate in the mode and manner of its introduction to its moderns. An institution of divine, that is, religious, origin, the hula in modern times has wandered so far and fallen so low that foreign and critical esteem has come to associate it

[p. 8]

with the riotous and passionate ebullitions of Polynesian kings and the amorous posturing of their voluptuaries. We must make a just distinction, however, between the gestures and bodily contortions presented by the men and women, the actors in the hula, and their uttered words. "The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau." In truth, the actors in the hula no longer suit the action to the word. The utterance harks back to the golden age; the gesture is trumped up by the passion of the hour, or dictated by the master of the hula, to whom the real meaning of the old bards is ofttimes a sealed casket.

Whatever indelicacy attaches in modern times to some of the gestures and contortions of the hula dancers, the old-time hula songs in large measure were untainted with grossness. If there ever were a Polynesian Arcadia, and if it were possible for true reports of the doings and sayings of the Polynesians to reach us from that happy land--reports of their joys and sorrows, their love-makings and their jealousies, their family spats and reconciliations, their worship of beauty and of the gods and goddesses who walked in the garden of beauty--we may say, I think, that such a report would be in substantial agreement with the report that is here offered; but, if one's virtue will not endure the love-making of Arcadia, let him banish the myth from his imagination and hie to a convent or a nunnery.

If this book does nothing more than prove that savages are only children of a younger growth than ourselves, that what we find them to have been we ourselves--in our ancestors--once were, the labor of making it will have been not in vain.

For an account of the first hula we may look to the story of Pele. On one occasion that goddess begged her sisters to dance and sing before her, but they all excused themselves, saying they did not know the alt. At that moment in came little Hiiaka, the youngest and the favorite. Unknown to her sisters, the little maiden had practised the dance under the tuition of her friend, the beautiful but ill-fated Hopoe. When banteringly invited to dance, to the surprise of all, Hiiaka modestly complied. The wave-beaten sand-beach was her floor, the open air her hall. Feet and hands and swaying form kept time to her improvisation:

Look, Puna is a-dance in the wind;
 The palm groves of Kea-au shaken.
 Haena and the woman Hopoe dance and sing
 On the beach Nana-huki,
 A dance of purest delight,
 Down by the sea Nana-huki.

The nature of this work has made it necessary to use occasional Hawaiian words in the technical parts. At their first introduction

[p. 9]

it has seemed fitting that they should be distinguished by italics; but, once given the entree, it is assumed that, as a rule, they will be granted the rights of free speech without further explanation.

A glossary, which explains all the Hawaiian words used in the prose text, is appended. Let no one imagine, however, that by the use of this little crutch alone he will be enabled to walk or stumble through the foreign ways of the simplest Hawaiian mele. Notes, often copious, have been appended to many of the mele, designed to exhaust neither the subject nor the reader, but to answer some of the questions of the intelligent thinker.

Thanks, many thanks, are due, first, to those native Hawaiians who have so far broken with the old superstitious tradition of concealment as to unearth so much of the unwritten literary wealth stored in Hawaiian memories; second, to those who have kindly contributed criticism, suggestion, material at the different stages of this book's progress, and, lastly, to those dear friends of the author's youth--living or dead--whose kindness has made it possible to send out this fledgling to the world. The author feels under special obligations to Dr. Titus Munson Coan, of New York, for a painstaking revision of the manuscript.

   HONOLULU, HAWAII.

 

Footnotes

^7:a It might be termed a handful of lyrics strung on an epic thread.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

 [p. 11]

  

UNWRITTEN LITERATURE OF HAWAII

  

By NATHANIEL B. EMERSON

  

I.--THE HULA

One turns from the study of old genealogies, myths, and traditions of the Hawaiians with a hungry despair at finding in them means so small for picturing the people themselves, their human interests and passions; but when it comes to the hula and the whole train of feelings and sentiments that made their entrances and exits in the halau (the hall of the hula) one perceives that in this he has found the door to the heart of the people. So intimate and of so simple confidence are the revelations the people make of themselves in their songs and prattlings that when one undertakes to report what he has heard and to translate into the terms of modern speech what he has received in confidence, as it were, he almost blushes, as if he had been guilty of spying on Adam and Eve in their nuptial bower. Alas, if one could but muffle his speech with the unconscious lisp of infancy, or veil and tone his picture to correspond to the perspective of antiquity, he might feel at least that, like Watteau, he had dealt worthily, if not truly, with that ideal age which we ever think of as the world's garden period.

The Hawaiians, it is true, were many removes from being primitives; their dreams, however, harked back to a period that was close to the world's infancy. Their remote ancestry was, perhaps, akin to ours--Aryan, at least Asiatic--but the orbit of their evolution seems to have led them away from the strenuous discipline that has whipped the Anglo-Saxon branch into fighting shape with fortune.

If one comes to the study of the hula and its songs in the spirit of a censorious moralist he will find nothing for him; if as a pure. ethnologist, he will take pleasure in pointing out the physical resemblances of the Hawaiian dance to the languorous grace of the Nautch girls, of the geisha, and other oriental dancers. But if he comes as a student and lover of human nature, back of the sensuous posturings, in the emotional language of the songs he will find himself entering the playground of the human race.

The hula was a religious service, in which poetry, music, pantomime, and the dance lent themselves, under the forms of dramatic

[p. 12]

art, to the refreshment of men's minds. Its view of life was idyllic, and it gave itself to the celebration of those mythical times when gods and goddesses moved on the earth as men and women and when men and women were as gods. As to subject-matter, its warp was spun largely from the bowels of the old-time mythology into cords through which the race maintained vital connection with its mysterious past. Interwoven with these, forming the woof, were threads of a thousand hues and of many fabrics, representing the imaginations of the poet, the speculations of the philosopher, the aspirations of many a thirsty soul, as well as the ravings and flame-colored pictures of the sensualist, the mutterings and incantations of the kahuna, the mysteries and paraphernalia of Polynesian mythology, the annals of the nation's history--the material, in fact, which in another nation and under different circumstances would have gone to the making of its poetry, its drama, its opera, its literature.

The people were superstitiously religious; one finds their drama saturated with religious feeling, hedged about with tabu, loaded down with prayer and sacrifice. They were poetical; nature was full of voices for their ears; their thoughts came to them as images; nature was to them an allegory; all this found expression in their dramatic art. They were musical; their drama must needs be cast in forms to suit their ideas of rhythm, of melody, and of poetic harmony. They were, moreover, the children of passion, sensuous, worshipful of whatever lends itself to pleasure. How, then, could the dramatic efforts of this primitive people, still in the bonds of animalism, escape the note of passion? The songs and other poetic pieces Which have come down to us from the remotest antiquity are generally inspired with a purer sentiment and a loftier purpose than the modern; and it may be said of them all that when they do step into the mud it is not to tarry and wallow in it; it is rather with the unconscious naivete of a child thinking no evil.

On the principle of "the terminal conversion of opposites," which the author once heard an old philosopher expound, the most advanced modern is better able to hark back to the sweetness and light and music of the primeval world than the veriest wigwam-dweller that ever chipped an arrowhead. It is not so much what the primitive man can give us as what we can find in him that is worth our while. The light that a Goethe, a Thoreau, or a Kipling can project into Arcadia is mirrored in his own nature.

If one mistakes not the temper and mind of this generation, we are living in an age that is not content to let perish one seed of thought or one single phase of life that can be rescued from the drift of time. We mourn the extinction of the buffalo of the plains and of the birds of the islands, rightly thinking that life is somewhat

[p. 13]

less rich and full without them. What of the people of the plains and of the islands of the sea? Is their contribution so nothingless that one can affirm that the orbit of man's mind is complete without it?

Comparison is unavoidable between the, place held by the dance in ancient Hawaii and that occupied by the dance in our modern society. The ancient Hawaiians did not personally and informally indulge in the dance for their own amusement, as does pleasure-loving society at the present time. Like the Shah of Persia, but for very different reasons, Hawaiians of the old time left it to be done for them by a body of trained and paid performers. This was not because the art and practice of the hula were held in disrepute--quite the reverse--but because the hula was an accomplishment requiring special education and arduous training in both song and dance, and more especially because it was a religious matter, to be guarded against profanation by the observance of tabus and the performance of priestly rites.

This fact, which we find paralleled in every form of communal amusement, sport, and entertainment in ancient Hawaii, sheds a strong light on the genius of the Hawaiian. We are wont to think of the old-time Hawaiians as light-hearted children of nature, given to spontaneous outbursts of song and dance as the mood seized them; quite as the rustics of "merrie England" joined hands and tripped "the light fantastic toe" in the joyous month of May or shouted the harvest home at a later season. The genius of the Hawaiian was different. With him the dance was an affair of premeditation, an organized effort, guarded by the traditions of a somber religion. And this characteristic, with qualifications, will be found to belong to popular Hawaiian sport and amusement of every variety. Exception must be made, of course, of the unorganized sports of childhood. One is almost inclined to generalize and to say that those children of nature, as we are wont to call them, in this regard were less free and spontaneous than the more advanced race to which we are proud to belong. But if the approaches to the temple of Terpsichore with them were more guarded, we may confidently assert that their enjoyment therein was deeper and more, abandoned.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

II.--THE HALAU; THE KUAHU--THEIR DECORATION AND CONSECRATION

  

THE HALAU

In building a halau, or hall, in which to perform the hula a Hawaiian of the old, old time was making a temple for his god. In later and degenerate ages almost any structure would serve the purpose; it might be a flimsy shed or an extemporaneous lanai such as is used to shelter that al fresco entertainment, the luau. But in the old times of strict tabu and rigorous etiquette, when the chief had but to lift his hand and the entire population of a district ransacked plain, valley, and mountain to collect the poles, beams, thatch, and cord stuff; when the workers were so numerous that the structure grew and took shape in a day, we may well believe that ambitious and punctilious patrons of the hula, such as La'a, Liloa, or Lono-i-ka-makahiki, did not allow the divine art of Laka to house in a barn.

The choice of a site was a matter of prime importance. A formidable code enunciated the principles governing the selection. But a matter of great solicitude--there were omens to be heeded, snares and pitfalls devised by the superstitious mind for its own entanglement. The untimely sneeze, the ophthalmic eye, the hunched back were omens to be shunned.

Within historic times, since the abrogation of the tabu system and the loosening of the old polytheistic ideas, there has been in the hula a lowering of former standards, in some respects a degeneration. The old gods, however, were not entirely dethroned; the people of the hula still continued to maintain the form of divine service and still appealed to them for good luck; but the soul of worship had exhaled, the main study now was to make of the hula a pecuniary success.

In an important sense the old way was in sympathy with the thought, "Except God be with the workmen, they labor in vain that build the house." The means for gaining divine favor and averting the frown of the gods were those practised by all religionists in the infantile state of the human mind-the observance of fasts and tabus, the offering of special prayers and sacrifices. The ceremonial purification of the site, or of the building if it had been used for profane purposes, was accomplished by aspersions with sea water mixed with turmeric or red earth.

[p. 15]

When one considers the tenacious hold which all rites and ceremonies growing out of what we are accustomed to call superstitions had on the mind of the primitive Hawaiian, it puzzles one to account for the entire dropping out from modern memory of the prayers which were recited during the erection of a hall for the shelter of an institution so festive and so popular as the hula, while the prayers and gloomy ritual of the temple service have survived. The explanation may be found, perhaps, in the fact that the priests of the temple held position by the sovereign's appointment; they formed a hierarchy by themselves, whereas the position of the kumu-hula, who was also a priest, was open to anyone who fitted himself for it by training and study and bypassing successfully the ai-lolo [*a] ordeal. After that he had the right to approach the altar of the hula god with the prescribed offerings and to present the prayers and petitions of the company to Laka or Kapo.

In pleasing contrast to the worship of the heiau, the service of the hula was not marred by the presence of groaning victims and bloody sacrifices. Instead we find the offerings to have been mostly rustic tokens, things entirely consistent with light-heartedness, joy, and ecstasy of devotion, as if to celebrate the fact that heaven had come down to earth and Pan, with all the nymphs, was dancing.

During the time the halau was building the tabus and rules that regulated conduct were enforced with the utmost strictness. The members of the company were required to maintain the greatest propriety of demeanor, to suppress all rudeness of speech and manner, to abstain from all carnal indulgence, to deny themselves specified articles of food, and above all to avoid contact with a corpse. If anyone, even by accident, suffered such defilement, before being received again into fellowship or permitted to enter the halau and take part in the exercises he must have ceremonial cleansing (huikala). The kumu offered up prayers, sprinkled the offender with salt water and turmeric, commanded him to bathe in the ocean, and he was clean. If the breach of discipline was gross and willful, an act of outrageous violence or the neglect of tabu, the offender could be restored only after penitence and confession.

  

THE KUAHU

In every halau stood the kuahu, or altar, as the visible temporary abode of the deity, whose presence was at once the inspiration of the performance and the luck-bringer of the enterprise--a rustic frame embowered in greenery. The gathering of the green leaves and other sweet finery of nature for its construction and decoration was a matter of so great importance that it could not be intrusted to any chance

[p. 16]

assemblage of wild youth who might see fit to take the work in hand. There were formalities that must be observed, songs to be chanted, prayers to be recited. It was necessary to bear in mind that when one deflowered the woods of their fronds of ie-ie and fern or tore the trailing lengths of maile--albeit in honor of Laka herself--the body of the goddess was being despoiled, and the despoiling must be done with all tactful grace and etiquette.

It must not be gathered from this that the occasion was made solemn and oppressive with weight of ceremony, as when a temple was erected or as when a tabu chief walked abroad, and all men lay with their mouths in the dust. On the contrary, it was a time of joy and decorous exultation, a time when in prayer-songs and ascriptions of praise the poet ransacked all nature for figures and allusions to be used in caressing the deity.

The following adulatory prayer (kanaenae) in adoration of Laka was recited while gathering the woodland decorations for the altar. It is worthy of preservation for its intrinsic beauty, for the spirit of trustfulness it breathes. We remark the petitions it utters for the growth of tree and shrub, as if Laka had been the alma mater under whose influence all nature budded and rejoiced.

It would seem as if the physical ecstasy of the dance and the sensuous joy of all nature's finery had breathed their spirit into the aspiration and that the beauty of leaf and flower, all of them familiar forms of the god's metamorphosis--accessible to their touch and for the regalement of their senses--had brought such nearness and dearness of affection between goddess and worshiper that all fear was removed.

He kanaenae no Laka

A ke kua-hiwi, i ke kua-lono,
 Ku ana o Laka i ka mauna;
 Noho ana o Laka i ke po'o o ka ohu.
 O Laka kumu hula,
 5 Nana i a'e ka wao-kele, [*a]
 Kahi, kahi i moli'a i ka pua'a,
 I ke po'o pua'a,
 He pua'a hiwa na Kane. [*b]

[p. 17]

He kane na Laka,
 10 Na ka wahine i oni a kelakela i ka lani:
 I kupu ke a'a i ke kumu,
 I lau a puka ka mu'o,
 Ka liko, ka ao i-luna.
 Kupu ka lala, hua ma ka Hikina;
 15 Kupu ka lala ona a Maka-li'i, [*a]
 O Maka-lei, [*b] laau kaulana mai ka Po mai. [*c]
 Mai ka Po mai ka oiaio--
 I ho-i'o i-luna, i o'o i-luna.
 He luna au e ki'i mai nei ia oe, e Laka,
 20 E ho'i ke ko-kua [*d] pa-u;
 He la uniki [*e] e no kaua;
 Ha-ike-ike [*f] o ke Akua;
 Hoike ka mana o ka Wahine,
 O Laka, kaikuahine,
 25 Wahine a Lono, i ka ou-alii. [*g]
 E Lono, e hu' [*h] ia mai ka lani me ka honua.
 Nou okoa Kukulu o Kahiki. [*i]
 Me ke ano-ai [*j] aloha, e!
 E ola, e!

[p. 18]

[Translation]

A Prayer of Adulation to Laka
 In the forests, on the ridges
 Of the mountains stands Laka;
 Dwelling In the source of the mists.
 Laka, mistress of the hula,
 5 Has climbed the wooded haunts of the gods,
 Altars hallowed by the sacrificial swine,
 The head of the boar, the black boar of Kane.
 A partner he with Laka;
 Woman, she by strife gained rank in heaven.
 10 That the root may grow from the stem,
 That the young shoot may put forth and leaf,
 Pushing up the fresh enfolded bud,
 The scion-thrust bud and fruit toward the East,
 Like the tree that bewitches the winter fish,
 15 Maka-lei, tree famed from the age of night.
 Truth is the counsel of night--
 May it fruit and ripen above.
 A messenger I bring you, O Laka,
 To the girding of pau.
 20 An opening festa this for thee and me;
 To show the might of the god,
 The power of the goddess,
 Of Laka, the sister,
 To Lono a wife in the heavenly courts.
 25 O Lono, join heaven and earth!
 Thine alone are the pillars of Kahiki.
 Warm greeting, beloved one,
 We hail thee!

The cult of god Lono was milder, more humane, than that of Kane and the other major gods. No human sacrifices were offered on his altars. The statement in verse 26 accords with the general belief of the Hawaiians that Lono dwelt in foreign parts, Kukulu o Kahiki, and that he would some time come to them from across the waters. When Captain Cook arrived in his ships, the Hawaiians worshiped him as the god Lono.

The following song-prayer also is one that was used at the gathering of the greenery in the mountains and during the building of the altar in the halau. When recited in the halau all the pupils took part, and the chorus was a response in which the whole assembly in the halau were expected to join:

Pule Kuahu no Laka

Haki pu o ka nahelehele,
 Haki hana maile o ka wao,

[p. 19]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE II
 IE-IE (FREYCINETIA ARNOTTI) LEAVES AND FRUIT

 

[paragraph continues] Hooulu [*a] lei ou, o Laka, e!
 O Hiiaka [*b] ke kaula nana e hooulu na ma'i,
 5 A aeae a ulu [*c] a noho i kou kuahu,
 Eia ka pule la, he pule ola,
 He noi ola nou, e-e!
    Chorus:
 E ola ia makou, aohe hala!

[Translation]

Altar-Prayer to Laka

This spoil and rape of the wildwood,
 This plucking of wilderness maile--
 Collect of garlands, Laka, for you.
 Hiiaka, the prophet, heals our diseases.
 5 Enter, possess, inspire your altar;
 Heed our prayer, 'tis for life;
 Our petition to you is for life.
   Chorus:
 Give us life, save from transgression!

The wildwoods of Hawaii furnished in great abundance and variety small poles for the framework of the kuahu, the altar, the holy place of the halau, and sweet-scented leaves and flowers suitable for its decoration. A spirit of fitness, however, limited choice among these to certain species that were deemed acceptable to the goddess because they were reckoned as among her favorite forms of metamorphosis. To go outside this ordained and traditional range would have been an offense, a sacrilege. This critical spirit would have looked with the greatest disfavor on the practice that in modern times has crept in, of bedecking the dancers with garlands of roses, pinks, jessamine, and other nonindigenous flowers, as being utterly repugnant to the traditional spirit of the hula.

Among decorations approved and most highly esteemed stood preeminent the fragrant maile (pl. IV) and the star-like fronds and ruddy drupe of the ie-ie (pl. II) and its kindred, the hala-pepe (pl. III); the scarlet pompons of the lehua (pl. XIII) and ohi'a, with the fruit of the latter (the mountain-apple); many varieties of fern, including that splendid parasite, the "bird's nest fern" (ekaha), hailed by

[p. 20]

the Hawaiians as Mawi's paddle; to which must be added the commoner leaves and lemon-colored flowers of the native hibiscus, the hau, the breadfruit, the native banana and the dracaena (ti), plate V; and lastly, richest of all, in the color that became Hawaii's favorite, the royal yellow ilima (pl. VI), a flower familiar to the eves of the tourist to Honolulu.

While deft hands are building and weaving the light framework of the kuahu, binding its parts with strong vines and decorating it with nature's sumptuous embroidery, the kumu, or teacher, under the inspiration of the deity for whose residence he has prepared himself by long vigil and fasting with fleshly abstinence, having spent the previous night alone in the halau, is chanting or cantillating his adulatory prayers, kanaenae--songs of praise they seem to be--to the glorification of the gods and goddesses who are invited to bless the occasion with their presence and inspiration, but especially of that one, Laka, whose bodily presence is symbolized by a rude block of wood arrayed in yellow tapa that is set up on the altar itself. Thus does the kumu sing:

Pule Kuahu

Ei' au, e Laka mai uka,
 E Laka mai kai;
 O hooulu
 O ka ilio [*a] nana e hae,
 5 O ka maile hihi i ka wao,
 O ka lau-ki [*b] lei o ke akua,
 O na ku'i hauoli
 O Ha'i-ka-manawa, [*c]
 O Laka oe,
 10 O ke akua i ke kuahu nei, la;
 E ho'i, ho'i mai a noho i kou kuahu!

[Translation]

Altar Prayer (to Laka)

Here am I, oh Laka from the mountains,
 Oh Laka from the shore;
 Protect us
 Against the dog that barks:

[p. 21]

5 Reside in the wild-twining maile
 And the goddess-enwreathing ti.
 All, the joyful pulses
 Of the woman Ha'i-ka-manawa!
 Thou art Laka,
 10 The god of this altar;
 Return, return, abide in thy shrine!

The prayers which the hula folk of old times chanted while gathering the material in the woods or while weaving it into shape in the halau for the construction of a shrine did not form a rigid liturgy; they formed rather a repertory as elastic as the sighing of the breeze, or the songs of the birds whose notes embroidered the pure mountain air. There were many altar-prayers, so that if a prayer came to an end before the work was done the priest had but to begin the recitation of another prayer, or, if the spirit of the occasion so moved him, he would take up again a prayer already repeated, for until the work was entirely accomplished the voice of prayer must continue to be heard.

The pule now to be given seems to be specially suited to that portion of the service which took place in the woods at the gathering of the poles and greenery. It was designed specially for the placating of the little god-folk who front their number were addressed as Kini o ke Akua, the multitude of the little gods, and who were the counterparts in old Hawaii of our brownies, elfins, sprites, kobolds, gnomes, and other woodland imps. These creatures, though dwarfish and insignificant in person, were in such numbers--four thousand, forty thousand, four hundred thousand--and were so impatient of any invasion of their territory, so jealous of their prerogatives, so spiteful and revengeful when injured, that it was policy always to keep on the right side of them.

Pule Kuahu

E hooulu ana i Kini [*a] o ke Akua,
 Ka lehu o ke Akua,
 Ka mano o ke Akua,
 I ka pu-ku'i o ke Akua,
 5 I ka lalani Akua,
 Ia ulu mai o Kane,
 Ulu o Kanaloa;
 Ulu ka ohia, lau ka ie-ie;
 Ulu ke Akua, noho i ke kahua,
 10 A a'ea'e, a ulu, a noho kou kuahu.
 Eia ka pule la, he pule ola.
   Chorus:
 E ola ana oe!

[p. 22]

[Translation]

Altar-Prayer

Invoke we now the four thousand,
 The myriads four of the nimble,
 The four hundred thousand elves,
 The countless host of sprites,
 5 Rank upon rank of woodland gods.
 Pray, Kane, also inspire us;
 Kanaloa, too, join the assembly.
 Now grows the ohi'a, now leafs ie-ie;
 God enters, resides in the place;
 10 He mounts, inspires, abides in the shrine.
 This Is our prayer, our plea this for life!
   Chorus:
 Life shall be thine!

From one point of view these pule are not to be regarded as prayers in the ordinary sense of the word, but rather as song-offerings, verbal bouquets, affectionate sacrifices to the gods.

Footnotes

^15:a Ai-lolo. See pp. <page 32>, <page 34>, <page 36>.

^16:a Wao-kele. That portion of the mountain forest where grew the monarch trees was called wao-kele or wao-maukele.

^16:b Na Kane. Why was the offering, the black roast porkling, said to be for Kane, who was not a special patron, au-makua, of the hula? The only answer the author has been able to obtain from any Hawaiian is that, though Kane was not a god of the hula, he was a near relative. On reflection, the author can see a propriety in devoting the reeking flesh of the swine to god Kane, while to the sylvan deity, Laka, goddess of the peaceful hula, were devoted the rustic offerings that were the embodiment of her charms. Her Image, or token--an uncarved block of wood--was set up in a prominent part of the kuahu, and at the close of a performance the wreaths that had been worn by the actors were draped about the image. Thus viewed, there is a delicate propriety and significance In such disposal of the pig.

^17:a Maka-li'i (Small eyes). The Pleiades; also the period of six months, including the rainy season, that began some time in October or November and was reckoned from the date when the Pleiades appeared in the East at sunset. Maka-li'i was also the name of a month, by some reckoned as the first month of the year.

^17:b Maka-lei. The name of a famous mythological tree which had the power of attracting fish. It did not poison, but only bewitched or fascinated them. There were two trees bearing this name, one a male, the other a female, which both grew at a place in Hilo called Pali-uli. One of these, the female, was, according to tradition, carried from its root home to the fish ponds in Kailua, Oahu, for the purpose of attracting fish to the neighboring waters. The enterprise was eminently successful.

^17:c Po. Literally night; the period in cosmogony when darkness and chaos reigned, before the affairs on earth had become settled under the rule of the gods. Here the word is used to indicate a period of remote mythologic antiquity. The use of the word Po in the following verse reminds one of the French adage, "La nuit porte conseil."

^17:d Kokua. Another form for kakua, to gird on, the pa-u. (See Pa-u song, pp. <page 51>-53.)

^17:e Uniki, A word not given in the dictionary. The debut of an actor at the hula, after passing the ai-lolo test and graduating from the school of the halau, a critical event.

^17:f Ha-ike-ike. Equivalent to ho-ike-ike, an exhibition, to exhibit.

^17:g Ou-alii. The Hawaiians seem to have lost the meaning of this word. The author has been at some pains to work it out somewhat conjecturally.

^17:h E Lono, e hu' ia mai, etc. The unelided form of the word hu' would be hui. The final i is dropped before the similar vowel of ia.

^17:i Kukulu o Kahiki. The pillars of Kahiki. The ancient Hawaiians supposed the starry heavens to be a solid dome supported by a wall or vertical construction--kukulu--set up along the horizon. That section of the wall that stood over against Kahiki they termed Kukulu o Kahiki. Our geographical name Tahiti is of course from Kahiki, though it does not apply to the same region. After the close of what has been termed "the period of intercourse," which came probably during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and during which the ancient Hawaiians voyaged to and fro between Hawaii and the lands of the South, geographical ideas became hazy and the term Kahiki came to be applied to any foreign country.

^17:j Ano-ai. An old form of salutation, answering In general to the more modern word aloha, much used at the present time. Ano-ai seems to have had a shade of meaning more nearly answering to our word "welcome." This is the first instance the author has met with of its use in poetry.

^19:a Hoo-ulu. This word has a considerable range of meaning, well illustrated in this mele. In its simplest form, ulu, it means to grow, to become strong. Joined with the causative hoo, as here, it takes on the spiritual meaning of causing to prosper, of inspiring. The word "collect," used in the translation, has been chosen to express the double sense of gathering the garlands and of devoting them to the goddess as a religious offering. In the fourth verse this word, hooulu, is used in the sense of to heal. Compare note  [*c].

^19:b Hiiaka. The youngest sister of Pele, often spoken of as Hiiaka-i-ka-poli-o-Pele, Hiiaka-of-the-bosom-of-Pele. Why she should be spoken of as capable of healing diseases is not at all clear.

^19:c Ulu. Here we have the word ulu in its simple, uncombined form, meaning to enter into and inspire.

^20:a Ilio nana e hae. The barking of a dog, the crowing of a cock, the grunting of a pig, the hooting of an owl, or any such sound occurring at the time of a religious solemnity, aha, broke the spell of the incantation and vitiated the ceremony. Such an untimely accident was as much deprecated as were the Turk, the Comet, and the Devil by pious Christian souls during the Middle Ages.

^20:b Lau-ki. The leaf of the ti plant--the same as the ki--(Dracaena terminalis), much used as an emblem of divine power, a charm or defense against malign spiritual Influences. The kahuna often wore about his neck a fillet of this leaf. The ti leaf was a special emblem of Ha'i-wahine, or of Li'a-wahine. It was much used as a decoration about the halau.

^20:c Ha'i-ka-manawa. It is conjectured that this is the same as Ha'i-wahine. She was a mythological character, about whom there is a long and tragic story.

^21:a Kini o ke Akua. See note d, <page 24>.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

III.--THE GODS OF THE HULA

Of what nature were the gods of the old times, and how did the ancient Hawaiians conceive of them? As of beings having the form, the powers, and the passions of humanity, yet standing above and somewhat apart from men. One sees, as through a mist, darkly, a figure, standing, moving; in shape a plant, a tree or vine-clad stump, a bird, a taloned monster, a rock carved by the fire-queen, a human form, a puff of vapor--and now it has given place to vacancy. It was a goddess, perhaps of the hula. In the solitude of the wilderness one meets a youthful being of pleasing address, of godlike wit, of elusive beauty; the charm of her countenance unspoken authority, her gesture command. She seems one with nature, yet commanding it. Food placed before her remains untasted; the oven, imu, [*a] in which the fascinated host has heaped his abundance, preparing for a feast, when opened is found empty; the guest of an hour has disappeared. Again it was a goddess, perhaps of the hula. Or, again, a traveler meets a creature of divine beauty, all smiles and loveliness. The infatuated mortal, smitten with hopeless passion, offers blandishments; he finds himself by the roadside embracing a rock. It was a goddess of the hula.

The gods, great and small, superior and inferior, whom the devotees and practitioners of the hula worshiped and sought to placate were many; but the goddess Laka was the one to whom they offered special prayers and sacrifices and to whom they looked as the patron, the au-makua, [*b] of that institution. It was for her benefit and in her honor that the kuahu was set up, and the wealth of flower and leaf used in its decoration was emblematic of her beauty and glory, a pledge of her bodily presence, the very forms that she, a sylvan deity, was wont to assume when she pleased to manifest herself.

As an additional crutch to the imagination and to emphasize the fact of her real presence on the altar which she had been invoked to occupy as her abode, she was symbolized by an uncarved block of wood from the sacred lama [*c] tree. This was wrapped in a robe of choice yellow tapa, scented with turmeric, and set conspicuously upon the altar.

[p. 24]

Laka was invoked as the god of the maile, the ie-ie, and other wildwood growths before mentioned (pl. II). She was hailed as the "sister, wife, of god Lono," as "the one who by striving attained favor with the gods of the upper ether;" as "the kumu [*a] hula"--head teacher of the Terpsichorean art; "the fount of joy;" "the prophet who brings health to the sick;" "the one whose presence gives life." In one of the prayers to Laka she is besought to come and take possession of the worshiper, to dwell in him as in a temple, to inspire him in all his parts and faculties--voice, hands, feet, the whole body.

Laka seems to have been a friend, but not a relative, of the numerous Pele family. So far as the author has observed, the fiery goddess is never invited to grace the altar with her presence, nor is her name so much as mentioned in any prayer met with.

To compare the gods of the Hawaiian pantheon with those of classic Greece, the sphere occupied by Laka corresponds most nearly to that filled by Terpsichore and Euterpe, the muses, respectively, of dance and of song. Lono, in one song spoken of as the husband of Laka, had features in common with Apollo.

That other gods, Kane, Ku, Kanaloa, [*b] with Lono, Ku-pulupulu, [*c] and the whole swarm of godlings that peopled the wildwood, were also invited to favor the performances with their presence can be satisfactorily explained on the ground, first, that all the gods were in a sense members of one family, related to each other by intermarriage, if not by the ties of kinship; and, second, by the patent fact of that great underlying cause of bitterness and strife among immortals as well as mortals, jealousy. It would have been an eruptive occasion of heart-burning and scandal if by any mischance a privileged one should have had occasion to feel slighted; and to have failed in courtesy to that countless host of wilderness imps and godlings, the Kini Akua, [*d] mischievous and irreverent as the monkeys of India, would indeed have been to tempt a disaster.

While it is true that the testimony of the various kumu-hula, teachers of the hula, and devotees of the art of the hula, so far as the author has talked with them, has been overwhelmingly to the effect that Laka was the one and only divine patron of the art known to them, there has been a small number equally ready to assert that there were those who observed the cult of the goddess Kapo and worshiped

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE III
 HALA-PEPE (DRACAeNA AUREA)

 

[p. 25]

her as the patron of the hula. The positive testimony of these witnesses must be reckoned as of more weight than the negative testimony of a much larger number, who either have not seen or will not look at the other side of the shield. At any rate, among the prayers before the kuahu, of which there are others yet to be presented, will be found several addressed to Kapo as the divine patron of the hula.

Kapo was sister of Pele and the daughter of Haumea [*a]. Among other roles played by her, like Laka she was at times a sylvan deity, and it was in the garb of woodland representations that she, was worshiped by hula folk. Her forms of activity, corresponding to her different metamorphoses, were numerous, in one of which she was at times "employed by the kahuna [*b] as a messenger in their black arts, and she is claimed by many as an aumakua," [*c] said to be the sister of Kalai-pahoa, the poison god.

Unfortunately Kapo had an evil name on account of a propensity which led her at times to commit actions that seem worthy only of a demon of lewdness. This was, however, only the hysteria of a moment, not the settled habit of her life. On one notable occasion, by diverting the attention of the bestial pig-god Kama-pua'a, and by vividly presenting to him a temptation well adapted to his gross nature, she succeeded in enticing him away at a critical moment, and thus rescued her sister Pele at a time when the latter's life was imperiled by an unclean and violent assault from the swine-god.

Like Catherine of Russia, who in one mood was the patron of literature and of the arts and sciences and in another mood a very satyr, so the Hawaiian goddess Kapo seems to have lived a double life whose aims were at cross purposes with one another--now an angel of grace and beauty, now a demon of darkness and lust.

Do we not find in this the counterpart of nature's twofold aspect, who presents herself to dependent humanity at one time as an alma mater, the food-giver, a divinity of joy and comfort, at another time as the demon of the storm and earthquake, a plowshare of fiery destruction?

The name of Hiiaka, the sister of Pele, is one often mentioned in the prayers of the hula.

Footnotes

^23:a Imu. The Hawaiian oven, which was a hole in the ground lined and arched over with stones.

^23:b Au-makua. An ancestral god.

^23:c Lama. A beautiful tree having firm, fine-grained, white wood; used in making sacred inclosures and for other tabu purposes.

^24:a Kumu-hula. The teacher, a leader and priest of the hula. The modern school-master is called kumu-kula.

^24:b Kanaloa. Kane, Ku, Kanaloa, and Lono were the major gods of the Hawaiian pantheon.

^24:c Ku-pulupulu. A god of the canoe-makers.

^24:d Kini Akua. A general expression--often used together with the ones that follow--meaning the countless swarms of brownies, elfs, kobolds, sprites, and other godlings (mischievous Imps) that peopled the wilderness. Kini means literally 40,000, lehu 400,000, and mano 4,000. See the Pule Kuahu--altar-prayer--on page <page 21>. The Hawaiians, curiously enough, did not put the words mano, kini, and lehu in the order of their numerical value.

^25:a Haumea. The ancient goddess, or ancestor, the sixth in line of descent from Wakea.

^25:b Kahuna. A sorcerer; with a qualifying adjective it meant a skilled craftsman; Kahuna-kalai-wa'a was a canoe-builder; kahuna lapaau was a medicine-man, a doctor, etc.

^25:c The Lesser Gods of Hawaii, a paper by Joseph S. Emerson, read before the Hawaiian Historical Society, April 7, 1892.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

IV.--SUPPORT AND ORGANIZATION OF THE HULA

In ancient times the hula to a large extent was a creature of royal support, and for good reason. The actors in this institution were not producers of life's necessaries. To the alii belonged the land and the sea and all the useful products thereof. Even the jetsam whale-tooth and wreckage scraps of iron that ocean cast up on the shore were claimed by the lord of the land. Everything was the king's. Thus it followed of necessity that the support of the hula must in the end rest upon the alii. As in ancient Rome it was a senator or general, enriched by the spoil of a province, who promoted the sports of the arena, so in ancient Hawaii it was the chief, or headman of the district who took the initiative in the promotion of the people's communistic sports and of the hula.

We must not imagine that the hula was a thing only of kings' courts and chiefish residences. It had another and democratic side. The passion for the hula was broadspread. If other agencies failed to meet the demand, there was nothing to prevent a company of enthusiasts from joining themselves together in the pleasures and, it might be, the profits of the hula. Their spokesman--designated as the po'o-puaa, from the fact that a pig, or a boar's head, was required of him as an offering at the kuahu--was authorized to secure the services of some expert to be their kumu. But with the hula all roads lead to the king's court.

Let us imagine a scene at the king's residence. The alii, rousing from his sloth and rubbing his eyes, rheumy with debauch and awa, overhears remark on the doings of a new company of hula dancers who have come into the neighborhood. He summons his chief steward.

"What is this new thing of which they babble?" he demands.

"It is nothing, son of heaven," answers the kneeling steward.

"They spoke of a hula. Tell me, what is it?"

"Ah, thou heaven-born (lani), it was but a trifle--a new company, young graduates of the halau, have set themselves up as great ones; mere rustics; they have no proper acquaintance with the traditions of the art as taught by the bards of * * * your majesty's father. They mouth and twist the old songs all awry, thou son of heaven."

"Enough. I will hear them to-morrow. Send a messenger for this new kumu. Fill again my bowl with awa."

[p. 27]

Thus it comes about that the new hula company gains audience at court and walks the road that, perchance, leads to fortune. Success to the men and women of the hula means not merely applause, in return for the incense of flattery, it means also a shower of substantial favors--food, garments, the smile of royalty, perhaps land--things that make life a festival. If welcome grows cold and it becomes evident that the harvest has been reaped, they move on to fresh woods and pastures new.

To return from this apparent digression, it was at the king's court--if we may extend the courtesy of this phrase to a group of thatched houses--that were gathered the bards and those skilled in song, those in whose memories were stored the mythologies, traditions, genealogies, proverbial wisdom, and poetry that, warmed by emotion, was the stuff from which was spun the songs of the hula. As fire is produced by friction, so it was often by the congress of wits rather than by the flashing of genius that the songs of the hula were evolved.

The composition and criticism of a poetical passage were a matter of high importance, often requiring many suggestions and much consultation. If the poem was to be a mele-inoa, a name-song to eulogize some royal or princely scion, it must contain no word of ill-omen. The fate-compelling power of such a word, once shot from the mouth, was beyond recall. Like the incantation of the sorcerer, the kahuna anaana, it meant death to the eulogized one. If not, it recoiled on the life of the singer.

The verbal form once settled, it remained only to stereotype it on the memories of the men and women who constituted the literary court or conclave. Think not that only thus were poems produced in ancient Hawaii. The great majority of songs were probably the fruit of solitary inspiration, in which the bard poured out his heart like a song-bird, or uttered his lone vision as a seer. The method of poem production in conclave may be termed the official method. It was often done at the command of an alii. So much for the fabrication, the weaving, of a song.

If the composition was intended as a eulogy, it was cantillated ceremoniously before the one it honored, if in anticipation of a prince yet unborn, it was daily recited before the mother until the hour of tier delivery; and this cantillation published it abroad. If the song was for production in the hula, it lay warm in the mind of the kumu, the master and teacher of the hula, until such time as he had organized his company.

The court of the alii was a vortex that drew in not only the bards and men of lore, but the gay and fashionable rout of pleasure-seekers, the young men and women of shapely form and gracious presence, the sons and daughters of the king's henchmen and favorites; among

[p. 28]

them, perhaps, the offspring of the king's morganatic alliances and amour--the flower and pick of Hawaii's youth. From these the kumu selected those most fitted by beauty and grace of form, as well as quickness of wit and liveliness of imagination, to take part in the hula.

The performers in the hula were divided into two classes, the olapa--agile ones-and the ho'o-paa--steadfast ones. The role of olapa, as was fitting, was assigned to the young men and young women who could best illustrate in their persons the grace and beauty of the human form. It was theirs, sometimes while singing, to move and pose and gesture in the dance; sometimes also to punctuate their song and action with the lighter instruments of music. The role of ho'o-paa, on the other hand, was given to men and women of greater experience and of more maturity. They handled the heavier instruments and played their parts mostly while sitting or kneeling, marking the time with their instrumentation. They also lent their voices to swell the chorus or utter the refrain of certain songs, sometimes taking the lead in the song or bearing its whole burden, while the light-footed olapa gave themselves entirely to the dance. The part of the ho'o-paa was indeed the heavier, the more exacting duty.

Such was the personnel of a hula troupe when first gathered by the hula-master for training and drill in the halau, now become a school for the hula. Among the pupils the kumu was sure to find some old hands at the business, whose presence, like that of veterans in a squad of recruits, was a leaven to inspire the whole company with due respect for the spirit and traditions of the historic institution and to breed in the members the patience necessary to bring them to the highest proficiency.

The instruction of the kumu, as we are informed, took a wide range. It dealt in elaborate detail on such matters as accent, inflection, and all that concerns utterance and vocalization. It naturally paid great attention to gesture and pose, attitude and bodily action. That it included comment on the meaning that lay back of the words may be gravely doubted. The average hula dancer of modern times shows great ignorance of the mele he recites, and this is true even of the kumu-hula. His work too often is largely perfunctory, a matter of sound and form, without appeal to the intellect.

It would not be legitimate, however, to conclude from this that ignorance of the meaning was the rule in old times; those were the days when the nation's traditional songs, myths, and lore formed the equipment of every alert and receptive mind, chief or commoner. There was no printed page to while away the hours of idleness. The library was stored in one's memory. The language of the mele, which now has become antiquated, then was familiar speech. For a

[p. 29]

kumu-hula to have given instruction in the meaning of a song would have been a superfluity, as if one at the present day were to inform a group of well-educated actors and actresses who was Pompey or Julius Caesar.

"Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue." Hamlet's words to the players were, it may be supposed, the substance of the kumu's instructions to the pupils in his halau.

The organization of a hula company was largely democratic. The kumu--in modern sense, the teacher--was the leader and conductor, responsible for the training and discipline of the company. He was the business manager of the enterprise; the priest, kahuna, the leader in the religious exercises, the one who interpreted the will of heaven, especially of the gods whose favor determined success. He might be called to his position by the choice of the company, appointed by the command of the alii who promoted the enterprise, or self-elected in case the enterprise was his own. He had under him a kokua kumu, a deputy, who took charge during his absence.

The po'o-puaa was an officer chosen by the pupils to be their special agent and mouthpiece. He saw to the execution of the kumu's judgments and commands, collected the fines, and exacted the penalties imposed by the kumu. It fell to him to convey to the altar the presents of garlands, awa, and the like that were contributed to the halau.

The paepae, also chosen by the pupils, subject to confirmation by the kumu, acted as an assistant of the po'o-puaa. During the construction of the kuahu the po'o-puaa stood to the right, the paepae at his left. They were in a general sense guardians of the kuahu.

The ho'o-ulu was the guard stationed at the door. He sprinkled with sea-water mixed with turmeric everyone who entered the halau. He also acted as sergeant-at-arms to keep order and remove anyone who made a disturbance. It was his duty each day to place a fresh bowl of awa on the altar of the goddess (hanai kuahu), literally to feed the altar.

In addition to these officials, a hula company naturally required the services of a miscellaneous retinue of stewards, cooks, fishermen, hewers of wood, and drawers of water.

  

RULES OF CONDUCT AND TABUS

Without a body of rules, a strict penal code, and a firm hand to hold in check the hot bloods of both sexes, it would have been impossible to keep order and to accomplish the business purpose of the organization. The explosive force of passion would have made the gathering a signal for the breaking loose of pandemonium. That it did not always so result is a compliment alike to the self-restraint of

[p. 30]

the people and to the sway that artistic ideals held over their minds, but, above all, to a peculiar system of discipline wisely adapted to the necessities of human nature. It does not seem likely that a Thespian band of our own race would have held their passions under equal check if surrounded by the same temptations and given the same opportunities as these Polynesians. It may well be doubted if the bare authority of the kumu would have sufficed to maintain discipline and to keep order, had it not been reenforced by the dread powers of the spirit world in the shape of the tabu.

The awful grasp of this law, this repressive force, the tabu, held fast the student from the moment of his entrance into the halau. It denied this pleasure, shut off that innocent indulgence, curtailed liberty in this direction and in that. The tabu waved before his imagination like a flaming sword, barring approach to the Eden of his strongest propensity.

The rules and discipline of the halau, the school for the hula, from our point of view, were a mixture of shrewd common sense and whimsical superstition. Under the head of tabus certain articles of food were denied; for instance, the sugar-cane--ko--was forbidden. The reason assigned was that if one indulged in it his work as a practitioner would amount to nothing; in the language of the kumu, aohe e ko ana kana mau hana, his work will be a failure. The argument turned on the double meaning of the word ko, the first meaning being sugar cane, the second, accomplishment. The Hawaiians were much impressed by such whimsical nominalisms. Yet there is a backing of good sense to the rule. Anyone who has chewed the sweet stalk can testify that for some time thereafter his voice is rough, ill-fitted for singing or elocution.

The strictest propriety and decorum were exacted of the pupils; there must be no license whatever. Even married people during the weeks preceding graduation must observe abstinence toward their partners. The whole power of one's being must be devoted to the pursuit of art.

The rules demanded also the most punctilious personal cleanliness. Above all things, one must avoid contact with a corpse. Such defilement barred one from entrance to the halau until ceremonial cleansing had been performed. The offender must bathe in the ocean; the kumu then aspersed him with holy water, uttered a prayer, ordered a penalty, an offering to the kuahu, and declared the offender clean. This done, he was again received into fellowship at the halau.

The ordinary penalty for a breach of ceremony or an offense against sexual morality was the offering of a baked porkling with awa. Since the introduction of money the penalty has generally been reckoned on a commercial basis; a money fine is imposed. The offering of pork and awa is retained as a concession to tradition.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

V.--CEREMONIES OF GRADUATION; DEBUT OF A HULA DANCER

  

CEREMONIES OF GRADUATION

The ai-lolo rite and ceremony marked the consummation of a pupil's readiness for graduation from the school of the halau and his formal entrance into the guild of hula dancers. As the time drew near, the kumu tightened the reins of discipline, and for a few days before that event no pupil might leave the halau save for the most stringent necessity, and then only with the head muffled (pulo'u) to avoid recognition, and he might engage in no conversation whatever outside the halau.

The night preceding the day of ai-lolo was devoted to special services of dance and song. Some time after midnight the whole company went forth to plunge into the ocean, thus to purge themselves of any lurking ceremonial impurity. The progress to the ocean and the return they made in complete nudity. "Nakedness is the garb of the gods." On their way to and from the bath they must not look back, they must not turn to the right hand or to the left.

The kumu, as the priest, remained at the halau, and as the procession returned from the ocean he met it at the door and sprinkled each one (pikai) with holy water. Then came another period of dance and song; and then, having cantillated a pule hoonoa, to lift the tabu, the kumu went forth to his own ceremonial cleansing bath in the sea. During his absence his deputy, the kokua kumu, took charge of the halau. When the kumu reached the door on his return, he made himself known by reciting a mele wehe puka, the conventional password.

Still another exercise of song and dance, and the wearied pupils are glad to seek repose. Some will not even remove the short dancing skirts that are girded about them, so eager are they to snatch an hour of rest; and some lie down with bracelets and anklets yet unclasped.

At daybreak the kumu rouses the company with the tap of the drum. After ablutions, before partaking of their simple breakfast, the company stand before the altar and recite a tabu-removing prayer, accompanying the cantillation with a rhythmic tapping of feet and clapping of hands:

Pule Hoonoa

Pupu we'uwe'u e, Laka e!
 O kona we'uwe'u ke ku nei. [p. 32]
 Kaumaha a'e la ia Laka.
 O Laka ke akua pule ikaika.
 5 Ua ku ka maile a Laka a imua;
 Ua lu ka hua [*a] o ka maile.
 Noa, noa ia'u, ia Kahaula--
 Papalua noa.
 Noa, a ua noa.
 10 Eli-eli kapu! eli-eli noa!
 Kapu oukou, ke akua!
 Noa makou, ke kanaka'.

[Translation]

Tabu-lifting Prayer

Oh wildwood bouquet, oh Laka!
 Hers are the growths that stand here.
 Suppliants we to Laka.
 The prayer to Laka has power;
 5 The maile of Laka stands to the fore.
 The maile vine casts now its seeds.
 Freedom, there's freedom to me, Kahaula--
 A freedom twofold.
 10 Freedom, aye freedom!
 A tabu profound, a freedom complete.
 Ye gods are still tabu;
 We mortals are free.

At the much-needed repast to which the company now sit down there may be present a gathering of friends and relatives and of hula experts, called olohe. Soon the porkling chosen to be the ai-lolo offering is brought in--a black suckling without spot or blemish. The kumu holds it down while all the pupils gather and lay their hands upon his hands; and he expounds to them the significance of the ceremony. If they consecrate themselves to the work in hand in sincerity and with true hearts, memory will be strong and the training, the knowledge, and the songs that have been intrusted to the memory will stay. If they are heedless, regardless of their vows, the songs they have learned will fly away.

The ceremony is long and impressive; many songs are used. Sometimes, it was claimed, the prayers of the kumu at this laying on of hands availed to cause the death of the little animal. On the completion of the ceremony the offering is taken out and made ready for the oven.

One of the first duties of the day is the dismantling of the old kuahu, the shrine, and the construction of another from new materials as a residence for the goddess. While night yet shadows the earth the attendants and friends of the pupils have gone up into the

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE IV
 MAILE (ALYXIA MYRTILLIFOLIA) WREATH

 

[p. 33]

mountains to collect the material for the new shrine. The rustic artists, while engaged in this loving work of building and weaving the new kuahu, cheer and inspire one another with joyful songs vociferous with the praise of Laka. The halau also they decorate afresh, strewing the floor with clean rushes, until the whole place enthralls the senses like a bright and fragrant temple.

The kumu now grants special dispensation to the, pupils to go forth that they may make good the results of the neglect of the person incident to long confinement in the halau. For days, for weeks, perhaps for months, they have not had full opportunity to trim hair, nails, or heard, to anoint and groom themselves. They use this short absence from the hall also to supply themselves with wreaths of fragrant maile, crocus-yellow ilima, scarlet-flaming lehua, fern, and what not.

At the appointed hour the pupils, wreathed and attired like nymphs and dryads, assemble in the halau, sweet with woodsy perfumes. At the door they receive aspersion with consecrated water.

The ai-lolo offering, cooked to a turn--no part raw, no part cracked or scorched--is brought in from the imu, its bearer sprinkled by the guard at the entrance. The kumu, having inspected the roast offering and having declared it ceremonially perfect, gives the signal, and the company break forth in songs of joy and of adulation to goddess Laka:

Mele Kuahu

Noho ana Laka i ka ulu wehi-wehi,
 Ku ana iluna i Mo'o-helaia, [*a]
 Ohia-Ku [*b] iluna o Mauna-loa. [*c]
 Aloha mai Kaulana-ula [*d] ia'u.
 5 Eia ka ula la, he ula leo, [*e]
 He uku, he modai, he kanaenae,
 He alana na'u ia oe.
 E Laka e, e maliu mai;
 E maliu mai oe, i pono au,
 10 A pono au, a pono kaua.

[p. 34]

[Translation]

Altar-Prayer

Laka sits in her shady grove,
 Stands on her terrace, at Mo'o-helaia;
 Like the tree of God Ku on Mauna-loa.
 Kaulana-ula trills in my ear;
 5 A whispered suggestion to me,
 Lo, an offering, a payment,
 A eulogy give I to thee.
 O Laka, incline to me!
 Have compassion, let it be well--
 10 Well with me, well with us both.

There is no stint of prayer-song. While the offering rests on the kuahu, the joyful service continues:

Mele Kuahu

E Laka, e!
 Pupu we'uwe'u e, Laka e!
 E Laka i ka leo;
 E laka i ka loaa:
 5 E Laka i ka waiwai;
 E Laka i na mea a pau!

[Translation]

Altar-Prayer

O goddess Laka!
 O wildwood bouquet, O Laka!
 O Laka, queen of the voice!
 O Laka, giver of gifts!
 5 O Laka, giver of bounty!
 O Laka, giver of all things!

At the conclusion of this loving service of worship and song each member of the troupe removes from his head and neck the wreaths that had bedecked him, and with them crowns the image of the goddess until her altar is heaped with the offerings.

Now comes the pith of the ceremony: the novitiates sit down to the feast of ai-lolo, theirs the place of honor, at the head of the table, next the kuahu. The ho'o-pa'a, acting as carver, selects the typical parts--snout, ear-tips, tail, feet, portions of the vital organs, especially the brain (lolo). This last it is which gives name to the ceremony. He sets an equal portion before each novitiate. Each one must eat all that is set before him. It is a mystical rite, a sacrament; as he eats he consciously partakes of the virtue of the goddess that is transmitted to himself.

[p. 35]

Meantime the olohe and friends of the novitiates, inspired with the proper enthusiasm of the occasion, lift their voices in joyful cantillations, in honor of the goddess, accompanied with the clapping of hands.

The ceremony now reaches a new stage. The kumu lifts the tabu by uttering a prayer--always a song--and declares the place and the feast free, and the whole assembly sit down to enjoy the bounty that is spread up and down the halau. On this occasion men and women may eat in common. The only articles excluded from this feast are luau--a food much like spinach, made by cooking the young and delicate taro leaf--and the drupe of the hala, the pandanus (pl. XVIII).

The company sit down to eat and to drink; presently they rise to dance and sing. The kumu leads in a tabu-lifting, freedom-giving song and the ceremony of ai-lolo is over. The pupils have been graduated from the school of the halau; they are now members of the great guild of hula dancers. The time has come for them to make their bow to the waiting public outside, to bid for the favor of the world. This is to be their "little go;" they will spread their wings for a greater flight on the morrow.

The kumu with his big drum, and the musicians, the ho'o-pa'a, pass through the door and take their places outside in the lanai, where sit the waiting multitude. At the tap of the drum the group of waiting olapa plume themselves like fine birds eager to show their feathers; and, as they pass out the halau door and present themselves to the breathless audience, into every pose and motion of their gliding, swaying figures they pour a full tide of emotion in studied and unstudied effort to captivate the public.

  

DEBUT OF A HULA DANCER

The occasion is that of a lifetime; it is their uniki, their debut. The song chosen must rise to the dignity of the occasion. Let us listen to the song that enthralls the audience seated in the rush-strown lanai, that we may judge of its worthiness.

He Mele-Inoa (no Naihe) [*a]

Ka nalu nui, a ku ka nalu mai Kona,
 Ka malo a ka mahiehie, [*b]
 Ka onaulu-loa, [*c] a lele ka'u malo.

[p. 36]

O kakai [*a] malo hoaka, [*b]
 5 O ka malo kai, [*c] malo o ke alii.
 E ku, e hume a paa i ka malo.

E ka'ika'i [*d] ka la i ka papa o Halepo; [*e]
 A pae o Halepo i ka nalu.
 Ho-e'e i ka nalu mai Kahiki; [*f]
 10 He nalu Wakea, [*g] nalu ho'ohua. [*h]
 Haki opu'u [*i] ka nalu, haki kua-pa. [*j]

Ea mai ka makakai [*k] he'e-nalu,
 Kai he'e kakala [*l] o ka moku,
 Kai-ka o ka nalu nui,
 15 Ka hu'a o ka nalu o Hiki-au. [*m]
 Kai he'e-nalu i ke awakea.

Ku ka puna, ke ko'a i-uka.
 Ka makaha o ka nalu o Kuhihewa. [*n]
 Ua o ia, [*o] noha ka papa!
 20 Noha Maui, nauweuwe,
 Nauweuwe, nakelekele.

Nakele ka ili o ka i he'e-kai.
 Lalilali ole ka ili o ke akamai;
 Kahilihili ke kai a ka he'e-nalu.
 25 Ike'a ka nalu nui o Puna, o Hilo.

*     *     *     *     *

[Translation]

A Name-Song, a Eulogy (for Naihe)

The huge roller, roller that surges from Kona,
 Makes loin-cloth fit for a lord;
 Far-reaching swell, my malo streams in the wind:
 Shape the crescent malo to the loins--
 5 The loin-cloth the sea, cloth for king's girding.
 Stand, gird fast the loin-cloth!

[p. 37]

Let the sun guide the board Halepo,
 Till Halepo lifts on the swell.
 It mounts the swell that rolls from Kahiki,
 10 From Wakea's age onrolling.
 The roller plumes and ruffles its crest.

Here comes the champion surf-man,
 While wave-ridden wave beats the island,
 A fringe of mountain-high waves.
 15 Spume lashes the Hiki-au altar--
 A surf this to ride at noontide.

The coral, horned coral, it sweeps far ashore.
 We gaze at the surf of Ka-kuhi-hewa.
 The surf-board snags, is shivered;
 20 Maui splits with a crash,
 Trembles, dissolves into slime.

Glossy the skin of the surf-man;
 Undrenched the skin of the expert;
 Wave-feathers fan the wave-rider.
 25 You've seen the grand surf of Puna, of Hilo.

*     *     *     *     *

This spirited song, while not a full description of a surf-riding scene, gives a vivid picture of that noble sport. The last nine verses have been omitted, as they add neither to the action nor to the interest.

It seems surprising that the accident spoken of in line 19 should be mentioned; for it is in glaring opposition to the canons that were usually observed in the composition of a mele-inoa. In the construction of a eulogy the Hawaiians were not only punctiliously careful to avoid mention of anything susceptible of sinister interpretation, but they were superstitiously sensitive to any such unintentional happening. As already mentioned (<page 27>), they believed that the fate-compelling power of a word of ill-omen was inevitable. If it did not result in the death of the one eulogized, retributive justice turned the evil influence back on him who uttered it.

Footnotes

^32:a Lu ka hua. Casts now its seeds. The maile vine (pl. IV), one of the goddess's emblems, casts its seeds, meaning that the goddess gives the pupils skill and inspires them.

^33:a Mo'o-helaia. A female deity, a kupua, who at death became one of the divinities, au-makua, of the hula. Her name was conferred on the place claimed as her residence, on Mauna-loa, island of Molokai.

^33:b Ohia-Ku. Full name ohia-ku-makua; a variety of the this, or lehua (pl. XIII), whose wood was used in making temple gods. A rough stem of this tree stood on each side near the hala-pepe. (See pl. III, also pp. <page 19>-20.)

^33:c Mauna-loa. Said to be the mountain of that name on Molokai, not that on Hawaii.

^33:d Kaulana-ula. Full form Kaulana-a-ula; the name of a deity belonging to the order, papa, of the hula. Its meaning is explained in the expression ula leo, in the next line.

^33:e Ula leo. A singing or trilling sound, a tinnitus aurium, a sign that the deity Kaulana-ula was making some communication to the one who heard it.

"By the pricking of my thumbs
 Something wicked this way comes."

^35:a Naihe. A man of strong character, but not a high chief. He was born in Kona and resided at Napoopoo. His mother was Ululani, his father Keawe-a-heulu, who was a celebrated general and strategist under Kamehameha I.

^35:b Mahiehie. A term conferring dignity and distinction.

^35:c Onaulu-loa. A roller of great length and endurance, one that reaches the shore, in contrast to a kakala.

^36:a Kakai. An archaic word meaning forty.

^36:b Hoaka. A crescent; the name of the second day of the month. The allusion is to the curve (downward) of a large number (kakai) of malo when hung on a line, the usual way of keeping such articles.

^36:c Malo kai. The ocean is sometimes poetically termed the malo or pa-u of the naked swimmer, or bather. It covers his nakedness.

^36:d Ka'ika'i. To lead or to carry; a tropical use of the word. The sun is described as leading the board.

^36:e Hale-po. In the opinion of the author it is the name of the board. A skilled Hawaiian says it is the name given the surf of a place at Napoopoo, in Kona, Hawaii. The action is not located there, but in Puna, it seems to the author.

^36:f Kahiki. Tahiti, or any foreign country; a term of grandiloquence.

^36:g Wakea. A mythical name, coming early in Hawaiian genealogies; here used in exaggeration to show the age of the roller.

^36:h Ho'ohua. Applied to a roller, one that rolls on and swells higher.

^36:i Opu'u. Said of a roller that completes its run to shore.

^36:j Kua-pa, Said of a roller as above that dies at the shore.

^36:k Maka-kai. The springing-up of the surf after an interval of quiet.

^36:l Kakala. Rough, heaped up, one wave overriding another, a chop sea.

^36:m Hiki-au. Said to be the name of a temple.

^36:n Kuhihewa. Full name Ka-kuhi-hewa, a distinguished king of Oahu.

^36:o O ia. Meaning that the board dug its nose into the reef or sand.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

VI.--THE PASSWORD--THE SONG OF ADMISSION

There prevailed among the practitioners of the hula from one end of the group to the other a mutual understanding, amounting almost to a sort of freemasonry, which gave to any member of the guild the right of free entrance at all times to the hall, or halau, where a performance was under way. Admission was conditioned, however, on the utterance of a password at the door. A snatch of song, an oli, denominated mele kahea, or mele wehe puka, was chanted, which, on being recognized by those within, was answered in the same language of hyperbole, and the door was opened.

The verbal accuracy of any mele kahea that may be adduced is at the present day one of the vexed questions among hula authorities, each hula-master being inclined to maintain that the version given by another is incorrect. This remark applies, though in smaller measure, to the whole body of mele, pule, and oli that makes up the songs and liturgy of the hula as well as to the traditions that guided the maestro, or kumu-hula, in the training of his company. The reasons for these differences of opinion and of text, now that there is to be a written text, are explained by the following facts: The devotees and practitioners of the hula were divided into groups that were separated from one another by wide intervals of sea and land. They belonged quite likely to more than one cult, for indeed there were many gods and au-makua to whom they sacrificed and offered prayers. The passwords adopted by one generation or by the group of practitioners on one island might suffer verbal changes in transmission to a later generation or to a remote island.

Again, it should be remembered that the entire body of material forming the repertory of the hula--pule, mele, and oli--was intrusted to the keeping of the memory, without the aid of letters or, so far as known, of any mnemonic device; and the human mind, even under the most athletic discipline, is at best an imperfect conservator of literary form. The result was what might be expected: as the imagination and emotions of the minstrel warmed under the inspiration of his trust, glosses and amendments crept in. These, however, caused but slight variations in the text. The substance remains substantially the same.

After carefully weighing the matter, the author can not avoid the conclusion that jealousy had much to do with the slight differences now manifest, that one version is as authoritative as another, and

[p. 39]

that it would be well for each kumu-hula to have kept in mind the wise adage that shines among the sayings of his nation: Aohe pau ka ike i kau halau [*a]--"Think not that all of wisdom resides in your halau." [*b]

Mele Kahea

Li'u-li'u aloha ia'u,
 Ka uka o Kohola-lele,
 Ka nahele mauka o Ka-papala [*c] la.
 Komo, e komo aku hoi au maloko.
 5 Mai ho'ohewahewa mai oe ia'u; oau no ia,
 Ke ka-nae-nae a ka mea hele,
     He leo, e-e,
 A he leo wale no, e-e!
 Eia ka pu'u nui owaho nei la,
 10 He ua, he ino, he anu, he ko'e-ko'e.
 E ku'u aloha, e,
 Maloko aku au.

[Translation]

Password

Long, long have I tarried with love
 In the uplands of Kohola-lele,
 The wildwood above Ka-papala.
 To enter, permit me to enter, I pray;
 5 Refuse me not recognition; I am he,
 A traveler offering mead of praise,
     Just a voice,
 Only a human voice.
 Oh, what I suffer out here,
 10 Rain, storm, cold, and wet.
 O sweetheart of mine,
 Let me come in to you.

Hear now the answer chanted by voices from within:

Mele Komo

Aloha na hale o makou i maka-maka ole,
 Ke alanui hele mauka o Pu'u-kahea la, e-e!
     Ka-he-a!
 E Kahea aku ka pono e komo mai oe iloko nei.
 Eia ka pu'u nui o waho nei, he anu.

[p. 40]

[Translation]

Song of Welcome

What love to our cottage-homes, now vacant,
 As one climbs the mount of Entreaty!
     We call,
 We voice the welcome, invite you to enter.
 The hill of Affliction out there is the cold.

Another fragment that was sometimes used as a password is the following bit of song taken from the story of Hiiaka, sister of Pele. She is journeying with the beautiful Hopoe to fetch prince Lohiau to the court of Pele. They have come by a steep and narrow path to the brink of the Wai-lua river, Kauai, at this point spanned by a single plank. But the bridge is gone, removed by an ill-tempered naiad (witch) said to have come from Kahiki, whose name, Wai-lua, is the same as that of the stream. Hiiaka calls out, demanding that the plank be restored to its place. Wai-lua does not recognize the deity in Hiiaka and, sullen, makes no response. At this the goddess puts forth her strength, and Wai-lua, stripped of her power and reduced to her true station, that of a mo'o, a reptile, seeks refuge in the caverns beneath the river. Hiiaka betters the condition of the crossing by sowing it with stepping stones. The stones remain in evidence to this day.

Mele Kahea

Kunihi ka mauna i ka la'i e,
 O Wai-ale-ale [*a] la i Wai-lua,
 Huki a'e la i ka lani
 Ka papa au-wai o ka Wai-kini;
 5 Alai ia a'e la e Nou-nou,
 Nalo ka Ipu-ha'a,
 Ka laula mauka o Kapa'a, e!
 Mai pa'a i ka leo!
 He ole ka hea mai, e!

[Translation]

Password--Song

Steep stands the mountain in calm,
 Profile of Wai-ale-ale at Wai-lua.
 Gone the stream-spanning plank of Wai-kini,
 Filched away by Nou-nou;
 5 Shut off the view of the hill Ipu-ha'a,
 And the upland expanse of Ka-pa'a.
 Give voice and make answer.
 Dead silence--no voice in reply.

In later, in historic times, this visitor, whom we have kept long waiting at the door, might have voiced his appeal in the passionate words of this comparatively modern song:

[p. 41]

Mele Kahea [*a]

Ka uka holo-kia ahi-manu o La'a, [*b]
 I po-ele i ka uahi, noe ka nahele,
 Nohe-nohea i ka makani luhau-pua.
 He pua oni ke kanaka--
 5 He mea laha ole ia oe.
 Mai kaua e hea nei;
 E hea i ke kanaka e komo maloko,
 E hanai ai a hewa [*c] ka wa'ha.
 Eia no ka uku la, o ka wa'a. [*d]

[Translation]

Password--Song

In the uplands, the darting flame-bird of La'a,
 While smoke and mist blur the woodland,
 Is keen for the breath of frost-bitten flowers.
     A fickle flower is man--
 5 A trick this not native to you.
 Come thou with her who is calling to thee;
 A call to the man to come in
 And eat till the month is awry.
     Lo, this the reward--the canoe.

The answer to this appeal for admission was in these words:

Mele Komo

E hea i ke kanaka e komo maloko,
 E hanai ai a hewa waha;
 Eia no ka uku la, o ka leo,
 A he leo wale no, e!

[Translation]

Welcoming-Song

Call to the man to come in,
 And eat till the mouth is estopt;
 And this the reward, the voice,
 Simply the voice.

The cantillation of the mele komo, in answer to the visitor's petition, meant not only the opening to him of the halau door, but also his welcome to the life of the halau as a heart-guest of honor, trebly welcome as the bringer of fresh tidings from the outside world.

Footnotes

^39:a Sophocles (Antigone, 705) had said the same thing: me nyn en Ethos moynon en saytui' forei, us feis su, kouden allo, tout' orthus exein--Don't get this idea fixed in your head, that what you say, and nothing else, is right."

^39:b Halau. As previously explained, In this connection halau has a meaning similar to word "school," or "academy," a place where some art was taught, as wrestling, boxing, or the hula.

^39:c Ka-papala. A verdant region on the southeastern flank of Mauna-Loa.

^40:a Wai-ale-ale (Leaping-water). The central mountain-mass of Kauai.

^41:a This utterance of passion is said to have been the composition of the Princess Kamamalu, as an address to Prince William Lunalilo, to whom she was at one time affianced and would have married, but that King Lihohho (Kamehameha IV) would not allow the marriage. Thereby hangs a tragedy.

^41:b La'a. The region In Hawaii now known as Ola'a was originally called La'a. The particle o has become fused with the word.

^41:c Hewa ka waha. This expression, here tortured into "(till) the mouth awry," is difficult of translation. A skilled Hawaiian scholar suggests it may mean to change one from an enemy to a friend by stopping his month with food.

^41:d Wa'a. Literally a canoe. This is a euphemism for the human body, a gift often too freely granted. It will be noted that in the answering mele komo, the song of admission, the reward promised is more modestly measured--"Simply the voice."

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

VII.--WORSHIP AT THE ALTAR OF THE HALAU

The first duty of a visitor on being admitted to the halau while the tabu was on--that is, during the conduct of a regular hula--was to do reverence at the kuahu. The obligations of religion took precedence of all social etiquette. He reverently approaches the altar, to which all eyes are turned, and with outstretched hands pours out a supplication that breathes the aroma of ancient prayer:

Pule Kuahu (no Laka)

O Laka oe,
 O ke akua i ke a'a-lii  [*a] nui.
 O Laka mai uka!
 E Laka mai kai!
 5 O hoo-ulu [*b] o Lono,
 O ka ilio nana e haehae ke aha,
 O ka ie-ie ku i ka wao,
 O ka maile hihi i ka nahele,
 O ka lau ki-ele [*c] ula o ke akua,
 10 O na ku'i [*d] o Hauoli,
 O Ha'i-ka-malama, [*e]
 Wahine o Kina'u. [*f]
 Kapo ula [*g] o Kina'u.
 O Laka oe,
 15 O ke akua i ke kuahu nei la, e!
 E ho'i, e ho'i a noho i kou kuahu.
 Hoo-ulu ia!

[Translation]

Altar-Prayer (to Laka)

Thou art Laka,
 God of the deep-rooted a'a-lii.
 O Laka from the mountains,
 O Laka from the ocean!

[p. 43]

5 Let Lono bless the service,
 Shutting the mouth of the dog,
 That breaks the charm with his barking.
 Bring the i-e that grows in the wilds.
 The maile that twines in the thicket,
 10 Red-beaked kiele, leaf of the goddess,
 The joyous pulse of the dance
 In honor of Ha'i-ka-malama,
 Friend of Kina'u,
 Red-robed friend of Kina'u.
 15 Thou art Laka,
 God of this altar here.
 Return, return and reside at your altar!
 Bring it good luck!

A single prayer may not suffice as the offering at Laka's altar. His repertory is full; the visitor begins anew, this time on a different tack:

Pule Kuahu (no Laka)

Ela ke kuko, ka li'a;
 I ka manawa he hiamoe ko'u,
 Hoala ana oe,
     Ooe o Halau-lani,
 5   O Hoa-lani,
     O Puoho-lani,
 Me he manu e hea ana i ka maha lehua
 Ku moho kiekie la i-uka.
 I-uka ho'i au me Laka
 10 A Lea, [*a] a Wahie-loa, [*b] i ka nahelehele;
 He hoa kaana ia no'u,
 No kela kuahiwi, kualono hoi.
     E Laka, e Laka, e!
 E maliu mai!
 15 A maliu mai oe pono au,
 A a'e mai oe pono au!

[Translation]

Altar-Prayer (to Laka)

This my wish, my burning desire,
 That in the season of slumber
 Thy spirit my soul may inspire,
     Altar-dweller,
 5   Heaven-guest,
     Soul-awakener,
 Bird from covert calling,
 Where forest champions stand.
     There roamed I too with Laka,

[p. 44]

10 Of Lea and Loa a wilderness-child;
 On ridge, in forest boon companion she
 To the heart that throbbed in me.
     O Laka, O Laka,
 Hark to my call!
 15 You approach, it is well;
 You possess me, I am blest!

In the translation of this pule the author has found it necessary to depart from the verse arrangement that obtains in the Hawaiian text.

The religious services of the halau, though inspired by one motive, were not tied to a single ritual or to one set of prayers. Prayer marked the beginning and the ending of every play--that is, of every dance--and of every important event in the programme of the halau; but there were many prayers from which the priest might select. After the prayer specially addressed to Laka the visitor might use a petition of more general scope. Such is the one now to be given:

He Pule Kuahu (ia Kane ame Kapo); a he Pule Hoolei

Kane, hiki a'e, he malama [*a] ia luna;
 Ha'aha'a, he malama ia lalo;
 Oni-oni, [*b] he malama ia ka'u;
 He wahine [*c] lei, malama ia Kapo;
 5 E Kapo nui, hala-hala [*d] a i'a;
 E Kapo nui, hala-hala [*e] a mea,
 Ka alihi [*f] luna, ka alihi lalo;
 E ka poha-ku. [*g]
 Noho ana Kapo i ka ulu wehi-wehi;
 10 Ku ana i Moo-helaia, [*h]
 Ka ohi'a-Ku iluna, o Mauna-loa.
 Aloha mai Kaulana-a-ula [*i] ia'u;
 Eia ka ula la, he ula leo, [*j]
 He uku, he mohai, he alana,

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE V
 TI (DRACAeNA TERMINALIS)

 

[p. 45]

15 He kanaenae na'u ia oe, e Kapo ku-lani.
 E moe hauna-ike, e hea au, e o mai oe.
 Aia la na lehua o Kaana, [*a]
 Ke kui ia mai la e na wahine a lawa
 I lei no Kapo--
 20 O Kapo, alii nui no ia moku,
 Ki'e-ki'e, ha'a-ha'a;
 Ka la o ka ike e ike aku ai:
 He ike kumu, he ike lono,
 He ike pu-awa [*b] hiwa,
 25 He ike a ke Akua, e!
 E Kapo, ho'i!
 E hoi a noho i kou kuahu.
 Ho'ulu ia!
 Ela ka wai, [*c] la,
 30 He wai e ola.
 E ola nou, e!

Verses 9 to 15, inclusive, are almost identical in form with the first seven verses in the Mele Kuahu addressed to Laka, given on page <page 33>.

[Translation]

An Altar-Prayer (to Kane and Kapo); also a Garland-Prayer, used while decorating the altar

Now, Kane, approach, illumine the altar;
 Stoop, and enlighten mortals below;
 Rejoice in the gifts I have brought.
 Wreathed goddess fostered by Kapo--
 5 Hail Kapo, of beauty resplendent!
 Great Kapo, of sea and land,
 The topmost stay of the net,
 Its lower stay and anchoring line.
 Kapo sits in her darksome covert;
 10 On the terrace, at Mo'o-he-laia,
 Stands the god-tree of Ku, on Mauna-loa.
 God Kaulana-ula twigs now mine ear,
 His whispered suggestion to me is
 This payment, sacrifice, offering,
 15 Tribute of praise to thee, O Kapo divine.
 Inspiring spirit in sleep, answer my call.
 Behold, of lehua bloom of Kaana
 The women are stringing enough
 To enwreath goddess Kapo;
 20 Kapo, great queen of that island,
 Of the high and the low.
 The day of revealing shall see what it sees:

[p. 46]

A seeing of facts, a sifting of rumors,
 An insight won by the black sacred awa,
 25 A vision like that of a god!
 O Kapo, return!
 Return and abide in your altar!
 Make it fruitful!
 Lo, here is the water,
 30 The water of life!
 Hail, now, to thee!

The little god-folk, whom the ancients called Kini Akua--myriads of gods--and who made the wildwoods and wilderness their playground, must also be placated. They were a lawless set of imps; the elfins, brownies, and kobolds of our fairy world were not "up to them" in wanton deviltry. If there is to be any luck in the house, it can only be when they are dissuaded from outbreaking mischief.

The pule next given is a polite invitation to these little brown men of the woods to honor the occasion with their presence and to bring good luck at their coming. It is such a prayer as the visitor might choose to repeat at this time, or it might be used on other occasions, as at the consecration of the kuahu:

He Pule Kuahu (no Kini Akua)

E ulu, e ulu, Kini o ke Akua
 Ulu Kane me Kanaloa!
 Ulu Ohi'a-lau-koa, me ka Ie-ie!
 A'e mai a noho i kou kuahu!
 5 Eia ka wai ia, he wai e ola.
 E ola no, e-e!

[Translation]

An Altar-Prayer (to the Kini Akua)

Gather, oh gather, ye hosts of godlings!
 Come Kane with Kanaloa!
 Come leafy Ohi'a and I-e!
 Possess me and dwell in your altar!
 5 Here's water, water of life!
 Life, give us life!

The visitor, having satisfied his sense of what the occasion demands, changes his tone from that of cantillation to ordinary speech, and concludes his worship with a petition conceived in the spirit of the following prayer:

E ola ia'u, i ka malihini; a pela hoi na kamaaina, ke kumu, na haumana, ia oe, e Laka. E Laka ia Pohaku i ka wawae. E Laka i ke kupe'e. E Laka ia Luukia i ka pa-u; e Laka i ke kuhi; e Laka i ka leo; e Laka i ka lei. E Laka i ke ku ana imua o ke anaina.

[p. 47]

[Translation]

Thy blessing, O Laka, on me the stranger, and on the residents, teacher and pupils. O Laka, give grace to the feet of Pohaku; and to her bracelets and anklets; comeliness to the figure and skirt of Luukia. To (each one) give gesture and voice. O Laka, make beautiful the lei; inspire the dancers when they stand before the assembly.

At the close of this service of song and prayer the visitor will turn from the kuahu and exchange salutations and greetings with his friends in the halau.

The song-prayer "Now, Kane, approach, illumine the altar" (<page 45>) calls for remark. It brings up again the question, previously discussed, whether there were not two distinct cults of worshipers, the one devoted to Laka, the other to Kapo. The following facts will throw light on the question. On either side of the approach to the altar stood, sentinel-like, a tall stem of hala-pepe, a graceful, slender column, its head of green sword-leaves and scarlet drupes making a beautiful picture. (See <page 24>.) These are said to have been the special emblems of the goddess Kapo.

The following account of a conversation the author had with an old woman, whose youthful days were spent as a hula dancer, will also help to disentangle the subject and explain the relation of Kapo to the hula:

"Will you not recite again the prayer you just now uttered, and slowly, that it may be written down?" the author asked of her. "Many prayers for the kuahu have been collected, but this one differs from them all."

"We Hawaiians," she answered, "have been taught that, these matters are sacred (kapu) and must not be bandied about from month to mouth."

"Aye, but the time of the tabus has passed. Then, too, in a sense having been initiated into hula matters, there can be no impropriety in my dealing with them in a kindly spirit."

"No harm, of course, will come to you, a haole (foreigner). The question is how it will affect us."

"Tell me, were there two different classes of worshipers, one class devoted to the worship of Laka and another class devoted to the worship of Kapo?"

"No," she answered, "Kapo and Laka were one in spirit, though their names were two."

"Haumea was the mother of Kapo. Who was her father?"

"Yes, Haumea was the mother, and Kua-ha-ilo [*a] was the father."

"How about Laka?"

[p. 48]

"Laka was the daughter of Kapo. Yet as a patron of the hula Laka stands first; she was worshiped at an earlier date than Kapo; but they are really one."

Further questioning brought out the explanation that Laka was not begotten in ordinary generation; she was a sort of emanation from Kapo. It was as if the goddess should sneeze and a deity should issue with the breath from her nostrils; or should wink, and thereby beget spiritual offspring from the eye, or as if a spirit should issue forth at some movement of the ear or mouth.

When the old woman's scruples had been laid to rest, she repeated slowly for the author's benefit the pule given on pages <page 45> and <page 46>, "Now, Kane, approach," * * * of which the first eight lines and much of the last part, to him, were new.

Footnotes

^42:a A'a-lii. A deep-rooted tree, sacred to Laka or to Kapo.

^42:b Hoo-ulu. Literally to make grow; secondarily, to inspire, to prosper, to bring good luck. This is the meaning most in mind in modern times, since the hula has become a commercial venture.

^42:c Ki-ele. A flowering plant native to the Hawaiian woods, also cultivated, sacred to Laka, and perhaps to Kapo. The leaves are said to be pointed and curved like the beak of the bird i-iwi, and the flower has the gorgeous yellow-red color of that bird.

^42:d It has been proposed to amend this verse by substituting akua for ku'i, thus making the idea the gods of the hula.

^42:e Ha'i-ka-malama. An epithet applied to Laka.

^42:f Kina'u. Said to mean Hiiaka, the sister of Pele.

^42:g Kapo ula. Red, ula, was the favorite color of Kapo. The kahuna anaana, high priests of sorcery, of the black art, and of murder, to whom Kapo was at times procuress, made themselves known as such by the display of a red flag and the wearing of a red malo.

^43:a Lea. The same as Laia, or probably Haumea.

^43:b Wahie loa. This must be a mistake. Laka the son of Wahie-loa was a great voyager. His canoe (kau-meli-eli) was built for him by the gods. In it he sailed to the South to rescue his father's bones from the witch who had murdered him. This Laka had his home at Kipahulu, Maui, and is not to be confounded with Laka, goddess of the hula.

^44:a Malama. Accented on the penult, as here, the word means to enlighten or a light (same in second verse). In the third and fourth verses the accent is changed to the first syllable, and the word here means to preserve, to foster. These words furnish an example of poetical word-repetition.

^44:b Onioni. To squirm, to dodge, to move. The meaning here seems to be to move with delight.

^44:c Wahine lei. A reference to Laka, the child of Kapo, who was symbolized by a block of wood on the altar. (See <page 23>.)

^44:d Hala-hala a i'a. Said to he a certain kind of fish that was ornamented about its tail-end with a band of bright color; therefore an object of admiration and desire.

^44:e Hala-hala a mea. The ending mea is perhaps taken from the last half of the proper name Hau-mea who was Kapo's mother. It belongs to the land, in contrast to the sea, and seems to be intended to intensify and extend the meaning of the term previously used. The passage is difficult. Expert Hawaiians profess their inability to fathom its meaning.

^44:f Alihi luna. The line or "stretching cord," that runs the length of a net at its top, the a lalo being the corresponding line at the bottom of the net. The exact significance of the language complimentary to Kapo can not be phrased compactly.

^44:g Poha-ku. The line that runs up and down at the end of a long net, by which it may be anchored.

^44:h Moo-helaia. See note a, <page 33>.

^44:i Kaulana-a-ula. See note d, <page 33>.

^44:j Ula leo. See note c, <page 33>.

^45:a Kaana. A place on Mauna-loa, Molokai, where the lehua greatly flourished. The body of Kapo, it is said, now lies there in appearance a rock. The same claim is made for a rock at Wailua, Hana, Maui.

^45:b Pu-awa hiwa (hiwa, black). A kind of strong awa. The gentle exhilaration, as well a the deep sleep, of awa were benefits ascribed to the gods. Awa was an essential to most complete sacrifices.

^45:c Wai. Literally water, refers to the bowl of awa, replenished each day, which set on the altar of the goddess.

^47:a Kua-ha-ilo. A god of the kahuna anaana; meaning literally to breed maggots in the back.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

VIII.--COSTUME OF THE HULA DANCER

The costume of the hula dancer was much the same for both sexes, its chief article a simple short skirt about the waist, the pa-u. (Pl. I.)

When the time has come for a dance, the halau becomes one common dressing room. At a signal from the kumu the work begins. The putting on of each article of costume is accompanied by a special song.

First come the ku-pe'e, anklets of whale teeth, bone, shell-work, dog-teeth, fiber-stuffs, and what not. While all stoop in unison they chant the song of the anklet:

Mele Ku-pe'e

Aala kupukupu [*a] ka uka o Kane-hoa. [*b]
 E ho-a! [*c]
 Hoa na lima o ka makani, he Wai-kaloa. [*d]
 He Wai-kaloa ka makani anu Lihue.
 5 Alina [*e] lehua i kau ka opua--
 Ku'u pua,
 Ku'u pua i'ini e ku-i a lei.
 Ina ia oe ke lei 'a mai la.

[Translation]

Anklet-Song

Fragrant the grasses of high Kane-hoa.
 Bind on the anklets, bind!
 Bind with finger deft as the wind
 That cools the air of this bower.
 5 Lehua bloom pales at my flower,
 O sweetheart of mine,
 Bud that I'd pluck and wear in my wreath,
 If thou wert but a flower!

The short skirt, pa-u, was the most important piece of attire worn by the Hawaiian female. As an article of daily wear it represented many stages of evolution beyond the primitive fig-leaf, being fabricated from a great variety of materials furnished by the garden of

[p. 50]

nature. In its simplest terms the pa-u was a mere fringe of vegetable fibers. When placed as the shield of modesty about the loins of a woman of rank, or when used as the full-dress costume of a dancing girl on a ceremonious occasion, it took on more elaborate forms, and was frequently of tapa, a fabric the finest specimens of which would not have shamed the wardrobe of an empress.

In the costuming of the hula girl the same variety obtained as in the dress of a woman of rank. Sometimes her pa-u would be only a close-set fringe of ribbons stripped from the bark of the hibiscus (hau), the ti leaf or banana fiber, or a fine rush, strung upon a thong to encircle the waist. In its most elaborate and formal style the pa-u consisted of a strip of fine tapa, several yards long and of width to reach nearly to the knees. It was often delicately tinted or printed. as to its outer part, with stamped figures. The part of the tapa skirt thus printed, like the outer, decorative one in a set of tapa bed-sheets, was termed the kilohana.

The pa-u worn by the danseuse, when of tapa, was often of such volume as to balloon like the skirt of a coryphee. To put it on was quite an art, and on that account, if not on the score of modesty, a portion of the halau was screened off and devoted to the use of the females as a dressing room, being known as the unu-lau-koa, and to this place they repaired as soon as the kumu gave the signal for dressing.

The hula pa-u of the women was worn in addition to that of daily life; the hula pa-u of the men, a less pretentious affair, was worn outside the malo, and in addition to it.

The method of girding on the pa-u was peculiar. Beginning at the right hip--some say the left--a free end was allowed to hang quite to the knee; then, passing across the back, rounding the left hip, and returning by way of the abdomen to the starting point, another circuit of the waist was accomplished; and, a reverse being made, the garment was secured by passing the bight of the tapa beneath the hanging folds of the pa-u from below upward until it slightly protruded above the border of the garment at the waist. This second end was thus brought to hang down the hip alongside of the first free end; an arrangement that produced a most decorative effect.

The Hawaiians, in their fondness for giving personal names to inanimate objects, named the two free ends (apua) of the pa-u respectively ku-kapu-ula-ka-lani and Lele-a-mahu'i.

According to another method, which was simpler and more commonly employed, the piece was folded sidewise and, being gathered into pleats, a cord was inserted the length of the fold. The cord was passed about the waist, knotted at the hip, and thus held the garment secure.

[p. 51]

While the girls are making their simple toilet and donning their unique, but scanty, costume, the kumu, aided by others, soothes the impatience of the audience and stimulates their imagination by cantillating a mele that sets forth in grandiloquent imagery the praise of the pa-u.

Oli Pa-u

Kakua pa-u, ahu na kikepa! [*a]
 I ka pa-u noenoe i hooluu'a,
 I hookakua ia a paa iluna o ka imu. [*b]
 Ku ka hu'a [*c] o ka pali o ka wai kapu,
 5 He kuina [*d] pa-u pali [*e] no Kupe-hau,
 I holo a paa ia, paa e Hono-kane. [*f]

Malama o lilo i ka pa-u.
 Holo iho la ke ala ka Manu [*g] i na pali;
 Pali ku kahako haka a-i,
 10 I ke keiki pa-u pali a Kau-kini, [*h]
 I hoonu'anu'a iluna o ka Auwana. [*i]

[p. 52]

Akahi ke ana, ka luhi i ka pa-u:
 Ka ho-oio i ke kapa-wai,
 I na kikepa wai o Apua, [*a]
 15 I hopu 'a i ka ua noe holo poo-poo,
 Me he pa-u elehiwa wale i na pali.

Ohiohi ka pali, ki ka liko o ka lama,
 Mama ula [*b] ia ka malua ula,
 I hopu a omau ia e ka maino.
 20 I [*c] ka malo o Umi ku huna mai.
 Ike'a ai na maawe wai olona, [*d]
 E makili ia nei i Waihilau. [*e]
 Holo ke olona, paa ke kapa.

Hu'a lepo ole ka pa-u;
 25 Nani ka o-iwi ma ka maka kilo-hana. [*f]
 Makalii ka ohe, [*g] paa ke kapa.

Opua ke ahi i na pali,
 I hookau kalena ia e ka makani,
 I kaomi pohaku ia i Wai-manu,
 30 I na ala [*h] ki-ola-ola.
 I na ala, i ala lele
 Ia Kane-poha-ka'a. [*i]

Paa ia Wai-manu, [*j] o-oki Wai-pi'o;
 Lalau o Ha'i i ka ohe,
 35 In Koa'e-kea, [*k]
 I kahuihi ia ia ohe laulii, in ohe.
 Oki'a a moku, mo' ke kihi, [*l]

[p. 53]

Mo' ke kihi, ka malama ka Hoaka, [*a]
 I apahu ia a poe,
 40 O awili [*b] o Malu-o.

He pola ia no ka pa-u;
 E hii ana e Ka-holo-kua-iwa,
 Ke amo la e Pa-wili-wili
 I ka pa-u poo kau-poku-- [*c]
 45 Kau poku a hana ke no,
 Kau iluna o Hala'a-wili,
 I owili hana haawe.

Ku-ka'a, olo-ka'a wahie;
 Ka'a ka opeope, ula ka pali; [*d]
 50 Uwa kamalii, hookani ka pihe,
 Hookani ka a'o, [*e] a hana pilo ka leo,
 I ka mahalo i ka pa-u,
 I ka pa-u wai-lehua a Hi'i-lawe [*f] iluna,
 Pi'o anuenue a ka ua e us nei.

This is a typical Hawaiian poem of the better sort, keyed in a highly imaginative strain. The multitude of specific allusions to topographical names make it difficult to translate it intelligently to

[p. 54]

a foreign mind. The poetical units are often so devised that each new division takes its clue from the last word of the previous verse, on the principle of "follow your leader," a capital feature in Hawaiian poetry.

[Translation]

Pa-u Song

Gird on the pa-u, garment tucked in one side,
 Skirt lacelike and beauteous in staining,
 That is wrapped and made fast about the oven.
 Bubbly as foam of falling water it stands,
 5 Quintuple skirt, sheer as the cliff Kupe-hau.
 One journeyed to work on it at Honokane.

Have a care the pa-u is not filched.
 Scent from the robe Manu climbs the valley walls--
 Abysses profound, heights twisting the neck.
 10 A child is this steep thing of the cliff Kau-kini,
 A swelling cloud on the peak of Auwana.

Wondrous the care and toll to make the pa-u!
 What haste to finish, when put a-soak
 In the side-glancing stream of Apua!
 15 Caught by the rain-scud that searches the glen,
 The tinted gown illumines the pali--

The sheeny steep shot with buds of lama--
 Outshining the comely malua-ula,
 Which one may seize and gird with a strong hand.
 20 Leaf of ti for his malo, Umi [*a] stood covered.

Look at the olona fibers inwrought,
 Like the trickling brooklets of Wai-hilau.
 The olona fibers knit with strength
 This dainty immaculate web, the pa-u,
 25 And the filmy weft of the kilo-hana.
 With the small bamboo the tapa is finished.

A fire seems to bud on the pali.
 When the tapa is spread out to dry,
 Pressed down with stones at Wai-manu--
 30 Stones that are shifted about and about,
 Stones that are tossed here and there,
 Like work of the hail-thrower Kane.

At Wai-manu finished, 'tis cut at Wai-pi'o;
 Ha'i takes the bamboo Ko-a'e-kea;

[p. 55]

35 Deftly wields the knife of small-leafed bamboo;
 A bamboo choice and fit for the work.
 Cut, cut through, cut off the corners;
 Cut round, like crescent moon of Hoaka;
 Cut in scallops this shift that makes tabu:
 40 A fringe is this for the pa-u.

'Tis lifted by Ka-holo-ku-iwa,
 'Tis borne by Pa-wili-wili;
 A pa-u narrow at top like a house,
 That's hung on the roof-tree till morning,

45 Hung on the roof-tree Ha-la'a-wili.
 Make a handle fitting the shoulder;
 Lash it fast, rolled tight like a log.
 The bundle falls, red shows the pali;
 The children shout, they scream in derision.
 50 The a'o bird shrieks itself hoarse
 In wonder at the pa-u--
 Pa-u with a sheen like Hi'i-lawe falls,
 Bowed like the rainbow arch
 Of the rain that's now falling.

The girls of the olapa, their work in the tiring-room completed, lift their voices in a spirited song, and with a lively motion pass out into the hall to bloom before the waiting assembly in the halau in all the glory of their natural charms and adornments:

Oli

Ku ka punohu ula i ka moana;
 Hele ke ehu-kai, uhi i ka aina;
 Olapa ka uila, noho i Kahiki.
 Uina, nakolo,
 5 Uwa ka pihe,
 Lau [*a] kanaka ka hula.
 E Laka, e!

[Translation]

Tiring Song

The rainbow stands red o'er the ocean;
 Mist crawls from the sea and covers the land;
 Far as Kahiki flashes the lightning;
 A reverberant roar,
 5 A shout of applause
 From the four hundred.
 I appeal to thee, Laka!

[p. 56]

The answering song, led by the kumu, is in the same flamboyant strain:

Oli

Lele Mahu'ilani [*a] a luna,
 Lewa ia Kauna-lewa! [*b]

[Translation]

Song

Lift Mahu'ilani on high,
 Thy palms Kauna-lewa a-waving!

After the ceremony of the pa-u came that of the lei, a wreath to crown the head and another for the neck and shoulders. It was not the custom in the old times to overwhelm the body with floral decorations and to blur the outlines of the figure to the point of disfigurement; nor was every flower that blows acceptable as an offering. The gods were jealous and nice in their tastes, pleased only with flowers indigenous to the soil--the ilima (pl. VI), the lehua, the maile, the ie-ie, and the like (see pp. <page 19>, <page 20>). The ceremony was quickly accomplished. As the company knotted the garlands about head or neck, they sang:

Oli Lei

Ke lei mai la o Ka-ula i ke kai, e!
 Ke malamalama o Niihau, ua malie.
 A maile, pa ka Inu-wai.
 Ke inu mai la na hala o Naue i ke kai.
 5 No Naue, ka hala, no Puna ka wahine. [*c]
 No ka lua no i Kilauea.

[Translation]

Wreath Song

Ka-ula wears the ocean as a wreath;
 Nii-hau shines forth in the calm.
 After the calm blows the wind Inu-wai;
 Naue's palms then drink in the salt.
 5 From Naue the palm, from Puna the woman--
 Aye, from the pit, Kilauea.

Tradition tells a pathetic story (<page 212>) in narrating an incident touching the occasion on which this song first was sung.

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE VI
 ILIMA (SIDA FALLAX) LEI AND FLOWERS

 

Footnotes

^49:a Kupukupu. Said to be a fragrant grass.

^49:b Kane-hoa. Said to be a hill at Kaupo, Maui. Another person says it is a hill at Lihue, on Oahu. The same name is often repeated.

^49:c Ho-a. To bind. An instance of word-repetition, common in Hawaiian poetry.

^49:d Wai-kaloa. A cool wind that blows at Lihue, Kauai.

^49:e Alina. A scar, or other mark of disfigurement, a moral blemish. In ancient times lovers inflicted injuries on themselves to prove devotion.

^51:a Kikepa. The bias, the one-sided slant given the pa-u by tucking it in at one side, as previously described.

^51:b Imu. An oven; an allusion to the heat and passion of the part covered by the pa-u.

^51:c Hu'a. Foam; figurative of the fringe at the border of the pa-u.

^51:d Kuina. A term applied to the five sheets that were stitched together (kui) to make a set of bed-clothes. Five turns also, It is said, complete a pa-u.

^51:e Pali no Kupe-hau. Throughout the poem the pa-u is compared to a pali, a mountain wall. Kupe-hau is a precipitous part of Wai-pi'o valley.

^51:f Hono-kane. A valley near Wai-pi'o. Here it is personified and said to do the work on the pa-u.

^51:g Manu. A proper name given to this pa-u.

^51:h Kau-kini. The name of a hill back of Lahaina-luna, the traditional residence of a kahuna named Lua-hoo-moe, whose two sons were celebrated for their manly beauty. Ole-pau, the king of the island Maui, ordered his retainer, Lua-hoo-moe, to fetch for his eating some young u-a'u, a sea-bird that nests and rears its young in the mountains. These young birds are esteemed a delicacy. The kahuna, who was a bird-hunter, truthfully told the king that it was not the season for the young birds; the parent birds were haunting the ocean. At this some of the king's boon companions, moved by ill-will, charged the king's mountain retainer with suppressing the truth, and in proof they brought some tough old birds caught at sea and had them served for the kings table. Thereupon the king, not discovering the fraud, ordered that Lua-hoo-moe should be put to death by fire. The following verses were communicated to the author as apropos of Kau-kini, evidently the name of a man:

Ike ia Kau-kini, he lawaia manu.
 He upena ku'u i ka noe, i Poha-kahi,
 Ua hoopulu ia i ka ohu ka kikepa;
 Ke na'i la i ka luna a Kea-auwana;
 Ka uahi i ke ka-peku e hei ai ka manu o Pu-o-alii.
 O ke alii wale no ka'u i makemake
 Ali'a la, ha'o, e!

[Translation]

Behold Kau-kini, a fisher of birds:
 Net spread in the mist of Poha-kahi,
 That is soaked by file sidling fog.
 It strives on the crest of Koa-auwana.
 Smoke traps the birds of Pu-o-alii.
 It's only the king that I wish:
 But stay now--I doubt.

^51:i Auwana. Said to be an eminence on the flank of Haleakala, back of Ulupalakua.

^52:a Apua. A place on Hawaii, on Maui, on Oahu, on Kauai. and on Molokai.

^52:b Mama ula ia ka malua ula. The malua-ula was a variety of tapa that was stained with hili kukui (the root-bark of the kukui tree). The ripe kukui nut was chewed into a paste and mingled with this stain. Mama ula refers to this chewing. The malua ula is mentioned as a foil to the pa-u, being a cheap tapa.

^52:c A contracted form of ti or ki, the plant or, as in this case, the leaf of the ti, the Dracaena (pl. v). Liloa, the father of Umi, used it to cover himself after his amour with the mother of Umi, having given his malo in pledge to the woman. Umi may have used this same leaf as a substitute for the malo while in the wilderness of Laupahoehoe, hiding away from his brother, King Hakau.

^52:d Olona. A strong vegetable fiber sometimes added to tapa to give it strength. The fibers of olona in the fabric of the pa-u are compared to the runnels and brooklets of Waihilau.

^52:e Wai-hilau. Name applied to the water that drips in a cave in Puna. It is also the name of a stream in Wai-pi'o valley, Hawaii.

^52:f Kilo-hana. The name given the outside, ornamented, sheet of a set (kuina) of five tapas used as bed-clothing. It was also applied to that part of a pa-u which was decorated with figures. The word comes from kilohi, to examine critically, and hana, to work and therefore means an ornamental work.

^52:g Ohe. Bamboo. In this case the stamp, made from bamboo, used to print the tapa.

^52:h Ala. The hard, dark basalt of which the Hawaiian ko'i, adz, is made; any pebble, or small water-worn stone, such as would be used to hold in place the pa-u while spread out to dry.

^52:i Kane-poha-ka'a. Kane-the-hail-sender. The great god Kane was also conceived of as Kane-hekili, the thunderer; Kane-lulu-honua, the earthquake-sender, etc.

^52:j Wai-manu and Wai-pi'o are neighboring valleys.

^52:k Ko-a'e-kea. A land in Wai-pi'o valley.

^52:l Mo' ke kihi. Mo' is a contracted form of moku.

^53:a Hoaka. The name of the moon in its second day, or of the second day of the Hawaiian month; a crescent.

^53:b O awili a Malu-o. The most direct and evident sense of the word awili is to wrap. It probably means the wrapping of the pa-u about the loins; or it may mean the movable, shifty action of the pa-u caused by the lively actions of the dancer. The expression Malu-o may be taken from the utterance of the king's ilamuku (constable or sheriff) or other official, who, in proclaiming a tabu, held an idol in his arms and at the same time called out Kapu, o-o! The meaning is that the pa-u, when wrapped about the woman's loins, laid a tabu on the woman. The old Hawaiian consulted on the meaning of this passage quoted the following, which illustrates the fondness of his people for endless repetitions and play upon words:

Awiliwili i ka hale [*1] o ka lauwili, e.
 He lauwili ka makani, he Kaua-ula, [*2]
 I hoapaapa i ka hale o ka lauwili, e:

[Translation]

Unstable the house of the shifty man,
 Pickle as the wind Kaua-ula.
 Treachery lurks in the house of Unstable.

^53:c Kaupoka. A variant of the usual form, which is kaupaku, the ridgepole of a house, its apex. The pa-u when worn takes the shape of a grass house, which has the form of a haystack.

^53:d Ula ka pali. Red shows the pali, i. e., the side hill. This is a euphemism for some accident by which the pa-u has been displaced, and an exposure of the person has taken place, as a result of which the boys scream and even the sea-bird, the a'o, shrieks itself hoarse.

^53:e A'o. A sea-bird, whose raucous voice is heard in the air at night at certain seasons.

^53:f Hi'i-lawe. A celebrated waterfall in Wai-pi'o valley, Hawaii.

^53:1 Primitive meaning, house; second, the body as the house of the soul.

^53:2 Kaua-ula. A strong wind that shifted from one point to another, and that blew, often with great violence, at Lahaina, Maui. The above triplet was often quoted by the chiefs of olden time apropos of a person who was fickle in love or residence,. As the old book has it, "The double-minded man Is unstable in all his ways," (O ke kanaka lolilua ka manao lauwili kona mau aoao a pau.)

^54:a Umi. It was Liloa, the father of Umi, who covered himself with a ti leaf instead of a malo after the amour that resulted in the birth of Umi. His malo he had given as a pledge to the woman who became the mother of Umi.

^55:a Lau (archaic). Four hundred.

^56:a Mahu'ilani. A poetical name for the right hand; this the olopa, the dancing girls, lifted in extension as they entered the halau from the dressing room. The left hand was termed Kaohi-lani.

^56:b Kauna-lewa. The name of a celebrated grove of coconuts at Kekaha, Kauai, near the residence of the late Mr. Knudsen.

^56:c Wahine. The woman, Pele.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

IX.--THE HULA ALA'A-PAPA

Every formal hula was regarded by the people of the olden time as a sacred and religious performance (tabu); but all hulas were not held to be of equal dignity and rank (hanohano). Among those deemed to be of the noblest rank and honor was the ala'a-papa. In its best days this was a stately and dignified performance, comparable to the old-fashioned courtly minuet.

We shall observe in this hula the division of the performers into two sets, the hoopa'a and the olapa. Attention will naturally bestow itself first on the olapa, a division of the company made up of splendid youthful figures, young men, girls, and women in the prime of life. They stand a little apart and in advance of the others, the right hand extended, the left resting upon the hip, from which hangs in swelling folds the pa-u. The time of their waiting for the signal to begin the dance gives the eye opportunity to make deliberate survey of the forms that stand before us.

The figures of the men are more finely proportioned, more statuesque, more worthy of preservation in marble or bronze than those of the women. Only at rare intervals does one find among this branch of the Polynesian race a female shape which from crown to sole will satisfy the canons of proportion--which one carries in the eye. That is not to say, however, that the artistic eye will not often meet a shape that appeals to the sense of grace and beauty. The springtime of Hawaiian womanly beauty hastes away too soon. Would it were possible to stay that fleeting period which ushers in full womanhood!

One finds himself asking the question to what extent the responsibility for this overthickness of leg and ankle exaggerated in appearance, no doubt, by the ruffled anklets often worn--this pronounced tendency to the growth of that degenerate weed, fat, is to be explained by the standard of beauty which held sway in Hawaii's courts and for many ages acted as a principle of selection in the physical molding of the Hawaiian female.

The prevailing type of physique among the Hawaiians, even more marked in the women than in the men, is the short and thick, as opposed to the graceful and slender. One does occasionally find delicacy of modeling in the young and immature; but with adolescence fatness too often comes to blur the outline.

The hoopa'a, who act as instrumentalists, very naturally maintain a position between sitting and kneeling, the better to enable them to

[p. 58]

handle that strangely effective drumlike instrument, the ipu, the one musical instrument used as an accompaniment in this hula. The, ipu is made from the bodies of two large, pear-shaped calabashes of unequal sizes, which are joined together at their smaller ends in such a manner as to resemble a figure-of-eight. An opening is left at the top of the smaller calabash to increase the resonance. In moments of calm the musicians allow the body to rest upon the heels: as the action warms they lift themselves to such height as the bended knee will permit.

The ala'a-papa is a hula of comparatively moderate action. While the olapa employ hands, feet, and body in gesture and pose to illustrate the meaning and emotion of the song, the musicians mark the time by lifting and patting with the right hand the ipu each holds in the left hand. If the action of the play runs strong and stirs the emotions, each hoopa'a lifts his ipu wildly, fiercely smites it, then drops it on the padded rest in such manner as to bring out its deep mysterious tone.

At a signal from the kumu, who sits with the hoopa'a, the poo-pua'a, leader of the olapa, calls the mele (kahea i ka mele)--that is, he begins its recitation--in a tone differing but little from that of ordinary conversation, a sing-song recitation, a vocalization less stilted and less punctilious than that usually employed in the utterance of the oli or mele. The kumu, the leader of the company, now joins in, mouthing his words in full observance of the mele style. His manner of cantillation may be either what may he called the low relief, termed ko'i-honua, or a pompous alto-relievo style, termed ai-ha'a. This is the signal for the whole company to chime in, in the same style as the kumu. The result, as it seems to the untutored ear, is a confusion of sounds like that of the many-tongued roar of the ocean.

The songs cantillated for the hula ala'a-papa were many and of great variety. It seems to have been the practice for the kumu. to arrange a number of mele, or poetical pieces, for presentation in the hula in such order as pleased him. These different mele, thus arranged, were called pale, compartments, or mahele, divisions, as if they were integral parts of one whole, while in reality their relation to one another was only that of the juxtaposition imposed upon them by the kumu.

The poetical pieces first to be presented were communicated to the author as mahele, divisions--hardly cantos--in the sense above defined. They are. however, distinct poems, though there chances to run through them all a somewhat similar motive. The origin of many of these is referred to a past so remote that tradition assigns them to what the Hawaiians call the wa po, the night of tradition, or they say of them, no ke akua mai, they are from the gods. It matters not

[p. 59]

how faithful has been the effort to translate these poems, they will not be found easy of comprehension. The local allusions, the point of view, the atmosphere that were in the mind of the savage are not in our minds to-day, and will not again be in any mind on earth; they defy our best efforts at reproduction. To conjure up the ghostly semblance of these dead impalpable things and make them live again is a problem that must be solved by each one with such aid from the divining rod of the imagination as the reader can summon to his help.

Now for the play, the song:

Mele no ka Hula Ala'a-papa

MAHELE-HELE I

PAUKU I

A Koolau wau, ike i ka ua,
 E ko-kolo la-lepo ana ka ua,
 E ka'i ku ana, ka'i mai ana ka ua,
 E nu mai ana ka ua i ke kuahiwi,
 5 E po'i ana ka ua me he nalu la.
 E puka, a puka mai ka ua la.
 Waliwali ke one i ka hehi'a e ka ua;
 Ua holo-wai na kaha-wai;
 Ua ko-ka wale na pali.
 10 Aia ka wai la i ka ilina, [*a] he ilio,
 He ilio hae, ke nahu nei e puka.

[Translation]

Song for the Hula Ala'a-papa.

CANTO I

STANZA 1

'Twas in Koolau I met with the rain:
 It comes with lifting and tossing of dust,
 Advancing in columns, dashing along.
 The rain, it sighs in the forest;
 5 The rain, it beats and whelms, like the surf;
 It smites, it smites now the land.
 Pasty the earth from the stamping rain;
 Full run the streams, a rushing flood;
 The mountain walls leap with the rain.
 10 See the water climbing its bounds like a dog,
 A raging dog, gnawing its way to pass out.

This song is from the story of Hiiaka on her journey to Kauai to bring the handsome prince, Lohiau, to Pele. The region is that on the windward, Koolau, side of Oahu.

[p. 60]

PAUKU 2

Hoopono oe, he aina kai Waialua i ka hau;
 Ke olelo [*a] wale no la i ka lani.
 Lohe ka uka o ka pehu i Ku-kani-loko. [*b]
 I-loko, i-waho kaua la, e ka hoa,
 5 I kahi e pau ai o ka oni?
 Oni ana i ka manawa o ka lili,
 Pee oe, pee ana iloko o ka hilahila.
 I hilahila wale ia no e oe;
 Nou no ka hale, [*c] komo mai maloko.

The lines from the fourth to the ninth in this stanza (pauku) represent a dialogue between two lovers.

[Translation]

STANZA 2

Look now, Waialua, land clothed with ocean-mist--
 Its wilderness-cries heaven's ear only hears,
 The wilderness-gods of Ku-kani-loko.
 Within or without shall we stay, friend,
 5 Until we have stilled the motion?
 To toss is a sign of impatience.
 You hide, hiding as if from shame.
 I am bashful because of your presence:
 The house is yours, you've only to enter.

PAUKU 3

(Ko'i-honua)

Paku Kea-au [*d] lulu, Wai-akea; [*e]
 Noho i ka la'i loa o Hana-kahi, [*f]
 O Hilo, i olokea [*g] ia, i au la, e, i kai,
 O Lele-iwi, [*h] o Maka-hana-loa. [*i]
 5 Me he kaele-papa [*j] la Hilo, i lalo ka noho.
 Kaele [*k] wale Hilo i ke alai ia e ka ua.
 Oi ka niho o ka ua o Hilo i ka lani;
 Kua-wa'a-wa'a Hilo i eli 'a e ka wai;
 Kai-koo, haki na nalu, ka ua o Hilo;

[p. 61]

10 Ha'i lau-wili mai ka nahele.
 Nanalu, kahe waikahe o Wai-luku;
 Hohonu Waiau, [*a] nalo ke poo o ka lae o Moku-pane; [*b]
 Wai ulaula o Wai-anue-nue; [*c]
 Ka-wowo nui i ka wai o Kolo-pule-pule; [*d]
 15 Halulu i ha-ku'i, ku me he uahi la
 Ka pua o ka wai ua o-aka i ka lani.
 Eleele Hilo e, pano e, i ka ua;
 Okakala ka hulu o Hilo i ke anu;
 Pili-kau [*e] mai Hilo ia ua loa.
 20 Pali-ku laau ka uka o Haili, [*f]
 Ka lae ohi'a e kope-kope,
 Me he aha moa la, ka pale pa laau,
 Ka nahele o Pa-ie-ie, [*g]
 Ku'u po'e lehua iwaena konu o Mo-kau-lele; [*h].
 25 Me ka ha'i laau i pu-kaula hala'i i ka ua.
 Ke nana ia la e la'i i Hanakahi.
 Oni aku Hilo, oni ku'u kai lipo-lipo,
 A Lele-iwi, ku'u kai ahu mimiki a ka Malua. [*i]
 Lei kahiko, lei nalu ka poai.
 30 Nana Pu'u-eo, [*j] e! makai ka iwi-honua, [*k] e!
 Puna-hoa la, ino, ku, ku wan a Wai-akea la.

[Translation]

STANZA 3

(With distinct utterance)

Kea-au shelters, Waiakea lies in the calm,
 The deep peace of King Hana-kahi.
 Hilo, of many diversions, swims in the ocean,
 'Tween Point Lele-iwi and Maka-hana-loa;
 5 And the village rests in the bowl,
 Its border surrounded with rain--
 Sharp from the sky the tooth of Hilo's rain.
 Trenched is the land, scooped out by the downpour--
 Tossed and like gnawing surf is Hilo's rain--
 10 Beach strewn with a tangle or thicket growth;
 A billowy freshet pours in Wailuku;
 Swoll'n is Wai-au, flooding the point Moku-pane;
 And red leaps the water of Anue-nue.
 A roar to heaven sends up Kolo-pule,

[p. 62]

15 Shaking like thunder, mist rising like smoke.
 The rain-cloud unfolds in the heavens;
 Dark grows Hilo, black with the rain.
 The skirt of Hilo grows rough from the cold;
 The storm-cloud hangs low o'er the land.
 20 A rampart stand the woods of Haili;
 Ohi'as thick-set must be brushed aside,
 To tear one's way, like a covey, of fowl,
 In the wilds of Pa-ie-ie--
 Lehua growths mine--heart of Mokau-lele.
 25 A breaking, a weaving of boughs, to shield from rain;
 A look enraptured on Hana-kahi,
 Sees Hilo astir, the blue ocean tossing
 Wind-thrown-spray--dear sea--'gainst Point Lele-iwi--
 A flute-worn foam-wreath to encircle its brow.
 30 Look, Pu'u-eo! guard 'gainst the earth-rib!
 It's Puna-hoa reef; halt!
 At Waiakea halt!

PAUKU 4

(Ai-ha' a)

Kua loloa Kea-au i ka nahele;
 Hala kua lulu-hulu Pana-ewa i ka laau;
 Inoino ka maha o ka ohia o La'a.
 Ua ku kepakepa ka maha o ka lehua;
 5 Ua po-po'o-hina i ka wela a ke Akua.
 Ua u-ahi Puna i ka oloka'a pohaku,
 I ka huna pa'a ia e ka wahine.
 Nanahu ahi ka papa o Olu-ea;
 Momoku ahi Puna hala i Apua;
 10 Ulu-a ka nahele me ka laau.
 Oloka'a kekahi ko'i e Papa-lau-ahi;
 I eli 'a kahi ko'i e Ku-lili-kaua.
 Kai-ahea a hala i Ka-li'u;
 A eu e, e ka La, ka malama-lama.
 15 O-na-naka ka piko o Hilo ua me ke one,
 I huli i uka la, i hulihia i kai;
 Ua wa-wahi 'a, ua na-ha-ha,
 Ua he-hele-lei!

[Translation]

STANZA 4

(Bombastic style)

Ke'-au is a long strip of wildwood;
 Shag of pandamus mantles Pan'-ewa;
 Scraggy the branching of Laa's ohias;
 The lehua limbs at sixes and sevens--
 5 They are gray from the heat of the goddess. [p. 63]
 Puna smokes mid the bowling of rocks--
 Wood and rock the She-god heaps in confusion,
 The plain Oluea's one bed of live coals;
 Puna is strewn with fires clean to Apua,
 10 Thickets and tall trees a-blazing.
 Sweep on, oh fire-ax, thy flame-shooting flood!
 Smit by this ax is Ku-lili-kaua.
 It's a flood tide of lava clean to Kali'u,
 And the Sun, the light-giver, is conquered.
 15 The bones of wet Hilo rattle from drought;
 She turns for comfort to mountain, to sea.
 Fissured and broken, resolved into dust.

This poem is taken from the story of Hiiaka. On her return from the journey to fetch Lohiau she found that her sister Pele had treacherously ravaged with fire Puna, the district that contained her own dear woodlands. The description given in the poem is of the resulting desolation.

PAUKU 5

No-luna ka Hale-kai, [*a] no ka ma'a-lewa, [*b]
 Nana ka maka ia Moana-nui-ka-lehua. [*c]
 Noi au i ke Kai, e mali'o. [*d]
 Ina ku a'e la he lehua [*e] ilaila!
 5 Hopoe-lehua [*f] kiekie.
 Maka'u ka lehua i ke kanaka, [*g]
 Lilo ilalo e hele ai, e-e,
 A ilalo hoi.
 O Kea-au [*h] ili-ili nehe ke kai,

[p. 64]

10 Hoo-lono [*a] ke kai o Puna
 I ka ulu hala la, e-e,
 Kai-ko'o Puna.
 Ia hooneenee ia pili mai [*b] kaua, e ke hoa.
 Ke waiho e mai la oe ilaila.
 15 Eia ka mea ino la, he anu,
 A he anu me he mea la iwaho kaua, e ke hoa;
 Me he wai la ko kaua ili.

The author of this poem of venerable age is not known. It is spoken of as belonging to the wa po, the twilight of tradition. It is represented to be part of a mele taught to Hiiaka by her friend and preceptress in the hula, Hopoe. Hopoe is often called Hopoe-wahine,  internal evidence one can see that it can not be in form the same as was given to Hiiaka by Hopoe; it may have been founded on the poem of Hopoe. If so, it has been modified.

[Translation]

STANZA 5

From mountain retreat and root-woven ladder
 Mine eye looks down on goddess Moana-Lehua;
 I beg of the Sea, Be thou calm;
 Would there might stand on thy shore a lehua--
 5 Lehua-tree tall of Ho-poe.
 The Lehua is fearful of man;
 It leaves him to walk on the ground below,
 To walk the ground far below.
 The pebbles at Ke'-au grind in the surf.
 10 The sea at Ke'-au shouts to Puna's palms,
 "Fierce is the sea of Puna."
 Move hither, snug close, companion mine;
 You lie so aloof over there.
 Oh what a bad fellow is cold!
 15 'Tis as if we were out on the wold;
 Our bodies so clammy and chill, friend!

The last five verses, which sound like a love song, may possibly be a modern addition to this old poem. The sentiment, they contain is comparable to that expressed in the Song of Welcome on page <page 39>:

Eia ka pu'u nui o waho nei, he anu.
 The hill of Affliction out there is the cold.

[p. 65]

MAHELE-HELE II

Hi'u-o-lani, [*a] kii ka ua o Hilo [*b] i ka lani;
 Ke hookiikii mai la ke ao o Pua-lani; [*c]
 O mahele ana, [*d] pule Hilo i ka ua--
 O Hilo Hana-kahi. [*e]

5 Ha'i ka nalu, wai kaka lepo o Pii-lani;
 Hai'na ka iwi o Hilo,
 I ke ku ia e ka wai.
 Oni'o lele a ka ua o Hilo i ka lani.

Ke hookiikii mai la ke ao o Pua-lani,
 10 Ke holuholu a'e la e puke,
 Puke e nana ke kiki a ka ua,
 Ka nonoho a ka ua i ka hale o Hilo.

Like Hilo me Puna ke ku a mauna-ole, [*f]
 He ole ke ku a mauna Hilo me Puna.
 15 He kowa Puna mawaena Hilo me Ka-u;
 Ke pili wale la i ke kua i mauna-ole;
 Pili hoohaha i ke kua o Mauna-loa.

He kuahiwi Ka-u e pa ka makani.
 Ke alai ia a'e la Ka-u e ke A'e; [*g]
 20 Na-u ku ke ehu lepo ke A'e;
 Ku ke ehu-lepo mai la Ka-u i ka makani.
 Makani Kawa hu'a-lepo Ka-u i ke A'-e.

[p. 66]

Kahiko mau no o Ka-u i ka makani.
 Makani ka Lae-ka-ilio i Unu-lau,
 25 Kaili-ki'i [*a] a ka lua a Kaheahea, [*b]
 I ka ha'a nawali ia ino.

Ino wa o ka  o Kau-na.
 Nana aku o ka makani ma malaila!
 O Hono-malino, malino i ka la'i o Kona.
 30 He inoa la!

[Translation]

CANTO II

Heaven-magic, fetch a Hilo-pour from heaven!
 Morn's cloud-buds, look! they swell in the East.
 The rain-cloud parts. Hilo is deluged with rain,
 The Hilo of King Hana-kahi.

5 Surf breaks, stirs the mire of Pii-lani;
 The bones of Hilo are broken
 By the blows of the rain.
 Ghostly the rain-scud of Hilo in heaven;

The cloud-forms of Pua-lani grow and thicken.
 10 The rain-priest bestirs him now to go forth,
 Forth to observe the stab and thrust of the rain.
 The rain that clings to the roof of Hilo.

Hilo, like Puna, stands mountainless;
 Aye, mountain-free stand Hilo and Puna.
 15 Puna 's a gulf 'twixt Ka-u and Hilo:
 Just leaning her back on Mount Nothing.
 She sleeps at the feet of Mount Loa.

A mountain-back is Ka-u which the wind strikes,
 Ka-u, a land much scourged by the A'e.
 20 A dust-cloud lifts in Ka-u as one climbs.
 A dust-bloom floats, the lift of the wind:
 'Tis blasts from fountain-walls piles dust, the A'e.

Ka-u was always tormented with wind.
 Cape-of-the-Dog feels Unulau's blasts;
 25 They turmoil the cove of Ka-hea-hea,
 Defying all strength with their violence.

There's a storm when wind blows at Kau-na.
 Just look at the tempest there raging!
 Hono-malino sleeps sheltered by Kona.
 30 A eulogy this of a name.

"What name?" was asked of the old Hawaiian.

"A god," said he.

"How is that? A mele-inoa celebrates the name and glory of a king, not of a god."

[p. 67]

His answer was, "The gods composed the mele; men did not compose it."

Like an old-time geologist, he solved the puzzle of a novel phenomenon by ascribing it to God.

MAHELE III

(A i-ha'a)

A Koa'e-kea, [*a] i Pueo-hulu-nui, [*a]
 Neeu a'e la ka makahiapo o ka pali;
 A a'e, a a'e, a'e [*b] la iluna
 Kaholo-kua-iwa, ka pali o Ha'i. [*c]
 5 Ha'i a'e la ka pali;
 Ha-nu'u ka pali;
 Hala e Malu-o;
 Hala a'e la Ka-maha-la'a-wili,
 Ke kaupoku hale a ka ua.
 10 Me he mea i uwae'na a'e la ka pali;
 Me he hale pi'o ka lei na ka manawa o ka pali Halehale-o-u;
 Me he aho i hilo 'a la ka wai o Wai-hi-lau;
 Me he uahi pulehu-manu la ke kai o ka auwala hula ana.
 Au ana Maka'u-kiu [*d] iloko o ke kai;
 15 Pohaku lele [*e] o Lau-nui, Lau-pahoehoe.
 Ka eku'na a ke kai i ka ala o Ka-wai-kapu--
 Eku ana, me he pua'a la, ka lae Makani-lele, 
 Koho-la-lele.

[Translation]

CANTO III

(Bombastic style)

Haunt of white tropic-bird and big ruffled owl, 
 Up rises the first-born child of the pali. 
 He climbs, he climbs, he climbs up aloft, 
 Kaholo-ku'-iwa, the pali of Ha'i.
 5 Accomplished now is the steep,
 The ladder-like series of steps.
 Malu-o is left far below.

[p. 68]

Passed is Ka-maha-la'-wili,
 The very ridge-pole of the rain--
 10 It's as if the peak cut it in twain--
 An arched roof the peak's crest Hale-hale-o-u.
 A twisted cord hangs the brook Wai-hilau;
 Like smoke from roasting bird Ocean's wild dance;
 The shark-god is swimming the sea;
 15 The rocks leap down at Big-leaf [*a] and Flat-leaf-- [*a]
 See the ocean charge 'gainst the cliffs,
 Thrust snout like rooting boar against Windy-cape,
 Against Kohola-lele.

MAHELE IV

Hole [*b] Waimea i ka ihe a ka makani,
 Hao mai na ale a ke Ki-pu'u-pu'u; [*c]
 He luau kala-ihi ia na ke anu,
 I o'o i ka nahele o Mahiki. [*d]
 5 Ku aku la oe i ka Malanai [*e] a ke Ki-puu-puu;
 Nolu ka maka o ka oha-wai [*f] o Uli;
 Niniau, eha ka pua o Koaie, [*g]
 Eha i ke anu ka nahele o Wai-ka-e,
 A he aloha, e!
 10 Aloha Wai-ka ia'u me he ipo la;
 Me he ipo la ka maka lena o ke Koo-lau, [*h]
 Ka pua i ka nahele o Mahule-i-a,
 E lei hele i ke alo o Moo-lau. [*i]
 E lau lea huaka'i-hele i ka pali loa;
 15 Hele hihiu, pili, [*j] noho i ka nahele.
 O ku'u noho wale iho no i kahua, e-e.
 A he aloha, e-e!
 O kou aloha ka i hiki mai i o'u nei.
 Mahea la ia i nalo iho nei?

This mele, Hole Waimea, is also sung in connection with the hula ipu.

[p. 69]

The song above given, the translation of which is to follow, belongs to historic times, being ascribed to King Liholiho--Kamehameha II--who died in London July 13, 1824, on his visit to England. It attained great vogue and still holds its popularity with the Hawaiians. The reader will note the comparative effeminacy and sentimentality of the style and the frequent use of euphemisms and double-entendre. The double meaning in a Hawaiian mele will not always be evident to one whose acquaintance with the language is not intimate. To one who comes to it from excursions in Anglo-Saxon poetry, wandering through its "meadows trim with daisies pied," the sly intent of the Hawaiian, even when pointed out, will, no doubt, seem an inconsequential thing and the demonstration of it an impertinence, if not a fiction to the imagination. Its euphemisms in reality have no baser intent than the euphuisms of Lyly, Ben Jonson, or Shakespeare.

['Translation]

Song--Hole Waimea

PART IV

Love tousled Waimea with shafts of the wind,
 While Kipuupuu puffed jealous gusts.
 Love is a tree that blights in the cold,
 But thrives in the woods of Mahiki.
 5 Smitten art thou with the blows of love;
 Luscious the water-drip in the wilds;
 Wearied and bruised is the flower of Koaie;
 Stung by the frost the herbage of Wai-ka-e,:
 And this--it is love.
 10 Wai-ka loves me like a sweetheart.
 Dear as my heart Koolau's yellow eye,
 My flower in the tangled wood, Hole-f-a,
 A travel-wreath to lay on love's breast,
 A shade to cover my journey's long climb.
 15 Love-touched, distraught, mine a wilderness-home;
 But still do I cherish the old spot,
 For love--it is love.
 Your love visits me even here:
 Where has it been hiding till now?

PAUKU 2

Kau ka ha-e-a, kau o ka hana wa ele,
 Ke ala-ula ka makani,
 Kulu a e ka ua i kou wahi moe.
 Palepale i na auwai o lalo;
 5 Eli mawaho o ka hale o Koolau, e.
 E lau Koolau, he aina ko'e-ko'e;
 Maka'u i ke anu ha uka o ka Lahuloa.
 Loa ia mea, na'u i waiho aku ai.

[p. 70]

[Translation]

STANZA 2

A mackerel sky, time for foul weather;
 The wind raises the dust--
 Thy couch is a-drip with the rain:
 Open the door, let's trench about the house:
 5 Koolau, land of rain, will shoot green leaves.
 I dread the cold of the uplands.
 An adventure that of long ago.

The poem above given from beginning to end is figurative, a piece of far-fetched, enigmatical symbolism in the lower plane of human nature.

PAUKU 3

Hoe Puna i ka wa'a po-lolo' [*a] a ha ino;
 Ha-uke-uke i ha wa o Koolau:
 Eha e! eha la!
 Eha i ku'i-ku'i o ha Ulu-mano. [*b],
 5 Hala 'e ka walu-ihe a ke A'e, [*c]
 Ku iho i ku'i-ku'i a ka Ho-li'o; [*d]
 Hana ne'e ke kikala o ko Hilo Kini.
 Ho'i lu'u-lu'u i ke one o Hana-kahi. [*e]
 I ka po-lolo' ua wahine o ka lua:
 10 Mai ka lua no, e!

[Translation]

STANZA 3

Puna plies paddle night-long in the storm;
 Is set back by a shift in the weather,
 Feels hurt and disgruntled;
 Dismayed at slap after slap of the squalls:
 5 Is struck with eight blows of Typhoon;
 Then smit with the lash of the North wind.
 Sad, he turns back to Hilo's sand-beach:
 He'll shake the town with a scandal--
 The night-long storm with the hag of the pit,
 10 Hag from Gehenna!

[p. 71]

This is not a line-for-line translation; that the author found infeasible. Line 8 of the English represents line 7 of the Hawaiian. Given more literally, it might be, "He'll shake the buttocks of Hilo's forty thousand."

The metaphor of this song is disjointed, but hot with the primeval passions of humanity.

PAUKU 4

Ho-ina-inau mea ipo i ka nahele;
 Haa-kokoe ana ka maka i ka Moani,
 I ka ike i na pua i hoomahie 'luna;
 Ua hi-hi-hina wale i ka moe awakea.
 5 Ka ino' ua poina ia Mali'o.
 Aia ka i Pua-lei o Ha'o.
 I Puna no ka waihona o ka makani;
 Kaela ka malama ana a ka Pu'u-lena,
 I kaki mea ho-aloha-loha, e!
 10 E aloha, e!

[Translation]

STANZA 4

Love is at play in the grove,
 A jealous swain glares fierce
 At the flowers tying love-knots,
 Lying wilted at noon-tide.
 5 So you've forgotten Mali'o,
 Turned to the flower of Puna--
 Puna, the cave of shifty winds.
 Long have I cherished this blossom,
 A treasure hid in my heart!
 10 Oh, sweetheart!

The following account is taken from the Polynesian Researches of the Rev. William Ellis, the well-known English missionary, who visited these islands in the years 1822 and 1823, and whose recorded observations have been of the highest value in preserving a knowledge of the institutions of ancient Hawaii:

In the afternoon, a party of strolling musicians and dancers arrived at Kairua. About four o'clock they came, followed by crowds of people, and arranged themselves on a fine sandy beach in front of one of the governor's houses, where they exhibited a native dance, called hura araapapa.

The five musicians first seated themselves in a line on the ground, and spread a piece of folded cloth on the sand before them. Their instrument was a large calabash, or rather two, one of an oval shape about three feet high, the other perfectly round, very neatly fastened to it, having also an aperture about three inches in diameter at the top. Each musician held his instrument before him with both hands, and produced his music by striking it on the ground, where he had laid a piece of cloth, and beating it with his fingers, or the palms of his hands. As soon as they began to sound their calabashes, the dancer, a young man about the middle stature, advanced through the opening crowd.

[p. 72]

His jet-black hair hung in loose and flowing ringlets on his naked shoulders; his necklace was made of a vast number of strings of nicely braided human hair, tied together behind, while a paraoa (an ornament made of a whale's tooth) hung pendent from it on his breast; his wrists were ornamented with bracelets formed of polished tusks of the hog, and his ankles with loose buskins, thickly set with dog's teeth, the rattle of which, during the dance, kept time with the music of the calabash drum. A beautiful yellow tapa was tastefully fastened round his loins, reaching to his knees. He began his dance in front of the musicians, and moved forward and backwards, across the area, occasionally chanting the achievements of former kings of Hawaii. The governor sat at the end of the ring, opposite to the musicians, and appeared gratified with the performance, which continued until the evening. (Vol. IV. 100-101, London, Fisher, Son & Jackson, 1831.)

NOTE BY THE AUTHOR.--At the time of Mr. Ellis' visit to Hawaii the orthography of the Hawaiian language was still in a formative stage, and it is said that his counsels had influence in shaping it. His use of r instead of l in the words hula, alaapapa, and palaoa may, therefore, be ascribed to the fact of his previous acquaintance with the dialects of southern Polynesia, in which the sound of r to a large extent substitutes that of 1, and to the probability that for that reason his ear was already attuned to the prevailing southern fashion, and his judgment prepossessed in that direction.

Footnotes

^59:a Ilina. A sink, a place where a stream sinks into the earth or sand.

^60:a Olelo. To speak, to converse; here used figuratively to mean that the place is lonely, has no view of the ocean, looks only to the sky. "Looks that commerce with the sky."

^60:b Ku-kani-loko. A land in Waialua, Oahu, to which princesses resorted in the olden times at the time of childbirth, that their offspring might have the distinction of being an alii kapu, a chief with a tabu.

^60:c Hale. House; a familiar euphemism of the human body.

^60:d Kea-au. An ahu-pua'a, small division of land, in Puna adjoining Hilo, represented as sheltering Hilo on that side.

^60:e Waiakea. A river in Hilo, and the land through which it flows.

^60:f Hana-kahi, A land on the Hamakua side of Hilo, also a king whose name was a synonym for profound peace.

^60:g Olo-kea. To be invited or pulled many ways at once; distracted.

^60:h Lele-iwi. A cape on the north side of Hilo.

^60:i Maka-hana-loa. A cape.

^60:j Kaele-papa. A large, round, hollowed board on which to pound taro in the making of poi. The poi-board was usually long and oval.

^60:k Kaele. In this connection the meaning is surrounded, encompassed by.

^61:a Waiau. The name given to the stretch of Wailuku river near its month.

^61:b Moku-pane. The cape between the mouth of the Wailuku river and the town of Hilo.

^61:c Wai-anue-nue. Rainbow falls and the river that makes the leap.

^61:d Kolo-pule-pule. Another branch of the Wailuku stream.

^61:e Pili-kau. To hang low, said of a cloud.

^61:f Haili. A region in the inland, woody, part of Hilo.

^61:g Pa-ieie. A well-wooded part of Hilo, once much resorted to by bird-hunters; a place celebrated in Hawaiian song.

^61:h Mokau-lele. A wild, woody region in the interior of Hilo.

^61:i Malua. Name given to a wind from a northerly or northwesterly direction on several  of the islands. The full form is Malua-lua.

^61:j Pu'u-eo. A village in the Hilo district near Puna.

^61:k Iwi-honua. Literally a bone of the earth: a projecting rock or a shoal; if in the water, an object to be avoided by the surf-rider. In this connection see note o, <page 36>.

^63:a Hale-kai. A wild mountain glen back of Hanalei valley, Kauai.

^63:b Ma'alewa. An aerial root that formed a sort of ladder by which one climbed the mountain steeps; literally a shaking sling.

^63:c Moana-nui-ka-lehua. A female demigod that came from the South (Ku-kulu-o-Kahiki) at about the same mythical period as that of Pele's arrival--if not in her company--and who was put in charge of a portion of the channel that lies between Kauai and Oahu. This channel was generally termed Ie-ie-waena and Ie-ie-waho. Here the name Moana-nui-ka-lehua seems to be used to indicate the sea as well as the demigoddess, whose dominion it was. Ordinarily she appeared as a powerful fish, but she was capable of assuming the form of a beautiful woman (mermaid?). The title lehua was given her on account of her womanly charms.

^63:d Mali'o. Apparently another form of the word malino, calm; at any rate it has the same meaning.

^63:e Lehua. An allusion to the ill-fated young woman Hopoe, who was Hiiaka's intimate friend. The allusion is amplified in the next line.

^63:f Hopoe-lehua. The lehua tree was one of the forms in which Hopoe appeared, and after her death, due to the jealous rage of Pele, she was turned into a charred lehua tree which stood on the coast subject to the beating of the surf.

^63:g Maka'u ka lehua i ke kanaka. Another version has it Maka'u ke kanaka i ka lehua; Man fears the lehua. The form here used is perhaps an ironical allusion to man's fondness not only to despoil the tree of its scarlet flowers, but womanhood, the woman it represented.

^63:h Kea-au. Often shortened in pronunciation to Ke-au, a fishing village in Puna near Hilo town. It now has a landing place for small vessels.

^64:a Hoolono. To call, to make an uproar, to spread a report.

^64:b Ia hoo-nee-nee ia pili mai. A very peculiar figure of speech. It is as if the poet personified the act of two lovers snuggling up close to each other. Compare with this the expression No huli mai, used by another poet in the thirteenth line of the lyric given on <page 204>. The motive is the same in each case.

^65:a Hi'u-o-lani. A very blind phrase. Hawaiians disagree as to its meaning. In the author's opinion, it is a word referring to the conjurer's art.

^65:b Ua o Hilo. Hilo is a very rainy country. The name Hilo seems to be used here as almost a synonym of violent rain. It calls to mind the use of the word Hilo to signify a strong wind:

Pa mai, pa mai.
 Ka makani a Hilo! [*1]
 Waiho ka ipu iki,
 Homai ka ipu nui!

[Translation]

Blow, blow, thou wind of Hilo!
 Leave the little calabash,
 Bring on the big one!

^65:c Pua-lani. The name of a deity who took the form of the rosy clouds of morning.

^65:d Mahele ana. Literally the dividing; an allusion to the fact, it is said, that in Hilo a rain-cloud, or rain-squall, as it came up would often divide and a part of it turn off toward Puna at the cape named Lele-iwi, one-half watering, in the direction of the present town, the land known as Hana-kahi.

^65:e Huna-kahi. Look at note f, <page 60>.

^65:f Mauna-ole. According to one authority this should be Mauna-Hilo. Verses 13, 14, 16, and 17 are difficult of translation. The play on the words ku a, standing at, or standing by, and kua, the back; also on the word kowa, a gulf or strait; and the repetition of the word mauna, mountain--all this is carried to such an extent as to be quite unintelligible to the Anglo-Saxon mind, though full of significance to a Hawaiian.

^65:g A'e. A strong wind that prevails in Ka-u. The some word also means to step on, to climb. This double-meaning gives the poet opportunity for a euphuistic word-play that was much enjoyed by the Hawaiians. The Hawaiians of the present day are not quite up to this sort of logomachy.

^65:1 Hilo, or Whiro, as in the Maori, was a great navigator.

^66:a Kaili-ki'i. The promontory that shelters the cove Ka-hewa-hewa.

^66:b Ka-hea-hea. The name of the cove Ka-hewa-hewa, above mentioned, is here given in a softened form obtained by the elision of the letter w.

^67:a Koa'e-kea, Pueo hulu-nui. Steep declivities, pali, on the side of Waipio valley, Hawaii. Instead of inserting these names, which would be meaningless without an explanation, the author has given a literal translation of the names themselves, thus getting a closer insight into the Hawaiian thought.

^67:b A'e. The precipices rise one above another like the steps of a stairway, climbing, climbing up, though the probable intent of the poet is to represent some one as climbing the ascent.

^67:c Ha'i. Short for Ha'ina-kolo; a woman about whom there is a story of tragic adventure. Through eating when famished of some berries in an unceremonious way she became distraught and wandered about for many months until discovered by the persistent efforts of her husband. The pali which she climbed was named after her.

^67:d Maka'u-kiu. The name of a famous huge shark that was regarded with reverential fear.

^67:e Pohaku lele. In order to determine whether a shark was present, it was the custom, before going into the clear water of some of these coves, to throw rocks into the water in order to disturb the monster and make his presence known.

^68:a Big-leaf. A literal translation of Lau-nui. Laupahoehoe, Flat-leaf.

^68:b Hole. To rasp, to handle rudely, to caress passionately. Waimea is a district and village on Hawaii.

^68:c Kipu'u-pu'u. A cold wind from Mauna-Kea that blows at Waimea.

^68:d Mahiki. A woodland in Waimea, in mythological times haunted by demons and spooks.

^68:e Mala-nai. The poetical name of a wind, probably the trade wind; a name much used in Hawaiian sentimental poetry.

^68:f Oha-wai. A water hole that is filled by dripping; an important source of supply for drinking purposes in certain parts of Hawaii.

^68:g Pua o Koaie. The koaie is a tree that grows in the wilds, the blossom of which is extremely fragrant. (Not the same as that subspecies of the koa (Acacia koa) which Hillebrand describes and wrongly spells koaia. Here a euphemism for the delicate parts.)

^68:h Koolau, or, full form, Ko-koo-lau. Described by Doctor Hillebrand as Kokolau, a wrong spelling. It has a pretty yellow flower, a yellow eye--maka lena--as the song has it. Here used tropically. (This is the plant whose leaf is sometimes used as a substitute for tea.)

^68:i Moolau. An expression used figuratively to mean a woman, more especially her breasts. The term huli-lau is also used, in a slang way, to signify the breasts of a woman, the primitive meaning being a calabash.

^68:j Pili. To touch; touched. This was the word used in the forfeit-paying love game, kilu, when the player made a point by hitting the target of his opponent with his kilu. (For further description see p. 235.)

^70:a Po-lolo. A secret word, like a cipher, made up for the occasion and compounded of two words, po, night, and loloa, long, the final a of loloa being dropped. This form of speech was called kepakepa, and was much used by the Hawaiians in old times.

^70:b Ulu-mano. A violent wind which blows by night only on the western side of Hawaii. Kamehameha with a company of men was once wrecked by this wind off Nawawa; a whole village was burned to light them ashore. (Dictionary of the Hawaiian Language, by Lorrin Andrews.)

^70:c Walu-ihe a ke A'e. The A'e is a violent wind that is described as blowing from different points of the compass in succession; a circular storm. Walu-ihe--eight spears--was a name applied to this same wind during a certain portion of its circuitous range, covering at least eight different points, as observed by the Hawaiians. It was well fitted, therefore, to serve as a figure descriptive of eight different lovers, who follow each other in quick succession in the favors of the same wanton.

^70:d Ho-li'o. The name of a wind, but of an entirely different character from those above mentioned.

^70:e Hana-kahi. (See note f, <page 60>.)

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE VII
 IPU HULA, GOURD DRUM

 

  

X.--THE HULA PA-IPU, OR KUOLO

The pa-ipu, called also the kuolo, was a hula of dignified character, in which all the performers maintained the kneeling position and accompanied their songs with the solemn tones of the ipu (pl. VII), with which each one was provided. The proper handling of this drumlike instrument in concert with the cantillation of the mele made such demands upon the artist, who was both singer and instrumentalist, that only persons of the most approved skill and experience were chosen to take part in the performance of this hula.

The manner of treating the ipu in this hula differed somewhat from that employed in the ala'a-papa, being subdued and quiet in that, whereas in the pa-ipu it was at times marked with great vigor and demonstrativeness, so that in moments of excitement and for the expression of passion, fierce joy, or grief the ipu might be lifted on high and wildly brandished. It thus made good its title as the most important instrument of the Hawaiian orchestra.

In the pa-ipu, as in the hulas generally, while the actors were sometimes grouped according to sex, they were quite as often distributed indiscriminately, the place for the leader, the kumu, being the center.

The vigor that marks the literary style of the mele now given stamps it as belonging to the archaic period, which closed in the early part of the eighteenth century, that century which saw the white man make his advent in Hawaii. The poem deals apparently with an incident in one of the migrations such as took place during the period of intercourse between the North and the South Pacific. This was a time of great stir and contention, a time when there was much paddling and sailing about and canoe-fleets, often manned by warriors, traversed the great ocean in every direction. It was then that Hawaii received many colonists from the archipelagoes that lie to the southward.

Mele

(Ko'i-honua )

Wela Kahiki, e!
 Wela Kahiki, e!
 Wela aku la Kahiki;
 Ua kaulu-wela ka moku; [p. 74]
 5 Wela ka ulu o Hawaii;
 Kakala wela aku la Kahiki ia Olopana, [*a]
 Ka'u wahi kanaka;
 O ka hei kapu [*b] o Hana-ka-ulani, [*c]
 Ka hei kapu a ke alii,
 10 Ka hoo-mamao-lani, [*d]
 Ke kapu o Keawe, [*e]
 A o Keawe
 Ke alii holo, ho-i'a 1 kai, e-e!

[p. 75]

[Translation]

Song

(Distinct utterance)

Glowing is Kahiki, oh!
 Glowing is Kahiki!
 Lo, Kahiki is a-blaze,
 The whole island a-burning.
 5 Scorched is thy scion, Hawaii.
 Kahiki shoots flame-tongues at Olopana,
 That hero of yours, and priest
 Of the oracle Hana-ka-ulani,
 The sacred shrine of the king--
 10 He is of the upper heavens,
 The one inspired by Keawe,
 That tabu-famous Keawe,
 The king passion-fond of the sea.

Mele

PALE I

Lau lehua punoni ula ke kai o Kona,
 Ke kai punoni ula i oweo ia;
 Wewena ula ke kai la, he kokona;
 Ula ia kini i ka uka o Alaea,
 5 I hili ahi ula i ke kapa a ka wahine,
 I hoeu ia e ka ni'a, e ka hana,
 E ka auwai lino mai la a kehau.
 He hau hoomoe ka lau o ka niu,
 Ke oho o ka laau, lauoho loloa.
 10 E loha ana i ka la i o Kailua la, l-u-a.
 O ke ku moena ololi a ehu
 O ku'u aina kai paeaea.
 Ea, hoea iluna o Mauna Kilohana,
 Na kaha poohiwi mau no he inoa.
 15 Ua noa e, ua pii'a kou wahi kapu, e-e!
 I a'e 'a mai e ha'i.

[p. 76]

[Translation]

Song

CANTO I

Leaf of lehua and noni-tint, the Kona sea,
 Iridescent saffron and red,
 Changeable watered red, peculiar to Kona;
 Red are the uplands Alaea;
 5 Ah, 'tis the flame-red stained robes of women
 Much tossed by caress or desire.
 The weed-tangled water-way shines like a robe of pearls,
 Dew-pearls that droop the coco leaf,
 The hair of the trees, their long locks--
 10 Lo, they wilt in the heat of Kailua the deep.
 A mat spread out narrow and gray,
 A coigne of land by the sea where the fisher drops hook.
 Now looms the mount Kilohana--
 Ah, ye wood-shaded heights, ever-lasting your fame!
 15 Your tabu is gone! your holy of holies invaded!
 Broke down by a stranger!

The intricately twisted language of this mele is allegorical, a rope whose strands are inwrought with passion, envy, detraction, and abuse. In translating it one has to choose between the poetic verbal garb and the esoteric meaning which the bard made to lurk beneath the surface.

Mele

PALE II

Kauo pu ka iwa kala-pahe'e,
 Ka iwa, ka manu o Kaula i ka makani.
 E ka manu o-u pani-wai o Lehua,
 O na manu kapu a Kuhai-moana,
 5 Mai hele a luna o Lei-no-ai,
 O kolohe, o alai mai ka Unu-lau.
 Puni'a iluna o ka Halau-a-ola;
 A ola aku i ka luna o Maka-iki-oleo.
 I ka lulu, i ka la'i o kai maio,
 10 Ma ka ha'i-wa i ka mole o Lehua in, Le-hu-a!
 O na lehua o Alaka'i ka'u aloha,
 O na lehua iluna o Ko'i-alana;
 Ua nonoho hooipo me ke kohe-kohe;
 Ua anu, maeele i ka ua noe.
 15 Ua mai oe; kau a'e ka nana laua nei, e-e,
 Na 'lii e o'oni mai nei, e-e!

['Translation]

Song

CANTO II

The iwa flies heavy to nest in the brush,
 Its haunt on windy Ke-ula.
 The watch-bird, that feuds off the rain from Le-hu-a--[p. 77]
 Bird sacred to Ku-hai, the shark-god--
 5 Shrieks, "Light not on terrace of Lei-no-ai,
 Lest Unu-lau fiercely assail you."
 Storm sweeps the cliffs of the islet;
 A covert they seek neath the hills,
 In the sheltered lee of the gale,
 10 The cove at the base of Le-hu-a.
 The shady groves there enchant them,
 The scarlet plumes of lehua.
 Love-dalliance now by the water-reeds,
 Till cooled and appeased by the rain-mist.
 15 Pour on, thou rain, the two heads press the pillow:
 Lo, prince and princess stir in their sleep!

The scene of this mele is laid on one of the little bird-islands that lie to the northwest of Kauai. The iwa bird, flying heavily to his nesting place in the wiry grass (kala-pahee), symbolizes the flight of a man in his deep-laden pirogue, abducting the woman of his love. The screaming sea-birds that warn him off the island, represented as watch-guards of the shark-god Kuhai-moana (whose reef is still pointed out), figure the outcries of the parents and friends of the abducted woman.

After the first passionate outburst (Puni'a iluna o ka Halau-a ola) things go more smoothly (ola * * *). The flight to covert from the storm, the cove at the base of Le-hu-a, the shady groves, the scarlet pompons of the lehua--the tree and the island have the same name--all these things are to be interpreted figuratively as emblems of woman's physical charms and the delights of love-dalliance.

Mele

PALE III

(Ai-ha'a)

Ku aku la Kea-au, lele ka makani mawaho,
 Ulu-mano, ma ke kaha o Wai-o-lono.
 Ua moani lehua a'e la mauka;
 Kani lehua iluna o Kupa-koili,
 5 I ka o ia i ka lau o ka hala,
 Ke poo o ka hala o ke aku'i.
 E ku'i e, e ka uwalo.
 Loli ka mu'o o ka hala,
 A helelei ka pua, a pili ke alanui:
 10 Pu ia Pana-ewa, ona-ona i ke ala,
 I ka nahele makai o Ka-unu-loa la.
 Nani ke kaunu, ke kaunu a ke alii,
 He puni ina'i poi na maua.
 Ua hala ke Kau a me ka Hoilo,
 15 Mailaila mai no ka hana ino.
 Ino mai oe, noho malie aku no hoi au;
 Hopo o' ka inaina, ka wai, e-e;
 Wiwo au, hopohopo iho nei, e-e!

[p. 78]

[Translation]

Song

CANTO III

(In turgid style)

A storm from the sea strikes Ke-au,
 Ulu-mano, sweeping across the barrens;
 It sniffs the fragrance of upland lehua,
 Turns back at Kupa-koili;
 5 Sawed by the blows of the palm leaves,
 The groves of pandanus in lava shag;
 Their fruit he would string 'bout his neck;
 Their fruit he finds wilted and crushed,
 Mere rubbish to litter the road--
 10 Ah, the perfume! Pana-ewa is drunk with the scent;
 The breath of it spreads through the groves.
 Vainly flares the old king's passion.
 Craving a sauce for his meat and mine.
 The summer has flown: winter has come:
 15 All. that is the head of our troubles.
 Palsied are you and helpless am I;
 You shrink from a plunge in the water;
 Alas, poor me! I'm a coward.

The imagery of this mele sets forth the story of the fierce, but fruitless, love-search of a chief, who is figured by the Ulu-mano, a boisterous wind of Puna. Hawaii. The fragrance of upland lehua (moani lehua a'e la mauka, verse 3) typifies the charms of the woman he pursues. The expression haul kani lehua (verse 4), literally the sudden ending of a rain-squall, signifies the man's failure to gain his object. The lover seeks to string the golden drupe of the pandanus (hala), that he may wear them as a wreath about his neck (uwalo); the is wounded by the teeth of the sword-leaves (o ia i ka lau o ka hala, verse 5). More than this, he meets powerful, concerted resistance (ke poo o ka hala o ke aku'i, verse offered by the compact groves of pandanus that grow in the rough lava-shag (aku'i), typifying, no doubt, the resistance made by the friends and retainers of the woman. After all, he finds, or declares that he finds, the hala fruit he had sought to gather and to wear as a lei about his neck, to be spoiled, broken, fit only to litter the road (loli ka mu'o o ka hala, verse 8: A helelei ka pua, a pili ke alanui. verse 9). In spite of his repulse and his villification of the woman, his passion still feeds on the thought of the one he has lost; her charms intoxicate his imagination, even as the perfume of the hala bloom bewitches the air of Pana-ewa (Pu ia Pana-ewa, ona-ona i ke ala, verse 10).

It is difficult to interpret verses 12 to 18 in harmony with the story as above given. They may be regarded as a commentary on the

[p. 79]

passionate episode in the life of the lover, looked at from the standpoint of old age, at a time when passion still survives but physical strength is in abeyance.

As the sugar-boiler can not extract from the stalk the last grain of sugar, so the author finds it impossible in any translation to express the full intent of these Hawaiian mele.

Mele

PALE IV

Aole au e hele ka li'u-la o Mana,
 Ia wai oupe-kanaka [*a] o Lima-loa: [*b]
 A e hoopunipuni ia a'e nei ka malihini;
 A mai puni au: he wai oupe na.
 5 He ala-pahi ka li'u-la o Mana;
 Ke poloai [*c] la i ke Koolau-wahine. [*d]
 Ua ulu mai ka hoaloha i Wailua,
 A ua kino-lau [*e] Kawelo [*f] mahamaha-i'a, [*g]

[p. 80]

A ua aona [*a] mai nei ho oiwi e.
 10 He mea e wale au e noho aku nei la.
 Noho.
 O ka noho kau a ka mea waiwai;
 O kau ka i'a a haawi ia mai.
 Oli-oli au ke loaa ia oe.
 15 A pela ke ahi o Ka-maile, [*b]
 He alualu hewa a'e la ka malihini,
 Kukuni hewa i ka ili a kau ka uli, e;
 Kau ka uli a ka mea aloha, e.

[Translation]

Song

CANTO IV

I will not chase the mirage of Mana,
 That man-fooling mist of god Lima-loa,
 Which still deceives the stranger--
 And came nigh fooling me--the tricksy water!
 5 The mirage of Mana, is a fraud; it
 Wantons with the witch Koolau.
 A friend has turned up at Wailua,
 Changeful Kawelo, with gills like a fish,
 Has power to bring luck in any queer shape.
 10 As a stranger now am I living,
 Aye, living.
 You flaunt like a person of wealth,
 Yours the fish, till it comes to my hook.
 I am blest at receiving from you:
 15 Like fire-sticks flung at Ka-maile--
 The visitor vainly chases the brand:
 Fool! he burns his flesh to gain the red mark,
 A sign for the girl he loves, oho!

Mele

PALE V

(Ai-ha'a, a he Ko'i-honua paha)

Kauhua Ku, ka Lani, i-loli ka moku;
 Hookohi ke kua-koko o ka Lani;
 He kua-koko, pu-koko i ka honua;
 He kua-koko kapu no ka Lani;

[p. 81]

5 He ko'i ula ana a maku'i i ka ala,
 Hoomau ku-wa mahu ia,
 Ka maka o ke ahi alii e a nei.
 Ko mai ke keiki koko a ka Lani,
 Ke keiki he nuuhiwa ia Hitu-kolo,
 10 O ke keiki hiapo anuenue, iloko o ka manawa,
 O hi ka wai nui o ka nuuhiwa a Ke-opu-o-lani,
 O ua alii lani alewa-lewa nei,
 E u-lele, e ku nei ma ka lani;
 O ka Lani o na mu'o-lau o Liliha,
 15 Ka hakina, ha pu'e, ka maka o Kuhi-hewa a Lola--
 Kalola, nana ke keiki laha-laha;
 Ua kela, he kela ka pakela
 O na pahi'a loa o ka pu likoliko i ka lani
 O kakoo hula manu o o-ulu,
 20 O ha hula o-ku'i lele i ka lani,
 O hiapo o ka manu leina a Pokahi,
 O Ka-lani-opu'u hou o ka moku,
 O na kupuna koikoi o Keoua, o ka Lani Kui-apo-iwa.

[Translation]

Song

CANTO V

(To be recited in bombastic style, or, it may be, distinctly)

Big with child is the Princess Ku;
 The whole island suffers her whimsies;
 The pangs of labor are on her;
 Labor that stains the land with blood,
 5 Blood-clots of the heavenly born,
 To preserve and guard the royal line,
 The spark of king-fire now glowing:
 A child is he of heavenly stock,
 Like the darling of Hitu-kolo,
 10 First womb-fruit born to love's rainbow.
 A bath for this child of heaven's breast,
 This mystical royal offspring,
 Who ranks with the heavenly peers,
 This tender bud of Liliha,
 15 This atom, this parcel, this flame,
 In the line Kuhi-hewa of Lola--
 Ka-lola, who mothered a babe prodigious,
 For glory and splendor renowned,
 A scion most comely from heaven,
 20 The finest down of the new-grown plume,
 From bird whose moult floats to heaven,
 Prime of the soaring birds of Pokahi,
 The prince, heaven-flower of the island,
 Ancestral sire of Ke-oua,
 25 And of King Kui-apo-iwa.

[p. 82]

The heaping up of adulations, of which this mele is a capital instance, was not peculiar to Hawaiian poetry. The Roman Senate bestowed divinity on its emperors by vote; the Hawaiian bard laureate, careering on his Pegasus, thought to accomplish the same end by piling Ossa on Pelion with high-flown phrases; and every loyal subject added his contribution to the cairn that grew heavenward.

In Hawaii, as elsewhere, the times of royal debasement, of aristocratic degeneracy, of doubtful or disrupted succession, have always been the times of loudest poetic insistence on birth-rank and the occasion for the most frenzied utterance of high-sounding titles. This is a disease that has grown with the decay of monarchy.

Applying this criterion to the mele above given, it may be judged to be by no means a product wholly of the archaic period. While certain parts, say from the first to the tenth verses, inclusive, bear the mark of antiquity, the other parts do not ring clear. It seems as if some poet of comparatively modern times had revamped an old mele to suit his own ends. Of this last part two verses were so glaringly an interpolation that they were expunged from the text.

The effort to translate into pure Anglo-Saxon this vehement outpour of high-colored phrases has made heavy demands on the vocabulary and has strained the idioms of our speech well-nigh to the point of protest.

In lines 1, 2, 4, 8, 14, and 23 the word Lani means a prince or princess, a high chief or king, a heavenly one. In lines 12, 13, 18, and 20 the same word lani means the heavens, a concept in the Hawaiian mind that had some far-away approximation to the Olympus of classic Greece.

Mele

Ooe no paha ia, e ka lau o ke aloha,
 Oia no paha ia ke kau mai nei ka hali'a.
 Ke hali'a-li'a mai nei ka maka,
 Manao hiki mai no paha au anei.
 5 Hiki mai no la ia, na wai e uwe aku?
 Ua pau kau la, kau ike iaia;
 Ka manawa oi' e ai ka manao iloko.
 Ua luu iho nei au i ke kai nui;
 Nui ka ukiuki, paio o ka naau.
 10 Aohe kanaka eha ole i ke aloha.
 A wahine e oe, kanaka e au;
 He mau alualu ka ha'i e lawe.
 Ike aku i ke kula i'a o Ka-wai-nui.
 Nui ka opala ai o Moku-lana.
 15 Lana ka limu pae hewa o Makau-wahine.
 O ka wahine no oe, o ke kane no ia.
 Hiki mai no la ia, na wai e uwe aku?
 Hoi mai no la ia, a ia wai e uwe aku?

[p. 83]

[Translation]

Song

Methinks it is you, leaf plucked from Love's tree,
 You mayhap, that stirs my affection.
 There's a tremulous glance of the eye,
 The thought she might chance yet to come:
 5 But who then would greet her with song?
 Your day has flown, your vision of her--
 A time this for gnawing the heart.
 I've plunged just now in deep waters:
 Oh the strife and vexation of soul!
 10 No mortal goes scathless of love.
 A wife thou estranged, I a husband estranged,
 Mere husks to be cast to the swine. [*a]
 Look, the swarming of fish at the weir!
 Their feeding grounds on the reef
 15 Are waving with mosses abundant.
 Thou art the woman, that one your man--
 At her coming who'll greet her with song?
 Her returning, who shall console?

This song almost explains itself. It is the soliloquy of a lover estranged from his mistress. Imagination is alive in eye and ear to everything that may bring tidings of her, even of her unhoped-for return. Sometimes he speaks as if addressing the woman who has gone from him, or he addresses himself, or he personifies some one who speaks to him, as in the sixth line: "Your day has flown, * * *."

The memory of past vexation and anguish extorts the philosophic remark, "No mortal goes scathless of love." He gives over the past, seeks consolation in a new attachment--he dives, lu'u, into the great ocean, "deep waters," of love, at least in search of love. The old self (selves), the old love, he declares to be only alualu, empty husks.

He--it is evidently a man--sets forth the wealth of comfort, opulence, that surrounds him in his new-found peace. The scene, being laid in the land Kailua, Oahu--the place to which the enchanted tree Maka-lei [*b] was carried long ago, from which time its waters abounded in fish--fish are naturally the symbol of the opulence that now bless his life. But, in spite of the new-found peace and prosperity that attend him, there is a lonely corner in his heart; the old question echoes in its vacuum, "Who'll greet her with song? * * * who shall console? "

[p. 84]

Mele

O Ewa, aina kai ula i ka lepo,
 I ula i ka makani anu Moa'e,
 Ka manu ula i ka lau ka ai,
 I palahe'a ula i ke kai o Kuhi-a.

5 Mai kuhi mai oukou e, owau ke kalohe;
 Aohe na'u, na lakou no a pau.
 Aohe hewa kekahi keiki a ke kohe.
 Ei' a'e; oia no paha ia.
 I lono oukou ia wai, e, ua moe?

10 Oia kini poai o lakou la paha?
 Ike aku ia ka mau'u hina-hina--
 He hina ko'u, he aka mai ko ia la.
 I aka mai oe i kou la manawa le'a;
 A manawa ino, nui mai ka nuku,

15 Hoomokapu, hoopale mai ka maka,
 Hoolahui wale mai i a'u nei.
 E, oia paha; ae, oia no paha ia.

[Translation]

Song

Ewa's lagoon is red with dirt--
 Dust blown by the cool Moa'e,
 A plumage red on the taro leaf,
 An ocherous tint in the bay.

5 Say not in your heart that I am the culprit.
 Not I, but they, are at fault.
 No child of the womb is to blame.
 There goes, likely he is the one.
 Who was it blabbed of the bed defiled?

10 It must have been one of that band.
 But look at the rank grass beat down--
 For my part, I tripped, the other one smiled.
 You smiled in your hour of pleasure;
 But now, when crossed, how you scold!

15 Avoiding the house, averting the eyes--
 You make of me a mere stranger.
 Yes it's probably so, he's the one.

A poem this full of local color. The plot of the story, as it may be interpreted, runs somewhat as follows: While the man of the house, presumably, is away, it would seem--fishing, perhaps, in the waters of Ewa's "shamrock lagoon"--the mistress sports with a lover. The culprit impudently defends himself with chaff and dust-throwing. The hoodlums, one of whom is himself the sinner, have been blabbing, says he.

[p. 85]

His accuser points to the beaten down hina-hina grass as evidence against him. At this the brazen-faced culprit parries the stroke with a humorous euphemistic description, in which he plays on the word hina, to fall. Such verbal tilting in ancient Hawaii was practically a defense against a charge. of moral obliquity as decisive and legitimate as was an appeal to arms in the times of chivalry. He euphemistically speaks of the beaten herbage as the result of his having tripped and fallen, at which, says he, the woman smiled, that is she fell in with his proposals. He gives himself away; but that doesn't matter.

It requires some study to make out who is the speaker in the tit-for-tat of the dialogue.

Mele

(Ai-ha'a)

He lua i ka Hikina,
 Ua ena e Pele;
 Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
 Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
 5 Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea;
 A ninau o Wakea,
 Owai nei akea e eli nei?
 Owau no, o Pele,
 Nana i eli aku ka lua i Niihau a a.

10 He lua i Niihau, ua ena e Pele.
 Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
 Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo
 Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea;
 A ninau o Wakea,
 15 Owai nei akua e eli nei?
 Owau no, o Pele,
 Nana i eli aku ka lua i Kauai a a.

He lua i Kauai ua ena e Pele.
 Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
 20 Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
 Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea;
 Ninau o Wakea,
 Owai nei akua e eli nei?
 Owau no, o Pele,
 25 Nana i eli ka lua i Oahu a a.

He lua i Oahu, ua ena e Pele.
 Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
 Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
 Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea;
 30 A ninau o Wakea.
 Owai nei akua e eli nei?
 Owau no, o Pele,
 Nana i eli ka lua i Molokai a a. [p. 86]

He lua i Molokai, ua ena e Pele.
 35 Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
 Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
 Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo, i akea.
 Ninau o Wakea,
 Owai nei akua e eli nei?
 40 Owau no, o Pele,
 Nana i eli aku ka lua i Lanai a a.

He lua i Lanai, ua ena e Pele.
 Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
 Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
 45 Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea.
 Ninau o Wakea.
 Owai nei akua e eli nei?
 Owau no, o Pele,
 Nana i eli aku ka lua i Maui a a.

50 He lua i Maui, ua ena e Pele.
 Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
 Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
 Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo, i akea.
 Ninau o Wakea,
 55 Owai, nei akua e eli nei?
 Owau no, o Pele,
 Nana i eli aku ka lua i Hu'ehu'e a a.

He lua i Hu'ehu'e, ua ena e Pele.
 Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
 60 Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
 Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo, i akea.
 Eli-eli, kau mai!

[Translation]

Song

(In turgid style)

A pit lies (far) to the East,
 Pit het by the Fire-queen Pele.
 Heaven's dawn is lifted askew.
 One edge tilts up, one down, in the sky:
 5 The thud of the pick is heard in the ground.
 The question is asked by Wakea,
 What god 's this a-digging?
 It is I, it is Pele,
 Who dug Niihau deep down till it burned,
 10 Dug fire-pit red-heated by Pele.

Night's curtains are drawn to one side,
 One lifts, one hangs in the tide.
 Crunch of spade resounds in the earth.
 Wakea 'gain urges the query,
 15 What god plies the spade in the ground?
 Quoth Pele, 'tis I: [p. 87]
 I mined to the fire heath Kauai,
 On Kauai I dug deep a pit,
 A fire-well flame-fed by Pele.

20 The heavens are lifted aslant,
 One border moves up and one down;
 There's a stroke of o-o 'neath the ground.
 Wakea, in earnest, would know,
 What demon's a-grubbing below?
 25 I am the worker, says Pele:
 Oahu I pierced to the quick,
 A crater white-heated by Pele.

Now morn lights one edge of the sky:
 The light streams up, the shadows fall down;
 30 There's a clatter of tools deep down.
 Wakea, in passion, demands,
 What god this who digs 'neath the ground?
 It is dame Pele who answers;
 Hers the toil to dig down to fire,
 35 To dig Molokai and reach fire.

Now morning peeps from the sky
 With one eye open, one shut.
 Hark, ring of the drill 'neath the plain!
 Wakea asks you to explain,
 40 What imp is a-drilling below?
 It is I, mutters Pele:
 I drilled till flame shot forth on Lanai,
 A pit candescent by Pele.

The morning looks forth aslant;
 45 Heaven's curtains roll up and roll down;
 There's a ring of o-o 'neath the sod.
 Who, asks Wakea, the god,
 Who is this devil a-digging?
 'Tis I, 'tis Pele, I who
 50 Dug on Maui the pit to the fire:
 Ah, the crater of Maui,
 Red-glowing with Pele's own fire!

Heaven's painted one side by the dawn,
 Her curtains half open, half drawn;
 55 A rumbling is heard far below.
 Wakea insists he will know
 The name of the god that tremors the land.
 'Tis I, grumbles Pele,
 I have scooped out the pit Hu'e-hu'e,
 60 A pit that reaches to fire,
 A fire fresh kindled by Pele.

Now day climbs up to the East;
 Morn folds the curtains of night;
 The spade of sapper resounds 'neath the plain:
 65 The goddess is at it again!

[p. 88]

This mele comes to us stamped with the hall-mark of antiquity. It is a poem of mythology, but with what story it connects itself, the author knows not.

The translation here given makes no profession of absolute, verbal literalness. One can not transfer a metaphor bodily, head and horns, from one speech to another. The European had to invent a new name for the boomerang or accept the name by which the Australian called it. The Frenchman, struggling with the English language, told a lady he was gangrened; he meant he was mortified. The cry for literalism is the cry for an impossibility; to put the chicken back into its shell, to return to the bows and arrows of the stone age.

To make the application to the mele in question: the word ha-olo-olo, for example, which is translated in several different ways in the poem, is of such generic and comprehensive meaning that one word fails to express its meaning. It is, by the way, not a word to be found in any dictionary. The author had to grope his way to its meaning by following the trail of some Hawaiian pathfinder who, after beating about the bush, finally had to acknowledge that the path had become so much overgrown since he last went that way that he could not find it.

The Arabs have a hundred or more words meaning sword--different kinds of swords. To them our word sword is very unspecific. Talk to an Arab of a sword--you may exhaust the list of special forms that our poor vocabulary compasses, straight sword, broadsword, saber, scimitar, yataghan, rapier, and what not, and yet not hit the mark of his definition.

Mele

Haku'i ka uahi o ka lua, pa i ka lani;
 Ha'aha'a Hawaii, moku o Keawe i hanau ia.
 Kiekie ke one o Malama ia Lohiau,
 I a'e 'a mai e ke alii o Kahiki,
 5 Nana i hele kai uli, kai ele,
 Kai popolo-hu'a a Kane,
 Ka wa i po'i ai ke Kai-a-ka-hina-lii,
 Kai nu'u, kai lewa.

Hoopua o Kane i ka la'i;
 10 Pa uli-hiwa mai la ka uka o ke ahi a Laka,
 Oia wahine kihene lehua o Hopoe,
 Pu'e aku o na hala.
 Ka hala o Panaewa,
 O Panaewa nui, moku lehua;
 15 Ohia kupu ha-o'e-o'e;
 Lehua ula, i wili ia e ke ahi.
 A po, e!

Po Puna, po Hilo!
 Po i ka uahi o ku'u aina.
 20 Ola ia kini!
 Ke a mai la ke ahi!

[p. 89]

[Translation]

Song

A burst of smoke from the pit lifts to the skies;
 Hawaii 's beneath, birth-land of Keawe;
 Malama's beach looms before Lohiau,
 Where landed the chief from Kahiki,
 5 From a voyage on the blue sea, the dark sea,
 The foam-mottled sea of Kane,
 What time curled waves of the king-whelming flood.
 The sea up-swells, invading the land--

Lo Kane, outstretched at his ease!
 10 Smoke and flame o'ershadow the uplands,
 Conflagration by Laka, the woman
 Hopoe wreathed with flowers of lehua,
 Stringing the pandanus fruit.
 Screw-palms that clash in Pan'-ewa--
 15 Pan'-ewa, whose groves of lehua
 Are nourished by lava shag,
 Lehua that bourgeons with flame.

Night, it is night
 O'er Puna and Hilo!
 20 Night from the smoke of my land!
 For the people salvation!
 But the land is on fire!

The Hawaiian who furnished the meles which, in their translated forms, are designated as canto I, canto II, and so on, spoke of them as pale; and, following his nomenclature, the term has been retained, though more intimate acquaintance with the meles and with the term has shown that the nearest English synonym to correspond with pale would be the word division. Still, perhaps with a mistaken tenderness for the word, the author has retained the caption Canto, as a sort of nodding recognition of the old Hawaiian's term--division of a poem. No idea is entertained that the five pale above given were composed by the same bard, or that they represent productions from the same individual standpoint. They do, however, breathe a spirit much in common; so that when the old Hawaiian insisted that they are so far related to one another as to form a natural series for recitation in the hula, being species of the same genus, as it were, he was not far from the truth. The man's idea seemed to be that they were so closely related that, like beads of harmonious colors and shapes, they might be strung on the same thread without producing a dissonance.

Of these five poems, or pale (pah-lay), numbers I, II, and IV were uttered in a natural tone of voice, termed kawele, otherwise termed ko'i-honua. The purpose of this style of recitation was to adapt the tone to the necessities of the aged when their ears no longer

[p. 90]

heard distinctly. It would require an audiphone to illustrate perfectly the difference between this method of pronunciation and the ai-ha'a, which was employed in the recitation of cantos III and V. The ai-ha'a was given in a strained and guttural tone.

The poetical reciter and cantillator, whether in the halau or in the king's court, was wont to heighten the oratorical effect of his recitation by certain crude devices, the most marked of which was that of choking the voice down, as it were, into the throat, and there letting it strain and growl like a hungry lion. This was the ai-ha'a, whose organic function was the expression of the underground passions of the soul.

Footnotes

^74:a Olopana. A celebrated king of Waipio valley. Hawaii, who had to wife the famous beauty, Luukia. Owing to misfortune, he sailed away to Kahiki, taking with him his wife and his younger brother, Moikeha, who was his pupa-lua, settling in a land called Moa-ula-nui-akea. Olopana probably ended his days in his new-found home, but Moi-keha, heart-sick at the loss of Luukia's favors, came back to Hawaii and became the progenitor of a line of distinguished men, several of whom were famous navigators. Exactly what incident in the life of Olopana is alluded to in the sixth and preceding verses, the traditions that narrate his adventures do not inform us.

^74:b Hei kapu. An oracle; the place where the high priest kept himself while consulting the deities of the heiau. It was a small house erected on an elevated platform of stones, and there he kept himself in seclusion at such times as he sought to be the recipient of communications from the gods.

^74:c Hana-ka-ulani. A name applied to several heiau (temples). The first one so styled, according to tradition, was built at Hana, Maui, and another one at Kaluanui, on Oahu. near the famous valley of Ka-liu-wa'a. These heiau are said to have been built by the gods in the misty past soon after landing on these shores. Was it to celebrate their escape from perils by sea and enemies on land, or was it in token of thankfulness to gods still higher than themselves?

The author's informant can not tell whether these followed the fierce, strict cult of Kane or the milder cult of Lono.

^74:d Hoo-mamao-lani. An epithet meaning remote in the heavens, applied to an alai of very high rank.

^74:e Keawe. This is a name that belonged to several kings and a large family of gods--papa akua--all of which gods are said to have come from Kahiki and to have dated their origin from the Wa Po, the twilight of antiquity. Among the demigods that were called Keawe may be mentioned: (1) Keawe-huli, a prophet and soothsayer. (2) Keawe-kilo-pono, a wise and righteous one, who loved justice. (3) Keawe-hulu-maemae. It was his function to maintain purity and cleanliness; he was a devouring flame that destroyed rubbish and all foulness. (4) Keawe-ula-o-ka-lani. This was the poetical appellation given to the delicate flush of early morning. Apropos of this the Hawaiians have the following quatrain, which they consider descriptive not only of morning blush, but also of the coming in of the reign of the gods:

O Keawe-ula-i-ka-lani,
 O Keawe-liko-i-ka-lani,
 O Keawe-uina-poha-i-Kahiki;
 Hiki mai alma o Lono.

[Translation]

Keawe-the-red-blush-of-dawn,
 Keawe-the-bud-in-the-sky,
 Keawe-thunder-burst-at-Kahiki:
 Till Lono comes in to reign.

(5) Keawe-pa-makani. It was his function to send winds from Kukulu-o-Kahiki, as well as from some other points. (6) Keawe-io-io-moa. This god inspected the ocean tides and currents, such as Au-miki and Au-ka. (7) Keawe-i-ka-liko. He took charge of flower-buds and tender shoots, giving them a chance to develop. (8) Keawe-ulu-pu. It was his function to promote the development and fruitage of plants. (9) Keawe-lu-pua. He caused flowers to shed their petals. (10) Keawe-opala. It was his thankless task to create rubbish and litter by scattering the leaves of the trees. (11) Keawe-hulu, a magician, who could blow a feather into the air and see it at once become a bird with power to fly away. (12) Keawe-nui-ka-ua-o-Hilo, a sentinel who stood guard by night and by day to watch over all creation. (13) Keawe-pulehu. He was a thief and served as cook for the gods. There were gods of evil as well as of good in this set. (14) Keawe-oili. He was [p. 75] gifted with the power to convey and transfer evil, sickness, misfortune, and death. (15) Keawe-kaili. He was a robber. (16) Keawe-aihue. He was a thief. (17) Keawe-makilo. He was a beggar. He would stand round while others were preparing food, doing honest work, and plead with his eyes. In this way he often obtained a dole. (16) Keawe-puni-pua'a. He was a glutton, very greedy of pork; he was also called Keawe-ai-pua'u. (19) Keawe-inoino. He was a sloven, unclean in all his ways. (20) Keawe-ilio. The only title to renown of this superhuman creature was his inordinate fondness for the flesh of the dog. So far none of the superhuman beings mentioned seemed fitted to the rule of the Keawe of the text, who was passionately fond of the sea. The author had given up in despair, when one day, on repeating his inquiry in another quarter, he was rewarded by learning of--(21) Keawe-i-na-kai. He was a resident of the region about the southeastern point of Molokai, called Lae-ka-Ilio--Cape of the Dog. He was extravagantly fond of the ocean and allowed no weather to interfere with the indulgence of his penchant. An epithet applied to him describes his dominating passion: Keawe moe i ke kai o Kohaku, Keawe who sleeps in (or on) the sea of Kohaku. It seems probable that this was the Keawe mentioned in the twelfth and thirteenth lines of the mele.

The appellation Keawe seems to have served as a sort of Jack among the demigods of the Hawaiian pantheon, on whom was to be laid the burden of a mongrel host of virtues and vices that were not assignable to the regular orthodox deities. Somewhat in the same way do we use the name Jack as a caption for a miscellaneous lot of functions, as when we speak of a "Jack-at-all-trades."

^79:a Wai oupe-kanaka. Man-fooling water; the mirage.

^79:b Lima-loa. The long-armed, the god of the mirage, who made his appearance at Mana, Kauai.

^79:c Poloai. To converse with, to have dealings with one.

^79:d Koolau-wahine. The sea-breeze at Mana. There is truth as well as poetry in the assertion made in this verse. The warm moist air, rising from the heated sands of Mana, did undoubtedly draw in the cool breeze from the ocean--a fruitful dalliance.

^79:e Kino-lau. Having many (400) bodies, or metamorphoses, said of Kawelo.

^79:f Kawelo. A sorcerer who lived in the region of Mana. His favorite metamorphosis was into the form of a shark. Even when in human form he retained the gills of a fish and had the mouth of a shark at the back of his shoulders, while to the lower part of his body were attached the tail and flukes of a shark. To conceal these monstrous appendages he wore over his shoulders a kihei of kapa and allowed himself to be seen only while in the sitting posture. He sometimes took the form of a worm, a moth, a caterpillar, or a butterfly to escape the hands of his enemies. On land he generally appeared as a man squatting. after the manner of a Hawaiian gardener while weeding his garden plot.

The cultivated lands of Kawelo lay alongside the much-traveled path to the beach where the people of the neighborhood resorted to bathe, to fish, and to swim in the ocean. He made a practice of saluting the passers-by and of asking them, "Whither are you going?" adding the caution, "Look to it that you are not swallowed head and tail by the shark; he has not breakfasted yet " (E akahele oukou o pau po'o, pau hi'u i ka mano; aohe i paina i kakahiaka o ka mano). As soon as the traveler had gone on his way to the ocean, Kawelo hastened to the sea and there assumed his shark-form. The tender flesh of children was his favorite food. The frequent utterance of the same caution, joined to the great mortality among the children and youth who resorted to the ocean at this place, caused a panic among the residents. The parents consulted a soothsayer. who surprised them with the information that the guilty one was none other than the innocent-looking farmer, Kawelo. Instructed by the soothsayer, the people made an immense net of great strength and having very fine meshes. This they spread in the ocean at the bathing place. Kawelo, when caught in the net, struggled fiendishly to break away, but in vain. According to directions, they flung the body of the monster into an enormous oven which they had heated to redness, and supplied with fresh fuel for five times ten days--elima anahulu. At the end of that time there remained only gray ashes. The prophet had commanded them that when this had been accomplished they must fill the pit of the oven with dry dirt; thus doing, the monster would never come to life. They neglected this precaution. A heavy rain flooded the country--the superhuman work of the sorcerer--and from the moistened ashes sprang into being a swarm of lesser sharks. From them have come the many species of shark that now infest our ocean.

The house which once was Kawelo's ocean residence is still pointed out, 7 fathoms deep, a structure regularly built of rocks.

^79:g Maha-maha i'a. The gills or fins of a fish such as marked Kawelo.

^80:a Aona. A word of doubtful meaning; according to one it means lucky. That expounder (T------ P------) says it should, or might be, haona; he instances the phrase iwi paoa, in which the word paoa has a similar, but not identical, form and means lucky bone.

^80:b Ka-maile. A place on Kauai where prevailed the custom of throwing firebrands down the lofty precipice of Nuololo. This amusement made a fine display at night. As the fire-sticks fell they swayed and drifted in the breeze, making it difficult for one standing below to premise their course through the air and to catch one of them before it struck the ground or the water, that being one of the objects of the sport. When a visitor had accomplished this feat, he would sometimes mark his flesh with the burning stick that he might show the brand to his sweetheart as a token of his fidelity,

^83:a In the original, He mau alualu ka ha'i e lawe, literally "Some skins for another to take."

^83:b Maka-lei. (See note b, <page 17>.)

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 91]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE VIII
 MAILE PAKAHA       NIHI-AU-MOE
 MARIONETTES

 

  

XI.--THE HULA KI'I

I was not a little surprised when I learned that the ancient hula repertory of the Hawaiians included a performance with marionettes, ki'i, dressed up to represent human beings. But before accepting the hula ki'i as a product indigenous to Hawaii, I asked myself, Might not this be a performance in imitation of the Punch-and-Judy show familiar to Europe and America?

After careful study of the question no evidence was found, other than what might be inferred from general resemblance, for the theory of adoption from a European or American origin. On the contrary, the words used as an accompaniment to the play agree with report and tradition, and bear convincing evidence in form and matter to a Hawaiian antiquity. That is not to say, however, that in the use of marionettes the Hawaiians did not hark back to their ancestral homes in the southern sea or to a remoter past in Asia.

The six marionettes, ki'i (pls. VIII and IX, in the writer's possession were obtained from a distinguished kumu-hula, who received them by inheritance, as it were, from his brother. "He gave them to me," said he, "with these words, 'Take care of these things, and when the time comes, after my death, that the king wants you to perform before him, be ready to fulfill his desire.'"

It was in the reign of Kamehameha III that they came into the hands of the elder brother, who was then and continued to be the royal hula-master until his death. These ki'i have therefore figured in performances that have been graced by the presence of King Kauikeaouli (Kamehameha III) and his queen, Kalama, and by his successors since then down to the times of Kalakaua. At the so-called "jubilee," the anniversary of Kalakaua's fiftieth birthday, these marionettes were very much in evidence.

The make-up and style of these ki'i are so similar that a description of one will serve for all six. This marionette represents the figure of a man, and was named Maka-ku (pl. IX). The head is carved out of some soft wood--either kukui or wiliwili--which is covered, as to the hairy scalp, with a dark woven fabric much like broadcloth. It is encircled at the level of the forehead with a broad band of gilt braid, as if to ape the style of a soldier. The median line from the forehead over the vertex to the back-head is crested with the mahiole ridge. This, taken in connection with the encircling

[p. 92]

gilt band, gives to the head a warlike appearance, somewhat as if it were armed with the classical helmet, the Hawaiian name for which is mahi-ole. The crest of the ridge and its points of junction with the forehead and back-head are decorated with fillets of wool dyed of a reddish color, in apparent imitation of the mamo or o-o, the birds whose feathers were used in decorating helmets, cloaks, and other regalia. The features are carved with some attempt at fidelity. The eyes are set with mother-of-pearl.

The figure is of about one-third life size, and was originally draped, the author was told, in a loose robe, holoku, of tapa cloth of the sort known as mahuna, which is quite thin. This piece of tapa is perforated at short intervals with small holes, kiko'i. It is also stained with the juice from the bark of the root of the kukui tree, which imparts a color like that of copper, and makes the Hawaiians class it as pa'ikukui. A portion of its former, its original, apparel has been secured.

The image is now robed in a holoku of yellow cotton, beneath which is an underskirt of striped silk in green and white. The arms are loosely jointed to the body.

The performer in the hula, who stood behind a screen, by insinuating his hands under the clothing of the marionette, could impart to it such movements as were called for by the action of the play, while at the same time he repeated the words of his part, words sup posed to be uttered by the marionette.

The hula ki'i was, perhaps, the nearest approximation made by the Hawaiians to a genuine dramatic performance. Its usual instrument of musical accompaniment was the ipu, previously described. This drumlike object was handled by that division of the performers called the hoopa'a, who sat in full view of the audience manipulating the ipu in a quiet, sentimental manner, similar to that employed in the hula kuolo.

As a sample of the stories illustrated in a performance of the hula ki'i the following may be adduced, the dramatis personae of which are four:

1. Maka-ku, a famous warrior, a rude, strong-handed braggart, as boastful as Ajax.

2. Puapua-kea, a small man, but brave and active.

3. Maile-lau-lii (Small-leafed-maile), a young woman, who be comes the wife of Maka-ku.

4. Maile-Pakaha, the younger sister of Maile-lau-lii, who becomes the wife of Puapua-kea.

Maka-ku, a rude and boastful son of Mars, at heart a bully, if not a coward, is represented as ever aching for a fight, in which his domineering spirit and rough-and-tumble ways for a time gave him the advantage over abler, but more modest, adversaries.

[p. 93]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE IX
 MARIONETTE, MAKA-KU

 

Puapuakea, a man of genuine courage, hearing of the boastful achievements of Maka-ku, seeks him out and challenges him.

At the first contest they fought with javelins, ihe, each one taking his turn according to lot in casting his javelins to the full tale of the prescribed number; after which the other contestant did the same. Neither was victorious.

Next they fought with slings, each one having the right to sling forty stones at the other. In this conflict also neither one of them got the better of the other. The next trial was with stone-throwing. The result was still the same.

Now it was for them to try the classical Hawaiian game of lua. This was a strenuous form of contest that has many features in common with the panathlion of the ancient Hellenes, some points in common with boxing, and still more, perhaps, partakes of the character of the grand art of combat, wrestling. Since becoming acquainted with the fine Japanese art of jiu-jitsu, the author recognizes certain methods that were shared by them both. But to all of these it added the wild privileges of choking, bone-breaking, dislocating, eye-gouging, and the infliction of tortures and grips unmentionable and disreputable. At first the conflict was in suspense, victory favoring neither party; but as the contest went on Puapuakea showed a slight superiority, and at the finish he had bettered Maka-ku by three points, or ai, [*a] as the Hawaiians uniquely term it.

The sisters, Maile-lau-lii and Maile-pakaha, who had been interested spectators of the contest, conceived passionate liking for the two warriors and laid their plans in concert to capture them for themselves. Fortunately their preferences were not in conflict. Maile-lau-lii set her affections on Maka-ku, while the younger sister devoted herself to Pua-pua-kea.

The two men had previously allowed their fancies to range abroad at pleasure; but from this time they centered their hearts on these two Mailes and settled down to regular married life.

Interest in the actual performance of the hula ki'i was stimulated by a resort to byplay and buffoonery. One of the marionettes, for instance, points to some one in the audience; whereupon one of the hoopaa asks, "What do you want?" The marionette persists in its pointing. At length the interlocutor, as if divining the marionette's wish, says: "Ah, you want So-and-so." At this the marionette nods assent, and the hoopaa asks again, "Do you wish him to come to you?" The marionette expresses its delight and approval by nods and gestures, to the immense satisfaction of the audience, who join in derisive laughter at the expense of the person held up to ridicule.

Besides the marionettes already named among the characters found in the different hula-plays of the hula ki'i, the author has heard

[p. 94]

mention of the following marionettes: Ku, Kini-ki'i, Hoo-lehelehe-ki'i, Ki'i-ki'i, and Nihi-aumoe.

Nihi-aumoe was a man without the incumbrance of a wife, an expert in the arts of intrigue and seduction. Nihi-aumoe is a word of very suggestive meaning, to walk softly at midnight. In Judge Andrews's dictionary are found the following pertinent Hawaiian verses apropos of the word nihi:

E hoopono ka hele i ka uka o Puna;
 E nihi ka hele, mai hoolawehala,
 Mai noho a ako i ka pua, o hewa,
 O inaina ke Akua, paa ke alanui,
 Aole ou ala e hiki aku ai.

[Translation]

Look to your ways in upland Puna;
 Walk softly, commit no offense;
 Daily not, nor pluck the flower sin;
 Lest God in anger bar the road,
 And you find no way of escape.

The marionette Ki'i-ki'i was a strenuous little fellow, an ilamuku, a marshal, or constable of the king. It was his duty to carry out with unrelenting rigor the commands of the alii, whether they bade him take possession of a taro patch, set fire to a house, or to steal upon a man at dead of night and dash out his brains while he slept.

Referring to the illustrations (pl. VIII), a judge of human nature can almost read the character of the libertine Nihi-aumoe written in his features--the flattened vertex, indicative of lacking reverence and fear, the ruffian strength of the broad face; and if one could observe the reverse of the picture he would note the flattened back-head, a feature that marks a large number of Hawaiian crania.

The songs that were cantillated to the hula ki'i express in some degree the peculiar libertinism of this hula, which differed from all others by many removes. They may be characterized as gossipy, sarcastic, ironical, scandal-mongering, dealing in satire, abuse, hitting right and left at social and personal vices--a cheese of rank flavor that is not to be partaken of too freely. It might be compared to the vaudeville in opera or to the genre picture in art.

E Wewehi, ke, ke!
 Wewehi oiwi, ke, ke!
 Punana [*a] i ka luna, ke, ke!
 Hoonoho kai-oa, [*b] ke, ke!

[p. 95]

5 Oluna ka wa'a, [*a] ke, ke!
 O Lela wa'a, ke, ke!
 O keia wa'a, ke, ke!

Ninau o Mawi, [*b] ke, ke!
 Nawai ka luau'i? [*c] ke, ke!
 10 Na Wewehi-loa, [*c] ke, ke!
 Ua make Wewehi, ke, ke!
 Ua ku i ka ihe, ke, ke!
 Ma ka puka kahiko, [*d] ke, ke!
 Ka puka a Mawi, ke, ke!

15 Ka lepe, ka lepe, la!
 Ka lepe, ua hina a uwe!
 Ninau ka lepe, la!
 Mana-mana lii-lii,
 Mana-mana heheiao,
 20 Ke kumu o ka lepe?
 Ka lepe hiolo, e?

[Translation]

Song

O Wewehi, la, la!
 Wewehi, peerless form, la, la!
 Encouched on the pola, la, la!
 Bossing the paddlers, la, la!
 5 Men of the canoe, la, la!
 Of that canoe, la, la!

Of this canoe, la, la!
 Mawi inquires, la, la!
 Who was her grand-sire? la, la!
 10 'Twas Wewehi-loa, la, la!
 Wewehi is dead, la, la!
 Wounded with spear, la, la!
 The same old wound, la, la!
 Wound made by Mawi, la, la!

[p. 96]

15 The flag, to the flag!
 The flag weeps at half-mast!
 The flag, indeed, asks--
 Many, many the flags,
 A scandal for number.
 20 Why are they overturned?
 Why their banners cast down?

The author has met with several variants to this mele, which do not greatly change its character. In one of these variants the following changes are to be noted:

Line 4. Pikaka [*a] e ka luna, ke, ke!
 Line 5. Ka luna o ka hale, Re, ke!
 Line 8. Ka puka o ka hale, a ke, ke!
 Line 9. E noho i anei, a ke, ke!

To attempt a translation of these lines which are unadulterated slang:

Line 4. The roof is a-dry, la, la!
 Line 5. The roof of the house, la, la!
 Line 8. The door of the house, la, la!
 Line 9. Turn in this way, la, la!

The one who supplied the above lines expressed inability to understand their meaning, averring that they are "classical Hawaiian," meaning, doubtless, that they are archaic slang. As to the ninth line, the practice of "sitting in the door" seems to have been the fashion with such folk as far back as the time of Solomon.

Let us picture this princess of Maui, this granddaughter of Wahieloa, Wewehi, as a Helen, with all of Helen's frailty, a flirt-errant, luxurious in life, quickly deserting one lover for the arms of another; yet withal of such humanity and kindness of fascination that, at her death, or absence, all things mourned her--not as Lycidas was mourned:

"With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head.
      *              *              *              *              *
 And daffodillies fill their cups with tears,"

but in some rude pagan fashion; all of which is wrought out and symbolized in the mele with such imagery as is native to the mind of the savage.

The attentive reader will not need be told that, as in many another piece out of Hawaii's old-time legends, the path through this song is beset with euphuistic stumbling blocks. The purpose of language, says Talleyrand, is to conceal thought. The veil in this case is quite gauzy.

The language of the following song for the marionette dance, hula ki'i, as in the one previously given, is mostly of that kind which the

[p. 97]

Hawaiians term olelo kapekepeke, or olelo huna, shifty talk, or secret talk. We might call it slang, though it is not slang in the exact sense in which we use that word, applying it to the improvised counters of thought that gain currency in our daily speech. until they find admission to the forum, the platform, and the dictionary. It is rather it cipher-speech, a method of concealing one's meaning from all but the initiated, of which the Hawaiian, whether alii or commoner, was very fond. The people of the hula were famous for this sort of accomplishment and prided themselves not a little in it as an effectual means of giving appropriate flavor and gusto to their performances.

Mele

Ele-ele kau-kau; [*a]
 Ka hala-le, [*b] e kau-kau,
 Na e-ele ihi,
 Ele ihi, ele a,
 5 Na e-ele ku-pou; [*c]
 Ku-pou.
 Na hala, e! [*d]

[Translation]

Song

Point to a dark one,
 Point to a dainty piece,
 A delicate morsel she!
 Very choice, very hot!
 5 She that stoops over--
 Aye stoops!
 Lo, the hala fruit!

The translation has to he based largely on conjecture. The author of this bit of fun-making, which is couched in old-time slang, died without making known the key to his cipher, and no one whom the present writer has met with is able to unravel its full meaning.

The following mele for the hula ki'i, in language colored by the same motive, was furnished by an accomplished practitioner who had traveled far and wide in the practice of her art, having been one of a company of hula dancers that attended the Columbian exposition in Chicago. It was her good fortune also to reach the antipodes

[p. 98]

in her travels, and it was at Berlin, she says, that she witnessed for the first time the European counterpart of the hula ki'i, the "Punch and Judy" show:

Mele no ka Hula Ki'i

E le'e kau-kau, kala le'e;
 E le'e kau-kau.
 E le'e kau-kau, kala le'e.
 E lepe kau-kau.
 5 E o-ku ana i kai;
 E u-au ai aku;
 E u-au ai aku;
 E u-au ai aku!
 E-he-he, e!

[Translation]

Song for the Hula Ki'i

Now for the dance, dance in accord;
 Prepare for the dance.
 Now for the dance, dance in time.
 Up, now, with the flag!
 5 Step out to the right;
 Step out to the left!
 Ha, ha, ha!

This translation is the result of much research, yet its absolute accuracy can not be vouched for. The most learned authorities (kaka-olelo) in old Hawaiian lore that have been found by the writer express themselves as greatly puzzled at the exact meaning of the mele just given. Some scholars, no doubt, would dub these nonsense-lines. The author can not consent to any such view. The old Hawaiians were too much in earnest to permit themselves to juggle with words in such fashion. They were fond of mystery and concealment, appreciated a joke, given to slang, but to string a lot of words together without meaning, after the fashion of a college student who delights to relieve his mind by shouting "Upidee, upida," was not their way. "The people of the hula," said one man, "had ways of fun-making peculiar to themselves."

When the hula-dancer who communicated to the author the above song--a very accomplished and intelligent woman--was asked for information that would render possible its proper translation, she replied that her part was only that of a mouthpiece to repeat the words and to make appropriate gestures, he pono hula wale no, mere parrot-work. The language, she said, was such "classic" Hawaiian as to be beyond her understanding.

[p. 99]

Here, again, is another song in argot, a coin of the same mintage as those just given:

Mele

E kau-kau i hale manu, e!
 Ike oe i ka lolo huluhulu, e?
 I ka huluhulu a we'uwe'u, e?
 I ka punohu, [*a] e, a ka la e kau nei?
 5 Walea ka manu i ka wai, e!
 I ka wai lohi o ke kini, e!

[Translation]

Song

Let's worship now the bird-cage.
 Seest thou the furzy woodland,
 The shag of herb and forest.
 The low earth-tinting rainbow.
 5 Child of the Sun that swings above?
 O, happy bird, to drink from the pool,
 A bliss free to the million!

This is the language of symbolism. When Venus went about to ensnare Adonis, among her other wiles she warbled to him of mountains, dales, and pleasant fountains.

The mele now presented is of an entirely different character from those that have just preceded. It is said to have been the joint composition of the high chief Keiki-o-ewa of Kauai, at one time the kahu of Prince Moses, and of Kapihe, a distinguished poet--haku-mele--and prophet. (To Kapihe is ascribed the prophetic and oracular utterance, E iho ana o luna, e pii ana o lalo; e ku ana ka paia, e moe ana kaula; e kau ana kau-huhu--o lani iluna, o honua ilalo--"The high shall be brought low, the lowly uplifted; the defenses shall stand; the prophet shall lie low; the mountain walls shall abide--heaven above, earth beneath.")

This next poem may be regarded as an epithalamium, the celebration of the mystery and bliss of the wedding night, the hoao ana of a high chief and his high-born kapu sister. The murmur of the breeze, the fury of the winds, the heat of the sun, the sacrificial ovens, all are symbols that set forth the emotions, experiences, and mysteries of the night:

[p. 100]

Mele

(Ko'ihonua)

O Wanahili [*a] ka po loa ia Manu'a, [*b]
 O ka pu kau kama [*c] i Hawaii akea;
 O ka pu leina [*d] kea a Kiha--
 O Kiha nui a Pii-lani-- [*e]
 5 O Kauhi kalana-honu'-a-Kama; [*f]
 O ka maka iolena [*g] ke hoohaulani i-o!
 O kela kanaka hoali mauna, [*h]
 O Ka Lani ku'i hono i ka moku. [*i]
 I waihona kapuahi kanaka eha, [*j]
 10 Ai' i Kauai, i Oahu, i Maui.
 I Hawaii kahiko o Keawe enaena, [*k]
 Ke a-a, mai la me ke o-koko,
 Ke lapa-lapa la i ka makani,
 Makani kua, he Naulu. [*l]
 15 Kua ka Waihoa i ka Mikioi,

[p. 101]

Pu-a ia lalo o Hala-li'i, [*a]
 Me he alii, alii, la no ka hele i Kekaha,
 Ka hookiekie i ka li'u-la, [*b]
 Ka hele i ke alia-lia la, alia!
 20 Alia-lia la'a-laau Kekaha.
 Ke kaha o Kala-ihi, Wai-o-lono.
 Ke olo la ke pihe a ka La, e!
 Ke nu la paha i Honua-ula.

[Translation]

Song

(Distinct utterance)

Wanahili bides the whole night with Manu'a,
 By trumpet hailed through broad Hawaii,
 By the white vaulting conch of Kiha--
 Great Kiha, offspring of Pii-lani,
 5 Father of eight-branched Kama-lala-walu.
 The far-roaming eye now sparkles with joy,
 Whose energy erstwhile shook mountains,
 The king who firm-bound the isles in one state,
 His glory, symboled by four human altars,
 10 Reaches Kauai, Oahu, Maui,
 Hawaii the eld of Keawe,
 Whose tabu, burning with blood-red blaze,
 Shoots flame-tongues that leap with the wind,
 The breeze from the mountain, the Naulu.
 15 Waihoa humps its back, while cold Mikioi
 Blows fierce and swift across Hala-li'i.
 It vaunts like a king at Kekaha,
 Flaunting itself in the sun's heat,
 And lifts itself up in mirage,
 20 Ghost-forms of woods and trees in Kekaha--
 Sweeping o'er waste Kala-ihi, Water-of-Lono;
 While the sun shoots forth its fierce rays--
 Its heat, perchance, reaches to Honua-ula.

The mele next given takes its local color from Kauai and brings vividly to mind the experiences of one who has climbed the mountain walls, pali, that buffet the winds of its northern coast.

Mele

Kalalau, pali eku i ka makani;
 Pu ka Lawa-kua, [*c] hoi mau i Kolo-kini;
 Nu a anahulu ka pa ana i-uka--
 Anahulu me na po keu elua.

[p. 102]

5 Elua Hono-pu o ia kua kanaka;
 Elua Ko'a-mano [*a] me Wai-aloha.
 Na pali waha iho, waha iho [*b] me ke kua;
 Ke keiki puu iloko o ka pali nui.
 E hii an' [*c] e Makua i Kalalau.

[Translation]

Song

The mountain walls of Kalalau
 Buffet the blasts of Lawa-kau.
 That surge a decade of nights and twain:
 Then, wearied, it veers to the north.

5 Two giant backs stand the cliffs Hono-pu;
 The falls Wai-aloha mate with the sea:
 An overhung pali--the climber's back swings in
 Its mouth--to face it makes one a child--
 Makua, whose arms embrace Kalalau.

The mind of the ancient bard was so narrowly centered on the small plot his imagination cultivated that he disregarded the outside world, forgetting that it could not gaze upon the scenes which filled his eyes.

The valley of Kalalau from its deep recess in the northwestern coast of Kauai looks out upon the heaving waters of the Pacific. The mountain walls of the valley are abrupt, often overhanging. Viewed from the ocean, the cliffs are piled one upon another like the buttresses of a Gothic cathedral. The ocean is often stormy, and during several months in the year forbids intercourse with other parts of the island, save as the hardy traveler makes his way along precipitous mountain trails.

The hula ala'a-papa, hula ipu, hula pa-ipu (or kuolo), the hula hoo-nana, and the hula ki'i were all performed to the accompaniment of the ipu or calabash, and, being the only ones that were so accompanied, if the author is correctly informed, they may be classed together under one head as the calabash hulas.

Footnotes

^93:a Ai, literally a food, a course.

^94:a Punana. Literally a nest; here a raised couch on the pola, which was a sheltered platform in the waist of a double canoe, corresponding to our cabin, for the use of chiefs and other people of distinction.

^94:b Kai-oa. The paddle-men; here a euphemism.

^95:a Wa'a. A euphemism for the human body.

^95:b Mawi. The hero of Polynesian mythology, whose name is usually spelled Maui, like the name of the island. Departure from the usual orthography is made in order to secure phonetic accuracy. The name of the hero is pronounced Mah-wee, not Mow-ee, as is the island. Sir George Gray, of New Zealand, following the usual orthography, has given a very full and interesting account of him in his Polynesian mythology.

^95:c Wewehi-loa. Another name for Wahie-loa, who is said to have been the grandfather of Wewehi. The word luau'i in the previous verse, meaning real father, is an archaic form. Another form is kua-u'i.

^95:d Puka kahiko. A strange story from Hawaiian mythology relates that originally the human anatomy was sadly deficient in that the terminal gate of the prima viae was closed. Mawi applied his common-sense surgery to the repair of the defect and relieved the situation. Ua olelo ia i kinohi na hana ia kanaka me ka hemahema no ka nele i ka hou puka ole ia ka okole, a na Mawi i hoopau i keia pilikia mamuli o kana hana akamai. Ua kapa ia keia puka ka puka kahiko.

^96:a Pikaka (full form pikakao). Dried up, juiceless.

^97:a Kau-kau. Conjectural meaning to point out some one in the audience, as the marionettes often did. People were thus sometimes inveigled in behind the curtain.

^97:b Hala-le. Said to mean a sop, with which one took tip the juice or gravy of food; a choice morsel.

^97:c Ku-pou. To stoop over, from devotion to one's own pursuits, from modesty, or from shame.

^97:d The meaning of this line has been matter for much conjecture. The author has finally adopted the suggestion embodied in the translation here given, which is a somewhat gross reference to the woman's physical charms.

^99:a Punohu. A compact mass of clouds, generally lying low in the heavens; a cloud-omen; also a rainbow that lies close to the earth, such as is formed when the sun is high in the heavens.

^100:a Wanahili. A princess of the mythological period belonging to Puna, Hawaii.

^100:b Manu'a. A king of Hilo, the son of Kane-hili, famous for his skill in spear-throwing, maika-rolling, and all athletic exercises. He was united in marriage, ho-ao, to the lovely princess Wanahili. Tradition deals with Manua as a very lovable character.

^100:c Pu kau kama. The conch (pu) is figured as the herald of fame. Kau is used in the sense of to set on high, in contrast with such a word as waiho, to set down. Kama is the word of dignity for children.

^100:d Pu leina. It is asserted on good authority that the triton (pu), when approached in its ocean habitat, will often make sudden and extraordinary leaps in an effort to escape. There is special reference here to the famous conch known in Hawaiian story as Kiha-pu. It was credited with supernatural powers as a kupua. During the reign of Umi, son of Liloa, it was stolen from the heiau in Waipio valley and came into the hands of god Kane. In his wild awa-drinking revels the god terrified Umi and his people by sounding nightly blasts with the conch. The shell was finally restored to King Umi by the superhuman aid of the famous dog Puapua-lena-lena.

^100:e Kiha-nui a Piilani. Son of Piilani, a king of Maui. He is credited with the formidable engineering work of making a paved road over the mountain palis of Koolau, Maui.

^100:f Kauhi kalana-honu'-a-Kama. This Kauhi, as his long title indicates, was the son of the famous king, Kama-lala-walu, and succeeded his father in the kingship over Maui and, probably, Lanai. Kama-lala-walu had a long and prosperous reign, which ended, however, in disaster. Acting on the erroneous reports of his son Kauhi, whom he had sent to spy out the land, he invaded the kingdom of Lono-i-ka-makahiki on Hawaii, was wounded and defeated in battle, taken prisoner, and offered up as a sacrifice on the altar of Lono's god, preferring that death, it is said, to the ignominy of release.

^100:g I-olena. Roving, shifty, lustful.

^100:h Kanaka hoali mauna. Man who moved mountains; an epithet of compliment applied perhaps to Kiha, above mentioned, or to the king mentioned in the next verse. Kekaulike.

^100:i Ku'i hono i ka moku. Who bound together into one (state) the islands Maui, Molokai, Lanai, and Kahoolawe. This was, it is said, Kekaulike, the fifth king of Maui after Kamalala-wale. At his death he was succeeded by Kamehameha-nui--to he distinguished from the Kamehameha of Hawaii and he in turn by the famous warrior-king Kahekili, who routed the invading array of Kalaniopuu, king of Hawaii, on the sand plains of Wailuku.

^100:j I waihona kapuahi kanaka eha. This verse presents grammatical difficulties. The word I implies the imperative, a form of request or demand, though that is probably not the intent. It seems to be a means, authorized by poetical license, of ascribing honor and tabu-glory to the name of the person eulogized, who, the context leads the author to think, was Kekaulike. The island names other than that of Maui seem to have been thrown in for poetical effect, as that king, in the opinion of the author, had no power over Kauai, Oahu, or Hawaii. The purpose may have been to assert that his glory reached to those islands.

^100:k Keawe enaena. Keawe, whose tabu was hot as a burning oven. Presumably Keawe, the son of Umi, is the one meant.

^100:l Naulu. The sea-breeze at Waimea, Kauai.

^101:a Hale-lii. A sandy plain on Niihau, where grows a variety of sugar-cane that lies largely covered by the loose soil, ke ko eli o Hala-lii.

^101:b Li'u-la. The mirage, a common phenomenon on Niihau, and especially at Mana, on Kauai.

^101:c Lawa-kua. A wind in Kalalau that blows for a time from the mountains and then, it is said, veers to the north, so that it comes from the direction of a secondary valley, Kolo-kini, a branch of Kalalau. The bard describes it as continuing to blow for twelve nights before it shifts, an instance, probably, of poetic license.

^102:a Ko'a-mano. A part of the ocean into which the stream Wai-aloha falls.

^102:b Waha iho. With mouth that yawns downward, referring, doubtless. to the overarching of the pali, precipice. The same figure is applied to the back (kua) of the traveler who climbs it.

^102:c Elision of the final a in ana.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 103]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE X
 PAHU HULA, HULA DRUM

 

  

XII.--THE HULA PAHU

The hula pahu was so named from the pahu, [*a] or drum, that was its chief instrument of musical accompaniment (pl. X).

It is not often that the story of an institution can be so closely fitted to the landmarks of history as in the case of this hula; and this comes about through our knowledge of the history of the pahu itself. Tradition, direct and reliable, informs us that the credit of introducing the big drum belongs to La'a. This chief flourished between five and six centuries ago, and from having spent most of his life in the lands to the south, which the ancient Hawaiians called Kahiki, was himself generally styled La'a-mai-Kahiki (La'a-from-Kahiki). The young man was of a volatile disposition, given to pleasure, and it is evident that the big drum he brought with him to Hawaii on one of his voyages from Kahiki was in his eyes by no means the least important piece of baggage that freighted his canoes. On nearing the land he waked the echoes with the stirring tones of his drum, which so astonished the people that they followed him from point to point along the coast and heaped favors upon him whenever he came ashore.

La'a was an enthusiastic patron of the hula and is said to have made a tour of the islands, in which he instructed the natives in new forms of this seductive pastime, one of which was the hula ka-eke.

There is reason to believe, it seems, that the original use of the pahu way in connection with the services of the temple, and that its adaptation to the halau was simply a transference from one to another religious use.

The hula pahu was preeminently a performance of formal and dignified character, not such as would be extemporized for the amusement of an irreverent company. Like all the formal hulas, it was tabu, by which the Hawaiians meant that it was a religious service, or so closely associated with the notion of worship as to make it an irreverence to trifle with it. For this reason as well as for its intrinsic dignity its performance was reserved for the most distinguished guests and the most notable occasions.

Both classes of actors took part in the performance of the hula pahu, the olapa contributing the mele as they stood and went through the motions of the dance, while the hoopaa maintained the kneeling position and operated the big drum with the left hand. While his left hand was thus engaged, the musician with a thong held in his

[p. 104]

right hand struck a tiny drum, the pu-niu, that was conveniently strapped to the thigh of the same side. As its name signifies, the pu-niu was made from coconut shell, being headed with fish-skin.

The harmonious and rhythmic timing of these two instruments called for strict attention on the part of the performer. The pahu, having a tone of lower pitch and greater volume than the other, was naturally sounded at longer intervals, while the pu-niu delivered its, sharp crisp tones in closer order.

Mele

(Ko'i-honua)

O Hilo oe, Hilo, muliwai a ka ua i ka lani,
 I hana ia Hilo, ko-i ana e ka ua.
 E halo ko Hilo ma i-o, i-anei;
 Lenalena Hilo e, panopano i ka ua.
 5 Ua lono Pili-keko o Hilo i ka wai;
 O-kakala ka hulu o Hilo i ke anu;
 Ua ku o ka paka a ka ua i ke one;
 Ua moe oni ole Hilo i-luna ke alo;
 Ua hana ka uluna lehu o Hana-kahi.
 10 Haule ka onohi Hilo o ka ua i ke one;
 Loku kapa ka hi-hilo kai o Pai-kaka.
 Ha, e!

2

A Puna au, i Kuki'i au, i Ha'eha'e,
 Ike au i ke a kino-lau lehua.
 He laau malalo o ia pohaku.
 Hanohano Puna e, kehakeha i ka ua,
 5 Kahiko mau no ia no-laila.
 He aina haaheo loa no Puna;
 I haaheo i ka hala me ka lehua;
 He maikai maluna, he a malalo;
 He kelekele ka papa o Mau-kele.
 10 Kahuli Apua e, kele ana i Mau-kele.

[Translation]

Song

(Bombastic style)

Thou art Hilo, Hilo, flood-gate of heaven.
 Hilo has power to wring out the rain.
 Let Hilo turn here and turn there;
 Hilo's kept from employ, somber with rain;
 5 Pili-keko roars with full stream;
 The feathers of Hilo bristle with cold,
 And her hail-stones smite on the sand.
 She lies without motion, with upturned face,
 The fire-places pillowed with ashes;
 10 The bullets of rain are slapping the land,
 Pitiless rain turmoiling Pai-kaka.
 So, indeed.

[p. 105]

2

In Puna was I, in Ku-ki'i, in Ha'e-ha'e,
 I saw a wraith of lehua, a burning bush,
 A fire-tree beneath the lava plate.
 Magnificent Puna, fertile from rain,
 5 At all times weaving its mantle.
 Aye Puna's a land of splendor,
 Proudly bedight with palm and lehua;
 Beauteous above, but horrid below,
 And miry the plain of Mau-kele.
 10 Apua upturned, plod on to Mau-kele.

Mele

Kau lilua i ke anu Wai-aleale;
 He maka halalo ka lehua makanoe; [*a]
 He lihilihi kuku ia no Aipo, [*b] e;
 O ka hulu a'a ia o Hau-a-iliki: [*c]
 5 Ua pehi 'a e ka na a eha ka nahele,

Maui ka pua, uwe eha i ke anu,
 I ke kukuna la-wai o Mokihana. [*d]
 Ua hana ia aka ka pono a ua pololei;
 Ua hai 'na ia aku no ia oe:
 10 O ke ola no ia.

O kia'i loko, kia'i Na-ula, [*e]
 Nana i ka makani, hoolono ka leo,
 Ka halulu o ka Malua-kele: [*f]
 Kiei, halo i Maka-ike-ole.

15 Kamau ke ea i ka halau [*g] a ola;
 He kula lima ia no Wawae-noho, [*h]
 Me he puko'a hakahaka la i Waahila
 Na momoku a ka unu-lehua o Lehua.
 A lehulehu ka hale pono ka noho ana,

20 Loaa kou haawina--o ke aloha,
 Ike hauna [*i] mai nei ka puka o ka hale.
 Ea!

[p. 106]

[Translation]

Song

Wai-aleale stands haughty and cold,
 Her lehua bloom, fog-soaked, droops pensive;
 The thorn-fringe set about swampy Ai-po is
 A feather that flaunts in spite of the pinching frost.
 5 Her herbage is pelted, stung by the rain;

Bruised all her petals, and moaning in cold
 Mokihana's sun, his wat'ry beams.
 I have acted in good faith and honor,
 My complaint is only to you--
 10 A matter that touches my life.

Best watch within and toward Ka-ula;
 Question each breeze, note every rumor,
 Even the whisper of Malua-kele.
 Search high and search low, unobservant.

15 There is life in the breath from her body,
 Fond caress by a hand not inconstant.
 Like fissured groves of coral
 Stand the ragged clumps of lehua.
 Many the houses, easy the life.

20 You have your portion--of love;
 Humanity smells at the door.
 Aye, indeed.

The imagery of this poem is peculiarly obscure and the meaning difficult of translation. The allusions are so local and special that their meaning does not carry to a distance.

Wai-aleale is the central mountain mass of Kauai, about 6,000 feet high. Its summit, a cold, fog-swept wilderness of swamp and lake beset with dwarfish growths of lehua, is used as the symbol of a woman, impulsively kind, yet in turn passionate and disdainful. The physical attributes of the mountain are ascribed to her, its spells of frosty coldness, its gloom and distance, its fickleness of weather, the repellant hirsuteness of the stunted vegetation that fringes the central swamp--these things are described as symbols of her temper, character, and physical make-up. The bloom and herbage of the wilderness, much pelted by the storm, are figures to represent her physical charms. But spite of all these faults and imperfections, a perennial fragrance, as of mokihana, clings to her person, and she is the object of devoted love, capable of weaving the spell of fascination about her victims.

This poem furnishes a good example of a peculiarity that often is an obstacle to the understanding of Hawaiian poetry. It is the breaking up of the composition into a number of parts that have but a loose seeming connection the one with the other.

Footnotes

^103:a Full form, pahu-hula.

^105:a Lehua makanoe. The lehua trees that grow on the top of Wai-aleale, the mountain mass of Kauai, are of peculiar form, low, stunted, and so furzy as to be almost thorny, kuku, as mentioned in the next line.

^105:b Ai-po. A swamp that occupies the summit basin of the mountain, in and about which the thorny lehua trees above mentioned stand as a fringe.

^105:c Hau-a-iliki. A word made up of hau, dew or frost, and iliki, to smite. The a is merely a connective.

^105:d Mokihana. The name of a region on the flank of Wai-aleale, also a plant that grows there, whose berry is fragrant and is used in making wreaths.

^105:e Ka-ula. A small rocky island visible from Kauai.

^105:f Malua-kele. A wind.

^105:g Halau. The shed or house which sheltered the canoe, wa'a, which latter, as we have seen, was often used figuratively to mean the human body, especially the body of a woman. Kamau ke ea i ka halau might be translated "persistent the breath from her body." "There's kames o' hinny 'tween my luve's lips."

^105:h Wawae-noho. Literally the foot that abides; it is the name of a place. Here it is to be understood as meaning constancy. It is an instance in which the concrete stands for the abstract.

^105:i Hauna. An odor. In this connection it means the odor that hangs about a human habitation. The hidden allusion, it is needless to say, is to sexual attractiveness.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

 

Click to enlarge
 PLATE XI
 ULI-ULI, A GOURD RATTLE

 

  

XIII.--THE HULA ULI-ULI

The hula uli-uli was so called from the rattle which was its sole instrument of accompaniment. This consisted of a small gourd about, the size of a large orange, into the cavity of which were put shot-like seeds, like those of the canna; a handle was then attached (pl. xi).

The actors who took part in this hula belonged, it is said, to the class termed hoopaa, and went through with the performance while kneeling or squatting, as has been described. While cantillating the mele they held the rattle, uli-uli, in the right hand, shaking it against the palm of the other hand or the thigh, or making excursions in one direction and another. In some performances of this hula which the author has witnessed the olapa also took part, in one case a woman, who stood and cantillated the song with movement and gesture, while the hoopaa devoted themselves exclusively to handling the uli-uli rattles.

The sacrificial offerings that preceded the old-time performances of this hula are said to have been awa and a roast porkling, in honor of the goddess Laka.

If the dignity and quality of the meles now used, or reported to have been used, in the hula uli-uli are to be taken as any criterion of the quality and dignity of this hula, one has to conclude that it must be assigned to a rank below that of some others, such, for instance, as the ala'a-papa, pa-ipu, Pele, and others.

David Malo, the Hawaiian historian, author of Ka Moolelo Hawaii, [*a] in the short chapter that he devotes to the hula, mentions only ten hulas by name, the ka-laau, pa'i-umauma, pahu, pahu'a, ala'a-papa, pa'i-pa'i, pa-ipu, ulili, and the kielei. Ulili is but another form of the word uli-uli. Any utterance of Malo is to be received seriously; but it seems doubtful if he deliberately selected for mention the ten hulas that were really the most important. It seems more probable that he set down the first ten that stood forth prominent in his memory. It was not Malo's habit, nor part of his education, to make an exhaustive list of sports and games, or in fact of anything. He spoke of what occurred to him. It must also be remembered that, being an ardent convert to Christianity, Malo felt

[p. 108]

himself conscience-bound to set himself in opposition to the amusements, sports, and games of his people, and he was unable, apparently, to see in them any good whatsoever. Malo was a man of uncompromising honesty and rigidity of principles. His nature, acting under the new influences that surrounded him after the introduction of Christianity, made it impossible for him to discriminate calmly between the good and the pernicious, between the purely human and poetic and the depraved elements in the sports practised by his people during their period of heathenism. There was nothing halfway about Malo. Having abandoned a system, his nature compelled him to denounce it root and branch.

The first mele here offered as an accompaniment to this hula can boast of no great antiquity; it belongs to the middle of the nineteenth century, and was the product of some gallant at a time when princes and princesses abounded in Hawaii:

Mele

Aole i manao ia
 Kahi wai a o Alekoki.
 Hookohu ka ua i uka,
 Noho mai la i Nuuanu.
 5 Anu-anu, makehewa au
 Ke kali ana i-laila.
 Ka ino' paha ua paa
 Kou manao i ane'i,
 Au i hoomalu ai.
 10 Hoomalu oe a malu;
 Ha malu keia kino
 Mamuli a o kou leo.
 Kau nui aku ka manao
 Kahi wai a o Kapena.
 15 Pani'a paa ia mai
 Na manowai a o uka;
 Ahu wale na ki'owai,
 Na papa-hale o luna.
 Maluna a'e no wau,
 20 Ma ke kuono liilii.
 A waho, a o Mamala,
 Hao mai nei ehu-ehu;
 Pulu au i ka huna-kai,
 Kai heahea i ka ili.
 25 Hookahi no koa nui,
 Nana e alo ia ino.
 Ino-ino mai nei luna,
 I ka hao a ka makani.
 He makani ahai-lono;
 30 Lohe ka luna i Pelekane.
 O ia pouli nui
 Mea ole i ku'u manao.
 I o, i a-ne'i au,
 Ka piina la o Ma'ema'e, [p. 109]
 35 E kilohi au o ka nani
 Na pua i Mauna-ala.
 He ala ona-ona kou,
 Ke pili mai i ane'i,
 O a'u lehua ula i-luna,
 40 Ai ono a na manu.

[Translation]

Song

I spurn the thought with disdain
 Of that pool Alekoki:
 On the upland lingers the rain
 And fondly haunts Nuuanu.
 5 Sharp was the cold, bootless
 My waiting up there.
 1 thought thou wert true,
 Wert loyal to me,
 Whom thou laids't under bonds.
 10 Take oath now and keep it;
 This body is sacred to thee,
 Bound by the word of thy month.
 My heart leaps up at thought
 Of the pool, pool of Kapena;
 15 To me it is fenced, shut oft,
 The water-heads tightly sealed up.
 The fountains must be a-hoarding,
 For skies are ever down-pouring;
 The while I am lodged up aloft,
 20 Bestowed in the cleft of a rock.
 Now, tossed by sea at Mamala,
 The wind drives wildly the surf;
 I'm soaked with the scud of the ocean,
 My body is rough with the rime.
 25 But one stout hero and soldier,
 With heart to face such a storm.
 Wild scud the clouds,
 Hurled by the tempest,
 A tale-bearing wind,
 30 That gossips afar.
 The darkness and storm
 Are nothing to me.
 This way and that am I turning,
 Climbing the hill Ma'e-ma'e,
 35 To look on thy charms, dear one,
 The fragrant buds of the mountain.
 What perfume breathes from thy body,
 Such time as to thee I come close,
 My scarlet bloom of lehua
 40 Yields nectar sought by the birds.

This mele is said to have been the production of Prince William Lunalilo--afterward king of the Hawaiian islands--and to have been

[p. 110]

addressed to the Princess Victoria Kamamalu, whom he sought in marriage. Both of them inherited high chief rank, and their off-spring, according to Hawaiian usage, would have outranked her brothers, kings Kamehameha IV and V. Selfish and political considerations, therefore, forbade the match, and thereby hangs a tale, the shadow of which darkens this song. Every lover is one part poet; and Lunalilo, even without the love-flame, was more than one part poet.

The poem shows the influence of foreign ways and teachings and the pressure of the new environment that had entered Hawaii, in its form, in the moderation of its language and imagery, and in the coherence of its parts: at the same time the spirit of the song and the color of its native imagery mark it as the product of a Polynesian mind.

According to the author's interpretation of the song, Alekoki (verse 2), a name applied to a portion of the Nuuanu stream lower down than the basin and falls of Kapena (Kahi wai a o Kapena--verse 14), symbolizes a flame that may once have warmed the singer's imagination, but which he discards in favor of his new love, the pool of Kapena. The rain, which prefers to linger in the upland regions of Nuuanu (verses 3 and 4) and which often reaches not the lower levels, typifies his brooding affection. The cold, the storm, and the tempest that rage at Mamala (verse 21)--a name given to the ocean just outside Honolulu harbor--and that fill the heavens with driving scud (verses 27 and 28) represent the violent opposition in high quarters to the love-match. The tale-bearing wind, makani ahai-lono (verse 29), refers, no doubt, to the storm of scandal. The use of the place-names Ma'ema'e and Mauna-ala seem to indicate Nuuanu as the residence of the princess.

Mele

PALE I

Auhea wale oe, e ka Makani Inu-wai?
 Pa kolonahe i ka ili-kai,
 Hoohui me ka Naulu,
 Na ulu ua i ka hapapa.
 5 Ano au ike i ke ko Hala-li'i,
 I keia wa nana in Lehua.

PALE II

Aia i Waimea ku'u haku-lei;
 Hui pu me ka wai ula ili-ahi,
 Mohala ka pua i ke one o Pawehe;
 10 Ka lawe a ke Koolau
 Noho pu me ka ua punonohu ula i ka nahele,
 Ike i ka wai kea o Makaweli: [p. 111]
 Ua noho pu i ka nahele
 Me ka lei hinahina o Maka-li'i.
 15 Liilii ka uka o Koae'a;
 Nana i ka ua lani-pili,
 Ka o-o, mane le'a o ka nahele.

I Pa-ie-ie au, noho pu me ke anu.
 E ha'i a'e oe i ka puana:
 20 Ke kahuna kalai-hoe o Puu-ka-Pele.

[Translation]

Song

CANTO I

Whence art thou, thirsty wind,
 That gently kissest the sea,
 Then, wed to the ocean breeze,
 Playest fan with the bread-fruit tree?
 5 Here sprawl Hala-lii's canes,
 There stands bird-haunted Lehua.

CANTO II

My wreath-maker dwells at Waimea.
 Partnered is she to the swirling river;
 They plant with flowers the sandy lea,
 10 While the bearded surf, tossed by the breeze,
 Vaunts on the hills as the sun-bow.
 Looks on the crystal stream Makaweli,
 And in the wildwood makes her abode
 With Hinahina of silvern wreaths.
 15 Koaea's a speck to the eye,
 Under the low-hanging rain-cloud,
 Woodland home of the plaintive o-o.

From frost-bitten Pa-ie-ie
 I bid you, guess me the fable:
 20 Paddle-maker on Pele's mount.

This mele comes from Kauai, an island in many respects individualized from the other parts of the group and that seems to have been the nurse of a more delicate imagination than was went to flourish elsewhere. Its tone is archaic, and it has the rare merit of not transfusing the more crudely erotic human emotions into the romantic sentiments inspired by nature.

The Hawaiians dearly loved fable and allegory. Argument or truth, dressed out in such fanciful garb, gained double force and acceptance. We may not be able to follow a poet in his wanderings; his local allusions may obscure to us much of his meaning; the doctrine of his allegory may be to us largely a riddle; and the connection between the body of its thought and illustration and the application, or solution, of the poetical conundrum may be past our comprehension; but the play of the poet's fancy, whether childish or mature, is

[p. 112]

an interesting study, and brings us closer in human sympathy to the people who took pleasure in such things.

In translating this poem, while not following literally the language of the poet, the aim has been to hit the  of his deeper meaning, without hopelessly involving the reader in the complexities of Hawaiian color and local topography. A few words of explanation must suffice.

The Makani Inu-wai (verse 1)--known to all the islands--is a wind that dries up vegetation, literally a water-drinking wind.

The Naulu (verse 3) is the ordinary sea-breeze at Waimea, Kauai, sometimes accompanied by showers.

Hala-li'i (verse r) is a sandy plain on Niihau, and the peculiarity of its canes is that they sprawl along on the ground, and are often to a considerable extent covered by the loose soil.

Lehua (verse (6) is the well-known bird-island, lying north of Niihau and visible from the Waimea side of Kauai.

The wreath-maker, hake-lei (verse 7), who dwells at Waimea, is perhaps the ocean-vapor, or the moist sea-breeze, or, it may be, some figment of the poet's imagination--the author can not make out exactly what.

The hinahina (verse 14), a native geranium, is a mountain shrub that stands about 3 feet high, with silver-gray leaves.

Maka-weli, Maka-li'i, Koae'a, and Pa-ie-ie are names of places on Kauai.

Puu-ka-Pele (verse 20) as the name indicates, is a volcanic hill, situated near Waimea.

The key or answer (puana), to the allegory given in verse 20, Ke kahuna kalai-hoe o Puu-ka-Pele, the paddle-making kahuna of Pele's mount, when declared by the poet (haku-mele), is not very informing to the foreign mind; but to the Hawaiian auditor it, no doubt, took the place of our haec fabula docet, and it at least showed that the poet was not without an intelligent motive. In the poem in point the author acknowledges his inability to make connection between it and the body of the song.

One merit we must concede to Hawaiian poetry, it wastes no time in slow approach. The first stroke of the artist places the auditor in medias res.

Footnotes

^107:a Translated by V. B. Emerson, M. D., under the title "Hawaiian Antiquities," and published by the B. P. Bishop Museum. Hawaiian Gazette Company (Limited), Honolulu, 1903.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

XIV.--THE HULA PUILI

The character of a hula was determined to some extent by the nature of the musical instrument that was its accompaniment. In the hula puili it certainly seems as if one could discern the influence of the rude, but effective, instrument that was its musical adjunct. This instrument, the puili (fig. 1), consisted of a section of bamboo from which one node with its diaphragm had been removed and the hollow joint at that end split up for a considerable distance into fine divisions, which gave forth a breezy rustling when the instrument was struck or shaken.

The performers, all of them hoopaa, were often placed in two rows, seated or kneeling and facing one another, thus favoring a responsive action in the use of the puili as well as in the cantillation of the song. One division would sometimes shake and brandish their instruments, while the others remained quiet, or both divisions would perform

FIG. 1.--Puili, bamboo-rattle.

at once, each individual clashing one puili against the other one held by himself, or against that of his vis-a-vis; or they might toss them back and forth to each other, one bamboo passing another in slid air.

While the hula puili is undeniably a performance of classical antiquity, it is not to be regarded as of great dignity or importance as compared with many other hulas. Its character, like that of the metes associated with it, is light and trivial.

The mele next presented is by no means a modern production. It seems to be the work of some unknown author, a fragment of folklore, it might be called by some, that has drifted down to the present generation and then been put to service in the hula. If hitherto the word folklore has not been used it is not from any prejudice against it, but rather from a feeling that there exists an inclination to stretch the application of it beyond its true limits and to make it include popular songs, stories, myths, and the like, regardless of its fitness of application. Some writers, no doubt, would apply this vague term to a large part of the poetical pieces which are given in this book.

[p. 114]

[paragraph continues] On the same principle, why should they not apply the term folklore to the myths and stories that make up the body of Roman and Greek mythology? The present author reserves the term folklore for application to those unappropriated scraps of popular song, story, myth, and superstition that have drifted down the stream of antiquity and that reach us in the scrap-bag of popular memory, often bearing in their battered forms the evidence of long use.

Mele

Hiki mai, hiki mai ka La, e.
 Aloha wale ka La e kau nei,
 Aia malalo o Ka-wai-hoa, [*a]
 A ka lalo o Kauai, o Lehua.
 5 A Kauai au, ike i ka pali;
 A Milo-ili [*b] pale ka pali loloa.
 E kolo ana ka pali o Makua-iki; [*c]
 Kolo o Pu-a, he keiki,
 He keiki makua-ole ke uwe nei.

[Translation]

Song

It has come, it has come; to the Sun!
 How I love the Sun that's on high;
 Below it swims Ka-wai-hoa,
 On the slope inclined from Lehua.
 5 On Kauai met I a pali,
 A beetling cliff that bounds Milo-lii,
 And climbing up Makua-iki,
 Crawling up was Pua, the child,
 An orphan that weeps out its tale.

The writer has rescued the following fragment from the waste-basket of Hawaiian song. A lean-to of modern verse has been omitted; it was evidently added within a generation:

Mele

Malua, [*d] ki'i wai ke aloha,
 Hoopulu i ka liko mamane.
 Ueuleu mai na manu,
 Inu wai lehua o Panaewa, [*e]
 5 E walea ana i ke onaona,
 Ke one wali o Ohele.

[p. 115]

Hele mai lei kou aloha
 A lalawe i ko'u nui kino,
 Au i hookohu ai,
 10 E kuko i ka manao.
 Kuhi no paha oe no Hopoe [*a]
 Nei lehua au i ka hana ohi ai.

[Translation]

Song

Malua, fetch water of love.
 Give drink to this mamane bud.
 The birds, they are singing ecstatic,
 Sipping Panaewa's nectared lehua,
 5 Beside themselves with the fragrance
 Exhaled from the garden Ohele.
 Your love comes to me a tornado;
 It has rapt away my whole body,
 The heart you once sealed as your own,
 10 There planted the seed of desire.
 Thought you 'twas the tree of Hopoe,
 This tree, whose bloom you would pluck?

What is the argument of this poem? A passion-stricken swain, or perhaps a woman, cries to Malua to bring relief to his love-smart, to give drink to the parched mamane buds--emblems of human feeling. In contrast to his own distress, he points to the birds caroling in the trees, reveling in the nectar of lehua bloom, intoxicated with the scent of nature's garden. What answer does the lovelorn swain receive from the nymph he adores? In lines 11 and 12 she banteringly asks him if he took her to be like the traditional lehua tree of Hopoe, of which men stood in awe as a sort of divinity, not daring to pluck its flowers? It is as if the woman had asked--if the poet's meaning is rightly interpreted--"Did you really think me plighted to vestal vows, a tree whose bloom man was forbidden to pluck?"

Footnotes

^114:a Kawaihoa. The southern point of Niihau. which is to the west of Kauai, the evident standpoint of the poet, and therefore "below" Kauai.

^114:b Milo-ili. A valley on the northwestern angle of Kauai, a precipitous region, in which travel from one point to another by land is almost impossible.

^114:c Makua-iki. Literally "little father," a name given to an overhanging pali, where was provided a hanging ladder to make travel possible. The series of palis in this region comes to an end at Milo-lii.

^114:d The Malua was a wind, often so dry that it sucked up the moisture from the land and destroyed the tender vegetation.

^114:e Panaewa was a woodland region much talked of in poetry and song.

^115:a Hopoe was a beautiful young woman, a friend of Hiiaka, and was persecuted by Pele, lowing to jealousy. One of the forms in which she as a divinity showed herself was as a lehua tree in full bloom.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 116]

  

XV.--THE HULA KA-LAAU

The hula ka-laau (ka, to strike; laau, wood) was named from the instruments of wood used in producing the accompaniment, a sort of xylophone, in which one piece of resonant wood was struck against another. Both divisions of the performers, the hoopaa and the olapa, took part and each division was provided with the instruments. The cantillation was done sometimes by one division alone, sometimes by both divisions in unison, or one division would answer the other, a responsive chanting that was termed haawe aku, haawe mai--"to give, to return."

Ellis gives a quotable description of this hula, which he calls the "hura ka raau:"

Five musicians advanced first, each with a staff in his left hand, five or six feet long, about three or four inches in diameter at one end, and tapering off to a point at the other. In his right hand he held a small stick of hard wood, six or nine inches long, with which he commenced his music by striking the small stick on the larger one, beating time all the while with his right foot on a stone placed on the ground beside him for that purpose. Six women, fantastically dressed in yellow tapas, crowned with garlands of flowers, having also wreaths of native manufacture, of the sweet-scented flowers of the gardenia, on their necks, and branches of the fragrant mairi (another native plant.) bound round their ankles, now made their way by couples through the crowd, and, arriving at the area, on one side of which the musicians stood, began their dance. Their movements were slow, and, though not always graceful, exhibited nothing offensive to modest propriety. Both musicians and dancers alternately chanted songs in honor of former gods and chiefs of the islands, apparently much to the gratification of the spectators. (Polynesian Researches, by William Ellis, IV, 78-79, London, 1836.)

The mele here first presented is said to be an ancient mele that has been modified and adapted to the glorification of that astute politician, genial companion, and pleasure-loving king, Kalakaua.

It was not an uncommon thing for one chief to appropriate the mele inoa of another chief. By substituting one name for another, by changing a genealogy, or some such trifle, the skin of the lion, so to speak, could be made to cover with more or less grace and to serve as an apparel of masquerade for the ass, and without interruption so long as there was no lion, or lion's whelp, to do the unmasking.

The poets who composed the mele for a king have been spoken of as "the king's washtubs." Mele inoa were not crown-jewels to be

[p. 117]

passed from one incumbent of the throne to another. The practice of appropriating the mele inoa composed in honor of another king and of another line was one that grew up with the decadence of honor in times of degeneracy.

Mele

O Kalakaua, he inoa,
 O ka pua mae ole i ka la;
 Ke pua mai la i ka mauna,
 I ke kuahiwi o Mauna-kea;
 5 Ke a la i Ki-lau-e-a,
 Malamalama i Wahine-kapu,
 I ka luna o Uwe-kahuna,
 I ka pali kapu o Ka-au-e-a.
 E a mai ke alii kia-manu;
 10 Ua Wahi i ka hula o ka mamo,
 Ka pua nani o Hawaii;
 O Ka-la-kaua, he inoa!

[Translation]

Song

Ka-la-kaua, a great name,
 A flower not wilted by the sun;
 It blooms on the mountains,
 In the forests of Manna-ken;
 5 It burns in Ki-lau-e-a,
 Illumines the cliff Wahine-kapu,
 The heights of Uwe-kahuna,
 The sacred pali of Ka-au-e-a.
 Shine forth, king of bird-hunters,
 10 Resplendent in plumage of maim,
 Bright flower of Hawaii:
 Ka-la-kaua, the illustrious!

The proper names Wahine-kapu, Uwe-kahuna, and Ka-au-e-a in the sixth, seventh, and eighth verses are localities, cliffs, bluffs, precipices, etc., in and about, the great caldera of Kilauea, following up the mention (in the fifth verse) of that giant among the world's active volcanoes.

The purpose of the poem seems to be to magnify the prowess of this once famous king as a captivator of the hearts and loving attentions of the fair sex.

Kona kai opua [*a] i kala i ka la'i;
 Opua hinano ua i ka malie;
 Hiolo na wai naoa a ke kehau, [p. 118]
 Ke' na-u [*a] la na kamalii,
 5 Ke kaohi la i ke kukuna o ka la;
 Ku'u la koili i ke kai--
 Pumehana wale ia aina!
 Aloha wale ke kini o Hoolulu,
 Aohe lua ia oe ke aloha,
 10 O ku'u puni, o ka me' owa.

[Translation]

Song

The cloud-piles o'er Kona's sea whet my joy,
 Clouds that drop rain in fair weather.
 The clustered dew-pearls shake to the ground;
 The boys drone out the na-u to the West,
 5 Eager for Sol to sink to his rest.
 This my day for a plunge in the sea--
 The Sun will be warming other shores--
 Happy the tribes of that land of calm!
 Fathomless, deep is my love
 10 To thee, my passion, my mate.

The author of this love-song, mele ipo, is said to have been Kalola, a widow of Kamehameha I, at a time when she was an old woman; the place was Lahaina, and the occasion an amour between Liholiho (Kamehameha II) and a woman of rank. The last two verses of the poem have been omitted from the present somewhat free, yet faithful translation, as they do not seem to be of interest or pertinent from our point of view, and there is internal evidence that they were added as an afterthought.

The hulas on the various islands differed somewhat from one another. In general, it may be said that on Kauai they were presented with more spirit and in greater variety than in other parts of the group. The following account will illustrate this fact:

About the year 1870 the late Queen Emma made the tour of the island of Kauai, and at some places the hula was performed as a recreation in her honor. The hula ka-laau was thus presented; it was marked, however, by such peculiarities as to make it hardly recognizable as being the same performance as the one elsewhere known by that name. As given on Kauai, both the olapa and the hoopaa took part, as they do on the other islands, but iii the Kauai

[p. 119]

performance the olapa alone handled the two sticks of the xylophone, which in other parts formed the sole instrument of musical accompaniment to this hula. Other striking novelties also were introduced. The olapa held between their toes small sticks with which they beat upon a resonant, beam of wood that lay on the floor, thus producing tones of a low pitch. Another departure from the usual style of this hula was that the hoopaa, at the same time, devoted themselves with the right hand to playing upon the pu-niu, the small drum, while with the left they developed the deep bass of the pahu. The result of this outre combination must have been truly remarkable.

It is a matter of observation that on the island of Kauai both the special features of its spoken language and the character of its myths and legends indicate a closer relationship to the groups of the southern Pacific, to which the Hawaiian people owe their origin, than do those of the other islands of the Hawaiian group.

Footnotes

^117:a Opua means a distinct cloud-pile, an omen, a weather-sign.

^118:a The word nu-u refers to a sportive contest involving a trial of lung-power, that was practised by the youth of Kona, Hawaii, as well as of other places. They stood on the shore at sunset, and as the lower limb of the sun touched the ocean horizon each one, having filled his lungs to the utmost, began the utterance of the sound na-u-a-u-u, which he must, according to the rules of the game, maintain continuously until the sun had disappeared, a lapse of about two minutes' time. This must be done without taking fresh breath. Anyone inhaling more air into his lungs or intermitting the utterance of the sound was compelled by the umpire to withdraw from the contest and to sit down, while anyone who maintained the droning utterance during the prescribed time was declared victor. It was no mean trial.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

  

XVI.--THE HULA ILI-ILI

The hula ili-ili, pebble-dance, was a performance of the classical times, in which, according to one who has witnessed it, the olapa alone took part. The dancers held in each hand a couple of pebbles, ili-ili, hence the name of the dance--which they managed to clash against each other, after the fashion of castanets, thus producing a rude music of much the same quality as that elicited from the "bones" in our minstrel performances. According to another witness, the drum also was sometimes used in connection with the pebbles as an accompaniment to this hula.

The ili-ili was at times a hula of intensity--that is to say, was acted with that stress of voice and manner which the Hawaiians termed ai-ha'a; but it seems to have been more often performed in that quiet natural tone of voice and of manner termed ko'i-honua, which may be likened to utterance in low relief.

The author can present only the fragment of a song to illustrate this hula:

Mele

A lalo maua o Wai-pi'o,
 Ike i ka nani o Hi'i-lawe.
 E lawe mai a oki
 I na hala o Naue i ke kai,
 5 I na lehua lu-lu'u pali;
 Noho ana lohe i ke kani o ka o-o,
 Hoolono aku i ka leo o ke kahuli.

[Translation]

Song

We twain were lodged in Wai-pi'o,
 Beheld Hi'i-lawe, the grand.
 We brought and cut for our love-wreath
 The rich hala drupe from Naue's strand,
 5 Tufted lehua that waves on the cliff;
 Then sat and gave ear to song of o-o,
 Or harked the chirp of the tree-shell.

Wai-pi'o, the scene of this idyl, is a valley deep and broad which the elements have scooped out in the windward exposure of Hawaii, and scarce needs mention to Hawaiian tourists. Hi'i-lawe is one of

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XII
 PUPU-KANI-OE, POETICALLY STYLED KAHULI
 HAWAIIAN TREE-SHELLS (ACHATINELLA * * *)

 

[p. 121]

several high waterfalls that leap from the world of clouds into the valley-basin.

Kahuli is a fanciful name applied to the beautiful and unique genus of tree-shells (Achatinella), plate XII, that inhabit the Hawaiian woods. The natives are persuaded that these shells have the power of chirping a song of their own, and the writer has often heard the note which they ascribe to them; but to his ear it was indistinguishable from the piping of the cricket. This is the song that the natives credit to the tree-shells:

Mele

Kahuli aku,
 Kahuli mai,
 Kahuli lei ula,
 Lei akolea. [*a]
 5 Kolea, kolea, [*b]
 Ki'i ka wai,
 Wai akolea.

[Translation]

Song of the Tree-shell

Trill a-far,
 Trill a-near,
 A dainty song wreath,
 Wreath akolea.
 5 Kolea, Kolea,
 Fetch me some dew,
 Dew from pink akolea.

This little piece of rustic imagination is said to have been used in the hula, but in connection with what dance the author has not been able to learn.

Footnotes

^121:a The akolea is a fern (by some classed as a Polypodium) which, according to Doctor Hillebrand (Flora of the Hawaiian Islands), "sustains its extraordinary length by the circinnate tips which twine round the branches of neighboring shrubs or trees."

^121:b Kolea. The red-breasted plover.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122]

  

XVII.--THE HULA KA-EKE-EKE

The kaekeeke was a formal hula worthy of high consideration. Some authorities assert that the performers in this dance were chosen from the hoopaa alone, who, it will be remembered, maintained the kneeling position, while, according to another authority, the olapa also took part in it. There is no reason for doubting the sincerity of both these witnesses. The disagreement probably arose from hasty generalization. One is reminded of the wise Hawaiian saw, already noted, "Do not think that, your halau holds all the knowledge."

This hula took its name from the simple instrument that formed its musical accompaniment. This consisted of a single division of the long-jointed bamboo indigenous to Hawaii, which was left open at one end. (The varieties of bamboo imported from China or the East Indies have shorter joints and thicker walls, and will not answer the purpose, being not sufficiently resonant.) The joints used in the kaekeeke were of different sizes and lengths, thus producing tones of various pitch. The performer held one in each hand and the tone was elicited by striking the base of the cylinder sharply against the floor or some firm, nonresonant body.

On making actual trial of the kaekeeke, in order to prove by experience its musical quality and capabilities, the writer's pleasure was as great as his surprise when he found it capable of producing musical tones of great purity and of the finest quality. Experiment soon satisfied him that for the best production of the tone it was necessary to strike the bamboo cylinder smartly upon some firm, inelastic substance, such as a bag of sand. The tone produced was of crystalline purity, and by varying the size and length of the cylinders it proved possible to represent a complete musical scale. The instrument was the germ of the modern organ.

The first mele to be presented partakes of the nature of the allegory. a form of composition not a little affected by the Hawaiians:

Mele

A Hamakua au.
 Noho i ka ulu hala.
 Malihini au i ka hiki ana.
 I ka ua pe'epe'e i pohaku.
 5 Noho oe a li'u-li'u,
 A luli-luli malie iho. [p. 123]

He keiki akamai ko ia pali;
 Elima no pua i ka lima.
 Kui oe a lawa
 10 I lei no ku'u aloha;
 Malama malie oe i ka makemake,
 I lei hooheno no ke aloha ole.

Moe oe a ala mai;
 Nana iho oe i kou pono.
 15 Hai'na ia ka puana:
 Keiki noho pali o Hamakua;
 A waka-waka, a waka-waka.

[Translation]

Song

It was in Hamakua;
 I sat in a grove of Pandanus,
 A stranger at my arrival,
 A rock was my shelter from rain.
 5 I found it a wearisome wait,
 Cautiously shifting about.

There's a canny son of the cliff
 That has five buds to his hand.
 You shall twine me a wreath of due length,
 10 A wreath to encircle my love,
 Whilst you hold desire in strong curb,
 Till love-touch thaws the cold-hearted.

When you rise from sleep on the mat,
 Look down, see the conquest of love.
 15 The meaning of this short story?
 What child fondly clings to the cliff?
 Waka-waka, the shell-fish.

The scene of this idyl, this love-song, mele hoipoipo, is Hamakua, a district on the windward side of Hawaii, subject to rain-squalls. The poet in his allegory represents himself as a stranger sitting in a pandanus grove, ulu hala (verse 2); sheltering himself from a rain-squall by crouching behind a rock, ua pe'epe'e pohaku (verse 4); shifting about on account of the veering of the wind, luli-luli malie iho (verse 6). Interpreting this figuratively, Hamakua, no doubt, is the woman in the case; the grove an emblem of her personality and physical charms; the rain-squall, of her changeful moods and passions. The shifting about of the traveler to meet the veering of the wind would seem to mean the man's diplomatic efforts to deal with the woman's varying caprices and outbursts.

He now takes up a parable about some creature, a child of the cliff--Hamakua's ocean boundary is mostly a precipitous wall--which he represents as a hand with five buds. Addressing it as a servant, he bids this creature twine a wreath sufficient for his love, kui oe a 

[p. 124]

lawa (verse 9), I lei no ku'u aloha (verse 10). This creature with five buds, what is it but the human hand, the errand-carrier of man's desire, makemake (verse 11)? The pali, by the way, is a figure often used by Hawaiian poets to mean the glory and dignity of the human body.

That is a fine imaginative touch in which the poet illustrates the power of the human hand to kindle love in one that is cold-hearted, as if he had declared the hand itself to be not only the wreath-maker, but the very wreath that is to encircle and warm into response the unresponsive loved one, I lei hooheno no ke aloha ole (verse 12).

Differences of physical environment, of social convention, of accepted moral and esthetic standards interpose seemingly impassable barriers between us and the savage mind, but at the touch of an all-pervading human sympathy these barriers dissolve into very thin air.

Mele

Kahiki-nui, auwahi [*a] ka makani!
 Nana aku au ia Kona,
 Me he kua lei ahi [*b] la ka moku;
 Me he lawa uli e, la, no
 5 Ku'u kai pa-u hala-ka  [*c]
 I ka lae o Hana-malo; [*d]
 Me he olohe ili polohiwa,
 Ke ku a mauna,
 Ma ka ewa lewa [*e] Hawaii.
 10 Me he ihu leiwi la, ka moku,
 Kou mauna, kou palamoa: [*f]
 Kau a waha mai Mauna-kea [*g]
 A me Mauna-loa, [*g]
 Ke ku a Maile-hahei. [*h]
 15 Uluna mai Mauna Kilohana [*i]
 I ka poohiwi o Hu'e-hu'e. [*i]

[p. 125]

[Translation]

Song

Kahiki-nui, land of wind-driven smoke!
 Mine eyes gaze with longing on Kona;
 A fire-wreath glows aback of the district,
 And a robe of wonderful green
 5 Lies the sea that has aproned my loins
 Off the point of Hana-malo.
 A dark burnished form is Hawaii,
 To one who stands on the mount--
 A hamper swung down from heaven,
 10 A beautiful carven shape is the island--
 Thy mountains, thy splendor of herbage:
 Mauna-kea and Loa stand (in glory) apart,
 To him who looks from Maile-hahei;
 And Kilohana pillows for rest
 15 On the shoulder of Hu'e-hu'e.

This love-song--mele hoipoipo--which would be the despair of a strict literalist--what is it all about? A lover in Kahiki-nui of the softer sex, it would appear--looks across the wind-swept channel and sends her thoughts lovingly, yearningly, over to Kona of Hawaii, which district she personifies as her lover. The mountains and plains, valleys and capes of its landscapes, are to her the parts and features of her beloved. Even in the ocean that flows between her and him, and which has often covered her nakedness as with a robe, she finds a link in the chain of association.

Footnotes

^124:a Auwahi (a word not found in any dictionary) is said by a scholarly Hawaiian to be au archaic form of the word uwahi, or uahi (milk of fire), smoke, Kahiki-nui is a dry region and the wind (makani) often fills the air with dust.

^124:b Kua lei ahi. No Hawaiian has been found who professes to know the true meaning of these words. The translation of them here given is, therefore, purely formal.

^124:c Pa-u halaka. An expression sometimes applied to the hand when used as a shield to one's modesty; here it is said of the ocean (hat) when one's body is immersed in it.

^124:d Hana-malo. A cape that lies between Kawaihae and Kailua in north Kona.

^124:e Ewa lewa. In this reading the author has followed the authoritative suggestion of a Hawaiian expert, substituting it for that first given by another, which was elewa. The latter was without discoverable meaning. Even as now given conjectures as to its meaning are at variance. The one followed presents the less difficulty.

^124:f Palamoa. The name of a virulent kupua that acted as errand-carrier and agent for sorcerers (kahuna anaana); also the name of a beautiful grass found on Hawaii that has a pretty red seed. Following the line of least resistance, the latter meaning has been adopted; in it is found a generic expression for the leafy covering of the island.

^124:g Mauna-kea and Mauna-loa. The two well-known mountains of the big island of Hawaii.

^124:h Maile-hahei. Said to be a hill in Kona.

^124:i Kilohana and Hu'e-hu'e. The names of two hills in Kona, Hawaii.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

XVIII. AN INTERMISSION

During the performance of a hula the halau and all the people there assembled are under a tabu, the imposition of which was accomplished by the opening prayer that had been offered before the altar. This was a serious matter, and laid everyone present under the most formal obligations to commit no breach of divine etiquette; it even forbade the most innocent remarks and expressions of emotion. But when the performers, wearied of the strait-jacket, determined to unbend and indulge in social amenities, to lounge, gossip, and sing informal songs, to quaff a social bowl of awa, or to indulge in an informal dance, they secured the opportunity for this interlude by suspending the tabu. This was accomplished by the utterance of a pule hoo-noa, a tabu-lifting prayer. If the entire force of the tabu was not thus removed, it was at least so greatly mitigated that the ordinary conversations of life might be carried on without offense. The pule was uttered by the kumu or some person who represented the whole company:

Pule Hoo-noa

Lehua [*a] i-luna,
 Lehua i-lalo,
 A wawae,
 A Ka-ulua, [*b]
 5 A o Haumea, [*c]
 Kou makua-kane, [*d]
 Manu o Kaae; [*e]
 A-koa-koa,
 O Pe-kau, [*f]
 10 O Pe-ka-nana. [*g]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XIII
 LEHUA (METROSIDEROS POLYMORPHA, FLOWERS AND LEAVES

 

[p. 127]

Papa pau.
 Pau a'e iluna;
 O Ku-mauna,
 A me Laka,
 15 A me Ku.
 Ku i ka wao,
 A me Hina,
 Hina mele-lani.
 A ua pan;
 20 Pau kakou;
 A ua noa;
 Noa ke kahua;
 Noa!

[Translation]

Power to Remove Tabu

Bloom of lehua on altar piled,
 Bloom of lehua below,
 Bloom of lehua at altar's base,
 In the month Ka-ulna.
 5 Present here is Haumea,
 And the father of thee,
 And the goddess of eloquent speech;
 Gather, now gather,
 Ye ranks of gods,
 10 And ye ranks of men,
 Complete in array.
 The heavenly service is done,
 Service of Ku of the mount,
 Service of Laka,
 15 And the great god Ku,
 Ku of the wilds,
 And of Hina,
 Hina, the heavenly singer.
 Now it is done,
 20 Our work is done;
 The tabu is lifted,
 Free is the place,
 Tabu-free!

Here also is another pule hoo-noa, a prayer-song addressed to Laka, an intercession for the lifting of the tabu. It will be noticed that the request is implied, not explicitly stated. All heads are lifted, all eyes are directed heavenward or to the altar, and the hands with a noiseless motion keep time as the voices of the company, led by the kumu, in solemn cantillation, utter the following prayer:

[p. 128]

Pule Hoo-noa no Laka

Pupu we'u-we'u [*a] e, Laka e,
 O kona we'u-we'u e ku-wa; [*b]
 O Ku-ka-ohia-Laka, [*c] e;
 Laua me Ku-pulu-pulu; [*d]
 5 Ka Lehua me ke Koa lau-lii;
 O ka Lama me Moku-halii,
 Ku-i-ku-i [*e] me ka Hala-pepe;
 Lakou me Lau-ka-ie-ie.
 Ka Palai me Maile-lau-lii.
 10 Noa, noa i kou kuahu;
 Noa, noa ia oe, Laka;
 Pa-pa-lua noa!

[Translation]

Tabu-lifting Prayer (to Laka)

Oh wildwood bouquet, O Laka!
 Set her greenwood leaves in order due;
 And Ku, god of Ohia-La-ka,
 He and Ku, the shaggy.
 5 Lehua with small-leafed Koa,
 And Lama and Moku-hali'i,
 Ku-i-ku-i and Hala-pe-pe;
 And with these leafy I-e-i-e,
 Fern and small-leafed Maile.
 10 Free, the altar is free!
 Free through you, Laka,
 Doubly free!

But even now, when the tabu has been removed and the assembly is supposed to have assumed an informal character, before they may indulge themselves in informalities, there remains to be chanted a dismissing prayer, pule hooku'u, in which all voices, must join:

[p. 129]

Pule Hooku'u

Ku ka makaia a ka huaka'i moe ipo; [*a]
 Ku au, hele;
 Noho oe, aloha!
 Aloha na hale o makou i makamaka-ole,
 5 Ke alanui hele mauka o Huli-wale, [*b] la;
 H-u-l-i.
 E huli a'e ana i ka makana,
 I ke alana ole e kanaenae aku ia oe.
 Eia ke kanaenae, o ka leo.

[Translation]

Dismissing Prayer

Doomed sacrifice I in the love-quest,
 I stand [loin-girt] [*c] for the journey;
 To you who remain, farewell!
 Farewell to our homes forsaken.
 5 On the road beyond In-decision,
 I turn me about--
 Turn me about, for lack of a gift,
 An offering, intercession, for thee--
 My sole intercession, the voice.

This fragment--two fragments, in fact, pieced together--belongs to the epic of Pele. As her little sister, Hiiaka, is about to start on her adventurous journey to bring the handsome Prince Lohiau from the distant island of Kauai she is overcome by a premonition of Pele's jealousy and vengeance, and she utters this intercession.

The formalities just described speak for themselves. They mark better than any comments can do the superstitious devotion of the old-timers to formalism, their remoteness from that free touch of social and artistic pleasure, the lack of which we moderns often lament in our own lives and sigh for as a lost art, conceiving it to have been once the possession of "the children of nature."

The author has already hinted at the form and character of the entertainments with which hula-folk sometimes beguiled their professional interludes. Fortunately the author is able to illustrate by means of a song the very form of entertainment they provided for themselves on such an occasion. The following mele, cantillated with an accompaniment of expressive gesture, is one that was actually given at an awa-drinking bout indulged in by hula-folk. The author has an account of its recital at Kahuku, island of Oahu, so late as the year 1849, during a circuit of that island made by King Kamehameha

[p. 130]

[paragraph continues] III. This mele is reckoned as belonging to the ordinary repertory of the hula; but to which particular form of the dance it was devoted has not been learned:

Mele

Ua ona o Kane i awa;
 Ua kau ke keha [*a] i ka uluna;
 Ua hi'o-lani [*b] i ka moena.
 Kipu mai la i ke kapa o ka noe.
 5 Noe-noe na hoku o ka lani--
 Imo-imo mai la i ka po a'e-a'e.
 Mahana-lua [*c] na kukui a Lanikaula, [*d]
 He kaula no Kane. [*e]
 Meha na pali o Wai-pi'o
 10 I ke kani mau o Kiha-pu;
 A ono ole ka awa a ke alii
 I ke kani mau o Kiha-pu;
 Moe ole kona po o ka Hooilo;
 Uluhua, a uluhua.
 15 I ka mea nana e huli a loaa
 I kela kupua ino i ka pali,
 Olali la, a olali.

[Translation]

Song

Kane is drunken with awa:
 His head is laid on the pillow;
 His body stretched on the neat.
 A trumpet sounds through the fog,
 5 Dimmed are the stars in the sky;
 When the night is clear, how they twinkle!
 Lani-kaula's torches look double,
 The torches that burn for Kane.
 Ghostly and drear the walls of Waipio
 10 At the endless blasts of Kiha-pu.
 The king's awa fails to console him:
 'Tis the all-night conching of Kiha-pu.
 Broken his sleep the whole winter;
 Downcast and sad, sad and downcast,
 15 At loss to find a brave hunter
 Shall steal the dunned conch from the cliff.
 Look, how it gleams [through the fog]!

[p. 131]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XIV
 HAWAIIAN TRUMPET, PU (CASSIS MADAGASCARENSIS)

 

Kane, the chief god of the Hawaiian pantheon, in company with other immortals, his boon companions, met in revelry on the heights bounding Wai-pi'o valley. With each potation of awa they sounded a blast upon their conch-shells, and the racket was almost continuous from the setting of the sun until drowsiness overcame them or the coming of day put an end to their revels.

The tumult of sound made it impossible for the priests to perform acceptably the offices of religion, and the pious king, Liloa, was distressed beyond measure. The whole valley was disturbed and troubled with forebodings at the suspension of divine worship.

The chief offender was Kane himself. The trumpet which he held to his lips was a conch of extraordinary size (pl. XIV) and credited with a divine origin and the possession of supernatural power; its note was heard above all the others. This shell, the famed Kiha-pu, had been stolen from the heiau of Paka'a-lana, Liloa's temple in Waipi'o valley, and after many adventures had come into the hands of god Kane, who used it, as we see, for the interruption of the very services that were intended for his honor.

The relief from this novel and unprecedented situation came from an unexpected quarter. King Liloa's awa-patches were found to be suffering from the nocturnal visits of a thief. A watch was set; the thief proved to be a dog, Puapua-lenalena, whose master was a confirmed awa-toper. When master and dog were brought into the presence of King Liloa, the shrewd monarch divined the remarkable character of the animal, and at his suggestion the dog was sent on the errand which resulted in the recovery by stealth of the famed conch Kiha-pu. As a result of his loss of the conch, Kane put an end to his revels, and the valley of Wai-pi'o again had peace.

This mele is an admirable specimen of Hawaiian poetry, and may be taken as representative of the best product of Hawaii's classical period. The language is elegant and concise, free from the redundancies that so often load down Hawaiian compositions. No one, it is thought, will deny to the subject-matter of this mele an unusual degree of interest.

There is a historic side to the story of the conch-shell Kiha-pu. Not many years ago the Hawaiian Museum contained an ethnological specimen of great interest, the conch-shell Kiha-pu. It was fringed, after the fashion of a witch-doll, with strings, beads, and wampum-like bits of mother-of-pearl, and had great repute as a kupua or luck-bringer. King Kalakaua, who affected a sentimental leaning to the notions of his mother's race, took possession of this famous "curio" and it disappeared from public view.

Footnotes

^126:a Lehua. See plate XIII.

^126:b Ka-ulua. The name of the third month of the  year. corresponding to late January or February, a time when in the latitude of Hawaii nature does not refrain from leafing and flowering.

^126:c Haumea. The name applied after her death and apotheosis to Papa, the wife of Wakea, and the ancestress of the Hawaiian race. (The Polynesian Race, A. Fornander, I, 205. London, 1878.)

^126:d It is doubtful to whom the expression "makua-kane " refers, possibly to Wakea, the husband of Papa; and if so, very properly termed father, ancestor, of the people.

^126:e Manu o Kaae (Manu-o-Kaae it might be written) is said to have been a goddess, one of the family of Pele, a sister of the sea  Moana-nui-ka-lehua, whose dominion was in the waters between Oahu and Kauai. She is said to have had the gift of eloquence.

^126:f Pe-kau refers to the ranks and classes of the gods.

^126:g Pe-ka-nana refers to men, their ranks and classes.

^128:a Pupu we'u-we'u. A bouquet. The reference is to the wreaths and floral decorations that bedecked the altar, and that were not only offerings to the goddess, but symbols of the diverse forms in which she manifested herself. At the conclusion of a performance the players laid upon the altar the garlands they themselves had worn. These were in addition to those which were placed there before the play began.

^128:b Ku-wa. It has cost much time and trouble to dig out the meaning of this word. The fundamental notion is that contained in its two parts, ku, to stand, and wa, an interval or space. the whole meaning to arrange or set in orderly intervals.

^128:c La-ka. A Tahitian name for the tree which in Hawaii is called lehua, or ohia. In verse 3 the Hawaiian name ohia and the Tahitian Laka (accented on the final syllable, thus distinguishing it from the name of the goddess Laka, with which it has no discoverable connection) are combined in one form as an appellation of the god Ku--ku-ka-ohia-Laka. This is a notable instance of the survival of a word as a sacred epithet in a liturgy, which otherwise had been lost to the language.

^128:d Ku-pulu-pulu. Ku, the fuzzy or shaggy, a deity much worshiped by canoe-makers, represented as having the figure of an old man with a long beard. In the sixth verse the full form of the god's name here given as Moku-ha-li'i would be Ku-moku-hali'i, the last part being an epithet applied to Ku working in another capacity. Moku-hali'i is the one who bedecks the island. His special emblem, as here implied, was the lama, a beautiful tree, whose wood was formerly used in making certain sacred inclosures. From this comes the proper name Palama, one of the districts of Honolulu.

^128:e Ku-i-ku-i. The same as the tree now called ku-ku-i, the tree whose nuts were used as candles and flambeaus. The Samoan name of the same tree is tu-i-tu-i.

^129:a A literal translation of the first line would be as follows: (Here) stands the doomed sacrifice for the journey in search of a bed-lover.

^129:b Huli-wale. To turn about, here used as the name of a place, is evidently intended figuratively to stand for mental indecision.

^129:c The bracketed phrase is not in the text of the original.

^130:a Keha is in elegant expression for the side of the head.

^130:b Hi'o-lani, literally to turn the side to heaven, is a classic expression of refinement.

^130:c Mahana-lua, literally to see double, was an accepted test of satisfactory drunkenness. It reminds the author of an expression he once heard used by the comedian Clarke in the play of Toddles. While in a maudlin state from liquor he spoke of the lighted candle that was in his hand as a "double-barreled candle."

^130:d Lani-kaula was a prophet who lived on Molokai at a place that still bears his name. He had his residence in the midst of a grove of tine kukui trees, the remnants of which remain to this day. Torches made from the nuts of these trees were supposed to be of superior quality and they furnished the illumination for the revelries of Kane and his fellows.

^130:e He kaula no Kane. A literal translation would be, a prophet of Kane.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

XIX.--THE HULA NIAU-KANI

The hula niau-kani was one of the classic dances of the halau, and took its name from the musical instrument that was its accompaniment. This was a simple, almost extemporaneous, contrivance, constructed, like the jew's-harp, on the principle of a reed instrument. It was made of two parts, a broad piece of bamboo with a longitudinal slit at one end and a thin narrow piece of the same material, the reed, which was held firmly against the fenestra on the concave side of part number one. The convexity of the instrument was pressed against the lips and the sound was produced by projecting the breath through the slit in a speaking or singing tone in such a way as to cause vibrations in the reed. The manner of constructing and operating this reed instrument is suggestive of the jew's-harp. It is asserted by those who should know that the niau-kani was an instrument of purely Hawaiian invention.

The performer did not depend simply upon the musical tone, but rather upon the modification it produced in the utterances that were strained through it. It would certainly require a quick ear, much practice, and a thorough acquaintance with the peculiarities of Hawaiian mele to enable one to distinguish the words of a song after being transformed by passage through the niau-kani.

As late as about thirty or forty years ago the niau-kani was often seen in the hands of the native Hawaiian youth, who used it as a means of romantic conversations and flirtation. Since the coming in of the Portuguese and their importation of the uku-lele, the taro-patch-fiddle, and other cheap stringed instruments, the niau-kani has left the field to them and disappeared.

The author's informant saw the niau-kani dance performed some years ago at Moana-lua, near Honolulu, and again on the island of Kauai. The dance in each case was the same. The kumu, aided by a pupil, stood and played on the niau-kani, straining the cantillations through the reed-protected aperture, while the olapa, girls, kept time to the music with the movements of their dancing.

[p. 133]

E pi'i ka wai ka nahele,
 U'ina, nakolo i na Molo-kama; [*a]
 Ka ua lele mawaho o Mamala-hoa.
 He manao no ko'u e ike
 5 I na pua ohi'a o Kupa-koili, [*b]
 I hoa kaunu no Manu'a-kepa; [*c]
 Ua like laua me Naha-moku. [*d]
 Anapa i ke kai o Mono-lau. [*e]
 Lalau ka lima a noa ia ia la,
 10 I hoa pili no Lani-huli. [*f]
 E huli oe i ku'u makemake,
 A loa'a i Kau-ka-opua. [*g]
 Elua no pua kau
 A la manao i makemake ai.
 15 Hoohihi oe a hihi
 I lei kohu no neia kino.
 Ahea oe hiki mai?
 A kau ka La i na pali; [*h]
 Ka huli a ka makani Wai-a-ma'o, [*i]
 20 Makemake e iki ia ka Hala-mapu-ana,
 Ka wai halana i Wai-pa. [*j]

[Translation]

Song

Up to the streams in the wildwood,
 Where rush the falls Molo-kama,
 While the rain sweeps past Mala-hoa,
 I had a passion to visit
 5 The forest of bloom at Koili,

[p. 134]

To give love-caress to Manu'a,
 And her neighbor Maha-moku,
 And see the waters flash at Mono-lau;
 My hand would quiet their rage,
 10 Would sidle and touch Lani-huli.
 Grant me but this one entreaty,
 Well meet 'neath the omens above.
 Two flowers there are that bloom
 In your garden of being;
 15 Entwine them into a garland,
 Fit emblem and crown of our love.
 And what the hour of your coining?
 When stands the Sun o'er the pali,
 When turns the breeze of the land,
 20 To breathe the perfume of hala,
 While the currents swirl at War-pa.

This mele is the language of passion, a song in which the lover frankly pours into the ear of his inamorata the story of his love up to the time of his last enthrallment. Verses 11, 12, and 17 are the language of the woman. The scene is laid in the rainy valley of Hanalei, Kauai, a broad and deep basin, to the finishing of which the elements have contributed their share. The rush and roar of the waters that unite to form the river Wai-oli, from their wild tumbling in the falls of Molo-kama till they pass the river's mouth and mingle with the flashing waves of the ocean at Mono-lau, Anapa i ke kai o Mono-lau (verse 8), are emblematic of the man's passion and his finest for satisfaction.

Footnotes

^133:a NOTE.--The proper names belong to localities along the course of the Wai-oli stream.

Molokama (more often given as Na Molo-kama). The name applied to a succession of falls made by the stream far up in the mountains. The author has here used a versifier's privilege, compressing this long word into somewhat less refractory shape.

^133:b Kupa-koili. A grove of mountain-apples, ohia ai, that stand on the bank of the stream not far from the public road.

^133:c Manu'a-kepa. A sandy, grass-covered meadow on the opposite side of the river from Kupa-koili.

^133:d Maha-moku. A sandy beach near the mouth of the river, on the same bank as Manu'a-kepa.

^133:e Monu-lau. That part of the bay into which the river flows, that is used as an anchorage for vessels.

^133:f Lani-huli. The side of the valley Kilauea of Wai-oli toward which the river makes a bend before it enters the ocean.

^133:g Kau-ka-opua. Originally a phrase meaning "the cloud-omen hangs," has come to be used as the proper name of a place. It is an instance of a form of personification often employed by the Hawaiians, in which words having a specific meaning--such, for instance, as our "jack-in-the-box"--have come to be used as a noun for the sake of the meaning wrapped up in the etymology. This figure of speech is, no doubt, common to all languages, markedly so in the Hawaiian. It may be further illustrated by the Hebrew name Ichahod--"his glory has departed."

^133:h A kau ka La, i na pali. When stands the sun o'er the pali, evening or late in the afternoon. On this part of Kauai the sun sets behind the mountains.

^133:i Wai-a-ma'o. The land-breeze, which sometimes springs up at night.

^133:j Wai-pu. A spot on the bank of the stream where grew a pandanus tree, hala, styled Ka-hala-mapu-ana, the hala-breathing-out-its-Fragrance.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 135]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XV
 WOMAN PLAYING ON THE NOSE FLUTE (OHE-HANO-IHU)

 

  

XX.--THE HULA OHE

The action of the hula ohe had some resemblance to one of the figures of the Virginia reel. The dancers, ranged in two parallel rows, moved forward with an accompaniment of gestures until the head of each row had reached the limit in that direction, and then, turning outward to right and left, countermarched in the same manner to the point of starting, and so continued to do. They kept step and timed their gestures and movements to the music of the bamboo nose-flute, the ohe.

In a performance of this hula witnessed by an informant the chorus of dancers was composed entirely of girls, while the kumu operated the nose-flute and at the same time led the cantillation of the mele. This seemed an extraordinary statement, and the author challenged the possibility of a person blowing with the nose into a flute and at the same time uttering words with the mouth. The Hawaiian asserted, nevertheless, that the leader of the hula, the kumu, did accomplish these two functions; yet his answer did not remove doubt that they were accomplished jointly and at the same time. The author is inclined to think that the kumu performed the two actions alternately.

The musical range of the nose-flute was very limited; it had but two or, at the most, three stops. The player with his left hand held the flute to the nostril, at the same time applying a finger of the same hand to keep the other nostril closed. With the fingers of his right hand he operated the stops (pl. XV).

Mele

E pi' i ka nahele,
 E ike ia Ka-wai-kini, [*a]
 Nana ia Pihana-ka-lani, [*b]

[p. 136]

I kela manu hulu ma'e-ma'e, [*a]
 5 Noho pu me Ka-hale-lehua,
 Punahele ia Kaua-kahi-alii. [*b]
 E Kaili, [*c] e Kaili, e!
 E Kaili, lau o ke koa,
 E Kaili, lau o ke koa,
 10 Moopuna a Hooipo-i-ka-Malanai, [*d]
 Hiwa-hiwa a ka Lehua-wehe! [*e]
 Aia ka nani i Wai-ehu,
 I ka wai kaili puuwai o ka makemake.
 Makemake au i ke kalukalu o Kewa, [*f]
 15 E he'e ana i ka nalu o Maka-iwa.
 He iwa-iwa oe na ke aloha,
 I Wai-lua nui hoano.
 Ano-ano ka hale, aohe kanaka,
 Ua la'i oe no ke one o Ali-o.
 20 Aia ka ipo i ka nahele.

[Translation]

Song

Come up to the wildwood, come;
 Let us visit Wai-kini,
 And gaze on Pihana-ka-lani,

[p. 137]

Its birds of plumage so fine;
 5 Be comrade to Hale-lehua,
 Soul-mate to Kau'kahi-alii.
 O, Kaili, Kaili!
 Kaili, leaf of the koa,
 Graceful as leaf of the koa,
 10 Granddaughter of goddess,
 Whose name is the breath of love,
 Darling of blooming Lehua.
 My lady rides with the gray foam,
 On the surge that enthralls the desire.
 15 I pine for the sylph robed in gauze,
 Who rides on the surf Maka-iwa--
 Aye, cynosure thou of all hearts,
 In all of sacred Wailua.
 Forlorn and soul-empty the house;
 20 You pleasure on the beach Ali-o;
 Your love is up here in the wildwood.

This mele hoipoipo, love-song, like the one previously given, is from Kauai. The proper names that abound in it, whether of places, of persons, or of winds, seem to have been mostly of Kauaian origin, furnished by its topography, its myths and legends. They have, however, become the common property of the whole group through having been interwoven in the national songs that pass current from island to island.

Footnotes

^135:a Ida-wai-kini. The name of a rocky bluff that stands on the side of Mount Wai-ale-ale, looking to Wailua. It is said to divide the flow from the great morass, the natural reservoir formed by the hollow at the top of the mountain, turning a part of it in the direction of Wai-niha, a valley not far from Hanalei, which otherwise would, it is said by Hawaiians, go to swell the stream that forms the Wailua river. This rock, in the old times, was regarded as a demigod, a kupua, and had a lover who resided in Wai-lua, also another who resided in the mountains. The words in the first two or three verses may be taken as if they were the utterance of this Wai-lua lover, saying "I will go up and see my sweetheart Ida-wai-kini."

^135:b Pihana-ka-lani. Literally, the fullness of heaven. This was a forest largely of lehua that covered the mountain slope below Ka-wai-kini. It seems as if the purpose of its mention was to represent the beauties and charms of the human body. In this romantic region lived the famous mythological princes--alii kupua the Hawaiians called them--[p. 136] named Kaua-kahi-alii and Aiwohi-kupua, with their princess sister Ka-hale-lehua. The second name mentioned was the one who married the famous heroine of the romantic story of Laie-i-ka-wai.

^136:a Manu hulu ma'ema'e. An allusion to the great number of plumage birds that were reputed to be found in this place.

^136:b Puna-hale ia Kaua-kahi-alii. The birds of the region are said to have been on very intimate and friendly terms with Kaua-kahi-alii. (See note b, p. 135.)

^136:c Kaili. The full form is said to be Ka-ili-lau-o-he-koa--Skin-like-the-leaf-of-the-koa. In the text of the mele this name is analyzed into its parts and written as if the phrase at the end were an appellative and not an integral part of the name itself. This was a mythical character of unusual beauty, a person of superhuman power, kupua, a mistress of the art of surf-riding, which passion she indulged in the waters about Wai-lua.

^136:d Hooipo-i-ha-Malanai. A mythical princess of Wailua, the grandmother of Kaili. This oft-quoted phrase, literally meaning to make love in the (gently-blowing) trade-wind, has become almost a stock expression, standing for romantic love, or love-making.

^136:e Lehua-wehe. The piece of ocean near the mouth of the Wailua river in which Kaili indulged her passion for surf-riding.

^136:f Kalu-kalu o Kewa. Kalu-kalu may mean a species of soft, smooth grass specially fitted for sliding upon, which flourished on the inclined plain of Kewa, Kauai. One would sit upon a mat, the butt end of a coconut leaf, or a sled, while another dragged it along. The Hawaiian name for this sport is pahe'e. Kalu-kalu is also the name applied to "a very thin gauze-like kapa." (See Andrews's Hawaiian Dictionary.) If we suppose the poet to have clearly intended the first meaning, the figure does not tally with the following verse, the fifteenth. Verses 14 and 15 would thus be made to read

I desire the kalu-kalu (grass) of Kewa,
 That is riding the surf of Maka-iwa.

[paragraph continues] This is an impossible figure and makes no sense. If, on the other hand, we take another version and conceive that the bard had in mind the gauze-like robe of kalu-kalu --using this, of course, as a figure for the person clad in such a robe--the rendering I have given,

I pine for the sylph robed in gauze,
 who rides the surf Maka-iwa,

would not only make a possible, but a poetic, picture. Let the critical reader judge which of these two versions hits closer to common sense and probability.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138]

  

XXI.--THE MUSIC AND MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS OF THE HAWAIIANS

A bird is easier captured than the notes of a song. The mele and oli of Hawaii's olden time have been preserved for us; but the music to which they were chanted, a less perdurable essence, has mostly exhaled. In the sudden transition from the tabu system to the new order of things that came in with the death of Kamehameha in 1819, the old fashion of song soon found itself antiquated and outdistanced. Its survival, so far as it did survive, was rather as a memorial and remembrance of the past than as a register of the living emotions of the present.

The new music, with its pa, ko, li--answering to our do, re, mi [*a]--was soon in everybody's mouth. From the first it was evidently destined to enact a role different from that of the old cantillation; none the less the musical ideas that came in with it, the air of freedom from tabu and priestcraft it breathed, and the diatonic scale, the highway along which it marched to conquest, soon produced a noticeable reaction in all the musical efforts of the people. This new seed, when it had become a vigorous plant, began to push aside the old indigenous stock, to cover it with new growths, and, incredible as it may seem, to inoculate it with its own pollen, thus producing a cross which to-day is accepted in certain quarters as the genuine article of Hawaiian song. Even now. the people of northwestern America are listening with demonstrative interest to songs which they suppose to be those of the old hula, but which in reality have no more connection with that institution than our negro minstrelsy has to do with the dark continent.

The one regrettable fact, from a historical point of view, is that a record was not made of indigenous Hawaiian song before this process of substitution and adulteration had begun. It is no easy matter now to obtain the data for definite knowledge of the subject.

While the central purpose of this chapter will be a study of the music native to old Hawaii, and especially of that produced in the halau, Hawaiian music of later times and of the present day can not be entirely neglected; nor will it be without its value for the indirect light it will shed on ancient conditions and on racial characteristics. The reaction that has taken place in Hawaii within historic times in

[p. 139]

response to the stimulus from abroad can not fail to be of interest in itself.

There is a peculiarity of the Hawaiian speech which can not but have its effect in determining the lyric tone-quality of Hawaiian music; this is the predominance of vowel and labial sounds in the language. The phonics of Hawaiian speech, we must remember, lack the sounds represented by our alphabetic symbols b, c or s, d, f, g, j, q, x, and z--a poverty for which no richness in vowel sounds can make amends. The Hawaiian speech, therefore, does not call into full play the uppermost vocal cavities to modify and strengthen, or refine, the throat and month tones of the speaker and to give reach and emphasis to his utterances. When he strove for dramatic and passional effect, he did not make his voice resound in the topmost cavities of the voice-trumpet, but left it to rumble and mutter low down in the throat-pipe, thus producing a feature that colors Hawaiian musical recitation.

This feature, or mannerism, as it might be called, specially marks Hawaiian music of the bombastic bravura sort in modern times, imparting to it in its strife for emphasis a sensual barbaric quality. It can be described further only as a gurgling throatiness, suggestive at times of ventriloquism, as if the singer were gloating over some wild physical sensation, glutting his appetite of savagery, the meaning of which is almost as foreign to us and as primitive as are the mewing of a cat, the gurgling of an infant, and the snarl of a mother-tiger. At the very opposite pole of development from this throat-talk of the Hawaiian must we reckon the highly-specialized tones of the French speech, in which we find the nasal cavities are called upon to do their full share in modifying the voice-sounds.

The vocal execution of Hawaiian music, like the recitation of much of their poetry, showed a surprising mastery of a certain kind of technique, the peculiarity of which was a sustained and continuous outpouring of the breath to the end of a certain period, when the lungs again drank their fill. This seems to have been an inheritance from the old religious style of prayer-recitation, which required the priest to repeat the whole incantation to its finish with the outpour of one lungful of breath. Satisfactory utterance of those old prayer-songs of the Aryans, the mantras, was conditioned likewise on its being a one-breath performance. A logical analogy may be seen between all this and that unwritten law, or superstition, which made it imperative for the heroes and demigods, kupua, of Hawaii's mythologic age to discontinue any unfinished work on the coming of daylight. [*a]

[p. 140]

When one listens for the first time to the musical utterance of a Hawaiian poem, it may seem only a monotonous onflow of sounds faintly punctuated by the primary rhythm that belongs to accent, but lacking those milestones of secondary rhythm which set a period to such broader divisions as distinguish rhetorical and musical phrasing. Further attention will correct this impression and show that the Hawaiians paid strict attention not only to the lesser rhythm which deals with the time and accent of the syllable, but also to that more comprehensive form which puts a limit to the verse.

With the Hawaiians musical phrasing was arranged to fit the verse of the mele, not to express a musical idea. The cadencing of a musical phrase in Hawaiian song was marked by a peculiarity all its own. It consisted of a prolonged trilling or fluctuating movement called i'i, in which the voice went up and down in a weaving manner, touching the main note that formed the framework of the melody, then springing away from it for some short interval--a half of a step, or even some shorter interval--like an electrified pith-ball, only to return and then spring away again and again until the impulse ceased. This was more extensively employed in the oli proper, the verses of which were longer drawn out, than in the mele such as formed the stock pieces of the hula. These latter were generally divided into shorter verses.

  

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS

The musical instruments of the Hawaiians included many classes, and their study can not fail to furnish substantial data for any attempt to estimate the musical performances, attainments, and genius of the people.

Of drums, or drum-like instruments of percussion, the Hawaiians had four:

1. The pahu, or pahu-hula (pl. X), was a section of hollowed log. Bread-fruit and coconut were the woods generally used for this purpose. The tough skin of the shark was the choice for the drumhead, which was held in place and kept tense by tightening cords of coconut fiber, that passed down the side of the cylinder.

The workmanship of the pahu, though rude, was of tasteful design. So far as the author has studied them, each pahu was constructed with a diaphragm placed about two-thirds the distance from the head, obtained by leaving in place a cross section of the log, thus making a closed chamber of the drum-cavity proper, after the fashion of the kettledrum. The lower part of the drum also was hollowed out and carved, as will be seen in the illustration. In the carving of all the specimens examined the artists have shown a notable fondness for a fenestrated design representing a series of arches, after the fashion of

[p. 141]

a two-storied arcade, the haunch of the superimposed arch resting directly on the crown of that below. In one case the lower arcade was composed of Roman, while the upper was of Gothic, arches. The grace of the design and the manner of its execution are highly pleasing, and suggest the inquiry, Whence came the opportunity for this intimate study of the arch?

The tone of the palm was produced by striking its head with the finger-tips, or with the palm of the hand; never with a stick, so far as the writer has been able to learn. Being both heavy and unwieldly, it was allowed to rest upon the ground, and, if used alone, was placed to the front of the operator; if sounded in connection with the instrument next to be mentioned, it stood at his left side.

The pahu, if not the most original, was the most important instrument used in connection with the hula. The drum, with its deep and solemn tones, is an instrument of recognized efficiency in its power to stir the heart to more vigorous pulsations, and in all ages it has been relied upon as a means of inspiring emotions of mystery, awe, terror, sublimity, or martial enthusiasm.

Tradition of the most direct sort ascribes the introduction of the pahu to La'a--generally known as La'a-mai-Kahiki (La'a-from-Kahiki)--a prince who flourished about six centuries ago. He was of a volatile, adventurous disposition, a navigator of some renown, having made the long voyage between Hawaii and the archipelagoes in the southern Pacific--Kahiki--not less than twice in each direction. On his second arrival from the South he brought with him the big drum, the pahu, which he sounded as he skirted the coast quite out to sea, to the wonder and admiration of the natives on the land. La'a, being of an artistic temperament and an ardent patron of the hula, at once gave the divine art of Laka the benefit of this newly imported instrument. He traveled from place to place, instructing the teachers and inspiring them with new ideals. It was he also who introduced into the hula the kaekeeke as an instrument of music.

2. The pu-niu (pl. XVI) was a small drum made from the shell of a coconut. The top part, that containing the eyes, was removed, and the shell having been smoothed and polished, the opening was tightly covered with the skin of some scaleless fish--that of the kala (Acanthurus unicornis) was preferred. A venerable kumu-hula states that it was his practice to use only the skin taken from the right side of the fish, because he found that it produced a finer quality of sound than that of the other side. The Hawaiian mind was very insistent on little matters of this sort--the mint, anise, and cummin of their system. The drumhead was stretched and placed in position while moist and flexible, and was then made fast to a ring-shaped cushion--poahu--of fiber or tapa that hugged the base of the shell.

[p. 142]

The Hawaiians sometimes made use of the clear gum of the kukui tree to aid in fixing the drumhead in place.

When in use the pu-niu was lashed to the right thigh for the convenience of the performer, who played upon it with a thong of braided fibers held in his right hand (), his left thus being free to manipulate the big drum that stood on the other side.

Of three pu-niu in the author's collection, one, when struck, gives off the sound of c+1 below the staff; another that of c+1###9839### below the staff, and a third that of c+2###9839### in the staff.

While the grand vibrations of the palm filled the air with their solemn tremor, the lighter and sharper tones of the pu-niu gave a piquancy to the effect, adding a feature which may be likened to the sparkling ripples which the breeze carves in the ocean's swell.

3. The ipu, or ipu-hula (pl. VII), though not strictly a drum, was a drumlike instrument. It was made by joining closely together two pear-shaped gourds of large size in such fashion as to make a body shaped like a figure 8. An opening was made in the upper end of

FIG. 2.--Ka, drumstick for pu-niu. (Pl. XVI.)

the smaller gourd to give exit to the sound. The cavities of the two gourds were thrown into one, thus making a single column of air, which, in vibration, gave off a note of clear bass pitch. An ipu of large size in the author's collection emits the tone of c in the bass. Though of large volume, the tone is of low intensity and has small carrying power.

For ease in handling, the ipu is provided about its waist with a loop of cord or tapa, by which device the performer was enabled to manipulate this bulky instrument with one hand. The instrument was sounded by dropping or striking it with well-adjusted force against the padded earth-floor of the Hawaiian house.

The manner and style of performing on the ipu varied with the sentiment of the mele, a light and caressing action when the feeling was sentimental or pathetic, wild and emphatic when the subject was such as to stir the feelings with enthusiasm and passion.

Musicians inform us that the drum--exception is made in the case of the snare and the kettle drum--is an instrument in which the pitch is a matter of comparative indifference, its function being to mark the time and emphasize the rhythm. There are other elements, it

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XVI
 PU-NIU, A DRUM

 

[p. 143]

would seem, that must be taken into the account in estimating the value of the drum. Attention may be directed first to its tone-character, the quality of its note which touches the heart in its own peculiar way, moving it to enthusiasm or bringing it within the easy reach of awe, fear, and courage. Again, while, except in the orchestra, the drum and other instruments of percussion may require no exact pitch, still this does not necessarily determine their effectiveness. The very depth and gravity of its pitch, made pervasive by its wealth of overtones, give to this primitive instrument a weird hold on the emotions.

This combination of qualities we find well illustrated in the pahu and the ipu, the tones of which range in the lower registers of the human voice. The tone-character of the pu-niu, on the other hand, is more subdued, yet lively and cheerful, by reason in part of the very sharpness of its pitch, and thus affords an agreeable offset to the solemnity of the other two.

Ethnologically the palm is of more world-wide interest than any other member of its class, being one of many varieties of the kettle-drum that are to be found scattered among the tribes of the Pacific, all of them, perhaps, harking back to Asiatic forbears, such as the tom-tom of the Hindus.

The sound of the pahu carries one back in imagination to the dread sacrificial drum of the Aztec teocallis and the wild kettles of the Tartar hordes. The drum has cruel and bloody associations. When listening to its tones one can hardly put away a thought of the many times they have been used to drown the screams of some agonized creature.

For more purely local interest, inventive, originality, and simplicity, the round-bellied ipu takes the palm, a contrivance of strictly Hawaiian, or at least Polynesian, ingenuity. It is an instrument of fascinating interest, and when its crisp rind puts forth its volume of sound one finds his imagination winging itself back to the mysterious caverns of Hawaiian mythology.

The gourd, of which the ipu is made, is a clean vegetable product of the fields and the garden, the gift of Lono-wahine--unrecognized daughter of mother Ceres--and is free from all cruel alliances. No bleating lamb was sacrificed to furnish parchment for its drumhead. Its associations are as innocent as the pipes of Pan.

4. The Ka-eke-eke, though not drumlike in form, must be classed as an instrument of percussion from the manner of eliciting its note. It was a simple joint of bamboo, open at one end, the other end being left closed with the diaphragm provided by nature. The tone is produced by striking the closed end of the cylinder, while held in a vertical position, with a sharp blow against some solid, nonresonant body, such as the matted earth floor of the old Hawaiian house. In

[p. 144]

the author's experiments with the kaekeeke an excellent substitute was found in a bag filled with sand or earth.

In choosing bamboo for the kaekeeke it is best to use a variety which is thin-walled and long-jointed, like the indigenous Hawaiian varieties, in preference to such as come from the Orient, all of which are thick-walled and short-jointed, and therefore less resonant than the Hawaiian.

The performer held a joint in each hand, the two being of different sizes and lengths, thus producing tones of diverse pitch. By making a proper selection of joints it would be possible to obtain a set capable of producing a perfect musical scale. The tone of the kaekeeke is of the utmost purity and lacks only sustained force and carrying power to be capable of the best effects.

An old Hawaiian once informed the writer that about the year 1850, in the reign of Kamehameha III, he was present at a hula kaekeeke given in the royal palace in Honolulu. The instrumentalists numbered six, each one of whom held two bamboo joints. The old man became enthusiastic as he described the effect produced by their performance, declaring it to have been the most charming hula he ever witnessed.

5. The uli-uli () consisted of a small gourd of the size of one's two fists, into which were introduced shotlike seeds, such as those of the canna. In character it was a rattle, a noise-instrument pure and simple, but of a tone by no means disagreeable to the ear, even as the note produced by a woodpecker drumming on a log is not without its pleasurable effect on the imagination.

The illustration of the uliuli faithfully pictured by the artist reproduces a specimen that retains the original simplicity of the, instrument before the meretricious taste of modern times tricked it out with silks and feathers. (For a further description of this instrument, see <page 107>.)

6. The pu-ili was also a variety of the rattle, made by splitting a long joint of bamboo for half its length into slivers, every alternate sliver being removed to give the remaining ones greater freedom and to make their play the one upon the other more lively, The tone is a murmurous breezy rustle that resembles the notes of twigs, leaves, or reeds struck against one another by the wind--not at all an unworthy imitation of nature-tones familiar to the Hawaiian ear.

The performers sat in two rows facing each other, a position that favored mutual action, in which each row of actors struck their instruments against those of the other side, or tossed them back and forth. (For further account of the manner in which the puili was used in the hula of the same name, see <page 113>.)

7. The laau was one of the noise-instruments used in the hula. It consisted of two sticks of hard resonant wood, the smaller of which

[p. 145]

was struck against the larger, producing a clear xylophonic note. While the pitch of this instrument is capable of exact determination, it does not seem that there was any attempt made at adjustment. A man in the author's collection, when struck, emits tones the predominant one of which is d+1 (below the staff).

8. The ohe, or ohe-hano-ihu (), is an instrument of undoubted antiquity. In every instance that has come under the author's observation the material has been, as its name--ohe--signifies, a simple joint of bamboo, with an embouchure placed about half an inch from the closed end, thus enabling the player to supply the instrument with air from his right nostril. In every nose-flute examined there have been two holes, one 2 or 3 inches away from the embouchure, the older about a third of the distance from the open end of the flute.

The musician with his left hand holds the end of the pipe squarely against his lip, so that the right nostril slightly overlaps the edge of the embouchure. The breath is projected into the embouchure with modulated force. A nose-flute in the author's collection with the lower hole open produces the sound of f+1###9839###; with both holes unstopped

FIG. 3.--Ohe-hano-ihu, nose-flute.

it emits the sound a+2; and when both holes are stopped it produces the sound of c+2###9839###, a series of notes which are the tonic, mediant, and dominant of the chord of F###9839### minor.

An ohe played by an old Hawaiian named Keaonaloa, an inmate of the Lunalilo Home, when both holes were stopped sounded f+1; with the lower hole open it sounded a+2, and when both holes were open it sounded c+3.

The music made by Keaonaloa with his ohe was curious, but not soul-filling. We must bear in mind, however, that it was intended only as an accompaniment to a poetical recitation.

Some fifty or sixty years ago it was not uncommon to see bamboo flutes of native manufacture in the hands of Hawaiian musicians of the younger generation. These instruments were avowedly imitations of the D-flute imported from abroad. The idea of using bamboo for this purpose must have been suggested by its previous use in the nose-flute.

"The tonal capacity of the Hawaiian nose-flute," says Miss Jennie Elsner, "which has nothing harsh and strident about it, embraces five tones, f+1 and g+2 in the middle register, and f+2, g+1, and a+2 an

[p. 146]

octave above. These flutes are not always pitched to the same key, varying half a tone or so." On inquiring of the native who kindly furnished the following illustrations, he stated that he had bored the holes of his ohe without much measurement, trusting to his intuitions and judgment.

Click to enlarge
I--Range of the Nose-flute

The player began with a slow, strongly accented, rhythmical movement, which continued to grow more and more intricate. Rhythmical diminution continued in a most astounding manner until a frenzied climax was reached; in other words, until the player's breath-capacity was exhausted.

A peculiar effect, as of several instruments being used at the same time, was produced by the two lower tones being thrown in in wild profusion, often apparently simultaneously with one of the upper tones. As the tempo in any one of these increased, the rhythm was lost sight of and a peculiar syncopated effect resulted. [*a]

Click to enlarge
II--Music from the Nose-flute

9. The pu-a was a whistle-like instrument. It was made from a gourd of the size of a lemon, and was pierced with three holes, or sometimes only two, one for the nose, by which it was blown, while

[p. 147]

the others were controlled by the fingers. This instrument has been compared to the Italian ocarina.

10. The ili-ili was a noise-instrument pure and simple. It consisted of two pebbles that were held in the hand and smitten together, after the manner of castanets, in time to the music of the voices. (See <page 120>.)

11. The niau-kani--singing splinter--was a reed-instrument of a rude sort, made by holding a reed of thin bamboo against a slit cut out in a larger piece of bamboo. This was applied to the mouth, and the voice being projected against it produced an effect similar to that of the jew's harp. (See <page 132>.)

12. Even still more extemporaneous and rustic than any of these is a modest contrivance called by the Hawaiians pu-la-i. It is nothing more than a ribbon torn from the green leaf of the ti plant, say three-quarters of an inch to an inch in width by 5 or 6 inches long, and rolled up somewhat after the manner of a lamplighter, so as to form a squat cylinder an inch or more in length. This was compressed to flatten it. Placed between the lips and blown into with proper force, it emits a tone of pure reedlike quality, that varies in pitch, according to the size of the whistle, from G in the middle register to a shrill piping note more than an octave above.

The hula girl who showed this simple device offered it in answer to reiterated inquiries as to what other instruments, besides those of more formal make already described, the Hawaiians were wont to use in connection with their informal rustic dances. "This," said she, "was sometimes used as an accompaniment to such informal dancing as was indulged in outside the halau." This little rustic pipe, quickly improvised from the leaf that every Hawaiian garden supplies, would at once convert any skeptic to a belief in the pipes of god Pan.

13. The ukeke, the one Hawaiian instrument of its class, is a mere strip of wood bent into the shape of a bow that its elastic force may keep tense the strings that are stretched upon it. These strings, three in number, were originally of sinnet, later after the arrival of the white man, of horsehair. At the present time it is the fashion to use the ordinary gut designed for the violin or the taro-patch guitar. Every ukeke seen followed closely a conventional pattern, which argues for the instrument a historic age sufficient to have gathered about itself some degree of traditional reverence. One end of the stick is notched or provided with holes to hold the strings, while the other end is wrought into a conventional figure resembling the tail of a fish and serves as an attachment about which to wind the free ends of the strings.

No ukeke seen by the author was furnished with pins, pegs, or any similar device to facilitate tuning. Nevertheless, the musician does

[p. 148]

tune his ukeke as the writer can testify from his own observation. This Hawaiian musician was the one whose performances on the nose-flute are elsewhere spoken of. When asked to give a sample of his playing on the ukeke, he first gave heed to his instrument as if testing whether it was in tune. He was evidently dissatisfied and pulled at one string as if to loosen it; then, pressing one end of the bow against his lips, he talked to it in a singing tone, at the same time plucking the strings with a delicate rib of grass. The effect was most pleasing. The open cavity of the mouth, acting as a resonator, reenforced the sounds and gave them a volume and dignity that was a revelation. The lifeless strings allied themselves to a human voice and became animated by a living soul.

With the assistance of a musical friend it was found that the old Hawaiian tuned his strings with approximate correctness to the tonic, the third and the fifth. We may surmise that this self-trained musician had instinctively followed the principle or rule proposed by Aristoxenus, who directed a singer to sing his most convenient note, and then, taking this as a starting point, to time the remainder of his strings--the Greek kithara, no doubt--in the usual manner from this one.

While the ukeke was used to accompany the mele and the oli, its chief employment was in serenading and serving the young folk in breathing their extemporized songs and uttering their love-talk--hoipoipo. By using a peculiar lingo or secret talk of their own invention, two lovers could hold private conversation in public and pour their loves and longings into each other's ears without fear of detection--a thing most reprehensible in savages. This display of ingenuity has been the occasion for outpouring many vials of wrath upon the sinful ukeke.

Experiment with the ukeke impresses one with the wonderful change in the tone of the instrument that takes place when its lifeless strings are brought into close relation with the cavity of the mouth. Let anyone having normal organs of speech contract his lips into the shape of an O, make his cheeks tense, and then, with the pulp of his finger as a plectrum, slap the center of his cheek and mark the tone that is produced. Practice will soon enable him to render a full octave with fair accuracy and to perform a simple melody that shall be recognizable at a short distance. The power and range this acquired will, of course, be limited by the skill of the operator. One secret of the performance lies in a proper management of the tongue. This function of the mouth to serve as a resonant cavity for a musical instrument is familiarly illustrated in the jew's-harp.

[p. 149]

The author is again indebted to Miss Elsner for the following comments on the ukeke:

The strings of this ukeke, the Hawaiian fiddle, are tuned to e+1, to b and to d+1. These three strings are struck nearly simultaneously, but the sound being very feeble, it is only the first which, receiving the sharp impact of the blow, gives out enough volume to make a decided impression.

Click to enlarge
III--The Ukeke (as played by Keaonaloa)

The early visitors to these islands, as a rule, either held the music of the savages in contempt or they were unqualified to report on its character and to make record of it.

We know that in ancient times the voices of the men as well as of the women were heard at the same time in the songs of the hula. One of the first questions that naturally arises is, Did the men and the women sing in parts or merely in unison?

It is highly gratifying to find clear historical testimony on this point from a competent authority. The quotation that follows is from the pen of Capt. James King, who was with Capt. James Cook on the latter's last voyage, in which he discovered the Hawaiian islands (January 18, 1778). The words were evidently penned after the death of Captain Cook, when the writer of them, it is inferred, must have succeeded to the command of the expedition. The fact that Captain King weighs his words, as evidenced in the footnote, and that he appreciates the bearing and significance of his testimony, added to the fact that he was a man of distinguished learning, gives unusual weight to his statements. The subject is one of so great interest and importance, that the whole passage is here quoted. [*a] It adds not a little to its value that the writer thereof did not confine his remarks to the music, but enters into a general description of the hula. The only regret is that he did not go still further into details.

Their dances have a much nearer resemblance to those of the New Zealanders than of the Otaheitians or Friendly Islanders. They are prefaced with a slow, solemn song, in which all the party join, moving their legs, and gently striking their breasts in a manner and with attitudes that are perfectly easy and graceful; and so far they are the same with the dances of the Society Islands. When this has lasted about ten minutes, both the tune and the motions gradually quicken, and end only by their inability to support the fatigue, which

[p. 150]

part of the performance is the exact counterpart of that of the New Zealanders; and (as it is among them) the person who uses the most violent action and holds out the longest is applauded as the best dancer. It is to be observed that in this dance the women only took part and that the dancing of the men is nearly of the same kind with what we saw at the Friendly Islands; and which may, perhaps, with more propriety, be called the accompaniment of the songs, with corresponding and graceful motions of the whole body. Yet as we were spectators of boxing exhibitions of the same kind with those we were entertained with at the Friendly Islands, it is probable that they had likewise their grand ceremonious dances, in which numbers of both sexes assisted.

Their music is also of a ruder kind, having neither flutes nor reeds, nor instruments of any other sort, that we saw, except drums of various sizes. But their songs, which they sing in parts, and accompany with a gentle motion of the arms, in the same manner as the Friendly Islanders, had a very pleasing effect.

To the above Captain King adds this footnote:

As this circumstance of their singing in parts has been much doubted by persons eminently skilled in music, and would be exceedingly curious if it was clearly ascertained, it is to be lamented that it can not be more positively authenticated.

Captain Burney and Captain Phillips of the Marines, who have both a tolerable knowledge of music, have given it as their opinion they did sing in parts; that is to say, that they sang together in different notes, which formed a pleasing harmony.

These gentlemen have fully testified that the Friendly Islanders undoubtedly studied their performances before they were exhibited public; that they had an idea of different notes being useful in harmony; and also that they rehearsed their compositions in private and threw out the inferior voices before they ventured to appear before those who were supposed to be judges of their skill in music.

In their regular concerts each man had a bamboo [*a] which was of a different length and gave a different tone. These they beat against the ground, and each performer, assisted by the note given by this instrument, repeated the same note, accompanying it with words, by which means it was rendered sometimes short and sometimes long. In this manner they sang in chorus, and not only produced octaves to pitch other, according to their species of voice, but fell on concords such as were not disagreeable to the ear.

Now, to overturn this fact, by the reasoning of persons who did not hear these performances, is rather an arduous task. And yet there is great improbability that any uncivilized people should by accident arrive at this perfection in the art of music, which we imagine can only be attained by dint of study and knowledge of the system and the theory on which musical composition is founded. Such miserable jargon as our country psalm-singers practice, which may be justly deemed the lowest class of counterpoint, or singing in several parts, can not be acquired in the coarse manner in which it is performed in the churches without considerable time and practice. It is, therefore, scarcely credible that a people, semibarbarous, should naturally arrive at any perfection in that art which it is much doubted whether the Greeks and Romans, with all their refinements in music, ever attained, and which the Chinese, who have been longer civilized than any people on the globe, have not yet found out.

[p. 151]

If Captain Burney (who, by the testimony of his father, perhaps the greatest musical theorist of this or any other age, was able to have done it) has written down in European notes the concords that these people sung, and if these concords had been such as European ears could tolerate, there would have been no longer doubt of the fact; but, as it is, it would, in my opinion, be a rash judgment to venture to affirm that they did or did not understand counterpoint; and therefore I fear that this curious matter must be considered as still remaining undecided. (A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, undertaken by the command of His Majesty, for making discoveries in the Northern Hemisphere. Performed under the direction of Captains Cook, Clerke, and Gore, in His Majesty's ships the Resolution and Discovery, in the years 1776, 1777, 1778, and 1780, 3 volumes, London, 1784, III, 2d ed., 142, 143, 144.)

While we can not but regret that Captain King did not go into detail and inform us specifically what were the concords those old-time people "fell on," whether their songs were in the major or minor key, and many other points of information, he has, nevertheless, put science under obligations to him by his clear and unmistakable testimony to the fact that they did arrange their music in parts. His testimony is decisive: "In this manner they sang in chorus, and not only produced octaves to each other, according to their species of voice, but fell on concords such as were not disagreeable to the ear." When the learned doctor argues that to overturn this fact would be an arduous task, we have to agree with him--an arduous task indeed. He well knew that one proven fact can overthrow a thousand improbabilities. "What man has done man can do" is a true saying; but it does not thence follow that what man has not done man can not do.

If the contention were that the Hawaiians understood counter-point as a science and a theory, the author would unhesitatingly admit the improbability with a readiness akin to that with which he would admit the improbability that the wild Australian understood the theory of the boomerang. But that a musical people, accustomed to pitch their voices to the clear and unmistakable notes of bamboo pipes cut to various lengths, a people whose posterity one generation later appropriated the diatonic scale as their own with the greatest avidity and readiness, that this people should recognize the natural harmonies of sound, when they had chanced upon them, and should imitate them in their songs--the improbability of this the author fails to see.

The clear and explicit statement of Captain King leaves little to be desired so far as this sort of evidence can go. There are, however, other lines of inquiry that must be developed:

1. The testimony of the Hawaiians themselves on this matter. This is vague. No one of whom inquiry has been made is able to affirm positively the existence of part-singing in the olden times. Most of those with whom the writer has talked are inclined to the view that the ancient cantillation was not in any sense part-singing as now practised. One must not, however, rely too much on such

[p. 152]

testimony as this, which at the best is only negative. In many cases it is evident the witnesses do not understand the true meaning and bearing of the question. The Hawaiians have no word or expression synonymous with our expression "musical chord." In all inquiries the writer has found it necessary to use periphrasis or to appeal to some illustration. The fact must be borne in mind, however, that people often do a thing, or possess a thing, for which they have no name.

2. As to the practice among Hawaiians at the present time, no satisfactory proof has been found of the existence of any case in which in the cantillations of their own songs the Hawaiians--those uninfluenced by foreign music--have given an illustration of what can properly be termed part-singing; nor can anyone be found who can testify affirmatively to the same effect. Search for it has thus far been as fruitless as pursuit of the will-o'-the-wisp.

3. The light that is thrown on this question by the study of the old Hawaiian musical instruments is singularly inconclusive. If it were possible, for instance, to bring together a complete set of kaekeeke bamboos which were positively known to have been used together at one performance, the argument from the fact of their forming a musical harmony, if such were found to be the case--or, on the other hand, of their producing only a haphazard series of unrelated sounds, if such were the fact--would bring to the decision of the question the overwhelming force of indirect evidence. Put such an assortment the author has not been able to find. Bamboo is a frail and perishable material. Of the two specimens of kaekeeke tubes found by him in the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum one was cracked and voiceless; and so the testimony of its surviving partner was of no avail.

The Hawaiians of the present day are so keenly alive to musical harmony that it is hardly conceivable that their ancestors two or three generations ago perpetrated discords in their music. They must either have sung in unison or hit on "concords such as were not disagreeable to the ear." If the music heard in the halau to-day in any close degree resembles that of ancient times--it must be assumed that it does--no male voice of ordinary range need have found any difficulty in sounding the notes, nor do they scale so low that a female voice would not easily reach them.

Granting, then, as we must, the accuracy of Captain King's statement, the conclusion to which the author of this paper feels forced is that since the time of the learned doctor's visit to these shores, more than one hundred and twenty-eight years ago, the art and practice of singing or cantillating after the old fashion has declined among the Hawaiians. The hula of the old times, in spite of all the efforts to maintain it, is becoming more and more difficult of procurement

[p. 153]

every day. Almost none of the singing that one hears at the so-called hula performances gotten up for the delectation of sight-seers is Hawaiian music of the old sort. It belongs rather to the second or third rattoon-crop, which has sprung up under the influence of foreign stimuli. Take the published hula songs, such as "Tomi-tomi," "Wahine Poupou" and a dozen others that might be mentioned, to say nothing about the words--the music is no more related to the genuine Hawaiian article of the old times than is "ragtime" to a Gregorian chant.

The bare score of a hula song, stripped of all embellishments and reduced by the logic of our musical science to the merest skeleton of notes, certainly makes a poor showing and gives but a feeble notion of the song itself--its rhythm, its multitudinous grace-notes, its weird tone-color. The notes given below offer such a skeletal presentation of a song which the author heard cantillated by a skilled hula-master. They were taken down at the author's request by Capt. H. Berger, conductor of the Royal Hawaiian Baud:

Click to enlarge
IV--Song from the Hula Pa'i-umauma

The same comment may be made on the specimen next to be given as on the previous one: there is an entire omission of the trills and flourishes with which the singer garlanded his scaffolding of song, and which testified of his adhesion to the fashion of his ancestors, the fashion according to which songs have been sung, prayers recited, brave deeds celebrated since the time when Pane and Pele and the other gods dipped paddle for the first time into Hawaiian waters. Unfortunately, in this as in the previous piece and as in the one next to be given, the singer escaped the author before he was able to catch the words.

Click to enlarge
V--Song from the Hula Pa-ipu

[p. 154]

Here, again, is a piece of song that to the author's ear bears much the same resemblance to the original that an oiled ocean in calm would bear to the same ocean when stirred by a breeze. The fine dimples which gave the ocean its diamond-flash have been wiped out.

Click to enlarge
VI--Song for the Hula Pele

Is it our ear that is at fault? Is it not rather our science of musical notation, in not reproducing the fractions of steps, the enharmonics that are native to the note-carving ear of the Chinaman, and that are perhaps essential to the perfect scoring of an oli or mele as sung by a Hawaiian?

None of the illustrations thus far given have caught that fluctuating trilling movement of the voice which most. musicians inter-viewed on the subject declare to be impossible of representation, while some flout the assertion that it represents a change of pitch. One is reminded by this of a remark made by Pietro Mascagni: [*a]

The feeling that a people displays in its character, its habits, its nature, and thus creates an overprivileged type of music, may be apprehended by a foreign spirit which has become accustomed to the usages and expressions common from that particular people. But popular music, [being] void of any scientific basis, will always remain incomprehensible to the foreigner who seeks to study it technically.

When we consider that the Chinese find pleasure in musical performances on instruments that divide the scale into intervals less than half a step, and that the Arabian musical scale included quarter-steps, we shall be obliged to admit that this statement of Mascagni is not merely a fling at our musical science.

Here are introduced the words and notes of a musical recitation done after the manner of the hula by a Hawaiian professional and his wife. Acquaintance with the Hawaiian language and a feeling for the allusions connoted in the text of the song would, of course, be a great aid in enabling one to enter into the spirit of the performance. As these adjuncts will be available to only a very few

[p. 155]

of those who will read these words, in the beginning are given the words of the oli with which he prefaced the song, with a translation of the same, and then the mele which formed the bulk of the song, also with a translation, together with such notes and comments as are necessary to bring one into intellectual and sympathetic relation with the performance, so far as that is possible under the circumstances. It is especially necessary to familiarize the imagination with the language, meaning, and atmosphere of a mele, because the Hawaiian approached song from the side of the. poet and elocutionist. Further discussion of this point must, however, be deferred to another division of the subject:

He Oli

Halau [*a] Hanalei i ka nini a ka ua;
 Kumano [*b] ke po'o-wai a ka liko; [*c]
 Naha ka opi-wai [*d] a Wai-aloha;
 O ke kahi koe a hiki i Wai-oli. [*e]
 Ua ike 'a.

[Translation]

A Song

Hanalei is a hall for the dance in the pouring rain;
 The stream-head is turned from its bed of fresh green;
 Broken the dam that peat the water of love--
 Naught now to hinder its rush to the vale of delight.
 You've seen it.

The mele to which the above oli was prelude is as follows:

Mele

Noluna ha hale kai, e ka ma'a-lewa,
 Nana ka maka ia Moana-nui-ka-Lehua.
 Noi au i ke kai e mali'o.
 Ane ku a'e la he lehua ilaila--
 5 Hopoe Lehua ki'eki'e.
 Maka'u ka Lehua i ke kanaka,
 Lilo ilalo e hele ai, ilalo, e.
 Keaau iliili nehe; olelo ke kai o Puna
 I ka ulu hala la, e, kaiko'o Puna.
 10 Ia hoone'ene'e ia pili mai kaua,

[p. 156]

E he koa, ke waiho e mai la oe;
 Eia ka mea ino, he anu, e.
 Aohe anu e!
 Me he mea la iwaho kaua, e ke hoa,
 15 Me he wai la ko kaua ili, e.

 

Click to enlarge
VII--Oli and Mele from the Hula Ala'a-papa

 

[p. 157]

Click to enlarge
VII--Oli and Mele from the Hula Ala'a-papa

[Translation]

Song from the Hula Ala'apapa

From mountain-retreat and root-woven ladder
 Mine eye looks down on goddess Moana-Lehua.
 Then I pray to the Sea, be thou calm;
 Would there might stand on thy shore a lehua--
 5 Lehua tree tall of Hopoe.
 The Lehua is fearful of man,
 Leaves him to walk on the ground below,
 To walk on the ground far below.
 The pebbles at Keaau grind in the surf;
 10 The sea at Keaau shouts to Puna's palms,
 "Fierce is the sea of Puna."
 Move hither, snug close, companion mine;
 You lie so aloof over there.
 Oh what a bad fellow is Cold!
 15 Not cold, do you say?
 It's as if we were out in the wold,
 Our bodies so clammy and chill, friend.

EXPLANATORY REMARKS

The acute or stress accent is placed over syllables that take the accent in ordinary speech.

A word or syllable italicized indicates drum-down-beat.

[p. 158]

It will be noticed that the stress-accent and the rhythmic accent, marked by the down-beat, very frequently do not coincide. The time marked by the drum-down-beat was strictly accurate throughout.

The tune was often pitched on some other key than that in which it is here recorded. This fact was noted when, from time to time, it was found necessary to have the singer repeat certain passages.

The number of measures devoted to the i'i, or fluctuation, which is indicated by the wavering line , varied from time to time, even when the singer repeated the same passage. (See remarks on the i'i, <page 140>.)

Redundancies of speech (interpolations) which are in disagreement with the present writer's text (pp. <page 155>-156) are inclosed in brackets. It will be seen that in the fifth verse he gives the version Maka'u ke kanaka i ka lehua instead of the one given by the author, which is Maka'u ka Lehua i ke kanaka. Each version has its advocates, and good arguments are made in favor of each.

On reaching the end of a measure that coincided with the close of a rhetorical phrase the singer, Kualii, made haste to snatch, as it were, at the first word or syllable of the succeeding phrase. This is indicated by the word "anticipating," or "anticipatory "--written anticip.--placed over the syllable or word thus snatched.

It was somewhat puzzling to determine whether the tones which this man sang were related to each other as five and three of the major key, or as three and one of the minor key. Continued and strained attention finally made it seem evident that it was the major key which he intended, i. e., it was f+1 and d+1 in the key of B sharp, rather than f+1 and d+1 in the key of D minor.

  

ELOCUTION AND RHYTHMIC ACCENT IN HAWAIIAN SONG

In their ordinary speech the Hawaiians were good elocutionists--none better. Did they adhere to this same system of accentuation in their poetry, or did they punctuate their phrases and words according to the notions of the song-maker and the conceived exigencies of poetical composition? After hearing and studying this recitation of Kualii the author is compelled to say that he does depart in a great measure from the accent of common speech and charge his words with intonations and stresses peculiar to the mele. What artificial influence has come in to produce this result? Is it from some demand of poetic or of musical rhythm? Which? It was observed that he substituted the soft sound of t for the stronger sound of k, "because," as he explained, "the sound of the t is lighter." Thus he said te tanata instead of ke kanaka, the man. The Hawaiian ear has always a delicate feeling for tone-color.

[p. 159]

In all our discussions and conclusions we must bear in mind that the Hawaiian did not approach song merely for its own sake; the song did not sing of itself. First in order came the poem, then the rhythm of song keeping time to the rhythm of the poetry. The Hawaiian sang not from a mere bubbling up of indefinable emotion, but because he had something to say for which he could find no other adequate form of expression. The Hawaiian boy, as he walks the woods, never whistles to keep his courage up. When he paces the dim aisles of Kaliuwa'a, he sets up an altar and heaps on it a sacrifice of fruit and flowers and green leaves, but he keeps as silent as a mouse.

During his performance Kualii cantillated his song while handling a round wooden tray in place of a drum; his wife meanwhile performed the dance. This she did very gracefully and in perfect time. In marking the accent the left foot was, if anything, the favorite, yet each foot in general took two measures; that is, the left marked the down-beat in measures 1 and 2, 5 and 6, and so on, while the right, in turn, marked the rhythmic accent that comes with the down-beat in measures 3 and 4, 7 and 8, and so on. During the four steps taken by the left foot, covering the time of two measures, the body was gracefully poised on the other foot. Then a shift was made, the position was reversed, and during two measures the emphasis came on the right foot.

The motions of the hands, arms, and of the whole body, including the pelvis--which has its own peculiar orbital and sidelong swing were in perfect sympathy one part with another. The movements were so fascinating that one was at first almost hypnotized and disqualified for criticism and analytic judgment. Not to derogate from the propriety and modesty of the woman's motions, under the influence of her Delsartian grace one gained new appreciation of "the charm of woven paces and of waving hands."

Throughout the whole performance of Kualii and his wife Abigaila it was noticed that, while he was the reciter, she took the part of the olapa (see <page 28>) and performed the dance; but to this role she added that of prompter, repeating to him in advance the words of the next verse, which he then took up. Her verbal memory, it was evident, was superior to his.

Experience with Kualii and his partner, as well as with others, emphasizes the fact that one of the great difficulties encountered in the attempt to write out the slender thread of music (leo) of a Hawaiian mele and fit to it the words as uttered by the singer arises from the constant interweaving of meaningless vowel sounds. This, which the Hawaiians call i'i, is a phenomenon comparable to the weaving of a vine about a framework, or to the pen-flourishes that

[p. 160]

illuminate old German text. It consists of the repetition of a vowel sound--generally i (= ee) or e (= a, as in fate), or a rapid interchange of these two. To the ear of the author the pitch varies through an interval somewhat less than a half-step. Exactly what is the interval he can not say. The musicians to whom appeal for aid in determining this point has been made have either dismissed it for the most part as a matter of little or no consequence or have claimed the seeming variation in pitch was due simply to a changeful stress of voice or of accent. But the author can not admit that the report of his senses is here mistaken.

A further embarrassment comes from the fact that this tone-embroidery found in the i'i is not a fixed quantity. It varies seemingly with the mood of the singer, so that not unfrequently, when one asks for the repetition of a phrase, it will, quite likely, be given with a somewhat different wording, calling for a readjustment of the rhythm on the part of the musician who is recording the score. But it must be acknowledged that the singer sticks to his rhythm, which, so far as observed, is in common time.

In justice to the Hawaiian singer who performs the accommodating task just mentioned it must be said that, under the circumstances in which he is placed, it is no wonder that at times he departs front the prearranged formula of song. His is the difficult task of pitching his voice and maintaining the same rhythm and tempo unaided by instrumental accompaniment or the stimulating movements of the dance. Let any stage-singer make the attempt to perform an aria, or even a simple recitative, off the stage, and without the support--real or imaginary--afforded by the wonted orchestral accompaniment as well as the customary stage-surroundings, and he will be apt to find himself embarrassed. The very fact of being compelled to repeat is of itself alone enough to disconcert almost anyone. The men and women who to-day attempt the forlorn task of reproducing for us a hula mele or an oli under what are to them entirely unsympathetic and novel surroundings are, as a rule, past the prime of life, and not unfrequently acknowledge themselves to be failing in memory.

After making all of these allowances we must, it would seem, make still another allowance, which regards the intrinsic nature and purpose of Hawaiian song. It was not intended, nor was it possible under the circumstances of the case, that a Hawaiian song should be sung to an unvarying tempo or to the same key; and even in the words or sounds that make up its fringework a certain range of individual choice was allowed or even expected of the singer. This privilege of exercising individuality might even extend to the solid framework of the mele or oli and not merely to the filigree, the i'i, that enwreathed it.

[p. 161]

It would follow from this, if the author is correct, that the musical critic of to-day must be content to generalize somewhat and must not be put out if the key is changed on repetition and if tempo and rhythm depart at times from their standard gait. It is questionable if even the experts in the palmy days of the hula attained such a degree of skill as to be faultless and logical in these matters.

It has been said that modern music has molded and developed it-self under the influence of three causes, (1) a comprehension of the nature of music itself, (2) a feeling or inspiration, and (3) the influence of poetry. Guided by this generalization, it may be said that Hawaiian poetry was the nurse and pedagogue of that stammering infant, Hawaiian music; that the words of the mele came before its rhythmic utterance in song; and that the first singers were the priests and the eulogists. Hawaiian poetry is far ahead of Hawaiian song in the power to move the feelings. A few words suffice the poet with which to set the picture before one's eyes, and one picture quickly follows another; whereas the musical attachment remains weak and colorless, reminding one of the nursery pictures, in which a few skeletal lines represent the human frame.

Let us now for refreshment and in continued pursuit of our subject listen to a song in the language and spirit of old-time Hawaii, composed, however, in the middle of the nineteenth century. It is given as arranged by Miss Lillian Byington, who took it down as she heard it sung by an old Hawaiian woman in the train of Queen Liliuokalani, and as the author has since heard it sung by Miss Byington's pupils of the Kamehameha School for Girls. The song has been slightly idealized, perhaps, by trimming away some of the superfluous i'i, but not more than is necessary to make it highly acceptable to our ears and not so much as to take from it the plaintive bewitching tone that pervades the folk-music of Hawaii. The song, the mele, is not in itself much--a hint, a sketch, a sweep of the brush, a lilt of the imagination, a connotation of multiple images which no jugglery of literary art can transfer into any foreign speech. Its charm, like that of all folk-songs and of all romance, lies in its mysterious tug at the heartstrings.

[p. 162]

 

Click to enlarge
VIII--He Inoa no Kamehameha
 (Old Mele--Kindness of H. R. H. Liliuokalani)

 

He Inoa no Kamehameha

Aia i Waipi'o [*a] Paka'alana, [*b],
 Paepae [*c] kapu ia o Liloa. [*d]
 He aloha ka wahine pi'i ka pali, [*e]
 Puili ana i ka hua ulei,
 5 I ka ai mo'a i ka lau laau. [*f]
 Hoolaau [*g] mai o ka welowelo.
 Ua pe'e pa Kai-a-ulu o Waimea, [*h]
 Ua ola i ku'u kai, [*i] Keoloewa, [*j] e.

[p. 163]

[Translation]

A Name-song of Kamehameha

In Waipi'o stands Paka'alana,
 The sacred shrine of Liloa.
 Love to the woman climbing the steep,
 Who gathered the ulei berries,
 5 Who ate of the uncooked herbs of the wild,
 Craving the swaying fruit like a hungry child.
 A covert I found from the storm,
 Life in my sea of delight.

The text of this mele--said to be a name-song of Kamehameha V--as first secured had undergone some corruption which obscured the meaning. By calling to his aid an old Hawaiian in whose memory the song had long been stored the author was able to correct it. Hawaiian authorities are at variance as to its meaning. One party reads in it an exclusive allusion to characters that have flitted across the stage within the memory of people now living, while another, taking a more romantic and traditional view, finds in it a reference to an old-time myth--that of Ke-anini-ula-o-ka-lani--the chief character in which was Haina-kolo. (See note e.) After carefully considering both sides of the question it seems to the author that, while the principle of double allusion, so common in Hawaiian poetry, may here prevail, one is justified in giving prominence to the historico-mythological interpretation that is inwoven in the poem. It is a comforting thought that adhesion to this decision will suffer certain unstaged actions of crowned heads to remain in charitable oblivion.

The music of this song is an admirable and faithful interpretation of the old Hawaiian manner of cantillation, having received at the hands of the foreign musician only so much trimming as was necessary to idealize it and make it reducible to our system of notation.

EXPLANATORY NOTE

Hoaeae.--This term calls for a quiet, sentimental style of recitation, in which the fluctuating trill i'i, if it occurs at all, is not made prominent. It is contrasted with the olioli, in which the style is warmer and the fluctuations of the i'i are carried to the extreme.

Thus far we have been considering the traditional indigenous music of the land. To come now to that which has been and is being produced in Hawaii by Hawaiians to-day, under influences from abroad, it will not be possible to mistake the presence in it of two strains: The foreign, showing its hand in the lopping away of much redundant foliage, has brought it largely within the compass of scientific and technical expression; the native element reveals itself, now in

[p. 164]

plaintive reminiscence and now in a riotous bonhommie, a rollicking love of the sensuous, and in a style of delivery and vocal technique which demands a voluptuous throatiness, and which must be heard to be appreciated.

The foreign influence has repressed and well-nigh driven from the field the monotonous fluctuations of the i'i, has lifted the starveling melodies of Hawaii out of the old ruts and enriched them with new notes, thus giving them a spring and elan that appeal alike to the cultivated ear and to the popular taste of the day. It has, moreover, tapped the springs of folk-song that lay hidden in the Hawaiian nature. This same influence has also caused to germinate a Hawaiian appreciation of harmony and has endowed its music with new chords, the tonic and dominant, as well as with those of the subdominant and various minor chords.

The persistence of the Hawaiian quality is, however, most apparent in the language and imagery of the song-poetry. This will be seen in the text of the various mele and oli now to be given. Every musician will also note for himself the peculiar intervals and shadings of these melodies as well as the odd effects produced by rhythmic syncopation.

The songs must speak for themselves. The first song to be given, though dating from no longer ago than about the sixth decade of the last century, has already scattered its wind-borne seed and reproduced its kind in many variants, after the manner of other folklore. This love-lyric represents a type, very popular in Hawaii, that has continued to grow more and more personal and subjective in contrast with the objective epic style of the earliest Hawaiian mele.

Click to enlarge
IX--Song, Poli Anuanu

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XVII
 HAWAIIAN MUSICIAN PLAYING ON THE UKU-LELE
 (By permission of Hubert Voss

 

[p. 165]

Poli Anuanu

1. Aloha wale oe,
 Poli anuanu;
 Maeele au
 I ke anu, e.

2. He anu e ka ua,
 He anu e ka wai,
 Li'a kuu ili
 I ke anu, e.

3. Ina paha,
 Ooe a owau
 Ka i pu-kuku'i,
 I ke anu, e.

He who would translate this love-lyric for the ear as well as for the mind finds himself handicapped by the limitations of our English speech--its scant supply of those orotund vowel sounds which flow forth with their full freight of breath in such words as a-lo-ha, po-li, and a-nu-a-nu. These vocables belong to the very genius of the Hawaiian tongue.

[Translation]

Cold Breast

1. Love fain compels to greet thee,
 Breast so cold, so cold.
 Chilled, benumbed am I
 With the pinching cold.

2. How bitter cold the rainfall,
 Bitter cold the stream,
 Body all a-shiver,
 From the pinching cold.

3. Pray, what think you?
 What if you and I
 Should our arms enfold,
 Just to keep off the cold?

The song next given, dating from a period only a few years subsequent, is of the same class and general character as Poli Anuanu. Both words and music are peculiarly Hawaiian, though one may easily detect the foreign influence that presided over the shaping of the melody.

[p. 166]

Click to enlarge
X--Song, Hua-hua'i

Huahua'i

He aloha wau ia oe.
 I kau hana, hana pono;
 La'i ai ke kaunu me ia la,
 Hoapaapa i ke kino.

  Chorus:
 Kaua i ka huahua'i,
 E uhene la'i pili koolua,
 Pu-kuku'i aku i ke koekoe,
 Anu lipo i ka palai.

[p. 167]

[Translation]

Outburst

O my love goes out to thee,
 For thy goodness and thy kindness.
 Fancy kindles at that other,
 Stirs, with her arts, my blood.

  Chorus:
 You and I, then, for an outburst!
 Sing the joy of love's encounter,
 Join arms against the invading damp,
 Deep chill of embowering ferns.

The following is given, not for its poetical value and significance, but rather as an example of a song which the trained Hawaiian singer delights to roll out with an unctuous gusto that bids defiance to all description:

Click to enlarge
XI--Song, Ka Mawae

2 PILA = Two measures of an instrumental interlude.

NOTE.--The music to which this hula song is set was produced by a member of the Hawaiian Band, Mr. Solomon A. Hiram, and arranged by Capt. H. Berger, to whom the author is indebted for permission to use it.

Ka Mawae

A e ho'i ke aloha i ka mawae,
 I ke Kawelu-holu, Papi'ohuli. [*a]

Huli mai kou alo, ua anu wau,
 Ua pulu i ka ua, malule o-luna.

[p. 168]

[Translation]

The Refuge

Return, O love, to the refuge,
 The wind-tossed covert of Papi'ohuli.

Face now to my face; I'm smitten with cold,
 Soaked with the rain and benumbed.

Click to enlarge
XII--Like no a Like

Like no a Like

1. Ua like no a like
 Me ka ua kani-lehua;
 Me he la e i mai ana,
 Aia ilaila ke aloha.

  Chorus:
 Ooe no ka'u i upu ai,
 Ku'u lei hiki ahiahi,
 O ke kani o na manu,
 I na hora o ke aumoe.

2. Maanei mai kaua,
 He welina pa'a i ka piko,
 A nau no wau i imi mai.
 A loaa i ke aheahe a ka makani.
   Chorus.

[p. 169]

[Translation]

Resemblance

1. When the rain drums loud on the leaf,
 It makes me think of my love:
 It whispers into my ear,
 Your love, your love--she is near.

  Chorus:
 Thou art the end of my longing,
 The crown of evening's delight,
 When I hear the cock blithe crowing,
 In the middle watch of the night.

2. This way is the path for thee and me,
 A welcome warm at the end.
 I waited long for thy coming,
 And found thee in waft of the breeze.
   Chorus.

Click to enlarge
XIII--Song, Pili Aoao

NOTE.--The composer of the music and the author of the reels was a Hawaiian named John Meha, a member of the Hawaiian Band, who died some ten years ago, at the ago of 40 years.

1. O ka ponaha iho a ke ao.
 Ka pipi'o malie maluna,
 Ike oe i ka hana mikiala,
 Nowelo i ka pili aoao.

  Chorus:
 Maikai ke aloha a ka ipo--
 Hana mao ole i ka puuwai,
 Houhou liilii i ka poli--
 Nowelo i ka pili aoao.

2. A mau ka pili'na olu pono;
 Huli a'e, hooheno malie,
 Hanu liilii nahenahe,
 Nowelo i ka pili aoao.
   Chorus.

[p. 170]

The author of the mele was a Hawaiian named John Meha, who died some years ago. He was for many years a member of the Hawaiian Band and set the words to the music given below, which has since been arranged by Captain Berger.

[Translation]

Side by side

1. Outspreads now the dawn,
 Arching itself on high--
 But look! a wondrous thing,
 A thrill at touch of the side.

  Chorus:
 Most dear to the soul is a love-touch;
 Its pulse stirs ever the heart
 And gently throbs iii the breast--
 At thrill from the touch of the side.

2. In time awakes a new charm
 As you turn and gently caress;
 Short comes to breath--at
 The thrill from the touch of the side.
   Chorus.

The fragments of Hawaiian music that have drifted down to us no doubt remain true to the ancient type, however much they may have changed in quality. They show the characteristics that stamp all primitive music--plaintiveness to the degree almost of sadness, monotony, lack of acquaintance with the full range of intervals that make up our diatonic scale, and therefore a measurable absence of that ear-charm we call melody. These are among its deficiencies.

If, on the other hand, we set down the positive qualities by the possession of which it makes good its claim to be classed as music, we shall find that it has a firm hold on rhythm. This is indeed one of the special excellencies of Hawaiian music. Added to this, we find that it makes a limited use of such intervals as the third, fifth, fourth, and at the same time resorts extravagantly, as if in compensation, to a fine tone-carving that divides up the tone-interval into fractions so much less than the semitone that our ears are almost indifferent to them, and are at first inclined to deny their existence. This minute division of the tone, or step, and neglect at the same time of the broader harmonic intervals, reminds one of work in which the artist charges his picture with unimportant detail, while failing in attention to the strong outlines. Among its merits we must not forget to mention a certain quality of tone-color which inheres in the Hawaiian tongue and which greatly tends to the enhancement of Hawaiian music, especially when thrown into rhythmic forms.

The first thing, then, to repeat, that will strike the auditor on listening to this primitive music will be its lack of melody. The voice goes wavering and lilting along like a canoe on a rippling ocean.

 

Click to enlarge
 PLATE XVIII
 HALA FRUIT BUNCH AND DRUPE WITH A ''LEI''
 (PANDANUS ODORATISSIMUS)

 

[p. 171]

[paragraph continues] Then, of a sudden, it swells upward, as if lifted by some wave of emotion; and there for a time it travels with the same fluctuating movement, soon descending to its old monotone, until again moved to rise on the breast of some fresh impulse. The intervals sounded may be, as already said, a third, or a fifth, or a fourth; but the whole movement leads nowhere; it is an unfinished sentence. Yet, in spite of all these drawbacks and of this childish immaturity, the amateur and enthusiast finds himself charmed and held as if in the clutch of some Old-World spell, and this at what others will call the dreary and monotonous intoning of the savage.

In matters that concern the emotions it is rarely possible to trace with certainty the lines that lead up from effect to cause. Such is the nature of art. If we would touch the cause which lends attractiveness to Hawaiian music, we must look elsewhere than to melody. In the belief of the author the two elements that conspire for this end are rhythm and tone-color, which comes of a delicate feeling for vowel-values.

The hall-mark of Hawaiian music is rhythm, for the Hawaiians be-long to that class of people who can not move hand or foot or perform any action except they do it rhythmically. Not alone in poetry and music and the dance do we find this recurring accent of pleasure, but in every action of life it seems to enter as a timekeeper and regulator, whether it be the movement of a fingerful of poi to the mouth or the swing of a kahili through the incense-laden air at the burial of a chief.

The typical Hawaiian rhythm is a measure of four beats, varied at times by a 2-rhythm, or changed by syncopation into a 3-rhythm.

These people have an emotional susceptibility and a sympathy with environment that belongs to the artistic temperament; but their feelings, though easily stirred, are not persistent and ideally centered; they readily wander away from any example or pattern. In this way may be explained their inclination to lapse from their own standard of rhythm into inexplicable syncopations.

As an instance of sympathy with environment, an experience with a hula dancer may be mentioned. Wishing to observe the movement of the dance in time with the singing of the mele, the author asked him to perform the two at one time. He made the attempt, but failed. At length, bethinking himself, he drew off his coat and bound it about his loins after the fashion of a pa-u, such as is worn by hula dancers. He at once caught inspiration, and was thus enabled to perform the double rule of dancer and singer.

It has been often remarked by musical teachers who have had experience with these islanders that as singers they are prone to flat the tone and to drag the time, yet under the stimulus of emotion they show the ability to acquit themselves in these respects with great credit. The native inertia of their being demands the spur of excitement

[p. 172]

to keep them up to the mark. While human nature everywhere shares in this weakness, the tendency seems to be greater in the Hawaiian than in some other races of no higher intellectual and esthetic advancement.

Another quality of the Hawaiian character which reenforces this tendency is their spirit of communal sympathy. That is but another way of saying that they need the stimulus of the crowd, as well as of the occasion, even to make them keep step to the rhythm of their own music. In all of these points they are but an epitome of humanity.

Before closing this special subject, the treatment of which has grown to an unexpected length, the author feels constrained to add one more illustration of Hawaii's musical productions. The Hawaiian national hymn on its poetical side may be called the last appeal of royalty to the nation's feeling of race-pride. The music, though by a foreigner, is well suited to the words and is colored by the environment in which the composer has spent the best years of his life. The whole production seems well fitted to serve as the clarion of a people that need every help which art and imagination can offer.

Click to enlarge
PLATE XIX
 PU (TRITON TRITONIS)

Click to enlarge
XIV--Hawaii Ponoi

[p. 173]

Click to enlarge
XIV--Hawaii Ponoi

[p. 174]

Click to enlarge
XIV--Hawaii Ponoi

HAWAI'I PONOI

1. Hawai'i ponoi,
 Nana I kou Moi,
 Ka lani Ali'i
 Ke Ali'i.

  Refrain:
 Makua lani, e,
 Kamehameha, e,
 Na kaua e pale,
 Me ka ihe.

2. Hawai'i ponoi,
 Nana i na 'li'i,
 Na kaua muli kou,
 Na poki'i.

  Refrain:
 3. Hawai'i ponoi
 E ka lahui, e,
 O kau hana nui
 E ui, e.
   Refrain.

[p. 175]

[Translation]

Hawaii Ponoi

1. Hawaii's very own,
 Look to your sovran Lord,
 Your chief that's heaven-born,
 Who is your King.

  Refrain:
 Protector, heaven-sent,
 Kamehameha great,
 To vanquish every foe,
 With conquering spear.

2. Men of Hawaii's land,
 Look to your native chiefs,
 Your sole surviving lords,
 The nation's pride.

  Refrain:
 3. Men of Hawaiian stock,
 My nation ever dear,
 With loins begirt for work,
 Strive with your might.
   Refrain.

Footnotes

^138:a The early American missionaries to Hawaii named the musical notes of the scale pa, ko, li, ha, no, la, mi.

^139:a The author can see no reason for supposing that this prolonged utterance had anything to do with that Hindoo practice belonging to the yoga, the exercise of which consists in regulating the breath.

^146:a The writer is indebted to Miss Elsner not only for the above comments but for the following score which she has cleverly arranged as a sample of nose-flute music produced by Keaonaloa.

^149:a Italics used are those of the present author.

^150:a These bamboos were, no doubt, the same as the kaekeeke, elsewhere described. (See <page 122>.)

^154:a The Evolution of Music from the Italian Standpoint, in the Century Library of Music, xvi, 521.

^155:a Halau. The rainy valley of Hanalei, on Kauai, is here compared to a halau, a dance-hall, apparently because the rain-columns seem to draw together and inclose the valley within walls, while the dark foreshortened vault of heaven covers it as with a roof.

^155:b Kumano. A water-source, or, as here, perhaps, a sort of dam or loose stone wall that was run out into a stream for the purpose of diverting a portion of it into a new channel.

^155:c Like. A bud; fresh verdure; a word much used in modern Hawaiian poetry.

^155:d Opiwai. A watershed. In Hawaii a knife-edged ridge as narrow as the back of a horse will often decide the course of a stream, turning its direction from one to the other side of the island.

^155:e Waioli (wai, water; oli, joyful). The name given to a part of the valley of Hanalei, also the name of a river.

^162:a Waipi'o. A deep valley on the windward side of Hawaii.

^162:b Paka'alana. A temple and the residence of King Liloa in Waipi'o.

^162:c Paepae. The doorsill (of this temple), always an object of superstitious regard, but especially so in the case of this temple. Here it stands for the whole temple.

^162:d Liloa. A famous king of Hawaii who had his seat in Waipi'o.

^162:e Wahine pii ka pali. Haina-kolo, a mythical character. is probably the one alluded to. She married a king of Kukulu o Kahiki, and. being deserted by him, swam back to Hawaii. Arrived at Waipi'o in a famishing state, she climbed the heights and ate of the ulei berries without first propitiating the local deity with a sacrifice. As an infliction of the offended deity, she became distraught and wandered away into the wilderness. Her husband repented of his neglect and after long search found her. Under kind treatment she regained her reason and the family was happily reunited.

^162:f Lau laau. Leaves of plants.

^162:g Hoolaau. The last part of this word, laau, taken in connection with the last word of the previous verse, form a capital instance of word repetition. This was an artifice much used in Hawaiian poetry, both as a means of imparting tone-color and for the punning wit it was supposed to exhibit.

^162:h Ua pe'e pa Kai-a-ulu a Waimea. Kai-a-ulu is a fierce rain-squall such as arises suddenly in the uplands of Waimea, Hawaii. The traveler, to protect himself, crouches (pe'e) behind a hummock of grass, or builds up in all haste a barricade (pa) of light stuff as a partial shelter against the oncoming storm.

^162:i Kai. Taken in connection with Kai-a-ulu in the preceding verse, this is another instance of verse repetition. This word, the primary meaning of which is sea, or ocean, is used figuratively to represent a source of comfort or life.

^162:j Keoloewa. The name of one of the old gods belonging to the class called akua noho, a class of deities that were sent by the necromancers on errands of demoniacal possession.

^167:a Papi'o-huli. A slope in the western valley-side at the head of Nuuanu, where the tall grass (kawelu) waves (holu) in the wind.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

  

XXII.--GESTURE

Gesture is a voiceless speech, a short-hand dramatic picture. The Hawaiians were adepts in this sort of art. Hand and foot, face and eye, and those convolutions of gray matter which are linked to the organs of speech, all worked in such harmony that, when the man spoke, he spoke not alone with his vocal organs, but all over, from head to foot, every part adding its emphasis to the utterance. Von Moltke could be reticent in six languages; the Hawaiian found it impossible to be reticent in one.

The hands of the hula dancer are ever going out in gesture, her body swaying and pivoting itself in attitudes of expression. Her whole physique is a living and moving picture of feeling, sentiment, and passion. If the range of thought is not always deep or high, it is not the fault of her art, but the limitations of her original endowment, limitations of hereditary environment, the universal limitations imposed on the translation from spirit into matter.

The art of gesture was one of the most important branches taught by the kumu. When the hula expert, the olohe, who has entered the halau as a visitor, utters the prayer (<page 47>), "O Laka, give grace to the feet of Pohaku, and to her bracelets and anklets; give comeliness to the figure and skirt of Luukia. To each one give gesture and voice. O Laka, make beautiful the lei; inspire the dancers to stand before the assembly," his meaning was clear and unmistakable, and showed his high valuation of this method of expression. We are not, however, to suppose that the kumu-hula, whatever his artistic attainments, followed any set of formulated doctrines in his teaching. His science was implicit, unformulated, still enfolded in the silence of unconsciousness, wrapped like a babe in its mother's womb. To apply a scientific name to his method, it might be calk inductive, for he led his pupils along the plain road of practical illustration, adding example to example, without the confusing aid of preliminary rule or abstract proposition, until his pupils had traveled over the whole ground covered by his own experience.

Each teacher went according to the light that was in him, not forgetting the instructions of his own kumu, but using them as a starting point, a basis on which to build as best he knew. There were no books, no manuals of instruction, to pass from hand to hand and thus secure uniformity of instruction. Then, again, it was a long journey from Hawaii to Kauai, or even from one island to

[p. 177]

another. The different islands, as a rule, were not harnessed to one another under the same political yoke; even districts of the same island were not unfrequently under the independent sway of warring chiefs; so that for long periods the separation, even the isolation, in matters of dramatic art and practice was as complete as in politics.

The method pursued by the kumu may be summarized as follows: Having labored to fix the song, the mele or oli, in the minds of his pupils, the haumana, he appointed some one to recite the words of the piece, while the class, standing with close attention to the motions of the kumu and with ears open at the same time to the words of the leader, were required to repeat the kumu's gestures in pantomime until he judged them to have arrived at a sufficient degree of perfection. That done, the class took up the double task of recitation joined to that of gesture. In his attempt to translate his concepts into physical signs the Hawaiian was favored not only by his vivid power of imagination, but by his implicit philosophy, for the Hawaiian looked at things from a physical plane--a safe ground to stand upon--albeit he had glimpses at times far into the depths of ether. When he talked about spirit, he still had in mind a form of matter. A god was to him but an amplified human being.

It is not the purpose to attempt a scientific classification of gesture as displayed in the halau. The most that can be done will be to give a few familiar generic illustrations which are typical and representative of a large class.

The pali, the precipice, stands for any difficulty or obstacle of magnitude. The Hawaiian represents this in his dramatic, pictorial manner with the hand vertically posed on the outstretched arm, the palm of the hand looking away. If it is desired to represent this wall of obstacle as being surmounted, the hand is pushed forward, and at the same time somewhat inclined, perhaps, from its rigid perpendicularity, the action being accompanied by a series of slight lifting or waving movements as of climbing.

Another way of dramatically picturing this same concept, that of the pali as a wall of obstacle, is by holding the forearm and hand vertically posed with the palmar aspect facing the speaker. This method of expression, while perhaps bolder and more graphic than that before mentioned, seems more purely oratorical and less graceful, less subtly pictorial and elegant than the one previously described, and therefore less adapted to the hula. For it must be borne in mind that the hula demanded the subordination of strength to grace and elegance. We may at the same time be sure that the halau showed individuality in its choice of methods, that it varied its technique and manner of expression at different times and places, according to the different conception of one or another kumu.

[p. 178]

Progression, as in walking or traveling, is represented by means of a forward undulatory movement of the outstretched arm and hand, palm downward, in a horizontal plane. This gesture is rhythmic and beautifully pictorial. If the other hand also is made a partner in the gesture, the significance would seem to be extended, making it include, perhaps, a larger number in the traveling company. The mere extension of the arm, the back-hand advanced, would serve the purpose of indicating removal, travel, but in a manner less gracious and caressing.

To represent an open level space, as of a sand-beach or of the earth-plain, the Hawaiian very naturally extended his arms and open hands--palms downward, of course--the degree of his reaching effort being in a sense a measure of the scope intended.

To represent the act of covering or protecting oneself with clothing, the Hawaiian placed the hollow of each hand over the opposite shoulder with a sort of hugging action. But here, again, one can lay down no hard and fast rule. There was differentiation; the pictorial action might well vary according to the actor's conception of the three or more generic forms that constituted the varieties of Hawaiian dress, which were the malo of the man, the pa-u of the woman, and the decent kihei, a togalike robe, which, like the blanket of the North American Indian, was common to both sexes. Still another gesture, a sweeping of the hands from the shoulder down toward the ground, would be used to indicate that costly feather robe, the ahuula, which was the regalia and prerogative of kings and chiefs.

The Hawaiian places his hands, palms up, edge to edge, so that the little finger of one hand touches its fellow of the other hand. By this action he means union or similarity. He turns one palm down, so that the little finger and thumb of opposite hands touch each other. The significance of the action is now wholly reversed; he now means disunion, contrariety.

To indicate death, the death of a person, the finger-tips, placed in apposition, are drawn away from each other with a sweeping gesture and at the same time lowered till the palms face the ground. In this case also we find diversity. One old man, well acquainted with hula matters, being asked to signify inn pantomimic fashion "the king is sick," went through the following motions: He first pointed upward, to indicate the heaven-born one, the king; then he brought his hands to his body and threw his face into a painful grimace. To indicate the death of the king he threw his hands upward toward the sky, as if to signify a removal by flight. He admitted the accuracy of the gesture, previously described, in which the hands are moved toward the ground.

There are, of course, imitative and mimetic gestures galore, as of paddling, swimming, diving, angling, and the like, which one sees

[p. 179]

every day of his life and which are to be regarded as parts of that universal shorthand vocabulary of unvocalized speech that is used the world over from Naples to Honolulu, rather than stage-conventions of the halau. It will suffice to mention one motion or gesture of this sort which the author has seen used with dramatic effect. An old man was describing the action of Hiiaka (the little sister of Pele) while clearing a passage for herself and her female companion with a great slaughter of the reptilian demon-horde of mo'o that came out in swarms to oppose the progress of the goddess through their territory while she was on her way to fetch Prince Lohiau. The goddess, a delicate piece of humanity in her real self, made short work of the little devils who covered the earth and filled the air. Seizing one after another, she bit its life out, or swallowed it as if it had been a shrimp. The old man represented the action most vividly: pressing his thumb, forefinger, and middle finger into a cone, he brought them quickly to his mouth, while he snapped his jaws together like a dog seizing a morsel, an action that pictured the story better than any words.

It might seem at first blush that facial expression, important as it is, owing to its short range of effectiveness, should hardly be put in the same category with what may be called the major stage-gestures that were in vogue in the halau. But such a judgment would certainly be mistaken. The Greek use of masks on the stage for their "carrying power" testified to their valuation of the countenance as a semaphore of emotion; at the same time their resort to this artifice was an implicit recognition of the desirability of bringing the window of the soul nearer to the audience. The Hawaiians, though they made no use of masks in the halau, valued facial expression no less than the Greeks. The means for the study of this division of the subject, from the nature of the case, is somewhat restricted and the pursuit of illustrations makes it necessary to go outside of the halau.

The Hawaiian language was one of hospitality and invitation. The expression mai, or komo mai, this way, or come in, was the most common of salutations. The Hawaiian sat down to meat before an open door; he ate his food in the sight of all men, and it was only one who dared being denounced as a churl who would fail to invite with word and gesture the passer-by to come in and share with him. This gesture might be a sweeping, downward, or sidewise motion of the hand in which the palm faced and drew toward the speaker. This seems to have been the usual form when the two parties were near to each other; if they were separated by any considerable distance, the fingers would perhaps more likely be turned upward, thus making the signal more distinctly visible and at the same time more emphatic.

[p. 180]

In the expression of unvoiced assent and dissent the Hawaiian practised refinements that went beyond our ordinary conventions. To give assent he did not find it necessary so much as to nod the head; a lifting of the eyebrows sufficed. On the other hand, the expression of dissent was no less simple as well as decisive, being attained by a mere grimace of the nose. This manner of indicating dissent was not, perhaps, without some admixture of disdain or even scorn; but that feeling, if predominant, would call for a reenforcement of the gesture by some additional token, such as a pouting of the lips accompanied by an upward toss of the chin. A more impersonal and coldly businesslike way of manifesting a negative was by an outward sweep of the hand, the back of the hand being turned to the applicant. Such a gesture, when addressed to a huckster or a beggar--a rare bird, by the way, in old Hawaii--was accepted as final.

There was another method of signifying a most emphatic, even contemptuous, no. In this the tongue is protruded and allowed to hang down fiat and wide like the flaming banner of a panting bound. A friend states that the Maoris made great use of gestures with the tongue in their dances, especially in the war-dance, sometimes letting it hang down broad, fiat, and long, directly in front, some-times curving it to right or left, and sometimes stuffing it into the hollow of the cheek and puffing out one side of the face. This manner--these methods it might be said--of facial expression, so far as observed and so far as can be learned, were chiefly of feminine practice. The very last gesture--that of the protruded tongue--is not mentioned as one likely to be employed on the stage in the halau, certainly not in the performance of what one would call the serious hulas. But it might well have been employed in the hula ki'i (see <page 91>), which was devoted, as we have seen, to the portrayal of the lighter and more comic aspects of daily life.

It is somewhat difficult to interpret the meaning of the various attitudes and movements of the feet and legs. Their remoteness from the centers of emotional control, their detachment from the vortices of excitement, and their seeming restriction to mechanical functions make them seem but slightly sympathetic with those tides of emotion that speed through the vital parts of the frame. But, though somewhat aloof from, they are still under the dominion of, the same emotional laws that govern the more central parts.

Man is all sympathy one part with another;
 For head with heart hath joyful amity,
 And both with moon and tides.

The illustrations brought to illuminate this division of the subject will necessarily be of the most general application and will seem to belong rather to the domain of oratory than to that of dramatic or

[p. 181]

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XX
 PHYLLODIA AND TRUE LEAVES OF THE KOA (ACACIA KOA)

 

stage expression, by which is meant expression fitted for the purposes of the halau.

To begin with a general proposition, the attitude of the feet and legs must be sympathetic with that of the other parts of the body. When standing squarely on both feet and looking directly forward, the action may be called noncommittal, general; but if the address is specialized and directed to a part of the audience, or if attention is called to some particular region, the face will naturally turn in that direction. To attain this end, while the leg and arm of the corresponding side will be drawn back, the leg and arm of the opposite side will be advanced, thus causing the speaker to face the point of address. If the speaker or the actor addresses himself, then, to persons, or to an object, on his right, the left leg will be the one more in advance and the left arm will be the one on which the burden of gesture will fall, and vice versa.

It would be a mistake to suppose that every motion or gesture displayed by the actors on the stage of the halau was significant of a purpose. To do that would be to ascribe to them a flawless perfection and strength that no body of artists have ever attained. Many of their gestures, like the rhetoric of a popular orator, were mere flourishes and ornaments. With a language so full of seemingly superfluous parts, it could not well be otherwise than that their rhetoric of gesture should be overloaded with flourishes.

The whole subject of gesture, including facial expression, is worthy of profound study, for it is linked to the basic elements of psychology. The illustrations adduced touch only the skirts of the subject; but they must suffice. An exhaustive analysis, the author believes, would show an intimate and causal relation between these facial expressions and the muscular movements that are the necessary accompaniments or resultants of actual speech. To illustrate, the pronunciation of the Hawaiian word ae (pronounced like our aye), meaning "yes," involves the opening of the mouth to its full extent; and this action, when accomplished, results in a sympathetic lifting of the eyebrows. It is this ultimate and completing part of the action which the Hawaiian woman adopts as her semaphore of assent.

One of the puzzling things about gesture comes when we try to think of it as a science rooted in psychology. It is then we discover variations presented by different peoples in different lands, which force us to the conviction that in only a part. of its domain does it base itself on the strict principles of psychology. Gesture, like language, seems to be made up in good measure of an opportunist. growth that springs lip in answer to man's varying needs and conditions. The writer hopes he will not be charged with begging the question in suggesting that another element which we must reckon

[p. 182]

with as influential in fashioning and stereotyping gesture is tradition and convention. To illustrate--the actor who took the role of Lord Dundreary in the first performance of the play of the same name accidentally made a fantastic misstep while crossing the stage. The audience was amused, and the actor, quick to avail himself of any open door, followed the lead thus hinted at. The result is that he won great applause and gave birth to a mannerism which has well-nigh become a stage convention.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 183]

  

XXIII.--THE HULA PA-HUA

The hula pa-hua was a dance of the classical times that has long been obsolete. Its last exhibition, so far as ascertained, was in the year 1846, on the island of Oahu. In this performance both the olapa and the hoopaa cantillated the mele, while the latter squatted on the floor. Each one was armed with a sharp stick of wood fashioned like a javelin, or a Hawaiian spade, the o-o; and with this he made motions, thrusting to right and to left; whether in imitation of the motions of a soldier or of a farmer could not be learned. The gestures of these actors were in perfect time with the rhythm of the mele.

The dance-movements performed by the olapa, as the author has heard them described, were peculiar, not an actual rotation, but a sort of half-turn to one side and then to the other, an advance followed by a retreat. While doing this the olapa, who were in two divisions, marked the time of the movement by clinking together two pebbles which they held in each hand.

The use of the pebbles after the manner of castanets, the division of the dancers into two sets, their advance and retreat toward and away from each other are all suggestive of the Spanish bolero or fandango. The resemblance went deeper than the surface. The prime motive of the song, the mele, also is the same, love in its different phases even to its most frenzied manifestations.

Mele

Pa au i ka ihe a Kane; [*a]
 Nana ka maka ia Koolau; [*b]
 Kau ka opua [*c] ma ka moana.
 Lu'u a e-a, lu'u a e-a, [*d]
 5 Hiki i Wai-ko-loa.
 Aole loa ke kula
 I ka pai-lani a Kane. [*e]
 Ke kane [*e] ia no hoi ia
 Ka hula pe-pe'e

[p. 184]

10 A ka hale ku'i.
 Ku'i oe a lono Kahiki-nui;
 Hoolei ia iluna o Kaua-loa,
 Ka lihilihi pua o ka makemake.
 Mao ole ke Koolau i ka lihilihi.
 15 He lihi kuleana ia no Puna.
 O ko'u puni no ia o ka ike maka.
 Aohe makamaka o ka hale, ua hele oe;
 Nawai la au e hookipa
 I keia mahaoi ana mai nei o ka loa?
 20 He makemake no au e ike maka;
 I hookahi no po, le'a ke kaunu,
 Ka hana mao ole a ke anu.
 He anu mawaho, a he hu'i ma-loko.
 A ilaila laua la, la'i pono iho.
 25 Ua pono oe o kaua, ua alu ka moena;
 Ka hana mau a ka Inu-wai:
 Mao ole i ka nui kino.
 Ku'u kino keia mauna ia ha'i.
 E Ku, e hoolei la!
 30 A ua noa!

[Translation]

Song

I am smitten with spear of Kane:
 Mine eyes with longing scan Koolau;
 Behold the love-omen hang o'er the sea.
 I dive and come up, dive and come up;
 5 Thus I reach my goal Wai-ko-loa.
 The width of plain is a trifle
 To the joyful spirit of Kane.
 Aye, a husband, and patron is he
 To the dance of the bended knee,
 10 In the hall of the stamping feet.
 Stamp, till the echo reaches Kahiki;
 Still pluck you a wreath by the way
 To crown your fondest ambition:
 A wreath not marred by the salt wind
 15 That plays with the skirts of Puna.
 I long to look eye into eye.
 Friendless the house, you away;
 Pray who will receive, who welcome,
 This guest uninvited from far?
 20 I long for one (soul-deep) gaze,
 One night of precious communion;
 Such a flower wilts not in the cold--
 Cold without, a tumult within.
 What bliss, if we two were together!
 25 You are the blest of us twain:
 The mat bends under your form.
 The thirsty wind, it still rages,[p. 185]
 Appeased not with her whole body.
 My body is pledged to another.
 30 Crown it, Ku, crown it.
 Now the service is free!

Some parts of this mele, which is a love-song, have defied the author's most strenuous efforts to penetrate their deeper meaning. No Hawaiian consulted has made a pretense of understanding it wholly. The Philistines of the middle of the nineteenth century, into whose hands it fell, have not helped matters by the emendations and interpolations with which they slyly interlarded the text, as if to set before us in a strong light the stigmata of degeneracy from which they were suffering.

The author has discarded from the text two verses which followed verse 28:

Hai'na ia mai ka puana:
 Ka wai anapa i ke kula.

[Translation]

Declare to me now the riddle:
 The waters that flash on the plain.

The author has refrained from casting out the last two verses, though in his judgment they are entirely out of place and were not in the mele originally.

Footnotes

^183:a Ihe a Kane. The spear of Kane. What else can this be than that old enemy to man's peace and comfort, love, passion?

^183:b Koolau. The name applied to the weather side of an island; the direction in which one would naturally turn first to judge of the weather.

^183:c Opua. A bunch of clouds; a cloud-omen; a heavenly phenomenon; a portent. In this case it probably means a lover. The present translation is founded on this view.

^183:d Lu'u a e-a. To dive and then come up to take breath, as one does in swimming out to sea against the incoming breakers, or as one might do in escaping from a pursuer, or in avoiding detection, after the manner of a loon.

^183:e A Kane and Ke kane. Instances of word-repetition, previously mentioned as a fashion much used in Hawaiian poetry. See instances also of the same figure in lines 13 and 14 and in lines 16 and 17.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 186]

  

XXIV.--THE HULA PELE

The Hawaiian drama could lay hold of no worthier theme than that offered by the story of Pele. In this epic we find the natural and the supernatural, the everyday events of nature and the sublime phenomena of nature's wonderland, so interwoven as to make a story rich in strong human and deific coloring. It is true that the genius of the Hawaiian was not equal to the task of assembling the dissevered parts and of combining into artistic unity the materials his own imagination had spun. This very fact, however, brings us so much nearer to the inner workshop of the Hawaiian mind.

The story of Pele is so long and complicated that only a brief abstract of it can be offered now:

Pele, the goddess of the volcano, in her dreams and wanderings in spirit-form, met and loved the handsome Prince Lohiau. She would not be satisfied with mere spiritual intercourse; she demanded the sacrament of bodily presence. Who should be the embassador to bring the youth from his distant home on Kauai? She begged her grown-up sisters to attempt the task. They foresaw the peril and declined the thankless undertaking. Hiiaka, the youngest and most. affectionate, accepted the mission; but, knowing her sister's evil temper, strove. to obtain from Pele a guaranty that her own forests and the life of her bosom friend Hopoe should be safeguarded during her absence.

Hiiaka was accompanied by Wahine-oma'o--the woman in green--a woman as beautiful as herself. After many adventures they arrived at Haena and found Lohiau dead and in his sepulchre, a sacrifice to the jealousy of Pele. They entered the cave, and after ten days of prayer and incantation Hiiaka had the satisfaction of seeing the body of Lohiau warmed and animated by the reentrance of the spirit; and the company, now of three, soon started on the return to Kilauea.

The time consumed by Hiiaka in her going and doing and returning had been so long that Pele was moved to unreasonable jealousy and, regardless of her promise to her faithful sister, she devastated with fire the forest parks of Hiiaka and sacrificed the life of Hiiaka's bosom friend, the innocent and beautiful Hopoe.

Hiiaka and Lohiau, on their arrival at Kilauea, seated themselves on its ferny brink, and there, in the open view of Pele's court, Hiiaka, in resentment at the broken faith of her sister and in defiance of her power, invited and received from Lohiau the kisses and dalliance

[p. 187]

which up to that time she had repelled. Pele, in a frenzy of passion, overwhelmed her errant lover, Lohiau, with fire, turned his body into a pillar of rock, and convulsed earth and sea. Only through the intervention of the benevolent peacemaking god Kane was the order of the world saved from utter ruin.

The ancient Hawaiians naturally regarded the Pele hula with special reverence by reason of its mythological importance, and they selected it for performance on occasions of gravity as a means of honoring the kings and alii of the land. They would have considered its presentation on common occasions, or in a spirit of levity, as a great impropriety.

In ancient times the performance of the hula Pele, like that of all other plays, was prefaced with prayer and sacrifice. The offering customarily used in the service of this hula consisted of salt crystals and of luau made from the delicate unrolled taro leaf. This was the gift demanded of every pupil seeking admission to the school of the hula, being looked upon as an offering specially acceptable to Pele, the patron of this hula. In the performance of the sacrifice teacher and pupil approached and stood reverently before the kuahu while the former recited a mele, which was a prayer to the goddess. The pupil ate the luau, the teacher placed the package of salt on the altar, and the service was complete.

Both olapa and hoopaa took part in the performance of this hula. There was little or no moving about, but the olapa did at times sink down to a kneeling position. The performance was without instrumental accompaniment, but with abundant appropriate gestures. The subjects treated of were of such dignity and interest as to require no extraneous embellishment.

Perusal of the mele which follows will show that the story of Pele dated back of her arrival in this group:

He Oli--O ka mele mua keia o ka hula Pele

Mai Kahiki ka wahine, o Pele,
 Mai ka aina i Pola-pola,
 Mai ka punohu ula a Kane,
 Mai ke ao lalapa i ka lani,
 5 Mai ka opua lapa i Kahiki.

Lapa-ku i Hawaii ka wahine, o Pele;
 Kalai i ka wa'a Houna-i-a-kea,
 Kou wa'a, e Ka-moho-alii.
 I apo'a ka moku i pa'a;
 10 Ua hoa ka wa'a o ke Akua,

Ka wa'a o Kane-kalai-honua.
 Holo mai ke au, a'ea'e Pele-honua-mea;
 A'ea'e ka Lani, ai-puni'a i ka moku;
 A'ea'e Kini o ke Akua, [p. 188]

15 Noho a'e o Malau.
 Ua ka ia ka liu o ka wa'a.
 Ia wai ka hope, ka uli o ka wa'a, e ne hoa 'lii?
 Ia Pele-honua-mea.
 A'ea'e kai hoe oluna o ka wa'a.

20 O Ku ma, laua o Lono,
 Noho i ka honua aina,
 Kau aku i hoolewa moku.
 Hiiaka, noiau, he akua,
 Ku ae, hele a noho i ka hale o Pele.

25 Huahua'i Kahiki, lapa uila, e Pele.
 E hua'i, e!

[Translation]

A Song--The first song of the hula Pele

From Kahiki came the woman, Pele,
 From the land of Pola-pola,
 From the red cloud of Kane,
 Cloud blazing in the heavens,
 5 Fiery cloud-pile in Kahiki.

Eager desire for Hawaii seized the woman, Pele;
 She carved the canoe, Honua-i-a-kea,
 Your canoe, O Ka-moho-alii.
 They push the work on the craft to completion.
 10 The lashings of the god's canoe are done.
 The canoe of Kane, the world-maker.

The tides swirl, Pele-honua-mea o'ermounts them;
 The god rides the waves, sails about the island;
 The host of little gods ride the billows;
 15 Malau takes his seat;
 One bales out the bilge of the craft.
 Who shall sit astern, be steersman, O, princes?
 Pele of the yellow earth.
 The splash of the paddles dashes o'er the canoe.

20 Ku and his fellow, Lono,
 Disembark on solid land;
 They alight on a shoal.
 Hiiaka, the wise one, a god,
 Stands up, goes to stay at the house of Pele.

25 Lo, an eruption in Kahiki!
 A flashing of lightning, O Pele!
 Belch forth. O Pele!

Tradition has it that Pele was expelled from Kahiki by her brothers because of insubordination, disobedience, and disrespect to their mother, Honua-mea, sacred land. (If Pele in Kahiki conducted herself as she has done in Hawaii, rending and scorching the bosom of mother earth--Honua-Mea--it is not to be wondered that her brothers were anxious to get rid of her.) She voyaged north. Her

[p. 189]

first stop was at the little island of Ka-ula, belonging to the Hawaiian group. She tunneled into the earth, but the ocean poured in and put a stop to her work. She had the same experience on Lehua, on Niihau, and on the large island of Kauai. She then moved on to Oahu, hoping for better results; but though she tried both sides of the island, first mount Ka-ala--the fragrant--and then Konahuanui, she still found the conditions unsatisfactory. She passed on to Molokai, thence to Lanai, and  West Maui, and East Maui, at which last place she dug the immense pit of Hale-a-ka-la; but every-where she was unsuccessful. Still journeying east and south, she crossed the wide Ale-nui-haha channel and came to Hawaii, and, after exploring in all directions, she was satisfied to make her home at Kilauea. Here is (ka piko o ka honua) the navel of the earth. Apropos of this effort of Pele to make a fire-pit for herself, see the song for the hula kuolo (<page 86>), "A pit lies (far) to the east."

Mele

A Kauai, a ke olewa [*a] iluna,
 Ka pua lana i kai o Wailua;
 Nana mai Pele ilaila;
 E waiho aku ana o Ahu. [*b]
 5 Aloha i ka wai niu o ka aina;
 E ala mai ana mokihana,
 Wai auau o Hiiaka.
 Hoo-paapaa Pele ilaila;
 Aohe Kau [*c] e ulu ai.
 10 Keehi aku Pele [*c] i ka ale kua-loloa,

He onohi no Pele, ka oaka o ka lani, la.
 Eli-eli, kau mai!

[Translation]

Song

To Kauai, lifted in ether,
 A floating flower at sea of Wailua--
 That way Pele turns her gaze,
 She's bidding adieu to Oahu,
 5 Loved land of new wine of the palm.
 There comes a perfumed waft--mokihana--
 The bath of the maid Hiiaka.
 Scene it was once of Pele's contention,
 Put by for future attention.
 10 Her foot now spurns the long-backed wave;
 The phosphor burns like Pele's eye,
 Or a meteor-flash in the sky.
 Finished the prayer, enter, possess!

[p. 190]

The incidents and allusions in this mele belong to the story of Pele's journey in search of Lohiau, the lover she met in her dreams, and describe her as about to take flight from Oahu to Kauai (verse 4).

Hiiaka's bath, Wai ai auau o Hiiaka (verse 7), which was the subject of Pele's contention (verse 8), was a spring of water which Pele had planted at Huleia on her arrival from Kahiki. The ones with whom Pele had the contention were Kukui-lau-manienie and Kukui-lau-hanahana, the daughters of Lima-loa, the god of the mirage. These two women lived at Huleia near the spring. Kamapuaa, the swine-god, their accepted lover, had taken the liberty to remove the spring from the rocky bed where Pele had planted it to a neighboring hill. Pele was offended and demanded of the two women:

"Where is my spring of water?"

"Where, indeed, is your spring? You belong to Hawaii. What have you to do with any spring on Kauai?" was their answer.

"I planted a clean spring here on this rock," said Pele.

"You have no water here," they insisted; "your springs are on Hawaii."

"If I were not going in search of my husband Lohiau," said Pele, "I would set that spring back again in its old place."

"You haven't the power to do that," said they. "The son of Kahikiula (Kama-puaa) moved it over there, and you can't undo his action."

The eye of Pele, He onohi no Pele (verse 11), is the phosphorescence which Pele's footfall stirs to activity in the ocean.

The formal ending of this mele, Elieli, kau mai, is often found at the close of a mele in the hula Pele, and marks it as to all intents and purposes a prayer.

E waiho aku ana o Ahu (verse 4). This is an instance of the separation of the article o from the substantive Ahu, to which it becomes joined to form the proper name of the island now called Oahu.

Mele

Ke amo la ke ko'i ke akua la i-uka;
 Haki nu'a-nu'a mai ka nalu mai Kahiki,
 Po-po'i aku la i ke alo o Kilauea. [*a]
 Kanaka hea i ka lakou puaa kanu;
 5 He wahine kui lei lehua i uka o Olaa,
 Ku'u moku lehua i ke alo o He-eia.
 O Kuku-ena [*b] wahine,
 Komo i ka lau-ki,

[p. 191]

A'e-a'e a noho.
 10 Eia makou, kou lau kaula la.
 Eli-eli, kau mai!

[Translation]

Song

They bear the god's ax up the mountain;
 Trampling the mire, like waves from Kahiki
 That beat on the front of Kilauea.
 The people with offerings lift up a prayer;
 5 A woman strings wreaths in Olaa--
 Lehua grove mine bord'ring He-eia.
 And now Kukuena, mother god,
 Covers her loins with a pa-u of ti leaf;
 She mounts the altar; she sits.
 10 Behold us, your conclave of priests.
 Enter in, possess us!

This has the marks of a Hawaiian prayer, and as such it is said to have been used in old times by canoe-builders when going up into the mountains in search of timber. Or it may have been recited by the priests and people who went up to fell the lehua tree from which to carve the Makahiki [*a] idol; or, again, may it possibly have been recited by the company of hula folk who climbed the mountain in search of a tree to be set up in the halau as a representation of the god whom they wished to honor? This is a question the author can not settle. That it was used by hula folk is indisputable, but that would not preclude its use for other purposes.

Mele

Ku i Wailua ka pou hale, [*b]
 Ka ipu hoolono i ka uwalo,
 Ka wawa nui, e Ulupo.
 Aole uwalo mai, e.
 5 Aloha nui o Ikuwa, Mahoena.
 Ke lele la ka makawao o ka hinalo.
 Aia i Mana ka oka'i o ka ua o Eleao;
 Ke holu la ka a'ahu o Ka-u [*c] i ka makani;
 Ke puhi a'e la ka ale kumupali o Ka-u, Honuapo;
 10 Ke hakoko ka niu o Paiaha'a i ka makani.
 Uki-uki oukou:
 Ke lele la ke kai;
 Lele iao, [*d] lele!
 O ka makani Koolau-wahine,

 

[p. 192]

15 O ka Moa'e-ku.
 Lele ua, lele kawa! [*a]
 Lele aku, lele mai!
 Lele o-o, [*b], o-o lele; [*c]
 Lele opuhi, [*d] lele;
 20 Lele u Kauna, [*e] kaha oe.
 E Hiiaka e, ku!

[Translation]

Song

At Wailua stands the main house-post;
 This oracle harks to wild voices,
 Tumult and clamor, O Ulu-po;
 It utters no voice to entreaty.
 5 Alas for the prophet that's dumb!
 But there drifts the incense of hala.
 Mana sees the rain-whirl of Eleao.
 The robe of Ka-u sways in the wind,
 That dashes the waves 'gainst the sea-wall,
 10 At Honu-apo, windy Ka-u;
 The Pai-ha'a palms strive with the gale.
 Such weather is grievous to you:
 The sea-scud is flying.
 Fly little i-ao, O fly
 15 With the breeze Koolau!
 Fly with the Moa'e-ku!
 Look at the rain-mist fly!
 Leap with the cataract, leap!
 Plunge, now here, now there!
 20 Feet foremost, head foremost;
 Leap with a glance and a glide!
 Kauna opens the dance; you win.
 Rise, Hiiaka, arise!

The meaning of this mele centers about a phenomenon that is said to have been observed at Pa-ipu-ha'a, near Wailua, on Kauai. To one standing on a knoll near the two cliffs Ikuwa and Mahoena (verse 5) there came, it is said, an echo from the murmur and clamor of the ocean and the moan of the wind, a confused mingling of nature's voices. The listener, however, got no echoing answer to his own call.

The mele does not stick to the unities as we understand them. The poets of old Hawaii felt at liberty to run to the ends of their earth; and the auditor must allow his imagination to be transported suddenly from one island to another; in this case, first from Wailua to

[p. 193]

[paragraph continues] Mana on the same island, where he is shown the procession of whirling rain clouds of Eleao (verse 7). Thence the poet carries him to Honuapo, Hawaii, and shows him the waves dashing against the ocean-walls and the clashing of the palm-fronds of Paiaha'a in the wind.

The scene shifts back to Kauai, and one stands with the poet looking down on a piece of ocean where the people are wont to disport themselves. (Maka-iwa, not far from Ka-ipu-ha'a, is said to be such a place.) Verses 12 to 19 in the Hawaiian (13 to 21 in the translation) describe the spirited scene.

It is somewhat difficult to determine whether the Kauna mentioned in the next poem is the name of the woman or of the stormy cape. In the mind of a Hawaiian poet the inanimate and the animate are often tied so closely together in thought and in speech as to make it hard to decide which is intended.

Mele

Ike ia Kauna-wahine, Makani Ka-u,
 He umauma i pa ia e ka Moa'e,
 E ka makani o-maka o Unulau.
 Lau ka wahine kaili-pua o Paia,
 5 Alualu puhala o ka Milo-pae-kanaka, e-e-e-e!
 He kanaka ke koa no ka ehu ahiahi,
 O ia nei ko ka ehu kakahiaka--
 O maua no, me ka makua o makou.
 Ua ike 'a!

[Translation]

Song

Behold Kauna, that sprite of windy Ka-u,
 Whose bosom is slapped by the Moa'e-ku,
 And that eye-smiting wind Unulau--
 Women by hundreds filch the bloom
 5 Of Paia, hunt fruit of the hala, a-ha!
 That one was the gallant, at evening,
 This one the hero of love, in the morning--
 'Twas our guardian I had for companion.
 Now you see it, a-ha!

This mele, based on a story of amorous rivalry, relates to a contest which arose between two young women of rank regarding the favors of that famous warrior and general of Kamehameha, Kalaimoku, whom the successful intrigante described as ka makua o makua (verse 8), our father, i. e., our guardian. The point of view is that of the victorious intrigante, and in speaking of her defeated rival she uses the ironical language of the sixth verse, He kanaka ke koa no ka ehu ahiahi, meaning that her opponent's chance of success faded with the evening twilight, whereas her own success was crowned with the

[p. 194]

glow of morning, O ia nei ko ka ehu kakahiaka (verse 7). The epithet kanaka hints ironically that her rival is of lower rank than herself, though in reality the rank of her rival may have been superior to her own.

The language, as pointed out by the author's informant, is marked with an elegance that stamps it as the product of a courtly circle.

Mele

E oe mauna i ka ohu,
 Kaha ka leo o ka ohi'a;
 Auwe! make au i ke ahi a mau
 A ka luahine [*a] moe nana,
 5 A papa enaena, wai hau,
 A wa'a kau-hi. [*b]
 Haila pepe [*c] mua me pepe waena,
 O pepe ka muimui:
 O kiele [*c] i na ulu [*c]
 10 Ka makaha kai kea
 O Niheu [*d] kolohe;
 Ka makaha kai kea!
 Eli-eli, kau mai.

[Translation]

Song

Ho! mountain of vapor-puffs,
 Now groans the mountain-apple tree.
 Alas! I burn in this deathless flame,
 That is fed by the woman who snores
 5 On a lava plate, now hot, now cold;
 Now 'tis a canoe full-rigged for sea:
 There are seats at the bow, amidships, abaft;
 Baggage and men--all is aboard.

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XXI
 PALA-PALAI FERNS

 

[p. 195]

And now the powerful thrust of the paddle,
 10 Making mighty swirl of wat'ry yeast,
 As of Niheu, the mischief-maker
 A mighty swirl of the yeasty wave.
 In heaven's name, come aboard!

After the death of Lohiau, his best friend, Paoa, came before Pele determined to invite death by pouring out the vials of his wrath on the head of the goddess. The sisters of Pele sought to avert the impending tragedy and persuaded him to soften his language and to forego mere abuse. Paoa, a consummate actor, by his dancing, which has been perpetuated in the hula Pele, and by his skillfully-worded prayer-songs, one of which is given above, not only appeased Pele, but won her.

The piece next appearing is also a song that was a prayer, and seems to have been uttered by the same mouth that groaned forth the one given above.

It does not seem necessary to take the language of the mele literally. The sufferings that the person in the mele describes in the first person, it seems to the author, may be those of his friend Lohiau; and the first person is used for literary effect.

Mele [*a]

Aole e mao ka ohu:
 Auwe! make au i ke ahi a mau
 A ka wahine moe nana,
 A papa ena-ena,
 5 A wa'a kau-hi.
 Ilaila pepe mua me pepe waena,
 O pepe ka mu'imu'i,
 O lei'na kiele,
 Kau-meli-eli; [*b]
 10 Ka maka kakahi kea
 O Niheu kolohe--
 Ka maka kaha-kai kea.
 Eli-eli, kau mai!

[Translation]

Song

Alas, there's no stay to the smoke:
 I must die mid the quenchless flame--
 Deed of the hag who snores in her sleep,
 Bedded on lava plate oven-hot.
 5 Now it takes the shape of canoe;

[p. 196]

Seats at the bow and amidships,
 And the steersman sitting astern;
 Their stroke stirs the ocean to foam--
 The myth-craft, Kau-meli-eli!
 10 Now look, the white gleam of an eye--
 It is Niheu, the turbulent one--
 An eye like the white sandy shore.
 Amen, possess me!

The mele now to be given has the form of a serenade. Etiquette forbade anyone to wake the king by rude touch, but it was permissible for a near relative to touch his feet. When the exigencies of business made it necessary for a messenger, a herald, or a courtier to disturb the sleeping monarch, he took his station at the king's feet and recited a serenade such as this:

Mele Koala (no ka Hula Pele)

E ala, e Kahiki-ku; [*a]
 E ala, e Kahiki-moe; [*a]
 E ala, e ke apapa nu'u: [*b]
 E ala, e ke apapa lani. [*b]
 5 Eia ka hoala nou, e ka lani [*c] la, e-e!
 E ala oe!

E ala, ua ao, ua malamalama.
 Aia o Kape'a ma, [*d] la, i-luna;
 Ua hiki mai ka maka o Unulau: [*e]

[p. 197]

10 Ke hoolale mai la ke kupa holowa'a o Ukumehame, [*a]
 Ka lae makani kaohi-wa'a o Papawai, [*b]
 Ka lae makani o Anahenahe la, e-e!
 E ala oe!

E ala, ua no, ua malamalama;
 15 Ke o a'e la ke kukuna o ka La i ka ili o ke kai;
 Ke hahai a'e la, e like me Kumukahi [*c]
 E hoaikane ana me Makanoni;
 Ka papa o Apua, ua lohi i ka La.
 E ala oe!

20 E ala, ua ao, ua malamalama;
 Ke kau aku la ka La i Kawaihoa
 Ke kolii aku la ka La i ka ili o ke kai;
 Ke anai mai la ka iwa anai-maka o Lei-no-ai,
 I ka luna o Maka-iki-olea,
 25 I ka poli wale o Lehua la.
 E ala oe!

[p. 198]

[Translation]

Song

Awake now, Kahiki-ku;
 Awake now, Kahiki-moe;
 Awake, ye gods of lower grade;
 Awake, ye gods of heavenly rank.
 5 A serenade to thee, O king.
 Awake thee!

Awake, it is day, it is light;
 The Day-god his arrows is shooting,
 Unulau his eye far-flashing,
 10 Canoe-men from Uku-me-hame
 Are astir to weather the windy cape,
 The boat-baffling cape, Papa-wai,
 And the boisterous A-nahe-nahe.
 Awake thee!

15 Awake, day is come and the light;
 The sun-rays stab the skin of the deep;
 It pursues, as did god Kumu-kahi
 To companion with god Maka-noni;
 The plain of Apua quivers with heat.
 20 Awake thee!

Awake, 'tis day, 'tis light;
 The sun stands over Waihoa,
 Afloat on the breast of ocean;
 The iwa of Leinoai is preening
 25 On the cliff Maka-iki-olea,
 On the breast of naked Lehua.
 Awake thee! awake!

The following is a prayer said to have been used at the time of awa-drinking. When given in the hula, the author is informed, its recitation was accompanied by the sound of the drum.

He Pule no Pele

PALE I

O Pele la ko'u akua:
 Miha ka lani, miha ka honua.
 Awa iku, awa lani;
 Kai awaawa, ka awa nui a Hiiaka,
 5 I kua i Mauli-ola; [*a] [p. 199]
 He awa kapu no na wahine.
 E kapu!

Ka'i kapu kou awa, e Pele a Honua-mea;
 E kala, e Haumea wahine,
 10 O ka wahine i Kilauea,
 Nana i eli a hohonu ka lua
 O Mau-wahine, o Kupu-ena,
 O na wahine i ka inu-hana awa.
 E ola na 'kua malihini! [*a]

PALE II

15 I kama'a-ma'a la i ka pua-lei;
 E loa ka wai apua,
 Ka pii'na i Ku-ka-la-ula; [*b]
 Hoopuka aku i Puu-lena,
 Aina a ke Akua i noho ai.

20 Kanaenae a ke Akua malihini; [*a]
 O ka'u wale iho la no la, o ka leo,
 He leo wale no, e-e!
 E ho-i!
 Eia ka ai!

[Translation]

A Prayer to Pele

CANTO I

Lo, Pele's the god of my choice:
 Let heaven and earth in silence wait
 Here is awa, potent, sacred,
 Bitter sea, great Hiiaka's root;
 5 'Twas cut at Mauli-ola
 Awa to the women forbidden,
 Let it tabu be!

Exact be the rite of your awa,
 O Pele of the sacred land.

[p. 200]

10 Proclaim it, mother, Haumea,
 Of the goddess of Kilauea;
 She who dug the pit world-deep,
 And Mau-wahine and Kupu-ena,
 Who prepare the awa for drink.
 15 A health to the stranger gods?

CANTO II

Bedeck now the board for the feast;
 Fill up the last bowl to the brim;
 Then pour a draught in the sun-cave
 Shall flow to the mellow haze,
 20 That tints the land of the gods.

All hail to the stranger gods!
 This my offering, simply a voice,
 Only a welcoming voice.
 Turn in!
 25 Lo, the feast!

This prayer, though presented in two parts or cantos, is really one, its purpose being to offer a welcome, kanaenae, to the feast and ceremony to the gods who had a right to expect that courtesy.

One more mele of the number specially used in the hula Pele:

Mele

Nou paha e, ka inoa
 E ka'i-ka'i ku ana,
 A kau i ka nuku.
 E hapa-hapai a'e,
 5 A pa i ke kihi
 O Ki-lau-e-a.
 Ilaila ku'u kama,
 O Ku-nui-akea. [*a]
 Hookomo a'e iloko
 10 A o Hale-ma'u-ma'u; [*b]
 A ma-u na pu'u
 E ola-ola nei.
 E kulipe'e nui ai-ahua. [*c]
 E Pele, e Pele!
 15 E Pele, e Pele!
 Huai'na! huai'na!
 Ku ia ka lani,
 Pue a huila!

[p. 201]

[Translation]

Song

Yours, doubtless, this name,
 Which people are toasting
 With loudest acclaim.
 Now raise it, aye raise it,
 5 Till it reaches the niches
 Of Ki-lau-e-a.
 Enshrined is there my kinsman,
 Ku-nui-akea.
 Then give it a place
 10 In the temple of Pele;
 And a bowl for the throats
 That are croaking with thirst.
 Knock-kneed eater of land,
 O Pele, god Pele!
 15 O Pele, god Pele!
 Burst forth now! burst forth!
 Launch a bolt from the sky!
 Let thy lightnings fly!

When this poem [*a] first came into the author's hands, though attracted by its classic form and vigorous style, he could not avoid being repelled by an evident grossness. An old Hawaiian, to whom he stated his objections, assured him that the mele was innocent of all bad intent, and when the offensive word was pointed out he protested that it was an interloper. The substitution of the right word showed that the man was correct. The offense was at once removed. This set the whole poem in a new light and it is presented with satisfaction. The mele is properly a name-song, mele-inoa. The poet represents some one as lifting a name to his mouth for praise and adulation. He tells him to take it to Kilauea--that it may reecho, doubtless, from the walls of the crater.

Footnotes

^189:a Olewa. Said to be the name of a wooded region high up on the mountain of Kauai. It is here treated as if it meant the heavens or the blue ether. Its origin is the same with the word lewa, the upper regions of the air.

^189:b O Ahu. In this instance the article still finds itself disunited from its substantive. To-day we have Oahu and Ola'a.

^189:c Kau. The summer; time of warm weather; the growing season.

^190:a The figure in the second and third verses, of waves from Kahiki (nalu mai Kahiki) beating against the front of Kilauea (Po-po'i aku la i ke alo o Kilauea), seems to picture the trampling of the multitude splashing the mire as if it were, waves of ocean.

^190:b Kukuena. There is some uncertainty as to who this character was; probably the same as Haumea, the mother of Pele.

^191:a For an account of the Makahiki idol see Hawaiian Antiquities, p. 159, by David Maio; translated by N. B. Emerson, A. M., M. D., Honolulu, Hawaiian Gazette Company (Limited), 1903.

^191:b Pou hale. The main post of a house, which is here intended, was the pou-hana; it was regarded with a superstitious reverence.

^191:c A'hu o Ka-u. A reference, doubtless, to the long grass that once covered Ka-u.

^191:d I-ao. A small fish that took short flights in the air.

^192:a Lele kawa. To jump in sport from a height into the water.

^192:b Lele o-o. To leap feet first into the water.

^192:c O-o lele. To dive head first into the water.

^192:d Lele opuhi. The same as pahi'a, to leap obliquely into the water from a height, bending oneself so that the feet come first to the surface.

^192:e Kauna. A woman of Ka-u celebrated for her skill in the hula, also the name of a cape that reaches out into the stormy ocean.

^194:a Pele is often spoken of as ka luahine, the old woman: but she frequently used her power of transformation to appear as a young woman of alluring beauty.

^194:b Lava poured out in plates and folds and coils resembles may diverse things, among others the canoe, wa'a, here characterized as complete in its appointments and ready for launching, kauhi. The words are subtly intended, no doubt, to convey the thought of Pele's readiness to launch on the voyage of matrimony.

^194:c Pepe, a seat; kiele, to paddle; and ulu, a shortened form of the old word oulu, meaning a paddle, are archaisms now obsolete.

^194:d Niheu. One of the mythological heroes of an old-time adventure, in which his elder brother Kana, who had the form of a long rope, played the principal part. This one enterprise of their life in which they joined forces was for the rescue of their mother, Hina, who had been  by a marauding chief and carried from her home in Hilo to the bold headland of Haupu, Molokai. Niheu is generally stigmatized as kolohe (verse 11), mischievous, for no other reason apparently than that he was an active spirit, full of courage, given to adventure and heaven-defying audacities, such as put the Polynesian Mawi and the Greek Prometheus in had odor with the gods of their times. One of these offensive actions was Niheu's theft of a certain ulu, breadfruit, which one of the gods rolled with a noise like that of thunder in the underground caverns of the southern regions of the world. Niheu is represented as a great sport, an athlete, skilled in all the games of his people. The worst that could be said of him was that he had small regard for other people's rights and that he was slow to pay his debts of honor.

^195:a The remarks on pp. <page 194> and <page 195> regarding the mele on <page 194> are mostly applicable to this mele.

^195:b Kau-meli-eli. The name of the double canoe which brought a company of the gods from the lands of the South--Kukulo o Kahiki--to Hawaii. Hawaiian myths refer to several migrations of the gods to Hawaii; one of them is that described in the mele given on <page 187>, the first mele in this chapter.

^196:a Hawaiians conceived of the dome of heaven as a solid structure supported by walls that rested on the earth's plain. Different names were given to different sections of the wall. Kahiki-ku and Kahiki-moe were names applied to certain of these sections. It would, however, be too much to expect any Hawaiian, however intelligent and well versed in old lore, to indicate the location of these regions.

^196:b The words apapa nu'u and apapa lani, which convey to the mind of the author the picture of a series of terraced plains or steppes--no doubt the original meaning--here mean a family or order of gods, not of the highest rank, at or near the head of which stood Pele. Apropos of this subject the following lines have been quoted:

Hanau ke apapa nu'u:
 Hanau ke apapa lani;
 Hanau Pele, ka hihi'o na lani.

[Translation]

Begotten were the gods of graded rank;
 Begotten were the gods of heavenly rank;
 Begotten was Pele, quintessence of heaven.

This same expression was sometimes used to mean an order of chiefs, alii. Apapa lani was also used to mean the highest order of gods, Ku, Kane, Kanaloa, Lono. The kings also were gods, for which reason this expression at times applied to the alii of highest rank, those, for instance, who inherited the rank of niau-pi'o or of wohi.

^196:c Lani. Originally the heavens, came to mean king. chief, alii.

^196:d There is a difference of opinion as to the meaning of Kape'a ma. After hearing diverse opinions the author concludes that it refers to the rays of the sun that precede its rising--a Greek idea.

^196:e Unulau. A name for the trade-wind which, owing to the conformation of the land, often sweeps down with great force through the deep valleys that seam the mountains of west Maui between Lahaina and Maalaea bay; such a wind squall was called a mumuku.

^197:a Ukumehame. The name of a deep valley on west Maui in the region above described.

^197:b Papawai. The principal cape on west Maui between Lahaina and Maalaea bay.

^197:c Kumu-kahi. A cape in Puna, the easternmost part of Hawaii; by some said to be the sun's wife, and the object of his eager pursuit after coming out of his eastern gate Ha'eha'e. The name was also applied to a pillar of stone that was planted on the northern border of this cape. Standing opposite to it, on the southern side, was the monolith Makanoni. In summer the sun in its northern excursion inclined, as the Hawaiians noted, to the side of Kumukahi, while in the season of cool weather, called Makalii, it swung in the opposite direction and passed over to Makanoni. The people of Puna accordingly said, "The sun has passed over to Makanoni," or "The sun has passed over to Kumukahi," as the case might be. These two pillars are said to be of such a form as to suggest the thought that they are phallic emblems, and this conjecture is strengthened by consideration of the tabus connected with them and of the religious ceremonies  before them. The Hawaiians speak of them as pohaku eho, which, the author believes, is the name given to a phallus, and describe them as plain uncarved pillars.

These stones were set up in very ancient times and are said to have been tabu to women at the times of their infirmity. If a woman climbed upon them at such a period or even set foot upon the platform on which one of them stood she was put to death. Another stringent tabu forbade anyone to perform an office of nature while his face was turned toward one of these pillars.

The language of the mele, Ke hahai ae la e like me Kumukahi (verse 16), implies that the sun chased after Kumukahi. Apropos of this is the following quotation from an article on the phallus in Chambers's Encyclopedia: "The common myth concerning it [the phallus] was the story of some god deprived of his power of generation--an allusion to the sun, which in autumn loses its fructifying influence."

In modern times there seems to have grown up a curious mixture of traditions about these two stones, in which the old have become overlaid with new superstitions; and these last in turn seem to be dying out. They are now vaguely remembered as relics of old demigods, petrified forms of ancient kupua. [*1] Fishermen, it is said, not long ago offered sacrifices to them, hoping thus to purchase good luck. Any offense against them, such as that by women, above mentioned, or by men, was atoned for by offering before these ancient monuments the first fish that came to the fisherman's hook or net.

Mention of the name Kumu-kahi to a Hawaiian versed in ancient lore called up to his memory the name of Pala-moa as his associate. The account this old man gave of them was that they were demigods much worshiped and feared for their power and malignity. They were reputed to be cannibals on the sly, and, though generally appearing in human form, were capable of various metamorphoses, thus eluding detection. They were believed to have the power of taking possession of men through spiritual obsession, as a result of which the obsessed ones were enabled to heal sickness as well as to cause it, to reveal secrets, and to inflict death, thus terrifying people beyond measure. The names of these two demigods, especially that of Palamoa, are to this day appealed to by practitioners of the black arts.

^197:1 The Hawaiian alphabet had no letter s. The Hawaiians indicated the plural by prefixing the particle na.

^198:a Mauli-ola. A god of health; perhaps also the name of a place. The same word also was applied to the breath of life, or to the physician's power of healing. In the Maori tongue the word mauri, corresponding to mauli, means life. the seat of life. In Samoan the word mauli means heart. "Sneeze, living heart " (Tihe mauri ora), says the Maori mother to her infant when it sneezes. For this bit of Maori lore acknowledgment is due to Mr. S. Percy Smith, of New Zealand.

^199:a According to one authority, at the close of the first canto the stranger gods--akua malihini--who consisted of that multitude of godlings called the Kini Akua, took their departure from the ceremony, since they did not belong to the Pele family. Internal evidence, however, the study of the prayer itself in its two parts, leads the writer to disagree with this authority. Other Hawaiians of equally deliberate judgment support him in this opinion. The etiquette connected with ceremonious awa-drinking, which the Samoans of to-day still maintain in full form, long ago died out in Hawaii. This etiquette may never have been cultivated here to the same degree as in its home, Samoa; but this poem is evidence that the ancient Hawaiians paid greater attention to it than they of modern times. The reason for this decline of ceremony must be sought for in the mental and esthetic make-up of the Hawaiian people; it was not due to any lack of fondness in the Hawaiian for awa as a beverage or as an intoxicant. It is no help to beg the question by ascribing the decline of this etiquette to the influence of social custom. To do so would but add one more link to the chain that binds cause to effect. The Hawaiian mind was not favorable to the observance of this sort of etiquette; it did not afford a soil fitted to nourish such an artificial growth.

^199:b The meaning of the word Ku-ka-la-ula presented great difficulty and defied all attempts at translation until the suggestion was made by a bright Hawaiian, which was adopted with satisfaction, that it probably referred to that state of dreamy mental exaltation which comes with awa-intoxication. This condition, like that of frenzy, of madness, and of idiocy, the Hawaiian regarded as a divine possession.

^200:a Kalakaua, for whom all these fine words are intended, could no more claim kinship with Ku-nui-akea, the son of Kau-i-ke-aouli, than with Julius Caesar.

^200:b Hale-mau-mau. Used figuratively of the mouth, whose hairy fringe--moustache and beard--gives it a fancied resemblance to the rough lava pit where Pele dwelt. The figure, to us no doubt obscure, conveyed to the Hawaiian the idea of trumpeting the name and making it famous.

^200:c E kuli-pe'e nui ai-ahua. Pele is here figured as an old, infirm woman, crouching and crawling along; a character and attitude ascribed to her, no doubt, from the fancied resemblance of a lava flow, which, when in the form of a-a, rolls and tumbles along over the surface of the ground in a manner suggestive of the motions and attitude of a palsied crone.

^201:a It is said to be the work of a hula-master, now some years dead, by the name of Namakeelua.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 202]

  

XXV.--THE HULA PA'I-UMAUMA

The hula pa'i-umauma--chest-beating hula--called also hula Palani, [*a] was an energetic dance, in which the actors, who were also the singers, maintained a kneeling position, with the buttocks at times resting on the heels. In spite of the restrictions imposed by this attitude, they managed to put a spirited action into the performance; there were vigorous gestures, a frequent smiting of the chest with the open hand, and a strenuous movement of the pelvis and lower part of the body called ami. This consisted of rhythmic motions, sidewise, backward, forward, and in a circular or elliptical orbit, all of which was done with the precision worthy of an acrobat, an accomplishment attained only after long practice. It was a hula of classic celebrity, and was performed without the accompaniment of instrumental music.

In the mele now to be given the poet calls up a succession of pictures by imagining himself in one scenic position after another, beginning at Hilo and passing in order from one island to another--omitting, however, Maui--until he finds himself at Kilauea, an historic and traditionally interesting place on the windward coast of the garden-island, Kauai. The order of travel followed by the poet forbids the supposition that the Kilauea mentioned is the great caldera of the volcano on Hawaii in which Pele had her seat.

It is useless to regret that the poet did not permit his muse to tarry by the way long enough to give us something more than a single eyeshot at the quickly shifting scenes which unrolled themselves before him, that so he might have given us further reminiscence of the lands over which his Pegasus bore him. Such completeness of view, however, is alien to the poesy of Hawaii.

[p. 203]

Mele

A Hilo au e, hoolulu ka lehua; [*a]
 A Wai-luku la, i ka Lua-kanaka; [*b]
 A Lele-iwi [*c] la, au i ke kai;
 A Pana-ewa, [*d] i ka ulu-lehua;
 5 A Ha-ili, [*e] i ke kula-manu;
 A , i ke ala-kahi,
 Ke kula o Kala'e, [*f] wela i ka la;
 Mauna-loa [*g] la, Ka-lua-ko'i, [*h] e;
 Na hala o Nihoa, [*i] he mapuna la;
 10 A Ko'i-ahi [*j] au, ka maile lau-lii la;
 A Makua [*k] la, i ke one opio-pio, [*l]
 E holu ana ke kai o-lalo;
 He wahine a-po'i-po'i [*m] e noho ana,
 A Kilauea, [*n] i ke awa ula.

[Translation]

Song

At Hilo I rendezvoused with the lehua;
 By the Wailuku stream, near the robber-den;
 Off cape Lele-iwi I swam in the ocean;
 At Pana-ewe, mid groves of lehua;
 5 At Ha-ili, a forest of flocking birds.
 On Molokai I travel its one highway;
 I saw the plain of Kala'e quiver with heat,
 And beheld the ax-quarries of Manna-loa.
 Ah, the perfume Nihoa's pandanus exhales!
 10 Ko'i-ahi, home of the small-leafed maile;
 And now at Makua, lo, its virgin sand,
 While ocean surges and scours on below.
 Lo, a woman crouched on the shore by the sea,
 In the brick-red bowl, Kilauea's bay.

[p. 204]

In the next mele to be given it is evident that, though the motive is clearly Hawaiian, it has lost something of the rugged simplicity and impersonality that belonged to the most archaic style, and that it has taken on the sentimentality of a later period.

Mele

E Manono la, e-a,
 E Manono la, e-a,
 Kau ka ope-ope;
 Ka ulu hala la, e-a,
 5 Ka uluhe la, e-a.
 Ka uluhe la, e-a,
 A hiki Pu'u-nana,
 Hali'i punana
 No huli mai.

10 Huli mai o-e la;
 Moe kaua;
 Hali'i punana
 No huli mai.
 Huli mai o-e la;
 15 Moe kaua;
 Moe aku kaua;
 O ka wai welawela,
 O ka papa lohi
 O Mau-kele:

20 Moe aku kaua;
 O ka wai welawela,
 O ka papa lohi
 O Mau-kele.
 A kele, a kele
 25 Kou manao la, e-a;
 A kele, a kele
 Kou manao la, e-a.

[Translation]

Song

Come now, Manono,
 Come, Manono, I say,
 Take up the burden;
 Through groves of pandanus
 5 And wild stag-horn fern,
 Wearisome fern, lies our way.
 Arrived at the hill-top,
 We'll smooth out the nest,
 That we may snug close.

10 Turn now to me, dear,
 While we rest here.
 Make we a little nest,
 That we may draw near.
 This way your face, dear, [p. 205]
 15 While we rest here.
 Rest thou and I here,
 Near the warm, warm water
 And the smooth lava-plate
 Of Mau-kele.

20 Rest thou and I here.
 By the water so warm,
 And the lava-plate smooth
 Of Mau-kele.
 Little by little
 25 Your thoughts will be mine.
 Little by little
 Your thoughts I'll divine.

Manono was the name of the brave woman, wife of Ke-kua-o-ka-lani, who fell in the battle of Kuamo'o, in Kona, Hawaii, in 1819, fighting by the side of her husband. They died in support of the cause of law and order, of religion and tabu, the cause of the conservative party in Hawaii, as opposed to license and the abolition of all restraint.

The uluhe (verses 5, 6) is the stag-horn fern, which forms a matted growth most obstructive to woodland travel. The burden Manono is asked to bear, what else is it but the burden of life, in this case lightened by love?

Whether there is any connection between the name of the hula--breast-beating--and the expression in the first verse of the following mele is more than the author can say.

Mele

Ka-hipa, [*a] na waiu olewa,
 Lele ana, ku ka mahiki akea;
 Keke ka niho o Lani-wahine; [*b]
 Opi ke a lalo, ke a luna.
 5 A hoi aku au i Lihue,
 Nana aku ia Ewa;
 E au ana o Miko-lo-lou, [*c]

[p. 206]

A pahu ha naau no Pa-pi'-o. [*a]
 A pa'a ka mano.
 10 Hopu i ka lima.
 Ai pakahi, e, i ka nahele, [*b]
 Alawa a'e ua ulu kani o Leiwalo.
 E noho ana Kolea-kani [*c]
 Ka pii'na i ka Uwa-lua;
 15 Oha-oha lei i ka makani.

[Translation]

Song

'Tis Kahipa, with pendulous breasts;
 How they swing to and fro, see-saw!
 The teeth of Lani-wahine gape--
 A truce to upper and lower jaw!
 5 From Lihue we look upon Ewa;
 There swam the monster, Miko-lo-lou,
 His bowels torn out by Pa-pi'-o.
 The shark was caught in grip of the hand.
 Let each one stay himself with wild herbs,
 10 And for comfort turn his hungry eyes
 To the rustling trees of Lei-walo.
 Hark! the whistling-plover--her old-time seat,
 As one climbs the hill from Echo-glen,
 And cools his brow in the breeze.

The thread of interest that holds together the separate pictures composing this mele is slight. It will, perhaps, give to the whole a more definite meaning if we recognize that it is made up of snapshots at various objects and localities that presented themselves to one passing along the old road from Kahuku, on Oahu, to the high land which gave the tired traveler his first distant view of Honolulu before he entered the winding canyon of Moana-lua.

Footnotes

^202:a Palani, French, so called at Moanalua because a woman who was its chief exponent was a Catholic, one of the "poe Palani." Much odium has been laid to the charge of the hula on account of the supposed indecency of the motion termed ami. There can be no doubt that the ami was at times used to represent actions unlit for public view, and so fir the blame is just. But the ami did not necessarily nor always represent obscenity, and to this extent the hula has been unjustly maligned.

^203:a Lehua. A tree that produces the tufted scarlet flower that is sacred to the goddess of the hula, Laka.

^203:b Lua-kanaka. A deep and dangerous crossing at the Wailuku river, which is said to have been the cause of death by drowning of very many. Another story is that it was once the hiding place of robbers.

^203:c Lele-iwi. The name of a cape at Hilo, near the mouth of the Wai-luku river--water of destruction.

^203:d Pana-ewa. A forest region in Ola'a much mentioned in myth and poetry.

^203:e Haili. A region in Ola'a. a famous resort for bird-catchers.

^203:f Ka-la'e. A beautiful place in the uplands back of Kaunakakai, on Molokai.

^203:g Mauna-loa. The mountain in the western part of Molokai.

^203:h Ka-lua-ko'i. A place on this same Mauna-loa where was quarried stone suitable for making the Hawaiian ax.

^203:i Nihoa. A small land near Kalaupapa, Molokai, where was a grove of fine pandanus trees.

^203:j Ko'i-ahi. A small valley in the district of Waianae, Oahu, where was the home of the small-leafed maile.

^203:k Makua. A valley in Waianae.

^203:l One opio-pio. Sand freshly smoothed by an ocean wave.

^203:m Apo'i-po'i. To crouch for the purpose, perhaps, of screening oneself from view, as one, for instance, who is naked and desires to escape observation.

^203:n Kilauea. There is some doubt whether this is the Kilauea on Kauai or a little place of the same name near cape Kaena, the westernmost point of Oahu.

^205:a Ka-hipa. Said to be the name of a mythological character, now applied to a place in Kahuku where the mountains present the form of two female breasts.

^205:b Lani-wahine. A benignant mo'o, or water-nymph, sometimes taking the form of a woman, that is said to have haunted the lagoon of Uko'a, Waialua, Oahu. There is a long story about her.

^205:c Miko-lo-lou. A famous man-eating shark-god whose home was in the waters of Hana, Maui. He visited Oahu and was hospitably received by Ka-ahu-pahau and Ka-hi'u-ka, sharks of the Ewa lagoons. who had a human ancestry and were on friendly terms with their kindred. Miko-lo-lou, when his hosts denied him human flesh, helped himself. In the conflict that rose the Ewa sharks joined with their human relatives and friends on land to put an end to Miko-lo-lou. After a fearful contest they took him and reduced his body to ashes. A dog, however, snatched and ate a portion--some say the tongue, some the tail--and another part fell into the water. This was reanimated by the spirit of the dead shark and grew to be a monster of the same size and power as the one deceased. Miko-lo-lou now gathered his friends and allies from all the waters and made war against the Ewa sharks, but was routed.

^206:a Pa-pi'-o. A shark of moderate size, but of great activity, that fought against Miko-lo-lou. It entered his enormous mouth, passed down into his stomach, and there played havoc with the monster, eating its way out.

^206:b Ai pakahi, e, i to nahele. The company represented by the poet to he journeying pass through an uninhabited region barren of food. The poet calls upon them to satisfy their hunger by eating of the edible wild herbs--they abound everywhere in Hawaii--at the same time representing them as casting longing glances on the breadfruit trees of Leiwalo. This was a grove in the lower levels of Ewa that still survives.

^206:c Kolea-kani. A female kupua--witch she might be called now--that had the form of a plover. She looked after the thirsty ones who passed along the road. and benevolently showed them where to find water. By her example the people of the district are said to have been induced to give refreshment to travelers who went that way.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 207]

  

XXVI.--THE HULA KU'I MOLOKAI

The hula ku'i Molokai was a variety of the Hawaiian dance that originated on the island of Molokai, probably at a later period than what one would call the classic times. Its performance extended to the other islands. The author has information of its exhibition on the island of its name as late as the last quarter of the nineteenth century. The actors, as they might be called, in this hula were arranged in pairs who faced each other and went through motions similar to those of boxing. This action, ku'i, to smite, gave the name to the performance. The limiting word Molokai was added to distinguish it from another still more modern form of dance called ku'i, which will be described later.

While the performers stood and went through with their motions, marching and countermarching, as they are said to have done, they chanted or recited in recitative some song, of which the following is an example. This they did with no instrumental accompaniment:

He ala kai olohia, [*a]
 He hiwahiwa na ka la'i luahine,
 He me' aloha na'u ka makani hanai-loli, [*b]
 E uwe ana i ke kai pale iliahi.
 5 Kauwa ke aloha i na lehua o Kaana. [*c]
 Pomaikai au i kou aloha e noho nei;
 Ka haluku wale no ia a ka waimaka,
 Me he makamaka puka a la
 Ke aloha i ke kanaka,
 10 E ho-iloli nei i ku'u nui kino.
 Mahea hoi au, a?
 Ma ko oe alo no.

[p. 208]

[Translation]

Song

Precious the gift of heart's-ease,
 A wreath for the cheerful dame;
 So dear to my heart is the breeze
 That murmurs, strip for the ocean.
 5 Love slaves for wreaths from Kaana.
 I'm blest in your love that reigns here;
 It speaks in the fall of a tear--
 The choicest thing in one's life.
 This love for a man by his wife--
 10 It has power to shake the whole frame.
 Ah. where am I now?
 Here, face to your face.

The platitudes of mere sentimentalism, when put into cold print, are not stimulating to the imagination; moods and states of feeling often approaching the morbid, their oral expression needs the reenforcement of voice, tone, countenance, the whole attitude. They are for this reason most difficult of translation and when rendered literally into a foreign speech often become meaningless. The figures employed also, like the watergourds and wine-skins of past generations and of other peoples, no longer appeal to us as familiar objects, but require an effort of the imagination to make them intelligible and vivid to our mental vision. If the translator carries these figures of speech over into his new rendering, they will often demand an explanation on their own account, and will thus fail of their original intent; while if he clothes the thought in some new figure he takes the risk of failing to do justice to the intimate meaning of the original. The force of these remarks will become apparent from an analysis of the prominent figures of speech that occur in the mele.

Mele

He inoa no ka Lani,
 No Nahi-ena-ena;
 A ka luna o wahine.
 Ho'i ka ena a ka makani;
 5 Noho ka la'i i ka malino--
 Makani ua ha-ao;
 Ko ke au i hale, ea.
 Punawai o Mana, [*a]
 Wai ola na ke kupa
 10 A ka ilio nana,
 Hae, nanahu i ke kai;
 Ehu kai nana ka pua,
 Ka pua o ka iliau,

[p. 209]

Ka ohai o Mapepe, [*a]
 15 Ka moena we'u-we'u,
 I ulana ia e ke A'e,
 Ka naku loloa.
 Hea mai o Kawelo-hea, [*b]
 Nawai la, e, ke kapu?
 20 No Nahi-ena-ena.
 Ena na pua i ka wai,
 Wai au o Holei.

[Translation]

Song

A eulogy for the princess,
 For Nahi-ena-ena a name!
 Chief among women!
 She soothes the cold wind with her flame--
 5 A peace that is mirrored in calm,
 A wind that sheddeth rain;
 A tide that flowed long ago;
 The water-spring of Mana,
 Life-spring for the people,
 10 A fount where the lapping dog
 Barks at the incoming wave,
 Drifting spray on the bloom
 Of the sand-sprawling ili-au
 And the scarlet flower of ohai,
 15 On the wind-woven mat of wild grass,
 Long naku, a springy mattress.
 The spout-horn, Kawelo-hea,
 Asks, Who of right has the tabu?
 The princess Nahi-ena-ena!
 20 The flowers glow in the pool,
 The bathing pool of Holei!

This mele inoa--name-song or eulogy--was composed in celebration of the lamented princess, Nahienaena, who, before she was misled by evil influences, was a most attractive and promising character. She was the daughter of Keopuolani and younger sister of Kamehameha III, and came to her untimely death in 1836. The name was compounded from the words na, the, ahi, fires, and enaena, hot, a meaning which furnishes the motive to the mele.

Footnotes

^207:a Kai olohia. A calm and tranquil sea. This expression has gained a poetic vogue that almost makes it pass current as a single word, meaning tranquillity, calmness of mind. As thus explained. it is here translated by the expression "heart's-ease."

^207:b Makani hanai-loli. A wind so gentle as not to prevent the beche de mer (loli), sea-anemones, and other marine slugs from coming out of their holes to feed. A similar figure is used in the next line in the expression kai pale iliahi. The thought is that the calmness of the ocean invites one to strip and plunge in for a bath.

^207:c Kauwa ke aloha i na lehua o Kaana. Kaana is said to be a hill on the road from Keaau to Olaa, a spot where travelers were wont to rest and where they not infrequently made up wreaths of the scarlet lehua bloom which there abounded. It took a large number of lehua flowers to suffice for a wreath, and to bind them securely to the fillet that made them a garland was a work demanding not only artistic skill but time and patience. If a weary traveler, halting at Kaana, employed his time of rest in plaiting flowers into a wreath for some loved one, there would be truth as well as poetry in the saying, "Love slaves for the lehuas of Kaana."

^208:a Punawai o Mana. A spring of water at Honuapo, Hawaii, which bubbled up at such a level that the ocean covered it at high tide.

^209:a Ka ohai o Mapepe. A beautiful flowering shrub, also spoken of as ka ohai o Papi'o-huli, said to have been brought from Kahiki by Namaka-o-kaha'i.

^209:b Kawelo-hea. A blowhole or spouting horn, also at Honuapo, through which the ocean at certain times sent up a column of spray or of water. After the volcanic disturbance of 1868 this spouting horn ceased action. The rending force of the earthquakes must have broken up and choked the subterranean channel through which the ocean had forced its way.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 210]

  

XXVII.--THE HULA KIELEI

The hula ki-e-lei, or ki-le-lei, was a performance of Hawaii's classic times. and finds mention as such in the professedly imperfect list of hulas given by the historian David Malo. [*a] It was marked by strenuous bodily action, gestures with feet and hands, and that vigorous exercise of the pelvis and body termed ami, the chief feature of which was a rotation of the pelvis in circles and ellipses, which is not to be regarded as an effort to portray sexual attitudes. It was a performance in which the whole company stood and chanted the mele without instrumental accompaniment.

The sacrifice offered at the kuahu in connection with the production of this hula consisted of a black pig, a cock of the color termed ula-hiwa--black pointed with red--a white hen, and awa. According to some authorities the offerings deemed appropriate for the sacrifice that accompanied each hula varied with the hula, but was definitely established for each variety of hula. The author's studies, however, lead him to conclude that, whatever may have been the original demands of the gods, in the long run they were not over-particular and were not only willing to put up with, but were well pleased so long as the offering contained, good pork or fish and strong awa.

Mele

Ku piliki'i Hanalei-lehua, [*b] la;
 Kao'o [*c] 'luna o ka naele, [*d] la;
 Ka Pili-iki i ka Hua-moa, la;
 E ka mauna o ke a'a lewalewa [*e] la.
 5 A lewa ka hope o ko'u hoa, la,

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XXII
 AWA-PUHI, A HAWAIIAN GINGER
 (ZINGIBER ZERUMBET)

 

[p. 211]

A ko-u ka hope o ke kolea, la--
 Na u'i elua [*a]
 Ki-ki'i ka ua i ka nana keia, la. [*b]

[Translation]

Song

Perilous, steep, is the climb to Hanalei woods;
 To walk canny footed over its bogs;
 To balance oneself on its ledges,
 And toil up ladder of hanging roots.
 5 The bulk of my guide overhangs me,
 His loins are well-nigh exhausted;
 Two beautiful shapes!
 'Neath this bank I crouch sheltered from rain.

At first blush this mele seems to be the account of a perilous climb through that wild mountainous region that lies back of Hanalei, Kauai, a region of tangled woods, oozy steeps, fathomless bogs, narrow ridges, and overhanging cliffs that fall away into profound abysses, making such an excursion a most precarious adventure. This is what appears on the surface. Hawaiian poets, however, did not indulge in landscape-painting for its own sake; as a rule, they had some ulterior end in view, and that end was the portrayal of some primal human passion, ambition, hate, jealousy, love, especially love. Guided by this principle, one asks what uncouth or romantic love adventure this wild mountain climb symbolizes. All the Hawaiians whom the author has consulted on this question deny any hidden meaning to this mele.

Footnotes

^210:a Hawaiian Antiquities, by David Malo; translated by N. B. Emerson, A. M., M. D. Honolulu, the Hawaiian Gazette Company (Limited), 1903.

^210:b Hanalei-lehua. A wilderness back of Hanalei valley, Kauai, in which the lehua tree-abounds. The features of this region are as above described.

^210:c Kao'o. To bend down the shrubs and tussocks of grass to furnish solid footing in crossing swampy ground.

^210:d Nae'le. Boggy ground; a swamp, such as pitted the summit of Kauai's central mountain mass, Waialeale.

^210:e A'a lewalewa. Aerial roots such as are put forth by the lehua trees in high altitudes and in a damp climate. They often aid the traveler by furnishing him with a sort of ladder.

^211:a U'i elua. Literally two beauties. One interpreter says the reference is to the arms, with which one pulls himself up; it is here rendered " flanks."

^211:b Ki-ki'i ka ua i ka nana keia, la. The meaning of this passage is obscure. The most plausible view is that this is an exclamation made by one of the two travelers while crouching for shelter under an overhanging bank. This one, finding himself unprotected, exclaims to his companion on the excellence of the shelter he has found, whereupon the second man comes over to share his comfort only to find that he has been hoaxed and that the deceiver has stolen his former place. The language of the text seems a narrow foundation on which to base such an incident. A learned Hawaiian friend, however, finds it all implied in this passage.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

  

XXVIII.--THE HULA MU'U-MU'U

The conception of this peculiar hula originated from a pathetic incident narrated in the story of Hiiaka's journey to bring Prince Lohiau to the court of Pele. , standing with her friend Wahine-oma'o on the heights that overlooked the beach at Kahakuloa, Maui, saw the figure of a woman, maimed as to hands and feet, dancing in fantastic glee on a plate of rock by the ocean. She sang as she danced, pouring out her soul in an ecstacy that ill became her pitiful condition; and as she danced her shadow-dance, for she was but a ghost, poor soul! these were the words she repeated:

Auwe, auwe, mo' ku'u lima!
 Auwe, auwe, mo' ku'u lima!

[Translation]

Alas, alas, maimed are my hands!
 Alas, alas, maimed are my hands!

Wahine-oma'o, lacking spiritual sight, saw nothing of this; but Hiiaka, in downright pity and goodness of impulse, plucked a hala fruit from the string about her neck and threw it so that it fell before the poor creature. who eagerly seized it and with the stumps of her hands held it up to enjoy its odor. At the sight of the woman's pleasure Hiiaka sang:

Le'a wale hoi ka wahine lima-lima ole, wawae ole.
 E ha ana i kana i'a, ku'i-ku'i ana i kana opihi.
 Wa'u-wa'u ana i kana limu, Mana-mana-ia-kalu-e-a.

[Translation]

How pleased is the girl maimed of hand and foot,
 Groping for fish. pounding shells of opihi,
 Kneading her moss. Mana-mana-ia-kalu-ea!

The answer of the desolate creature, grateful for Hiiaka's recognition and kind attention, was that pretty mele appropriated by hula folk as the wreath-song, already given (<page 56>), which will bear repetition:

Ke lei mai la o Ka-ula i ke kai, e-e!
 Ke malamalama o Niihau, na malie.
 A malie, pa ka Inu-wai.
 Ke inu mai la na hala o Naue i ke kai.
 5 No Naue ka hala, no Puna ka wahine,
 No ka lua no i Kilauea.

[p. 213]

[Translation]

Kaula wreathes her brow with the ocean;
 Niihau shines forth in the calm.
 After the calm blows the Inu-wai,
 And the palms of Naue drink of the salt.
 5 From Naue the palm, from Puna the maid,
 Aye, from the pit of Kilauea.

The hula mu'u-mu'u, literally the dance of the maimed, has long been out of vogue, so that the author has met with but one person, and he not a practitioner of the hula, who has witnessed its performance. This was in Puna, Hawaii; the performance was by women only and was without instrumental accompaniment. The actors were seated in a half-reclining position, or kneeling. Their arms, as if in imitation of a maimed person, were bent at the elbows and doubled up, so that their gestures were made with the upper arms. The mele they cantillated went as follows:

Pii ana a-ama, [*a]
 A-ama kai nui,
 Kai pua-lena;
 A-ama, pai-e-a, [*b]
 5 Naholo i ka laupapa.
 Popo'i, popo'i, popo'i!
 Pii mai pipipi, [*c] alealea;
 Noho i ka malua kai
 O-u, [*d] o-i kela.
 10 Ai ka limu akaha-kaha; [*e]
 Ku e, Kahiki, i ke kai nui!
 I ke kai pualena a Kane!
 A ke Akua o ka lua,
 Ua hiki i kai!
 15 Ai humu-humu,
 E lau, e lau e,
 Ka opihi [*f] koele!
 Pa i uka, pa i kai,
 Kahi a ke Akua i pe'e ai.

[p. 214]

20 Pe'e oe a nalo loa;
 Ua nalo na Pele.
 E hua'i e, hua'i e, hua'i,
 O Ku ka mahu nui akea! [*a]
 Iho i kai o ka Milo-holu; [*b]
 25 Auau mehana i ka wai o ke Akua.
 Kea e, ke a mai la
 Ke ahi a ka Wahine.
 E hula e, e hula e, e hula e!
 E hula mai oukou!
 30 Ua noa no Manamana-ia-kalu-e-a,
 Puili kua, puili alo;
 Holo i kai, holo i uka,
 Holo i ka lua o Pele--
 He Akua ai pohaku no Puna.
 35 O Pi, [*c] o Pa, [*c] uhini mai ana,
 O Pele i ka lua.
 A noa!

[Translation]

Black crabs are climbing,
 Crabs from the great sea,
 Sea that is darkling.
 Black crabs and gray crabs
 5 Scuttle o'er the reef-plate.
 Billows are tumbling and lashing,
 Beating and surging nigh.
 Seashells are crawling up;
 And lurking in holes
 10 Are the eels o-u and o-i.
 But taste the moss akahakaha,
 Kahiki! how the sea rages!
 The wild sea of Kane!
 The pit-god has come to the ocean,
 15 All consuming, devouring
 By heaps the delicate shellfish!
 Lashing the mount, lashing the sea,
 Lurking place of the goddess.
 Pray hide yourself wholly;
 20 The Pele women are hidden.
 Burst forth now! burst forth!
 Ku with spreading column of smoke!
 Now down to the grove Milo-holu:
 Bathe in waters warmed by the goddess.
 25 Behold, they burn, behold, they burn!

[p. 215]

The fires of the goddess burn!
 Now for the dance, the dance!
 Bring out the dance made public
 By Mana-mana-ia-kalu-e-a.
 30 Turn about back, turn about face;
 Advance toward the sea;
 Advance toward the land,
 Toward the pit that is Pele's,
 Portentous consumer of rocks in Puna.
 35 Pi and Pa chirp the cricket notes
 Of Pele at home in her pit.
 Have done with restraint!

The imagery and language of this mele mark the hula to which it belonged as a performance of strength.

Footnotes

^213:a A-ama. An edible black crab. When the surf is high it climbs up on the rocks.

^213:b Pai-e-a. An edible gray crab. The favorite time for taking these crabs is when the high tide or surf forces them to leave the water for protection.

^213:c Pipipi. A black seashell (Nerita). With it is often found the alea-lea, a gray shell. These shellfish, like the crabs above mentioned, crawl up the rocks and cliffs during stormy weather.

^213:d O-u. A variety of eel that lurks in holes; it is wont to keep its head lifted. The o-i' (same verse) is an eel that snakes about in the shallow water or on the sand at the edge of the water.

^213:e Akahakaha. A variety of moss. If one ate of this as he gathered it, the ocean at once became tempestuous.

^213:f Opihi. An edible bivalve found in the salt waters of Hawaii. Pele is said to have been very fond of it. There is an old saying, He akua at opihi o Pele--"Pele is a goddess who eats the opihi." In proof of this statement they point to the huge piles of opihi shells that may he found along the coast of Puna, the middens, no doubt, of the old-time people. Koele was a term applied to the opihi that lives well under water, and therefore are delicate eating. Another meaning given to the word koele--opihi koele, line 17--is " heaped up."

^214:a Ku ka mahu nui akea. The Hawaiians have come to treat this phrase as one word, an epithet applied to the god Ku. In the author's translation it is treated as an ordinary phrase.

^214:b Milo-holu. A grove of milo trees that stood, as some affirm, about that natural basin of warm water in Puna, which the Hawaiians called Wai-wela-wela.

^214:c Pi, Pa. These were two imaginary little beings who lived in the crater of Kilauea, and who declared their presence by a tiny shrill piping sound, such, perhaps, as a stick of green wood will make when burning. Pi was active at such times as the fires were retreating, Pa when the fires were rising to a full head.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 216]

  

XXIX.--THE HULA KOLANI

For the purpose of this book the rating of any variety of hula must depend not so much on the grace and rhythm of its action on the stage as on the imaginative power and dignity of its poetry. Judged in this way, the kolani is one of the most interesting and important of the hulas. Its performance seems to have made no attempt at sensationalism, yet it was marked by a peculiar elegance. This must have been due in a measure to the fact that only adepts--olohe--those of the most finished skill in the art. of hula, took part in its presentation. It was a hula of gentle, gracious action, acted and sung while the performers kept a sitting position, and was without instrumental accompaniment. The fact that this hula was among the number chosen for presentation before the king (Kamehameha III) while on a tour of Oahu in the year 1846 or 1847 is emphatic testimony as to the esteem in which it was held by the Hawaiians themselves.

The mele that accompanied this hula when performed for the king's entertainment at Waimanalo was the following:

He ua la, he ua,
 He ua pi'i mai;
 Noe-noe halau,
 Halau lea o Lono.
 5 O lono oe;
 Pa-a-a na pali
 I ka hana a Ikuwa--
 Poha ko-ele-ele.
 A Welehu ka malama,
 10 Noho i Makali'i;
 Li'i-li'i ka hana.
 Aia a e'e-u,
 He eu ia no ka la hiki.
 Hiki mai ka Lani,
 15 Nauweuwe ka honua,
 Ka hana a ke ola'i nui:
 Moe pono ole ko'u po--
 Na niho ai kalakala,
 Ka hana a ka Niuhi
 20 A mau i ke kai loa.
 He loa o ka hiki'na.
 A ua noa, a ua noa.

[p. 217]

[Translation]

Lo, the rain, the rain!
 The rain is approaching;
 The dance-hall is murky,
 The great hall of Lono.
 5 Listen! its mountain walls
 Are stunned with the clatter,
 As when in October,
 Heaven's thunderbolts shatter.
 Then follows Welehu,
 10 The month of the Pleiads.
 Scanty the work then done,
 Save as one's driven.
 Spur comes with the sun,
 When day has arisen.
 15 Now comes the Heaven-born:
 The whole land doth shake,
 As with an earthquake;
 Sleep quits then my bed:
 How shall this maw be fed!
 20 Great maw of the shark--
 Eyes that gleam in the dark
 Of the boundless sea!
 Rare the king's visits to me.
 All is free, all is free!

If the author of this Hawaiian idyl sought to adapt its descriptive imagery to the features of any particular landscape, it would almost seem as if he had in view the very region in which Kauikeaouli found himself in the year 1847 as he listened to the mele of this unknown Hawaiian Theocritus. Under the spell of this poem, one is transported to the amphitheater of Mauna-wili, a valley separated from Waimanalo only by a rampart of hills. At one's back are the abrupt walls of Konahuanni; at the right, and encroaching so as almost to shut in the front, stands the knife-edge of Olomana; to the left range the furzy hills of Ulamawao; while directly to the front, looking north, winds the green valley, whose waters, before reaching the ocean, spread out into the fish-ponds and duck swamps of Kailua. It would seem as if this must have been the very picture the idyllic poet had in mind. This smiling, yet rock-walled, amphitheater was the vast dance-hall of Lono--Halau loa o Lono (verse 4)--whose walls were deafened, stunned (pa-a-a, verse 6), by the tumult and uproar of the multitude that always followed in the wake of a king, a multitude whose night-long revels banished sleep: Moe pono ole ko'u po (verse 17). The poet seems to be thinking of this same hungry multitude in verse 18, niho ai kalakala, literally the teeth that tear the food; also when he speaks of the Niuhi (verse 19), a mythical shark, the glow of whose eyes was said to be visible for a great distance in the ocean, A mau i ke kai loa (verse 20).

[p. 218]

Ikuwa, Welehu, Makali'i (verses 7, 9, and 10). These were months in the Hawaiian year corresponding to a part of September, October and November, and a part of December. The Hawaiian year began when the Pleiades (Makali'i) rose at sunset (about November 20), and was divided into twelve lunar months of twenty-nine or thirty days each. The names of the months differed somewhat in the different parts of the group. The month Ikuwa is said to have been so named from its being the season of thunderstorms. This does not of itself settle the time of its occurrence, for the reason that in Hawaii the procession of the seasons and the phenomena of weather follow no definite order; that is, though electrical storms occur, there is no definite season of thunderstorms.

Maka-li'i (verse 10) was not only the name of a month and the name applied to the Pleiades, but was also a name given the cool, the rainy, season. The name more commonly given this season was Hooilo. The Makahiki period, continuing four months, occurred at this time of the year. This was a season when the people rested from unnecessary labor and devoted themselves to festivals, games, and special religious observances. Allusion is made to this avoidance of toil in the words Li'ili'i ka hana (verse 11).

One can not fail to perceive a vein of gentle sarcasm cropping up in this idyl, softened, however, by a spirit of honest good feeling. Witness the following: Noe-noe (verse 3), primarily meaning cloudy, conveys also the idea of agreeable coolness and refreshment. Again, while the multitude that follows the king is compared to the ravenous man-eating Niuhi (verse 19), the final remark as to the rarity of the king's visits, He loa o ka hiki'na (verse 21), may be taken not only as a salve to atone for the satire, but as a sly self-gratulation that the affliction is not to be soon repeated.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 219]

  

XXX.--THE HULA KOLEA

There was a peculiar class of hulas named after animals, in each one of which the song-maker developed some characteristic of the animal in a fanciful way, while the actors themselves aimed to portray the animal's movements in a mimetic fashion. To this class belongs the hula kolea. [*a] It was a peculiar dance, performed, as an informant asserts, by actors who took the kneeling posture, all being placed in one row and facing in the same direction. There were gestures without stint, arms, heads, and bodies moving in a fashion that seemed to imitate in a far-off way the movements of the bird itself. There was no instrumental accompaniment. to the music. The following mele is one that was given with this hula:

Kolea kai piha! [*b],
 I aha mai nei?
 Ku-nou [*c] mai nei.
 E aha kakou?
 5 E ai kakou. [*d]
 Nohea ka ai? [*e]
 No Kahiki mai. [*e]
 Hiki mai ka Lani, [*e]
 Olina Hawaii,
 10 Mala'ela'e ke ala,
 Nou, e ka Lani.
 Puili pu ke aloha,
 Pili me ka'u manu. [*f]
 Ka puana a ka moe?
 15 Moe oe a hoolana

[p. 220]

Ka hali'a i hiki mai;
 Ooe pu me a'u
 Noho pu i ka wai aliali.
 Hai'na ia ka pauna.
 20 O ka hua o ke kolea, aia i Kahiki. [*a]
 Hiki mai kou aloha, mae'ele au.

[Translation]

A plover at the full of the sea--
 What, pray, is it saying to me?
 It keeps bobbing its noddy.
 To do what would you counsel?
 5 Why, eat its plump body!
 Whence comes the sweet morsel?
 From the land of Kahiki.
 When our sovereign appears,
 Hawaii gathers for play,
 10 Stumble-blocks cleared from the way--
 Fit rule of the king's highway.
 Let each one embrace then his love;
 For me, I'll keep to my dove.
 Hark now, the signal for bed!
 15 Attentive then to love's tread,
 While a wee bird sings in the soul,
 My love comes to me heart-whole--
 Then quaff the waters of bliss.
 Say what is the key to all this?
 20 The plover egg's laid in Kahiki.
 Your love. when it conies, finds me dumb.

The plover--kolea--is a wayfarer in Hawaii; its nest-home is in distant lands, Kahiki. The Hawaiian poet finds in all this some-thing that reminds him of the spirit of love.

Footnotes

^219:a The plover.

^219:b Kolea kai piha. The kolea is a feeder along the shore, his range limited to a narrower strip as the tide rises. The snare was one of the methods used by the Hawaiians for the capture of this bird. In his efforts to escape when snared he made that futile bobbing motion with his head that mast be familiar to every hunter.

^219:c Usually the bobbing motion, ku-nou, is the prelude to flight; but the snared bird can do nothing more, a fact which suggests to the poet the nodding and bowing of two lovers when they meet.

^219:d E ai kakou. Literally, let us eat. While this figure of speech often has a sensual meaning, it does not necessarily imply grossness. Hawaiian literalness and narrowness of vocabulary is not to be strained to the overthrow of poetical sentiment.

^219:e To the question Nohea ka ai?, whence the food? that is, the bird, the poet answers, No Kahiki mai, from Kahiki, from some distant region, the gift of heaven, it may be, as implied in the next line, Hiki mai ka Lani. The coming of the king, or chief, Lani, literally, the heaven-born, with the consummation of the love. Exactly what this connection is no one can say.

^219:f In the expression Pili me ka'u manu the poet returns to his figure of a bird as representing a loved one.

^220:a O ka hua o ke kolea, aia i Kahiki. In declaring that the egg of the kolea is laid in a foreign land, Kahiki, the poor enigmatizes, basing his thought on some fancied resemblance between the mystery of love and the mystery of the kolea's birth.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

  

XXXI.--THE HULA MANO

The hula mano, shark-dance, as its name signifies, was a performance that takes class with the hula kolea, already mentioned, as one of the animal dances. But little can be said about the physical features of this hula as a dance, save that the performers took a sitting position, that the action was without sensationalism, and that there was no instrumental accompaniment. The cantillation of the mele was in the distinct and quiet tone and manner which the Hawaiians termed ko'i-honua.

The last and only mention found of its performance in modern times was in the year 1847, during the tour, previously mentioned, which Kamehameha III made about Oahu. The place was the lonely and romantic valley of Waimea, a name already historic from having been the scene of the tragic death of Lieutenant Hergest (of the ship Daedalus) in 1792.

Mele

Auwe! pau au i ka mano nui, e!
 Lala-kea [*a] niho pa-kolu.
 Pau ka papa-ku o Lono [*b]
 I ka ai ia e ka mano nui,
 5 O Niuhi maka ahi,
 Olapa i ke kai lipo.
 Ahu e! au-we!
 A pua ka wili-wili,
 A nanahu ka mano, [*c]

[p. 222]

10 Auwe! pau au i ka mano nui!
 Kai uli, kai ele,
 Kai popolohua o Kane.
 A lealea au i ka'u hula,
 Pau au i ka mano nui!

[Translation]

Song

Alas! I am seized by the shark, great shark!
 Lala-kea with triple-banked teeth.
 The stratum of Lono is gone,
 Torn up by the monster shark,
 5 Niuhi with fiery eyes,
 That flamed in the deep blue sea.
 Alas! and alas!
 When flowers the wili-wili tree,
 That is the time when the shark-god bites.
 10 Alas! I am seized by the huge shark!
 O blue sea, O dark sea,
 Foam-mottled sea of Kane!
 What pleasure I took in my dancing!
 Alas! now consumed by the monster shark!

Who would imagine that a Hawaiian would ever picture the god of love as a shark? As a bird, yes; but as a shark! What a light this fierce idyl casts on the imagination of the people of ancient Hawaii!

Footnotes

^221:a Lala-kea. This proper name, as it seems once to have been, has now become rather the designation of a whole class of man-eating sea-monsters. The Hawaiians worshiped individual sharks as demigods, in the belief that the souls of the departed at death, or even before death, sometimes entered and took possession of them, and that they at times resumed human form. To this class belonged the famous shark Niuhi (verse 5).

^221:b Papa-ku o Lono. This was one of the underlying strata of the earth that must be passed before reaching Milu, the hades of the Hawaiians. The cosmogony of the southern Polynesians, according to Mr. Tregear, recognized ten papa, or divisions. "The first division was the earth's surface; the second was the abode of Rongo-ma-tane and Haumiatiketike; * * * the tenth was Meto, or Ameto, or Aweto, wherein the soul of man found utter extinction." (The Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary, by Edward Tregear, F. R. G. S., etc., Wellington, New Zealand, 1891.)

^221:c Verses 8 and 9 are from an old proverb which the Hawaiians put into the following quatrain:

A pua ka wiliwili,
 A nanahu ka mano:
 A pua ka wahine u'i,
 A nanahu ke kanawai.

[Translation]

When flowers the wiliwili,
 Then bites the shark;
 When flowers a young woman,
 Then bites the law.

The people came to take this old saw seriously and literally, and during the season when the wiliwili (Erythrina monosperma) was clothed in its splendid tufts of brick-red. mothers kept their children from swimming into the deep sea by setting before them the terrors of the shark.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 223]

  

XXXII.--THE HULA ILIO

The dog took his part and played his enthusiastic role in the domestic life of every Hawaiian. He did not starve in a fool's paradise, a neglected object of man's superstitious regard, as in Constantinople; nor did he vie with kings and queens in the length and purity of his pedigree, as in England; but in Hawaii he entered with full heart of sympathy into all of man's enterprises, and at his death bequeathed his body a sacrifice to men and gods. It was fitting that the Hawaiian poet should celebrate the dog and his altogether virtuous and altruistic services to mankind. The hula ilio may be considered as part of Hawaii's tribute to man's most faithful friend, the dog.

The hula ilio was a classic performance that demanded of the actors much physical stir; they shifted their position, now sitting, now standing; they moved from place to place; indulged in many gestures, sometimes as if imitating the motions of the dog. This hula has long been out of commission. Like the two animal-hulas previously mentioned, it was performed without the aid of instrumental accompaniment.

The allusions in this mele are to the mythical story that tells of Kane's drinking revels on the heights about Waipi'o valley; how he and his fellows by the noise of their furious couching disturbed the prayers and rituals of King Liloa and his priests, Kane himself being the chief offender by his blowing on the conch-shell Kihapu, stolen from Liloa's temple of Paka'alana; its recovery by the wit and dramatic action of the gifted dog Puapua-lenalena. (See <page 131>.)

Mele

Ku e, nana e!
 Makole [*a] o Ku!
 Hoolei ia ka lei, [*b]
 I lei no Puapua-lenalena,
 5 He lei hinano no Kahili, [*c]
 He wehiwehi no Niho-ku. [*d]

[p. 224]

Kaanini ka lani, [*a] uwe ka honua;
 A aoa aku oe;
 Lohe o Hiwa-uli, [*b]
 10 Ka milimili a ka lani.
 Noho opua i ka malamalama
 Malama ia ka ipu. [*c]
 He hano-wai no Kilioe, [*d]
 Wahine noho pali o Haena.
 15 Enaena na ahi o Kilauea, [*e]
 Ka haku pali o Kamohoalii. [*f]
 A noho i Waipi'o,
 Ka pali kapu a Kane.
 Moe ole ka po o he alii,
 20 Ke kani mau o Kiha-pu.
 Ukiuki, uluhua ke alii
 Hoouna ka elele; [*g]
 Loaa i Kauai o Mano.
 Kupueu a Wai-uli me Kahili;
 25 A ao aku oe, aoa, [*h] aoa a aoa.
 Hana e o Kaua-hoa, [*i]
 Ka mea ui o Hanalei,
 Hu'e'a kaua, moe i ke awakea,

[p. 225]

Kapae ke kaua o ka hoahanau! [*a]
 30 Hookahi no pua o ka oi;
 Awili pu me ke kaio'e. [*b]
 I lei no Puapua-lenalena.
 O ku'u luhi ua hiki iho la,
 Ka nioi o Paka'a-lana. [*c]
 35 A lana ka manao, hakuko'i 'loko,
 Ka hae mau ana a Puapua-lenalena,
 A hiki i Kumu-kahi, [*d]
 Kahi au i noho ai,
 A hiki iho la ka elele,
 40 Inu i ka awa kau-laau o Puna. [*e]
 Aoa, he, he, hene!

The author of this mele, apparently under the sanction of his poetic license, uses toward the great god Ku a plainness of speech which to us seems satirical; he speaks of him as makole, red-eyed, the result, no doubt, of his notorious addiction to awa, in which he was not alone among the gods. But it is not at all certain that the Hawaiians looked upon this ophthalmic redness as repulsive or disgraceful. Everything connected with awa had for them a cherished value, In the mele given on <page 130> the cry was, "Kane is drunken with awa!" The two gods Kane and Ku were companions in their revels as well as in nobler adventures. Such a poem as this flashes a strong light into the workings of the Hawaiian mind on the creations of their own imagination, the beings who stood to them as gods; not robbing them of their power, not deposing them from the throne of the universe, perhaps not even penetrating the veil of enchantment and mystery with which the popular regard covered them, at the most perhaps giving them a hold on the affections of the people.

[Translation]

Song

Look forth, god Ku, look forth!
 Huh! Ku is blear-eyed!
 Aye, weave now the wreath--
 A wreath for the dog Pua-lena;
 5 A halo plume for Kahili,
 Choice garlands from Niho-ku.

[p. 226]

There was a scurry of clouds, earth groaned;
 The sound of your baying reached
 Hawaii the verdant, the pet of the gods;
 10 A portent was seen in the heavens.
 You were kept in a cradle of gourd,
 Water-gourd of the witch Kilioe,
 Who haunted the cliffs of Haena--
 The fiery blasts of the crater
 15 Touch not Kamoho-alii's cliff.
 Your travel reaches Waipi'o,
 The sacred cliff of god Pane.
 Sleep fled the bed of the king
 At the din of the conch Kiha-pu.
 20 The king was tormented, depressed;
 His messenger sped on his way;
 Found help from Kauai of Mano--
 The marvelous foster child,
 By Waiuli, Kahuli, upreared
 25 Your answer, a-o-a, a-o-a!--
 'Twas thus Kauahoa made ready betimes,
 That hero of old Hanalei
 "Strike home! then sleep at midday!"
 "God fend a war between kindred!"
 30 One flower all other surpasses;
 Twine with it a wreath of kai-o'e,
 A chaplet to crown Pua-lena.
 My labor now has its reward,
 The doorsill of Pa-ka'a-lana.
 35 My heart leaps up in great cheer;
 The bay of the dog greets my ear,
 It reaches East Cape by the sea,
 Where Puna gave refuge to thee,
 Till came the king's herald, hot-foot,
 40 And quaffed the awa's tree-grown root.
 A-o-a, a-o-a, he, he, hene!

The problem to be solved by the translator of this peculiar mele is a difficult one. It involves a constant readjustment of the mental standpoint to meet the poet's vagrant fancy, which to us seems to occupy no consistent point of view. If this difficulty arises from the author's own lack of insight, he can at least absolve himself from the charge of negligence and lack of effort to discover the standpoint that shall give unity to the whole composition; and can console himself with the reflection that no native Hawaiian scholar with whom he has conferred has been able to give a key to the solution of this problem. In truth, the native Hawaiian scholars of to-day do not appreciate as we do the necessity of holding fast to one viewpoint. They seem to be willing to accept with gusto any production of their old-time singers, though they may not be able to explain them, and though to us, in whose hearts the songs of the masters ever make music, they may seem empty riddles.

[p. 227]

The solution of this problem here furnished is based on careful study of the text and of the allusions to tradition and myth that therein abound. Its expression in the translation has rendered necessary occasional slight departures from absolute literalness, and has involved the supplying of certain conjunctive and explanatory words and phrases of which the original, it is true, gives no hint, but without which the text would be meaningless.

One learned Hawaiian with whom the author has enjoyed much conference persists in taking a most discouraging and pessimistic view of this mele. It is gratifying to be able to differ from him in this matter and to be able to sustain one's position by the consenting opinion of other Hawaiians equally accomplished as the learned friend just referred to.

The incidents in the story of Puapua-lenalena alluded to in the mele do not exactly chime with any version of the legend met with. That is not strange. Hawaiian legends of necessity had many variants, especially where, as in this case, the adventures of the hero occurred in part on one and in part on another island. The author's knowledge of this story is derived from various independent sources, mainly from a version given to his brother, Joseph S. Emerson, who took it down from the words of an intelligent Hawaiian youth of Kohala.

English literature, so far as known to the author, does not furnish any example that is exactly comparable to or that will serve as an illustration of this nonterminal rhyme, which abounds in Hawaiian poetry. Perhaps the following will serve the purpose of illustration:

'Twas the swine of Gadara, fattened on mast.
 The mast-head watch of a ship was the last
 To see the wild herd careering past.

[paragraph continues] Or such a combination as this:

He was a mere flat,
 Yet flattered the girls.

Such artificial productions as these give us but a momentary intellectual entertainment. While the intellectual element in them was not lacking with the Hawaiians, the predominant feeling, no doubt, was a sensuous delight coining from the repetition of a full-throated vowel-combination.

Footnotes

^223:a Makole. Red-eyed; ophthalmic.

^223:b The wreath, lei, is not for the god, but for the dog Puapua-lenalena, the one who in the story recovered the stolen conch. Kiha-pu (verse 20), with which god Kane made night hideous and disturbed the repose of pious King Liloa (Moe ole ka po o ke alii, verse 19).

^223:c Kahili. Said to be the foster mother of Puapua-lenalena.

^223:d Niho-ku. Literally an upright tooth, was the name of the hill on which lived the old couple who were the foster parents of the dog.

^224:a Kaanini ka lani, etc. Portents by which heaven and earth expressed their appreciation of the birth of a new prodigy, the dog Puapua-lenalena.

^224:b Hiwa-uli. An epithet applied to the island of Hawaii, perhaps on account of the immense extent of territory on that island that was simply black lava; hiwa, black, was a sacred color. The term uli has reference to its verdancy.

^224:c Ipu. Wai-uli, the foster father of the dog, while fishing in a mountain brook, brought up a pebble on his hook; his wife, who was childless and yearned for offspring, kept it in a calabash wrapped in choice tapa. In a year or two it had developed into the wonderful dog, Puapua-lenalena. The calabash was the ipu here mentioned, the same as the hano wai (verse 13), a water-container.

^224:d Kilioe. A sorceress who lived at Haena. Kauai, on the steep cliffs that were inaccessible to human foot.

^224:e Ena-ena na ahi o Kilauea. "Hot are the fires of Kilauea." The duplicated word ena-ena, taken in connection with Ha-ena in the previous verse, is a capital instance of a form of assonance, or nonterminal rhyme, much favored and occasionally used by Hawaiian poets of the middle period. From the fact that its use here introduces a break in the logical relation which it is hard to reconcile with unity one may think that the poet was seduced from the straight and narrow way by this opportunity for an indulgence that sacrifices reason to rhyme.

^224:f Kamoho-alii. The brother of Pele; his person was so sacred that the flames and smoke of Kilauea dared not invade the bank on which he reposed. The connection of thought between this and the main line of argument is not clear.

^224:g Hoouna ka elele. According to one story Liloa dispatched a messenger to bring Puapua-lenalena and his master to Waipi'o to aid him in regaining possession of Kiha-pu.

^224:h A no aku oe, aoa * * * . This indicated the dog's assent. Puapua-lenalena understood what was said to him, but could make no reply in human speech. When a question was put to him, if he wished to make a negative answer, he would keep silent; but if he wished to express assent to a proposition, he barked and frisked about.

^224:i Hana e o Kaua-hoa. * * * No one has been found who can give a satisfactory explanation of the logical connection existing between the passage here cited and the rest of the poem. It treats of an armed conflict between Kauahoa and his cousin Kawelo, a hero from Oahu. which took place on Kauai. Kauahoa was a retainer and soldier of Ai-kanaka, a king of Kauai. The period was in the reign of King Kakuhihewa, of Oahu. Kawelo invaded Kauai with an armed force and made a proposition to Kauahoa which involved treachery to Kauahoa's liege-lord Ai-kanaka. Kauahoa's answer to this proposition is given in verse 28; Hu'e a kaua, aloe i ke awakea!--"Strike home, then sleep at midday!" The sleep at midday was the sleep of death.

^225:a Kapae ke kaua o ka hoahanau! This was the reply of Kawelo, urging Kauahoa to set the demands of kinship above those of honor and loyalty to his liege-lord. In the battle that ensued Kauahoa came to his death. The story of Kawelo is full of romance.

^225:b Kaio'e. Said to be a choice and beautiful flower found on Kauai. It is not described by Hillebrand.

^225:c Ka nioi o Paka'a-lana. The doorsill of the temple, heiau, of Paka'a-lana was made of the exceedingly hard wood nioi. It was to this temple that Puapua-lenalena brought the conch Kiha-pu when he had stolen (recovered) it from god Kane.

^225:d . See note e on <page 197>.

^225:e Awa kau-laau o Puna. It is said that in Puna the birds sometimes planted the awa in the stumps or in the crotches of the trees, and this awa was of the finest quality.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 228]

  

XXXIII.--THE HULA PUA'A

The hula pua'a rounds out the number of animal-dances that have survived the wreck of time, or the memory of which has come down to us. It was a dance in which only the olapa took part without the aid of instrumental accompaniment. Women as well as men were eligible as actors in its performance. The actors put much spirit into the action, beating the chest, flinging their arms in a strenuous fashion, throwing the body into strained attitudes, at times bending so far back as almost to touch the floor. This energy seems to have invaded the song, and the cantillation of the mele is said to have been done in that energetic manner called ai-ha'a.

The hula pua'a seems to have been native to Kauai. The author has not been able to learn of its performance within historic times on any other island.

The student of Hawaiian mythology naturally asks whether the hula pua'a concerned itself with the doings of the mythological hog-deity Kama-pua'a whose amour with Pele was the scandal of Hawaiian mythology. It takes but a superficial reading of the mele to answer this question in the affirmative.

The following mele, or oli more properly, which was used in connection with the hula pua'a, is said to have been the joint production of two women, the daughters of a famous bard named Kana, who was the reputed brother of Limaloa (long-armed), a wonder-working hero who piled up the clouds in imitation of houses and mountains and who produced the mirage:

Oli

Ko'i maka nui, [*a]
 Ike ia na pae moku,
 Na moku o Mala-la-walu, [*b]
 Ka noho a Ka-maulu-a-niho,
 5 Kupuna o Kama-pua'a.

[p. 229]

Ike ia ka hono a Pii-lani; [*a]
 Ku ka paoa i na mokupuni.
 Ua puni au ia Pele,
 Ka u'i noho mau i Kilauea,
 10 Anau hewa i ke a o Puna.
 Keiki kolohe a Ku ame Hina-- [*b]
 Hina ka opua, kau i ke olewa,
 Ke ao pua'a [*c] maalo i Haupu.
 Haku'i ku'u manao e hoi [*d] i Kahiki;
 15 Pau ole ka'u hoohihi ia Hale-ma'u-ma'u, [*e]
 I ka pali kapu a Ka-moho-alii. [*f]
 Kela kuahiwi a mau a ke ahi.
 He manao no ko'u e noho pu;
 Pale 'a mai e ka hilahila,
 20 I ka hakukole ia mai e ke Akua wahine.
 Pale oe, pale au, iloko o ka hilahila;
 A hilahila wale ia iho no e oe;
 Nau no ia hale i noho. [*g]
 Ka hana ia a ke Ko'i maka nui,
 25 Ike ia na pae moku.
 He hiapo [*h] au na Olopana,
 He hi'i-alo na Ku-ula,
 Ka mea nana na haka moa;

[p. 230]

Noho i ka uka o Ka-liu-wa'a; [*a]
 30 Ku'u wa'a ia ho'i i Kahiki.
 Pau ia ike ana ia Hawaii,
 Ka aina a ke Akua i hiki mai ai,
 I noho malihini ai i na moku o Hawaii.
 Malihiui oe, malihini au,
 35 Ko'i maka nui, ike ia na pae opuaa.
 A pepelu, a pepelu, a pepelu
 Ko ia la huelo! pili i ka lemu!
 Hu! hu! hu! hu!
 Ka-haku-ma'a-lani [*b] kou inoa!
 40 A e o mai oe, e Kane-hoa-lani.
 Ua noa.

[Translation]

Song

Ax of broadest edge I'm hight;
 The island groups I've visited,
 Islands of Mala-la-walu,
 Seat of Ka-maulu-a-niho,
 5 Grandam of Kama, the swine-god.
 I have seen Pi'i-lani's glory,
 Whose fame spreads over the islands.
 Enamored was I of Pele;
 Her beauty holds court at the fire-pit,
 10 Given to ravage the plains of Puna.
 Mischievous son of Ku, and of Hina,
 Whose cloud-bloom hangs in ether,
 The pig-shaped cloud that shadows Haupu,
 An impulse comes to return to Kahiki--
 15 The chains of the pit still gall me,
 The tabu cliff of Ka-moho-alii,
 The mount that is ever ablaze.
 I thought to have domiciled with her;
 Was driven away by mere shame--
 20 The shameful abuse of the goddess!
 Go thou, go I--a truce to the shame.
 It was your manners that shamed me.
 Free to you was the house we lived in.
 These were the deeds of Broad-edged-Ax,
 25 Who has seen the whole group of islands.
 Olopana's firstborn am I,
 Nursed in the arms of Ku-ula;

[p. 231]

Hers were the roosts for the gamecocks.
 The wilds of Ka-liu-wa'a my home,
 30 That too my craft back to Kahiki;
 This my farewell to Hawaii,
 Land of the God's immigration.
 Strangers we came to Hawaii;
 A stranger thou, a stranger I,
 35 Called Broad-edged-Ax:
 I've read the cloud-omens in heaven.
 It curls, it curls! his tail--it curls!
 Look, it clings to his buttocks!
 Faugh, faugh, faugh, faugh, uff!
 40 What! Ka-haku-ma'a-lani your name!
 Answer from heaven, oh Kane!
 My song it is done!

If one can trust the statement of the Hawaiian who communicated the above mele, it represents only a portion of the whole composition, the first canto--if we may so term it--having dropped into the limbo of forgetfulness. The author's study of the mele lends no countenance to such a view. Like all Hawaiian poetry, this mele wastes no time with introductory flourishes; it plunges at once in medias res.

Hawaiian mythology figured Pele, the goddess of the volcano, as a creature of passion, capable of many metamorphoses; now a wrinkled hag, asleep in a cave on a rough lava bed, with banked fires and only an occasional blue flame playing about her as symbols of her power; now a creature of terror, riding on a chariot of flame and carrying destruction; and now as a young woman of seductive beauty, as when she sought passionate relations with the handsome prince, Lohiau; but in disposition always jealous, fickle, vengeful.

Kama-pua'a was a demigod of anomalous birth, character, and make-up, sharing the nature and form of a man and of a hog, and assuming either form as suited the occasion. He was said to be the nephew of Olopana, a king of Oahu, whose kindness in acting as his foster father he repaid by the robbery of his henroosts and other unfilial conduct. He lived the lawless life of a marauder and freebooter, not confining his operations to one island, but swimming from one to another as the fit took him. On one occasion, when the farmers of Waipi'o, whom he had robbed, assembled with arms to bar his retreat and to deal vengeance upon him, he charged upon the multitude, overthrew them with great slaughter, and escaped with his plunder.

Toward Pele Kama-pua'a assumed the attitude of a lover, whose approaches she at one time permitted to her peril. The incident took place in one of the water caves--volcanic bubbles--in Puna, and at the level of the ocean; but when he had the audacity to invade her privacy and call to her as she reposed in her home at Kilauea she repelled his advances and answered his persistence with a fiery onset, from which he fled in terror and discomfiture, not halting until he

[p. 232]

had put the width of many islands and ocean channels between himself and her.

In seeking an explanation of this myth of Pele, the volcano god and Kama-pua'a, who, on occasion, was a sea-monster, there is no necessity to hark back to the old polemics of Asia. Why not account for this remarkable myth as the statement in terms of passion familiar to all Hawaiians of those impressive natural phenomena that were daily going on before them? The spectacle of the smoking mountain pouring out its fiery streams, overwhelming river and forest, halting not until they had invaded the ocean; the awful turmoil as fire and water came in contact; the quick reprisal as the angry waves overswept the hand; then the subsiding and retreat of the ocean to its own limits and the restoration of peace and calm, the fiery mount still unmoved, an apparent victory for the volcanic forces. Was it not this spectacular tournament of the elements that the Hawaiian sought to embody and idealize in his myth of Pele and Kama-pua'a? [*a]

The likeness to be found between the amphibious Kama-pua'a and the hog appeals picturesquely to one's imagination in many ways. The very grossness of the hog enables him becomingly to fill the role of the Beast as a foil to Pele, the Beauty. The hog's rooting snout, that ravages the cultivated fields; his panicky retreat when suddenly disturbed; his valiant charge and stout resistance if cornered; his lowered snout in charge or retreat; his curling tail--how graphic-ally all these features appeal to the imagination in support of the comparison which likens hint to a tidal wave.

Footnotes

^228:a Ko'i maka nui. The word maka, which from the connection here must mean the edge of an ax, is the word generally used to mean an eye. Insistence on their peculiarity leads one to think that there must have been something remarkable about the eyes of Kama-pua'a. One account describes Kama-pua'a as having eight eyes and as many feet. It is said that on one occasion as Kama-pua'a was lying in wait for Pele in a volcanic bubble in the plains of Puna Pele's sisters recognized his presence by the gleam of his eyes. They immediately walled up the only door of exit.

^228:b Mala-la-wale. A celebrated king of Maui, said to have been a just ruler, who was slain in battle on Hawaii while making war against Lono-i-ka-makahiki, the rightful ruler of the island. It may be asked if the name is not introduced here because of the word walu (eight) as a reference to Kama-pua'a's eight eyes.

^229:a Pi'i-lane. A king of Maui, father-in-law to Umi, the son of Liloa.

^229:b Hina. There were several Hinas in Hawaiian mythology and tradition. Olopana, the son of Kamaulu-a-niho (Pomander gives this name as Ka-maunu-a-niho), on his arrival from Kahiki, settled in Koolau and married a woman named Hina. Kama-pua'a is said to be the natural son of Hina by Kahiki-ula, the brother of Olopana. To this Olopana was attributed the heiau of Kawaewae at Kaneohe.

^229:c Ao pua'a. The cloud-cap that often rested on the summit of Haupu, a mountain on Kauai, near Koloa, is said to have resembled the shape of a pig. It was a common saying, "The pig is resting on Haupu."

^229:d Ho'i. To return. This argues that, if Kama-pua'a was not originally from Kahiki, he had at least visited there.

^229:e Hale-ma'u-ma'u. This was an ancient lava-cone which until within a few years continued to be the most famous fire-lake in the caldera of Kilauea. It was so called, probably, because the roughness of its walls gave it a resemblance to one of those little shelters made from rough ama'u fern such as visitors put up for temporary convenience. The word has not the same pronunciation and is not to be confounded with that other word mau, meaning everlasting.

^229:f Kamoho-ali'i. The brother of Pele; in one metamorphosis he took the form of a shark. A high point in the northwest quarter of the wall of Kilauea was considered his special residence and regarded as so sacred that no smoke or flame from the volcano ever touched it. He made his abode chiefly in the earth's underground caverns, through which the sun made its nightly transit from West back to the East. He often retained the orb of the day to warm and illumine his abode. On one such occasion the hero Mawi descended into this region and stole away the sun that his mother Hina might have the benefit of its heat in drying her tapas.

^229:g Hale i noho. The word hale, meaning house, is frequently used metaphorically for the human body, especially that of a woman. Pale thus acknowledges her amour with Kama-pua'a.

^229:h Hiapo. A firstborn child. Legends are at variance with one another as to the parentage of Kama-pua'a. According to the legend referred to previously, Kama-pua'a was the son of Olopana's wife Hina, his true father being Kahiki-ula, the brother of Olopana. Olopana seems to have treated him as his own son. After Kama-pua'a's robbery of his mother's henroosts, Olopana chased the thief into the mountains and captured him. Kama eventually turned the tables against his benefactor and caused the death of Olopana through the treachery of a priest in a heiau; he was offered up on the altar as a sacrifice.

^230:a Ka-liu-wa'a. The bilge of the canoe. This is the name of a deep and narrow valley at Hauula, Koolau, Oahu, and Is well worth a visit. Kama-pua'a. hard pressed by the host of his enemies, broke through the multitude that encompassed him on the land side and with his followers escaped up this narrow gorge. When the valley came to an abrupt end before him, and he could retreat no farther, he reared up on his hind legs and scaled the mountain wall; his feet, as he sprang up, scored the precipice with immense hollowed-out grooves or flutings. The Hawaiians call these wa'a from their resemblance to the hollow of a Hawaiian canoe. This feat of the hog-god compelled recognition of Kama-pua'a as a deity; and from that time no one entered Ka-liu-wa'a valley without making an offering to Kama-pua'a.

^230:b Ka-haku-ma'a-lani. A name evidently applied to Kama-pua'a.

^232:a "The Hawaiian tradition of Pele, the dread goddess of the volcanic fires," says Mr. Fornander, "analogous to the Samoan Fe'e, is probably a local adaptation in aftertimes of an elder myth, half forgotten and much distorted. The contest related in the legend between Pele and Kamapua'u, the eight-eyed monster demigod, indicates, however, a confused knowledge of some ancient strife between religious sects, of which the former represented the worshipers of fire and the latter those with whom water was the principal element worthy of adoration." Abraham Fornander, The Polynesian Race, pp. 51, 52, Trubner & Co., London.)

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 233]

  

XXXIV.--THE HULA OHELO

The hula ohelo was a very peculiar ancient dance, in which the actors, of both sexes, took a position almost that of reclining, the body supported horizontally by means of the hand and extended leg of one side, in such a manner that flank and buttock did not rest upon the floor, while the free leg and arm of the opposite side swung in wide gestures, now as if describing the arch of heaven, or sweeping the circle of the horizon, now held straight, now curved like a hook. At times the company, acting in concert, would shift their base of support from the right hand to the left hand, or vice versa. The whole action, though fantastical, was conducted with modesty. There was no instrumental accompaniment; but while performing the gymnastics above described the actors chanted the words of a mele to some Old World tune, the melody and rhythm of which are lost.

A peculiar feature of the training to which pupils were subjected in preparation for this dance was to range them in a circle about a large fire, their feet pointing to the hearth. The theory of this practice was that the heat of the fire suppled the limbs and imparted vivacity to the motions, on the same principle apparently as fire enables one to bend into shape a crooked stick. The word kapuahi, fireplace, in the fourth line of the mele, is undoubtedly an allusion to this practice.

The fact that the climate of the islands, except in the mountains and uplands, is rarely so cold as to make it necessary to gather about a fire seems to argue that the custom of practising this dance about a fireplace must have originated in some land of climate more austere than Hawaii.

It is safe to say that very few kumu-hulas have seen and many have not even heard of the hula ohelo. The author has an authentic account of its production at Ewa in the year 1856, its last performance, so far as he can learn, on the public stage.

Mele

Ku oe ko'u wahi ohelo nei la, auwe, auwe!
 Maka'u au i kau mea nui wali-wali, wali-wali!
 Pe hoolewa nei, a lewa la, a lewa nei!
 Minomino, enaena ka ia in kapuahi, kapuahi!
 5 Nenea i ka la'i o Kona, o Kona, a o Kona!
 Pohu malino i ke kai hawana-wana, hawana-wana!
 He makau na ka lawaia nui, a nui e, a nui la!
 Ke o-e nei ke aho o ka ipu-holoholona, holoholona![p. 234]
 Nana i ka opua makai e, makai la!
 10 Maikai ka hana a Mali'o e, a Mali'o la!
 Kohu pono ka inu ana i ka wai, a wai e!
 Auwe, ku oe ko'u wahi ohelo nei la, ohelo nei la!

2

Ki-o lele, ki-o lele, ki-o lele, e!
 Ke mapu mai nei ke ala, ke ala e!
 15 Ua malihini ka hale, ua hiki ia, ua hiki e!
 Ho'i paoa i ka uka o Manai-ula, ula la, ula e!
 Maanei oe, e ka makemake e noho malie, ma-li-e!
 Ka pa kolonahe o ka Unulau mahope, ma-ho-pe!
 Pe'e oe, a pe'e au, pe'e o ia la,
 20 A haawe ke aloha i ke kaona, i ke kaona la!
 Mo-li-a i ka nahele e, nahele la!
 E hele oe a manao mai i ka luhi mua, a i-mua!
 O moe hewa na iwi i ke alanui, ala-nui.
 Kaapa Hawaii a ka moku nui, a nui e!
 25 Nui mai ke aloha a uwe au, a uwe au.
 Au-we! pau au i ka mano nui,  nui!
 Au-we! pau au i ka mano nui, mano nui!

[Translation]

Song

1

Touched, thou art touched by my gesture, I fear, I fear.
 I dread your mountain of flesh, of flesh;
 How it sways, how it sways, it sways!
 I'm scorched by the heat of this hearth, this hearth.
 5 We bask in this summer of Kona, of Kona;
 Calm mantles the whispering sea, the whispering sea.
 Lo, the hook of the fisherman great, oh so great!
 The line hums as it runs from the gourd, from the gourd.
 Regard the cloud-omens over the sea, the sea.
 10 Well skilled in his craft is Mali'o, Mali'o.
 How grateful now were a draught of water, of water!
 Pardon! thou art touched by thrust of my leg, of my leg!

2

Forth and return, forth and return, forth and return!
 Now waft the woodland perfumes, the woodland perfumes.
 15 The house ere we entered was tenant-free, quite free.
 Heart-heavy we turn to the greenwood, the greenwood;
 This the place, Heart's desire, you should tarry, should tarry,
 And feel the soft breath of the Unulau, Unulau--
 Retirement for you, retirement for me, and for him.
 20 We'll give then our heart to this task, this great task,
 And build in the wildwood a shrine, ay a shrine.
 You go; forget not the toils we have shared, have shared,
 Lest your bones lie unblest in the road, in the road.
 How wearisome, long, the road 'bout Hawaii, great Hawaii!
 25 Love carries me off with a rush, and I cry, I cry,
 Alas, I'm devoured by the shark, great shark!

This is not the first time that a Hawaiian poet has figured love by the monster shark.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XXIII
 HINANO HALA
 MALE FLOWER OF THE PANDANUS ODORATISSIMUS

 

[p. 235]

  

XXXV.--THE HULA KILU

The hula kilu was so called from being used in a sport bearing that name which was much patronized by the alii class of the ancient regime. It was a betting game, or, more strictly, forfeits were pledged, the payment of which was met by the performance of a dance, or by the exaction of kisses and embraces. The satisfaction of these forfeits not unfrequently called for liberties and concessions that could not be permitted on the spot or in public, but must wait the opportunity of seclusion. There were, no doubt, times when the conduct of the game was carried to such a pitch of license as to offend decency; but as a rule the outward proprieties were seemingly as well regarded as at an old-fashioned husking bee, when the finding of the "red ear" conferred or imposed the privilege or penalty of exacting or granting the blushing tribute of a kiss. Actual improprieties were not witnessed.

The game of kilu was played in an open matted space that lay between the two divisions of the audience--the women being on one side and the men on the other. Any chief of recognized rank in the papa alii was permitted to join in the game; and kings and queens were not above participating in the pleasures of this sport. Once admitted to the hall or inclosure, all were peers and stood on an equal footing as to the rules and privileges of the game. King nor queen could plead exemption from the forfeits incurred nor deny to another the full exercise of privileges acquired under the rules.

The players, five or more of each sex, having been selected by the president, La anoano ("quiet day"), sat facing each other in the space between the spectators. In front of each player stood a conical block of heavy wood, broad at the base to keep it upright. The kilu, with which the game was played, was an oval, one-sided dish, made by cutting in two an egg-shaped coconut shell. The object of the player was to throw his kilu so that it should travel with a sliding and at the same time a rotary motion across the matted floor and hit the wooden block which stood before the one of his choice on the side opposite. The men and the women took turns in playing. A successful hit entitled the player to claim a kiss from his opponent, a toll which was exacted at once. Success in winning ten points made one the victor in the game, and, according to some, entitled him to claim the larger forfeit, such as was customary in the democratic

[p. 236]

game of ume. The payment of these extreme forfeits was delayed till a convenient season, or might be commuted--on grounds of policy, or at the request of the loser, if a king or queen--by an equivalent of land or other valuable possession. Still no fault could be found if the winner insisted on the strict payment of the forfeit.

The game of kilu was often got up as a compliment, a supreme expression of hospitality, to distinguished visitors of rank, thus more than making good the polite phrase of the Spanish don, "all that I have is yours."

The fact that the hula kilu was performed by the alii class, who took great pains and by assiduous practice made themselves proficient that they might be ready to exhibit their accomplishment before the public, was a guarantee that this hula, when performed by them, would be of more than usual grace and vivacity. When performed in the halau as a tabu dance, according to some, the olapa alone took part, and the number of dancers, never very large, was at times limited to one performer. Authorities differ as to whether any musical instrument was used as an accompaniment. From an allusion to this dance met with in an old story it is quite certain that the drum was sometimes used as an accompaniment.

Let us picture to ourselves the scene: A shadowy, flower-scented hall; the elite of some Hawaiian court and their guests, gathered, in accord with old-time practice, to contend in a tournament of wit and grace and skill, vying with one another for the prize of beauty. The president has established order in the assembly; the opposing players have taken their stations, each one seated behind his target-block. The tallykeeper of one side now makes the challenge. "This kilu," says he, "is a love token; the forfeit a kiss." An Apollo of the opposite side joyfully takes up the gauge. His tallykeeper introduces him by name. He plumes himself like a wild bird of gay feather, standing forth in the decorous finery of his rank, girded and flower-bedecked after the manner of the halau, eager to win applause for his party not less than to secure for himself the loving reward of victory. In his hand is the instrument of the play, the kilu; the artillery of love, however, with which he is to assail the heart and warm the imagination of the fair woman opposed to him is the song he shoots from his lips.

The story of the two songs next to be presented is one, and will show us a side of Hawaiian life on which we can not afford entirely to close our eyes. During the stay at Lahaina of Kamehameha, called the Great--whom an informant in this matter always calls "the murderer," in protest against the treacherous assassination of Keoua, which took place at Kawaihae in Kamehameha's very presence--a high chiefess of his court named Kalola engaged in a love affair with a young man of rank named Ka'i-ama. He was

[p. 237]

much her junior, but this did not prevent his infatuation. Early one morning she rose, leaving him sound asleep, and took canoe for Molokai to serve as one of the escort to the body of her relative, Keola, on the way to its place of sepulture.

Some woman, appreciating the situation, posted to the house and waked the sleeper with the information. Ka'iama hastened to the shore, and as he strained his vision to gain sight of the woman of his infatuation the men at the paddles and the bristling throng on the central platform--the pola---of the craft, vanishing in the twilight, made on his imagination the impression of a hazy mountain thicket floating on the waves, but hiding from view some rare flower. He gave vent to his feelings in song:

Mele

Pua ehu kamalena [*a] ka uka o Kapa'a;
 Luhi-ehu iho la [*b] ka pua i Maile-huna;
 Hele a ha ka iwi [*c] a ke Koolau,
 Ke pua mai i ka maka o ka nahelehele,
 5 I hali hoo-muu, [*d] hoohalana i Wailua.
 Pa kahea a Koolau-wahine,
 O Pua-ke'i, e-e-e-e!
 He pua laukona [*e] ka moe e aloh' ai;
 O ia moe la, e kaulele hou, [*f]
 10 No ka po i hala aku aku net.
 Hoiho kaua a eloelo, e ka hoa, e,
 A hookahi!

[Translation]

Song

Misty and dim, a bush in the wilds of Kapa'a,
 The paddlers bend to their work, as the flower-laden
 Shrub inclines to the earth in Maile-huna;
 They sway like reeds in the breeze to crack their bones--
 5 Such the sight as I look at this tossing grove,
 The rhythmic dip and swing on to Wailua.
 My call to the witch shall fly with the breeze,
 Shall be heard at Pua-ke'i, e-he, e-he!
 The flower-stalk Laukona beguiles man to love,
 10 Can bring back the taste of joys once our own,

[p. 238]

Make real again the hours that are flown.
 Turn hither, mine own, let's drench us with love--
 Just for one night!

The unchivalrous indiscretion of the youth in publishing the secret of his amour elicited from Kamehameha only the sarcastic remark, "Couldn't he eat his food and keep his mouth shut?" The lady herself took the same view of his action. There was no evasion in her reply; her only reproach was for his childishness in blabbing.

Mele

Kalakalaihi, kaha [*a] ka La ma ke kua o Lehua;
 Lulana iho la ka pihe a ke Akua; [*b]
 Ea mai ka Unulau [*c] o Halali'i;
 Lawe ke Koolau-wahine [*d] i ka hoa la, lilo;
 5 Hao ka Mikioi [*e] ke kai o Lehua:
 Puwa-i'a na hoa-makani [*f] mai lalo, e-e-e, a.
 I hoonalonalo i ke aloha, pe'e ma-loko;
 Ha'i ka wai-maka hanini;
 I ike aku no i ka uwe ana iho;
 10 Pela wale no ka hoa kamalii, c-e, a!

[Translation]

Song

The sun-furrow gleams at the back of Lehua;
 The King's had his fill of scandal and chaff;
 The wind-god empties his lungs with a laugh;
 And the Mikioi tosses the sea at Lehua,
 5 As the trade-wind wafts his friend on her way--
 A congress of airs that ruffles the bay.
 Hide love 'neath a mask--that's all I would ask.
 To spill but a tear makes our love-tale appear;
 He pours out his woe; I've seen it, I know;
 10 That's the way with a boy-friend, heigh-ho!

The art of translating from the Hawaiian into the English tongue consists largely in a fitting substitution of generic for specific terms. The Hawaiian, for instance, had at command scores of specific names for the same wind, or for the local modifications that were inflicted

[p. 239]

upon it by the features of the landscape. One might almost say that every cape and headland imposed a new nomenclature upon the breeze whose direction it influenced. He rarely contented himself with using a broad and comprehensive term when he could match the situation with special form.

The singer restricts her blame to charging her youthful lover with an indiscreet exhibition of childish emotion. The mere display of emotion evinced by the shedding of tears was in itself a laudable action and in good form.

This first reply of the woman to her youthful lover did not by any means exhaust her armament of retaliation. When she next treats of the affair it is with an added touch of sarcasm and yet with a sang frond that proved it had not unsettled her nerves.

Mele

Ula Kala'e-loa [*a] i ka lepo a ka makani;
 Hoonu'anu'a na pua i Kalama-ula,
 He hoa i Ra la'i a ka manu-- [*b]
 Manu ai ia i ka hoa laukona.
 5 I keke lau-au'a ia e ka moe;
 E kuhi ana ia he kanaka e.
 Oau no keia mai luna a lalo;
 Huna ke aloha, pe'e maloko.
 Ike 'a i ka uwe ana iho.
 10 Pela ka hoa kamalii--
 He uwe wale ke kamalii.

[Translation]

Song

Red glows Kala'e through the wind-blown dust
 That defiles the flowers of Lama-ula,
 Outraged by the croak of this bird,
 That eats of the aphrodisiac cane,
 5 And then boasts the privileged bed.
 He makes me a creature of outlaw:
 True to myself from crown to foot-sole,
 My love I've kept sacred, pent up within.
 He flouts it as common, weeping it forth
 10 That is the way with a child-friend;
 A child just blubbers at nothing.

To return to the description of the game, the player, having uttered his vaunt in true knightly fashion, with a dexterous whirl now sends his kilu spinning on its course. If his play is successful and the kilu strikes the target on the other side at which he aims, the

[p. 240]

audience, who have kept silence till now, break forth in applause, and his tally-keeper proclaims his success in boastful fashion:

Oli

A uweuwe ke ko'e a ke kae;
 Puehuehu ka la, komo inoino;
 Kakia, kahe ka ua ilalo.

[Translation]

Now wriggles the worm to its goal;
 A tousling; a hasty encounter;
 A grapple; down falls the rain.

It is now the winner's right to cross over and claim his forfeit. The audience deals out applause or derision in unstinted pleasure; the enthusiasm reaches fever-point when some one makes himself the champion of the game by bringing his score up to ten, the limit. The play is often kept up till morning, to be resumed the following night. [*a]

Here also is a mele, which tradition reports to have been cantillated by Hiiaka, the sister of Pele, during her famous kilu contest with the Princess Pele-ula, which took place at Kou--the ancient name for Honolulu--on Hiiaka's voyage of return from Kauai to her sister's court at Kilauea. In this affair Lohiau and Wahine-oma'o contended on the side of Hiiaka, while Pele-ula, was assisted by her husband, Kou, and by other experts. But on this occasion the dice were cogged; the victory was won not by human skill but by the magical power of Hiiaka, who turned Pele-ula's kilu away from the target each time she threw it, but used her gift to compel it to the mark when the kilu was cast by herself.

Mele

Ku'u hoa mai ka makani kuehu-kapa o Kalalau, [*b]
 Mai na pali ku'i [*c] o Makua-iki,
 Ke lawe la i ka haka, [*d] a lilo!
 A lilo o-e, la!
 5 Ku'u kane i ka uhu ka'i o Maka-pu'u,
 Huki iluna ka Lae-o-ka-laau; [*e]
 Oia pali makaa-ole [*f] olaila.
 Ohiohi ku ka pali o Ulamao, e-e!
 A lilo oe, la!

[p. 241]

[Translation]

Song

Comrade mine in the robe-stripping gusts of Lalau,
 On the up-piled beetling cliffs of Makua,
 The ladder * * * is taken away * * * It is gone!
 Your way is cut off, my man!
 5 With you I've backed the uhu of Maka-pu'u,
 Tugging them up the steeps of Point-o'-woods,
 A cliff that stands fatherless, even as
 Sheer stands the pall of Ula-mao--
 And thus * * * you are lost!

This is but a fragment of the song which Hiiaka pours out in her efforts to calm the fateful storm which she saw piling up along the horizon. The situation was tragic. Hiiaka, daring fate, defying the dragons and monsters of the primeval world, had made the journey to Kauai, had snatched away from death the life of Lohiau and with incredible self-denial was escorting the rare youth to the arms of her sister, whose jealousy she knew to be quick as the lightning, her vengeance hot as the breath of the volcano, and now she saw this feather-head, with monstrous ingratitude, dallying with fate, calling down upon the whole party the doom she alone could appreciate, all for the smile of a siren whose charms attracted him for the moment; but, worst of all, her heart condemned her as a traitress--she loved him.

Hiiaka held the trick-card and she won; by her miraculous power she kept the game in her own hands and foiled the hopes of the lovers.

Mele

Ula ka lani ia Kanaloa, [*a]
 Ula ma'ema'e ke ahi a ke A'e-loa. [*b]
 Pohina iluna i ke ao makani,
 Naue pu no i ka ilikai o Makahana-loa, [*c]
 5 Makemake i ka ua lihau. [*d]
 Aohe hana i koe a Ka-wai-loa; [*e]
 Noho a ka li'u-la i ke kula.
 I kula oe no ka makemake, a hiki iho,
 I hoa hula no ka la le'ale'a,
 10 I noho pu me ka uahi pohina. [*f]

[p. 242]

Hina oe i ka Naulu, [*a] noho pu me ka Inuwai. [*b]
 Akahi no a pumehana ka hale, ua hiki oe:
 Ma'ema'e ka luna i Haupu. [*c]
 Upu ka makemake e ike ia Ka-ala.
 15 He ala ka makemake e ike ia Lihu'e; [*d]
 Ku'u uka ia noho ia Halemano. [*e]
 Maanei oe, pale oe, pale au,
 Hana ne'e ke kikala i ka ha'i keiki.
 Hai'na ka manao--noho i Waimea,
 20 Hoonu'u pu i ka i'a ku o ka aina. [*f]
 E kala oe a kala au a kala ia Ku, Ahuena. [*g]

[Translation]

Song

Kanaloa tints heaven with a blush,
 'Tis the flame of the A'e, pure red,
 And gray the wind-clouds overhead.
 We trudge to the waters calm of Kahana--
 5 Heaven grant us a favoring shower!
 The work is all done on the farm.
 We stay till twilight steals o'er the plain
 Then, love-spurred, tramp o'er it again,
 Have you as partner in holiday dance--
 10 We've moiled as one in the gray smoke;
 Cast down by the Naulu, you thirst.
 For once the house warms at your coming.
 How clear glow the heights of you Haupu!
 I long for the sight of Ka-ala,
 15 And sweet is the thought of Lihu'e,
 And our mountain retreat, Hale-mano.
 Here, fenced from each other by tabu,
 Your graces make sport for the crowd.
 What then the solution? Let us dwell
 20 At Waimea and feast on the fish
 That swarm in the neighboring sea,
 With freedom to you and freedom to me,
 Licensed by Ku and by Ahu-ena.

[p. 243]

The scene of this idyl is laid in the district of Waialua, Oahu, but the poet gives his imagination free range regardless of the unities. The chief subjects of interest that serve as a trellis about which the human sentiments entwine concern the duties of the fisherman, who is also a farmer; the school for the hula, in which the hero and the heroine are pupils; and lastly an ideal condition of happiness which the lovers look forward to under the benevolent dispensation of the gods Ku and Ahuena.

Among the numerous relatives of Pele was one said to be a sister, who was stationed on a bleak sun-burnt promontory in Koolau, Oahu, where she supported a half-starved existence, striving to hold soul and body together by gathering the herbs of the fields, eked out by unsolicited gifts of food contributed by passing travelers. The pathetic plaint given below is ascribed to this goddess.

Mele

Mao wale i ka lani
 Ka leo o ke Akua pololi.
 A pololi a moe au
 O ku'u la pololi,
 5 A ola i kou aloha;
 I na'i pu no i ka waimaka e uwe nei.
 E uwe kaua, e!

[Translation]

Song

Engulfed in heaven's abyss
 Is the cry of the famished god.
 I sank to the ground from faintness,
 My day of utter starvation;
 5 Was rescued, revived, by your love:
 Ours a contest of tears sympathetic--
 Let us pour out together our tears.

The Hawaiian thought it not undignified to express sympathy (aloha-ino) with tears.

Footnotes

^237:a Pua ehu kamalena (yellow child). This exclamation is descriptive of the man's visual impression on seeing the canoe with its crowd of passengers and paddlers, in the misty light of morning, receding in the distance. The kamalena is a mountain shrub having a yellow flower.

^237:b Luhi ehu iho la. Refers to the drooping of a shrub under the weight of its leaves and flowers, a figure applied to the bending of the paddlemen to their work.

^237:c Hele a ha ka iwi. An exaggerated figure of speech, referring to the exertions of the men at their paddles (ha, to strain).

^237:d I hali hoomu. This refers in a fine spirit of exaggeration to the regular motions of the paddlers.

^237:e Pua laukona. A kind of sugar-cane which was prescribed and used by the kahunas as an aphrodisiac.

^237:f Kaulele hou. To experience, or to enjoy, again.

^238:a The picture of the sun declining, kaha, to the west, its reflected light-track, kala kalaihi, furrowing the ocean with glory, may be taken to be figurative of the loved and beautiful woman, Kalola, speeding on her westward canoe-flight.

^238:b Akua. Literally a god, must stand for the king.

^238:c Unulau. A special name for the trade-wind.

^238:d Koolau-wahine. Likewise another name for the trade-wind, here represented as carrying off the (man's) companion.

^238:e Mikioi. An impetuous, gusty wind is represented as lashing the ocean at Lehua, thus picturing the emotional stir attending Kalola's departure.

^238:f The words Puwa-i'a na hoa makani, which literally mean that the congress of winds, na hoa makani, have stirred up a commotion, even as a school of fish agitate the surface of the ocean, puwa-i'a, refer to the scandal caused by Ka'i-ama's conduct.

^239:a Kala'e-loa. The full name of the place on Molokai now known as Kala'e.

^239:b La'i a ka manu. Some claim this to be a proper name, La'i-a-ka-manu, that of a place near Kala'e. However that may be the poet evidently uses the phrase here in its etymological sense.

^240:a The account above given is largely based on David Malo's description of the game kilu. In his confessedly imperfect list of the hulas he does not mention the hula kilu. This hula was, however, included in the list of hulas announced for performance in the programme of King Kalakaua's coronation ceremonies.

^240:b Ka-lalau (in the translation by the omission of the article ka, shortened to Lalau). A deep cliff-bound valley on the windward side of Kauai. accessible only at certain times of the year by boats and by a steep mountain trail at its head.

^240:c Pala ku'i. Ku'i means literally to join together, to splice or piece out. The cliffs tower one above another like the steps of a stairway.

^240:d Haka. A ladder or frame such as was laid across a chasm or set up at an impassable place in a precipitous road. The windward side of Kauai about Kalalau abounded in such places.

^240:e Lae-o-ka-laau. The southwest point of Molokai. on which is a light-house.

^240:f Makua-ole. Literally fatherless, perhaps meaning remarkable, without peer.

^241:a Kanaloa. One of the four great gods of the Hawaiians, here represented as playing the part of Phoebus Apollo.

^241:b A'e-loa. The name of a wind whose blowing was said to be favorable to the fisherman in this region.

^241:c Makahana-loa. A favorite fishing ground. The word ilikai ("skin of the sea") graphically depicts the calm of the region. In the translation the name aforementioned has been shortened to Kahana.

^241:d Lihau. A gentle rain that was considered favorable to the work of the fisherman.

^241:e Ka-wai-loa. A division of Waialua, here seemingly used to mean the farm.

^241:f Uahi pohina. Literally gray-headed smoke. It is said that when studying together the words of the mele the pupils and the kumu would often gather about a fire, while the teacher recited and expounded the text. There is a possible allusion to this in the mention of the smoke.

^242:a Naulu. A wind.

^242:b Inu-wai. A wind that dried up vegetation, here indicating thirst.

^242:c Haupu. A mountain on Kauai, sometimes visible on Oahu in clear weather. (See note e, <page 229>, on Haupu.)

^242:d Lihu'e. A beautiful and romantic region nestled, as the Hawaiians say, "between the thighs of the mountain," Mount Kaala.

^242:e Hale-mano. Literally the multitude of houses: a sylvan region bound to the south western flank of the Konahuanni range of mountains, a region of legend and romance, since the coming of the white mau given over to the ravage and desolation that follow the free-ranging of cattle and horses, the vaquero, and the abusive use of fire and ax by the woodman.

^242:f I'a ku o ka aina. Fish common to a region; in this place it was probably the kala, which word is found in the next line, though in a different sense. Here the expression is doubtless a euphemism for dalliance.

^242:g Ku, Ahuena. At Waimea, Oahu, stood two rocks on the opposite bluffs that sentineled the bay. These rocks were said to represent respectively the gods Ku and Ahuena, patrons of the local fishermen.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 244]

  

XXXVI.--THE HULA HOO-NA-NA

The hula hoo-na-na--to quiet, amuse--was an informal dance, such as was performed without the usual restrictions of tabu that hedged about the set dances of the halau. The occasion of an outdoor festival, an ahaaina or luau, was made the opportunity for the exhibition of this dance. It seems to have been an expression of pure sportiveness and mirth-making, and was therefore performed without sacrifice or religious ceremony. While the king, chiefs, and aialo--courtiers who ate in the king's presence--are sitting with the guests about the festal board, two or three dancers of graceful carriage make a circuit of the place, ambling, capering, gesturing as they go in time to the words of a gay song.

A performance of this sort was witnessed by the author's informant in Honolulu many years ago; the occasion was the giving of a royal luau. There was no musical instrument, the performers were men, and the mele they cantillated went as follows:

A pili, a pili.
 A pili ka'u manu
 Ke kepau [*a] o ka ulu-laau.
 Poai a puni,
 5 Noho ana i muli-wa'a; [*b]
 Hoonu'u ka momona a ke alii.
 Eli-eli [*c] ke kapu; ua noa.
 Noa ia wai?
 Noa ia ka lani.
 10 Kau lilua, [*d] kaohi ka maku'u
 E ai ana ka ai a ke alii!
 Hoonu'u, hoonu'u hoonu'u
 I ka i'a a ke alii!

[p. 245]

[Translation]

She is limed, she is limed,
 My bird is limed,
 With the gum of the forest.
 We make a great circuit,
 5 Outskirting the feast.
 You shall feast on king's bounty:
 No fear of the tabu, all's free.
 Free! and by whom?
 Free by the word of the king.
 10 Then a free rein to mirth!
 Banish the kill-joy
 Who eats the king's dainties!
 Feast then till replete
 With the good king's meat!

Footnotes

^244:a Kepau. Gum, the bird-lime of the fowler, which was obtained from forest trees, but especially from the ulu, the breadfruit.

^244:b Muli-wa'a (muli, a term applied to a younger brother). The idea involved is that of separation by an interval, as a younger brother is separated from his older brother by an interval. Muliwai is an interval of water, a stream. Wa'a, the last part of the above compound word, literally a canoe, is here used tropically to mean the tables, or the dishes, on which the food was spread, they being long and narrow, in the shape of a canoe. The whole term, consequently, refers to the people and the table about which they are seated.

^244:c Eli-eli. A word that is found in ancient prayers to emphasize the word kapu or the word noa.

^244:d Lilua. To stand erect and act without the restraint usually prescribed in the presence of royalty.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 246]

  

XXXVII.--THE HULA ULILI

The hula ulili, also called by the descriptive name kolili--to wave or flutter, as a pennant--was a hula that was not at all times confined to the tabu restrictions of the halau. Like a truant schoolboy, it delighted to break loose from restraint and join the informal pleasurings of the people. Imagine an assembly of men and women in the picturesque illumination given by flaring kukui torches, the men on one side, the women on the other. Husbands and wives, smothering the jealousy instinctive to the human heart, are there by mutual consent--their daughters they leave at home--each one ready to play his part to the finish, with no thought of future recrimination. It was a game of love-forfeits, on the same lines as kilu and ume.

Two men, armed with wands furnished with tufts of gay feathers, pass up and down the files of men and women, waving their decorated staffs, ever and anon indicating with a touch of the wand persons of the opposite sea, who under the rules must pay the forfeit demanded of them. The kissing, of course, goes by favor. The wand-bearers, as they move along, troll an amorous ditty:

Oli

Kii na ka ipo * * *
 Mahele-hele i ka la o Kona! [*a]
 O Kona, kai a ke Akua. [*b]
 Elua la, huli ka Wai-opua, [*c]
 5 Nehe i ke kula,
 Leha iluna o Wai-aloha. [*d]
 Kani ka aka a ka ua i ka laau,
 Hoolaau ana i ke aloha ilaila.
 Pili la, a pili i ka'u manu--
 10 O pili o ka La-hiki-ola.
 Ola ke kini o-lalo.
 Hana i ka mea he ipo.
 A hui e hui la!
 Hui Koolau-wahine [*e] o Pua-ke-i! [*f]

[p. 247]

[Translation]

Song

A search for a sweetheart * * *
 Sport for a Kona day!
 Kona, calm sea of the gods.
 Two days the wind surges;
 5 Then, magic of cloud!
 It veers to the plain,
 Drinks up the water of love.
 How gleesome the sound
 Of rain on the trees,
 10 A balm to love's wound!
 The wand touches, heart-ease!
 It touches my bird--
 Touch-of life from the sun!
 Brings health to the million.
 15 Ho, now comes the fun!
 A meeting, a union--
 The nymph, Koo-lau,
 And the hero, Ke-i.

Footnotes

^246:a La o Kona. A day of Kona. i.e., of fine weather.

^246:b Kai a he Akua. Sea of the gods, because calm.

^246:c Wai-opua. A wind which changed its direction after blowing for a few days from one quarter.

^246:d Wai-aloha. The name of a hill. In the translation the author has followed its meaning ("water of love").

^246:e Koolau-wahine. The name of a refreshing wind, often mentioned in Hawaiian poetry; here used as a symbol of female affection.

^246:f Pua-ke-i. The name of a sharp, bracing wind felt on the windward side of Molokai; used here apparently as a symbol of strong masculine passion.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 248]

  

XXXVIII.--THE HULA O-NIU

The so-called hula o-niu is not to be classed with the regular dances of the halau. It was rather a popular sport, in which men and women capered about in an informal dance while the players engaged in a competitive game of top-spinning. The instrument of sport was made from the lower pointed half of an oval coconut shell, or from the corresponding part of a small gourd. The sport was conducted in the presence of a mixed gathering of people amid the enthusiasm and boisterous effervescence which betting always greatly stimulated in Hawaii.

The players were divided into two sides of equal number, and each player had before him a plank, slightly hollowed in the center--like the board on which the Hawaiians pounded their poi--to be used as the bed for spinning his top. The naked hand, unaided by whip or string, was used to impart to the rude top a spinning motion and at the same time the necessary projectile force--a balancing of forces that called for nice adjustment, lest the whirling thing reel too far to one side or run wild and fly its smooth bed. Victory was declared and the wager given to the player whose top spun the longest.

The feature that most interests us is the singing, or cantillation, of the oli. In a dance and game of this sort, which the author's inform-ant witnessed at Kahuku, Oahu, in 1844, one contestant on each side, in turn, cantillated an oli during the performance of the game and the dance.

Oli

Ke poha nei; u'ina la!
 Kani ole-olei, hau-walaau!
 Ke wawa Pu'u-hina-hina; [*a]
 Kani ka aka, he-hene na pali,
 5 Na pali o Ka-iwi-ku'i. [*b]
 Hanohano, makana i ka Wai-opua. [*c]
 Malihini ka hale, ua hiki mai;
 Kani ka pahu a Lohiau,
 A Lohiau-ipo [*d] i Haena la.
 10 Enaena ke aloha, ke hiki mai;

[p. 249]

Auau i ka wai a Kanaloa [*a]
 Nana kaua ia Lima-huli, [*b] e.
 E huli oe a loaa pono
 Ka ia nei o-niu.

[Translation]

Song

The rustle and hum of spinning top,
 Wild laughter and babel of sound--
 Hear the roar of the waves at Pu'u-hina!
 Bursts of derision echoed from cliffs,
 5 The cliffs of Ka-iwi-ku'i;
 And the day is stirred by a breeze.
 The house swarms with women and men.
 List! the drum-beat of Lohiau,
 Lohiau, the lover, prince of Haena--
 10 Love glows like an oven at his coming;
 Then to bathe in the lake of the God.
 Let us look at the vale Lima-huli, look!
 Now turn we and study the spinning--
 That trick we must catch to be winning.

This fragment from antiquity, as the local coloring indicates, finds its setting at Haena, the home of the famous mythological Prince Lohiau, of whom Pele became enamored in her spirit journey. Study of the mele suggests the occasion to have been the feast that was given in celebration of Lohiau's restoration to life and health through the persevering incantations of Hiiaka, Pele's beloved sister. The feast was also Lohiau's farewell to his friends at Haena. At its conclusion Hiiaka started with her charge on the journey which ended with the tragic death of Lohiau at the brink of the volcano. Pele in her jealousy poured out her fire and consumed the man whom she had loved.

Footnotes

^248:a Pu'u-hina-hina. A precipitous place on the coast near Haena.

^248:b Ka-iwi-ku'i. A high cliff against which the waves dash.

^248:c Wai-opua. The name of a pleasant breeze.

^248:d Lohiau-ipo. The epithet ipo, sweetheart, dear one, was often affixed to the name of Lohiau, in token, no doubt, of his being distinguished as the object of Pele's passionate regard.

^249:a Kanaloa. There is a deep basin of clear water, almost fluorescent in its sparkle, in one of the arched caves of Haena, which is called the water of Kanaloa--the name of the great God. This is a favorite bathing place.

^249:b Limu-huli. The name of a beautiful valley that lies back of Haena.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 250]

  

XXXIX.--THE HULA KU'I

The account of the Hawaiian hulas would be incomplete if without mention of the hula ku'i. This was an invention, or introduction, of the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Its formal, public, appearance dates from the coronation ceremonies of the late King Kalakaua, 1883, when it filled an important place in the programme. Of the 262 hula performances listed for exhibition, some 30 were of the hula ku'i. This is perhaps the most democratic of the hulas, and from the date of its introduction it sprang at once into public favor. Not many years ago one could witness its extemporaneous performance by nonprofessionals at many an entertainment and festive gathering. Even the school-children took it up and might frequently be seen innocently footing its measures on the streets. (Pl. xxiv.)

The steps and motions of the hula ku'i to the eyes of the author resemble those of some Spanish dances. The rhythm is in common, or double, time. One observes the following motions:

Figure A.--1. A step obliquely forward with the left foot, arms pointing the same way, body inclining to the right. 2. The ball of the left foot (still advanced) gently pressed on the floor; the heel swings back and forth, describing an arc of some 30 or 40 degrees. 3. The left foot is set firmly in the last position, the body inclining to it as the base of support; the right foot is advanced obliquely, and 4, performs the heel-swinging motions above described, arms pointing obliquely to the right.

Figure B.--Hands pressed to the waist, fingers directed forward, thumbs backward, elbows well away from the body; left foot advanced as in figure A, 1, body inclining to the right. 2. The left foot performs the heel-waving motions, as above. 3. Hands in same position, right foot advanced as previously described. 4. The right foot performs the swinging motions previously described--the body inclined to the left.

Figure C.--In this figure, while the hands are pressed as before against the waist, with the elbows thrown well away from the body, the performer sways the pelvis and central axis of the trunk in a circular or elliptical orbit, a movement, which, carried to the extreme, is termed ami.

There are other figures and modifications, which the ingenuity and fancy of performers have introduced into this dance; but this account must suffice.

 

Click to enlarge
PLATE XXIV
 LADY DANCING THE HULA KU'I

 

[p. 251]

Given a demand for a pas seul, some pleasing dance combining grace with dexterity, a shake of the foot, a twist of the body, and a wave of the hands, the hula ku'i filled the bill to perfection. The very fact that it belonged by name to the genus hula, giving it, as it were, the smack of forbidden fruit, only added to its attractiveness. It became all the rage among dancing folk, attaining such a vogue as almost to cause a panic among the tribunes and censors of society. Even to one who cares nothing for the hula per se, save as it might be a spectacle out of old Hawaii, or a setting for an old-time song, the innocent grace and Delsartian flexibility of this solo dance, which one can not find in its Keltic or African congeners, associate it in mind with the joy and light-heartedness of man's Arcadian period.

The instruments generally used in the musical accompaniment of the hula ku'i are the guitar, the uku-lele, [*a] the taro-patch fiddle, or the mandolin; the piano also lends itself effectively for this purpose; or a combination of these may be used.

The songs that are sung to this dance as a rule belong naturally to later productions of the Hawaiian muse, or to modifications of old poetical compositions. The following mele was originally a name-song (mele-inoa). It was appropriated by the late Princess Kino-iki; and by her it was passed on to Kalani-ana-ole, a fact which should not prejudice our appreciation of its beauty.

Mele

I aloha i ke ko a ka wai,
 I ka i mai, e, anu kaua.
 Ua anu ha pua o ka laina, [*b]
 Ka wahine noho anu o ke kula.
 5 A luna au a o Poli-ahu; [*c]
 Ahu wale kai a o Wai-lua.
 Lua-ole ka hana a ka makani,
 A ke Kiu-ke'e [*d] a o na pali,
 Pa iho i ke kai a o Puna--
 10 Ko Puna mea ma'a mau ia.
 Pau ai ko'u lihi hoihoi
 I ka wai awili me he kai.
 Ke ono hou nei ku'u pu'u
 I ha wai hu'iliu'i o ka uka,

[p. 252]

15 Wai hone i ke kumu o ka pali,
 I malu i ka lau kui-kui. [*a]
 Ke kuhi nei au a he pono
 Ka ilima lei a ke aloha,
 Au i kau nui aku ai,
 20 I ka nani oi a oia pua.

[Translation]

Song

How pleasing, when borne by the tide,
 One says, you and I are a-cold.
 The buds of the center are chilled
 Of the woman who shivers on shore.
 5 I stood on the height Poli-ahu;
 The ocean enrobed Wai-lua.
 Ah, strange are the pranks of the wind,
 The Kiu-ke'e wind of the pali!
 It smites now the ocean at Puna--
 10 That's always the fashion at Puna.
 Gone, gone is the last of my love,
 At this mixture of brine in my drink!
 My mouth is a-thirst for a draught
 Of the cold mountain-water,
 15 That plays at the foot of the cliff,
 In the shade of the kui-kui tree.
 I thought our love-flower, ilima--
 Oft worn as a garland by you--
 Still held its color most true.
 20 You'd exchange its beauty for rue!

Mele

Kaulana mai nei Pua Lanakila;
 Olali oe o ke aupuni hui,
 Nana i koke aku ke kahua,
 Na ale o ka Pakipika.
 5 Lilo i mea ole na enemi;
 Punwai hao-kila, he manao paa;
 Na Ka nupepa la i hoike mai.
 Ua kau Lanakila i ka hanohano,
 O ka u'i mapela la o Aina-hau;
 10 O ko'u hoa ia la e pili ai--
 I hoa kaana i ka puuwai,
 I na kohi kelekele i ka Pu'ukolu.
 Ina ilaila Pua Komela,
 Ka u'i kaulana o Aina-pua!
 15 O ka pua o ka Lehua me ka Ilima
 I lei kahiko no ko'u kino,
 Ka Palai lau-lii me ka Maile,
 Ke ala e hoene i kou poli.

[p. 253]

[Translation]

Song

Fame trumpets your conquests each day,
 Brave Lily Victoria!
 Your scepter finds new hearts to sway,
 Subdues the Pacific's wild waves,
 5 Your foes are left stranded ashore,
 Firm heart as of steel!
 Dame Rumor tells us with glee
 Your fortunes wax evermore,
 Beauty of Aina-hau,
 10 Comrade dear to my heart.
 And what of the hyacinth maid,
 Nymph of the Flowery Land?
 I choose the lehua, ilima,
 As my wreath and emblem of love,
 15 The small-leafed fern and the maile--
 What fragrance exhales from thy breast!

The story that might explain this modern lyric belongs to the gossip of half a century ago. The action hinges about one who is styled Pua Lanakila--literally Flower of Victory. Now there is no flower, indigenous or imported, known by this name to the Hawaiians. It is an allegorical invention of the poet. A study of the name and of its interpretation, Victory, at once suggested to me the probability that it was meant for the Princess Victoria Kamamalu.

As I interpret the story, the lover seems at first to be in a condition of unstable equilibrium, but finally concludes to cleave to the flowers of the soil, the lehua and the ilima (verse 15), the palai and the maile (verse 17), the meaning of which is clear.

Footnotes

^251:a The uku-lele and the taro-patch fiddle are stringed instruments resembling in general appearance the fiddle. They seem to have been introduced into these islands by the Portuguese immigrants who have come in within the last twenty-five years. As with the guitar, the four strings of the uku-lele or the five strings of the taro-patch fiddle are plucked with the finger or thumb.

^251:b Na pua o ka laina. The intent of this expression, which seems to have an erotic meaning, may perhaps be inferred from its literal rendering in the translation. It requires a tropical imagination to follow a Hawaiian poem.

^251:c Poli-ahu. A place or region on Mauna-kea.

^251:d Kiu-ke'e. The name of a wind felt at Nawiliwili, Kauai. The local names for winds differed on the various islands and were multiplied almost without measure; as given in the mythical story of Kama-pua'a, or in the semihistoric tale of Ku-a-Paka'a, they taxed the memories of raconteurs.

^252:a Kui-kui. The older name-form of the tree (Aleurites triloba), popularly known by some as the candle-nut tree, from the fact that its oily nuts were used in making torches. Kukui, or tutui, is the name now applied to the tree, also to a torch or lamp. The Samoan language still retains the archaic name tuitui. This is one of the few instances in which the original etymology of a word is retained in Hawaiian poetry.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

XL.--THE OLI

The Hawaiian word mele included all forms of poetical composition. The fact that the mele, in whatever form, was intended for cantillation, or some sort of rhythmical utterance addressed to the ear, has given to this word in modern times a special meaning that covers the idea of song or of singing, thus making it overlap ambiguously into the territory that more properly belongs to the word oli. The oli was in strict sense the lyric utterance of the Hawaiians.

In its most familiar form the Hawaiians--many of whom possessed the gift of improvisation in a remarkable degree--used the oli not only for the songful expression of joy and affection, but as the vehicle of humorous or sarcastic narrative in the entertainment of their comrades. The traveler, as he trudged along under his swaying burden, or as he rested by the wayside, would solace himself and his companions with a pensive improvisation in the form of an oli. Or, sitting about the camp-fire of an evening, without the consolation of the social pipe or bowl, the people of the olden time would keep warm the fire of good-fellowship and cheer by the sing-song chanting of the oli, in which the extemporaneous bard recounted the events of the day and won the laughter and applause of his audience by witty, ofttimes exaggerated, allusions to many a humorous incident that had marked the journey. If a traveler, not knowing the language of the country, noticed his Hawaiian guide and baggage-carriers indulging in mirth while listening to an oli by one of their number, he would probably be right in suspecting himself to be the innocent butt of their merriment.

The lover poured into the ears of his mistress his gentle fancies: the mother stilled her child with some bizarre allegory as she rocked it in her arms; the bard favored by royalty--the poet laureate--amused the idle moments of his chief with some witty improvisation; the alii himself, gifted with the poetic fire, would air his humor or his didactic comments in rhythmic shape--all in the form of the oli.

The dividing line, then. between the oli and those other weightier forms of the mele, the inoa, the kanikau (threnody), the pule, and that unnamed variety of mele in which the poet dealt with historic or mythologic subjects, is to be found almost wholly in the mood of the singer. In truth, the Hawaiians not unfrequently applied the term pule to compositions which we moderns find it hard to bring within our definitions of prayer. For to our understanding the

 

[p. 255]

[paragraph continues] Hawaiian pule often contains neither petition, nor entreaty, nor aspiration, as we measure such things.

The oli from its very name (oli-oli, joyful) conveys the notion of gladness, and therefore of song. It does not often run to such length as the more formal varieties of the mele; it is more likely to be pitched to the key of lyric and unconventional delight, and, as it seems to the writer, more often than other forms attains a gratifying unity by reason of closer adherence to some central thought or mood; albeit, when not so labeled, one might well be at a loss whether in any given case he should term the composition mele or oli.

It may not be entirely without significance that the first and second examples here given come from Kauai, the island which most vividly has retained a memory of the southern lands that were the homes of the people until they came as emigrants to Hawaii.

The story on which this song is founded relates that the comely Pamaho'a was so fond of her husband during his life that at his death she was unwilling to part with his bones. Having cleaned and wrapped them in a bundle, she carried them with her wherever she went. In the indiscretion begotten of her ill-balanced state of mind she committed the mortal offense of entering the royal residence while thus encumbered, where was Kaahumanu, favorite wife of Kamehameha I. The king detailed two constables (ilamuku) to remove the woman and put her to death. When they had reached a safe distance, moved with pity, the men said: "Our orders were to slay; but what hinders you to escape?" The woman took the hint and fled hot-foot.

Oli

Ka wai opua-makani o Wailua, [*a]
 I hulihia e ke kai;
 Awahia ka lau hau,
 Ai pala-ka-ha, ka ai o Maka'u-kiu.
 5 He kiu ka pua kukui,
 He elele hooholo na ke Koolau; [*b]
 Ke kipaku mai la i ka wa'a-- [*c]
 "E holo oe!"
 Holo newa ka lau maia me ka pua hau,
 10 I pili aloha me ka mokila ula i ka wai;
 Maalo pulelo i ka wai o Malu-aka.
 He aka kaua makani kaili-hoa;
 Kaili ino ka lau Malua-kele,
 Lalau, hopu hewa i ka hoa kanaka; [*d]

[p. 256]

15 Koe a kau me ka manao iloko.
 Ke apo wale la no i ke one,
 I ka uwe wale iho no i Mo'o-mo'o-iki, [*a] e!
 He ike moolelo na ke kuhi wale,
 Aole ma ka waha mai o kanaka.
 20 Hewa, pono ai la hoi au, e ka hoa;
 Nou ka ke aloha,
 I lua-ai-ele [*b] ai i o, i anei;
 Ua kuewa i ke ala me ka wai-maka.
 Aohe wa, ua uku i kou hale--
 25 Hewa au, e!

[Translation]

Song

The wind-beaten stream of Wailua
 Is tossed into waves from the sea;
 Salt-drenched are the leaves of the hau,
 The stalks of the taro all rotted--
 5 'Twas the crop of Maka'u-kiu.
 The flowers of kukui are a telltale,
 A messenger sped by the gale
 To warn the canoe to depart.
 Pray you depart!
 10 Hot-foot, she's off with her pack--
 A bundle red-stained with the mud--
 And ghost-swift she breasts Malu-aka.
 Quest follows like smoke--lost is her companion;
 Fierce the wind plucks at the leaves,
 15 Grabs--by mistake--her burden, the man.
 Despairing, she falls to the earth.
 And, hugging the hillock of sand,
 Sobs out her soul on the beach Mo-mo-iki.
 A tale this wrung from my heart,
 20 Not told by the tongue of man.
 Wrong! yet right, was I. my friend;
 My love after all was for you,
 While I lived a vagabond life there and here,
 Sowing my vagrom tears in all roads--
 25 Prompt my payment of debt to your house--
 Yes, truly, I'm wrong!

Footnotes

^255:a The scene is laid in the region about the Wailua, a river on Kauai. This stream, tossed with waves driven up from the sea, represents figuratively the disturbance of the woman's mind at the coming of the officers.

^255:b Koolau, The name of a wind; stands for the messengers of the king, whose instructions were to expel (kipaku, verse 7) and then to slay.

^255:c Wa'a. Literally canoe; stands for the woman herself.

^255:d Hoa kanaka. Human companion: is an allusion to the bundle of her husband's bones which she carries with her, but which are torn away and lost in the flood.

^256:a Mo'o-mo'o-iki. A land at Wailua. Kauai.

^256:b Lua-ai-ele. To carry about with one a sorrow.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 257]

  

XLI.--THE WATER OF KANE

If one were asked what, to the English-speaking mind, constitutes the most representative romantico-mystical aspiration that has been embodied in song and story, doubtless he would be compelled to answer the legend and myth of the Holy Grail. To the Hawaiian mind the aspiration and conception that most nearly approximates to this is that embodied in the words placed at the head of this chapter, The Water of Kane. One finds suggestions and hints of this conception in many passages of Hawaiian song and story, sometimes a phosphorescent flash, answering to the dip of the poet's blade, sometimes crystallized into a set form; but nowhere else than in the following mele have I found this jewel deliberately wrought into shape, faceted, and fixed in a distinct form of speech.

This mele comes from Kauai, the island which more than any other of the Hawaiian group retains a tight hold on the mystical and imaginative features that mark the mythology of Polynesia; the island also which less than any other of the group was dazzled by the glamour of royalty and enslaved by the theory of the divine birth of kings.

He Mele no Kane

He u-i, he ninau:
 E u-i aku ana au ia oe,
 Ala i-he'a ka wai a Kane?
 Aia i ka hikina a ka La,
 5 Puka i Hae-hae; [*a]
 Aia i-laila ka Wai a Kane.

E u-i aku ana au ia oe,
 Aia i-hea ka Wai a Kane?
 Aia i Kau-lana-ka-la, [*b]
 10 I ka pae opua i ke kai, [*c]
 Ea mai ana ma Nihoa, [*d]

[p. 258]

Ma ka mole mai o Lehua;
 Aia i-laila ka Wai a Kane.

E u-i aku ana au ia oe,
 15 Aia i-hea ka Wai a Kane?
 Aia i ke kua-hiwi, i ke kua-lono,
 I ke awawa, i ke kaha-wai;
 Aia i-laila ka Wai a Kane.

E u-i aku ana au ia oe,
 20 Aia i-hea ka Wai a Kane?
 Aia i-kai, i ka moana,
 I ke Kua-lau, i ke anuenue,
 I ka punohu, [*a] i ka ua-koko, [*b]
 I ka alewa-lewa:
 25 Aia i-laila ka Wai a Kane.

E u-i aku ana au ia oe,
 Aia i-hea ka Wai a Kane?
 Aia i-luna ka Wai a Kane,
 I ke ouli, i ke ao eleele,
 30 I ke ao pano-pano,
 I ke ao popolo-hua mea a Kane la, e!
 Aia i-laila ka Wai a Kane.

E u-i aku ana au ia oe.
 Aia i-hea ka Wai a Kane?
 35 Aia i-lalo, i ka honua, i ka Wai hu,
 I ka wai kau a Kane me Kanaloa-- [*c]
 He wai-puna, he wai e inu,
 He wai e mana, he wai e ola.
 E ola no, e-a!

[Translation]

The Water of Kane

A query, a question,
 I put to you:
 Where is the water of Kane?
 At the Eastern Gate
 5 Where the Sun comes in at Haehae;
 There is the water of Kane.

A question I ask of you:
 Where is the water of Kane?
 Out there with the floating Sun,

[p. 259]

10 Where cloud-forms rest on Ocean's breast.
 Uplifting their forms at Nihoa,
 This side the base of Lehua;
 There is the water of Kane.

One question I put to you:
 15 Where is the water of Kane?
 Yonder on mountain peak,
 On the ridges steep,
 In the valleys deep,
 Where the rivers sweep;
 20 There is the water of Kane.

This question I ask of you:
 Where, pray, is the water of Kane?
 Yonder, at sea, on the ocean,
 In the driving rain,
 25 In the heavenly bow,
 In the piled-up mist-wraith,
 In the blood-red rainfall,
 In the ghost-pale cloud-form;
 There is the water of Kane.

30 One question I put to you:
 Where, where is the water of Kane?
 Up on high is the water of Kane,
 In the heavenly blue,
 In the black piled cloud,
 35 In the black-black cloud.
 In the black-mottled sacred cloud of the gods;
 There is the water of Kane.

One question I ask of you:
 Where flows the water of Kane?
 40 Deep in the ground. in the gushing spring,
 In the ducts of Kane and Loa,
 A well-spring of water, to quaff,
 A water of magic power--
 The water of life!
 45 Life! O give us this life!

 

Footnotes

^257:a Hae-hae. Heaven's eastern gate; the portal in the solid walls that supported the heavenly dome, through which the sun entered in the morning.

^257:b Kau-Lana-ka-la. When the setting sun, perhaps by an optical illusion drawn out into a boatlike form, appeared to be floating on the surface of the ocean, the Hawaiians named the phenomenon Kau-lana-ka-la--the floating of the sun. Their fondness for personification showed itself in the final conversion of this phrase into something like a proper name, which they applied to the locality of the phenomenon.

^257:c Pae opua i ke kai. Another instance of name-giving, applied to the bright clouds that seem to rest on the horizon, especially to the west.

^257:d Nihoa (Bird Island). This small rock to the northwest of Kauai, though far below the horizon, is here spoken of as if it were in sight.

^258:a Punohu. A red luminous cloud, or a halo, regarded as an omen portending some sacred and important event.

^258:b Ua-koko. Literally bloody rain, a term applied to a rainbow when lying near the ground, or to a freshet-stream swollen with the red muddy water from the wash of the hillsides. These were important omens, claimed as marking the birth of tabu chiefs.

^258:c Wai kau a Kane me Kanaloa. Once when Kane and Kanaloa were journeying together Kanaloa complained of thirst. Kane thrust his staff into the pali near at hand, and out flowed a stream of pure water that has continued to the present day. The place is at Keanae, Maui.

     
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 260]

  

XLII.--GENERAL REVIEW

In this preliminary excursion into the wilderness of Hawaiian literature we have covered but a small part of the field; we have reached no definite boundaries; followed no stream to its fountain head; gained no high point of vantage, from which to survey the whole. It was indeed outside the purpose of this book to make a delimitation of the whole field of Hawaiian literature and to mark out its relations to the formulated thoughts of the world.

Certain provisional conclusions, however, are clearly indicated: that this unwritten speech-literature is but a peninsula, a semidetached, outlying division of the Polynesian, with which it has much in common, the whole running back through the same lines of ancestry to the people of Asia. There still lurk in the subliminal consciousness of the race, as it were, vague memories of things that long ago passed from sight and knowledge. Such, for instance, was the mo'o; a word that to the Hawaiian meant a nondescript reptile, which his imagination vaguely pictured, sometimes as a dragonlike monster belching fire like a chimera of mythology, or swimming the ocean like a sea-serpent, or multiplied into a manifold pestilential swarm infesting the wilderness, conceived of as gifted with superhuman powers and always as the malignant foe of mankind. Now the only Hawaiian representatives of the reptilian class were two species of harmless lizards, so that it is not conceivable that the Hawaiian notion of a mo'o was derived from objects present in his island home. The word mo'o may have been a coinage of the Hawaiian speech-center, but the thing it stood for must have been an actual existence, like the python and cobra of India, or the pterodactyl of a past geologic period. May we not think of it as an ancestral memory, an impress, of Asiatic sights and experiences?

In this connection, it will not, perhaps, lead us too far afield, to remark that in the Hawaiian speech we find the chisel-marks of Hindu and of Aryan scoring deep-graven. For instance, the Hawaiian word pali, cliff or precipice, is the very word that Younghusband--following, no doubt, the native speech of the region, the Pamirs--applies to the mountain-walls that buttress off Tibet and the central plateaus of Asia from northern India. Again the Hawaiian word merle, which we have used so often in these chapters as to make it seem almost like a household word, corresponds in form, in sound, and in meaning to the Greek melos: ta mele, lyric

[p. 261]

poetry (Liddell and Scott). Again, take the Hawaiian word i'a, fish--Maori, ika; Malay, ikan; Java, iwa; Bouton, ikani (Edward Tregear: The Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary). Do not these words form a chain that links the Hawaiian form to the ixthus of classic Greece? The subject is fascinating, but it would soon lead us astray. These examples must suffice.

If we can not give a full account of the tangled woodland of Hawaiian literature, it is something to be able to report on its fruits and the manner of men and beasts that dwelt therein. Are its fruits good for food, or does the land we have explored bring forth only poisonous reptiles and the deadly upas? Is it a land in which the very principles of art and of human nature are turned upside down? Its language the babble of Bander-log?

This excursion into the jungle of Hawaiian literature should at least impress us with the oneness of humanity; that its roots and springs of action, and ours, draw their sustenance from one and the same primeval mold; that, however far back one may travel, he will never come to a point where he can say this is "common or unclean;" so that he may without defilement "kill and eat" of what the jungle provides. The wonder is that they in Hawaii of the centuries past, shut off by vast spaces of sea and land from our world, yet accomplished so much.

Test the ancient Hawaiians by our own weights and measures. The result will not be to their discredit. In practical science, in domestic arts, in religion, in morals, in the raw material of literature, even in the finished article--though unwritten--the showing would not be such as to give the superior race cause for self-gratulation.

Another lesson--a corollary to the above--is the debt of recognition we owe to the virtues and essential qualities of untutored human nature itself. Imagine a portion of our own race cut off from the thought-currents of the great world and stranded on the island-specks of the great ocean, as the Polynesians have been for a period of centuries that would count back to the times of William the Conqueror or Charlemagne, with only such outfit of he world's goods as might survive a 3,000-mile voyage in frail canoes, reenforced by such flotsam of the world's metallic stores as the tides of ocean might chance to bring them--and, with such limited capital to start with in life, what, should we judge, would have been the outcome of the experiment in religion, in morals, in art, in mechanics, in civilization, or in the production of materials for literature, as compared with what the white man found in Hawaii at its discovery in the last quarter of the eighteenth century?

It were well to come to the study of primitive and savage people, of nature-folk, with a mind purged of the thanks-to-the-goodness-and-the-grace spirit.

[p. 262]

It will not do for us to brush aside contemptuously the notions held by the Hawaiians in religion, cosmogony, and mythology as mere heathen superstitions. If they were heathen, there was nothing else for them to be. But even the heathen can claim the right to be judged by their deeds, not by their creeds. Measured by this standard, the average heathen would not make a bad showing in comparison with the average denizen of Christian lands. As to beliefs, how much more defensible were the superstitions of our own race two or three centuries ago, or of to-day, than those of the Hawaiians? How much less absurd and illogical were our notions of cosmogony, of natural history; how much less beneficent, humane, lovable the theology of the pagan Hawaiians than of our Christian ancestors a few centuries ago if looked at from an ethical or practical point of view. At the worst, the Hawaiian sacrificed the enemy he took in battle on the altar of his gods; the Christian put to death with exquisite torture those who disagreed with him in points of doctrine. And when it comes to morals, have not the heathen time and again demonstrated their ability to give lessons in self-restraint to their Christian invaders?

It is a matter of no small importance in the rating of a people to take account of their disposition toward nature. If there has been a failure to appreciate truly the mental attitude of the "savage," and especially of the Polynesian savage, the Hawaiian, toward the book of truth that was open to him in nature, it is always in order to correct it. That such a mistake has been made needs no further proof than the perusal of the following passage in a book entitled "History of the Sandwich Islands:"

To the heathen the book of nature is a sealed book. Where the word of God is not, the works of God fail either to excite admiration or to impart instruction. The Sandwich Islands present some of the sublimest scenery on earth, but to an ignorant native--to the great mass of the people in entire heathenism--it has no meaning. As one crested billow after another of the heaving ocean rolls in and dashes upon the unyielding rocks of an iron-bound coast, which seems to say, "Hitherto shalt thou come and no farther," the low-minded heathen is merely thinking of the shellfish on the shore. As he looks up to the everlasting mountains, girt with clouds and capped with snow, he betrays no emotion. As he climbs a towering cliff, looks down a yawning precipice, or abroad upon a forest of deep ravines, immense rocks, and spiral mountains thrown together in the utmost wildness and confusion by the might of God's volcanoes, he is only thinking of some roots in the wilderness that may be good for food.

There is hardly a poem in this volume that does not show the utter falsity of this view. The writer of the words quoted above, now in his grave for more than sixty years, was a man for whose purity and moral character one must entertain the highest esteem. He enjoyed the very best opportunity to study the minds of the "heathen" about him, to discern their thoughts, to learn at first hand their emotions

[p. 263]

toward the natural world, whether of admiration, awe, reverence, or whether their attitude was that of blank indifference and absorption in selfish things. But he utterly failed to penetrate the mystery, the "truth and poetry," of the Hawaiian mind and heart. Was it because he was tied to a false theology and a false theory of human nature? We are not called upon to answer this question. Let others say what was wrong in his standpoint. The object of this book is not controversial; but when a palpable injustice has been done, and is persisted in by people of the purest motives, as to the thoughts, emotions, and mental operations of the "savage," and as to the finer workings within that constitute the furniture and sanctuary of heart and soul, it is imperative to correct so grave a mistake; and we may be sure that he whose words have just been quoted, were he living to-day, would acknowledge his error.

Though it is not the purpose of these pages to set forth in order a treatise on the human nature of the "savage," or to make unneeded apology for the primitive and uncultured races of mankind in general, or for the Hawaiian in particular, yet it is no small satisfaction to be able to set in array evidence from the life and thoughts of the savages themselves that shall at least have a modifying influence upon our views on these points.

The poetry of ancient Hawaii evinces a deep and genuine love of nature, and a minute, affectionate, and untiring observation of her moods, which it would be hard to find surpassed in any literature. Her poets never tired of depicting nature; sometimes, indeed, their art seems heaven-born. The mystery, beauty, and magnificence of the island world appealed profoundly to their souls; in them the ancient Hawaiian found the image of man the embodiment of Deity; and their myriad moods and phases were for him an inexhaustible spring of joy, refreshment, and delight.

    
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 264] [p. 265]

  

GLOSSARY

The study of Hawaiian pronunciation is mainly a study of vowel sounds and of accent. Each written vowel represents at least two related sounds.

A (ah) has the Italian sound found in father, as in ha-le or in La-ka; also a short sound like that of a in liable, as in ke-a-ke-a, to contradict, or in a-ha, an assembly.

E (a) has the sound of long a in fate, or of e in prey, without the i-glide that follows, as in the first syllable of Pe-le, or of me-a, a thing; also the short sound of e in net, as in e-ha, hurt, or in pea, a sail.

I (ee) has the long sound of i in pique, or in police, as in i-li, skin, or in hi-la-hi-la, shame; also the short sound of i in hill, as in li-hi, border, and in i-ki, small.

O (oh) has the long sound of o in note or in old, without the u-glide, as in lo-a, long, or as in the first syllable of Lo-no; also a short sound, which approximates to that sometimes erroneously given to the vowel in coat, as in po-po, rotten, or as in lo-ko, a lake.

U (oo) has the long sound of u in rule, as in hu-la, to dance; and a short sound approximating to that of u in full, as in mu-ku, cut off.

Every Hawaiian syllable ends in a vowel. No attempt has been made to indicate these differences of vowel sound. The only diacritical marks here employed are the acute accent for stressed syllables and the apostrophe between two vowels to indicate the glottic closure or interruption of sound (improperly sometimes called a guttural) that prevents the two from coalescing.

In the seven diphthongs ae, ai, ao, au, ei, ia, and ua a delicate ear will not fail to detect a coalescence of at least two sounds, thus proving them not to be mere digraphs.

In animated description or pathetic narrative, or in the effort to convey the idea of length, or height, or depth, or immensity, the Hawaiian had a way of prolonging the vowel sounds of a word, as if by so doing he could intimate the amplitude of his thought.

The letter w (way) represents two sounds, corresponding to our w and our v. At the beginning of a word it has the sound of w (way), retaining this even when the word has become compounded. This is illustrated in Wai-a-lu-a (geographical name), and wa-ha mouth. In the middle of a word, or after the first syllable, it

[p. 266]

almost always has the sound of v (vay), as in he-wa (wrong), and in E-wa (geographical name). In ha-wa-wa (awkward), the compound word ha-wai (water-pipe), and several others the w takes the way sound.

The great majority of Hawaiian words are accented on the penult, and in simple words of four or more syllables there is, as a rule, an accent on the fourth and on the sixth syllables, counting back from the final syllable, as in la-na-ki-la (victorious) and as in ho-o-ko-lo-ko-lo (to try at law).

 

Aha (a-ha)--a braided cord of sinet; an assembly; a prayer or religious service (note a, <page 20>).

Ahaaina (a-ha-ai-na)--a feast.

Ai (ai, as in aisle)--vegetable food; to eat; an event in a game or contest (<page 93>).

Ai-a-lo (to eat in the presence of)--the persons privileged to eat at an alii's table.

Aiha'a (ai-ha'a)--a strained, bombastic, guttural tone of voice in reciting a mele, in contrast to the style termed ko'i-honua (pp. <page 89>, <page 90>).

Ailolo (ai-lo-lo = to eat brains)--a critical, ceremonial sacrifice, the conditions of which must be met before a novitiate can be admitted as a practitioner of the hula as well as of other skilled professions (pp. <page 15>, <page 31>, <page 34>).

Aina (ai-na)--the land; a meal (of food).

Alii (a-li'i)--chief; a person of rank; a king.

Aloha (a-lo-ha)--good will; affection; love; a word of salutation.

Ami (a-mi)--to bend: a bodily motion used in the hula (note, <page 202>).

Anuenue (a-nu-e-nu-e)--a rainbow; a waterfall in Hilo (<page 61>, verse 13).

Ao (a-o)--dawn; daytime: the world; a cloud (<page 196>, verse 7).

Aumakua (au-ma-ku-a)--an ancestral god (<page 23>).

Awa (a-va)--bitter; sour; the soporific root of the Piper methysticum (<page 130>).

 

Ekaha (e-kaha)--the nidus fern, by the Hawaiians sometimes called ka hoe a Mawi, Mawi's paddle, from the shape of its leaves (<page 19>).

 

Haena (Ha-e-na)--a village on the windward coast of Kauai, the home of Lohiau, for whom Pele conceived a passion in her dreams (<page 186>).

Hala (ha-la)--a sin; a variety of the "screw-pine" (Pandanus odoratissimus, Hillebrand). Its drupe was used in decoration, its leaves were braided into mats, hats, bags, etc.

Halapepe (ha-la-pe-pe)--a tree used in decorating the kuahu (Dracaena aurea, Hillebrand) (<page 24>).

Halau (ha-lau--made of leaves)--a canoe-shed; a hall consecrated to the hula; a sort of school of manual arts or the art of combat (p. 14).

Hale (ha-le)--a house.

Hanai-kuahu (ha-nai-ku-a-hu--altar-feeder)--the daily renewal of the offerings laid on the kuahu; the officer who performed this work (<page 29>).

Hanohano (ha-no-ha-no)--having dignity and wealth.

Hau (how)--a tree whose light, tough wood. strong fibrous bark, and mucilaginous flowers have many uses (Hibiscus tiliaceus).

Haumea (Hau-me-a)--a mythological character, the same as Papa (note c. <page 126>).

Heiau (hei-au)--a temple.

Hiiaka (Hi'i-a-ka)--the youngest sister of Pele (<page 186>).

Hilo (Hi-lo)--to twist as in making string; the first day in the month when the new moon appears; a town and district in Hawaii (pp. <page 60>, <page 61>).

Holoku (ho-lo-ku)--a loose gown resembling a "Mother Hubbard," much worn by the women of Hawaii.

[p. 267]

Hoonoa (ho'o-no-a)--to remove a tabu; to make ceremonially free (<page 126>).

Hooulu (ho'o-u-lu)--to cause to grow; to inspire. (Verse 3, Pule Kuahu, <page 20>, and verse 1, Pule Kuahu, <page 21>.)

Hoopaa (ho'o-pa'a)--the members of a hula company who, as instrumentalists, remained stationary, not moving in the dance (<page 28>).

Huikala (hu-i-ka-la)--to cleanse ceremonially; to pardon (<page 15>).

Hula (hu-la), or int. hulahula--to dance, to make sport, to the accompaniment of music and song.

 

I'a (i'a)--fish; a general term for animal food or whatever relish serves for the time in its place.

Ieie (i-e-i-e)--a tall woody climber found in the wild woods, much used in decoration (Freycinetia arnotti, <page 19>).

Ilamuka (i-la-mu-ku)--a constable.

Ilima (i-li-ma)--a woody shrub (Sida fallax, Hillebrand) whose chrome-yellow flowers were much used in making wreaths (<page 56>).

Ilio (i-li-o)--a dog; a variety of hula (<page 223>).

Imu (i-mu), sometimes umu (u-mu)--a native oven, made by lining a hole in the ground and arching it over with stones (verse 3, Oli Pau, <page 51>).

Inoa (i-no-a)--a name. (see Mele inoa.)

Ipo (i-po)--a lover; a sweetheart.

Ipoipo (i-po-i-po), hoipo (ho-i-po), or hoipoipo (ho-i-po-i-po)--to make love; to play the lover; sexual dalliance.

Ipu (i-pu)-a general name for the Cucurbitaceae, and the dishes made from them, as well as dishes of coconut shell, wood, and stone; the drum-like musical Instrument made from joining two calabashes (<page 73>).

Iwa (i-wa, pr. i-va)--the number nine; a large black sea-bird, probably a gull (<page 76>).

 

Kahiki (Ka-hi-ki)--Tahiti; any foreign country (<page 17>).

Kahiko (ka-hi-ko)--ancient; to array; to adorn.

Kahuna (ka-hu-na)--a priest; a skilled craftsman. Every sort of kahuna was at bottom and in some regard a priest, his special department being indicated by a qualifying word, as kahuna anaana, sorcerer, kahuna kalai wa'a, canoe-maker.

Kai (pr. kye)--the ocean; salty. I-kai, to the ocean; ma-kai, at the ocean.

Kakaolelo (ka-ka-o-le-lo)--One skilled in language; a rhetorician; a councilor (<page 98>).

Kamapua'a (Ka-ma-pu-a'a)--literally the bog-child; the mythological swine-god, whose story is connected with that of Pele (<page 231>).

Kanaka (ka-na-ka)--a man; a commoner as opposed to the alii. Kanaka (ka-na-ka), men in general; the human race. (Notice the different accents.)

Kanaenae (ka-nae-nae)--a propitiatory sacrifice; an intercession; a part of a prayer (pp. <page 16>, <page 20>).

Kanaloa (Ka-na-lo-a)--one of the four major gods, represented as of a dark complexion and of a malignant disposition (<page 24>).

Kane (Ka-ne)--male; a husband; one of the four major gods, represented as being a tall blond and of a benevolent disposition (<page 24>).

Kapa (ka-pa)--the paper-cloth of the Polynesians, made from the fibrous bark of many plants by pounding with wooden beaters while kept moist.

Kapo (Ka-po)--a goddess and patron of the hula, sister of the poison-god, Kalai-pahoa, and said to be mother of Laka (pp. <page 25>, <page 45>).

Kapu (ka-pu)--a tabu; a religious prohibition (pp. <page 30>, <page 57>).

Kau (Ka-u)--"the milk;" a district on the island of Hawaii.

Kawele (ka-we-le)--a manner of cantillating In a distinct and natural tone of voice; about the same as ko'i-honua (<page 58>).

Kihei (ki-hei)--a robe of kapa worn after the fashion of the Roman toga,

[p. 268]

Kii (ki'i)--to fetch, to go after a thing: an image, a picture, a marionette: a variety of the hula (<page 91>).

Kilauea (Ki-lau-e-a)--the great active volcano of Hawaii.

Kini (ki-ni)--the number 40,000; a countless number. Kini Akua, a host of active, often mischievous, little folk in human form that peopled the deep woods. They resembled our elves and brownies, and were esteemed as having godlike powers (<page 21>, note; <page 24>).

Kilu (ki-lu)--a dish made by cutting off obliquely the top of a coconut or small gourd, which was used as a sort of top in the game and dance called kilu. (Hula kilu, <page 235>.)

Ko--sugar-cane; performed, accomplished. With the causative prefix ho'o, as in ho'oko (ho'o-ko), to accomplish, to carry to success (<page 30>).

Ko'i (ko'i)--an ax, an adz; originally a stone implement. (See mele beginning Ko'i maka nui, <page 228>.)

Ko'i honua (ko'i ho-nu-a)--a compound of the causative ko, i, to utter, and honua, the earth; to recite or cantillate in a quiet distinct tone, in distinction from the stilted bombastic manner termed ai-ha'a (<page 58>).

Kokua-kumu (ko-ku-a-ku-mu)--the assistant or deputy who took charge of the halau in the absence of the kumu-hula (<page 29>).

Kolea (ko-le-a)--the plover; the name of a hula (<page 219>).

Kolohe (ko-lo-he)--mischievous; restless; lawless (note d, <page 194>).

Kona (Kona)--a southerly wind or storm; a district on the leeward side of many of the islands.

Koolau (Ko'o-lau)--leaf-compeller; the windward side of an island; the name of a wind. (A Koolau wau, ike i ka ua. verse 1. <page 59>.)

Ku--to stand; to rise up; to fit; a division of land; one of the four major gods who had many functions, such as Ku-pulupulu, Ku-mokuhalii, Ku-kaili-moku, etc. (Mele, Ku e, nana e! <page 223>.)

Kuahu (ku-a-hu)--an altar; a rustic stand constructed in the halau in honor of the hula gods (<page 15>).

Kuhai-moana (Ku-hai-mo-a-na)--a shark-god (pp. <page 76>, <page 77>).

Ku'i (ku'i)--to smite; to beat; the name of a hula (<page 250>).

Kukui (ku-ku-i)--a tree (Aleurites moluccana) from the nuts of which were made torches; a torch. (Mahana lua na kukui a Lanikaula, <page 130>, note c.)

Kumu-hula (ku-mu hula)--a teacher and leader of the hula.

Kupee (ku-pe'e)--a bracelet; an anklet (Mele Kupe'e, <page 49>.)

Kupua (ku-pu-a)--a superhuman being; a wonder-worker: a wizard.

Ku-pulupulu (Ku-pu-lu-pu-lu)--Ku the hairy; one of the forms of god Ku, propitiated by canoe-makers and hula folk (<page 24>).

 

Laa (la'a)--consecrated; holy; devoted.

Laa-mai-Kahiki--A prince who flourished some six or seven centuries ago and voyaged to Kahiki and back. He was an ardent patron of the hula (<page 103>).

Lama (la-ma)--a torch; a beautiful tree (Maba sandwicensis, Hillebrand) having fine-grained whitish wood that was much used for sacred purposes (<page 23>).

Lanai (la-nai)--a shed or veranda; an open part of a house covered only by a roof.

Lanai (La-na'i)--the small island lying southwest of Maui.

Lani (la-ni)--the sky; the heaven or the heavens; a prince or king; heaven-born (pp. <page 81>, <page 82>).

Lehua (le-hu-a)--a forest tree (Metrosideros polymorpha) whose beautiful scarlet or salmon-colored flowers were much used in decoration (Pule Hoo-noa, <page 126>).

Lei (lei: both vowels are sounded, the i slightly)--a wreath of flowers. of leaves, feathers, beads, or shells (<page 56>).

Liloa (Li-lo-a)--an ancient king of Hawaii, the father of Umi (<page 131>).

[p. 269]

Lohiau (Lo-hi-au)--the prince of Haena, with whom Pele became enamored in her dreams (<page 186>).

Lolo (lo-lo)--the brain (<page 34>).

Lono (Lo-no)--one of the four major gods of Hawaii (<page 24>).

Luau (lu-au)--greens made by cooking young taro leaves; in modern times a term applied to a Hawaiian feast.

 

Mahele (ma-he-le)--to divide; a division of a mele; a canto; a part of a song-service (<page 58>).

Mahiole (ma-hi-o-le)--a helmet or war-cap, a style of hair-cutting in imitation of the same (<page 91>).

Mahuna (ma-hu-na)--a small particle; a fine scale; a variety of delicate kapa; the desquammation of the skin resulting from habitual awa-drinking.

Makalii (Ma-ka-li'i)--small eyes; small, fine; the Pleiades (<page 216> and note on <page 218>).

Malo (ma-lo)--a loin-cloth worn especially by men. (Verses 4, 5, 6 of mele on <page 36>).

Mano (ma-no)--a shark; a variety of hula (<page 221>).

Mauna (mau-na)--a mountain. A word possibly of Spanish origin.

Mele (me-le)--a poem; a song; to chant; to sing.

Mele inoa--a name-song; a eulogy (pp. <page 27>, <page 37>).

Mele kahea (ka-hea = to call)--a password by which one gained admission to the halau (pp. <page 38>, <page 41>).

Moo (mo'o)--a reptile: a dragon; a mythologic monster (<page 260>).

Muumuu (mu'u-mu'u)--an under garment worn by women; a shift; a chemise; a person maimed of hand or foot; the name of a hula (<page 212>).

 

Naulu (nau-lu)--name of the seat-breeze at Waimea. Lanai. Ua naulu=at heavy local rain (pp. <page 110>, <page 112>).

Noa (no-a)--ceremonially free; unrestrained by tabu (<page 126>).

Noni (no-ni)--a dye-plant (Morinda citrifolia) whose fruit was sometimes eaten.

Nuuanu (Nu'u-a-nu) a valley back of Honolulu that leads to the "Pali."

 

Ohe (o-he)--bamboo; a flute; a variety of the hula (pp. <page 135>, <page 145>).

Ohelo (o-he-lo)--an edible berry that grows at high altitudes; to reach out; to stretch; a variety of the hula (<page 233>).

Ohia (o-hi'a)--a name in some places applied to the lehua (q. v.), more generally the name of a fruit tree, the "mountain apple" (Eugenia malaccensis).

Olapa (o-la-pa)--those members of a hula company who moved in the dance, as distinguished from the hoopaa, q. v., who sat and cantillated or played on some instrument (<page 28>).

Oli (o-li)--a song; a lyric; to sing or chant (<page 254>).

Olioli--Joyful.

Olohe (o-lo-he)--an expert in the hula; one who has passed the ailolo test and has also had much experience (<page 32>).

Oo (o-o)--a spade; an agricultural implement, patterned after the whale spade (<page 85>); a blackbird, one of those that furnished the golden-yellow feathers for the ahuula, or feather cloak.

 

Paepae (pae-pae)--a prop; a support; the assistant to the po'o-pua'a (<page 20>).

Pahu (pa-hu)--a box; a drum; a landmark; to thrust, said of a spear (pp. <page 103>, <page 138>).

Pale (pa-le)--a division; a canto of a mele; a division of the song service in a hula performance (pp. <page 58>, <page 89>).

Pali (pa-li)--a precipice; a mountain wall cut up with steep ravines. (Mele on pp. <page 51>-53, verses 4, 5, 8, 16, 17, 27, 49.)

Papa (pa-pa)--a board; the plane of the earth's surface: a mythological character, the wife of Wakea.

Pa-u (pa-u)--a skirt; a garment worn by women reaching from the waist to about the knees (<page 50>). The dress of the hula performer (<page 49>), Oli Pa-u (<page 51>),

[p. 270]

Pele (Pe-le)--the goddess of the volcano and of volcanoes generally, who held court at the crater of Kilauea, on Hawaii; a variety of the hula (<page 186>).

Pikai (pi-kai)--to asperse with sea-water mixed, perhaps, with turmeric, etc., as in ceremonial cleansing (<page 31>).

Poo-puaa (po'o-pu-a'a)--Boar's head; the one selected by the pupils in a school of the hula to be their agent and mouthpiece (<page 29>).

Pua'a (pu-a'a)--a pig; the name of a hula (<page 228>).

Puka (pu-ka)--a hole, a doorway, to pass through.

Pule (pu-le)--a prayer; an incantation; to pray.

Pulou (pu-lo'u)--to muffle; to cover the head and face (p. 31).

Puniu (pu-ni-u)--a coconut shell; a small drum made from the coconut shell (<page 141>): a derisive epithet for the human headpiece.

 

Ti, or ki--a plant (Dracaena terminalis) that has large smooth green leaves used for wrapping food and in decoration. Its fleshy root becomes syrupy when cooked (<page 44>).

 

Uka (u-ka)--landward or mountainward.

Ulu-lele (u-ku-le-le)--a flea; a sort of guitar introduced by the Portuguese.

Uniki (u-ni-ki)--the debut or the first public performance of a hula actor. (Verse 21 of mele on <page 17>.)

 

Waa (wa'a)--a canoe.

Wahine (wa-hi-ne)--a female; a woman; a wife.

Wai--water.

Waialeale (Wai-a-le-a-le)--billowy water; the central mountain on the island of Kauai (<page 106>).

    


===== BOOK: uljc.txt =====



The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE UNKNOWN LIFE

  

OF

  

JESUS CHRIST

  

By the Discoverer of the Manuscript

  

NICOLAS NOTOVITCH

  

Translated by

  

J. H. CONNELLY and L. LANDSBERG

  

R. F. FENNO COMPANY

  

16 East 17 Street

  

NEW YORK

[1890]

Scanned, proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, August 2006, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

CONTENTS.

           

       Page

     
      PREFACE

       <page 7>

     
      A JOURNEY IN   THIBET

       <page 17>

     
      LADAK

       <page 94>

     
      A FESTIVAL IN A   GONPA

       <page 117>

     
      THE LIFE OF   SAINT ISSA

       <page 155>

     
      RESUME

       <page 219>

     
      EXPLANATORY   NOTES

       <page 281>

     
   

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

PREFACE.

After the Turkish War (1877-1878) I made a series of travels in the Orient. From the little remarkable Balkan peninsula, I went across the Caucasus to Central Asia and Persia, and, finally, in 1887, visited India, an admirable country which had attracted me from my earliest childhood. My purpose in this journey was to study and know, at home, the peoples who inhabit India and their customs, the grand and mysterious archaeology, and the colossal and majestic nature of their country. Wandering about without fixed plans, from one place to another, I came to

[p. 8]

mountainous Afghanistan, whence I regained India by way of the picturesque passes of Bolan and Guernai. Then, going up the Indus to Raval Pindi, I ran over the Pendjab--the land of the five rivers; visited the Golden Temple of Amritsa--the tomb of the King of Pendjab, Randjid Singh, near Lahore; and turned toward Kachmyr, "The Valley of Eternal Bliss." Thence I directed my peregrinations as my curiosity impelled me, until I arrived in Ladak, whence I intended returning to Russia by way of Karakoroum and Chinese Turkestan.

One day, while visiting a Bhuddist convent on my route, I learned from a chief lama, that there existed in the archives of Lhassa, very ancient memoirs relating to the life of Jesus Christ and the occidental nations, and that certain great monasteries

[p. 9]

possessed old copies and translations of those chronicles.

As it was little probable that I should make another journey into this country, I resolved to put off my return to Europe until a later date, and, cost what it might, either find those copies in the great convents or go to Lhassa--a journey which is far from being so dangerous and difficult as is generally supposed, involving only such perils as I was already accustomed to, and which would not make me hesitate at attempting it.

During my sojourn at Leh, capital of Ladak, I visited the great convent Himis, situated near the city, the chief lama of which informed me that their monastic library contained copies of the manuscripts in question. In order that I might not awaken the suspicions of the authorities concerning

[p. 10]

the object of my visit to the cloister, and to evade obstacles which might be opposed to me as a Russian, prosecuting further my journey in Thibet, I gave out upon my return to Leh that I would depart for India, and so left the capital of Ladak. An unfortunate fall, causing the breaking of a leg, furnished me with an absolutely unexpected pretext for returning to the monastery, where I received surgical attention. I took advantage of my short sojourn among the lamas to obtain the consent of their chief that they should bring to me, from their library, the manuscripts relating to Jesus Christ, and, assisted by my interpreter, who translated for me the Thibetan language, transferred carefully to my note-book what the lama read to mc.

Not doubting at all the authenticity of this Preface,

[p. 11]

chronicle, edited with great exactitude by the Brahminic, and more especially the Buddhistic historians of India and Nepaul, I desired, upon my return to Europe, to publish a translation of it.

To this end, I addressed myself to several universally known ecclesiastics, asking them to revise my notes and tell me what they thought of them.

Mgr. Platon, the celebrated metropolitan of Kiew, thought that my discovery was of great importance. Nevertheless, he sought to dissuade me from publishing the memoirs, believing that their publication could only hurt me. "Why?" This the venerable prelate refused to tell me more explicitly. Nevertheless, since our conversation took place in Russia, where the censor would

[p. 12]

have put his veto upon such a work, I made up my mind to wait.

A year later, I found myself in Rome. I showed my manuscript to a cardinal very near to the Holy Father, who answered me literally in these words:--"What good will it do to print this? Nobody will attach to it any great importance and you will create a number of enemies. But, you are still very young! If it is a question of money which concerns you, I can ask for you a reward for your notes, a sum which will repay your expenditures and recompense you for your loss of time." Of course, I refused.

In Paris I spoke of my project to Cardinal Rotelli, whose acquaintance I had made in Constantinople. He, too, was opposed to having my work printed, under the pretext that it would be premature. "The church,"

[p. 13]

he added, "suffers already too much from the new current of atheistic ideas, and you will but give a new food to the calumniators and detractors of the evangelical doctrine. I tell you this in the interest of all the Christian churches."

Then I went to see M. Jules Simon. He found my matter very interesting and advised me to ask the opinion of M. Renan, as to the best way of publishing these memoirs. The next day I was seated in the cabinet of the great philosopher. At the close of our conversation, M. Renan proposed that I should confide to him the memoirs in question, so that he might make to the Academy a report upon the discovery.

This proposition, as may be easily understood, was very alluring and flattering to my amour propre. I, however, took away with

[p. 14]

me the manuscript, under the pretext of further revising it. I foresaw that if I accepted the proposed combination, I would only have the honor of having found the chronicles, while the illustrious author of the "Life of Jesus" would have the glory of the publication and the commenting upon it. I thought myself sufficiently prepared to publish the translation of the chronicles, accompanying them with my notes, and, therefore, did not accept the very gracious offer he made to me. But, that I might not wound the susceptibility of the great master, for whom I felt a profound respect, I made up my mind to delay publication until after his death, a fatality which could not be far off, if I might judge from the apparent general weakness of M. Renan. A short time after M. Renan's death, I wrote to M. Jules Simon again for

[p. 15]

his advice. He answered me, that it was my affair to judge of the opportunity for making the memoirs public.

I therefore put my notes in order and now publish them, reserving the right to substantiate the authenticity of these chronicles. In my commentaries I proffer the arguments which must convince us of the sincerity and good faith of the Buddhist compilers. I wish to add that before criticising my communication, the societies of savans can, without much expense, equip a scientific expedition having for its mission the study of those manuscripts in the place where I discovered them, and so may easily verify their historic value.

NICOLAS NOTOVITCH.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 16] [p. 17]

  

THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST.

  

A JOURNEY IN THIBET.

During my sojourn in India, I often had occasion to converse with the Buddhists, and the accounts they gave me of Thibet excited my curiosity to such an extent that I resolved to make a journey into that still almost unknown country. For this purpose I set out upon a route crossing Kachmyr (Cashmere), which I had long intended to visit.

[p. 18]

On the 14th of October, 1887, I entered a railway car crowded with soldiers, and went from Lahore to Raval-Pindi, where I arrived the next day, near noon. After resting a little and inspecting the city, to which the permanent garrison gives the aspect of a military camp, I provided myself with the necessaries for a journey, where horses take the place of the railway cars. Assisted by my servant, a colored man of Pondichery, I packed all my baggage, hired a tonga (a two-wheeled vehicle which is drawn by two horses), stowed myself upon its back seat, and set out upon the picturesque road leading to Kachmyr, an excellent highway, upon which we travelled rapidly. We had to use no little skill in making our way through the ranks of a military caravan--its baggage carried upon camels--which was part of a detachment

[p. 19]

returning from a country camp to the city. Soon we arrived at the end of the valley of Pendjab, and climbing up a way with infinite windings, entered the passes of the Himalayas. The ascent became more and more steep. Behind us spread, like a beautiful panorama, the region we had just traversed, which seemed to sink farther and farther away from us. As the sun's last glances rested upon the tops of the mountains, our tonga came gaily out from the zigzags which the eye could still trace far down the forest-clad slope, and halted at the little city of Mure; where the families of the English functionaries come to seek shade and refreshment.

Ordinarily, one can go in a tonga from Mure to Srinagar; but at the approach of the winter season, when all Europeans desert

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] Kachmyr, the tonga  service is suspended. I undertook my journey precisely at the time when the summer life begins to wane, and the Englishmen whom I met upon the road, returning to India, were much astonished to see me, and made vain efforts to divine the purpose of my travel to Kachmyr.

Abandoning the tonga, I hired saddle-horses--not without considerable difficulty--and evening had arrived when we started to descend from Mure, which is at an altitude of 5,000 feet. This stage of our journey had nothing playful in it. The road was torn in deep ruts by the late rains, darkness came upon us and our horses rather guessed than saw their way. When night had completely set in, a tempestuous rain surprised us in the open country, and, owing to the thick foliage of the centennarian oaks which stood on the

[p. 21]

sides of our road, we were plunged in profound darkness. That we might not lose each other, we had to continue exchanging calls from time to time. In this impenetrable obscurity we divined huge masses of rock almost above our heads, and were conscious of, on our left, a roaring torrent, the waters of which formed a cascade we could not see. During two hours we waded in the mud and the icy rain had chilled my very marrow, when we perceived in the distance a little fire, the sight of which revived our energies. But how deceitful are lights in the mountains! You believe you see the fire burning quite near to you and at once it disappears, to re-appear again, to the right, to the left, above, below you, as if it took pleasure in playing tricks upon the harassed traveller. All the time the road makes a thousand turns,

[p. 22]

and winds here and there, and the fire--which is immovable--seems to be in continual motion, the obscurity preventing you realizing that you yourself modify your direction every instant.

I had quite given up all hope of approaching this much-wished-for fire, when it appeared again, and this time so near that our horses stopped before it.

I have here to express my sincere thanks to the Englishmen for the foresight of which they gave proof in building by the road-sides the little bengalows--one-story houses for the shelter of travellers. It is true, one must not demand comfort in this kind of hotel; but this is a matter in which the traveller, broken down by fatigue, is not exacting, and he is at the summit of happiness when he finds at his disposal a clean and dry room.

[p. 23]

The Hindus, no doubt, did not expect to sec a traveller arrive at so late an hour of the night and in this season, for they had taken away the keys of the bengalow, so we had to force an entrance. I threw myself upon a bed prepared for me, composed of a pillow and blanket saturated with water, and almost at once fell asleep. At daybreak, after taking tea and some conserves, we took up our march again, now bathed in the burning rays of the sun. From time to time, we passed villages; the first in a superb narrow pass, then along the road meandering in the bosom of the mountain. We descended eventually to the river Djeloum (Jhelum), the waters of which flow gracefully, amid the rocks by. which its course is obstructed, between rocky walls whose tops in many places seem almost to reach the azure skies of the Himalayas, a

[p. 24]

heaven which here shows itself remarkably pure and serene.

Toward noon we arrived at the hamlet called Tongue--situated on the bank of the river--which presents an unique array of huts that give the effect of boxes, the openings of which form a facade. Here are sold comestibles and all kinds of merchandise. The place swarms with Hindus, who bear on their foreheads the variously colored marks of their respective castes. Here, too, you see the beautiful people of Kachmyr, dressed in their long white shirts and snowy turbans. I hired here, at a good price, a Hindu cabriolet, from a Kachmyrian. This vehicle is so constructed that in order to keep one's seat in it, one must cross his legs in the Turkish fashion. The seat is so small that it will hold, at most, only two persons. The absence

[p. 25]

of any support for the back makes this mode of transportation very dangerous; nevertheless, I accepted this kind of circular table mounted on two wheels and drawn by a horse, as I was anxious to reach, as soon as possible, the end of my journey. Hardly, however, had I gone five hundred yards on it, when I seriously regretted the horse I had forsaken, so much fatigue had I to endure keeping my legs crossed and maintaining my equilibrium. Unfortunately, it was already too late.

Evening was falling when I approached the village of Hori. Exhausted by fatigue; racked by the incessant jolting; my legs feeling as if invaded by millions of ants, I had been completely incapable of enjoying the picturesque landscape spread before us as we journeyed along the Djeloum, the banks of which

[p. 26]

are bordered on one side by steep rocks and on the other by the heavily wooded slopes of mountains. In Hori I encountered a caravan of pilgrims returning from Mecca.

Thinking I was a physician and Learning my haste to reach Ladak, they invited me to join them, which I promised them I would at Srinagar.

I spent an ill night, sitting up in my bed, with a lighted torch in my hand, without closing my eyes, in constant fear of the stings and bites of the scorpions and centipedes which swarm in the bengalows. I was sometimes ashamed of the fear with which those vermin inspired me; nevertheless, I could not fall asleep among them. Where, truly, in man, is the line that separates courage from cowardice? I will not boast of my bravery, but I am not a coward, yet the insurmountable

[p. 27]

fear with which those malevolent little creatures thrilled me, drove sleep from my eyelids, in spite of my extreme fatigue.

Our horses carried us into a flat valley, encircled by high mountains. Bathed as I was in the rays of the sun, it did not take me long to fall asleep in the saddle. A sudden sense of freshness penetrated and awoke me. I saw that we had already begun climbing a mountain path, in the midst of a dense forest, rifts in which occasionally opened to our admiring gaze ravishing vistas, impetuous torrents; distant mountains; cloudless heavens; a landscape, far below, of wondrous beauty. All about us were the songs of numberless brilliantly plumaged birds. We came out of the forest toward noon, descended to a little hamlet on the bank of the river, and after refreshing ourselves with a

[p. 28]

light, cold collation, continued our journey. Before starting, I went to a bazaar and tried to buy there a glass of warm milk from a Hindu, who was sitting crouched before a large cauldron full of boiling milk. How great was my surprise when he proposed to me that I should take away the whole cauldron, with its contents, assuring me that I had polluted the milk it contained! "I only want a glass of milk and not a kettle of it," I said to him.

"According to our laws," the merchant answered me, "if any one not belonging to our caste has fixed his eyes for a long time upon one of our cooking utensils, we have to wash that article thoroughly, and throw away the food it contains. You have polluted my milk and no one will drink any more of it, for not only were you not contented

[p. 29]

with fixing your eyes upon it, but you have even pointed to it with your finger."

I had indeed a long time examined his merchandise, to make sure that it was really milk, and had pointed with my finger, to the merchant, from which side I wished the milk poured out. Full of respect for the laws and customs of foreign peoples, I paid, without dispute, a rupee, the price of all the milk, which was poured in the street, though I had taken only one glass of it. This was a lesson which taught me, from now on, not to fix my eyes upon the food of the Hindus.

There is no religious belief more muddled by the numbers of ceremonious laws and commentaries prescribing its observances than the Brahminic.

While each of the other principal religions has but one inspired book, one Bible, one

[p. 30]

[paragraph continues] Gospel, or one Koran--books from which the Hebrew, the Christian and the Musselman draw their creeds--the Brahminical Hindus possess such a great number of tomes and commentaries in folio that the wisest Brahmin has hardly had the time to peruse one-tenth of them. Leaving aside the four books of the Vedas; the Puranas--which are written in Sanscrit and composed of eighteen volumes--containing 400,000 strophes treating of law, rights, theogony, medicine, the creation and destruction of the world, etc.; the vast Shastras, which deal with mathematics, grammar, etc.; the Upa-Vedas, Upanishads, Upo-Puranas--which are explanatory of the Puranas;--and a number of other commentaries in several volumes; there still remain twelve vast books, containing the laws of Manu, the grandchild of Brahma--books dealing

[p. 31]

not only with civil and criminal law, but also the canonical rules--rules which impose upon the faithful such a considerable number of ceremonies that one is surprised into admiration of the illimitable patience the Hindus show in observance of the precepts inculcated by Saint Manu. Manu was incontestably a great legislator and a great thinker, but he has written so much that it has happened to him frequently to contradict himself in the course of a single page. The Brahmins do not take the trouble to notice that, and the poor Hindus, whose labor supports the Brahminic caste, obey servilely their clergy, whose prescriptions enjoin upon them never to touch a man who does not belong to their caste, and also absolutely prohibit a stranger from fixing his attention upon anything belonging to a Hindu. Keeping himself to

[p. 32]

the strict letter of this law, the Hindu imagines that his food is polluted when it receives a little protracted notice from the stranger.

And yet, Brahminism has been, even at the beginning of its second birth, a purely monotheistic religion, recognizing only one infinite and indivisible God. As it came to pass in all times and in all religions, the clergy took advantage of the privileged situation which places them above the ignorant multitude, and early manufactured various exterior forms of cult and certain laws, thinking they could better, in this way, influence and control the masses. Things changed soon, so far that the principle of monotheism, of which the Vedas have given such a clear conception, became confounded with, or, as it were, supplanted by an absurd

[p. 33]

and limitless series of gods and goddesses, half-gods, genii and devils, which were represented by idols, of infinite variety but all equally horrible-looking. The people, once glorious as their religion was once great and pure, now slip by degrees into complete idiocy. Hardly does their day suffice for the accomplishment of all the prescriptions of their canons. It must be said positively that the Hindus only exist to support their principal caste, the Brahmins, who have taken into their hands the temporal power which once was possessed by independent sovereigns of the people. While governing India, the Englishman does not interfere with this phase of the public life, and so the Brahmins profit by maintaining the people's hope of a better future.

The sun passed behind the summit of a

[p. 34]

mountain, and the darkness of night in one moment overspread the magnificent landscape we were traversing. Soon the narrow 'valley of the Djeloum fell asleep. Our road winding along ledges of steep rocks, was instantly hidden from our sight; mountains and trees were confounded together in one dark mass, and the stars glittered in the celestial vault. We had to dismount and feel our way along the mountain side, for fear of becoming the prey of the abyss which yawned at our feet. At a late hour of the night we traversed a bridge and ascended a steep elevation leading to the bengalow Ouri, which at this height seems to enjoy complete isolation. The next day we traversed a charming region, always going along the river--at a turn of which we saw the ruins of a Sikh fortress, that seemed to

[p. 35]

remember sadly its glorious past. In a little valley, nestled amid the mountains, we found a bengalow which seemed to welcome us. In its proximity were encamped a cavalry regiment of the Maharajah of Kachmyr.

When the officers learned that I was a Russian, they invited me to share their repast. There I had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of Col. Brown, who was the first to compile a dictionary of the Afghanpouchton language.

As I was anxious to reach, as soon as possible, the city of Srinagar, I, with little delay, continued my journey through the picturesque region lying at the foot of the mountains, after having, for a long time, followed the course of the river. here, before our eyes, weary of the monotonous desolation of the preceding landscapes, was unfolded a

[p. 36]

charming view of a well-peopled valley, with many two-story houses surrounded by gardens and cultivated fields. A little farther on begins the celebrated valley of Kachmyr, situated behind a range of high rocks which I crossed toward evening. What a superb panorama revealed itself before my eyes, when I found myself at the last rock which separates the valley of Kachmyr from the mountainous country I had traversed. A ravishing tableau truly enchanted my sight. This valley, the limits of which are lost in the horizon, and is throughout well populated, is enshrined amid the high Himalayan mountains. At the rising and the setting of the sun, the zone of eternal snows seems a silver ring, which like a girdle surrounds this rich and delightful plateau, furrowed by numerous rivers and traversed by excellent roads.

[p. 37]

[paragraph continues] Gardens, hills, a lake, the islands in which are occupied by constructions of pretentious style, all these cause the traveller to feel as if he had entered another world. It seems to him as though he had to go but a little farther on and there must find the Paradise of which his governess had told him so often in his childhood.

The veil of night slowly covered the valley, merging mountains, gardens and lake in one dark amplitude, pierced here and there by distant fires, resembling stars. I descended into the valley, directing myself toward the Djeloum, which has broken its way through a narrow gorge in the mountains, to unite itself with the waters of the river Ind. According to the legend, the valley was once an inland sea; a passage opened through the rocks environing it, and drained the waters

[p. 38]

away, leaving nothing more of its former character than the lake, the Djeloum and minor water-courses. The banks of the river are now lined with boat-houses, long and narrow, which the proprietors, with their families, inhabit the whole year.

From here Srinagar can be reached in one day's travel on horseback; but with a boat the journey requires a day and a half. I chose the latter mode of conveyance, and having selected a boat and bargained with its proprietor for its hire, took my seat in the bow, upon a carpet, sheltered by a sort of penthouse roof. The boat left the shore at midnight, bearing us rapidly toward Srinagar. At the stern of the bark, a Hindu prepared my tea. I went to sleep, happy in knowing my voyage was to be accomplished. The hot caress of the sun's rays penetrating

[p. 39]

beneath my little roof awakened me, and what I experienced delighted me beyond all expression. Entirely green banks; the distant outlines of mountain tops covered with snow; pretty villages which from time to time showed themselves at the mountain's foot; the crystalline sheet of water; pure and peculiarly agreeable air, which I breathed with exhilaration; the musical carols of an infinity of birds; a sky of extraordinary purity; behind me the plash of water stirred by the round-ended paddle which was wielded with ease by a superb woman (with marvellous eyes and a complexion browned by the sun), who wore an air of stately indifference: all these things together seemed to plunge me into an ecstasy, and I forgot entirely the reason for my presence on the river. In that moment I had not even a

[p. 40]

desire to reach the end of my voyage--and yet, how many privations remained for me to undergo, and dangers to encounter! I felt myself here so well content!

The boat glided rapidly and the landscape continued to unfold new beauties before my eyes, losing itself in ever new combinations with the horizon, which merged into the mountains we were passing, to become one with them. Then a new panorama would display itself, seeming to expand and flow out from the sides of the mountains, becoming more and more grand. . . . The day was almost spent and I was not yet weary of contemplating this magnificent nature, the view of which reawakened the souvenirs of childhood and youth. How beautiful were those days forever gone!

The more nearly one approaches Srinagar,

[p. 41]

the more numerous become the villages embowered in the verdure. At the approach of our boat, some of their inhabitants came running to see us; the men in their turbans, the women in their small bonnets, both alike dressed in white gowns reaching to the ground, the children in a state of nudity which reminded one of the costumes of our first parents.

When entering the city one sees a range of barks and floating houses in which entire families reside. The tops of the far-off, snow-covered mountains were caressed by the last rays of the setting sun, when we glided between the wooden houses of Srinagar, which closely line both banks of the river. Life seems to cease here at sunset; the thousands of many-colored open boats (dunga) and palanquin-covered barks (bangla) were

[p. 42]

fastened along the beach; men and women gathered near the river, in the primitive costumes of Adam and Eve, going through their evening ablutions without feeling any embarrassment or prudery before each other, since they performed a religious rite, the importance of which is greater for them than all human prejudices.

On the 20th of October I awoke in a neat room, from which I had a gay view upon the river that was now innundated with the rays of the sun of Kachmyr. As it is not my purpose to describe here my experiences in detail, I refrain from enumerating the lovely valleys, the paradise of lakes, the enchanting islands, those historic palaces, mysterious pagodas, and coquettish villages which seem lost in vast gardens; on all sides of which rise the majestic tops of the giants of the

[p. 43]

[paragraph continues] Himalaya, shrouded as far as the eye can see in eternal snow. I shall only note the preparations I made in view of my journey toward Thibet. I spent six days at Srinagar, making long excursions into the enchanting surroundings of the city, examining the numerous ruins which testify to the ancient prosperity of this region, and studying the strange customs of the country.

 

Kachmyr, as well as the other provinces attached to it, Baltistan, Ladak, etc., are vassals of England. They formerly formed part of the possessions of Randjid Sing, the Lion of the Pendjab. At his death, the English troops occupied Lahore, the capital of the Pendjab, separated Kachmyr from the rest of the empire and ceded it, under color of hereditary right and for the sum of 160,000,000

[p. 44]

francs, to Goulab-Sing, one of the familiars of the late sovereign, conferring on him besides the title of Maharadja. At the epoch of my journey, the actual Maharadja was Pertab-Sing, the grandchild of Goulab, whose residence is Jamoo, on the southern slope of the Himalaya.

The celebrated "happy valley" of Kachmyr (eighty-five miles long by twenty-five miles wide) enjoyed glory and prosperity only under the Grand Mogul, whose court loved to taste here the sweetness of country life, in the still existent pavilions on the little island of the lake. Most of the Maharadjas of Hindustan used formerly to spend here the summer months, and to take part in the magnificent festivals given by the Grand Mogul; but times have greatly changed since, and the happy valley is to-day no more than

[p. 45]

a beggar-retreat. Aquatic plants and scum have covered the clear waters of the lake; the wild juniper has smothered all the vegetation of the islands; the palaces and pavilions retain only the souvenir of their past grandeur; earth and grass cover the buildings which are now falling in ruins. The surrounding mountains and their eternally white tops seem to be absorbed in a sullen sadness, and to nourish the hope of a better time for the disclosure of their immortal beauties. The once spiritual, beautiful and cleanly inhabitants have grown animalistic and stupid; they have become dirty and lazy; and the whip now governs them, instead of the sword.

The people of Kachmyr have so often been subject to invasions and pillages and have had so many masters, that they have now

[p. 46]

become indifferent to every thing. They pass their time near the banks of the rivers, gossiping about their neighbors; or are engaged in the painstaking work of making their celebrated shawls; or in the execution of filagree gold or silver work. The Kachmyr women are of a melancholy temperament, and an inconceivable sadness is spread upon their features. Everywhere reigns misery and uncleanness. The beautiful men and superb women of Kachmyr are dirty and in rags. The costume of the two sexes consists, winter and summer alike, of a long shirt, or gown, made of thick material and with puffed sleeves. They wear this shirt until it is completely worn out, and never is it washed, so that the white turban of the men looks like dazzling snow near

[p. 47]

their dirty shirts, which are covered all over with spittle and grease stains.

The traveller feels himself permeated with sadness at seeing the contrast between the rich and opulent nature surrounding them, and this people dressed in rags.

The capital of the country, Srinagar (City of the Sun), or, to call it by the name which is given to it here after the country, Kachmyr, is situated on the shore of the Djeloum, along which it stretches out toward the south to a distance of five kilometres and is not more than two kilometres in breadth.

Its two-story houses, inhabited by a population of 100,000 inhabitants, are built of wood and border both river banks. Everybody lives on the river, the shores of which are united by ten bridges. Terraces lead from the houses to the Djeloum, where

[p. 48]

all day long people perform their ceremonial ablutions, bathe and wash their, culinary utensils, which consist of a few copper pots. Part of the inhabitants practice the Musselman religion; two-thirds are Brahminic; and there are but few Buddhists to be found among them.

It was time to make other preparations for travel before plunging into the unknown. Having purchased different kinds of conserves, wine and other things indispensable on a journey through a country so little peopled as is Thibet, I packed all my baggage in boxes; hired six carriers and an interpreter, bought a horse for my own use, and fixed my departure for the 27th of October. To cheer up my journey, I took from a good Frenchman, M. Peicheau, the wine cultivator of the Maharadja, a big dog, Pamir, who had

[p. 49]

already traversed the road with my friends, Bonvallot, Capus and Pepin, the well-known explorers. As I wished to shorten my journey by two days, I ordered my carriers to leave at dawn from the other side of the lake, which I crossed in a boat, and joined them and my horse at the foot of the mountain chain which separates the valley of Srinagar from the Sind gorge.

I shall never forget the tortures which we had to undergo in climbing almost on all fours to a mountain top, three thousand feet high. The carriers were out of breath; every moment I feared to see one tumble down the declivity with his burden, and I felt pained at seeing my poor dog, Pamir, panting and with his tongue hanging out, make two or three steps and fall to the ground exhausted. Forgetting my own fatigue, I

[p. 50]

caressed and encouraged the poor animal, who, as if understanding me, got up to make another two or three steps and fall anew to the ground.

The night had come when we reached the crest; we threw ourselves greedily upon the snow to quench our thirst; and after a short rest, started to descend through a very thick pine forest, hastening to gain the village of Haiena, at the foot of the defile, fearing the attacks of beasts of prey in the darkness.

A level and good road leads from Srinagar to Haiena, going straight northward over Ganderbal, where it turns abruptly to the east, previously keeping close to the Sind, and traversing a country with a superb vegetation, as far as Kangan. Six miles from there it approaches the village of Haiena, where I repaired by a more direct route

[p. 51]

across a pass three thousand feet high, which shortened for me both time and distance.

My first step in the unknown was marked by an incident which made all of us pass an ugly quarter of an hour. The defile of the Sind, sixty miles long, is especially noteworthy for the inhospitable hosts it contains. Among others it abounds in panthers, tigers, leopards, black bears, wolves and jackals. As though by a special misfortune, the snow had covered with its white carpet the heights of the chain, compelling those formidable, carniverous beasts to descend a little lower for shelter in their dens. We descended in silence, amid the darkness, a narrow path that wound through the centennary firs and birches, and the calm of the night was only broken by the crackling sound of our steps. Suddenly, quite near to us, a terrible

[p. 52]

howling awoke the echoes of the woods. Our small troop stopped. "A panther!" exclaimed, in a low and frightened voice, my servant. The small caravan of a dozen men stood motionless, as though riveted to the spot. Then it occurred to me that at the moment of starting on our ascent, when already feeling fatigued, I had entrusted my revolver to one of the carriers, and my Winchester rifle to another. Now I felt bitter regret for having parted with my arms, and asked in a low voice where the man was to whom I had given the rifle. The howls became more and more violent, and filled the echoes of the woods, when suddenly a dull sound was heard, like the fall of some body. A minute later we heard the noise of a struggle and a cry of agony which mingled with the fierce roars of the starved animal.

[p. 53]

"Saaib, take the gun," I heard some one near by. I seized feverishly the rifle, but, vain trouble, one could not see two steps before oneself. A new cry, followed by a smothered howling, indicated to me vaguely the place of the struggle, toward which I crawled, divided between the ardent desire to "kill a panther" and a horrible fear of being eaten alive. No one dared to move; only after five minutes it occurred to one of the carriers to light a match. I then remembered the fear which feline animals exhibit at the presence of fire, and ordered my men to gather two or three handfuls of brush, which I set on fire. We then saw, about ten steps from us, one of our carriers stretched out on the ground, with his limbs frightfully lacerated by the claws of a huge panther. The beast still lay upon him defiantly, holding a

[p. 54]

piece of flesh in its mouth. At its side, gaped a box of wine broken open by its fall when the carrier was torn down. Hardly did I make a movement to bring the rifle to my shoulder, when the panther raised itself, and turned toward us while dropping part of its horrible meal. One moment, it appeared about to spring upon me, then it suddenly wheeled, and rending the air with a howl, enough to freeze one's blood, jumped into the midst of the thicket and disappeared.

My coolies, whom an odious fear had all the time kept prostrated on the ground, recovered little by little from their fright. Keeping in readiness a few packages of dry grass and matches, we hastened to reach the village Haiena, leaving behind the remains of the unfortunate Hindoo, whose fate we feared sharing.

[p. 55]

An hour later we had left the forest and entered the plain. I ordered my tent erected under a very leafy plane-tree, and had a great fire made before it, with a pile of wood, which was the only protection we could employ against the ferocious beasts whose howls continued to reach us from all directions. In the forest my dog had pressed himself against me, with his tail between his legs; but once under the tent, he suddenly recovered his watchfulness, and barked incessantly the whole night, being very careful, however, not to step outside. I spent a terrible night, rifle in hand, listening to the concert of those diabolical how lings, the echoes of which seemed to shake the defile. Some panthers approached our bivouac to answer the barking of Pamir, but dared not attack us.

I had left Srinagar at the head of eleven

[p. 56]

carriers, four of whom had to carry so many boxes of wine, four others bore my travelling effects; one my weapons, another various utensils, and finally a last, who went errands or on reconnaissance. His name was "Chicari," which means "he who accompanies the hunter and gathers the prey." I discharged him in the morning on account of his cowardice and his profound ignorance of the country, and only retained four carriers. It was but slowly that I advanced toward the village of Gounde.

How beautiful is nature in the Sind pass, and how much is it beloved by the hunters! Besides the great fallow-deer, you meet there the hind, the stag, the mountain-sheep and an immense variety of birds, among which I want to mention above all the golden pheasant,

[p. 57]

and others of red or snow-white plumage, very large partridges and immense eagles.

The villages situated along the Sind do not shine by their dimensions. They contain, for the greatest part, not more than ten to twenty huts of an extremely miserable appearance, Their inhabitants are clad in rags. Their cattle belongs to a very small race.

I crossed the river at Sambal, and stopped dear the village Gounde, where I procured relay horses. In some villages they refused to hire horses to me; I then threatened them with my whip, which at once inspired respect and obedience; my money accomplished the same end; it inspired a servile obedience--not willingness--to obey my least orders.

Stick and gold are the true sovereigns in the Orient; without them the Very Grand Mogul would not have had any preponderance.

[p. 58]

Night began to descend, and I was in a hurry to cross the defile which separates the villages Gogangan and Sonamarg. The road is in very bad condition, and the mountains are infested by beasts of prey which in the night descend into the very villages to seek their prey. The country is delightful and very fertile; nevertheless, but few colonists venture to settle here, on account of the neighborhood of the panthers, which come to the door-yards to seize domestic animals.

At the very exit of the defile, near the village of Tchokodar, or Thajwas, the half obscurity prevailing only permitted me to distinguish two dark masses crossing the road. They were two big bears followed by a young one. I was alone with my servant (the caravan having loitered behind), so I did

[p. 59]

not like to attack them with only one rifle; but the long excursions which I had made on the mountain had strongly developed in me the sense of the hunter. To jump from my horse, shoot, and, without even verifying the result, change quickly the cartridge, was the affair of a second. One bear was about to jump on me, a second shot made it run away and disappear. Holding in my hand my loaded gun, I approached with circumspection, the one at which I had aimed, and found it laying on its flank, dead, with the little cub beside it. Another shot killed the little one, after which I went to work to take off the two superb jet-black skins.

This incident made us lose two hours, and night had completely set in when I erected my tent near Tchokodar, which I left at sunrise to gain Baltal, by following the course

[p. 60]

of the Sind river. At this place the ravishing landscape of the "golden prairie" terminates abruptly with a village of the same name (Sona, gold, and Marg, prairie). The abrupt acclivity of Zodgi-La, which we next surmounted, attains an elevation of 11,500 feet, on the other side of which the whole country assumes a severe and inhospitable character. My hunting adventures closed before reaching Baltal. From there I met on the road only wild goats. In order to hunt, I would have had to leave the grand route and to penetrate into the heart of the mountains full of mysteries. I had neither the inclination nor the time to do so, and, therefore, continued quietly my journey toward Ladak.

 

How violent the contrast I felt when passing

[p. 61]

from the laughing nature and beautiful population of Kachmyr to the arid and forbidding rocks and the beardless and ugly inhabitants of Ladak!

The country into which I penetrated is situated at an altitude of 11,000 to 12,000 feet. Only at Karghil the level descends to 8,000 feet.

The acclivity of Zodgi-La is very rough; one crust climb up an almost perpendicular rocky wall. In certain places the road winds along upon rock ledges of only a metre in width, below which the sight drops into unfathomable abysses. May the Lord preserve the traveller from a fall! At one place, the way is upon long beams introduced into holes made in the rock, like a bridge, and covered up with earth. Brr!--At the thought that a little stone might get loose

[p. 62]

and roll down the slope of the mountain, or that a too strong oscillation of the beams could precipitate the whole structure into the abyss, and with it him who had ventured upon the perilous path, one feels like fainting more than once during this hazardous passage.

After crossing the glaciers we stopped in a valley and prepared to spend the night near a hut, a dismal place surrounded by eternal ice and snow.

From Baltal the distances are determined by means of daks, i.e., postal stations for mail service. They are low huts, about seven kilometres distant from each other. A man is permanently established in each of these huts. The postal service between Kachmyr and Thibet is yet carried on in a very primitive form. The letters are enclosed in a leather bag,

[p. 63]

which is handed to the care of a carrier. The latter runs rapidly over the seven kilometres assigned to him, carrying on his back a basket which holds several of these bags, which he delivers to another carrier, who, in his turn, accomplishes his task in an identical manner. Neither rain nor snow can arrest these carriers. In this way the mail service is carried on between Kachmyr and Thibet, and vice versa once a week. For each course the letter-carrier is paid six annas (twenty cents); the same wages as is paid to the carriers of merchandise. This sum I also paid to every one of my servants for carrying a ten times heavier load.

It makes one's heart ache to see the pale and tired-looking figures of these carriers; but <<'hat is to be done? It is the custom of the country. The tea is brought from China

[p. 64]

by a similar system of transportation, which is rapid and inexpensive.

In the village of Montaiyan, I found again the Yarkandien caravan of pilgrims, whom I had promised to accompany on their journey. They recognized me from a distance, and asked me to examine one of their men, who had fallen sick. I found him writhing in the agonies of an intense fever. Shaking my hands as a sign of despair, I pointed to the heavens and gave them to understand that human will and science were now useless, and that God alone could save him. These people journeyed by small stages only; I, therefore, left them and arrived in the evening at Drass, situated at the bottom of a valley near a river of the same name. Near Drass, a little fort of ancient construction, but freshly painted,

[p. 65]

stands aloof, under the guard of three Sikhs of the Maharadja's army.

At Drass, my domicile was the post-house, which is a station--and the only one--of an unique telegraph line from Srinagar to the interior of the Himalayas. From that time on, I no more had my tent put up each evening, but stopped in the caravansarais; places which, though made repulsive by their dirt, are kept warm by the enormous piles of wood burned in their fireplaces.

From Drass to Karghil the landscape is unpleasing and monotonous, if one excepts the marvellous effects of the rising and setting sun and the beautiful moonlight. Apart from these the road is wearisome and abounding with dangers. Karghil is the principal place of the district, where the governor of the country resides. Its site is

[p. 66]

quite picturesque. Two water courses, the Souron and the Wakkha, roll their noisy and turbulent waters among rocks and sunken snags of up-rooted trees, escaping from their respective defiles in the rocks, to join in forming here the river Souron, upon the banks of which stands Karghil. A little fort, garrisoned by two or three Sikhs, shows its outlines at the junction of the streams. Provided with a horse, I continued my journey at break of day, entering now the province of Ladak, or Little Thibet. I traversed a ricketty bridge, composed--like all the bridges of Kachmyr--of two long beams, the ends of which were supported upon the banks and the floor made of a layer of fagots and sticks, which imparted to the traveller, at least the illusion of a suspension bridge. Soon afterward I climbed slowly up on a

[p. 67]

little plateau, which crosses the way at a distance of two kilometres, to descend into the narrow valley of Wakkha. Here there are Several villages, among which, on the left shore, is the very picturesque one called Paskium.

Here my feet trod Buddhist ground. The inhabitants are of a very simple and mild disposition, seemingly ignorant of "quarrelling." Women are very rare among them. Those of them whom I encountered were distinguished from the women I had hitherto seen in India or Kachmyr, by the air of gaiety and prosperity apparent in their countenances. How could it be otherwise, since each woman in this country has, on an average, three to five husbands, and possesses them in the most legitimate way in the world. Polyandry flourishes here. However

[p. 68]

large a family may be, there is but one woman in it. if the family does not contain already more than two husbands, a bachelor may share its advantages, for a consideration. The days sacred to each one of those husbands are determined in advance, and all acquit themselves of their respective duties and respect each others' rights. The men generally seem feeble, with bent backs, and do not live to old age. During my travels in Ladak, I only encountered one man so old that his hair was white.

From Karghil to the centre of Ladak, the road had a more cheerful aspect than that I had traversed before reaching Karghil, its prospect being brightened by a number of little hamlets, but trees and verdure were, unfortunately, rare.

Twenty miles from Karghil, at the end of

[p. 69]

the defile formed by the rapid current of the Wakkha, is a little village called Chargol, in the centre of which stand three chapels, decorated with lively colors (t'horthenes, to give them the name they bear in Thibet). Below, near the river, are masses of rocks, in the form of long and large walls, upon which are thrown, in apparent disorder, flat stones of different colors and sizes. Upon these stones are engraved all sorts of prayers, in Ourd, Sanscrit and Thibetan, and one can even find among them inscriptions in Arabic characters. Without the knowledge of my carriers, I succeeded in taking away a few of these stones, which are now in the palace of the Trocadero.

Along the way, from Chargol, one finds frequently oblong mounds, artificial constructions. After sunrise, with fresh horses,

[p. 70]

[paragraph continues] I resumed my journey and stopped near the "gonpa" (monastery) of Moulbek, which seems glued on the flank of an isolated rock. Below is the hamlet of Wakkha, and not far from there is to be seen another rock, of very strange form, which seems to have been placed where it stands by human hands. In one side of it is cut a Buddha several metres in height. Upon it are several cylinders, the turning of which serves for prayers. They are a sort of wooden barrel, draped with yellow or white fabrics, and are attached to vertically planted stakes. It requires only the least wind to make them turn. The person who puts up one of these cylinders no longer feels it obligatory upon him to say his prayers, for all that devout believers can ask of God is written upon the cylinders. Seen from a distance this white

[p. 71]

painted monastery, standing sharply out from the gray background of the rocks, with all these whirling, petticoated wheels, produce a strange effect in this dead country. I left my horses in the hamlet of Wakkha, and, followed by my servant, walked toward the convent, which is reached by a narrow stairway cut in the rock. At the top, I was received by a very fat lama, with a scanty, straggling beard under his chin--a common characteristic of the Thibetan people--who was very ugly, but very cordial. His costume consisted of a yellow robe and a sort of big night-cap, with projecting flaps above the ears of the same color. He held in his hand a copper prayer-machine which, from time to time, he shook with his left hand, without at all permitting that exercise to interfere with his conversation. It was his

[p. 72]

eternal prayer, which he thus communicated to the wind, so that by this element it should be borne to Heaven. We traversed a suite of low chambers, upon the walls of which were images of Buddha, of all sizes and made of all kinds of materials, all alike covered by a thick layer of dust. Finally we reached an open terrace, from which the eyes, taking in the surrounding region, rested upon an inhospitable country, strewn with grayish rocks and traversed by only a single road, which on both sides lost itself in the horizon.

When we were seated, they brought us beer, made with hops, called here "Tchang" and brewed in the cloister. It has a tendency to rapidly produce embonpoint upon the monks, which is regarded as a sign of the particular favor of Heaven.

[p. 73]

They spoke here the Thibetan language. The origin of this language is full of obscurity. One thing is certain, that a king of Thibet, a contemporary of Mohammed, undertook the creation of an universal language for all the disciples of Buddha. To this end he had simplified the Sanscrit grammar, composed an alphabet containing an infinite number of signs, and thus laid the foundations of a language the pronunciation of which is one of the easiest and the writing the most complicated. Indeed, in order to represent a sound one must employ not less than eight characters. All the modern literature of Thibet is written in this language. The pure Thibetan is only spoken in Ladak and Oriental Thibet. In all the other parts of the country are employed dialects formed by the mixture of this mother language with different idioms

[p. 74]

taken from the neighboring peoples of the various regions round about. In the ordinary life of the Thibetan, there exists always two languages, one of which is absolutely incomprehensible to the women, while the other is spoken by the entire nation; but only in the convents can be found the Thibetan language in all its purity and integrity.

The lamas much prefer the visits of Europeans to those of Musselmen, and when I asked the one who received me why this was so, he answered me: "Musselmen have no point of contact at all with our religion. Only comparatively recently, in their victorious campaign, they have converted, by force, part of the Buddhists to Islam. It requires of us great efforts to bring back those Musselmen, descendants of Buddhists,

[p. 75]

into the path of the true God. As regards the Europeans, it is quite a different affair. Not only do they profess the essential principles of monotheism, but they are, in a sense, adorers of Buddha, with almost the same rites as the lamas who inhabit Thibet. The only fault of the Christians is that after having adopted the great doctrines of Buddha, they have completely separated themselves from him, and have created for themselves a different Dalai-Lama. Our Dalai-Lama is the only one who has received the divine gift of seeing, face to face, the majesty of Buddha, and is empowered to serve as an intermediary between earth and heaven."

"Which Dalai-Lama of the Christians do you refer to?" I asked him; "we have one, the Son of God, to whom we address directly our fervent prayers, and to him alone we

[p. 76]

recur to intercede with our One and Indivisible God."

"It is not him on whom it is a question, Sahib," he replied. "We, too, respect him, whom we reverence as son of the One and Indivisible God, but we do not see in him the Only Son, but the excellent being who was chosen among all. Buddha, indeed, has incarnated himself, with his divine nature, in the person of the sacred Issa, who, without employing fire or iron, has gone forth to propagate our true and great religion among all the world. Him whom I meant was your terrestrial Dalai-Lama; he to whom you have given the title of 'Father of the Church.' That is a great sin. May he be brought back, with the flock, who are now in a bad road," piously added the lama, giving another twirl to his prayer-machine.

[p. 77]

I understood now that he alluded to the Pope. "You have told me that a son of Buddha, Issa, the elect among all, had spread your religion on the Earth. Who is he?" I asked.

At this question the lama's eyes opened wide; he looked at me with astonishment and pronounced some words I could not catch, murmuring in an unintelligible way. "Issa," he finally replied, "is a great prophet, one of the first after the twenty-two Buddhas. He is greater than any one of all the Dalai-Lamas, for he constitutes part of the spirituality of our Lord. It is he who has instructed you; he who brought back into the bosom of God the frivolous and wicked souls; he who made you worthy of the beneficence of the Creator, who has ordained that each being should know good and evil. His name

[p. 78]

and his acts have been chronicled in our sacred writings, and when reading how his great life passed away in the midst of an erring people, we weep for the horrible sin of the heathen who murdered him, after subjecting him to torture."

I was struck by this recital of the lama. The prophet Issa--his tortures and death--our Christian Dalai-Lama--the Buddhist recognizing Christianity--all these made me think more and more of Jesus Christ. I asked my interpreter not to lose a single word of what the lama told me.

"Where can those writings be found, and who compiled them?" I asked the monk.

"The principal scrolls--which were written in India and Nepaul, at different epochs, as the events happened--are in Lhassa; several thousands in number. In

[p. 79]

some great convents are to be found copies, which the lamas, during their sojourn in Lhassa, have made, at various times, and have then given to their cloisters as souvenirs of the period they spent with the Dalai-Lama."

"But you, yourselves; do you not possess copies of the scrolls bearing upon the prophet Issa?"

"We have not. Our convent is insignificant, and since its foundation our successive lamas have had only a few hundred manuscripts in their library. The great cloisters have several thousands of them; but they are sacred things which will not, anywhere, be shown to you."

We spoke together a few minutes longer, after which I went home, all the while thinking of the lama's statements. Issa, a prophet of the Buddhists! But, how could this be?

[p. 80]

[paragraph continues] Of Jewish origin, he lived in Palestine and in Egypt; and the Gospels do not contain one word, not even the least allusion, to the part which Buddhism should have played in the education of Jesus.

I made up my mind to visit all the convents of Thibet, in the hope of gathering fuller information upon the prophet Issa, and perhaps copies of the chronicles bearing upon this subject.

 

We traversed the Namykala Pass, at 30,00o feet of altitude, whence we descended into the valley of the River Salinoumah. Turning southward, we gained Karbou, leaving behind us, on the opposite bank, numerous villages, among others, Chagdoom, which is at the top of a rock, an extremely imposing sight. Its houses are white and have a sort

[p. 81]

of festive look, with their two and three stories. This, by the way, is a common peculiarity of all the villages of Ladak. The eye of the European, travelling in Kachmyr, would soon lose sight of all architecture to which he had been accustomed. In Ladak, on the contrary, he would be agreeably surprised at seeing the little two and three-story houses, reminders to him of those in European provinces. Near the city of Karbou, upon two perpendicular rocks, one sees the ruins of a little town or village. A tempest and an earthquake are said to have shaken down its walls, the solidity of which seems to have been exceptional.

The next day I traversed the Fotu-La Pass, at an altitude of 13,500 feet. At its summit stands a little t'haorthene (chapel). Thence, following the dry bed of a stream, I descended

[p. 82]

to the hamlet of Lamayure, the sudden appearance of which is a surprise to the traveller. A convent, which seems grafted on the side of the rock, or held there in some miraculous way, dominates the village. Stairs are unknown in this cloister. In order to pass from one story of it to another, ropes are used. Communication with the world outside is through a labyrinth of passages in the rock. Under the windows of the convent--which make one think of birds' nests on the face of a cliff--is a little inn, the rooms of which are little inviting. Hardly had I stretched myself on the carpet in one of them, when the monks, dressed in their yellow robes, filled the apartment, bothered me with questions as to whence I came, the purpose of my coming, where I was going, and so on, finally inviting me to come and see them.

[p. 83]

In spite of my fatigue I accepted their invitation and set out with them, to climb up the excavated passages in the rock, which were encumbered with an infinity of prayer cylinders and wheels, which I could not but touch and set turning as I brushed past them. They are placed there that they may be so turned, saving to the passers-by the time they might otherwise lose in saying their prayers--as if their affairs were so absorbing, and their time so precious, that they could not find leisure to pray. Many pious Buddhists use for this purpose an apparatus arranged to be turned by the current of a stream. I have seen a long row of cylinders, provided with their prayer formulas, placed along a river bank, in such a way that the water kept them constantly in motion, this ingenious device freeing the proprietors

[p. 84]

from any further obligation to say prayers themselves.

I sat down on a bench in the hall, where semi-obscurity reigned. The walls were garnished with little statues of Buddha, books and prayer-wheels. The loquacious lamas began explaining to me the significance of each object.

"And those books?" I asked them; "they, no doubt, have reference to religion."

"Yes, sir. These are a few religious volumes which deal with the primary and principal rites of the life common to all. We possess several parts of the words of Buddha consecrated to the Great and Indivisible Divine Being, and to all that issued from his hands."

"Is there not, among those books, some account of the prophet Issa?"

[p. 85]

"No, sir," answered the monk. "We only possess a few principal treatises relating to the observance of the religious rites. As for the biographies of our saints, they are collected in Lhassa. There are even great cloisters which have not had the time to procure them. Before coming to this gonpa, I was for several years in a great convent on the other side of Ladak, and have seen there thousands of books, and scrolls copied out of various books by the lamas of the monastery."

By some further interrogation I learned that the convent in question was near Leh, but my persistent inquiries had the effect of exciting the suspicions of the lamas. They showed me the way out with evident pleasure, and, regaining my room, I fell asleep--after a light lunch--leaving orders with my Hindu to inform himself in a skilful way,

[p. 86]

from some of the younger lamas of the convent, about the monastery in which their chief had lived before coming to Lamayure.

In the morning, when we set forth on our journey, the Hindu told me that he could get nothing from the lamas, who were very reticent. I will not stop to describe the life of the monks in those convents, for it is the same in all the cloisters of Ladak. I have seen the celebrated monastery of Leh--of which I shall have to speak later on--and learned there the strange existences the monks and religious people lead, which is everywhere the same. In Lamayure commences a declivity which, through a steep, narrow and sombre gorge, extends toward India.

Without having the least idea of the dangers which the descent presented, I sent my

[p. 87]

carriers in advance and started on a route, rather pleasant at the outset, which passes between the brown clay hills, but soon it produced upon me the most depressing effect, as though I was traversing a gloomy subterranean passage. Then the road came out on the flank of the mountain, above a terrible abyss. If a rider had met me, the could not possibly have passed each other, the way was so narrow. All description would fail to convey a sense of the grandeur and wild beauty of this canon, the summit of the walls of which seemed to reach the sky. At some points it became so narrow that from my saddle I could, with my cane, touch the opposite rock. At other places, death might be fancied looking up expectantly, from the abyss, at the traveller. It was too late to dismount. In entering alone this gorge, I

[p. 88]

had not the faintest idea that I would have occasion to regret my foolish imprudence. I had not realized its character. It was simply an enormous crevasse, rent by some Titanic throe of nature, some tremendous earthquake, which had split the granite mountain. In its bottom I could just distinguish a hardly perceptible white thread, an impetuous torrent, the dull roar of which filled the defile with mysterious and impressive sounds. Far overhead extended, narrow and sinuously, a blue ribbon, the only glimpse of the celestial world that the frowning granite walls permitted to be seen. It was a thrilling pleasure, this majestic view of nature. At the same time, its rugged severity, the vastness of its proportions, the deathly silence only invaded by the ominous murmur from the depths beneath, all together filled me with

[p. 89]

an unconquerable depression. I had about eight miles in which to experience these sensations, at once sweet and painful. Then, turning to the right, our little caravan reached a small valley, almost surrounded by precipitous granite rocks, which mirrored themselves in the Indus. On the bank of the river stands the little fortress Khalsi, a celebrated fortification dating from the epoch of the Musselman invasion, by which runs the wild road from Kachmyr to Thibet.

We crossed the Indus on an almost suspended bridge which led directly to the door of the fortress, thus impossible of evasion. Rapidly we traversed the valley, then the village of Khalsi, for I was anxious to spend the night in the hamlet of Snowely, which is placed upon terraces descending to the Indus. The two following days I travelled

[p. 90]

tranquilly and without any difficulties to overcome, along the shore of the Indus, in a picturesque country--which brought me to Leh, the capital of Ladak.

While traversing the little valley of Saspoula, at a distance of several kilometres from the village of the same name, I found "t'horthenes" and two cloisters, above one of which floated the French flag. Later on, I learned that a French engineer had presented the flag to the monks, who displayed it simply as a decoration of their building.

I passed the night at Saspoula and certainly did not forget to visit the cloisters, seeing there for the tenth time the omnipresent dust-covered images of Buddha; the flags and banners heaped in a corner; ugly masks on the floor; books and papyrus rolls heaped together without order or care, and

[p. 91]

the inevitable abundance of prayer-wheels. The lamas demonstrated a particular pleasure in exhibiting these things, doing it with the air of shopmen displaying their goods, with very little care for the degree of interest the traveller may take in them. "We must show everything, in the hope that the sight alone of these sacred objects will force the traveller to believe in the divine grandeur of the human soul."

Respecting the prophet Issa, they gave me the same account I already had, and I learned, what I had known before, that the books which could instruct me about him were at Lhassa, and that only the great monasteries possessed some copies. I did not think any more of passing Kara-koroum, but only of finding the history of the prophet Issa, which would, perhaps, bring to light the entire life

[p. 92]

of the best of men, and complete the rather vague information which the Gospels afford us about him.

Not far from Leh, and at the entrance of the valley of the same name, our road passed near an isolated rock, on the top of which were constructed a fort--with two towers and without garrison--and a little convent named Pitak. A mountain, 10,500 feet high, protects the entrance to Thibet. There the road makes a sudden turn toward the north, in the direction of Leh, six miles from Pitak and a thousand feet higher. Immense granite mountains tower above Leh, to a height of 18,000 or 19,000 feet, their crests covered with eternal snow. The city itself, surrounded by a girdle of stunted aspen trees, rises upon successive terraces, which are dominated by an old fort and the palaces of

[p. 93]

the ancient sovereigns of Ladak. Toward evening I made my entrance into Leh, and stopped at a bengalow constructed especially for Europeans, whom the road from India brings here in the hunting season.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

  

LADAK

Ladak formerly was part of Great Thibet, The powerful invading forces from the north which traversed the country to conquer Kachmyr, and the wars of which Ladak was the theatre, not only reduced it to misery, but eventually subtracted it from the political domination of Lhassa, and made it the prey of one conqueror after another. The Musselmen, who sized Kachmyr and Ladak at a remote epoch, converted by force the poor inhabitants of old Thibet to the faith of Islam. The political existence of Ladak ended with the annexation of this country to Kachmyr by the seiks, which, however, permitted

[p. 95]

the Ladakians to return to their ancient beliefs. Two-thirds of the inhabitants took advantage of this opportunity to rebuild their gonpas and take up their past life anew. Only the Baltistans remained Musselman schuttes--a sect to which the conquerors of the country had belonged. They, however, have only conserved a vague shadow of Islamism, the character of which manifests itself in their ceremonials and in the polygamy which they practice. Some lamas affirmed to me that they did not despair of one day bringing them back to the faith of their ancestors.

From the religious point of view Ladak is a dependency of Lhassa, the capital of Thibet and the place of residence of the Dalai-Lama. In Lhassa are located the principal Khoutoukhtes, or Supreme Lamas,

[p. 96]

and the Chogzots, or administrators. Politically, it is under the authority of the Maharadja of Kachmyr, who is represented there by a governor.

The inhabitants of Ladak belong to the Chinese-Touranian race, and are divided into Ladakians and Tchampas. The former lead a sedentary existence, building villages of two-story houses along the narrow valleys, are cleanly in their habits, and cultivators of the soil. They are excessively ugly; thin, with stooping figures and small heads set deep between their shoulders; their cheek bones salient, foreheads narrow, eyes black and brilliant, as are those of all the Mongol race; noses flat, mouths large and thin-lipped; and from their small chins, very thinly garnished by a few hairs, deep wrinkles extend upward furrowing their hollow

[p. 97]

cheeks. To all this, add a close-shaven head with only a little bristling fringe of hair, and you will have the general type, not alone of Ladak, but of entire Thibet.

The women are also of small stature, and have exceedingly prominent cheek bones, but seem to be of much more robust constitution. A healthy red tinges their cheeks and sympathetic smiles linger upon their lips. They have good dispositions, joyous inclinations, and are fond of laughing.

The severity of the climate and rudeness of the country, do not permit to the Ladakians much latitude in quality and colors of costume. They wear gowns of simple gray linen and coarse dull-hued clothing of their own manufacture. The pantaloons of the men only descend to their knees. People in good circumstances wear, in addition to the

[p. 98]

ordinary dress, the "choga," a sort of overcoat which is draped on the back when not wrapped around the figure. In winter they wear fur caps, with big ear flips, and in summer cover their heads with a sort of cloth hood, the top of which dangles on one side, like a Phrygian cap. Their shoes are made of felt and covered with leather. A whole arsenal of little things hangs down from their belts, among which you will find a needle case, a knife, a pen and inkstand, a tobacco pouch, a pipe, and a diminutive specimen of the omnipresent prayer-cylinder.

The Thibetan men are generally so lazy, that if a braid of hair happens to become loose, it is not tressed up again for three months, and when once a shirt is put on the body, it is not again taken off until it falls to pieces. Their overcoats are always unclean,

[p. 99]

and, on the back, one may contemplate a long oily stripe imprinted by the braid of hair, which is carefully greased every day. They wash themselves once a year, but even then do not do so voluntarily, but because compelled by law. They emit such a terrible stench that one avoids, as much as possible, being near them.

The Thibetan women, on the contrary, are very fond of cleanliness and order. They wash themselves daily and as often as may be needful. Short and clean chemises hide their dazzling white necks. The Thibetan woman throws on her round shoulders a red jacket, the flaps of which are covered by tight pantaloons of green or red cloth, made in such a manner as to puff up and so protect the legs against the cold. She wears embroidered red half-boots, trimmed and lined

[p. 100]

with fur. A large cloth petticoat with numerous folds completes her home toilet. Her hair is arranged in thin braids, to which, by means of pins, a large piece of floating cloth is attached,--which reminds one of the headdress so common in Italy. Underneath this sort of veil are suspended a variety of various colored pebbles, coins and pieces of metal. The ears are covered by flaps made of cloth or fur. A furred sheepskin covers the back, poor women contenting themselves with a simple plain skin of the animal, while wealthy ladies wear veritable cloaks, lined with red cloth and adorned with gold fringes.

The Ladak woman, whether walking in the streets or visiting her neighbors, always carries upon her back a conical basket, the smaller end of which is toward the ground. They fill it with the dung of horses or cows,

[p. 101]

which constitute the combustible of the count try. Every woman has money of her own, and spends it for jewelry. Generally she purchases, at a small expense, large pieces of turquoise, which are added to the bizarre ornaments of her headdress. I have seen pieces so worn which weighed nearly five pounds. The Ladak woman occupies a social position for which she is envied by all women of the Orient. She is free and respected. With the exception of some rural work, she passes the greatest part of her time in visiting. It must, however, be added that women's gossip is here a perfectly unknown thing.

The settled population of Ladak is engaged in agriculture, but they own so little land (the share of each may amount to about eight acres) that the revenue drawn from it

[p. 102]

is insufficient to provide them with the barest necessities and does not permit them to pay taxes. Manual occupations are generally despised. Artisans and musicians form the lowest class of society. The name by which they are designated is Bem, and people are very careful not to contract any alliance with them. The hours of leisure left by rural work are spent in hunting the wild sheep of Thibet, the skins of which are highly valued in India. The poorest, i.e., those who have not the means to purchase arms for hunting, hire themselves as coolies. This is also an occupation of women, who are very capable of enduring arduous toil. They are healthier than their husbands, whose laziness goes so far that, careless of cold or heat, they are capable of spending a whole night

[p. 103]

in the open air on a bed of stones rather than take the trouble to go to bed.

Polyandry (which I shall treat later more fully) causes the formation of very large families, who, in common, cultivate their jointly possessed lands, with the assistance of yaks, zos and zomos (oxen and cows). A member of a family cannot detach himself from it, and when he dies, his share reverts to the survivors in common.

They sow but little wheat and the grain is very small, owing to the severity of the climate. They also harvest barley, which they pulverize before selling. When work in the field is ended, all male inhabitants go to gather on the mountain a wild herb called "enoriota," and large thorn bushes or "dama," which are used as fuel, since combustibles are scarce in Ladak. You see there

[p. 104]

neither trees nor gardens, and only exceptionally thin clumps of willows and poplars u grow on the shores of the rivers. Near the villages are also found some aspen trees; but, on account of the unfertility of the ground, arboriculture is unknown and gardening is little successful.

The absence of wood is especially noticeable in the buildings, which are made of sun-dried bricks, or, more frequently, of stones of medium size which are agglomerated with a kind of mortar composed of clay and chopped straw. The houses of the settled inhabitants are two stories high, their fronts whitewashed, and their window-sashes painted with lively colors. The flat roof forms a terrace which is decorated with wild flowers, and here, during good weather, the inhabit, ants spend much of their time contemplating

[p. 105]

nature, or turning their prayer-wheels. Every dwelling-house is composed of many rooms; among them always one of superior size, the walls of which are decorated with superb fur-skins, and which is reserved for visitors. In the other rooms are beds and other furniture. Rich people possess, moreover, a special room filled with all kinds of idols, and set apart as a place of worship.

Life here is very regular. They eat anything attainable, without much choice; the principal nourishment of the Ladak people, however, being exceedingly simple. Their breakfast consists of a piece of rye bread. At dinner, they serve on the table a bowl with meal into which lukewarm water is stirred with little rods until the mixture assumes the consistency of thick paste. From this, small portions are scooped out and eaten

[p. 106]

with milk. In the evening, bread and tea are served. Meat is a superfluous luxury. Only the hunters introduce some variety in their alimentation, by eating the meat of wild sheep, eagles or pheasants, which are very common in this country.

During the day, on every excuse and opportunity, they drink "tchang," a kind of pale, unfermented beer.

If it happens that a Ladakian, mounted on a pony (such privileged people are very rare), goes to seek work in the surrounding country, he provides himself with a small stock of meal; when dinner time comes, he descends to a river or spring, mixes with water, in a wooden cup that he always has with him, some of the meal, swallows the simple refreshment and washes it down with water.

[p. 107]

The Tchampas, or nomads, who constitute the other part of Ladak's population, are rougher, and much poorer than the settled population. They are, for the most part, hunters, who completely neglect agriculture. Although they profess the Buddhistic religion, they never frequent the cloisters unless in want of meal, which they obtain in exchange for their venison. They mostly camp in tents on the summits of the mountains, where the cold is very great. While the properly called Ladakians are peaceable, very desirous of learning, of an incarnated laziness, and are never known to tell untruth; the Tchampas, on the contrary, are very irascible, extremely lively, great liars and profess a great disdain for the convents.

Among them lives the small population of Khombas, wanderers from the vicinity of

[p. 108]

[paragraph continues] Lhassa, who lead the miserable existence of a troupe of begging gipsies on the highways. Incapable of any work whatever, speaking a language not spoken in the country where they beg for their subsistence, they are the objects of general contempt, and are only tolerated out of pity for their deplorable condition, when hunger drives their mendicant bands to seek alms in the villages.

 

Polyandry, which is universally prevalent here, of course interested my curiosity. This institution is, by the way, not the outcome of Buddha's doctrines. Polyandry existed long before the advent of Buddha. It assumed considerable proportions in India, where it constituted one of the most effective means for checking the growth of a population which tends to constant increase, an

[p. 109]

economic danger which is even yet combatted by the abominable custom of killing new-born female children, which causes terrible ravages in the child-life of India. The efforts made by the English in their enactments against the suppression of the future mothers have proved futile and fruitless. Manu himself established polyandry as a law, and Buddhist preachers, who had renounced Brahminism and preached the use of opium, imported this custom into Ceylon, Thibet, Corea, and the country of the Moguls. For a long time suppressed in China, polyandry, which flourishes in Thibet and Ceylon, is also met with among the Kalmonks, between Todas in Southern India, and Nairs on the coast of Malabar. Traces of this strange constitution of the family are also to be found

[p. 110]

with the Tasmanians and the Irquois Indians in North America.

Polyandry, by the way, has even flourished in Europe, if we may believe Caesar, who, in his De Bello Gallico, book V., page 17, writes: "Uxores habent deni duodenique inter se communes, et maxime fratres cum fratribus et parentes cum liberis."

In view of all this it is impossible to hold any religion responsible for the existence of the institution of polyandry. In Thibet it can be explained by motives of an economical nature; the small quantity of arable land falling to the share of each inhabitant. In order to support the 1,500,000 inhabitants distributed in Thibet, upon a surface of 1,200,000 square kilometres, the Buddhists were forced to adopt polyandry. Moreover, each family is bound to enter one of its members

[p. 111]

in a religious order. The first-born is consecrated to a gonpa, which is inevitably found upon an elevation, at the entrance of every village. As soon as the child attains the age of eighteen years, he is entrusted to the caravans which pass Lhassa, where he remains from eight to fifteen years as a novice, in one of the gonpas which are near the city. There he learns to read and write, is taught the religious rites and studies the sacred parchments written in the Pali language--which formerly used to be the language of the country of Maguada, where, according to tradition, Buddha was born.

The oldest brother remaining in a family chooses a wife, who becomes common to his brothers. The choice of the bride and the nuptial ceremonies are most rudimentary. When a wife and her husband have decided

[p. 112]

upon the marriage of a son, the brother who possesses the right of choice, pays a visit to a neighboring family in which there is a marriageable daughter.

The first and second visits are spent in more or less indifferent conversations, blended with frequent libations of tchang, and on the third visit only does the young man declare his intention to take a wife. Upon this the girl is formally introduced to him. She is generally not unknown to the wooer, as, in Ladak, women never veil their faces.

A girl cannot be married without her consent. When the young man is accepted, he takes his bride to his house, and she becomes his wife and also the wife of all his brothers. A family which has an only son sends him to a woman who has no more than two or three husbands, and he offers himself to her

[p. 113]

as a fourth husband. Such an offer is seldom declined, and the young man settles in the new family.

The newly married remain with the parents of the husbands, until the young wife bears her first child. The day after that event, the grandparents of the infant make over the bulk of their fortune to the new family, and, abandoning the old home to them, seek other shelter.

Sometimes marriages are contracted between youth who have not reached a marriageable age, but in such event, the married couple are made to live apart, until they have attained and even passed the age required. An unmarried girl who becomes enceinte, far from being exposed to the scorn of every one, is shown the highest respect; for she is demonstrated fruitful, and men

[p. 114]

eagerly seek her in marriage. A wife has the unquestioned right of having an unlimited number of husbands and lovers. If she likes a young man, she takes him home, announces that he has been chosen by her as a "jingtuh" (a lover), and endows him with all the personal rights of a husband, which situation is accepted by her temporarily supplanted husbands with a certain philosophic pleasure, which is the more pronounced if their wife has proved sterile during the three first years of her marriage.

They certainly have here not even a vague idea of jealousy. The Thibetan's blood is too cold to know love, which, for him, would be almost an anachronism; if indeed he were not conscious that the sentiment of the entire community would be against him, as a flagrant violator of popular usage and established

[p. 115]

rights, in restraining the freedom of the women. The selfish enjoyment of love would be, in their eyes, an unjustifiable luxury.

In case of a husband's absence, his place may be offered to a bachelor or a widower. The latter are here in the minority, since the wife generally survives her feeble husbands. Sometimes a Buddhist traveller, whom his affairs bring to the village, is chosen for this office. A husband who travels, or seeks for work in the neighboring country, at every stop takes advantage of his co-religionists' hospitality, who offer him their own wives. The husbands of a sterile woman exert themselves to find opportunities for hospitality, which may happily eventuate in a change in her condition, that they may be made happy fathers.

[p. 116]

The wife enjoys the general esteem, is ever of a cheerful disposition, takes part in everything that is going on, goes and comes without any restriction, anywhere and everywhere she pleases, with the exception of the principal prayer-room of the monastery, entrance into which is formally prohibited to her.

Children know only their mother, and do not feel the least affection for their fathers, for the simple reason that they have so many. Without approving polyandry, I could not well blame Thibet for this institution, since without it, the population would prodigiously increase. Famine and misery would fall upon the whole nation, with all the sinister sequellae of murder and theft, crimes so far absolutely unknown in the whole country.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 117]

  

A FESTIVAL IN A GONPA.

Leh, the capital of Ladak, is a little town of 5,000 inhabitants, who live in white, two-story houses, upon two or three streets, principally. In its centre is the square of the bazaar, where the merchants of India, China, Turkestan, Kachmyr and Thibet, come to exchange their products for the Thibetan gold. Here the natives provide themselves with cloths for themselves and their monks, and various objects of real necessity.

An old uninhabited palace rises upon a hill which dominates the town. Fronting the central square is a vast building, two

[p. 118]

stories in height, the residence of the governor of Ladak, the Vizier Souradjbal--a very amiable and universally popular Pendjaban, who has received in London the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.

To entertain me, during my sojourn in Leh, the governor arranged, on the bazaar square, a game of polo--the national sport of the Thibetans, which the English have adopted and introduced into Europe. In the evening, after the game, the people executed dances and played games before the governor's residence. Large bonfires illuminated the scene, lighting up the throng of inhabitants, who formed a great circle about the performers. The latter, in considerable numbers, disguised as animals, devils and sorcerers, jumped and contorted themselves in rhythmic dances timed to the measure of

[p. 119]

the monotonous and unpleasing music made by two long trumpets and a drum.

The infernal racket and shouting of the crowd wearied me. The performance ended with some graceful dances by Thibetan women, who spun upon their heels, swaying to and fro, and, in passing before the spectators in the windows of the residence, greeted us by the clashing together of the copper and ivory bracelets on their crossed wrists.

The next day, at an early hour, I repaired to the great Himis convent, which, a little distance from Leh, is elevated upon the top of a great rock, on a picturesque site, commanding the valley of the Indies. It is one of the principal monasteries of the country, and is maintained by the gifts of the people and the subsidies it receives from Lhassa. On the road leading to it, beyond the bridge

[p. 120]

crossing the Indus, and in the vicinity of the villages lining the way, one finds heaps of stones bearing engraved inscriptions, such as have already been described, and t'horthenes. At these places, our guides were very careful to turn to the right. I wished to turn my horse to the left, but the Ladakians made him go back and led him by his halter to the right, explaining to me that such was their established usage. I found it impossible to learn the origin or reason of this custom.

Above the gonpa rises a battlemented tower, visible from a great distance. We climbed, on foot, to the level on which the edifice stands and found ourselves confronted by a large door, painted in brilliant colors, the portal of a vast two-story building enclosing a court paved with little pebbles. To the right, in one of the angles of the

[p. 121]

court, is another huge painted door, adorned with big copper rings. It is the entrance to the principal temple, which is decorated with paintings of the principal gods, and contains a great statue of Buddha and a multitude of sacred statuettes. To the left, upon a verandah, was placed an immense prayer-cylinder. All the lamas of the convent, with their chief, stood about it, when we entered the court. Below the verandah were musicians, holding long trumpets and drums.

At the right of the court were a number of doors, leading to the rooms of the lamas; all decorated with sacred paintings and provided with little prayer-barrels fancifully surmounted by black and white tridents, from the points of which floated ribbons bearing inscriptions--doubtless prayers. In the centre of the court were raised two tall masts,

[p. 122]

from the tops of which dangled tails of yaks, and long paper streamers floated, covered with religious inscriptions. All along the walls were numerous prayer-barrels, adorned with ribbons.

A profound silence reigned among the many spectators present. All awaited anxiously the commencement of a religious "mystery," which was about to be presented. We took up a position near the verandah. Almost immediately, the musicians drew from their long trumpets soft and monotonous tones, marking the time by measured beats upon an odd-looking drum, broad and shallow, upreared upon a stick planted in the ground. At the first sounds of the strange music, in which joined the voices of the lamas in a melancholy chant, the doors along the wall opened simultaneously, giving entrance

[p. 123]

to about twenty masked persons, disguised as animals, birds, devils and imaginary monsters. On their breasts they bore representations of fantastic dragons, demons and skulls, embroidered with Chinese silk of various colors. From the conical hats they wore, depended to their breasts long multicolored ribbons, covered with inscriptions. Their masks were white death's-heads. Slowly they marched about the masts, stretching out their arms from time to time and flourishing with their left hands spoon-shaped objects, the bowl portions of which were said to be fragments of human crania, with ribbons attached, having affixed to their ends human hair, which, I was assured, had been taken from scalped enemies. Their promenade, in gradually narrowing circles about the masts, soon became merely a confused

[p. 124]

jostling of each other; when the rolling of the drum grew more accentuated, the performers for an instant stopped, then started again, swinging above their heads yellow sticks, ribbon-decked, which with their right hands they brandished in menacing attitudes.

After making a salute to the chief lama, they approached the door leading to the temple, which at this instant opened, and from it another band came forth, whose heads were covered by copper masks. Their dresses were of rich materials, embroidered in various bright colors. in one hand each of them carried a small tambourine and with the other he agitated a little bell. From the rim of each tambourine depended a metallic ball, so placed that the least movement of the hand brought it in contact with the

[p. 125]

resonant tympanum, which caused a strange, continuous under-current of pulsating sound. These new performers circled several times about the court, marking the time of their dancing steps by measured thumpings of the tambourines. At the completion of each turn, they made a deafening noise with their instruments. Finally, they ran to the temple-door and ranged themselves upon the steps before it.

For a moment, there was silence. Then we saw emerge from the temple a third band of performers. Their enormous masks represented different deities, and each bore upon its forehead "the third eye." At their head marched Thlogan-Poudma-Jungnas (literally "he who was born in the lotus flower"). Another richly dressed mask marched beside him, carrying a yellow parasol covered with symbolic

[p. 126]

designs. His suite was composed of gods, in magnificent costumes; Dorje-Trolong and Sangspa-Kourpo (i.e., Brahma himself), and others. These masks, as a lama sitting near me explained to us, represented six classes of beings subject to the metamorphoses; the gods, the demi-gods, men, animals, spirits and demons.

On each side of these personages, who advanced gravely, marched other masks, costumed in silks of brilliant hues and wearing on their heads golden crowns, fashioned with six lotus-like flowers on each, surmounted by a tall dart in the centre. Each of these masks carried a drum.

These disguises made three turns about the masts, to the sound of a noisy and incoherent music, and then seated themselves on the ground, around Thlogan-Pondma-Jungnas,

[p. 127]

a god with three eyes, who gravely introduced two fingers into his mouth and emitted a shrill whistle. At this signal, young men dressed in warrior costumes--with ribbon-decked bells dangling about their legs--came with measured steps from the temple. Their heads were covered by enormous green masks, from which floated triangular red flags, and they, too, carried tambourines. Making a diabolical din, they whirled and danced about the gods seated on the ground. Two big fellows accompanying them, who were dressed in tight clown costumes, executed all kinds of grotesque contortions and acrobatic feats, by which they won plaudits and shouts of laughter from the spectators.

Another group of disguises--of which the principal features were red mitres and yellow

[p. 128]

pantaloons--came out of the temple, with bells and tambourines in their hands, and seated themselves opposite the gods, as representatives of the highest powers next to divinity. Lastly there entered upon the scene a lot of red and brown masks, with a "third eye" painted on their breasts. With those who had preceded them, they formed two long lines of dancers, who to the thrumming of their many tambourines, the measured music of the trumpets and drums, and the jingling of a myriad of bells, performed a dance, approaching and receding from each other, whirling in circles, forming by twos in a column and breaking from that formation to make new combinations, pausing occasionally to make reverent obeisance before the gods.

After a time this spectacular excitement the noisy monotony of which began to weary

[p. 129]

me--calmed down a little; gods, demigods, kings, men and spirits got up, and followed by all the other maskers, directed themselves toward the temple door, whence issued at once, meeting them, a lot of men admirably disguised as skeletons. All those sorties were calculated and pre-arranged, and every one of them had its particular significance. The cortege of dancers gave way to the skeletons, who advanced with measured steps, in silence, to the masts, where they stopped and made a concerted clicking with pieces of wood hanging at their sides, simulating perfectly the rattling of dry bones and gnashing o f teeth. Twice they went in a circle around the masts, marching in time to low taps on the drums, and then joined in a lugubrious religious chant. Having once more made the concerted rattling of their artificial bones

[p. 130]

and jaws, they executed some contortions painful to witness and together stopped.

Then they seized upon an image of the Enemy of Man--made of some sort of brittle paste--which had been placed at the foot of one of the masts. This they broke in pieces and scattered, and the oldest men among the spectators, rising from their places, picked up the fragments which they handed to the skeletons--an action supposed to signify that would soon be ready to join the bony crew in the cemetery.

 

The chief lama, approaching me, tendered an invitation to accompany him to the principal terrace and partake of the festal "tchang;" which I accepted with pleasure, for my head was dizzy from the long spectacle.

[p. 131]

We crossed the court and climbed a staircase--obstructed with prayer-wheels, as usual--passed two rooms where there were many images of gods, and came out upon the terrace, where I seated myself upon a bench opposite the venerable lama, whose eyes sparkled with spirit.

Three lamas brought pitchers of tchang, which they poured into small copper cups, that were offered first to the chief lama, then to me and my servants.

"Did you enjoy our little festival?" the lama asked me.

"I found it very enjoyable and am still impressed by the spectacle I have witnessed. But, to tell the truth, I never suspected for a moment that Buddhism, in these religious ceremonies, could display such a visible, not to say noisy, exterior form."

[p. 132]

"There is no religion, the ceremonies of which are not surrounded with more theatrical forms," the lama answered. "This is a ritualistic phase which does not by any means violate the fundamental principles of Buddhism. It is a practical means for maintaining in the ignorant mass obedience to and love for the one Creator, just as a child is beguiled by toys to do the will of its parents. The ignorant mass is the child of The Father."

"But what is the meaning," I said to him, "of all those masks, costumes, bells, dances, and, generally, of this entire performance, which seems to be executed after a prescribed programme?"

"We have many similar festivals in the year," answered the lama, "and we arrange particular ones to represent 'mysteries,' susceptible

[p. 133]

of pantomimic presentation, in which each actor is allowed considerable latitude of action, in the movements and jests he likes, conforming, nevertheless, to the circumstances and to the leading idea. Our mysteries are simply pantomimes calculated to show the veneration offered to the gods, which veneration sustains and cheers the soul of man, who is prone to anxious contemplation of inevitable death and the life to come. The actors receive the dresses from the cloister and they play according to general indications, which leave them much liberty of individual action. The general effect produced is, no doubt, very beautiful, but it is a matter for the spectators themselves to divine the signification of one or another action. You, too, have recourse sometimes to similar devices, which, however, do not

[p. 134]

in the least violate the principle of monotheism."

"Pardon me," I remarked, "but this multitude of idols with which your gonpas abound, is a flagrant violation of that principle."

"As I have told you," replied the lama to my interruption, "man will always be in! childhood. He sees and feels the grandeur of nature and understands everything presented to his senses, but he neither sees nor divines the Great Soul which created and animates all things. Man has always sought for tangible things. It was not possible for him to believe long in that which escaped his material senses. He has racked his brain to and means for contemplating the Creator; has endeavored to enter into direct relations with him who has done him so much good,

[p. 135]

and also, as he erroneously believes, so much evil. For this reason he began to adore every phase of nature from which he received benefits. We see a striking example of this in the ancient Egyptians, who adored animals, trees, stones, the winds and the rain. Other peoples, who were more sunk in ignorance, seeing that the results of the wind were not always beneficent, and that the rain did not inevitably bring good harvests, and that the animals were not willingly subservient to man, began to seek for direct intermediaries between themselves and the great mysterious and unfathomable power of the Creator. Therefore they made for themselves idols, which they regarded as indifferent to things concerning them, but to whose interposition in their behalf, they might always recur. From remotest antiquity to our own days,

[p. 136]

man was ever inclined only to tangible realities.

"While seeking a route to lead their feet to the Creator, the Assyrians turned their eyes toward the stars, which they contemplated without the power of attaining them. The Guebers have conserved the same belief to our days. In their nullity and spiritual blindness, men are incapable of conceiving the invisible spiritual bond which unites them to the great Divinity, and this explains why I they have always sought for palpable things, which were in the domain of the senses, and I by doing which they minimized the divine principle. Nevertheless, they have dared to attribute to their visible and man-made images a divine and eternal existence. We can see the same fact in Brahminism, where man, given to his inclination for exterior

[p. 137]

forms, has created, little by little, and not all at once, an army of gods and demi-gods. The Israelites may be said to have demonstrated, in the most flagrant way, the love of man for everything which is concrete. In spite of a series of striking miracles accomplished by the great Creator, who is the same for all the peoples, the Jewish people could not help making a god of metal in the very minute when their prophet Mossa spoke to them of the Creator! Buddhism has passed through the same modifications. Our great reformer, Sakya-Muni, inspired by the Supreme Judge, understood truly the one and] indivisible Brahma, and forbade his disciples attempting to manufacture images in imaginary semblance of him. He had openly broken from the polytheistic Brahmins, and appreciated the purity, oneness and immortality

[p. 138]

of Brahma. The success he achieved by his teachings in making disciples among the people, brought upon hint persecution by the Brahmins, who, in the creation of new gods, had found a source of personal revenue, and who, contrary to the law of God, treated the people in a despotic manner. Our first sacred teachers, to whom we give the name of buddhas--which means, learned men or saints--because the great Creator has incarnated in them, settled in different countries of the globe. As their teachings attacked especially the tyranny of the Brahmins and the misuse they made of the idea of God--of which they indeed made a veritable business--almost all the Buddhistic converts, they who followed the doctrines of those great teachers, were among the common people of China and India. Among those teachers,

[p. 139]

particular reverence is felt for the Buddha, Sakya-Muni, known in China also under the name of Fo, who lived three thousand years ago, and whose teachings brought all China back into the path of the true God; and the Buddha, Gautama, who lived two thousand five hundred years ago, and converted almost half the Hindus to the knowledge of the impersonal, indivisible and only God, besides whom there is none.

"Buddhism is divided into many sects which, by the way, differ only in certain religious ceremonies, the basis of the doctrine being everywhere the same. The Thibetan Buddhists, who are called 'lamaists,' separated themselves from the Fo-ists fifteen hundred years ago. Until that time we had formed part of the worshippers of the Buddha, Fo-Sakya-Muni, who was the first to collect all

[p. 140]

the laws compiled by the various buddhas preceding him, when the great schism took place in the bosom of Brahmanism. Later on, a Khoutoukhte-Mongol translated into Chinese the books of the great Buddha, for which the Emperor of China rewarded him by bestowing upon him the title of 'Go-Chi--'Preceptor of the King!' After his death, this title was given to the Dalai-Lama of Thibet. Since that epoch, all the titularies of this position have borne the title of Go-Chi. Our religion is called the Lamaic one--from the word 'lama,' superior. It admits of two classes of monks, the red and the yellow. The former may marry, and they recognize the authority of the Bantsine, who resides in Techow Loumba, and is chief of the civil administration in Thibet. We, the yellow lamas, have taken the vow of celibacy, and

[p. 141]

our direct chief is the Dalai-Lama. This is the difference which separates the two religious orders, the respective rituals of which are identical."

"Do all perform mysteries similar to that which I have just witnessed?"

"Yes; with a few exceptions. Formerly these festivals were celebrated with very solemn pomp, but since the conquest of Ladak our convents have been, more than once, pillaged and our wealth taken away. Now we content ourselves with simple garments and bronze utensils, while in Thibet you sec but golden robes and gold utensils."

"In a visit which I recently made to a gonpa, one of the lamas told me of a prophet, or, as you call him, a buddha, by the name of Issa. Could you not tell me anything about him?" I asked my interlocutor, seizing

[p. 142]

this favorable moment to start the subject which interested me so greatly.

"The name Issa is very much respected among the Buddhists," he replied, "but he is only known by the chief lamas, who have read the scrolls relating to his life. There have existed an infinite number of buddhas like Issa, and the 84,000 scrolls existing are filled brim full of details concerning each one of them. But very few persons have read the one-hundredth part of those memoirs. In conformity with established custom, every disciple or lama who visits Lhassa makes a gift of one or several copies, from the scrolls there, to the convent to which he belongs. Our gonpa, among others, possesses already a great number, which I read in my leisure hours. Among them are the memoirs of the life and acts of the Buddha Issa, who preached

[p. 143]

the same doctrine in India and among the sons of Israel, and who was put to death by the Pagans, whose descendants, later on, adopted the beliefs he spread,--and those beliefs are yours.

"The great Buddha, the soul of the Universe, is the incarnation of Brahma. He, almost always, remains immobile, containing in himself all things, being in himself the origin of all and his breath vivifying the world. He has left man to the control of his own forces, but, at certain epochs, lays aside his inaction and puts on a human form that he may, as their teacher and guide, rescue his creatures from impending destruction. In the course of his terrestrial existence in the similitude of man, Buddha creates a new world in the hearts of erring men; then he leaves the earth, to become once more an

[p. 144]

invisible being and resume his condition of perfect bliss. Three thousand years ago, Buddha incarnated in the celebrated Prince Sakya-Muni, re-affirming and propagating the doctrines taught by him in his twenty preceding incarnations. Twenty-five hundred years ago, the Great Soul of the World incarnated anew in Gautama, laying the foundation of a new world in Burmah, Siam and different islands. Soon afterward, Buddhism began to penetrate China, through the persevering efforts of the sages, who devoted themselves to the propagation of the sacred doctrine, and under Ming-Ti, of the Honi dynasty, nearly 2,050 years ago, the teachings of Sakya-Muni were adopted by the people of that country. Simultaneously with the appearance of Buddhism in China, the same doctrines began to spread among the

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] Israelites. It is about 2,000 years ago that the Perfect Being, awaking once more for a short time from his inaction, incarnated in the new-born child of a poor family. It was his will that this little child should enlighten the unhappy upon the life of the world to conic and bring erring men back into the path of truth; showing to them, by his own example, the way they could best return to the primitive morality and purity of our race. When this sacred child attained a certain age, he was brought to India, where, until he attained to manhood. he studied the laws of the great Buddha, who dwells eternally in heaven."

"In what language are written the principal scrolls bearing upon the life of Issa?" I asked, rising from my seat, for I saw that my interesting interlocutor evidenced fatigue,

[p. 146]

and had just given a twirl to his prayer-wheel, as if to hint the closing of the conversation.

"The original scrolls brought from India to Nepaul, and from Nepaul to Thibet, relating to the life of Issa, are written in the Pali language and are actually in Lhassa; but a copy in our language--I mean the Thibetan--is in this convent."

"How is Issa looked upon in Thibet? Has he the repute of a saint?"

"The people are not even aware that he ever existed. Only the principal lamas, who know of him through having studied the scrolls in which his life is related, are familiar with his name; but, as his doctrine does not constitute a canonical part of Buddhism, and the worshippers of Issa do not recognize the authority of the Dalai-Lama, the prophet

[p. 147]

[paragraph continues] Issa--with many others like him--is not recognized in Thibet as one of the principal saints."

"Would you commit a sin in reciting your copy of the life of Issa to a stranger?" I asked him.

"That which belongs to God," he answered me, "belongs also to man. Our duty requires us to cheerfully devote ourselves to the propagation of His doctrine. Only, I do not, at present, know where that manuscript is. If you ever visit our gonpa again, I shall take pleasure in showing it to you."

At this moment two monks entered, and uttered to the chief lama a few words unintelligible to me.

"I am called to the sacrifices. Will you kindly excuse me?" said he to me, and,

[p. 148]

with a salute, turned to the door and disappeared.

I could do no better than withdraw and lie down in the chamber which was assigned to me. and where I spent the night.

 

In the evening of the next day I was again in Leh--thinking of how to get back to the convent. Two days later I sent, by a messenger, to the chief lama, as presents, a watch, an alarm clock, and a thermometer. At the same time I sent the message that before leaving Ladak I would probably return to the convent, in the hope that he would permit me to see the manuscript which had been the subject of our conversation. It was now my purpose to gain Kachmyr and return from there, some time later,

[p. 149]

to Himis. But fate made a different decision for me.

In passing a mountain, on a height of which is perched the gonpa of Piatak, my horse made a false step, throwing me to the ground so violently that my right leg was broken below the knee.

It was impossible to continue my journey, I was not inclined to return to Leh; and seeking the hospitality of the gonpa, of Piatak was not, from the appearance of the cloister, an enticing prospect. My best recourse would be to return to Himis, .then only about half a day's journey distant, and I ordered my servants to transport me there. They bandaged my broken leg--an operation which caused me great pain--and lifted me into the saddle. One carrier walked by my side, supporting the weight of the injured

[p. 150]

member, while another led my horse. At a late hour of the evening we reached the door of the convent of Himis.

When informed of my accident, the kind monks came out to receive me and, with a wealth of extraordinary precautions of tenderness, I was carried inside, and, in one of their best rooms, installed upon an improvised bed, consisting of a mountain of soft. fabrics, with the naturally-to-be-expected prayer-cylinder beside me. All this was done for me under the personal supervision of their chief lama, who, with affectionate sympathy, pressed the hand I gave him in expression of my thanks for his kindness.

In the morning, I myself bound around the injured limb little oblong pieces of wood, held by cords, to serve as splints. Then I remained perfectly quiescent and nature was

[p. 151]

not slow in her reparative work. Within two days my condition was so far improved that I could, had it been necessary, have left the gonpa and directed myself slowly toward India in search of a surgeon to complete my cure.

While a boy kept in motion the prayer-barrel near my bed, the venerable lama who ruled the convent entertained me with many interesting stories. Frequently he took from their box the alarm clock and the watch, that I might illustrate to him the process of winding them and explain to him their uses. At length, yielding to my ardent insistence, he brought me two big books, the large leaves of which were of paper yellow with age, and from them read to me the biography of Issa, which I carefully transcribed in my travelling note-book according to the translation

[p. 152]

made by the interpreter. This curious document is compiled under the form of isolated verses, which, as placed, very often had no apparent connection with, or relation to each other.

On the third day, my condition was so far improved as to permit the prosecution of my journey. Having bound up my leg as well as possible, I returned, across Kachmyr, to India; a slow journey, of twenty days, filled with intolerable pain. Thanks, however, to a litter, which a French gentleman, M. Peicheau, had kindly sent to me (my gratitude for which I take this occasion to express), and to an ukase of the Grand Vizier of the Maharajah of Kachmyr, ordering the local authorities to provide me with carriers, I reached Srinagar, and left almost immediately,

[p. 153]

being anxious to gain India before the first snows fell.

In Mure I encountered another Frenchman, Count Andre de Saint Phall, who was making a journey of recreation across Hindostan. During the whole course, which we made together, to Bombay, the young count demonstrated a touching solicitude for me, and sympathy for the excruciating pain I suffered from my broken leg and the fever induced by its torture. I cherish for him sincere gratitude, and shall never forget the friendly care which I received upon my arrival in Bombay from the Marquis de Mores, the Vicomte de Breteul, M. Monod, of the Comptoir d'Escompte, M. Moet, acting consul, and all the members of the very sympathetic French colony there.

During a long time I revolved in my mind

[p. 154]

the purpose of publishing the memoirs of the life of Jesus Christ found by me in Himis, of which I have spoken, but other interests absorbed my attention and delayed it. Only now, after having passed long nights of wakefulness in the co-ordination of my notes and grouping the verses conformably to the march of the recital, imparting to the work, as a whole, a character of unity, I resolve to let this curious chronicle see the light.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 155]

  

THE LIFE OF SAINT ISSA.

  

"BEST OF THE SONS OF MEN."

  

I.

1. The earth trembled and the heavens wept, because of the great crime committed in the land of Israel.

2. For there was tortured and murdered the great and just Issa, in whom was manifest the soul of the Universe;

3. Which had incarnated in a simple mortal, to benefit men and destroy the evil spirit in them;

4. To lead back to peace, love and happiness, man, degraded by his sins, and recall him to the one and indivisible Creator whose mercy is infinite.

[p. 156]

5. The merchants coming from Israel have given the following account of what has occurred:

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

II.

1. The people of Israel--who inhabit a fertile country producing two harvests a year and affording pasture for large herds of cattle--by their sins brought down upon themselves the anger of the Lord;

2. Who inflicted upon them terrible chastisements, taking from them their land, their cattle and their wealth. They were carried away into slavery by the rich and mighty Pharaohs who then ruled the land of Egypt.

3. The Israelites were, by the Pharaohs, treated worse than beasts, condemned to hard labor and put in irons; their bodies were covered with wounds and sores; they

[p. 157]

were not permitted to live under a roof, and were starved to death;

4. That they might be maintained in a state of continual terror and deprived of all human resemblance;

5. And in this great calamity, the Israelites, remembering their Celestial Protector, implored his forgiveness and mercy.

6. At that period reigned in Egypt an illustrious Pharaoh, who was renowned for his many victories, immense riches, and the gigantic palaces he had erected by the labor of his slaves.

7. This Pharaoh had two sons, the younger of whom, named Mossa, had acquired much knowledge from the sages of Israel.

8. And Mossa was beloved by all in Egypt, for his kindness of heart and the pity ho showed to all sufferers.

[p. 158]

9. When Mossa saw that the Israelites, in spite of their many sufferings, had not forsaken their God, and refused to worship the gods of Egypt, created by the hands of man.

10. He also put his faith in their invisible God, who did not suffer them to betray Him, despite their ever growing weakness.

11. And the teachers among Israel animated Mossa in his zeal, and prayed of him that he would intercede with his father, Pharaoh, in favor of their co-religionists.

12. Prince Mossa went before his father, begging him to lighten the burden of the unhappy people; Pharaoh, however, became incensed with rage, and ordered that they should be tormented more than before.

13. And it came to pass that Egypt was visited by a great calamity. The plague decimated young and old, the healthy and the

[p. 159]

sick; and Pharaoh beheld in this the resentment of his own gods against him.

14. But Prince Mossa said to his father that it was the God of his slaves who thus interposed on behalf of his wretched people, and avenged them upon the Egyptians.

15. Thereupon, Pharaoh commanded Mossa, his son, to gather all the Israelite slaves, and lead them away, and found, at a great distance from the capital, another city where he should rule over them.

16. Then Mossa made known to the Hebrew slaves that he had obtained their freedom in the name of his and their God, the God of Israel; and with them he left the city and departed from the land of Egypt.

17. He led them back to the land which, because of their many sins, had been taken from them. There he gave them laws and

[p. 160]

admonished them to pray always to God, the indivisible Creator, whose kindness is infinite.

18. After Prince Mossa's death, the Israelites observed rigorously his laws; and God rewarded them for the ills to which they had been subjected in Egypt.

19. Their kingdom became one of the most powerful on earth; their kings made themselves renowned for their treasures, and peace reigned in Israel.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

III.

1. The glory of Israel's wealth spread over the whole earth, and the surrounding nations became envious.

2. But the Most High himself led the victorious arms of the Hebrews, and the Pagans did not dare to attack them.

[p. 161]

3. Unfortunately, man is prone to err, and the fidelity of the Israelites to their God was not of long duration.

4. Little by little they forgot the favors he had bestowed upon them; rarely invoked his name, and sought rather protection by the magicians and sorcerers.

5. The kings and the chiefs among the people substituted their own laws for those given by Mossa; the temple of God and the observances of their ancient faith were neglected; the people addicted themselves to sensual gratifications and lost their original purity.

6. Many centuries had elapsed since their exodus from Egypt, when God bethought himself of again inflicting chastisement upon them.

7. Strangers invaded Israel, devastated

[p. 162]

the land, destroyed the villages, and carried their inhabitants away into captivity.

8. At last came the Pagans from over the sea, from the land of Romeles. These made themselves masters of the Hebrews, and placed over them their army chiefs, who governed in the name of Caesar.

9. They defiled the temples, forced the inhabitants to cease the worship of the indivisible God, and compelled them to sacrifice to the heathen gods.

10. They made common soldiers of those who had been men of rank; the women became their prey, and the common people, reduced to slavery, were carried away by thousands over the sea.

11. The children were slain, and soon, in the whole land, there was naught heard but weeping and lamentation.

[p. 163]

12. In this extreme distress, the Israelites once more remembered their great God, implored his mercy and prayed for his forgiveness. Our Father, in his inexhaustible clemency, heard their prayer.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV.

1. At that time the moment had come for the compassionate Judge to re-incarnate in a human form;

2. And the eternal Spirit, resting in a state of complete inaction and supreme bliss, awakened and separated from the eternal Being, for an undetermined period,

3. So that, in human form, He might teach man to identify himself with the Divinity and attain to eternal felicity;

[p. 164]

4. And to show, by His example, how man can attain moral purity and free his soul from the domination of the physical senses, so that it may achieve the perfection necessary for it to enter the Kingdom of Heaven, which is immutable and where bliss eternal reigns.

5. Soon after, a marvellous child was born in the land of Israel. God himself spoke, through the mouth of this child, of the miseries of the body and the grandeur of the soul.

6, The parents of the infant were poor people, who belonged to a family noted for great piety; who forgot the greatness of their ancestors in celebrating the name of the Creator and giving thanks to Him for the trials which He had sent upon them.

7. To reward them for adhering to the

[p. 165]

path of truth, God blessed the first-born of this family; chose him for His elect, and sent him to sustain the fallen and comfort the afflicted.

8. The divine child, to whom the name Issa was given, commenced in his tender years to talk of the only and indivisible God, exhorting the strayed souls to repent and purify themselves from the sins of which they had become guilty.

9. People came from all parts to hear him, and marvelled at the discourses which came from his infantile mouth; and all Israel agreed that the Spirit of the Eternal dwelt in this child.

10. When Issa was thirteen years old, the age at which an Israelite is expected to marry,

11. The modest house of his industrious

[p. 166]

parents became a meeting-place of the rich and illustrious, who were anxious to have as a son-in-law the young Issa, who was already celebrated for the edifying discourses he made in the name of the All-Powerful.

12. Then Issa secretly absented himself from his father's house; left Jerusalem, and, in a train of merchants, journeyed toward the Sindh,

13. With the object of perfecting himself in the knowledge of the word of God and the study of the laws of the great Buddhas.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

V.

1. In his fourteenth year, young Issa, the Blessed One, came this side of the Sindh and settled among the Aryas, in the country beloved by God.

[p. 167]

2. Fame spread the name of the marvellous youth along the northern Sindh, and when he came through the country of the five streams and Radjipoutan, the devotees of the god Djaine asked him to stay among them.

3. But he left the deluded worshippers of Djaine and went to Djagguernat, in the country of Orsis, where repose the mortal remains of Vyassa-Krishna, and where the white priests of Brahma welcomed him joyfully.

4. They taught him to read and to understand the Vedas, to cure physical ills by means of prayers, to teach and to expound the sacred Scriptures, to drive out evil desires from man and make him again in the likeness of God.

5. He spent six years in Djagguernat, in

[p. 168]

[paragraph continues] Radjagriha, in Benares, and in other holy cities. The common people loved Issa, for he lived in peace with the Vaisyas and the Sudras, to whom he taught the Holy Scriptures.

6. But the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas told him that they were forbidden by the great Para-Brahma to come near to those who were created from his belly and his feet; [**]

7. That the Vaisyas might only hear the recital of the Vedas, and this only on the festal days, and

8. That the Sudras were not only forbidden to attend the reading of the Vedas, but even to look on them; for they were condemned to perpetual servitude, as slaves of the Brahmins, the Kshatriyas and even the Vaisyas.

[p. 169]

9. "Death alone can enfranchise them from their servitude," has said Para-Brahma. "Leave them, therefore, and come to adore with us the gods, whom you will make angry if you disobey them."

10. But Issa, disregarding their words, remained with the Sudras, preaching against the. Brahmins and the Kshatriyas.

11. He declaimed strongly against man's arrogating to himself the authority to deprive his fellow-beings of their human and spiritual rights. "Verily," he said, "God has made no difference between his children, who are all alike dear to Him."

12. Issa denied the divine inspiration of the Vedas and the Puranas, for, as he taught his followers,--"One law has been given to man to guide him in his actions:

13. "Fear the Lord, thy God; bend thy

[p. 170]

knees only before Him and bring to Him only the offerings which come from thy earnings."

14. Issa denied the Trimurti and the incarnation of Para-Brahma in Vishnu, Siva, and other gods; "for," said he:

15. "The eternal Judge, the eternal Spirit, constitutes the only and indivisible soul of the universe, and it is this soul alone which creates, contains and vivifies all.

16. "He alone has willed and created. He alone has existed from eternity, and IIis existence will be without end; there is no one like unto Him either in the heavens or on the earth.

17. "The great Creator has divided His power with no other being; far less with inanimate objects, as you have been taught to

[p. 171]

believe, for He alone is omnipotent and all-sufficient.

18. "He willed, and the world was. By one divine thought, He reunited the waters and separated them from the dry land of the globe. He is the cause of the mysterious life of man, into whom He has breathed part of His divine Being.

19. "And He has put under subjection to man, the lands, the waters, the beasts and everything which He created, and which He himself preserves in immutable order, allotting to each its proper duration.

20. "The anger of God will soon break forth upon man; for he has forgotten his Creator; he has filled His temples with abominations; and he adores a multitude of creatures which God has subordinated to him;

21. "And to gain favor with images of

[p. 172]

stone and metal, he sacrifices human beings in whom dwells part of the Spirit of the Most  High;

22. "And he humiliates those who work in the sweat of their brows, to gain favor in the eyes of the idler who sitteth at a sumptuous table.

23. "Those who deprive their brothers of divine happiness will themselves be deprived of it; and the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas shall become the Sudras of the Sudras, with whom the Eternal will stay forever.

24. "In the day of judgment the Sudras and the Vaisyas will be forgiven for that they knew not the light, while God will let loose his wrath upon those who arrogated his authority."

25. The Vaisyas and the Sudras were filled with great admiration, and asked Issa how

[p. 173]

they should pray, in order not to lose their hold upon eternal life.

26. "Pray not to idols, for they cannot hear you; hearken not to the Vedas where the truth is altered; be humble and humiliate not your fellow-man.

27. "Help the poor, support the weak, do evil to none; covet not that which ye have not and which belongs to others."

Footnotes

^168:* The Vaisyas and Sudras castes.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI.

1. The white priests and the warriors, [**] who had learned of Issa's discourse to the Sudras, resolved upon his death, and sent their servants to find the young teacher and slay him.

2. But Issa, warned by the Sudras of his

[p. 174]

danger, left by night Djagguernat, gained the mountain, and settled in the country of the Gautamides, where the great Buddha Sakya-Muni came to the world, among a people who worshipped the only and sublime Brahma.

3. When the just Issa had acquired the Pali language, he applied himself to the study of the sacred scrolls of the Sutras.

4. After six years of study, Issa, whom the Buddha had elected to spread his holy word, could perfectly expound the sacred scrolls.

5. He then left Nepaul and the Himalaya mountains, descended into the valley of Radjipoutan and directed his steps toward the West, everywhere preaching to the people the supreme perfection attainable by man;

6. And the good he must do to his fellowmen,

[p. 175]

which is the sure means of speedy union with the eternal Spirit. "He who has recovered his primitive purity," said Issa, "shall die with his transgressions forgiven and have the right to contemplate the majesty of God."

7. When the divine Issa traversed the territories of the Pagans, he taught that the adoration of visible gods was contrary to natural law.

8. "For to man," said he, "it has not been given to see the image of God, and it behooves him not to make for himself a multitude of divinities in the imagined likeness of the Eternal.

9. "Moreover, it is against human conscience to have less regard for the greatness of divine purity, than for animals or works of stone or metal made by the hands of man.

[p. 176]

10. "The eternal Lawgiver is One; there are no other Gods than He; He has parted the world with none, nor had He any counsellor.

11. "Even as a father shows kindness toward his children, so will God judge men after death, in conformity with His merciful laws. He will never humiliate his child by casting his soul for chastisement into the body of a beast.

12. "The heavenly laws," said the Creator, through the mouth of Issa, "are opposed to the immolation of human sacrifices to a statue or an animal; for I, the God, have sacrificed to man all the animals and all that the world contains.

13. "Everything has been sacrificed to man, who is directly and intimately united to me, his Father; therefore, shall the man be

[p. 177]

severely judged and punished, by my law, who causes the sacrifice of my children.

14. "Man is naught before the eternal Judge; as the animal is before man.

15. "Therefore, I say unto you, leave your idols and perform not ceremonies which separate you from your Father and bind you to the priests, from whom heaven has turned away.

16. "For it is they who have led you away from the true God, and by superstitions and cruelty perverted the spirit and made you blind to the knowledge of the truth."

Footnotes

^173:* Brahmins and Kshatriyas.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII.

1. The words of Issa spread among the Pagans, through whose country he passed, and the inhabitants abandoned their idols.

[p. 178]

2. Seeing which, the priests demanded of him who thus glorified the name of the true God, that he should, in the presence of the people, prove the charges he made against them, and demonstrate the vanity of their idols.

3. And Issa answered them: "If your idols, or the animals you worship, really possess the supernatural powers you claim, let them strike me with a thunder-bolt before you!"

4. "Why dost not thou perform a miracle," replied the priests, "and let thy God confound ours, if He is greater than they?"

5. But Issa said: "The miracles of our God have been wrought from the first day when the universe was created; and are performed every day and every moment; whoso

[p. 179]

sees them not is deprived of one of the most beautiful gifts of life.

6. "And it is not on inanimate objects of stone, metal or wood that He will let His anger fall, but on the men who worship them, and who, therefore, for their salvation, must destroy the idols they have made.

7. "Even as a stone and a grain of sand, which are naught before man, await patiently their use by Him,

8. "In like manner, man, who is naught before God, must await in resignation His pleasure for a manifestation of His favor.

9. "But woe to you! ye adversaries of men, if it is not the favor you await, but rather the wrath of the Most High; woe to you, if you demand that He attest His power by a miracle!

10. "For it is not the idols which He will

[p. 180]

destroy in His wrath, but those by whom they were created; their hearts will be the prey of an eternal fire and their flesh shall be given to the beasts of prey.

11. "God will drive away the contaminated animals from His flocks; but will take to Himself those who strayed because they knew not the heavenly part within them."

12. When the Pagans saw that the power of their priests was naught, they put faith in the words of Issa. Fearing the anger of the true God, they broke their idols to pieces and caused their priests to flee from among them.

13. Issa furthermore taught the Pagans that they should not endeavor to see the eternal Spirit with their eyes; but to perceive Him with their hearts, and make

[p. 181]

themselves worthy of His favors by the purity of their souls.

14. "Not only," he said to them, "must ye refrain from offering human sacrifices, but ye may not lay on the altar any creature to which life has been given, for all things created are for man.

15. "Withhold not from your neighbor his just due, for this would be like stealing from him what he had earned in the sweat of his brow.

16. "Deceive none, that ye may not yourselves be deceived; seek to justify yourselves before the last judgment, for then it will be too late.

17. "Be not given to debauchery, for it is a violation of the law of God.

18. "That you may attain to supreme bliss ye must not only purify yourselves, but

[p. 182]

must also guide others into the path that will enable them to regain their primitive innocence."

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII.

1. The countries round about were filled with the renown of Issa's preachings, and when he came unto Persia, the priests grew afraid and forbade the people hearing him;

2. Nevertheless, the villages received him with joy, and the people hearkened intently to his words, which, being seen by the priests, caused them to order that he should be arrested and brought before their High Priest, who asked him:

3. "Of what new God dost thou speak? Knowest thou not, unfortunate man that thou art! that Saint Zoroaster is the only Just

[p. 183]

[paragraph continues] One, to whom alone was vouchsafed the honor of receiving revelations from the Most High;

4. "By whose command the angels compiled His Word in laws for the governance of His people, which were given to Zoroaster in Paradise?

5. "Who, then, art thou, who darest utter blasphemies against our God and sow doubt in the hearts of believers?"

6. And Issa said to them: "I preach no new God, but our celestial Father, who has existed before the beginning and will exist until after the end.

7. "Of Him I have spoken to the people, who--even as innocent children--are incapable of comprehending God by their own intelligence, or fathoming the sublimity of the divine Spirit;

[p. 184]

8. "But, as the new-born child in the night recognizes the mother's breast, so your people, held in the darkness of error by your pernicious doctrines and religious ceremonies, have recognized instinctively their Father, in the Father whose prophet I am.

9. "The eternal Being says to your people, by my mouth, 'Ye shall not adore the sun, for it is but a part of the universe which I have created for man;

10. "It rises to warm you during your work; it sets to accord to you the rest that I have ordained.

11. "To me only ye owe all that ye possess, all that surrounds you and that is above and below you.'"

12. "But," said the priests, "how could the people live according to your rules if they had no teachers?"

[p. 185]

13. Whereupon Issa answered: "So long as they had no priests, they were governed by the natural law and conserved the simplicity of their souls;

14. "Their souls were in God and to commune with the Father they had not to have recourse to the intermediation of idols, or animals, or fire, as taught by you.

15. "Ye pretend that man must adore the sun, and the Genii of Good and Evil. But I say unto you that your doctrine is pernicious. The sun does not act spontaneously, but by the will of the invisible Creator, who has given to it being."

16. "Who, then, has caused that this star lights the day, warms man at his work and vivifies the seeds sown in the ground?"

17. "The eternal Spirit is the soul of everything animate, and you commit a great

[p. 186]

sin in dividing Him into the Spirit of Evil and the Spirit of Good, for there is no God other than the God of Good.

18. "And He, like to the father of a family, does only good to His children, to whom He forgives their transgressions if they repent of them.

19. "And the Spirit of Evil dwells upon earth, in the hearts of those who turn the children of God away from the right path.

20. "Therefore, I say unto you; Fear the day of judgment, for God will inflict a terrible chastisement upon all those who have led His children astray and beguiled them with superstitions and errors;

21. "Upon those who have blinded them who saw; who have brought contagion to the well; who have taught the worship of

[p. 187]

those things which God made to be subject to man, or to aid him in his works.

22. "Your doctrine is the fruit of your error in seeking to bring near to you the God of Truth, by creating for yourselves false gods."

23. When the Magi heard these words, they feared to themselves do him harm, but at night, when the whole city slept, they brought him outside the walls and left him on the highway, in the hope that he would not fail to become the prey of wild beasts.

24. But, protected by the Lord our God, Saint Issa continued on his way, without accident.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX.

1. Issa--whom the Creator had selected to recall to the worship of the true God, men

[p. 188]

sunk in sin--was twenty-nine years old when he arrived in the land of Israel.

2. Since the departure therefrom of Issa, the Pagans had caused the Israelites to endure more atrocious sufferings than before, and they were filled with despair.

3. Many among them had begun to neglect the laws of their God and those of Mossa, in the hope of winning the favor of their brutal conquerors.

4. But Issa, notwithstanding their unhappy condition, exhorted his countrymen not to despair, because the day of their redemption from the yoke of sin was near, and he himself, by his example, confirmed their faith in the God of their fathers.

5. "Children, yield not yourselves to despair," said the celestial Father to them, through the mouth of Issa, "for I have heard

[p. 189]

your lamentations, and your cries have reached my cars.

6. "Weep not, oh, my beloved sons! for your griefs have touched the heart of your Father and He has forgiven you, as He forgave your ancestors.

7. "Forsake not your families to plunge into debauchery; stain not the nobility of your souls; adore not idols which cannot but remain deaf to your supplications.

8. "Fill my temple with your hope and your patience, and do not adjure the religion of your forefathers, for I have guided them and bestowed upon them of my beneficence.

9. "Lift up those who are fallen; feed the hungry and help the sick, that ye may be altogether pure and just in the day of the last judgment which I prepare for you."

10. The Israelites came in multitudes to

[p. 190]

listen to Issa's words; and they asked him where they should thank their Heavenly Father, since their enemies had demolished their temples and robbed them of their sacred vessels.

11. Issa told them that God cared not for temples erected by human hands, but that human hearts were the true temples of God.

12. "Enter into your temple, into your heart; illuminate it with good thoughts, with patience and the unshakeable faith which you owe to your Father.

13. "And your sacred vessels! they are your hands and your eyes. Look to do that which is agreeable to God, for in doing good to your fellow-men, you perform a ceremony that embellishes the temple wherein abideth Him who has created you.

[p. 191]

14. "For God has created you in His own image, innocent, with pure souls, and hearts' filled with kindness and not made for the planning of evil, but to be the sanctuaries of love and justice.

15. "Therefore, I say unto you, soil not your hearts with evil, for in them the Eternal Being abides.

16. "When ye do works of devotion and love, let them be with full hearts, and see that the motives of your actions be not hopes of gain or self-interest;

17. For actions, so impelled, will not bring you nearer to salvation, but lead to a state of moral degradation wherein theft, lying and murder pass for generous deeds."

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

X.

1. Issa went from one city to another,

[p. 192]

strengthening by the word of God the courage of the Israelites, who were bear to succumbing under their weight of woe, and thousands of the people followed him to hear his teachings.

2. But the chiefs of the cities were afraid of him and they informed the principal governor, residing in Jerusalem, that a man called Issa had arrived in the country, who by his sermons had arrayed the people against the authorities, and that multitudes, listening assiduously to him, neglected their labor; and, they added, he said that in a short time they would be free of their invader rulers.

3. Then Pilate, the Governor of Jerusalem, gave orders that they should lay hold of the preacher Issa and bring him before the judges. In order, however, not to excite the

[p. 193]

anger of the populace, Pilate directed that he should be judged by the priests and scribes, the Hebrew elders, in their temple.

4. Meanwhile, Issa, continuing his preachings, arrived at Jerusalem, and the people, who already knew his fame, having learned of his coming, went out to meet him.

5. They greeted him respectfully and opened to him the doors of their temple, to hear from his mouth what he had said in other cities of Israel.

6. And Issa said to them: "The human race perishes, because of the lack of faith; for the darkness and the tempest have caused the flock to go astray and they have lost their shepherds.

7. "But the tempests do not rage forever and the darkness will not hide the light eternally; soon the sky will become serene,

[p. 194]

the celestial light will again overspread the earth, and the strayed flock will re-unite around their shepherd.

8. "Wander not in the darkness, seeking the way, lest ye fall into the ditch; but gather together, sustain one another, put your faith in your God and wait for the first glimmer of light to re-appear.

9. "He who sustains his neighbor, sustains himself; and he who protects his family, protects all his people and his country.

10. "For, be assured that the day is near when you will be delivered from the darkness; you will be re-united into one family and your enemy will tremble with fear, he who is ignorant of the favor of the great God."

11. The priests and the elders who heard him, filled with admiration for his language,

[p. 195]

asked him if it was true that he had sought to raise the people against the authorities of the country, as had been reported to the governor Pilate.

12. "Can one raise against estrayed men, to whom darkness has hidden their road and their door?" answered Issa. "I have but forewarned the unhappy, as I do here in this temple, that they should no longer advance on the dark road, for an abyss opens before their feet.

13. "The power of this earth is not of long duration and is subject to numberless changes. It would be of no avail for a man to rise in revolution against it, for one phase of it al ways succeeds another, and it is thus that it will go on until the extinction of human life.

14. "But do you not see that the powerful,

[p. 196]

and the rich, sow among the children of Israel a spirit of rebellion against the eternal power of Heaven?"

15. Then the elders asked him: "Who art thou, and from what country hast thou come to us? We have not formerly heard thee spoken of and do not even know thy name!"

16. "I am an Israelite," answered Issa; "and on the day of my birth have seen the walls of Jerusalem, and have heard the sobs of my brothers reduced to slavery, and the lamentations of my sisters carried away by the Pagans;

17. "And my soul was afflicted when I saw that my brethren had forgotten the true God. When a child I left my father's house to go and settle among other people.

18. "But, having heard it said that my brethren suffered even greater miseries now,

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] I have come back to the land of my fathers, to recall my brethren to the faith of their ancestors, which teaches us patience upon earth in order to attain the perfect and supreme bliss above."

19. Then the wise old men put to him again this question: "We are told that thou disownest the laws of Mossa, and that thou teachest the people to forsake the temple of God?"

20. Whereupon Issa: "One does not demolish that which has been given by our Heavenly Father, and which has been destroyed by sinners. I have but enjoined the people to purify the heart of all stains, for it is the veritable temple of God.

21. "As regards the laws of Mossa, I have endeavored to re-establish them in the hearts of men; and I say unto you that ye ignore

[p. 198]

their true meaning, for it is not vengeance but pardon which they teach. Their sense has been perverted."

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI.

1. When the priests and the elders heard Issa, they decided among themselves not to give judgment against him, for he had done no harm to any one, and, presenting themselves before Pilate--who was made Governor of Jerusalem by the Pagan king of the country of Romeles--they spake to him thus:

2. "We have seen the man whom thou chargest with inciting our people to revolt; we have heard his discourses and know that he is our countryman;

3. "But the chiefs of the cities have made to you false reports, for he is a just man, who

[p. 199]

teaches the people the word of God. After interrogating him, we have allowed him to go in peace."

4. The governor thereupon became very angry, and sent his disguised spies to keep watch upon Issa and report to the authorities the least word he addressed to the people.

5. In the meantime, the holy Issa continued to visit the neighboring cities and preach the true way of the Lord, enjoining the Hebrews patience and promising them speedy deliverance.

6. And all the time great numbers of the people followed him wherever he went, and many did not leave him at all, but attached themselves to him and served him.

7. And Issa said: "Put not your faith in miracles performed by the hands of men, for He who rules nature is alone capable of doing

[p. 200]

supernatural things, while man is impotent to arrest the wrath of the winds or cause the rain to fall.

8. "One miracle, however, is within the power of man to accomplish. It is, when his heart is filled with sincere faith, he resolves to root out from his mind all evil promptings and desires, and when, in order to attain this end, he ceases to walk the path of iniquity.

9. "All the things done without God are only gross errors, illusions and seductions, serving but to show how much the heart of the doer is full of presumption, falsehood and impurity.

10. "Put not your faith in oracles. God alone knows the future. He who has recourse to the diviners soils the temple of his heart and shows his lack of faith in his Creator.

[p. 201]

11. "Belief in the diviners and their miracles destroys the innate simplicity of man and his childlike purity. An infernal power takes hold of him who so errs, and forces him to commit various sins and give himself to the worship of idols.

12. "But the Lord our God, to whom none can be equalled, is one omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent; He alone possesses all wisdom and all light.

13. "To Him ye must address yourselves, to be comforted in your afflictions, aided in your works, healed in your sickness and whoso asks of Him, shall not ask in vain.

14. "The secrets of nature are in the hands of God, for the whole world, before it was made manifest, existed in the bosom of the divine thought, and has become material and visible by the will of the Most High.

[p. 202]

15. "When ye pray to him, become again like little children, for ye know neither the past, nor the present, nor the future, and God is the Lord of Time."

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII.

1. "Just man," said to him the disguised spies of the Governor of Jerusalem, "tell us if we must continue to do the will of Caesar, or expect our near deliverance?"

2. And Issa, who recognized the questioners as the apostate spies sent to follow him, replied to them: "I have not told you that you would be delivered from Caesar; it is the soul sunk in error which will gain its deliverance.

3. "There cannot be a family without a head, and there cannot be order in a people

[p. 203]

without a Caesar, whom ye should implicitly obey, as he will be held to answer for his acts before the Supreme Tribunal."

4. "Does Caesar possess a divine right?" the spies asked him again; "and is he the best of mortals?"

5. "There is no one 'the best' among human beings; but there are many bad, who--even as the sick need physicians--require the care of those chosen for that mission, in which must be used the means given by the sacred law of our Heavenly Father;

6. "Mercy and justice are the high prerogatives of Caesar, and his name will be illustrious if he exercises them.

7. "But he who acts otherwise, who transcends the limits of power he has over those under his rule, and even goes so far as to put their lives in danger, offends the great Judge

[p. 204]

and derogates from his own dignity in the eyes of men."

8. Upon this, an old woman who had approached the group, to better hear Issa, was pushed aside by one of the disguised men, who placed himself before her.

9. Then said Issa: "It is not good for a son to push away his mother, that he may occupy the place which belongs to her. Whoso doth not respect his mother--the most sacred being after his God--is unworthy of the name of son.

10. "Hearken to what I say to you: Respect woman; for in her we see the mother of the universe, and all the truth of divine creation is to come through her.

12. "She is the fount of everything good and beautiful, as she is also the germ of life and death. Upon her man depends in all his

[p. 205]

existence, for she is his moral and natural support in his labors.

12. "In pain and suffering she brings you forth; in the sweat of her brow she watches over your growth, and until her death you cause her greatest anxieties. Bless her and adore her, for she is your only friend and support on earth.

13. "Respect her; defend her. In so doing you will gain for yourself her love; you will find favor before God, and for her sake many sins will be remitted to you.

14. "Love your wives and respect them, for they will be the mothers of to-morrow and later the grandmothers of a whole nation.

"Be submissive to the wife; her love ennobles man, softens his hardened heart,

[p. 206]

tames the wild beast in him and changes it to a lamb.

16. "Wife and mother are the priceless treasures which God has given to you. They are the most beautiful ornaments of the universe, and from them will be born all who will inhabit the world.

17. "Even as the Lord of Hosts separated the light from the darkness, and the dry land from the waters, so does woman possess the divine gift of calling forth out of man's evil nature all the good that is in him.

18. "Therefore I say unto you, after God, to woman must belong your best thoughts, for she is the divine temple where you will most easily obtain perfect happiness.

19. "Draw from this temple your moral force. There you will forget your sorrows

[p. 207]

and your failures, and recover the love necessary to aid your fellow-men.

20. "Suffer her not to be humiliated, for by humiliating her you humiliate yourselves, and lose the sentiment of love, without which nothing can exist here on earth.

21. "Protect your wife, that she may protect you--you and all your household. All that you do for your mothers, your wives, for a widow, or for any other woman in distress, you will do for your God."

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII.

1. Thus Saint Issa taught the people of Israel for three years, in every city and every village, on the highways and in the fields, and all he said came to pass.

2. All this time the disguised spies of the

[p. 208]

governor Pilate observed him closely, but heard nothing to sustain the accusations formerly made against Issa by the chiefs of the cities.

3. But Saint Issa's growing popularity did not allow Pilate to rest. He feared that Issa would be instrumental in bringing about a revolution culminating in his elevation to the sovereignty, and, therefore, ordered the spies to make charges against him.

4. Then soldiers were sent to arrest him, and they cast him into a subterranean dungeon, where he was subjected to all kinds of tortures, to compel him to accuse himself, so that he might be put to death.

5. The Saint, thinking only of the perfect bliss of his brethren, endured all those torments with resignation to the will of the Creator.

[p. 209]

6, The servants of Pilate continued to torture him, and he was reduced to a state of extreme weakness; but God was with him and did not permit him to die at their hands.

7. When the principal priests and wise elders learned of the sufferings which their Saint endured, they went to Pilate, begging him to liberate Issa, so that he might attend the great festival which was near at hand.

8. But this the governor refused. Then they asked him that Issa should be brought before the elders' council, so that he might be condemned, or acquitted, before the festival, and to this Pilate agreed.

9. On the following day the governor assembled the principal chiefs, priests, elders and judges, for the purpose of judging Issa.

10. The Saint was brought from his prison. They made him sit before the governor,

[p. 210]

between two robbers, who were to be judged at the same time with Issa, so as to show the people he was not the only one to be condemned.

11. And Pilate, addressing himself to Issa, said, "Is it true, Oh! Man; that thou incitest the populace against the authorities, with the purpose of thyself becoming King of Israel?"

12. Issa replied, "One does not become king by one's own purpose thereto. They have told you an untruth when you were informed that I was inciting the people to revolution. I have only preached of the King of Heaven, and it was Him whom I told the people to worship.

13. "For the sons of Israel have lost their original innocence and unless they return to worship the true God they will be sacrificed and their temple will fall in ruins.

[p. 211]

14. "The worldly power upholds order in the land; I told them not to forget this. I said to them, 'Live in conformity with your situation and refrain from disturbing public order;' and, at the same time, I exhorted them to remember that disorder reigned in their own hearts and spirits

15. "Therefore, the King of Heaven has punished them, and has destroyed their nationality and taken from them their national kings, 'but,' I added, 'if you will be resigned to your fate, as a reward the Kingdom of Heaven will be yours."

16. At this moment the witnesses were introduced; one of whom deposed thus: "Thou hast said to the people that in comparison with the power of the king who would soon liberate the Israelites from the

[p. 212]

yoke of the heathen, the worldly authorities amounted to nothing."

17. "Blessings upon thee!" said Issa. "For thou hast spoken the truth! The King of Heaven is greater and more powerful than the laws of man and His kingdom surpasses the kingdoms of this earth.

18. "And the time is not far off, when Israel, obedient to the will of God, will throw off its yoke of sin; for it has been written that a forerunner would appear to announce the deliverance of the people, and that he would re-unite them in one family."

19. Thereupon the governor said to the judges: "Have you heard this? The Israelite Issa acknowledges the crime of which he is accused. Judge him, then, according to your laws and pass upon him condemnation to death."

[p. 213]

20. "We cannot condemn him," replied the priests and the ancients. "As thou hast heard, he spoke of the King of Heaven, and he has preached nothing which constitutes insubordination against the law."

21. Thereupon the governor called a witness who had been bribed by his master, Pilate, to betray Issa, and this man said to Issa: "Is it not true that thou hast represented thyself as a King of Israel, when thou didst say that He who reigns in Heaven sent thee to prepare His people?"

22. But Issa blessed the man and answered: "Thou wilt find mercy, for what thou hast said did not come out from thine own heart." Then, turning to the governor he said: "Why dost thou lower thy dignity and teach thy inferiors to tell falsehood, when,

[p. 214]

without doing so, it is in thy power to condemn an innocent man?"

23. When Pilate heard his words, he became greatly enraged and ordered that Issa be condemned to death, and that the two robbers should be declared guiltless.

24. The judges, after consulting among themselves, said to Pilate: "We cannot consent to take this great sin upon us,--to condemn an innocent man and liberate malefactors. It would be against our laws.

25. "Act thyself, then, as thou seest fit." Thereupon the priests and elders walked out, and washed their hands in a sacred vessel, and said: "We are innocent of the blood of this righteous man."

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 215]

  

XIV.

I. By order of the governor, the soldiers seized Issa and the two robbers, and led them to the place of execution, where they were nailed upon the crosses erected for them.

2. All day long the bodies of Issa and the two robbers hung upon the crosses, bleeding, guarded by the soldiers. The people stood all around and the relatives of the executed prayed and wept.

3. When the sun went down, Issa's tortures ended. He lost consciousness and his soul disengaged itself from the body, to reunite with God.

4. Thus ended the terrestrial existence of the reflection of the eternal Spirit under the

[p. 216]

form of a man who had saved hardened sinners and comforted the afflicted.

5. Meanwhile, Pilate was afraid for what he had done, and ordered the body of the Saint to be given to his relatives, who put it in a tomb near to the place of execution. Great numbers of persons came to visit the tomb, and the air was filled with their wailings and lamentations.

6. Three days later, the governor sent his soldiers to remove Issa's body and bury it in some other place, for he feared a rebellion among the people.

7. The next day, when the people came to the tomb, they found it open and empty, the body of Issa being gone. Thereupon, the rumor spread that the Supreme Judge had sent His angels from Heaven, to remove the

[p. 217]

mortal remains of the saint in whom part of the divine Spirit had lived on earth.

8. When Pilate learned of this rumor, he grew angry and prohibited, under penalty of death, the naming of Issa, or praying for him to the Lord.

9. But the people, nevertheless, continued to weep over Issa's death and to glorify their master; wherefore, many were carried into captivity, subjected to torture and put to death.

10. And the disciples of Saint Issa departed from the land of Israel and went in all directions, to the heathen, preaching that they should abandon their gross errors, think of the salvation of their souls and earn the perfect bliss which awaits human beings in the immaterial world, full of glory, where the

[p. 218]

great Creator abides in all his immaculate and perfect majesty.

11. The heathen, their kings, and their warriors, listened to the preachers, abandoned their erroneous beliefs and forsook their priests and their idols, to celebrate the praises of the most wise Creator of the Universe, the King of Kings, whose heart is filled with infinite mercy

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 219]

  

RESUME.

In reading the account of the life of Issa (Jesus Christ), one is struck, on the one hand by the resemblance of certain principal passages to accounts in the Old and New Testaments; and, on the other, by the not less remarkable contradictions which occasionally occur between the Buddhistic version and Hebraic and Christian records.

To explain this, it is necessary to remember the epochs when the facts were consigned to writing.

We have been taught, from our childhood, that the Pentateuch was written by Moses himself, but the careful researches of modern

[p. 220]

scholars have demonstrated conclusively, that at the time of Moses, and even much later, there existed in the country bathed by the Mediterranean, no other writing than the hieroglyphics in Egypt and the cuniform inscriptions, found nowadays in the excavations of Babylon. We know, however, that the alphabet and parchment were known in China and India long before Moses.

Let me cite a few proofs of this statement. We learn from the sacred books of "the religion of the wise" that the alphabet was invented in China in 2800 by Fou-si, who was the first emperor of China to embrace this religion, the ritual and exterior forms of which he himself arranged. Tao, the fourth of the Chinese emperors, who is said to have belonged to this faith, published moral and civil laws, and, in 2228, compiled a penal

[p. 221]

code. The fifth emperor, Soune, proclaimed in the year of his accession to the throne that "the religion of the wise" should thenceforth be the recognized religion of the State, and, in 2282, compiled new penal laws. His laws, modified by the Emperor Vou-vange,--founder of the dynasty of the Tcheou in 1122,--are those in existence to-day, and known under the name of "Changements."

We also know that the doctrine of the Buddha Fo, whose true name was Sakya-Muni, was written upon parchment. Fo-ism began to spread in China about 260 years before Jesus Christ. In 206, an emperor of the Tsine dynasty, who was anxious to learn Buddhism, sent to India for a Buddhist by the name of Silifan, and the Emperor Ming-Ti, of the Hagne dynasty, sent, a year before Christ's birth, to India for the sacred books

[p. 222]

written by the Buddha Sakya-Muni--the founder of the Buddhistic doctrine, who lived about 1200 before Christ.

The doctrine of the Buddha Gauthama or Gothama, who lived 600 years before Jesus Christ, was written in the Pali language upon parchment. At that epoch there existed already in India about 84,000 Buddhistic manuscripts, the compilation of which required a considerable number of years.

At the time when the Chinese and the Hindus possessed already a very rich written literature, the less fortunate or more ignorant peoples who had no alphabet, transmitted their histories from mouth to mouth, and from generation to generation. Owing to the unreliability of human memory, historical facts, embellished by Oriental imagination, soon degenerated into fabulous legends,

[p. 223]

which, in the course of time, were collected, and by the unknown compilers entitled "The Five Books of Moses." As these legends ascribe to the Hebrew legislator extraordinary divine powers which enabled him to perform miracles in the presence of Pharaoh, the claim that he was an Israelite may as well have been legendary rather than historical.

The Hindu chroniclers, on the contrary, owing to their knowledge of an alphabet, were enabled to commit carefully to writing, not mere legends, but the recitals of recently occurred facts within their own knowledge, or the accounts brought to them by merchants who came from foreign countries.

It must be remembered, in this connection, that--in antiquity as in our own days--the whole public life of the Orient was concentrated

[p. 224]

in the bazaars. There the news of foreign events was brought by the merchant-caravans and sought by the dervishes, who found, in their recitals in the temples and public places, a means of subsistence. When the merchants returned home from a journey, they generally related fully during the first days after their arrival, all they had seen or heard abroad. Such have been the customs of the Orient, from time immemorial, and are to-day.

The commerce of India with Egypt and, later, with Europe, was carried on by way of Jerusalem, where, as far back as the time of King Solomon, the Hindu caravans brought precious metals and other materials for the construction of the temple. From Europe, merchandise was brought to Jerusalem by sea, and there unloaded in a port, which is

[p. 225]

now occupied by the city of Jaffa. The chronicles in question were compiled before, during and after the time of Jesus Christ.

During his sojourn in India, in the quality of a simple student come to learn the Brahminical and Buddhistic laws, no special attention whatever was paid to his life. When, however, a little later, the first accounts of the events in Israel reached India, the chroniclers, after committing to writing that which they were told about the prophet, Issa,--viz., that he had for his following a whole people, weary of the yoke of their masters, and that he was crucified by order of Pilate, remembered that this same Issa had only recently sojourned in their midst, and that, an Israelite by birth, he had come to study among them, after which he had returned to his country. They conceived a

[p. 226]

lively interest for the man who had grown so rapidly under their eyes, and began to investigate his birth, his past and all the details concerning his existence.

The two manuscripts, from which the lama of the convent Himis read to me all that had a bearing upon Jesus, are compilations from divers copies written in the Thibetan language, translations of scrolls belonging to the library of Lhassa and brought, about two hundred years after Christ, from India, Nepaul and Maghada, to a convent on Mount Marbour, near the city of Lhassa, now the residence of the Dalai-Lama.

These scrolls were written in Pali, which certain lamas study even now, so as to be able to translate it into the Thibetan.

The chroniclers were Buddhists belonging to the sect of the Buddha Gothama.

[p. 227]

The details concerning Jesus, given in the chronicles, are disconnected and mingled with accounts of other contemporaneous events to which they bear no relation.

The manuscripts relate to us, first of all,--according to the accounts given by merchants arriving from Judea in the same year when the death of Jesus occurred--that a just man by the name of Issa, an Israelite, in spite of his being acquitted twice by the judges as being a man of God, was nevertheless put to death by the order of the Pagan governor, Pilate, who feared that he might take ad vantage of his great popularity to reestablish the kingdom of Israel and expel from the country its conquerors.

Then follow rather incoherent communications regarding the preachings of Jesus among the Guebers and other heathens.

[p. 228]

[paragraph continues] They seem to have been written during the first years following the death of Jesus, in whose career a lively and growing interest is shown.

One of these accounts, communicated by merchant, refers to the origin of Jesus and his family; another tells of the expulsion of his partisans and the persecutions they had to suffer.

Only at the end of the second volume is found the first categorical affirmation of the chronicler. He says there that Issa was a man blessed by God and the best of all; that it was he in whom the great Brahma had elected to incarnate when, at a period fixed by destiny, his spirit was required to, for a time, separate from the Supreme Being.

After telling that Issa descended from poor Israelite parents, the chronicler makes

[p. 229]

a little digression, for the purpose of explaining, according to ancient accounts, who were those sons of Israel.

I have arranged all the fragments concerning the life of Issa in chronological order and have taken pains to impress upon them the character of unity, in which they were absolutely lacking.

I leave it to the savans, the philosophers and the theologians to search into the causes for the contradictions which may be found between the "Life of Issa" which I lay before the public and the accounts of the Gospels. But I trust that everybody will agree with me in assuming that the version which I present to the public, one compiled three or four years after the death of Jesus, from the accounts of eye-witnesses and contemporaries, has much more probability of being in

[p. 230]

conformity with truth than the accounts of the Gospels, the composition of which was effected at different epochs and at periods much posterior to the occurrence of the events.

Before speaking of the life of Jesus, I must say a few words on the history of Moses, who, according to the so-far most accredited legend, was an Israelite. In this respect the legend is contradicted by the Buddhists. We learn from the outset that Moses was an Egyptian prince, the son of a Pharaoh, and that he only was taught by learned Israelites. I believe that if this important point is carefully examined, it must be admitted that the Buddhist author may be right.

It is not my intent to argue against the Biblical legend concerning the origin of Moses, but I think everyone reading it must share my

[p. 231]

conviction that Moses could not have been a simple Israelite. His education was rather that of a king's son, and it is difficult to believe that a child introduced by chance into the palace should have been made an equal with the son of the sovereign. The rigor with which the Egyptians treated their slaves by no means attests the mildness of their character. A foundling certainly would not have been made the companion of the sons of a Pharaoh, but would be placed among his servants. Add to this the caste spirit so strictly observed in ancient Egypt, a most salient point, which is certainly calculated to raise doubts as to the truth of the Scriptural story.

And it is difficult to suppose that Moses had not received a complete education. How otherwise could his great legislative

[p. 232]

work, his broad views, his high administrative qualities be satisfactorily explained?

And now comes another question: Why should he, a prince, have attached himself to the Israelites? The answer seems to me very simple. It is known that in ancient, as well as in modern times, discussions were often raised as to which of two brothers should succeed to the father's throne. Why not admit this hypothesis, viz., that Mossa, or Moses, having an elder brother whose existence forbade him to think of occupying the throne of Egypt, contemplated founding a distinct kingdom.

It might very well be that, in view of this end, he tried to attach himself to the Israelites, whose firmness of faith as well as physical strength he had occasion to admire. We know, indeed, that the Israelites of Egypt

[p. 233]

had no resemblance whatever to their descendants as regards physical constitution. The granite blocks which were handled by them in building the palaces and pyramids are still in place to testify to this fact. In the same way I explain to myself the history of the miracles which he is said to have performed before Pharaoh.

Although there are no definite arguments for denying the miracles which Moses might have performed in the name of God before Pharaoh, I think it is not difficult to realize that the Buddhistic statement sounds more probable than the Scriptural gloss. The pestilence, the small-pox or the cholera must, indeed, have caused enormous ravages among the dense population of Egypt, at an epoch when there existed yet but very rudimentary ideas about hygiene and where,

[p. 234]

consequently, such diseases must have rapidly assumed frightful virulence.

In view of Pharaoh's fright at the disasters which befell Egypt, Moses' keen wit might well have suggested to him to explain the strange and terrifying occurrences, to his father, by the intervention of the God of Israel in behalf of his chosen people.

Moses was here afforded an excellent opportunity to deliver the Israelites from their slavery and have them pass under his own domination.

In obedience to Pharaoh's will--according to the Buddhistic version--Moses led the Israelites outside the walls of the city; but, instead of building a new city within reach of the capital, as he was ordered, he left with them the Egyptian territory. Pharaoh's indignation on learning of this infringement of

[p. 235]

his commands by Moses, can easily be imagined. And so he gave the order to his soldiers to pursue the fugitives. The geographical disposition of the region suggests at once that Moses during his flight must have moved by the side of the mountains and entered Arabia by the way over the Isthmus which is now cut by the Suez Canal.

Pharaoh, on the contrary, pursued, with his troops, a straight line to the Red Sea; then, in order to overtake the Israelites, who had already gained the opposite shore, he sought to take advantage of the ebb of the sea in the Gulf, which is formed by the coast and the Isthmus, and caused his soldiers to wade through the ford. But the length of the passage proved much greater than he had expected; so that the flood-tide set in

[p. 236]

when the Egyptian host was half way across, and, of the army thus overwhelmed by the returning waves, none escaped death.

This fact, so simple in itself, has in the course of the centuries been transformed by the Israelites into a religious legend, they seeing in it a divine intervention in their behalf and a punishment which their God inflicted on their persecutors. There is, moreover, reason to believe that Moses himself saw the occurrence in this light. This, however, is a thesis which I shall try to develop in a forthcoming work.

The Buddhistic chronicle then describes the grandeur and the downfall of the kingdom of Israel, and its conquest by the foreign nations who reduced the inhabitants to slavery.

The calamities which befell the Israelites,

[p. 237]

and the afflictions that thenceforth embittered their days were, according to the chronicler, more than sufficient reasons that God, pitying his people and desirous of coming to their aid, should descend on earth in the person of a prophet, in order to lead them back to the path of righteousness.

Thus the state of things in that epoch justified the belief that the coming of Jesus was signalized, imminent, necessary.

This explains why the Buddhistic traditions could maintain that the eternal Spirit separated from the eternal Being and incarnated in the child of a pious and once illustrious family,

Doubtless the Buddhists, in common with the Evangelists, meant to convey by this that the child belonged to the royal house of David; but the text in the Gospels, according

[p. 238]

to which "the child was born from the Holy Spirit," admits of two interpretations, while according to Buddha's doctrine, which is more in conformity with the laws of nature, the spirit has but incarnated in a child already born, whom God blessed and chose for the accomplishment of His mission on earth.

The birth of Jesus is followed by a long gap in the traditions of the Evangelists, who either from ignorance or neglect, fail to tell us anything definite about his childhood, youth or education. They commence the history of Jesus with his first sermon, i.e., at the epoch, when thirty years of age, he returns to his country.

All the Evangelists tell us concerning the infancy of Jesus is marked by the lack of precision: "And the child grew, and waxed

[p. 239]

strong in spirit, filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon him," says one of the sacred authors (Luke 2, 40), and another: "And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his sheaving unto Israel." (Luke 1, 80.)

As the Evangelists compiled their writings a long time after the death of Jesus, it is presumable that they committed to writing only those accounts of the principal events in the life of Jesus which happened to come to their knowledge.

The Buddhists, on the contrary, who compiled their chronicles soon after the Passion occurred, and were able to collect the surest information about everything that interested them, give us a complete and very detailed description of the life of Jesus.

In those unhappy times, when the struggle

[p. 240]

for existence seems to have destroyed all thought of God, the people of Israel suffered the double oppression of the ambitious Herod and the despotic and avaricious Romans. Then, as now, the Hebrews put all their hopes in Providence, whom they expected, would send them an inspired man, who should deliver them from all their physical and moral afflictions. The time passed, however, and no one took the initiative in a revolt against the tyranny of the rulers.

In that era of hope and despair, the people of Israel completely forgot that there lived among them a poor Israelite who was a direct descendant from their King David. This poor man married a young girl who gave birth to a miraculous child.

The Hebrews, true to their traditions of devotion and respect for the race of their

[p. 241]

kings, upon learning of this event went in great numbers to congratulate the happy father and sec the child. It is evident that Herod was informed of this occurrence. He feared that this infant, once grown to manhood, might avail himself of his prospective popularity to re-conquer the throne of his ancestors. He sent out his men to seize the child, which the Israelites endeavored to hide from the wrath of the king, who then ordered the abominable massacre of the children, hoping that Jesus would perish in this vast human hecatomb. But Joseph's family had warning of the impending danger, and took refuge in Egypt.

A short time afterward, they returned to their native country. The child had grown during those journeyings, in which his life was more than once exposed to danger.

[p. 242]

[paragraph continues] Formerly, as now, the Oriental Israelites commenced the instruction of their children at the age of five or six years. Compelled to constantly hide him from the murderous King Herod, the parents of Jesus could not allow their son to go out, and he, no doubt, spent all his time in studying the sacred Scriptures, so that his knowledge was sufficiently beyond what would naturally have been expected of a boy of his age to greatly astonish the elders of Israel. He had in his thirteenth year attained an age when, according to Jewish law, the boy becomes an adult, has the right to marry, and incurs obligations for the discharge of the religious duties of a man.

There exists still, in our times, among the Israelites, an ancient religious custom that fixes the majority of a youth at the accomplished

[p. 243]

thirteenth year. From this epoch the youth becomes a member of the congregation and enjoys all the rights of an adult. Hence, his marriage at this age is regarded as having legal force, and is even required in the tropical countries. In Europe, however, owing to the influence of local laws and to nature, which does not contribute here so powerfully as in warm climates to the physical development, this custom is no more in force and has lost all its former importance.

The royal lineage of Jesus, his rare intelligence and his learning, caused him to be looked upon as an excellent match, and the wealthiest and most respected Hebrews would fain have had him for a son-in-law, just as even nowadays the Israelites are very desirous of the honor of marrying their daughters to the sons of Rabbis or scholars.

[p. 244]

[paragraph continues] But the meditative youth, whose mind was far above anything corporeal, and possessed by the thirst for knowledge, stealthily left his home and joined the caravans going to India.

It stands to reason that Jesus Christ should have thought, primarily, of going to India, first, because at that epoch Egypt formed part of the Roman possessions; secondly, and principally, because a very active commercial exchange with India had made common report in Judea of the majestic character and unsurpassed richness of the arts and sciences in this marvellous country, to which even now the aspirations of all civilized peoples are directed.

Here the Evangelists once more lose the thread of the terrestrial life of Jesus. Luke says he "was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel " (Luke 1, 80), which

[p. 245]

clearly demonstrates that nobody knew where the holy youth was until his sudden re-appearance sixteen years later.

Arrived in India, this land of marvels, Jesus began to frequent the temples of the Djainites.

There exists until to-day, on the peninsula of Hindustan, a sectarian cult under the name of Djainism. It forms a kind of connecting link between Buddhism and Brahminism, and preaches the destruction of all other beliefs, which, it declares, are corroded by falsehood. It dates from the seventh century before Jesus Christ and its name is derived from the word "djain" (conqueror), which was assumed by its founders as expressive of its destined triumph, over its rivals.

In sympathetic admiration for the spirit of the young man, the Djainites asked him to

[p. 246]

stay with them; but Jesus left them to settle in Djagguernat, where he devoted himself to the study of treatises on religion, philosophy, etc. Djagguernat is one of the chief sacred cities of Brahmins, and, at the time of Christ, was of great religious importance. According to tradition, the ashes of the illustrious Brahmin, Krishna, who lived in 1580 B. C., are preserved there, in the hollow of a tree, near a magnificent temple, to which thousands make pilgrimage every year. Krishna collected and put in order the Vedas, which he divided into four books--Richt, Jagour, Saman and Artafan;--in commemoration of which great work he received the name of Vyasa (he who collected and divided the Vedas), and he also compiled the Vedanta and eighteen Puranas, which contain 400,000 stanzas.

[p. 247]

In Djagguernat is also found a very precious library of Sanscrit books and religious manuscripts.

Jesus spent there six years in studying the language of the country and the Sanscrit, which enabled him to absorb the religious doctrines, philosophy, medicine and mathematics. He found much to blame in Brahminical laws and usages, and publicly joined issue with the Brahmins, who in vain endeavored to convince him of the sacred character of their established customs. Jesus, among other things, deemed it extremely unjust that the laborer should be oppressed and despised, and that he should not only be robbed of hope of future happiness, but also be denied the right to hear the religious services. He, therefore, began preaching to the Sudras, the lowest caste of slaves, telling

[p. 248]

them that, according to their own laws, God is the Father of all men; that all which exists, exists only through Him; that, before Him, all men are equal, and that the Brahmins had obscured the great principle of monotheism by misinterpreting Brahma's own words, and laying excessive stress upon observance of the exterior ceremonials of the cult.

Here are the words in which, according to the doctrine of the Brahmins, God Himself speaks to the angels: ''I have been from eternity, and shall continue to be eternally. I am the first cause of everything that exists in the East and in the West, in the North and in the South, above and below, in heaven and in hell. I am older than all things. I am the Spirit and the Creation of the universe and also its Creator. I am all-powerful; I am the God of the Gods, the King of the

[p. 249]

[paragraph continues] Kings; I am Para-Brahma, the great soul of the universe."

After the world appeared by the will of Para-Brahma, God created human beings, whom he divided into four classes, according to their colors: white (Brahmins), red (Kshatriyas), yellow (Vaisyas), and black (Sudras). Brahma drew the first from his own mouth, and gave them for their appanage the government of the world, the care of teaching men the laws, of curing and judging them. Therefore do the Brahmins occupy only the offices of priests and preachers, are expounders of the Vedas, and must practice celibacy.

The second caste of Kshatriyas issued from the hand of Brahma. He made of them warriors, entrusting them with the care of defending society. All the kings, princes,

[p. 250]

captains, governors and military men belong to this caste, which lives on the best terms with the Brahmins, since they cannot subsist without each other, and the peace of the country depends on the alliance of the lights and the sword, of Brahma's temple and the royal throne.

The Vaisyas, who constitute the third caste, issued from Brahma's belly. They are destined to cultivate the ground, raise cattle, carry on commerce and practice all kinds of trades in order to feed the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas. Only on holidays are they authorized to enter the temple and listen to the recital of the Vedas; at all other times they must attend to their business.

The lowest caste, that of the black ones, or Sudras, issued from the feet of Brahma to be the humble servants and slaves of the

[p. 251]

three preceding castes. They are interdicted from attending the reading of the Vedas at any time; their touch contaminates a Brahmin, Kshatriya, or even a Vaisya who conies in contact with them. They are wretched creatures, deprived of all human rights; they cannot even look at the members of the other castes, nor defend themselves, nor, when sick, receive the attendance of a physician. Death alone can deliver the Sudra from a life of servitude; and even then, freedom can only be attained under the condition that, during his whole life, he shall have served diligently and without complaint some member of the privileged classes. Then only it is promised that the soul of the Sudra shall, after death, be raised to a superior caste.

If a Sudra has been lacking in obedience to a member of the privileged classes, or has

[p. 252]

in any way brought their disfavor upon him. self, he sinks to the rank of a pariah, who is banished from all cities and villages and is the object of general contempt, as an abject being who can only perform the lowest kind of work.

The same punishment may also fall upon members of another caste; these, however, may, through repentance, fasting and other trials, re-habilitate themselves in their former caste; while the unfortunate Sudra, once expelled from his, has lost it forever.

From what has been said above, it is easy to explain why the Vaisyas and Sudras were animated with adoration for Jesus, who, in spite of the threats of the Brahmins and Kshatriyas, never forsook those poor people. In his sermons Jesus not only censured the system by which man was robbed of his

[p. 253]

right to be considered as a human being, while an ape or a piece of marble or metal was paid divine worship, but he attacked the very life of Brahminism, its system of gods, its doctrine and its "trimurti" (trinity), the angular stone of this religion.

Para-Brahma is represented with three faces on a single head. This is the "trimurti" (trinity), composed of Brahma (creator), Vishnu (conservator), and Siva (destroyer).

Here is the origin of the trimurti:--

In the beginning, Para-Brahma created the waters and threw into them the seed of procreation, which transformed itself into a brilliant egg, wherein Brahma's image was reflected. Millions of years had passed when Brahma split the egg in two halves, of which the upper one became the heaven, the lower

[p. 254]

one, the earth. Then Brahma descended to the earth under the shape of a child, established himself upon a lotus flower, absorbed himself in his own contemplation and put to himself the question: "Who will attend to the conservation of what I have created?" "I," came the answer from his mouth under the appearance of a flame. And Brahma gave to this word the name, "Vishnu," that is to say, "he who preserves." Then Brahma divided his being into two halves, the one male, the other female, the active and the passive principles, the union of which produced Siva, "the destroyer."

These are the attributes of the trimurti; Brahma, creative principle; Vishnu, preservative wisdom; Siva, destructive wrath of justice. Brahma is the substance from which everything was made; Vishnu, space wherein

[p. 255]

everything lives; and Siva, time that annihilates all things.

Brahma is the face which vivifies all; Vishnu, the water which sustains the forces of the creatures; Siva, the fire which breaks the bond that unites all objects. Brahma is the past; Vishnu, the present; Siva, the future. Each part of the trimurti possesses, moreover, a wife. The wife of Brahma is Sarasvati, goddess of wisdom; that of Vishnu, Lakshmi, goddess of virtue, and Siva's spouse is Kali, goddess of death, the universal destroyer.

Of this last union were born, Ganesa, the elephant-headed god of wisdom, and Indra, the god of the firmament, both chiefs of inferior divinities, the number of which, if all the objects of adoration of the Hindus

[p. 256]

be included, amounts to three hundred millions.

Vishnu has .descended eight times upon the earth, incarnating in a fish in order to save the Vedas from the deluge, in a tortoise, a dwarf, a wild boar, a lion, in Rama, a king's son, in Krishna and in Buddha. He will come a ninth time under the form of a rider mounted on a white horse in order to destroy death and sin.

Jesus denied the existence of all these hierarchic absurdities of gods, which darken the great principle of monotheism.

When the Brahmins saw that Jesus, who, instead of becoming one of their party, as they had hoped, turned out to be their adversary, and that the people began to embrace his doctrine, they resolved to kill him but his servants, who were greatly attached

[p. 257]

to him, forewarned him of the threatening danger, and he took refuge in the mountains of Nepaul. At this epoch, Buddhism had taken deep root in this country. It was a kind of schism, remarkable by its moral principles and ideas on the nature of the divinity

ideas which brought men closer to nature and to one another.

Sakya-Muni, the founder of this sect, was born fifteen hundred years before Jesus Christ, at Kapila, the capital of his father's kingdom, near Nepaul, in the Himalayas. He belonged to the race of the Gotamides, and to the ancient family of the Sakyas. From his infancy he evinced a lively interest in religion, and, contrary to his father's wishes, leaving his palace with all its luxury, began at once to preach against the Brahmins, for the purification of their doctrines.

[p. 258]

[paragraph continues] He died at Koucinagara, surrounded by many faithful disciples. His body was burned, and his ashes, divided into several parts, were distributed between the cities, which, on account of his new doctrine, had renounced Brahminism.

According to the Buddhistic doctrine, the Creator reposes normally in a state of perfect inaction, which is disturbed by nothing and which he only leaves at certain destiny-determined epochs, in order to create terrestrial buddhas. To this end the Spirit disengages itself from the sovereign Creator, incarnates in a buddha and stays for some time on the earth, where' he creates Bodhisattvas (masters), [**] whose mission it is to preach the

[p. 259]

divine word and to found new churches of believers to whom they will give laws, and for whom they will institute a new religious order according to the traditions of Buddhism.

A terrestrial buddha is, in a certain way, a reflection of the sovereign creative Buddha, with whom he unites after the termination of his terrestrial existence. In like manner do the Bodhisattvas, as a reward for their labors and the privations they undergo, receive eternal bliss and enjoy a rest which nothing can disturb.

Jesus sojourned six years among the Buddhists, where he found the principle of monotheism still pure. Arrived at the age of twenty-six years, he remembered his fatherland, which was then oppressed by a foreign yoke. On his way homeward, he preached

[p. 260]

against idol-worship, human sacrifice, and other errors of faith, admonishing the people to recognize and adore God, the Father of all beings, to whom all are alike dear, the master as well as the slave; for they all are his children, to whom he has given this beautiful universe for a common heritage. The sermons of Jesus often made a profound impression upon the peoples among whom he came, and he was exposed to all sorts of dangers provoked by the clergy, but was saved by the very idolators who, only the preceding day, had offered their children as sacrifices to their idols.

While passing through Persia, Jesus almost caused a revolution among the adorers of Zoroaster's doctrine. Nevertheless, the priests refrained from killing him, out of fear of the peoples' vengeance. They

[p. 261]

resorted to artifice, and led him out of town at night, with the hope that he might be devoured by wild beasts. Jesus escaped this peril and arrived safe and sound in the country of Israel.

It must be remarked here that the Orientals, amidst their sometimes so picturesque misery, and in the ocean of depravation in which they slumber, always have, under the influence of their priests and teachers, a pronounced inclination for learning and understand easily good common sense explications. It happened to me more than once that, by using simple words of truth, I appealed to the conscience of a thief or some otherwise intractable person. These people, moved by a sentiment of innate honesty,--which the clergy for personal reasons of their own, tried by

[p. 262]

all means to stifle--soon became again very honest and had only contempt for those who had abused their confidence.

By the virtue of a mere word of truth, the whole of India, with its 300,000,000 of idols, could be made a vast Christian country; but . . . . this beautiful project would, no doubt, be antagonized by certain Christians who, similar to those priests of whom I have spoken before, speculate upon the ignorance of the people to make themselves rich.

According to St. Luke, Jesus was about thirty years of age when he began preaching to the Israelites. According to the Buddhistic chroniclers, Jesus's teachings in Judea began in his twenty-ninth year. All his sermons which are not mentioned by the Evangelists, but have been preserved by the Buddhists, are remarkable

[p. 263]

for their character of divine grandeur. The fame of the new prophet spread rapidly in the country, and Jerusalem awaited with impatience his arrival. When he came near the holy city, its inhabitants went out to meet him, and led him in triumph to the temple; all of which is in agreement with Christian tradition. The chiefs and elders who heard him were filled with admiration for his sermons, and were happy to see the beneficent impression which his words exercised upon the populace. All these remarkable sermons of Jesus are full of sublime sentiments.

Pilate, the governor of the country, however, did not look upon the matter in the same light. Eager agents notified him that Jesus announced the near coming of a new kingdom, the re-establishment of the throne

[p. 264]

of Israel, and that he suffered himself to he called the Son of God, sent to bring back courage in Israel, for he, the King of Judea, would soon ascend the throne of his ancestors.

I do not purpose attributing to Jesus the role of a revolutionary, but it seems to me very probable that Jesus wrought up the people with a view to re-establish the throne to which he had a just claim. Divinely inspired, and, at the same time, convinced of the legitimacy of his pretentions, Jesus preached the spiritual union of the people in order that a political union might result.

Pilate, who felt alarmed over these rumors, called together the priests and the elders of the people and ordered them to interdict Jesus from preaching in public, and even to condemn him in the temple under the charge of apostasy. This was the best means for

[p. 265]

[paragraph continues] Pilate to rid himself of a dangerous man, whose royal origin he knew and whose popularity was constantly increasing.

It must be said in this connection that the Israelites, far from persecuting Jesus, recognized in him the descendant of the illustrious dynasty of David, and made him the object of their secret hopes, a fact which is evident from the very Gospels which tell that Jesus preached freely in the temple, in the presence of the elders, who could have interdicted him not only the entrance to the temple, but also his preachings.

Upon the order of Pilate the Sanhedrim met and cited Jesus to appear before its tribunal. As the result of the inquiry, the members of the Sanhedrim informed Pilate that his suspicions were without any foundation whatever; that Jesus preached a religious,

[p. 266]

and not a political, propaganda; that he was expounding the Divine word, and that he claimed to have come not to overthrow, but to re-establish the laws of Moses. The Buddhistic record does but confirm this sympathy, which unquestionably existed between the young preacher, Jesus, and the elders of the people of Israel; hence their answer: "We do not judge a just one."

Pilate felt not at all assured, and continued seeking an occasion to hale Jesus before a new tribunal, as regular as the former. To this end he caused him to be followed by spies, and finally ordered his arrest.

If we may believe the Evangelists, it was the Pharisees who sought the life of Jesus, while the Buddhistic record most positively declares that Pilate alone can be held responsible for his execution. This version is

[p. 267]

evidently much more probable than the account of the Evangelists. The conquerors of Judea could not long tolerate the presence of a man who announced to the people a speedy deliverance from their yoke. The popularity of Jesus having commenced to disturb Pilate's mind, it is to be supposed that he sent after the young preacher spies, with the order to take note of all his words and acts. Moreover, the servants of the Roman governor, as true "agents provocateurs," endeavored by means of artful questions put to Jesus, to draw from him some imprudent words under color of which Pilate might proceed against him. If the preachings of Jesus had been offensive to the Hebrew priests and scribes, all they needed to do was simply to command the people not to hear and follow him, and to forbid him entrance

[p. 268]

into the temple. But the Evangelists tell us that Jesus enjoyed great popularity among the Israelites and full liberty in the temples, where Pharisees and scribes discussed with him.

In order to find a valid excuse for condemning him, Pilate had him tortured so as to extort from him a confession of high treason.

But, contrary to the rule that the innocent, overcome by their pain, will confess anything to escape the unendurable agonies inflicted upon them, Jesus made no admission of guilt. Pilate, seeing that the usual tortures were powerless to accomplish the desired result, commanded the executioners to. proceed to the last extreme of their diabolic cruelties, meaning to compass the death of Jesus by the complete exhaustion of his

[p. 269]

forces. Jesus, however, fortifying his endurance by the power of his will and zeal for his righteous cause--which was also that of his people and of God--was unconquerable by all the refinements of cruelty inflicted upon him by his executioners.

The infliction of "the question" upon Jesus evoked much feeling among the elders, and they resolved to interfere in his behalf; formally demanding of Pilate that he should be liberated before the Passover.

When their request was denied by Pilate they resolved to petition that Jesus should be brought to trial before the Sanhedrim, by whom they did not doubt his acquittal--which was ardently desired by the people--would be ordained.

In the eyes of the priests, Jesus was a saint, belonging to the family of David; and

[p. 270]

his unjust detention, or--what was still more to be dreaded--his condemnation, would have saddened the celebration of the great national festival of the Israelites.

They therefore prayed Pilate that the trial of Jesus should take place before the Passover, and to this he acceded. But he ordered that two thieves should be tried at the same time with Jesus, thinking to, in this way, minimize in the eyes of the people, the importance of the fact that the life of an innocent man was being put in jeopardy before the tribunal; and, by not allowing Jesus to be condemned alone, blind the populace to the unjust pre-arrangement of his condemnation.

The accusation against Jesus was founded upon the depositions of the bribed witnesses.

During the trial, Pilate availed himself of

[p. 271]

perversions of Jesus' words concerning the heavenly kingdom, to sustain the charges made against him. He counted, it seems, upon the effect produced by the answers of Jesus, as well as upon his own authority, to influence the members of the tribunal against examining too minutely the details of the case, and to procure from them the sentence of death for which he intimated his desire.

Upon hearing the perfectly natural answer of the judges, that the meaning of the words of Jesus was diametrically opposed to the accusation, and that there was nothing in them to warrant his condemnation, Pilate employed his final resource for prejudicing the trial, viz., the deposition of a purchased traitorous informer. This miserable wretch--who was, no doubt, Judas--accused Jesus

[p. 272]

formally, of having incited the people to rebellion.

Then followed a scene of unsurpassed sublimity. When Judas gave his testimony, Jesus, turning toward him, and giving him his blessing, says: "Thou wilt find mercy, for what thou hast said did not come out from thine own heart!" Then, addressing himself to the governor: "Why dost thou lower thy dignity, and teach thy inferiors to tell falsehood, when without doing so it is in thy power to condemn an innocent man?"

Words touching as sublime! Jesus Christ here manifests all the grandeur of his soul by pardoning his betrayer, and he reproaches Pilate with having resorted to such means, unworthy of his dignity, to attain his end.

This keen reproach enraged the governor,

[p. 273]

and caused him to completely forget his position, and the prudent policy with which he had meant to evade personal responsibility for the crime he contemplated. He now imperiously demanded the conviction of Jesus, and, as though he intended to make a display of his power, to overawe the judges, ordered the acquittal of the two thieves.

The judges, seeing the injustice of Pilate's demand, that they should acquit the malefactors and condemn the innocent Jesus, refused to commit this double crime against their consciences and their laws. But as they could not cope with one who possessed the authority of final judgment, and saw that he was firmly decided to rid himself, by whatever means, of a man who had fallen under the suspicions of the Roman authorities, they left him to himself pronounce the verdict

[p. 274]

for which he was so anxious. In order, however, that the people might not suspect them of sharing the responsibility for such unjust judgment, which would not readily have been forgiven, they, in leaving the court, performed the ceremony of washing their hands, symbolizing the affirmation that they were clean of the blood of the innocent Jesus, the beloved of the people.

About ten years ago, I read in a German journal, the Fremdenblatt, an article on Judas, wherein the author endeavored to demonstrate that the informer had been the best friend of Jesus. According to him, it was out of love for his master that Judas betrayed him, for he put blind faith in the words of the Saviour, who said that his kingdom would arrive after his execution. But after seeing him on the cross, and having waited in vain

[p. 275]

for the resurrection of Jesus, which he expected to immediately take place, Judas, not able to bear the pain by which his heart was torn, committed suicide by hanging himself. It would be profitless to dwell upon this ingenious product of a fertile imagination.

To take up again the accounts of the Gospels and the Buddhistic chronicle, it is very possible that the bribed informer was really Judas, although the Buddhistic version is silent on this point. As to the pangs of conscience which are said to have impelled the informer to suicide, I must say that I give no credence to them. A man capable of committing so vile and cowardly an action as that of making an infamously false accusation against his friend, and this, not out of a spirit of jealousy, or for revenge, but to gain a handful of shekels! such a man is, from the

[p. 276]

psychic point of view, of very little worth. He ignores honesty and conscience, and pangs of remorse are unknown to him.

It is presumable that the governor treated him as is sometimes done in our days, when it is deemed desirable to effectually conceal state secrets known to men of his kind and presumably unsafe in their keeping. Judas probably was simply hanged, by Pilate's order, to prevent the possibility of his some day revealing that the plot of which Jesus was a victim had been inspired by the authorities.

On the day of the execution, a numerous detachment of Roman soldiers was placed around the cross to guard against any attempt by the populace for the delivery of him who was the object of their veneration

[p. 277]

[paragraph continues] In this occurrence Pilate gave proof of his extraordinary firmness and resolution.

But though, owing to the precautions taken by the governor, the anticipated revolt did not occur, he could not prevent the people, after the execution, mourning the ruin of their hopes, which were destroyed, together with the last scion of the race of David. All the people went to worship at Jesus' grave. Although we have no precise information concerning the occurrences of the first few days following the Passion, we could, by some probable conjectures, re-construct the scenes which must have taken place.

It stands to reason that the Roman Caesar's clever lieutenant, when he saw that Christ's grave became the centre of universal lamentations and the subject of national grief, and

[p. 278]

feared that the memory of the righteous victim might excite the discontent of the people and raise the whole country against the foreigners' rule, should have employed any effective means for the removal of this rallying-point, the mortal remains of Jesus. Pilate began by having the body buried. For three days the soldiers who were stationed on guard at the grave, were exposed to all kinds of insults and injuries on the part of the people who, defying the danger, came in multitudes to mourn the great martyr. Then Pilate ordered his soldiers to remove the body at night, and to bury it clandestinely in some other place, leaving the first grave open. and the guard withdrawn from it, so that the people could see that Jesus had disappeared. But Pilate missed his end; for when, on the following

[p. 279]

morning, the Hebrews did not find the corpse of their master in the sepulchre, the superstitious and miracle-accepting among them thought that he had been resurrected.

How did this legend take root? We cannot say. Possibly it existed for a long time in a latent state and, at the beginning, spread only among the common people; perhaps the ecclesiastic authorities of the Hebrews looked with indulgence upon this innocent belief, which gave to the oppressed a shadow of revenge on their oppressors. However it be, the day when the legend of the resurrection finally became known to all, there was no one to be found strong enough to demonstrate the impossibility of such an occurrence.

Concerning this resurrection, it must be remarked that, according to the Buddhists.,

[p. 280]

the soul of the just Issa was united with the eternal Being, while the Evangelists insist upon the ascension of the body. It seems to me, however, that the Evangelists and the Apostles have done very well to give the description of the resurrection which they have agreed upon, for if they had not done so, i.e., if the miracle had been given a less material character, their preaching would not have had, in the eyes of the nations to whom it was presented, that divine authority, that avowedly supernatural character, which has clothed Christianity, until our time, as the only religion capable of elevating the human race to a state of sublime enthusiasm, suppressing its savage instincts, and bringing it nearer to the grand and simple nature which God has bestowed, they say, upon that feeble dwarf called man.

Footnotes

^258:* Sanscrit:--"He whose essence (sattva) has become intelligence (bhodi)," those who need but one more incarnation to become perfect buddhas, i.e., to be entitled to Nirvana.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 281]

  

EXPLANATORY NOTES.

Chapter III.

 section3, 4, 5, 7.

The histories of all peoples show that when a nation has reached the apogee of its military glory and its wealth, it begins at once to sink more or less rapidly on the declivity of moral degeneration and decay. The Israelites having, among the first, experienced this law of the evolution of nations, the neighboring peoples profited by the decadence of the then effeminate and debauched descendants of Jacob, to despoil them.

 section 8.

The country of Romeles, i.e., the fatherland of Romulus; in our days, Rome.

 section section 11, 12.

It must be admitted that the Israelites, in spite of their incontestable wit and intelligence, seem to have only had regard for the present. Like all other Oriental peoples, they only in their

[p. 282]

misfortunes remembered the faults of their past, which they each time had to expiate by centuries of slavery.

Chapter IV.

 section 6.

As it is easy to divine, this verse refers to Joseph, who was a lineal descendant from King David. Side by side with this somewhat vague indication may be placed the following passages from the Gospels:

--"The angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife " . . . (Matt. i, 20.)

--"And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the son of David" (Matt. xxi, 9).

--"To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David;" . . (Luke i, 27.)

--"And the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David;" . . . (Luke i, 32.)

--"And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was supposed) the

[p. 283]

son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli, . . . which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David " (Luke iii, 23-3i).

 section 7.

Both the Old and the New Testaments teach that God promised David the rehabilitation of his throne and the elevation to it of one of his descendants.

 section 8, 9.

--"And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him,"

--"And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions."

--"And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers."

--"And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?"

--"And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man" (Luke ii, 40, 46, 47, 49, 52).

[p. 284]

Chapter V.

 section 1.

"Sind," a Sanscrit word, which has been modified by the Persians into Ind. "Arya," the name given in antiquity to the inhabitants of India; signified first "man who cultivates the ground" or "cultivator." Anciently it had a purely ethnographical signification; this appellation assumed later on a religious sense, notably that of "man who believes."

 section 2.

Luke says (i, 80): "And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his sheaving unto Israel." The Evangelists say that Jesus was in the desert, the Buddhists explain this version of the Gospels by indicating where Jesus was during his absence from Judea. According to them he crossed the Sind, a name which, properly spoken, signifies "the river" (Indus). In connection with this word it is not amiss to note that many Sanscrit words in passing into the Persian language underwent the same transformation by changing the "s" into "h;" per example:

[p. 285]

Sapta (in Sanscrit), signifying seven--hafta (in Persian);

Sam (Sanscrit), signifying equal--ham (Persian);

Mas (Sanscrit), meaning mouth--mah (Persian); Sur (Sanscrit), meaning sun--hur (Persian); Das (Sanscrit), meaning ten--Dah (Persian); Loco citato--and those who believed in the god Djain.

There exists, even yet, on the peninsula of Hindustan, a cult under the name of Djainism, which forms, as it were, a link of union between Buddhism and Brahminism, and its devotees teach the destruction of all other beliefs, which they declare contaminated with falsehood. It dates as far back as the seventh century, B. c. Its name is derived from Djain (conqueror), which it assumed as the symbol of its triumph over its rivals.

 section 4.

Each of the eighteen Puranas is divided into five parts, which, besides the canonical laws, the rites and the commentaries upon the creation, destruction and resurrection of the universe. deal with theogony, medicine, and even the trades and professions.

[p. 286]

Chapter VI.

 section 12.

Owing to the intervention of the British, the human sacrifices, which were principally offered to Kali, the goddess of death, have now entirely ceased. The goddess Kali is represented erect, with one foot upon the dead body of a man, whose head she holds in one of her innumerable hands, while with the other hand she brandishes a bloody dagger. Her eyes and mouth, which are wide open, express passion and cruelty.

Chapter VIII.

 section 3, 4.

Zoroaster lived 550 years before Jesus. He founded the doctrine of the struggle between light and darkness, a doctrine which is fully expounded in the Zend-Avesta (Word of God), which is written in the Zend language, and, according to tradition, was given to him by an angel from Paradise.

According to Zoroaster we must worship Mithra (the sun), from whom descend Ormuzd, the god of good, and Ahriman, the god of evil. The world will end when Ormuzd has triumphed

[p. 287]

over his rival, Ahriman, who will then return to his original source, Mithra.

Chapter X.

 section 16.

According to the Evangelists, Jesus was born in Bethlehem, which the Buddhistic version confirms, for only from Bethlehem, situated at a distance of about seven kilometres from Jerusalem, could the walls of this latter city be seen.

Chapter XI.

 section 15.

The doctrine the Redemptor is, almost in its entirety, contained in the Gospels. As to the transformation of men into children, it is especially known from the conversation that took place between Jesus and Nicodemus.

Chapter XII.

 section 1.

--"Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?" (Matt. xxii, 17.)

 section 3.

--"Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and

[p. 288]

unto God the things that are God's. (Matt. xxii, 21; et. al.)

Chapter XIV

 section 3.

According to the Buddhistic belief, the terrestrial buddhas after death, lose consciousness of their independent existence and unite with the eternal Spirit.

 section section 10, 11.

Here, no doubt, reference is made to the activity of the Apostles among the neighboring peoples; an activity which could not have passed unnoticed at that epoch, because of the great results which followed the preaching of the new religious doctrine of love among nations whose religions were based upon the cruelty of their gods.

Without permitting myself indulgence in great dissertations, or too minute analysis upon each verse, I have thought it useful to accompany my work with these few little explanatory notes, leaving it to the reader to take like trouble with the rest.

 

 

 

FINIS.

 

 

    


===== BOOK: vifb.txt =====


The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

THE VIOLET FAIRY BOOK

Edited by ANDREW LANG

London, New York: Longmans, Green

[1901]

TO VIOLET MYERS IS DEDICATED
 THE VIOLET FAIRY BOOK

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*Preface]

[*A Tale of the Tontlawald]

[*The finest Liar in the World]

[*The Story of three Wonderful Beggars]

[*Schippeitaro]

[*The Three Princes and their Beasts]

[*The Goat's Ears of the Emperor Trojan]

[*The Nine Pea-hens and the Golden Apples]

[*The Lute Player]

[*The Grateful Prince]

[*The Child who came from an Egg]

[*Stan Bolovan]

[*The Two Frogs]

[*The Story of a Gazelle]

[*How a Fish Swam in the Air and a Hare in the Water]

[*Two in a Sack]

[*The Envious Neighbour]

[*The Fairy of the Dawn]

[*The Enchanted Knife]

[*Jesper who herded the Hares]

[*The Underground Workers]

[*The History of Dwarf Long Nose]

[*The Nunda, Eater of People]

[*The Story of Hassebu]

[*The Maiden with the Wooden Helmet]

[*The Monkey and the Jelly-fish]

[*The Headless Dwarfs]

[*The young Man who would have his Eyes opened]

[*The Boys with the Golden Stars]

[*The Frog]

[*The Princess who was hidden Underground]

[*The Girl who pretended to be a Boy]

[*The Story of Halfman]

[*The Prince who wanted to see the World]

[*Virgililus the Sorcerer]

[*Mogarzea and his Son]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

PREFACE

The Editor takes this opportunity to repeat what he has often said before, that he is not the author of the stories in the Fairy Books; that he did not invent them 'out of his own head.' He is accustomed to being asked, by ladies, 'Have you written anything else except the Fairy Books?' He is then obliged to explain that he has NOT written the Fairy Books, but, save these, has written almost everything else, except hymns, sermons, and dramatic works.

The stories in this Violet Fairy Book, as in all the others of the series, have been translated out of the popular traditional tales in a number of different languages. These stories are as old as anything that men have invented. They are narrated by naked savage women to naked savage children. They have been inherited by our earliest civilised ancestors, who really believed that beasts and trees and stones can talk if they choose, and behave kindly or unkindly. The stories are full of the oldest ideas of ages when science did not exist, and magic took the place of science. Anybody who has the curiosity to read the 'Legendary Australian Tales,' which Mrs. Langloh Parker has collected from the lips of the Australian savages, will find that these tales are closely akin to our own. Who were the first authors of them nobody knows--probably the first men and women. Eve may have told these tales to amuse Cain and Abel. As people grew more civilised and had kings and queens, princes and princesses, these exalted persons generally were chosen as heroes and heroines. But originally the characters were just 'a man,' and 'a woman,' and 'a boy,' and 'a girl,' with crowds of beasts, birds, and fishes, all behaving like human beings. When the nobles and other people became rich and educated, they forgot the old stories, but the country people did not, and handed them down, with changes at pleasure, from generation to generation. Then learned men collected and printed the country people's stories, and these we have translated, to amuse children. Their tastes remain like the tastes of their naked ancestors, thousands of years ago, and they seem to like fairy tales better than history, poetry, geography, or arithmetic, just as grown-up people like novels better than anything else.

This is the whole truth of the matter. I have said so before, and I say so again. But nothing will prevent children from thinking that I invented the stories, or some ladies from being of the same opinion. But who really invented the stories nobody knows; it is all so long ago, long before reading and writing were invented. The first of the stories actually written down, were written in Egyptian hieroglyphs, or on Babylonian cakes of clay, three or four thousand years before our time.

Of the stories in this book, Miss Blackley translated 'Dwarf Long Nose,' 'The Wonderful Beggars,' 'The Lute Player,' 'Two in a Sack,' and 'The Fish that swam in the Air.' Mr. W. A. Craigie translated from the Scandinavian, 'Jasper who herded the Hares.' Mrs. Lang did the rest.

Some of the most interesting are from the Roumanion, and three were previously published in the late Dr. Steere's 'Swahili Tales.' By the permission of his representatives these three African stories have here been abridged and simplified for children.

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

A TALE OF THE TONTLAWALD

Long, long ago there stood in the midst of a country covered with lakes a vast stretch of moorland called the Tontlawald, on which no man ever dared set foot. From time to time a few bold spirits had been drawn by curiosity to its borders, and on their return had reported that they had caught a glimpse of a ruined house in a grove of thick trees, and round about it were a crowd of beings resembling men, swarming over the grass like bees. The men were as dirty and ragged as gipsies, and there were besides a quantity of old women and half-naked children.

One night a peasant who was returning home from a feast wandered a little farther into the Tontlawald, and came back with the same story. A countless number of women and children were gathered round a huge fire, and some were seated on the ground, while others danced strange dances on the smooth grass. One old crone had a broad iron ladle in her hand, with which every now and then she stirred the fire, but the moment she touched the glowing ashes the children rushed away, shrieking like night owls, and it was a long while before they ventured to steal back. And besides all this there had once or twice been seen a little old man with a long beard creeping out of the forest, carrying a sack bigger than himself. The women and children ran by his side, weeping and trying to drag the sack from off his back, but he shook them off, and went on his way. There was also a tale of a magnificent black cat as large as a foal, but men could not believe all the wonders told by the peasant, and it was difficult to make out what was true and what was false in his story. However, the fact remained that strange things did happen there, and the King of Sweden, to whom this part of the country belonged, more than once gave orders to cut down the haunted wood, but there was no one with courage enough to obey his commands. At length one man, bolder than the rest, struck his axe into a tree, but his blow was followed by a stream of blood and shrieks as of a human creature in pain. The terrified woodcutter fled as fast as his legs would carry him, and after that neither orders nor threats would drive anybody to the enchanted moor.

A few miles from the Tontlawald was a large village, where dwelt a peasant who had recently married a young wife. As not uncommonly happens in such cases, she turned the whole house upside down, and the two quarrelled and fought all day long.

By his first wife the peasant had a daughter called Elsa, a good quiet girl, who only wanted to live in peace, but this her stepmother would not allow. She beat and cuffed the poor child from morning till night, but as the stepmother had the whip-hand of her husband there was no remedy.

For two years Elsa suffered all this ill-treatment, when one day she went out with the other village children to pluck strawberries. Carelessly they wandered on, till at last they reached the edge of the Tontlawald, where the finest strawberries grew, making the grass red with their colour. The children flung themselves down on the ground, and, after eating as many as they wanted, began to pile up their baskets, when suddenly a cry arose from one of the older boys:

'Run, run as fast as you can! We are in the Tontlawald!'

Quicker than lightning they sprang to their feet, and rushed madly away, all except Elsa, who had strayed farther than the rest, and had found a bed of the finest strawberries right under the trees. Like the others, she heard the boy's cry, but could not make up her mind to leave the strawberries.

'After all, what does it matter?' thought she. 'The dwellers in the Tontlawald cannot be worse than my stepmother'; and looking up she saw a little black dog with a silver bell on its neck come barking towards her, followed by a maiden clad all in silk.

'Be quiet,' said she; then turning to Elsa she added: 'I am so glad you did not run away with the other children. Stay here with me and be my friend, and we will play delightful games together, and every day we will go and gather strawberries. Nobody will dare to beat you if I tell them not. Come, let us go to my mother'; and taking Elsa's hand she led her deeper into the wood, the little black dog jumping up beside them and barking with pleasure.

Oh! what wonders and splendours unfolded themselves before Elsa's astonished eyes! She thought she really must be in Heaven. Fruit trees and bushes loaded with fruit stood before them, while birds gayer than the brightest butterfly sat in their branches and filled the air with their song. And the birds were not shy, but let the girls take them in their hands, and stroke their gold and silver feathers. In the centre of the garden was the dwelling-house, shining with glass and precious stones, and in the doorway sat a woman in rich garments, who turned to Elsa's companion and asked:

'What sort of a guest are you bringing to me?'

'I found her alone in the wood,' replied her daughter, 'and brought her back with me for a companion. You will let her stay?'

The mother laughed, but said nothing, only she looked Elsa up and down sharply. Then she told the girl to come near, and stroked her cheeks and spoke kindly to her, asking if her parents were alive, and if she really would like to stay with them. Elsa stooped and kissed her hand, then, kneeling down, buried her face in the woman's lap, and sobbed out:

'My mother has lain for many years under the ground. My father is still alive, but I am nothing to him, and my stepmother beats me all the day long. I can do nothing right, so let me, I pray you, stay with you. I will look after the flocks or do any work you tell me; I will obey your lightest word; only do not, I entreat you, send me back to her. She will half kill me for not having come back with the other children.'

And the woman smiled and answered, 'Well, we will see what we can do with you,' and, rising, went into the house.

Then the daughter said to Elsa, 'Fear nothing, my mother will be your friend. I saw by the way she looked that she would grant your request when she had thought over it,' and, telling Elsa to wait, she entered the house to seek her mother. Elsa meanwhile was tossed about between hope and fear, and felt as if the girl would never come.

At last Elsa saw her crossing the grass with a box in her hand.

'My mother says we may play together to-day, as she wants to make up her mind what to do about you. But I hope you will stay here always, as I can't bear you to go away. Have you ever been on the sea?'

'The sea?' asked Elsa, staring; 'what is that? I've never heard of such a thing!'

'Oh, I'll soon show you,' answered the girl, taking the lid from the box, and at the very bottom lay a scrap of a cloak, a mussel shell, and two fish scales. Two drops of water were glistening on the cloak, and these the girl shook on the ground. In an instant the garden and lawn and everything else had vanished utterly, as if the earth had opened and swallowed them up, and as far as the eye could reach you could see nothing but water, which seemed at last to touch heaven itself. Only under their feet was a tiny dry spot. Then the girl placed the mussel shell on the water and took the fish scales in her hand. The mussel shell grew bigger and bigger, and turned into a pretty little boat, which would have held a dozen children. The girls stepped in, Elsa very cautiously, for which she was much laughed at by her friend, who used the fish scales for a rudder. The waves rocked the girls softly, as if they were lying in a cradle, and they floated on till they met other boats filled with men, singing and making merry.

'We must sing you a song in return,' said the girl, but as Elsa did not know any songs, she had to sing by herself. Elsa could not understand any of the men's songs, but one word, she noticed, came over and over again, and that was 'Kisika.' Elsa asked what it meant, and the girl replied that it was her name.

It was all so pleasant that they might have stayed there for ever had not a voice cried out to them, 'Children, it is time for you to come home!'

So Kisika took the little box out of her pocket, with the piece of cloth lying in it, and dipped the cloth in the water, and lo! they were standing close to a splendid house in the middle of the garden. Everything round them was dry and firm, and there was no water anywhere. The mussel shell and the fish scales were put back in the box, and the girls went in.

They entered a large hall, where four and twenty richly dressed women were sitting round a table, looking as if they were about to attend a wedding. At the head of the table sat the lady of the house in a golden chair.

Elsa did not know which way to look, for everything that met her eyes was more beautiful than she could have dreamed possible. But she sat down with the rest, and ate some delicious fruit, and thought she must be in heaven. The guests talked softly, but their speech was strange to Elsa, and she understood nothing of what was said. Then the hostess turned round and whispered something to a maid behind her chair, and the maid left the hall, and when she came back she brought a little old man with her, who had a beard longer than himself. He bowed low to the lady and then stood quietly near the door.

'Do you see this girl?' said the lady of the house, pointing to Elsa. 'I wish to adopt her for my daughter. Make me a copy of her, which we can send to her native village instead of herself.'

The old man looked Elsa all up and down, as if he was taking her measure, bowed again to the lady, and left the hall. After dinner the lady said kindly to Elsa, 'Kisika has begged me to let you stay with her, and you have told her you would like to live here. Is that so?'

At these words Elsa fell on her knees, and kissed the lady's hands and feet in gratitude for her escape from her cruel stepmother; but her hostess raised her from the ground and patted her head, saying, 'All will go well as long as you are a good, obedient child, and I will take care of you and see that you want for nothing till you are grown up and can look after yourself. My waiting-maid, who teaches Kisika all sorts of fine handiwork, shall teach you too.'

Not long after the old man came back with a mould full of clay on his shoulders, and a little covered basket in his left hand. He put down his mould and his basket on the ground, took up a handful of clay, and made a doll as large as life. When it was finished he bored a hole in the doll's breast and put a bit of bread inside; then, drawing a snake out of the basket, forced it to enter the hollow body.

'Now,' he said to the lady, 'all we want is a drop of the maiden's blood.'

When she heard this Elsa grew white with horror, for she thought she was selling her soul to the evil one.

'Do not be afraid!' the lady hastened to say; 'we do not want your blood for any bad purpose, but rather to give you freedom and happiness.'

Then she took a tiny golden needle, pricked Elsa in the arm, and gave the needle to the old man, who stuck it into the heart of the doll. When this was done he placed the figure in the basket, promising that the next day they should all see what a beautiful piece of work he had finished.

When Elsa awoke the next morning in her silken bed, with its soft white pillows, she saw a beautiful dress lying over the back of a chair, ready for her to put on. A maid came in to comb out her long hair, and brought the finest linen for her use; but nothing gave Elsa so much joy as the little pair of embroidered shoes that she held in her hand, for the girl had hitherto been forced to run about barefoot by her cruel stepmother. In her excitement she never gave a thought to the rough clothes she had worn the day before, which had disappeared as if by magic during the night. Who could have taken them? Well, she was to know that by-and-by. But WE can guess that the doll had been dressed in them, which was to go back to the village in her stead. By the time the sun rose the doll had attained her full size, and no one could have told one girl from the other. Elsa started back when she met herself as she looked only yesterday.

'You must not be frightened,' said the lady, when she noticed her terror; 'this clay figure can do you no harm. It is for your stepmother, that she may beat it instead of you. Let her flog it as hard as she will, it can never feel any pain. And if the wicked woman does not come one day to a better mind your double will be able at last to give her the punishment she deserves.'

From this moment Elsa's life was that of the ordinary happy child, who has been rocked to sleep in her babyhood in a lovely golden cradle. She had no cares or troubles of any sort, and every day her tasks became easier, and the years that had gone before seemed more and more like a bad dream. But the happier she grew the deeper was her wonder at everything around her, and the more firmly she was persuaded that some great unknown power must be at the bottom of it all.

In the courtyard stood a huge granite block about twenty steps from the house, and when meal times came round the old man with the long beard went to the block, drew out a small silver staff, and struck the stone with it three times, so that the sound could be heard a long way off. At the third blow, out sprang a large golden cock, and stood upon the stone. Whenever he crowed and flapped his wings the rock opened and something came out of it. First a long table covered with dishes ready laid for the number of persons who would be seated round it, and this flew into the house all by itself.

When the cock crowed for the second time, a number of chairs appeared, and flew after the table; then wine, apples, and other fruit, all without trouble to anybody. After everybody had had enough, the old man struck the rock again. the golden cock crowed afresh, and back went dishes, table, chairs, and plates into the middle of the block.

When, however, it came to the turn of the thirteenth dish, which nobody ever wanted to eat, a huge black cat ran up, and stood on the rock close to the cock, while the dish was on his other side.

There they all remained, till they were joined by the old man.

He picked up the dish in one hand, tucked the cat under his arm, told the cock to get on his shoulder, and all four vanished into the rock. And this wonderful stone contained not only food, but clothes and everything you could possibly want in the house.

At first a language was often spoken at meals which was strange to Elsa, but by the help of the lady and her daughter she began slowly to understand it, though it was years before she was able to speak it herself.

One day she asked Kisika why the thirteenth dish came daily to the table and was sent daily away untouched, but Kisika knew no more about it than she did. The girl must, however, have told her mother what Elsa had said, for a few days later she spoke to Elsa seriously:

'Do not worry yourself with useless wondering. You wish to know why we never eat of the thirteenth dish? That, dear child, is the dish of hidden blessings, and we cannot taste of it without bringing our happy life here to an end. And the world would be a great deal better if men, in their greed, did not seek to snatch every thing for themselves, instead of leaving something as a thankoffering to the giver of the blessings. Greed is man's worst fault.'

The years passed like the wind for Elsa, and she grew into a lovely woman, with a knowledge of many things that she would never have learned in her native village; but Kisika was still the same young girl that she had been on the day of her first meeting with Elsa. Each morning they both worked for an hour at reading and writing, as they had always done, and Elsa was anxious to learn all she could, but Kisika much preferred childish games to anything else. If the humour seized her, she would fling aside her tasks, take her treasure box, and go off to play in the sea, where no harm ever came to her.

'What a pity,' she would often say to Elsa, 'that you have grown so big, you cannot play with me any more.'

Nine years slipped away in this manner, when one day the lady called Elsa into her room. Elsa was surprised at the summons, for it was unusual, and her heart sank, for she feared some evil threatened her. As she crossed the threshold, she saw that the lady's cheeks were flushed, and her eyes full of tears, which she dried hastily, as if she would conceal them from the girl. 'Dearest child,' she began, 'the time has come when we must part.'

'Part?' cried Elsa, burying her head in the lady's lap. 'No, dear lady, that can never be till death parts us. You once opened your arms to me; you cannot thrust me away now.'

'Ah, be quiet, child,' replied the lady; 'you do not know what I would do to make you happy. Now you are a woman, and I have no right to keep you here. You must return to the world of men, where joy awaits you.'

'Dear lady,' entreated Elsa again. 'Do not, I beseech you, send me from you. I want no other happiness but to live and die beside you. Make me your waiting maid, or set me to any work you choose, but do not cast me forth into the world. It would have been better if you had left me with my stepmother, than first to have brought me to heaven and then send me back to a worse place.'

'Do not talk like that, dear child,' replied the lady; 'you do not know all that must be done to secure your happiness, however much it costs me. But it has to be. You are only a common mortal, who will have to die one day, and you cannot stay here any longer. Though we have the bodies of men, we are not men at all, though it is not easy for you to understand why. Some day or other you will find a husband who has been made expressly for you, and will live happily with him till death separates you. It will be very hard for me to part from you, but it has to be, and you must make up your mind to it.' Then she drew her golden comb gently through Elsa's hair, and bade her go to bed; but little sleep had the poor girl! Life seemed to stretch before her like a dark starless night.

Now let us look back a moment, and see what had been going on in Elsa's native village all these years, and how her double had fared. It is a well-known fact that a bad woman seldom becomes better as she grows older, and Elsa's stepmother was no exception to the rule; but as the figure that had taken the girl's place could feel no pain, the blows that were showered on her night and day made no difference. If the father ever tried to come to his daughter's help, his wife turned upon him, and things were rather worse than before.

One day the stepmother had given the girl a frightful beating, and then threatened to kill her outright. Mad with rage, she seized the figure by the throat with both hands, when out came a black snake from her mouth and stung the woman's tongue, and she fell dead without a sound. At night, when the husband came home, he found his wife lying dead upon the ground, her body all swollen and disfigured, but the girl was nowhere to be seen. His screams brought the neighbours from their cottages, but they were unable to explain how it had all come about. It was true, they said, that about mid-day they had heard a great noise, but as that was a matter of daily occurrence they did not think much of it. The rest of the day all was still, but no one had seen anything of the daughter. The body of the dead woman was then prepared for burial, and her tired husband went to bed, rejoicing in his heart that he had been delivered from the firebrand who had made his home unpleasant. On the table he saw a slice of bread lying, and, being hungry, he ate it before going to sleep.

In the morning he too was found dead, and as swollen as his wife, for the bread had been placed in the body of the figure by the old man who made it. A few days later he was placed in the grave beside his wife, but nothing more was ever heard of their daughter.

All night long after her talk with the lady Elsa had wept and wailed her hard fate in being cast out from her home which she loved.

Next morning, when she got up, the lady placed a gold seal ring on her finger, strung a little golden box on a ribbon, and placed it round her neck; then she called the old man, and, forcing back her tears, took leave of Elsa. The girl tried to speak, but before she could sob out her thanks the old man had touched her softly on the head three times with his silver staff. In an instant Elsa knew that she was turning into a bird: wings sprang from beneath her arms; her feet were the feet of eagles, with long claws; her nose curved itself into a sharp beak, and feathers covered her body. Then she soared high in the air, and floated up towards the clouds, as if she had really been hatched an eagle.

For several days she flew steadily south, resting from time to time when her wings grew tired, for hunger she never felt. And so it happened that one day she was flying over a dense forest, and below hounds were barking fiercely, because, not having wings themselves, she was out of their reach. Suddenly a sharp pain quivered through her body, and she fell to the ground, pierced by an arrow.

When Elsa recovered her senses, she found herself lying under a bush in her own proper form. What had befallen her, and how she got there, lay behind her like a bad dream.

As she was wondering what she should do next the king's son came riding by, and, seeing Elsa, sprang from his horse, and took her by the hand, sawing, 'Ah! it was a happy chance that brought me here this morning. Every night, for half a year, have I dreamed, dear lady, that I should one day find you in this wood. And although I have passed through it hundreds of times in vain, I have never given up hope. To-day I was going in search of a large eagle that I had shot, and instead of the eagle I have found--you.' Then he took Elsa on his horse, and rode with her to the town, where the old king received her graciously.

A few days later the wedding took place, and as Elsa was arranging the veil upon her hair fifty carts arrived laden with beautiful things which the lady of the Tontlawald had sent to Elsa. And after the king's death Elsa became queen, and when she was old she told this story. But that was the last that was ever heard of the Tontlawald.

[From Ehstnische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

THE FINEST LIAR IN THE WORLD

At the edge of a wood there lived an old man who had only one son, and one day he called the boy to him and said he wanted some corn ground, but the youth must be sure never to enter any mill where the miller was beardless.

The boy took the corn and set out, and before he had gone very far he saw a large mill in front of him, with a beardless man standing in the doorway.

'Good greeting, beardless one!' cried he.

'Good greeting, sonny,' replied the man.

'Could I grind something here?'

'Yes, certainly! I will finish what I am doing and then you can grind as long as you like.'

But suddenly the boy remembered what his father had told him, and bade farewell to the man, and went further down the river, till he came to another mill, not knowing that as soon as his back was turned the beardless man had picked up a bag of corn and run hastily to the same mill before him. When the boy reached the second mill, and saw a second beardless man sitting there, he did not stop, and walked on till he came to a third mill. But this time also the beardless man had been too clever for him, and had arrived first by another road. When it happened a fourth time the boy grew cross, and said to himself, 'It is no good going on; there seems to be a beardless man in every mill'; and he took his sack from his back, and made up his mind to grind his corn where he was.

The beardless man finished grinding his own corn, and when he had done he said to the boy, who was beginning to grind his, 'Suppose, sonny, we make a cake of what you have there.'

Now the boy had been rather uneasy when he recollected his father's words, but he thought to himself, 'What is done cannot be undone,' and answered, 'Very well, so let it be.'

Then the beardless one got up, threw the flour into the tub, and made a hole in the middle, telling the boy to fetch some water from the river in his two hands, to mix the cake. When the cake was ready for baking they put it on the fire, and covered it with hot ashes, till it was cooked through. Then they leaned it up against the wall, for it was too big to go into a cupboard, and the beardless one said to the boy:

'Look here, sonny: if we share this cake we shall neither of us have enough. Let us see who can tell the biggest lie, and the one who lies the best shall have the whole cake.'

The boy, not knowing what else to do, answered, 'All right; you begin.'

So the beardless one began to lie with all his might, and when he was tired of inventing new lies the boy said to him, 'My good fellow, if THAT is all you can do it is not much! Listen to me, and I will tell you a true story.

'In my youth, when I was an old man, we had a quantity of beehives. Every morning when I got up I counted them over, and it was quite easy to number the bees, but I never could reckon the hives properly. One day, as I was counting the bees, I discovered that my best bee was missing, and without losing a moment I saddled a cock and went out to look for him. I traced him as far as the shore, and knew that he had crossed the sea, and that I must follow. When I had reached the other side I found a man had harnessed my bee to a plough, and with his help was sowing millet seed.

' "That is my bee!" I shouted. "Where did you get him from?" ' "Brother," replied the man, "if he is yours, take him." And he not only gave me back my bee, but a sack of millet seed into the bargain, because he had made use of my bee. Then I put the bag on my shoulders, took the saddle from the cock, and placed it on the back of the bee, which I mounted, leading the cock by a string, so that he should have a rest. As we were flying home over the sea one of the strings that held the bag of millet broke in two, and the sack dropped straight into the ocean. It was quite lost, of course, and there was no use thinking about it, and by the time we were safe back again night had come. I then got down from my bee, and let him loose, that he might get his supper, gave the cock some hay, and went to sleep myself. But when I awoke with the sun what a scene met my eyes! During the night wolves had come and had eaten my bee. And honey lay ankle-deep in the valley and knee-deep on the hills. Then I began to consider how I could best collect some, to take home with me.

'Now it happened that I had with me a small hatchet, and this I took to the wood, hoping to meet some animal which I could kill, whose skin I might turn into a bag. As I entered the forest I saw two roe-deer hopping on one foot, so I slew them with a single blow, and made three bags from their skins, all of which I filled with honey and placed on the back of the cock. At length I reached home, where I was told that my father had just been born, and that I must go at once to fetch some holy water to sprinkle him with. As I went I turned over in my mind if there was no way for me to get back my millet seed, which had dropped into the sea, and when I arrived at the place with the holy water I saw the seed had fallen on fruitful soil, and was growing before my eyes. And more than that, it was even cut by an invisible hand, and made into a cake.

'So I took the cake as well as the holy water, and was flying back with them over the sea, when there fell a great rain, and the sea was swollen, and swept away my millet cake. Ah, how vexed I was at its loss when I was safe on earth again.

'Suddenly I remembered that my hair was very long. If I stood it touched the ground, although if I was sitting it only reached my ears. I seized a knife and cut off a large lock, which I plaited together, and when night came tied it into a knot, and prepared to use it for a pillow. But what was I to do for a fire? A tinder box I had, but no wood. Then it occurred to me that I had stuck a needle in my clothes, so I took the needle and split it in pieces, and lit it, then laid myself down by the fire and went to sleep. But ill-luck still pursued me. While I was sleeping a spark from the fire lighted on the hair, which was burnt up in a moment. In despair I threw myself on the ground, and instantly sank in it as far as my waist. I struggled to get out, but only fell in further; so I ran to the house, seized a spade, dug myself out, and took home the holy water. On the way I noticed that the ripe fields were full of reapers, and suddenly the air became so frightfully hot that the men dropped down in a faint. Then I called to them, "Why don't you bring out our mare, which is as tall as two days, and as broad as half a day, and make a shade for yourselves?" My father heard what I said and jumped quickly on the mare, and the reapers worked with a will in the shadow, while I snatched up a wooden pail to bring them some water to drink. When I got to the well everything was frozen hard, so in order to draw some water I had to take off my head and break the ice with it. As I drew near them, carrying the water, the reapers all cried out, "Why, what has become of your head?" I put up my hand and discovered that I really had no head, and that I must have left it in the well. I ran back to look for it, but found that meanwhile a fox which was passing by had pulled my head out of the water, and was tearing at my brains. I stole cautiously up to him, and gave him such a kick that he uttered a loud scream, and let fall a parchment on which was written, "The cake is mine, and the beardless one goes empty-handed." '

With these words the boy rose, took the cake, and went home, while the beardless one remained behind to swallow his disappointment.

[Volksmarchen der Serben.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

THE STORY OF THREE WONDERFUL BEGGARS

There once lived a merchant whose name was Mark, and whom people called 'Mark the Rich.' He was a very hard-hearted man, for he could not bear poor people, and if he caught sight of a beggar anywhere near his house, he would order the servants to drive him away, or would set the dogs at him.

One day three very poor old men came begging to the door, and just as he was going to let the fierce dogs loose on them, his little daughter, Anastasia, crept close up to him and said:

'Dear daddy, let the poor old men sleep here to-night, do--to please me.'

Her father could not bear to refuse her, and the three beggars were allowed to sleep in a loft, and at night, when everyone in the house was fast asleep, little Anastasia got up, climbed up to the loft, and peeped in.

The three old men stood in the middle of the loft, leaning on their sticks, with their long grey beards flowing down over their hands, and were talking together in low voices.

'What news is there?' asked the eldest.

'In the next village the peasant Ivan has just had his seventh son. What shall we name him, and what fortune shall we give him?' said the second.

The third whispered, 'Call him Vassili, and give him all the property of the hard-hearted man in whose loft we stand, and who wanted to drive us from his door.'

After a little more talk the three made themselves ready and crept softly away.

Anastasia, who had heard every word, ran straight to her father, and told him all.

Mark was very much surprised; he thought, and thought, and in the morning he drove to the next village to try and find out if such a child really had been born. He went first to the priest, and asked him about the children in his parish.

'Yesterday,' said the priest, 'a boy was born in the poorest house in the village. I named the unlucky little thing "Vassili." He is the seventh son, and the eldest is only seven years old, and they hardly have a mouthful amongst them all. Who can be got to stand godfather to such a little beggar boy?'

The merchant's heart beat fast, and his mind was full of bad thoughts about that poor little baby. He would be godfather himself, he said, and he ordered a fine christening feast; so the child was brought and christened, and Mark was very friendly to its father. After the ceremony was over he took Ivan aside and said:

'Look here, my friend, you are a poor man. How can you afford to bring up the boy? Give him to me and I'll make something of him, and I'll give you a present of a thousand crowns. Is that a bargain?'

Ivan scratched his head, and thought, and thought, and then he agreed. Mark counted out the money, wrapped the baby up in a fox skin, laid it in the sledge beside him, and drove back towards home. When he had driven some miles he drew up, carried the child to the edge of a steep precipice and threw it over, muttering, 'There, now try to take my property!'

Very soon after this some foreign merchants travelled along that same road on the way to see Mark and to pay the twelve thousand crowns which they owed him.

As they were passing near the precipice they heard a sound of crying, and on looking over they saw a little green meadow wedged in between two great heaps of snow, and on the meadow lay a baby amongst the flowers.

The merchants picked up the child, wrapped it up carefully, and drove on. When they saw Mark they told him what a strange thing they had found. Mark guessed at once that the child must be his godson, asked to see him, and said:

'That's a nice little fellow; I should like to keep him. If you will make him over to me, I will let you off your debt.'

The merchants were very pleased to make so good a bargain, left the child with Mark, and drove off.

At night Mark took the child, put it in a barrel, fastened the lid tight down, and threw it into the sea. The barrel floated away to a great distance, and at last it floated close up to a monastery. The monks were just spreading out their nets to dry on the shore, when they heard the sound of crying. It seemed to come from the barrel which was bobbing about near the water's edge. They drew it to land and opened it, and there was a little child! When the abbot heard the news, he decided to bring up the boy, and named him 'Vassili.'

The boy lived on with the monks, and grew up to be a clever, gentle, and handsome young man. No one could read, write, or sing better than he, and he did everything so well that the abbot made him wardrobe keeper.

Now, it happened about this time that the merchant, Mark, came to the monastery in the course of a journey. The monks were very polite to him and showed him their house and church and all they had. When he went into the church the choir was singing, and one voice was so clear and beautiful, that he asked who it belonged to. Then the abbot told him of the wonderful way in which Vassili had come to them, and Mark saw clearly that this must be his godson whom he had twice tried to kill.

He said to the abbot: 'I can't tell you how much I enjoy that young man's singing. If he could only come to me I would make him overseer of all my business. As you say, he is so good and clever. Do spare him to me. I will make his fortune, and will present your monastery with twenty thousand crowns.'

The abbot hesitated a good deal, but he consulted all the other monks, and at last they decided that they ought not to stand in the way of Vassili's good fortune.

Then Mark wrote a letter to his wife and gave it to Vassili to take to her, and this was what was in the letter: 'When the bearer of this arrives, take him into the soap factory, and when you pass near the great boiler, push him in. If you don't obey my orders I shall be very angry, for this young man is a bad fellow who is sure to ruin us all if he lives.'

Vassili had a good voyage, and on landing set off on foot for Mark's home. On the way he met three beggars, who asked him: 'Where are you going, Vassili?'

'I am going to the house of Mark the Merchant, and have a letter for his wife,' replied Vassili.

'Show us the letter.'

Vassili handed them the letter. They blew on it and gave it back to him, saying: 'Now go and give the letter to Mark's wife. You will not be forsaken.'

Vassili reached the house and gave the letter. When the mistress read it she could hardly believe her eyes and called for her daughter. In the letter was written, quite plainly: 'When you receive this letter, get ready for a wedding, and let the bearer be married next day to my daughter, Anastasia. If you don't obey my orders I shall be very angry.'

Anastasia saw the bearer of the letter and he pleased her very much. They dressed Vassili in fine clothes and next day he was married to Anastasia.

In due time, Mark returned from his travels. His wife, daughter, and son-in-law all went out to meet him. When Mark saw Vassili he flew into a terrible rage with his wife. 'How dared you marry my daughter without my consent?' he asked.

'I only carried out your orders,' said she. 'Here is your letter.'

Mark read it. It certainly was his handwriting, but by no means his wishes.

'Well,' thought he, 'you've escaped me three times, but I think I shall get the better of you now.' And he waited a month and was very kind and pleasant to his daughter and her husband.

At the end of that time he said to Vassili one day, 'I want you to go for me to my friend the Serpent King, in his beautiful country at the world's end. Twelve years ago he built a castle on some land of mine. I want you to ask for the rent for those twelve years and also to find out from him what has become of my twelve ships which sailed for his country three years ago.'

Vassili dared not disobey. He said good-bye to his young wife, who cried bitterly at parting, hung a bag of biscuits over his shoulders, and set out.

I really cannot tell you whether the journey was long or short. As he tramped along he suddenly heard a voice saying: 'Vassili! where are you going?'

Vassili looked about him, and, seeing no one, called out: 'Who spoke to me?'

'I did; this old wide-spreading oak. Tell me where you are going.'

'I am going to the Serpent King to receive twelve years' rent from him.'

'When the time comes, remember me and ask the king: "Rotten to the roots, half dead but still green, stands the old oak. Is it to stand much longer on the earth?" '

Vassili went on further. He came to a river and got into the ferryboat. The old ferryman asked: 'Are you going far, my friend?'

'I am going to the Serpent King.'

'Then think of me and say to the king: "For thirty years the ferryman has rowed to and fro. Will the tired old man have to row much longer?" '

'Very well,' said Vassili; 'I'll ask him.'

And he walked on. In time he came to a narrow strait of the sea and across it lay a great whale over whose back people walked and drove as if it had been a bridge or a road. As he stepped on it the whale said, 'Do tell me where you are going.'

'I am going to the Serpent King.'

And the whale begged: 'Think of me and say to the king: "The poor whale has been lying three years across the strait, and men and horses have nearly trampled his back into his ribs. Is he to lie there much longer?" '

'I will remember,' said Vassili, and he went on.

He walked, and walked, and walked, till he came to a great green meadow. In the meadow stood a large and splendid castle. Its white marble walls sparkled in the light, the roof was covered with mother o' pearl, which shone like a rainbow, and the sun glowed like fire on the crystal windows. Vassili walked in, and went from one room to another astonished at all the splendour he saw.

When he reached the last room of all, he found a beautiful girl sitting on a bed.

As soon as she saw him she said: 'Oh, Vassili, what brings you to this accursed place?'

Vassili told her why he had come, and all he had seen and heard on the way.

The girl said: 'You have not been sent here to collect rents, but for your own destruction, and that the serpent may devour you.'

She had not time to say more, when the whole castle shook, and a rustling, hissing, groaning sound was heard. The girl quickly pushed Vassili into a chest under the bed, locked it and whispered: 'Listen to what the serpent and I talk about.'

Then she rose up to receive the Serpent King.

The monster rushed into the room, and threw itself panting on the bed, crying: 'I've flown half over the world. I'm tired, VERY tired, and want to sleep--scratch my head.'

The beautiful girl sat down near him, stroking his hideous head, and said in a sweet coaxing voice: 'You know everything in the world. After you left, I had such a wonderful dream. Will you tell me what it means?'

'Out with it then, quick! What was it?'

'I dreamt I was walking on a wide road, and an oak tree said to me: "Ask the king this: Rotten at the roots, half dead, and yet green stands the old oak. Is it to stand much longer on the earth?" '

'It must stand till some one comes and pushes it down with his foot. Then it will fall, and under its roots will be found more gold and silver than even Mark the Rich has got.'

'Then I dreamt I came to a river, and the old ferryman said to me: "For thirty year's the ferryman has rowed to and fro. Will the tired old man have to row much longer?" '

'That depends on himself. If some one gets into the boat to be ferried across, the old man has only to push the boat off, and go his way without looking back. The man in the boat will then have to take his place.'

'And at last I dreamt that I was walking over a bridge made of a whale's back, and the living bridge spoke to me and said: "Here have I been stretched out these three years, and men and horses have trampled my back down into my ribs. Must I lie here much longer?" '

'He will have to lie there till he has thrown up the twelve ships of Mark the Rich which he swallowed. Then he may plunge back into the sea and heal his back.'

And the Serpent King closed his eyes, turned round on his other side, and began to snore so loud that the windows rattled.

In all haste the lovely girl helped Vassili out of the chest, and showed him part of his way back. He thanked her very politely, and hurried off.

When he reached the strait the whale asked: 'Have you thought of me?'

'Yes, as soon as I am on the other side I will tell you what you want to know.'

When he was on the other side Vassili said to the whale: 'Throw up those twelve ships of Mark's which you swallowed three years ago.'

The great fish heaved itself up and threw up all the twelve ships and their crews. Then he shook himself for joy, and plunged into the sea.

Vassili went on further till he reached the ferry, where the old man asked: 'Did you think of me?'

'Yes, and as soon as you have ferried me across I will tell you what you want to know.'

When they had crossed over, Vassili said: 'Let the next man who comes stay in the boat, but do you step on shore, push the boat off, and you will be free, and the other man must take your place.

Then Vassili went on further still, and soon came to the old oak tree, pushed it with his foot, and it fell over. There, at the roots, was more gold and silver than even Mark the Rich had.

And now the twelve ships which the whale had thrown up came sailing along and anchored close by. On the deck of the first ship stood the three beggars whom Vassili had met formerly, and they said: 'Heaven has blessed you, Vassili.' Then they vanished away and he never saw them again.

The sailors carried all the gold and silver into the ship, and then they set sail for home with Vassili on board.

Mark was more furious than ever. He had his horses harnessed and drove off himself to see the Serpent King and to complain of the way in which he had been betrayed. When he reached the river he sprang into the ferryboat. The ferryman, however, did not get in but pushed the boat off. . . .

Vassili led a good and happy life with his dear wife, and his kind mother-in-law lived with them. He helped the poor and fed and clothed the hungry and naked and all Mark's riches became his.

For many years Mark has been ferrying people across the river. His face is wrinkled, his hair and beard are snow white, and his eyes are dim; but still he rows on.

[From the Serbian.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

SCHIPPEITARO

It was the custom in old times that as soon as a Japanese boy reached manhood he should leave his home and roam through the land in search of adventures. Sometimes he would meet with a young man bent on the same business as himself, and then they would fight in a friendly manner, merely to prove which was the stronger, but on other occasions the enemy would turn out to be a robber, who had become the terror of the neighbourhood, and then the battle was in deadly earnest.

One day a youth started off from his native village, resolved never to come back till he had done some great deed that would make his name famous. But adventures did not seem very plentiful just then, and he wandered about for a long time without meeting either with fierce giants or distressed damsels. At last he saw in the distance a wild mountain, half covered with a dense forest, and thinking that this promised well at once took the road that led to it. The difficulties he met with--huge rocks to be climbed, deep rivers to be crossed, and thorny tracts to be avoided--only served to make his heart beat quicker, for he was really brave all through, and not merely when he could not help himself, like a great many people. But in spite of all his efforts he could not find his way out of the forest, and he began to think he should have to pass the night there. Once more he strained his eyes to see if there was no place in which he could take shelter, and this time he caught sight of a small chapel in a little clearing. He hastened quickly towards it, and curling himself up in a warm corner soon fell asleep.

Not a sound was heard through the whole forest for some hours, but at midnight there suddenly arose such a clamour that the young man, tired as he was, started broad awake in an instant. Peeping cautiously between the wooden pillars of the chapel, he saw a troop of hideous cats, dancing furiously, making the night horrible with their yells. The full moon lighted up the weird scene, and the young warrior gazed with astonishment, taking great care to keep still, lest he should be discovered. After some time he thought that in the midst of all their shrieks he could make out the words, 'Do not tell Schippeitaro! Keep it hidden and secret! Do not tell Schippeitaro!' Then, the midnight hour having passed, they all vanished, and the youth was left alone. Exhausted by all that had been going on round him, he flung himself on the ground and slept till the sun rose.

The moment he woke he felt very hungry, and began to think how he could get something to eat. So he got up and walked on, and before he had gone very far was lucky enough to find a little side-path, where he could trace men's footsteps. He followed the track, and by-and-by came on some scattered huts, beyond which lay a village. Delighted at this discovery, he was about to hasten to the village when he heard a woman's voice weeping and lamenting, and calling on the men to take pity on her and help her. The sound of her distress made him forget he was hungry, and he strode into the hut to find out for himself what was wrong. But the men whom he asked only shook their heads and told him it was not a matter in which he could give any help, for all this sorrow was caused by the Spirit of the Mountain, to whom every year they were bound to furnish a maiden for him to eat.

'To-morrow night,' said they, 'the horrible creature will come for his dinner, and the cries you have heard were uttered by the girl before you, upon whom the lot has fallen.'

And when the young man asked if the girl was carried off straight from her home, they answered no, but that a large cask was set in the forest chapel, and into this she was fastened.

As he listened to this story, the young man was filled with a great longing to rescue the maiden from her dreadful fate. The mention of the chapel set him thinking of the scene of the previous night, and he went over all the details again in his mind. 'Who is Schippeitaro?' he suddenly asked; 'can any of you tell me?'

'Schippeitaro is the great dog that belongs to the overseer of our prince,' said they; 'and he lives not far away.' And they began to laugh at the question, which seemed to them so odd and useless.

The young man did not laugh with them, but instead left the hut and went straight to the owner of the dog, whom he begged to lend him the animal just for one night. Schippeitaro's master was not at all willing to give him in charge to a man of whom he knew nothing, but in the end he consented, and the youth led the dog away, promising faithfully to return him next day to his master. He next hurried to the hut where the maiden lived, and entreated her parents to shut her up safely in a closet, after which he took Schippeitaro to the cask, and fastened him into it. In the evening he knew that the cask would be placed in the chapel, so he hid himself there and waited.

At midnight, when the full moon appeared above the top of the mountain, the cats again filled the chapel and shrieked and yelled and danced as before. But this time they had in their midst a huge black cat who seemed to be their king, and whom the young man guessed to be the Spirit of the Mountain. The monster looked eagerly about him, and his eyes sparkled with joy when he saw the cask. He bounded high into the air with delight and uttered cries of pleasure; then he drew near and undid the bolts.

But instead of fastening his teeth in the neck of a beautiful maiden, Schippeitaro's teeth were fastened in HIM, and the youth ran up and cut off his head with his sword. The other cats were so astonished at the turn things had taken that they forgot to run away, and the young man and Schippeitaro between them killed several more before they thought of escaping.

At sunrise the brave dog was taken back to his master, and from that time the mountain girls were safe, and every year a feast was held in memory of the young warrior and the dog Schippeitaro.

[Japanische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

THE THREE PRINCES AND THEIR BEASTS

(LITHUANIAN FAIRY TALE)

Once on a time there were three princes, who had a step-sister. One day they all set out hunting together. When they had gone some way through a thick wood they came on a great grey wolf with three cubs. Just as they were going to shoot, the wolf spoke and said, 'Do not shoot me, and I will give each of you one of my young ones. It will be a faithful friend to you.'

So the princes went on their way, and a little wolf followed each of them.

Soon after they came on a lioness with three cubs. And she too begged them not to shoot her, and she would give each of them a cub. And so it happened with a fox, a hare, a boar, and a bear, till each prince had quite a following of young beasts padding along behind him.

Towards evening they came to a clearing in the wood, where three birches grew at the crossing of three roads. The eldest prince took an arrow, and shot it into the trunk of one of the birch trees. Turning to his brothers he said:

'Let each of us mark one of these trees before we part on different ways. When any one of us comes back to this place, he must walk round the trees of the other two, and if he sees blood flowing from the mark in the tree he will know that that brother is dead, but if milk flows he will know that his brother is alive.'

So each of the princes did as the eldest brother had said, and when the three birches were marked by their arrows they turned to their step-sister and asked her with which of them she meant to live.

'With the eldest,' she answered. Then the brothers separated from each other, and each of them set out down a different road, followed by their beasts. And the step-sister went with the eldest prince.

After they had gone a little way along the road they came into a forest, and in one of the deepest glades they suddenly found themselves opposite a castle in which there lived a band of robbers. The prince walked up to the door and knocked. The moment it was opened the beasts rushed in, and each seized on a robber, killed him, and dragged the body down to the cellar. Now, one of the robbers was not really killed, only badly wounded, but he lay quite still and pretended to be dead like the others. Then the prince and his step-sister entered the castle and took up their abode in it.

The next morning the prince went out hunting. Before leaving he told his step-sister that she might go into every room in the house except into the cave where the dead robbers lay. But as soon as his back was turned she forgot what he had said, and having wandered through all the other rooms she went down to the cellar and opened the door. As soon as she looked in the robber who had only pretended to be dead sat up and said to her:

'Don't be afraid. Do what I tell you, and I will be your friend.

If you marry me you will be much happier with me than with your brother. But you must first go into the sitting-room and look in the cupboard. There you will find three bottles. In one of them there is a healing ointment which you must put on my chin to heal the wound; then if I drink the contents of the second bottle it will make me well, and the third bottle will make me stronger than I ever was before. Then, when your brother comes back from the wood with his beasts you must go to him and say, "Brother, you are very strong. If I were to fasten your thumbs behind your back with a stout silk cord, could you wrench yourself free?" And when you see that he cannot do it, call me.'

When the brother came home, the step-sister did as the robber had told her, and fastened her brother's thumbs behind his back. But with one wrench he set himself free, and said to her, 'Sister, that cord is not strong enough for me.'

The next day he went back to the wood with his beasts, and the robber told her that she must take a much stouter cord to bind his thumbs with. But again he freed himself, though not so easily as the first time, and he said to his sister:

'Even that cord is not strong enough.'

The third day, on his return from the wood he consented to have his strength tested for the last time. So she took a very strong cord of silk, which she had prepared by the robber's advice, and this time, though the prince pulled and tugged with all his might, he could not break the cord. So he called to her and said: 'Sister, this time the cord is so strong I cannot break it. Come and unfasten it for me.'

But instead of coming she called to the robber, who rushed into the room brandishing a knife, with which he prepared to attack the prince.

But the prince spoke and said:

'Have patience for one minute. I would like before I die to blow three blasts on my hunting horn--one in this room, one on the stairs, and one in the courtyard.'

So the robber consented, and the prince blew the horn. At the first blast, the fox, which was asleep in the cage in the courtyard, awoke, and knew that his master needed help. So he awoke the wolf by flicking him across the eyes with his brush. Then they awoke the lion, who sprang against the door of the cage with might and main, so that it fell in splinters on the ground, and the beasts were free. Rushing through the court to their master's aid, the fox gnawed the cord in two that bound the prince's thumbs behind his back, and the lion flung himself on the robber, and when he had killed him and torn him in pieces each of the beasts carried off a bone.

Then the prince turned to the step-sister and said:

'I will not kill you, but I will leave you here to repent.' And he fastened her with a chain to the wall, and put a great bowl in front of her and said, 'I will not see you again till you have filled this bowl with your tears.'

So saying, he called his beasts, and set out on his travels. When he had gone a little way he came to an inn. Everyone in the inn seemed so sad that he asked them what was the matter.

'Ah,' replied they, 'to-day our king's daughter is to die. She is to be handed over to a dreadful nine-headed dragon.'

Then the prince said: 'Why should she die? I am very strong, I will save her.'

And he set out to the sea-shore, where the dragon was to meet the princess. And as he waited with his beasts round him a great procession came along, accompanying the unfortunate princess: and when the shore was reached all the people left her, and returned sadly to their houses. But the prince remained, and soon he saw a movement in the water a long way off. As it came nearer, he knew what it was, for skimming swiftly along the waters came a monster dragon with nine heads. Then the prince took counsel with his beasts, and as the dragon approached the shore the fox drew his brush through the water and blinded the dragon by scattering the salt water in his eyes, while the bear and the lion threw up more water with their paws, so that the monster was bewildered and could see nothing. Then the prince rushed forward with his sword and killed the dragon, and the beasts tore the body in pieces.

Then the princess turned to the prince and thanked him for delivering her from the dragon, and she said to him:

'Step into this carriage with me, and we will drive back to my father's palace.' And she gave him a ring and half of her handkerchief. But on the way back the coachman and footman spoke to one another and said:

'Why should we drive this stranger back to the palace? Let us kill him, and then we can say to the king that we slew the dragon and saved the princess, and one of us shall marry her.'

So they killed the prince, and left him dead on the roadside. And the faithful beasts came round the dead body and wept, and wondered what they should do. Then suddenly the wolf had an idea, and he started off into the wood, where he found an ox, which he straightway killed. Then he called the fox, and told him to mount guard over the dead ox, and if a bird came past and tried to peck at the flesh he was to catch it and bring it to the lion. Soon after a crow flew past, and began to peck at the dead ox. In a moment the fox had caught it and brought it to the lion. Then the lion said to the crow:

'We will not kill you if you will promise to fly to the town where there are three wells of healing and to bring back water from them in your beak to make this dead man alive.'

So the crow flew away, and she filled her beak at the well of healing, the well of strength, and the well of swiftness, and she flew back to the dead prince and dropped the water from her beak upon his lips, and he was healed, and could sit up and walk.

Then he set out for the town, accompanied by his faithful beasts.

And when they reached the king's palace they found that preparations for a great feast were being made, for the princess was to marry the coachman.

So the prince walked into the palace, and went straight up to the coachman and said: 'What token have you got that you killed the dragon and won the hand of the princess? I have her token here--this ring and half her handkerchief.'

And when the king saw these tokens he knew that the prince was speaking the truth. So the coachman was bound in chains and thrown into prison, and the prince was married to the princess and rewarded with half the kingdom.

One day, soon after his marriage, the prince was walking through the woods in the evening, followed by his faithful beasts. Darkness came on, and he lost his way, and wandered about among the trees looking for the path that would lead him back to the palace. As he walked he saw the light of a fire, and making his way to it he found an old woman raking sticks and dried leaves together, and burning them in a glade of the wood.

As he was very tired, and the night was very dark, the prince determined not to wander further. So he asked the old woman if he might spend the night beside her fire.

'Of course you may,' she answered. 'But I am afraid of your beasts. Let me hit them with my rod, and then I shall not be afraid of them.'

'Very well,' said the prince, 'I don't mind'; and she stretched out her rod and hit the beasts, and in one moment they were turned into stone, and so was the prince.

Now soon after this the prince's youngest brother came to the cross-roads with the three birches, where the brothers had parted from each other when they set out on their wanderings. Remembering what they had agreed to do, he walked round the two trees, and when he saw that blood oozed from the cut in the eldest prince's tree he knew that his brother must be dead. So he set out, followed by his beasts, and came to the town over which his brother had ruled, and where the princess he had married lived. And when he came into the town all the people were in great sorrow because their prince had disappeared.

But when they saw his youngest brother, and the beasts following him, they thought it was their own prince, and they rejoiced greatly, and told him how they had sought him everywhere. Then they led him to the king, and he too thought that it was his son-in-law. But the princess knew that he was not her husband, and she begged him to go out into the woods with his beasts, and to look for his brother till he found him.

So the youngest prince set out to look for his brother, and he too lost his way in the wood and night overtook him. Then he came to the clearing among the trees, where the fire was burning and where the old woman was raking sticks and leaves into the flames. And he asked her if he might spend the night beside her fire, as it was too late and too dark to go back to the town.

And she answered: 'Certainly you may. But I am afraid of your beasts. May I give them a stroke with my rod, then I shall not be afraid of them.'

And he said she might, for he did not know that she was a witch. So she stretched out her rod, and in a moment the beasts and their master were turned into stone.

It happened soon after that the second brother returned from his wanderings and came to the cross-roads where the three birches grew. As he went round the trees he saw that blood poured from the cuts in the bark of two of the trees. Then he wept and said:

'Alas! both my brothers are dead.' And he too set out towards the town in which his brother had ruled, and his faithful beasts followed him. When he entered the town, all the people thought it was their own prince come back to them, and they gathered round him, as they had gathered round his youngest brother, and asked him where he had been and why he had not returned. And they led him to the king's palace, but the princess knew that he was not her husband. So when they were alone together she besought him to go and seek for his brother and bring him home. Calling his beasts round him, he set out and wandered through the woods. And he put his ear down to the earth, to listen if he could hear the sound of his brother's beasts. And it seemed to him as if he heard a faint sound far off, but he did not know from what direction it came. So he blew on his hunting horn and listened again. And again he heard the sound, and this time it seemed to come from the direction of a fire burning in the wood. So he went towards the fire, and there the old woman was raking sticks and leaves into the embers. And he asked her if he might spend the night beside her fire. But she told him she was afraid of his beasts, and he must first allow her to give each of them a stroke with her rod.

But he answered her:

'Certainly not. I am their master, and no one shall strike them but I myself. Give me the rod'; and he touched the fox with it, and in a moment it was turned into stone. Then he knew that the old woman was a witch, and he turned to her and said:

'Unless you restore my brothers and their beasts back to life at once, my lion will tear you in pieces.'

Then the witch was terrified, and taking a young oak tree she burnt it into white ashes, and sprinkled the ashes on the stones that stood around. And in a moment the two princes stood before their brother, and their beasts stood round them.

Then the three princes set off together to the town. And the king did not know which was his son-in-law, but the princess knew which was her husband, and there were great rejoicings throughout the land.

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

THE GOAT'S EARS OF THE EMPEROR TROJAN

Once upon a time there lived an emperor whose name was Trojan, and he had ears like a goat. Every morning, when he was shaved, he asked if the man saw anything odd about him, and as each fresh barber always replied that the emperor had goat's ears, he was at once ordered to be put to death.

Now after this state of things had lasted a good while, there was hardly a barber left in the town that could shave the emperor, and it came to be the turn of the Master of the Company of Barbers to go up to the palace. But, unluckily, at the very moment that he should have set out, the master fell suddenly ill, and told one of his apprentices that he must go in his stead.

When the youth was taken to the emperor's bedroom, he was asked why he had come and not his master. The young man replied that the master was ill, and there was no one but himself who could be trusted with the honour. The emperor was satisfied with the answer, and sat down, and let a sheet of fine linen be put round him. Directly the young barber began his work, he, like the rest, remarked the goat's ears of the emperor, but when he had finished and the emperor asked his usual question as to whether the youth had noticed anything odd about him, the young man replied calmly, 'No, nothing at all.' This pleased the emperor so much that he gave him twelve ducats, and said, 'Henceforth you shall come every day to shave me.'

So when the apprentice returned home, and the master inquired how he had got on with the emperor, the young man answered, 'Oh, very well, and he says I am to shave him every day, and he has given me these twelve ducats'; but he said nothing about the goat's ears of the emperor.

From this time the apprentice went regularly up to the palace, receiving each morning twelve ducats in payment. But after a while, his secret, which he had carefully kept, burnt within him, and he longed to tell it to somebody. His master saw there was something on his mind, and asked what it was. The youth replied that he had been tormenting himself for some months, and should never feel easy until some one shared his secret.

'Well, trust me,' said the master, 'I will keep it to myself; or, if you do not like to do that, confess it to your pastor, or go into some field outside the town and dig a hole, and, after you have dug it, kneel down and whisper your secret three times into the hole. Then put back the earth and come away.'

The apprentice thought that this seemed the best plan, and that very afternoon went to a meadow outside the town, dug a deep hole, then knelt and whispered to it three times over, 'The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears.' And as he said so a great burden seemed to roll off him, and he shovelled the earth carefully back and ran lightly home.

Weeks passed away, and there sprang up in the hole an elder tree which had three stems, all as straight as poplars. Some shepherds, tending their flocks near by, noticed the tree growing there, and one of them cut down a stem to make flutes of; but, directly he began to play, the flute would do nothing but sing: 'The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears.' Of course, it was not long before the whole town knew of this wonderful flute and what it said; and, at last, the news reached the emperor in his palace. He instantly sent for the apprentice and said to him:

'What have you been saying about me to all my people?'

The culprit tried to defend himself by saying that he had never told anyone what he had noticed; but the emperor, instead of listening, only drew his sword from its sheath, which so frightened the poor fellow that he confessed exactly what he had done, and how he had whispered the truth three times to the earth, and how in that very place an elder tree had sprung up, and flutes had been cut from it, which would only repeat the words he had said. Then the emperor commanded his coach to be made ready, and he took the youth with him, and they drove to the spot, for he wished to see for himself whether the young man's confession was true; but when they reached the place only one stem was left. So the emperor desired his attendants to cut him a flute from the remaining stem, and, when it was ready, he ordered his chamberlain to play on it. But no tune could the chamberlain play, though he was the best flute player about the court--nothing came but the words, 'The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears.' Then the emperor knew that even the earth gave up its secrets, and he granted the young man his life, but he never allowed him to be his barber any more.

[Volksmarchen der Serben.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

THE NINE PEA-HENS AND THE GOLDEN APPLES

Once upon a time there stood before the palace of an emperor a golden apple tree, which blossomed and bore fruit each night. But every morning the fruit was gone, and the boughs were bare of blossom, without anyone being able to discover who was the thief.

At last the emperor said to his eldest son, 'If only I could prevent those robbers from stealing my fruit, how happy I should be!'

And his son replied, 'I will sit up to-night and watch the tree, and I shall soon see who it is!'

So directly it grew dark the young man went and hid himself near the apple tree to begin his watch, but the apples had scarcely begun to ripen before he fell asleep, and when he awoke at sunrise the apples were gone. He felt very much ashamed of himself, and went with lagging feet to tell his father!

Of course, though the eldest son had failed, the second made sure that he would do better, and set out gaily at nightfall to watch the apple tree. But no sooner had he lain himself down than his eyes grew heavy, and when the sunbeams roused him from his slumbers there was not an apple left on the tree.

Next came the turn of the youngest son, who made himself a comfortable bed under the apple tree, and prepared himself to sleep. Towards midnight he awoke, and sat up to look at the tree. And behold! the apples were beginning to ripen, and lit up the whole palace with their brightness. At the same moment nine golden pea-hens flew swiftly through the air, and while eight alighted upon the boughs laden with fruit, the ninth fluttered to the ground where the prince lay, and instantly was changed into a beautiful maiden, more beautiful far than any lady in the emperor's court. The prince at once fell in love with her, and they talked together for some time, till the maiden said her sisters had finished plucking the apples, and now they must all go home again. The prince, however, begged her so hard to leave him a little of the fruit that the maiden gave him two apples, one for himself and one for his father. Then she changed herself back into a pea-hen, and the whole nine flew away.

As soon as the sun rose the prince entered the palace, and held out the apple to his father, who was rejoiced to see it, and praised his youngest son heartily for his cleverness. That evening the prince returned to the apple tree, and everything passed as before, and so it happened for several nights. At length the other brothers grew angry at seeing that he never came back without bringing two golden apples with him, and they went to consult an old witch, who promised to spy after him, and discover how he managed to get the apples. So, when the evening came, the old woman hid herself under the tree and waited for the prince. Before long he arrived and laid down on his bed, and was soon fast asleep. Towards midnight there was a rush of wings, and the eight pea-hens settled on the tree, while the ninth became a maiden, and ran to greet the prince. Then the witch stretched out her hand, and cut off a lock of the maiden's hair, and in an instant the girl sprang up, a pea-hen once more, spread her wings and flew away, while her sisters, who were busily stripping the boughs, flew after her.

When he had recovered from his surprise at the unexpected disappearance of the maiden, the prince exclaimed, 'What can be the matter?' and, looking about him, discovered the old witch hidden under the bed. He dragged her out, and in his fury called his guards, and ordered them to put her to death as fast as possible. But that did no good as far as the pea-hens went. They never came back any more, though the prince returned to the tree every night, and wept his heart out for his lost love. This went on for some time, till the prince could bear it no longer, and made up his mind he would search the world through for her. In vain his father tried to persuade him that his task was hopeless, and that other girls were to be found as beautiful as this one. The prince would listen to nothing, and, accompanied by only one servant, set out on his quest.

After travelling for many days, he arrived at length before a large gate, and through the bars he could see the streets of a town, and even the palace. The prince tried to pass in, but the way was barred by the keeper of the gate, who wanted to know who he was, why he was there, and how he had learnt the way, and he was not allowed to enter unless the empress herself came and gave him leave. A message was sent to her, and when she stood at the gate the prince thought he had lost his wits, for there was the maiden he had left his home to seek. And she hastened to him, and took his hand, and drew him into the palace. In a few days they were married, and the prince forgot his father and his brothers, and made up his mind that he would live and die in the castle.

One morning the empress told him that she was going to take a walk by herself, and that she would leave the keys of twelve cellars to his care. 'If you wish to enter the first eleven cellars,' said she, 'you can; but beware of even unlocking the door of the twelfth, or it will be the worse for you.'

The prince, who was left alone in the castle, soon got tired of being by himself, and began to look about for something to amuse him.

'What CAN there be in that twelfth cellar,' he thought to himself, 'which I must not see?' And he went downstairs and unlocked the doors, one after the other. When he got to the twelfth he paused, but his curiosity was too much for him, and in another instant the key was turned and the cellar lay open before him. It was empty, save for a large cask, bound with iron hoops, and out of the cask a voice was saying entreatingly, 'For goodness' sake, brother, fetch me some water; I am dying of thirst!'

The prince, who was very tender-hearted, brought some water at once, and pushed it through a hole in the barrel; and as he did so one of the iron hoops burst.

He was turning away, when a voice cried the second time, 'Brother, for pity's sake fetch me some water; I'm dying of thirst!'

So the prince went back, and brought some more water, and again a hoop sprang.

And for the third time the voice still called for water; and when water was given it the last hoop was rent, the cask fell in pieces, and out flew a dragon, who snatched up the empress just as she was returning from her walk, and carried her off. Some servants who saw what had happened came rushing to the prince, and the poor young man went nearly mad when he heard the result of his own folly, and could only cry out that he would follow the dragon to the ends of the earth, until he got his wife again.

For months and months he wandered about, first in this direction and then in that, without finding any traces of the dragon or his captive. At last he came to a stream, and as he stopped for a moment to look at it he noticed a little fish lying on the bank, beating its tail convulsively, in a vain effort to get back into the water.

'Oh, for pity's sake, my brother,' shrieked the little creature, 'help me, and put me back into the river, and I will repay you some day. Take one of my scales, and when you are in danger twist it in your fingers, and I will come!'

The prince picked up the fish and threw it into the water; then he took off one of its scales, as he had been told, and put it in his pocket, carefully wrapped in a cloth. Then he went on his way till, some miles further down the road, he found a fox caught in a trap.

'Oh! be a brother to me!' called the fox, 'and free me from this trap, and I will help you when you are in need. Pull out one of my hairs, and when you are in danger twist it in your fingers, and I will come.'

So the prince unfastened the trap, pulled out one of the fox's hairs, and continued his journey. And as he was going over the mountain he passed a wolf entangled in a snare, who begged to be set at liberty.

'Only deliver me from death,' he said, 'and you will never be sorry for it. Take a lock of my fur, and when you need me twist it in your fingers.' And the prince undid the snare and let the wolf go.

For a long time he walked on, without having any more adventures, till at length he met a man travelling on the same road.

'Oh, brother!' asked the prince, 'tell me, if you can, where the dragon-emperor lives?'

The man told him where he would find the palace, and how long it would take him to get there, and the prince thanked him, and followed his directions, till that same evening he reached the town where the dragon-emperor lived. When he entered the palace, to his great joy he found his wife sitting alone in a vast hall, and they began hastily to invent plans for her escape.

There was no time to waste, as the dragon might return directly, so they took two horses out of the stable, and rode away at lightning speed. Hardly were they out of sight of the palace than the dragon came home and found that his prisoner had flown. He sent at once for his talking horse, and said to him:

'Give me your advice; what shall I do--have my supper as usual, or set out in pursuit of them?'

'Eat your supper with a free mind first,' answered the horse, 'and follow them afterwards.'

So the dragon ate till it was past mid-day, and when he could eat no more he mounted his horse and set out after the fugitives. In a short time he had come up with them, and as he snatched the empress out of her saddle he said to the prince:

'This time I will forgive you, because you brought me the water when I was in the cask; but beware how you return here, or you will pay for it with your life.'

Half mad with grief, the prince rode sadly on a little further, hardly knowing what he was doing. Then he could bear it no longer and turned back to the palace, in spite of the dragon's threats. Again the empress was sitting alone, and once more they began to think of a scheme by which they could escape the dragon's power.

'Ask the dragon when he comes home,' said the prince, 'where he got that wonderful horse from, and then you can tell me, and I will try to find another like it.'

Then, fearing to meet his enemy, he stole out of the castle.

Soon after the dragon came home, and the empress sat down near him, and began to coax and flatter him into a good humour, and at last she said:

'But tell me about that wonderful horse you were riding yesterday. There cannot be another like it in the whole world. Where did you get it from?'

And he answered:

'The way I got it is a way which no one else can take. On the top of a high mountain dwells an old woman, who has in her stables twelve horses, each one more beautiful than the other. And in one corner is a thin, wretched-looking animal whom no one would glance at a second time, but he is in reality the best of the lot. He is twin brother to my own horse, and can fly as high as the clouds themselves. But no one can ever get this horse without first serving the old woman for three whole days. And besides the horses she has a foal and its mother, and the man who serves her must look after them for three whole days, and if he does not let them run away he will in the end get the choice of any horse as a present from the old woman. But if he fails to keep the foal and its mother safe on any one of the three nights his head will pay.'

The next day the prince watched till the dragon left the house, and then he crept in to the empress, who told him all she had learnt from her gaoler. The prince at once determined to seek the old woman on the top of the mountain, and lost no time in setting out. It was a long and steep climb, but at last he found her, and with a low bow he began:

'Good greeting to you, little mother!'

'Good greeting to you, my son! What are you doing here?'

'I wish to become your servant,' answered he.

'So you shall,' said the old woman. 'If you can take care of my mare for three days I will give you a horse for wages, but if you let her stray you will lose your head'; and as she spoke she led him into a courtyard surrounded with palings, and on every post a man's head was stuck. One post only was empty, and as they passed it cried out:

'Woman, give me the head I am waiting for!'

The old woman made no answer, but turned to the prince and said:

'Look! all those men took service with me, on the same conditions as you, but not one was able to guard the mare!'

But the prince did not waver, and declared he would abide by his words.

When evening came he led the mare out of the stable and mounted her, and the colt ran behind. He managed to keep his seat for a long time, in spite of all her efforts to throw him, but at length he grew so weary that he fell fast asleep, and when he woke he found himself sitting on a log, with the halter in his hands. He jumped up in terror, but the mare was nowhere to be seen, and he started with a beating heart in search of her. He had gone some way without a single trace to guide him, when he came to a little river. The sight of the water brought back to his mind the fish whom he had saved from death, and he hastily drew the scale from his pocket. It had hardly touched his fingers when the fish appeared in the stream beside him.

'What is it, my brother?' asked the fish anxiously.

'The old woman's mare strayed last night, and I don't know where to look for her.'

'Oh, I can tell you that: she has changed herself into a big fish, and her foal into a little one. But strike the water with the halter and say, "Come here, O mare of the mountain witch!" and she will come.'

The prince did as he was bid, and the mare and her foal stood before him. Then he put the halter round her neck, and rode her home, the foal always trotting behind them. The old woman was at the door to receive them, and gave the prince some food while she led the mare back to the stable.

'You should have gone among the fishes,' cried the old woman, striking the animal with a stick.

'I did go among the fishes,' replied the mare; 'but they are no friends of mine, for they betrayed me at once.'

'Well, go among the foxes this time,' said she, and returned to the house, not knowing that the prince had overheard her.

So when it began to grow dark the prince mounted the mare for the second time and rode into the meadows, and the foal trotted behind its mother. Again he managed to stick on till midnight: then a sleep overtook him that he could not battle against, and when he woke up he found himself, as before, sitting on the log, with the halter in his hands. He gave a shriek of dismay, and sprang up in search of the wanderers. As he went he suddenly remembered the words that the old woman had said to the mare, and he drew out the fox hair and twisted it in his fingers.

'What is it, my brother?' asked the fox, who instantly appeared before him.

'The old witch's mare has run away from me, and I do not know where to look for her.'

'She is with us,' replied the fox, 'and has changed herself into a big fox, and her foal into a little one, but strike the ground with a halter and say, "Come here, O mare of the mountain witch!"'

The prince did so, and in a moment the fox became a mare and stood before him, with the little foal at her heels. He mounted and rode back, and the old woman placed food on the table, and led the mare back to the stable.

'You should have gone to the foxes, as I told you,' said she, striking the mare with a stick.

'I did go to the foxes,' replied the mare, 'but they are no friends of mine and betrayed me.'

'Well, this time you had better go to the wolves,' said she, not knowing that the prince had heard all she had been saying.

The third night the prince mounted the mare and rode her out to the meadows, with the foal trotting after. He tried hard to keep awake, but it was of no use, and in the morning there he was again on the log, grasping the halter. He started to his feet, and then stopped, for he remembered what the old woman had said, and pulled out the wolf's grey lock.

'What is it, my brother?' asked the wolf as it stood before him.

'The old witch's mare has run away from me,' replied the prince, 'and I don't know where to find her.'

'Oh, she is with us,' answered the wolf, 'and she has changed herself into a she-wolf, and the foal into a cub; but strike the earth here with the halter, and cry, "Come to me, O mare of the mountain witch." '

The prince did as he was bid, and as the hair touched his fingers the wolf changed back into a mare, with the foal beside her. And when he had mounted and ridden her home the old woman was on the steps to receive them, and she set some food before the prince, but led the mare back to her stable.

'You should have gone among the wolves,' said she, striking her with a stick.

'So I did,' replied the mare, 'but they are no friends of mine and betrayed me.'

The old woman made no answer, and left the stable, but the prince was at the door waiting for her.

'I have served you well,' said he, 'and now for my reward.'

'What I promised that will I perform,' answered she. 'Choose one of these twelve horses; you can have which you like.'

'Give me, instead, that half-starved creature in the corner,' asked the prince. 'I prefer him to all those beautiful animals.'

'You can't really mean what you say?' replied the woman.

'Yes, I do,' said the prince, and the old woman was forced to let him have his way. So he took leave of her, and put the halter round his horse's neck and led him into the forest, where he rubbed him down till his skin was shining like gold. Then he mounted, and they flew straight through the air to the dragon's palace. The empress had been looking for him night and day, and stole out to meet him, and he swung her on to his saddle, and the horse flew off again.

Not long after the dragon came home, and when he found the empress was missing he said to his horse, 'What shall we do? Shall we eat and drink, or shall we follow the runaways?' and the horse replied, 'Whether you eat or don't eat, drink or don't drink, follow them or stay at home, matters nothing now, for you can never, never catch them.'

But the dragon made no reply to the horse's words, but sprang on his back and set off in chase of the fugitives. And when they saw him coming they were frightened, and urged the prince's horse faster and faster, till he said, 'Fear nothing; no harm can happen to us,' and their hearts grew calm, for they trusted his wisdom.

Soon the dragon's horse was heard panting behind, and he cried out, 'Oh, my brother, do not go so fast! I shall sink to the earth if I try to keep up with you.'

And the prince's horse answered, 'Why do you serve a monster like that? Kick him off, and let him break in pieces on the ground, and come and join us.'

And the dragon's horse plunged and reared, and the dragon fell on a rock, which broke him in pieces. Then the empress mounted his horse, and rode back with her husband to her kingdom, over which they ruled for many years.

[Volksmarchen der Serben.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

THE LUTE PLAYER

Once upon a time there was a king and queen who lived happily and comfortably together. They were very fond of each other and had nothing to worry them, but at last the king grew restless. He longed to go out into the world, to try his strength in battle against some enemy and to win all kinds of honour and glory.

So he called his army together and gave orders to start for a distant country where a heathen king ruled who ill-treated or tormented everyone he could lay his hands on. The king then gave his parting orders and wise advice to his ministers, took a tender leave of his wife, and set off with his army across the seas.

I cannot say whether the voyage was short or long; but at last he reached the country of the heathen king and marched on, defeating all who came in his way. But this did not last long, for in time he came to a mountain pass, where a large army was waiting for him, who put his soldiers to flight, and took the king himself prisoner.

He was carried off to the prison where the heathen king kept his captives, and now our poor friend had a very bad time indeed. All night long the prisoners were chained up, and in the morning they were yoked together like oxen and had to plough the land till it grew dark.

This state of things went on for three years before the king found any means of sending news of himself to his dear queen, but at last he contrived to send this letter: 'Sell all our castles and palaces, and put all our treasures in pawn and come and deliver me out of this horrible prison.'

The queen received the letter, read it, and wept bitterly as she said to herself, 'How can I deliver my dearest husband? If I go myself and the heathen king sees me he will just take me to be one of his wives. If I were to send one of the ministers!--but I hardly know if I can depend on them.'

She thought, and thought, and at last an idea came into her head.

She cut off all her beautiful long brown hair and dressed herself in boy's clothes. Then she took her lute and, without saying anything to anyone, she went forth into the wide world.

She travelled through many lands and saw many cities, and went through many hardships before she got to the town where the heathen king lived. When she got there she walked all round the palace and at the back she saw the prison. Then she went into the great court in front of the palace, and taking her lute in her hand, she began to play so beautifully that one felt as though one could never hear enough.

After she had played for some time she began to sing, and her voice was sweeter than the lark's:

'I come from my own country far Into this foreign land, Of all I own I take alone My sweet lute in my hand.

'Oh! who will thank me for my song, Reward my simple lay? Like lover's sighs it still shall rise To greet thee day by day.

'I sing of blooming flowers Made sweet by sun and rain; Of all the bliss of love's first kiss, And parting's cruel pain.

'Of the sad captive's longing Within his prison wall, Of hearts that sigh when none are nigh To answer to their call.

'My song begs for your pity, And gifts from out your store, And as I play my gentle lay I linger near your door.

'And if you hear my singing Within your palace, sire, Oh! give, I pray, this happy day, To me my heart's desire.'

No sooner had the heathen king heard this touching song sung by such a lovely voice, than he had the singer brought before him.

'Welcome, O lute player,' said he. 'Where do you come from?'

'My country, sire, is far away across many seas. For years I have been wandering about the world and gaining my living by my music.'

'Stay here then a few days, and when you wish to leave I will give you what you ask for in your song--your heart's desire.'

So the lute player stayed on in the palace and sang and played almost all day long to the king, who could never tire of listening and almost forgot to eat or drink or to torment people.

He cared for nothing but the music, and nodded his head as he declared, 'That's something like playing and singing. It makes me feel as if some gentle hand had lifted every care and sorrow from me.'

After three days the lute player came to take leave of the king.

'Well,' said the king, 'what do you desire as your reward?'

'Sire, give me one of your prisoners. You have so many in your prison, and I should be glad of a companion on my journeys. When I hear his happy voice as I travel along I shall think of you and thank you.'

'Come along then,' said the king, 'choose whom you will.' And he took the lute player through the prison himself.

The queen walked about amongst the prisoners, and at length she picked out her husband and took him with her on her journey. They were long on their way, but he never found out who she was, and she led him nearer and nearer to his own country.

When they reached the frontier the prisoner said:

'Let me go now, kind lad; I am no common prisoner, but the king of this country. Let me go free and ask what you will as your reward.'

'Do not speak of reward,' answered the lute player. 'Go in peace.'

'Then come with me, dear boy, and be my guest.'

'When the proper time comes I shall be at your palace,' was the reply, and so they parted.

The queen took a short way home, got there before the king and changed her dress.

An hour later all the people in the palace were running to and fro and crying out: 'Our king has come back! Our king has returned to us.'

The king greeted every one very kindly, but he would not so much as look at the queen.

Then he called all his council and ministers together and said to them:

'See what sort of a wife I have. Here she is falling on my neck, but when I was pining in prison and sent her word of it she did nothing to help me.'

And his council answered with one voice, 'Sire, when news was brought from you the queen disappeared and no one knew where she went. She only returned to-day.'

Then the king was very angry and cried, 'Judge my faithless wife!

Never would you have seen your king again, if a young lute player had not delivered him. I shall remember him with love and gratitude as long as I live.'

Whilst the king was sitting with his council, the queen found time to disguise herself. She took her lute, and slipping into the court in front of the palace she sang, clear and sweet:

'I sing the captive's longing Within his prison wall, Of hearts that sigh when none are nigh To answer to their call.

'My song begs for your pity, And gifts from out your store, And as I play my gentle lay I linger near your door.

'And if you hear my singing Within your palace, sire, Oh! give, I pray, this happy day, To me my heart's desire.'

As soon as the king heard this song he ran out to meet the lute player, took him by the hand and led him into the palace.

'Here,' he cried, 'is the boy who released me from my prison. And now, my true friend, I will indeed give you your heart's desire.'

'I am sure you will not be less generous than the heathen king was, sire. I ask of you what I asked and obtained from him. But this time I don't mean to give up what I get. I want YOU--yourself!'

And as she spoke she threw off her long cloak and everyone saw it was the queen.

Who can tell how happy the king was? In the joy of his heart he gave a great feast to the whole world, and the whole world came and rejoiced with him for a whole week.

I was there too, and ate and drank many good things. I sha'n't forget that feast as long as I live.

[From the Russian.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

THE GRATEFUL PRINCE

Once upon a time the king of the Goldland lost himself in a forest, and try as he would he could not find the way out. As he was wandering down one path which had looked at first more hopeful than the rest he saw a man coming towards him.

'What are you doing here, friend?' asked the stranger; 'darkness is falling fast, and soon the wild beasts will come from their lairs to seek for food.'

'I have lost myself,' answered the king, 'and am trying to get home.'

'Then promise me that you will give me the first thing that comes out of your house, and I will show you the way,' said the stranger.

The king did not answer directly, but after awhile he spoke: 'Why should I give away my BEST sporting dog. I can surely find my way out of the forest as well as this man.'

So the stranger left him, but the king followed path after path for three whole days, with no better success than before. He was almost in despair, when the stranger suddenly appeared, blocking up his way.

'Promise you will give me the first thing that comes out of your house to meet you?'

But still the king was stiff-necked and would promise nothing.

For some days longer he wandered up and down the forest, trying first one path, then another, but his courage at last gave way, and he sank wearily on the ground under a tree, feeling sure his last hour had come. Then for the third time the stranger stood before the king, and said:

'Why are you such a fool? What can a dog be to you, that you should give your life for him like this? Just promise me the reward I want, and I will guide you out of the forest.'

'Well, my life is worth more than a thousand dogs,' answered the king, 'the welfare of my kingdom depends on me. I accept your terms, so take me to my palace.' Scarcely had he uttered the words than he found himself at the edge of the wood, with the palace in the dim distance. He made all the haste he could, and just as he reached the great gates out came the nurse with the royal baby, who stretched out his arms to his father. The king shrank back, and ordered the nurse to take the baby away at once.

Then his great boarhound bounded up to him, but his caresses were only answered by a violent push.

When the king's anger was spent, and he was able to think what was best to be done, he exchanged his baby, a beautiful boy, for the daughter of a peasant, and the prince lived roughly as the son of poor people, while the little girl slept in a golden cradle, under silken sheets. At the end of a year, the stranger arrived to claim his property, and took away the little girl, believing her to be the true child of the king. The king was so delighted with the success of his plan that he ordered a great feast to be got ready, and gave splendid presents to the foster parents of his son, so that he might lack nothing. But he did not dare to bring back the baby, lest the trick should be found out. The peasants were quite contented with this arrangement, which gave them food and money in abundance.

By-and-by the boy grew big and tall, and seemed to lead a happy life in the house of his foster parents. But a shadow hung over him which really poisoned most of his pleasure, and that was the thought of the poor innocent girl who had suffered in his stead, for his foster father had told him in secret, that he was the king's son. And the prince determined that when he grew old enough he would travel all over the world, and never rest till he had set her free. To become king at the cost of a maiden's life was too heavy a price to pay. So one day he put on the dress of a farm servant, threw a sack of peas on his back, and marched straight into the forest where eighteen years before his father had lost himself. After he had walked some way he began to cry loudly: 'Oh, how unlucky I am! Where can I be? Is there no one to show me the way out of the wood?'

Then appeared a strange man with a long grey beard, with a leather bag hanging from his girdle. He nodded cheerfully to the prince, and said: 'I know this place well, and can lead you out of it, if you will promise me a good reward.'

'What can a beggar such as I promise you?' answered the prince. 'I have nothing to give you save my life; even the coat on my back belongs to my master, whom I serve for my keep and my clothes.'

The stranger looked at the sack of peas, and said, 'But you must possess something; you are carrying this sack, which seems to be very heavy.'

'It is full of peas,' was the reply. 'My old aunt died last night, without leaving money enough to buy peas to give the watchers, as is the custom throughout the country. I have borrowed these peas from my master, and thought to take a short cut across the forest; but I have lost myself, as you see.'

'Then you are an orphan?' asked the stranger. 'Why should you not enter my service? I want a sharp fellow in the house, and you please me.'

'Why not, indeed, if we can strike a bargain?' said the other. 'I was born a peasant, and strange bread is always bitter, so it is the same to me whom I serve! What wages will you give me?'

'Every day fresh food, meat twice a week, butter and vegetables, your summer and winter clothes, and a portion of land for your own use.'

'I shall be satisfied with that,' said the youth. 'Somebody else will have to bury my aunt. I will go with you!'

Now this bargain seemed to please the old fellow so much that he spun round like a top, and sang so loud that the whole wood rang with his voice. Then he set out with his companion, and chattered so fast that he never noticed that his new servant kept dropping peas out of the sack. At night they slept under a fig tree, and when the sun rose started on their way. About noon they came to a large stone, and here the old fellow stopped, looked carefully round, gave a sharp whistle, and stamped three times on the ground with his left foot. Suddenly there appeared under the stone a secret door, which led to what looked like the mouth of a cave. The old fellow seized the youth by the arm, and said roughly, 'Follow me!'

Thick darkness surrounded them, yet it seemed to the prince as if their path led into still deeper depths. After a long while he thought he saw a glimmer of light, but the light was neither that of the sun nor of the moon. He looked eagerly at it, but found it was only a kind of pale cloud, which was all the light this strange underworld could boast. Earth and water, trees and plants, birds and beasts, each was different from those he had seen before; but what most struck terror into his heart was the absolute stillness that reigned everywhere. Not a rustle or a sound could be heard. Here and there he noticed a bird sitting on a branch, with head erect and swelling throat, but his ear caught nothing. The dogs opened their mouths as if to bark, the toiling oxen seemed about to bellow, but neither bark nor bellow reached the prince. The water flowed noiselessly over the pebbles, the wind bowed the tops of the trees, flies and chafers darted about, without breaking the silence. The old greybeard uttered no word, and when his companion tried to ask him the meaning of it all he felt that his voice died in his throat.

How long this fearful stillness lasted I do not know, but the prince gradually felt his heart turning to ice, his hair stood up like bristles, and a cold chill was creeping down his spine, when at last--oh, ecstasy!--a faint noise broke on his straining ears, and this life of shadows suddenly became real. It sounded as if a troop of horses were ploughing their way over a moor.

Then the greybeard opened his mouth, and said: 'The kettle is boiling; we are expected at home.'

They walked on a little further, till the prince thought he heard the grinding of a saw-mill, as if dozens of saws were working together, but his guide observed, 'The grandmother is sleeping soundly; listen how she snores.'

When they had climbed a hill which lay before them the prince saw in the distance the house of his master, but it was so surrounded with buildings of all kinds that the place looked more like a village or even a small town. They reached it at last, and found an empty kennel standing in front of the gate. 'Creep inside this,' said the master, 'and wait while I go in and see my grandmother. Like all very old people, she is very obstinate, and cannot bear fresh faces about her.'

The prince crept tremblingly into the kennel, and began to regret the daring which had brought him into this scrape.

By-and-by the master came back, and called him from his hiding-place. Something had put out his temper, for with a frown he said, 'Watch carefully our ways in the house, and beware of making any mistake, or it will go ill with you. Keep your eyes and ears open, and your mouth shut, obey without questions. Be grateful if you will, but never speak unless you are spoken to.'

When the prince stepped over the threshold he caught sight of a maiden of wonderful beauty, with brown eyes and fair curly hair. 'Well!' the young man said to himself, 'if the old fellow has many daughters like that I should not mind being his son-in-law. This one is just what I admire'; and he watched her lay the table, bring in the food, and take her seat by the fire as if she had never noticed that a strange man was present. Then she took out a needle and thread, and began to darn her stockings. The master sat at table alone, and invited neither his new servant nor the maid to eat with him. Neither was the old grandmother anywhere to be seen. His appetite was tremendous: he soon cleared all the dishes, and ate enough to satisfy a dozen men. When at last he could eat no more he said to the girl, 'Now you can pick up the pieces, and take what is left in the iron pot for your own dinner, but give the bones to the dog.'

The prince did not at all like the idea of dining off scraps, which he helped the girl to pick up, but, after all, he found that there was plenty to eat, and that the food was very good. During the meal he stole many glances at the maiden, and would even have spoken to her, but she gave him no encouragement. Every time he opened his mouth for the purpose she looked at him sternly, as if to say, 'Silence,' so he could only let his eyes speak for him. Besides, the master was stretched on a bench by the oven after his huge meal, and would have heard everything.

After supper that night, the old man said to the prince, 'For two days you may rest from the fatigues of the journey, and look about the house. But the day after to-morrow you must come with me, and I will point out the work you have to do. The maid will show you where you are to sleep.'

The prince thought, from this, he had leave to speak, but his master turned on him with a face of thunder and exclaimed:

'You dog of a servant! If you disobey the laws of the house you will soon find yourself a head shorter! Hold your tongue, and leave me in peace.'

The girl made a sign to him to follow her, and, throwing open a door, nodded to him to go in. He would have lingered a moment, for he thought she looked sad, but dared not do so, for fear of the old man's anger.

'It is impossible that she can be his daughter!' he said to himself, 'for she has a kind heart. I am quite sure she must be the same girl who was brought here instead of me, so I am bound to risk my head in this mad adventure.' He got into bed, but it was long before he fell asleep, and even then his dreams gave him no rest. He seemed to be surrounded by dangers, and it was only the power of the maiden who helped him through it all.

When he woke his first thoughts were for the girl, whom he found hard at work. He drew water from the well and carried it to the house for her, kindled the fire under the iron pot, and, in fact, did everything that came into his head that could be of any use to her. In the afternoon he went out, in order to learn something of his new home, and wondered greatly not to come across the old grandmother. In his rambles he came to the farmyard, where a beautiful white horse had a stall to itself; in another was a black cow with two white-faced calves, while the clucking of geese, ducks, and hens reached him from a distance.

Breakfast, dinner, and supper were as savoury as before, and the prince would have been quite content with his quarters had it not been for the difficulty of keeping silence in the presence of the maiden. On the evening of the second day he went, as he had been told, to receive his orders for the following morning.

'I am going to set you something very easy to do to-morrow,' said the old man when his servant entered. 'Take this scythe and cut as much grass as the white horse will want for its day's feed, and clean out its stall. If I come back and find the manger empty it will go ill with you. So beware!'

The prince left the room, rejoicing in his heart, and saying to himself, 'Well, I shall soon get through that! If I have never yet handled either the plough or the scythe, at least I have often watched the country people work them, and know how easy it is.'

He was just going to open his door, when the maiden glided softly past and whispered in his ear: 'What task has he set you?'

'For to-morrow,' answered the prince, 'it is really nothing at all! Just to cut hay for the horse, and to clean out his stall!'

'Oh, luckless being!' sighed the girl; 'how will you ever get through with it. The white horse, who is our master's grandmother, is always hungry: it takes twenty men always mowing to keep it in food for one day, and another twenty to clean out its stall. How, then, do you expect to do it all by yourself? But listen to me, and do what I tell you. It is your only chance. When you have filled the manger as full as it will hold you must weave a strong plait of the rushes which grow among the meadow hay, and cut a thick peg of stout wood, and be sure that the horse sees what you are doing. Then it will ask you what it is for, and you will say, 'With this plait I intend to bind up your mouth so that you cannot eat any more, and with this peg I am going to keep you still in one spot, so that you cannot scatter your corn and water all over the place!' After these words the maiden went away as softly as she had come.

Early the next morning he set to work. His scythe danced through the grass much more easily than he had hoped, and soon he had enough to fill the manger. He put it in the crib, and returned with a second supply, when to his horror he found the crib empty.

Then he knew that without the maiden's advice he would certainly have been lost, and began to put it into practice. He took out the rushes which had somehow got mixed up with the hay, and plaited them quickly.

'My son, what are you doing?' asked the horse wonderingly.

'Oh, nothing!' replied he. 'Just weaving a chin strap to bind your jaws together, in case you might wish to eat any more!'

The white horse sighed deeply when it heard this, and made up its mind to be content with what it had eaten.

The youth next began to clean out the stall, and the horse knew it had found a master; and by mid-day there was still fodder in the manger, and the place was as clean as a new pin. He had barely finished when in walked the old man, who stood astonished at the door.

'Is it really you who have been clever enough to do that?' he asked. 'Or has some one else given you a hint?'

'Oh, I have had no help,' replied the prince, 'except what my poor weak head could give me.'

The old man frowned, and went away, and the prince rejoiced that everything had turned out so well.

In the evening his master said, 'To-morrow I have no special task to set you, but as the girl has a great deal to do in the house you must milk the black cow for her. But take care you milk her dry, or it may be the worse for you.'

'Well,' thought the prince as he went away, 'unless there is some trick behind, this does not sound very hard. I have never milked a cow before, but I have good strong fingers.'

He was very sleepy, and was just going toward his room, when the maiden came to him and asked: 'What is your task to-morrow?'

'I am to help you,' he answered, 'and have nothing to do all day, except to milk the black cow dry.'

'Oh, you are unlucky,' cried she. 'If you were to try from morning till night you couldn't do it. There is only one way of escaping the danger, and that is, when you go to milk her, take with you a pan of burning coals and a pair of tongs. Place the pan on the floor of the stall, and the tongs on the fire, and blow with all your might, till the coals burn brightly. The black cow will ask you what is the meaning of all this, and you must answer what I will whisper to you.' And she stood on tip-toe and whispered something in his ear, and then went away.

The dawn had scarcely reddened the sky when the prince jumped out of bed, and, with the pan of coals in one hand and the milk pail in the other, went straight to the cow's stall, and began to do exactly as the maiden had told him the evening before.

The black cow watched him with surprise for some time, and then said: 'What are you doing, sonny?'

'Oh, nothing,' answered he; 'I am only heating a pair of tongs in case you may not feel inclined to give as much milk as I want.'

The cow sighed deeply, and looked at the milkman with fear, but he took no notice, and milked briskly into the pail, till the cow ran dry.

Just at that moment the old man entered the stable, and sat down to milk the cow himself, but not a drop of milk could he get. 'Have you really managed it all yourself, or did somebody help you?'

'I have nobody to help me,' answered the prince, 'but my own poor head.' The old man got up from his seat and went away.

That night, when the prince went to his master to hear what his next day's work was to be, the old man said: 'I have a little hay-stack out in the meadow which must be brought in to dry. To-morrow you will have to stack it all in the shed, and, as you value your life, be careful not to leave the smallest strand behind.' The prince was overjoyed to hear he had nothing worse to do.

'To carry a little hay-rick requires no great skill,' thought he, 'and it will give me no trouble, for the horse will have to draw it in. I am certainly not going to spare the old grandmother.'

By-and-by the maiden stole up to ask what task he had for the next day.

The young man laughed, and said: 'It appears that I have got to learn all kinds of farmer's work. To-morrow I have to carry a hay-rick, and leave not a stalk in the meadow, and that is my whole day's work!'

'Oh, you unlucky creature!' cried she; 'and how do you think you are to do it. If you had all the men in the world to help you, you could not clear off this one little hay-rick in a week. The instant you have thrown down the hay at the top, it will take root again from below. But listen to what I say. You must steal out at daybreak to-morrow and bring out the white horse and some good strong ropes. Then get on the hay-stack, put the ropes round it, and harness the horse to the ropes. When you are ready, climb up the hay-stack and begin to count one, two, three.

The horse will ask you what you are counting, and you must be sure to answer what I whisper to you.'

So the maiden whispered something in his ear, and left the room. And the prince knew nothing better to do than to get into bed.

He slept soundly, and it was still almost dark when he got up and proceeded to carry out the instructions given him by the girl. First he chose some stout ropes, and then he led the horse out of the stable and rode it to the hay-stack, which was made up of fifty cartloads, so that it could hardly be called 'a little one.' The prince did all that the maiden had told him, and when at last he was seated on top of the rick, and had counted up to twenty, he heard the horse ask in amazement: 'What are you counting up there, my son?'

'Oh, nothing,' said he, 'I was just amusing myself with counting the packs of wolves in the forest, but there are really so many of them that I don't think I should ever be done.'

The word 'wolf' was hardly out of his mouth than the white horse was off like the wind, so that in the twinkling of an eye it had reached the shed, dragging the hay-stack behind it. The master was dumb with surprise as he came in after breakfast and found his man's day's work quite done.

'Was it really you who were so clever?' asked he. 'Or did some one give you good advice?'

'Oh, I have only myself to take counsel with,' said the prince, and the old man went away, shaking his head.

Late in the evening the prince went to his master to learn what he was to do next day.

'To-morrow,' said the old man, 'you must bring the white-headed calf to the meadow, and, as you value your life, take care it does not escape from you.'

The prince answered nothing, but thought, 'Well, most peasants of nineteen have got a whole herd to look after, so surely I can manage one.' And he went towards his room, where the maiden met him.

'To morrow I have got an idiot's work,' said he; 'nothing but to take the white-headed calf to the meadow.'

'Oh, you unlucky being!' sighed she. 'Do you know that this calf is so swift that in a single day he can run three times round the world? Take heed to what I tell you. Bind one end of this silk thread to the left fore-leg of the calf, and the other end to the little toe of your left foot, so that the calf will never be able to leave your side, whether you walk, stand, or lie.' After this the prince went to bed and slept soundly.

The next morning he did exactly what the maiden had told him, and led the calf with the silken thread to the meadow, where it stuck to his side like a faithful dog.

By sunset, it was back again in its stall, and then came the master and said, with a frown, 'Were you really so clever yourself, or did somebody tell you what to do?'

'Oh, I have only my own poor head,' answered the prince, and the old man went away growling, 'I don't believe a word of it! I am sure you have found some clever friend!'

In the evening he called the prince and said: 'To- morrow I have no work for you, but when I wake you must come before my bed, and give me your hand in greeting.'

The young man wondered at this strange freak, and went laughing in search of the maiden.

'Ah, it is no laughing matter,' sighed she. 'He means to eat you, and there is only one way in which I can help you. You must heat an iron shovel red hot, and hold it out to him instead of your hand.'

So next morning he wakened very early, and had heated the shovel before the old man was awake. At length he heard him calling, 'You lazy fellow, where are you? Come and wish me good morning.'

But when the prince entered with the red-hot shovel his master only said, 'I am very ill to-day, and too weak even to touch your hand. You must return this evening, when I may be better.'

The prince loitered about all day, and in the evening went back to the old man's room. He was received in the most; friendly manner, and, to his surprise, his master exclaimed, 'I am very well satisfied with you. Come to me at dawn and bring the maiden with you. I know you have long loved each other, and I wish to make you man and wife.'

The young man nearly jumped into the air for joy, but, remembering the rules of the house, he managed to keep still. When he told the maiden, he saw to his astonishment that she had become as white as a sheet, and she was quite dumb.

'The old man has found out who was your counsellor,' she said when she could speak, 'and he means to destroy us both.' We must escape somehow, or else we shall be lost. Take an axe, and cut off the head of the calf with one blow. With a second, split its head in two, and in its brain you will see a bright red ball. Bring that to me. Meanwhile, I will do what is needful here.

And the prince thought to himself, 'Better kill the calf than be killed ourselves. If we can once escape, we will go back home. The peas which I strewed about must have sprouted, so that we shall not miss the way.'

Then he went into the stall, and with one blow of the axe killed the calf, and with the second split its brain. In an instant the place was filled with light, as the red ball fell from the brain of the calf. The prince picked it up, and, wrapping it round with a thick cloth, hid it in his bosom. Mercifully, the cow slept through it all, or by her cries she would have awakened the master.

He looked round, and at the door stood the maiden, holding a little bundle in her arms.

'Where is the ball?' she asked.

'Here,' answered he.

'We must lose no time in escaping,' she went on, and uncovered a tiny bit of the shining ball, to light them on their way.

As the prince had expected the peas had taken root, and grown into a little hedge, so that they were sure they would not lose the path. As they fled, the girl told him that she had overheard a conversation between the old man and his grandmother, saying that she was a king's daughter, whom the old fellow had obtained by cunning from her parents. The prince, who knew all about the affair, was silent, though he was glad from his heart that it had fallen to his lot to set her free. So they went on till the day began to dawn.

The old man slept very late that morning, and rubbed his eyes till he was properly awake. Then he remembered that very soon the couple were to present themselves before him. After waiting and waiting till quite a long time had passed, he said to himself, with a grin, 'Well, they are not in much hurry to be married,' and waited again.

At last he grew a little uneasy, and cried loudly, 'Man and maid! what has become of you?'

After repeating this many times, he became quite frightened, but, call as he would, neither man nor maid appeared. At last he jumped angrily out of bed to go in search of the culprits, but only found an empty house, and beds that had never been slept in.

Then he went straight to the stable, where the sight of the dead calf told him all. Swearing loudly, he opened the door of the third stall quickly, and cried to his goblin servants to go and chase the fugitives. 'Bring them to me, however you may find them, for have them I must!' he said. So spake the old man, and the servants fled like the wind.

The runaways were crossing a great plain, when the maiden stopped. 'Something has happened!' she said. 'The ball moves in my hand, and I'm sure we are being followed!' and behind them they saw a black cloud flying before the wind. Then the maiden turned the ball thrice in her hand, and cried,

'Listen to me, my ball, my ball. Be quick and change me into a brook, And my lover into a little fish.'

And in an instant there was a brook with a fish swimming in it. The goblins arrived just after, but, seeing nobody, waited for a little, then hurried home, leaving the brook and the fish undisturbed. When they were quite out of sight, the brook and the fish returned to their usual shapes and proceeded on their journey.

When the goblins, tired and with empty hands, returned, their master inquired what they had seen, and if nothing strange had befallen them.

'Nothing,' said they; 'the plain was quite empty, save for a brook and a fish swimming in it.'

'Idiots!' roared the master; 'of course it was they!' And dashing open the door of the fifth stall, he told the goblins inside that they must go and drink up the brook, and catch the fish. And the goblins jumped up, and flew like the wind.

The young pair had almost reached the edge of the wood, when the maiden stopped again. 'Something has happened,' said she. 'The ball is moving in my hand,' and looking round she beheld a cloud flying towards them, large and blacker than the first, and striped with red. 'Those are our pursuers,' cried she, and turning the ball three times in her hand she spoke to it thus:

'Listen to me, my ball, my ball. Be quick and change us both. Me into a wild rose bush, And him into a rose on my stem.'

And in the twinkling of an eye it was done. Only just in time too, for the goblins were close at hand, and looked round eagerly for the stream and the fish. But neither stream nor fish was to be seen; nothing but a rose bush. So they went sorrowing home, and when they were out of sight the rose bush and rose returned to their proper shapes and walked all the faster for the little rest they had had.

'Well, did you find them?' asked the old man when his goblins came back.

'No,' replied the leader of the goblins, 'we found neither brook nor fish in the desert.'

'And did you find nothing else at all?'

'Oh, nothing but a rose tree on the edge of a wood, with a rose hanging on it.'

'Idiots!' cried he. 'Why, that was they.' And he threw open the door of the seventh stall, where his mightiest goblins were locked in. 'Bring them to me, however you find them, dead or alive!' thundered he, 'for I will have them! Tear up the rose tree and the roots too, and don't leave anything behind, however strange it may be!'

The fugitives were resting in the shade of a wood, and were refreshing themselves with food and drink. Suddenly the maiden looked up. 'Something has happened,' said she. 'The ball has nearly jumped out of my bosom! Some one is certainly following us, and the danger is near, but the trees hide our enemies from us.'

As she spoke she took the ball in her hand, and said:

'Listen to me, my ball, my ball. Be quick and change me into a breeze, And make my lover into a midge.'

An instant, and the girl was dissolved into thin air, while the prince darted about like a midge. The next moment a crowd of goblins rushed up, and looked about in search of something strange, for neither a rose bush nor anything else was to be seen. But they had hardly turned their backs to go home empty-handed when the prince and the maiden stood on the earth again.

'We must make all the haste we can,' said she, 'before the old man himself comes to seek us, for he will know us under any disguise.'

They ran on till they reached such a dark part of the forest that, if it had not been for the light shed by the ball, they could not have made their way at all. Worn out and breathless, they came at length to a large stone, and here the ball began to move restlessly. The maiden, seeing this, exclaimed:

'Listen to me, my ball, my ball. Roll the stone quickly to one side, That we may find a door.'

And in a moment the stone had rolled away, and they had passed through the door to the world again.

'Now we are safe,' cried she. 'Here the old wizard has no more power over us, and we can guard ourselves from his spells. But, my friend, we have to part! You will return to your parents, and I must go in search of mine.'

'No! no!' exclaimed the prince. 'I will never part from you. You must come with me and be my wife. We have gone through many troubles together, and now we will share our joys. The maiden resisted his words for some time, but at last she went with him.

In the forest they met a woodcutter, who told them that in the palace, as well as in all the land, there had been great sorrow over the loss of the prince, and many years had now passed away during which they had found no traces of him. So, by the help of the magic ball, the maiden managed that he should put on the same clothes that he had been wearing at the time he had vanished, so that his father might know him more quickly. She herself stayed behind in a peasant's hut, so that father and son might meet alone.

But the father was no longer there, for the loss of his son had killed him; and on his deathbed he confessed to his people how he had contrived that the old wizard should carry away a peasant's child instead of the prince, wherefore this punishment had fallen upon him.

The prince wept bitterly when he heard this news, for he had loved his father well, and for three days he ate and drank nothing. But on the fourth day he stood in the presence of his people as their new king, and, calling his councillors, he told them all the strange things that had befallen him, and how the maiden had borne him safe through all.

And the councillors cried with one voice, 'Let her be your wife, and our liege lady.'

And that is the end of the story.

[Ehstnische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

THE CHILD WHO CAME FROM AN EGG

Once upon a time there lived a queen whose heart was sore because she had no children. She was sad enough when her husband was at home with her, but when he was away she would see nobody, but sat and wept all day long.

Now it happened that a war broke out with the king of a neighbouring country, and the queen was left in the palace alone.

She was so unhappy that she felt as if the walls would stifle her, so she wandered out into the garden, and threw herself down on a grassy bank, under the shade of a lime tree. She had been there for some time, when a rustle among the leaves caused her to look up, and she saw an old woman limping on her crutches towards the stream that flowed through the grounds.

When she had quenched her thirst, she came straight up to the queen, and said to her: 'Do not take it evil, noble lady, that I dare to speak to you, and do not be afraid of me, for it may be that I shall bring you good luck.'

The queen looked at her doubtfully, and answered: 'You do not seem as if you had been very lucky yourself, or to have much good fortune to spare for anyone else.'

'Under rough bark lies smooth wood and sweet kernel,' replied the old woman. 'Let me see your hand, that I may read the future.'

The queen held out her hand, and the old woman examined its lines closely. Then she said, 'Your heart is heavy with two sorrows, one old and one new. The new sorrow is for your husband, who is fighting far away from you; but, believe me, he is well, and will soon bring you joyful news. But your other sorrow is much older than this. Your happiness is spoilt because you have no children.' At these words the queen became scarlet, and tried to draw away her hand, but the old woman said:

'Have a little patience, for there are some things I want to see more clearly.'

'But who are you?' asked the queen, 'for you seem to be able to read my heart.'

'Never mind my name,' answered she, 'but rejoice that it is permitted to me to show you a way to lessen your grief. You must, however, promise to do exactly what I tell you, if any good is to come of it.'

'Oh, I will obey you exactly,' cried the queen, 'and if you can help me you shall have in return anything you ask for.'

The old woman stood thinking for a little: then she drew something from the folds of her dress, and, undoing a number of wrappings, brought out a tiny basket made of birch-bark. She held it out to the queen, saying, 'In the basket you will find a bird's egg. This you must be careful to keep in a warm place for three months, when it will turn into a doll. Lay the doll in a basket lined with soft wool, and leave it alone, for it will not need any food, and by-and-by you will find it has grown to be the size of a baby. Then you will have a baby of your own, and you must put it by the side of the other child, and bring your husband to see his son and daughter. The boy you will bring up yourself, but you must entrust the little girl to a nurse. When the time comes to have them christened you will invite me to be godmother to the princess, and this is how you must send the invitation. Hidden in the cradle, you will find a goose's wing: throw this out of the window, and I will be with you directly; but be sure you tell no one of all the things that have befallen you.'

The queen was about to reply, but the old woman was already limping away, and before she had gone two steps she had turned into a young girl, who moved so quickly that she seemed rather to fly than to walk. The queen, watching this transformation, could hardly believe her eyes, and would have taken it all for a dream, had it not been for the basket which she held in her hand. Feeling a different being from the poor sad woman who had wandered into the garden so short a time before, she hastened to her room, and felt carefully in the basket for the egg. There it was, a tiny thing of soft blue with little green spots, and she took it out and kept it in her bosom, which was the warmest place she could think of.

A fortnight after the old woman had paid her visit, the king came home, having conquered his enemies. At this proof that the old woman had spoken truth, the queen's heart bounded, for she now had fresh hopes that the rest of the prophecy might be fulfilled.

She cherished the basket and the egg as her chiefest treasures, and had a golden case made for the basket, so that when the time came to lay the egg in it, it might not risk any harm.

Three months passed, and, as the old woman had bidden her, the queen took the egg from her bosom, and laid it snugly amidst the warm woollen folds. The next morning she went to look at it, and the first thing she saw was the broken eggshell, and a little doll lying among the pieces. Then she felt happy at last, and leaving the doll in peace to grow, waited, as she had been told, for a baby of her own to lay beside it.

In course of time, this came also, and the queen took the little girl out of the basket, and placed it with her son in a golden cradle which glittered with precious stones. Next she sent for the king, who nearly went mad with joy at the sight of the children.

Soon there came a day when the whole court was ordered to be present at the christening of the royal babies, and when all was ready the queen softly opened the window a little, and let the goose wing fly out. The guests were coming thick and fast, when suddenly there drove up a splendid coach drawn by six cream-coloured horses, and out of it stepped a young lady dressed in garments that shone like the sun. Her face could not be seen, for a veil covered her head, but as she came up to the place where the queen was standing with the babies she drew the veil aside, and everyone was dazzled with her beauty. She took the little girl in her arms, and holding it up before the assembled company announced that henceforward it would be known by the name of Dotterine--a name which no one understood but the queen, who knew that the baby had come from the yolk of an egg. The boy was called Willem.

After the feast was over and the guests were going away, the godmother laid the baby in the cradle, and said to the queen, 'Whenever the baby goes to sleep, be sure you lay the basket beside her, and leave the eggshells in it. As long as you do that, no evil can come to her; so guard this treasure as the apple of your eye, and teach your daughter to do so likewise.' Then, kissing the baby three times, she mounted her coach and drove away.

The children throve well, and Dotterine's nurse loved her as if she were the baby's real mother. Every day the little girl seemed to grow prettier, and people used to say she would soon be as beautiful as her godmother, but no one knew, except the nurse, that at night, when the child slept, a strange and lovely lady bent over her. At length she told the queen what she had seen, but they determined to keep it as a secret between themselves.

The twins were by this time nearly two years old, when the queen was taken suddenly ill. All the best doctors in the country were sent for, but it was no use, for there is no cure for death. The queen knew she was dying, and sent for Dotterine and her nurse, who had now become her lady-in-waiting. To her, as her most faithful servant, she gave the lucky basket in charge, and besought her to treasure it carefully. 'When my daughter,' said the queen, 'is ten years old, you are to hand it over to her, but warn her solemnly that her whole future happiness depends on the way she guards it. About my son, I have no fears. He is the heir of the kingdom, and his father will look after him.' The lady-in-waiting promised to carry out the queen's directions, and above all to keep the affair a secret. And that same morning the queen died.

After some years the king married again, but he did not love his second wife as he had done his first, and had only married her for reasons of ambition. She hated her step-children, and the king, seeing this, kept them out of the way, under the care of Dotterine's old nurse. But if they ever strayed across the path of the queen, she would kick them out of her sight like dogs.

On Dotterine's tenth birthday her nurse handed her over the cradle, and repeated to her her mother's dying words; but the child was too young to understand the value of such a gift, and at first thought little about it.

Two more years slipped by, when one day during the king's absence the stepmother found Dotterine sitting under a lime tree. She fell as usual into a passion, and beat the child so badly that Dotterine went staggering to her own room. Her nurse was not there, but suddenly, as she stood weeping, her eyes fell upon the golden case in which lay the precious basket. She thought it might contain something to amuse her, and looked eagerly inside, but nothing was there save a handful of wool and two empty eggshells. Very much disappointed, she lifted the wool, and there lay the goose's wing. 'What old rubbish,' said the child to herself, and, turning, threw the wing out of the open window.

In a moment a beautiful lady stood beside her. 'Do not be afraid,' said the lady, stroking Dotterine's head. 'I am your godmother, and have come to pay you a visit. Your red eyes tell me that you are unhappy. I know that your stepmother is very unkind to you, but be brave and patient, and better days will come. She will have no power over you when you are grown up, and no one else can hurt you either, if only you are careful never to part from your basket, or to lose the eggshells that are in it. Make a silken case for the little basket, and hide it away in your dress night and day and you will be safe from your stepmother and anyone that tries to harm you. But if you should happen to find yourself in any difficulty, and cannot tell what to do, take the goose's wing from the basket, and throw it out of the window, and in a moment I will come to help you. Now come into the garden, that I may talk to you under the lime trees, where no one can hear us.'

They had so much to say to each other, that the sun was already setting when the godmother had ended all the good advice she wished to give the child, and saw it was time for her to be going. 'Hand me the basket,' said she, 'for you must have some supper. I cannot let you go hungry to bed.'

Then, bending over the basket, she whispered some magic words, and instantly a table covered with fruits and cakes stood on the ground before them. When they had finished eating, the godmother led the child back, and on the way taught her the words she must say to the basket when she wanted it to give her something.

In a few years more, Dotterine was a grown-up young lady, and those who saw her thought that the world did not contain so lovely a girl.

About this time a terrible war broke out, and the king and his army were beaten back and back, till at length they had to retire into the town, and make ready for a siege. It lasted so long that food began to fail, and even in the palace there was not enough to eat.

So one morning Dotterine, who had had neither supper nor breakfast, and was feeling very hungry, let her wing fly away. She was so weak and miserable, that directly her godmother appeared she burst into tears, and could not speak for some time.

'Do not cry so, dear child,' said the godmother. 'I will carry you away from all this, but the others I must leave to take their chance.' Then, bidding Dotterine follow her, she passed through the gates of the town, and through the army outside, and nobody stopped them, or seemed to see them.

The next day the town surrendered, and the king and all his courtiers were taken prisoners, but in the confusion his son managed to make his escape. The queen had already met her death from a spear carelessly thrown.

As soon as Dotterine and her godmother were clear of the enemy, Dotterine took off her own clothes, and put on those of a peasant, and in order to disguise her better her godmother changed her face completely. 'When better times come,' her protectress said cheerfully, 'and you want to look like yourself again, you have only to whisper the words I have taught you into the basket, and say you would like to have your own face once more, and it will be all right in a moment. But you will have to endure a little longer yet.' Then, warning her once more to take care of the basket, the lady bade the girl farewell.

For many days Dotterine wandered from one place to another without finding shelter, and though the food which she got from the basket prevented her from starving, she was glad enough to take service in a peasant's house till brighter days dawned. At first the work she had to do seemed very difficult, but either she was wonderfully quick in learning, or else the basket may have secretly helped her. Anyhow at the end of three days she could do everything as well as if she had cleaned pots and swept rooms all her life.

One morning Dotterine was busy scouring a wooden tub, when a noble lady happened to pass through the village. The girl's bright face as she stood in the front of the door with her tub attracted the lady, and she stopped and called the girl to come and speak to her.

'Would you not like to come and enter my service?' she asked.

'Very much,' replied Dotterine, 'if my present mistress will allow me.'

'Oh, I will settle that,' answered the lady; and so she did, and the same day they set out for the lady's house, Dotterine sitting beside the coachman.

Six months went by, and then came the joyful news that the king's son had collected an army and had defeated the usurper who had taken his father's place, but at the same moment Dotterine learned that the old king had died in captivity. The girl wept bitterly for his loss, but in secrecy, as she had told her mistress nothing about her past life.

At the end of a year of mourning, the young king let it be known that he intended to marry, and commanded all the maidens in the kingdom to come to a feast, so that he might choose a wife from among them. For weeks all the mothers and all the daughters in the land were busy preparing beautiful dresses and trying new ways of putting up their hair, and the three lovely daughters of Dotterine's mistress were as much excited as the rest. The girl was clever with her fingers, and was occupied all day with getting ready their smart clothes, but at night when she went to bed she always dreamed that her godmother bent over her and said, 'Dress your young ladies for the feast, and when they have started follow them yourself. Nobody will be so fine as you.'

When the great day came, Dotterine could hardly contain herself, and when she had dressed her young mistresses and seen them depart with their mother she flung herself on her bed, and burst into tears. Then she seemed to hear a voice whisper to her, 'Look in your basket, and you will find in it everything that you need.'

Dotterine did not want to be told twice! Up she jumped, seized her basket, and repeated the magic words, and behold! there lay a dress on the bed, shining as a star. She put it on with fingers that trembled with joy, and, looking in the glass, was struck dumb at her own beauty. She went downstairs, and in front of the door stood a fine carriage, into which she stepped and was driven away like the wind.

The king's palace was a long way off, yet it seemed only a few minutes before Dotterine drew up at the great gates. She was just going to alight, when she suddenly remembered she had left her basket behind her. What was she to do? Go back and fetch it, lest some ill-fortune should befall her, or enter the palace and trust to chance that nothing evil would happen? But before she could decide, a little swallow flew up with the basket in its beak, and the girl was happy again.

The feast was already at its height, and the hall was brilliant with youth and beauty, when the door was flung wide and Dotterine entered, making all the other maidens look pale and dim beside her. Their hopes faded as they gazed, but their mothers whispered together, saying, 'Surely this is our lost princess!'

The young king did not know her again, but he never left her side nor took his eyes from her. And at midnight a strange thing happened. A thick cloud suddenly filled the hall, so that for a moment all was dark. Then the mist suddenly grew bright, and Dotterine's godmother was seen standing there.

'This,' she said, turning to the king, 'is the girl whom you have always believed to be your sister, and who vanished during the siege. She is not your sister at all, but the daughter of the king of a neighbouring country, who was given to your mother to bring up, to save her from the hands of a wizard.'

Then she vanished, and was never seen again, nor the wonder-working basket either; but now that Dotterine's troubles were over she could get on without them, and she and the young king lived happily together till the end of their days.

[Ehstnische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

STAN BOLOVAN

Once upon a time what happened did happen, and if it had not happened this story would never have been told.

On the outskirts of a village just where the oxen were turned out to pasture, and the pigs roamed about burrowing with their noses among the roots of the trees, there stood a small house. In the house lived a man who had a wife, and the wife was sad all day long.

'Dear wife, what is wrong with you that you hang your head like a drooping rosebud?' asked her husband one morning. 'You have everything you want; why cannot you be merry like other women?'

'Leave me alone, and do not seek to know the reason,' replied she, bursting into tears, and the man thought that it was no time to question her, and went away to his work.

He could not, however, forget all about it, and a few days after he inquired again the reason of her sadness, but only got the same reply. At length he felt he could bear it no longer, and tried a third time, and then his wife turned and answered him.

'Good gracious!' cried she, 'why cannot you let things be as they are? If I were to tell you, you would become just as wretched as myself. If you would only believe, it is far better for you to know nothing.'

But no man yet was ever content with such an answer. The more you beg him not to inquire, the greater is his curiosity to learn the whole.

'Well, if you MUST know,' said the wife at last, 'I will tell you. There is no luck in this house--no luck at all!'

'Is not your cow the best milker in all the village? Are not your trees as full of fruit as your hives are full of bees? Has anyone cornfields like ours? Really you talk nonsense when you say things like that!'

'Yes, all that you say is true, but we have no children.'

Then Stan understood, and when a man once understands and has his eyes opened it is no longer well with him. From that day the little house in the outskirts contained an unhappy man as well as an unhappy woman. And at the sight of her husband's misery the woman became more wretched than ever.

And so matters went on for some time.

Some weeks had passed, and Stan thought he would consult a wise man who lived a day's journey from his own house. The wise man was sitting before his door when he came up, and Stan fell on his knees before him. 'Give me children, my lord, give me children.'

'Take care what you are asking,' replied the wise man. 'Will not children be a burden to you? Are you rich enough to feed and clothe them?'

'Only give them to me, my lord, and I will manage somehow!' and at a sign from the wise man Stan went his way.

He reached home that evening tired and dusty, but with hope in his heart. As he drew near his house a sound of voices struck upon his ear, and he looked up to see the whole place full of children. Children in the garden, children in the yard, children looking out of every window--it seemed to the man as if all the children in the world must be gathered there. And none was bigger than the other, but each was smaller than the other, and every one was more noisy and more impudent and more daring than the rest, and Stan gazed and grew cold with horror as he realised that they all belonged to him.

'Good gracious! how many there are! how many!' he muttered to himself.

'Oh, but not one too many,' smiled his wife, coming up with a crowd more children clinging to her skirts.

But even she found that it was not so easy to look after a hundred children, and when a few days had passed and they had eaten up all the food there was in the house, they began to cry, 'Father! I am hungry--I am hungry,' till Stan scratched his head and wondered what he was to do next. It was not that he thought there were too many children, for his life had seemed more full of joy since they appeared, but now it came to the point he did not know how he was to feed them. The cow had ceased to give milk, and it was too early for the fruit trees to ripen.

'Do you know, old woman!' said he one day to his wife, 'I must go out into the world and try to bring back food somehow, though I cannot tell where it is to come from.'

To the hungry man any road is long, and then there was always the thought that he had to satisfy a hundred greedy children as well as himself.

Stan wandered, and wandered, and wandered, till he reached to the end of the world, where that which is, is mingled with that which is not, and there he saw, a little way off, a sheepfold, with seven sheep in it. In the shadow of some trees lay the rest of the flock.

Stan crept up, hoping that he might manage to decoy some of them away quietly, and drive them home for food for his family, but he soon found this could not be. For at midnight he heard a rushing noise, and through the air flew a dragon, who drove apart a ram, a sheep, and a lamb, and three fine cattle that were lying down close by. And besides these he took the milk of seventy-seven sheep, and carried it home to his old mother, that she might bathe in it and grow young again. And this happened every night.

The shepherd bewailed himself in vain: the dragon only laughed, and Stan saw that this was not the place to get food for his family.

But though he quite understood that it was almost hopeless to fight against such a powerful monster, yet the thought of the hungry children at home clung to him like a burr, and would not be shaken off, and at last he said to the shepherd, 'What will you give me if I rid you of the dragon?'

'One of every three rams, one of every three sheep, one of every three lambs,' answered the herd.

'It is a bargain,' replied Stan, though at the moment he did not know how, supposing he DID come off the victor, he would ever be able to drive so large a flock home.

However, that matter could be settled later. At present night was not far off, and he must consider how best to fight with the dragon.

Just at midnight, a horrible feeling that was new and strange to him came over Stan--a feeling that he could not put into words even to himself, but which almost forced him to give up the battle and take the shortest road home again. He half turned; then he remembered the children, and turned back.

'You or I,' said Stan to himself, and took up his position on the edge of the flock.

'Stop!' he suddenly cried, as the air was filled with a rushing noise, and the dragon came dashing past.

'Dear me!' exclaimed the dragon, looking round. 'Who are you, and where do you come from?'

'I am Stan Bolovan, who eats rocks all night, and in the day feeds on the flowers of the mountain; and if you meddle with those sheep I will carve a cross on your back.'

When the dragon heard these words he stood quite still in the middle of the road, for he knew he had met with his match.

'But you will have to fight me first,' he said in a trembling voice, for when you faced him properly he was not brave at all.

'I fight you?' replied Stan, 'why I could slay you with one breath!' Then, stooping to pick up a large cheese which lay at his feet, he added, 'Go and get a stone like this out of the river, so that we may lose no time in seeing who is the best man.'

The dragon did as Stan bade him, and brought back a stone out of the brook.

'Can you get buttermilk out of your stone?' asked Stan.

The dragon picked up his stone with one hand, and squeezed it till it fell into powder, but no buttermilk flowed from it. 'Of course I can't!' he said, half angrily.

'Well, if you can't, I can,' answered Stan, and he pressed the cheese till buttermilk flowed through his fingers.

When the dragon saw that, he thought it was time he made the best of his way home again, but Stan stood in his path.

'We have still some accounts to settle,' said he, 'about what you have been doing here,' and the poor dragon was too frightened to stir, lest Stan should slay him at one breath and bury him among the flowers in the mountain pastures.

'Listen to me,' he said at last. 'I see you are a very useful person, and my mother has need of a fellow like you. Suppose you enter her service for three days, which are as long as one of your years, and she will pay you each day seven sacks full of ducats.'

Three times seven sacks full of ducats! The offer was very tempting, and Stan could not resist it. He did not waste words, but nodded to the dragon, and they started along the road.

It was a long, long way, but when they came to the end they found the dragon's mother, who was as old as time itself, expecting them. Stan saw her eyes shining like lamps from afar, and when they entered the house they beheld a huge kettle standing on the fire, filled with milk. When the old mother found that her son had arrived empty-handed she grew very angry, and fire and flame darted from her nostrils, but before she could speak the dragon turned to Stan.

'Stay here,' said he, 'and wait for me; I am going to explain things to my mother.'

Stan was already repenting bitterly that he had ever come to such a place, but, since he was there, there was nothing for it but to take everything quietly, and not show that he was afraid.

'Listen, mother,' said the dragon as soon as they were alone, 'I have brought this man in order to get rid of him. He is a terrific fellow who eats rocks, and can press buttermilk out of a stone,' and he told her all that had happened the night before.

'Oh, just leave him to me!' she said. 'I have never yet let a man slip through my fingers.' So Stan had to stay and do the old mother service.

The next day she told him that he and her son should try which was the strongest, and she took down a huge club, bound seven times with iron.

The dragon picked it up as if it had been a feather, and, after whirling it round his head, flung it lightly three miles away, telling Stan to beat that if he could.

They walked to the spot where the club lay. Stan stooped and felt it; then a great fear came over him, for he knew that he and all his children together would never lift that club from the ground.

'What are you doing?' asked the dragon.

'I was thinking what a beautiful club it was, and what a pity it is that it should cause your death.'

'How do you mean--my death?' asked the dragon.

'Only that I am afraid that if I throw it you will never see another dawn. You don't know how strong I am!'

'Oh, never mind that be quick and throw.'

'If you are really in earnest, let us go and feast for three days: that will at any rate give you three extra days of life.'

Stan spoke so calmly that this time the dragon began to get a little frightened, though he did not quite believe that things would be as bad as Stan said.

They returned to the house, took all the food that could be found in the old mother's larder, and carried it back to the place where the club was lying. Then Stan seated himself on the sack of provisions, and remained quietly watching the setting moon.

'What are you doing?' asked the dragon.

'Waiting till the moon gets out of my way.'

'What do you mean? I don't understand.'

'Don't you see that the moon is exactly in my way? But of course, if you like, I will throw the club into the moon.'

At these words the dragon grew uncomfortable for the second time.

He prized the club, which had been left him by his grandfather, very highly, and had no desire that it should be lost in the moon.

'I'll tell you what,' he said, after thinking a little. 'Don't throw the club at all. I will throw it a second time, and that will do just as well.'

'No, certainly not!' replied Stan. 'Just wait till the moon sets.'

But the dragon, in dread lest Stan should fulfil his threats, tried what bribes could do, and in the end had to promise Stan seven sacks of ducats before he was suffered to throw back the club himself.

'Oh, dear me, that is indeed a strong man,' said the dragon, turning to his mother. 'Would you believe that I have had the greatest difficulty in preventing him from throwing the club into the moon?'

Then the old woman grew uncomfortable too! Only to think of it! It was no joke to throw things into the moon! So no more was heard of the club, and the next day they had all something else to think about.

'Go and fetch me water!' said the mother, when the morning broke, and gave them twelve buffalo skins with the order to keep filling them till night.

They set out at once for the brook, and in the twinkling of an eye the dragon had filled the whole twelve, carried them into the house, and brought them back to Stan. Stan was tired: he could scarcely lift the buckets when they were empty, and he shuddered to think of what would happen when they were full. But he only took an old knife out of his pocket and began to scratch up the earth near the brook.

'What are you doing there? How are you going to carry the water into the house?' asked the dragon.

'How? Dear me, that is easy enough! I shall just take the brook!'

At these words the dragon's jaw dropped. This was the last thing that had ever entered his head, for the brook had been as it was since the days of his grandfather.

'I'll tell you what!' he said. 'Let me carry your skins for you.'

'Most certainly not,' answered Stan, going on with his digging, and the dragon, in dread lest he should fulfil his threat, tried what bribes would do, and in the end had again to promise seven sacks of ducats before Stan would agree to leave the brook alone and let him carry the water into the house.

On the third day the old mother sent Stan into the forest for wood, and, as usual, the dragon went with him.

Before you could count three he had pulled up more trees than Stan could have cut down in a lifetime, and had arranged them neatly in rows. When the dragon had finished, Stan began to look about him, and, choosing the biggest of the trees, he climbed up it, and, breaking off a long rope of wild vine, bound the top of the tree to the one next it. And so he did to a whole line of trees.

'What are you doing there?' asked the dragon.

'You can see for yourself,' answered Stan, going quietly on with his work.

'Why are you tying the trees together?'

'Not to give myself unnecessary work; when I pull up one, all the others will come up too.'

'But how will you carry them home?'

'Dear me! don't you understand that I am going to take the whole forest back with me?' said Stan, tying two other trees as he spoke.

'I'll tell you what,' cried the dragon, trembling with fear at the thought of such a thing; 'let me carry the wood for you, and you shall have seven times seven sacks full of ducats.'

'You are a good fellow, and I agree to your proposal,' answered Stan, and the dragon carried the wood.

Now the three days' service which were to be reckoned as a year were over, and the only thing that disturbed Stan was, how to get all those ducats back to his home!

In the evening the dragon and his mother had a long talk, but Stan heard every word through a crack in the ceiling.

'Woe be to us, mother,' said the dragon; 'this man will soon get us into his power. Give him his money, and let us be rid of him.'

But the old mother was fond of money, and did not like this.

'Listen to me,' said she; 'you must murder him this very night.'

'I am afraid,' answered he.

'There is nothing to fear,' replied the old mother. 'When he is asleep take the club, and hit him on the head with it. It is easily done.'

And so it would have been, had not Stan heard all about it. And when the dragon and his mother had put out their lights, he took the pigs' trough and filled it with earth, and placed it in his bed, and covered it with clothes. Then he hid himself underneath, and began to snore loudly.

Very soon the dragon stole softly into the room, and gave a tremendous blow on the spot where Stan's head should have been. Stan groaned loudly from under the bed, and the dragon went away as softly as he had come. Directly he had closed the door, Stan lifted out the pigs' trough, and lay down himself, after making everything clean and tidy, but he was wise enough not to shut his eyes that night.

The next morning he came into the room when the dragon and his mother were having their breakfast.

'Good morning,' said he.

'Good morning. How did you sleep?'

'Oh, very well, but I dreamed that a flea had bitten me, and I seem to feel it still.'

The dragon and his mother looked at each other. 'Do you hear that?' whispered he. 'He talks of a flea. I broke my club on his head.'

This time the mother grew as frightened as her son. There was nothing to be done with a man like this, and she made all haste to fill the sacks with ducats, so as to get rid of Stan as soon as possible. But on his side Stan was trembling like an aspen, as he could not lift even one sack from the ground. So he stood still and looked at them.

'What are you standing there for?' asked the dragon.

'Oh, I was standing here because it has just occurred to me that I should like to stay in your service for another year. I am ashamed that when I get home they should see I have brought back so little. I know that they will cry out, "Just look at Stan Bolovan, who in one year has grown as weak as a dragon." '

Here a shriek of dismay was heard both from the dragon and his mother, who declared they would give him seven or even seven times seven the number of sacks if he would only go away.

'I'll tell you what!' said Stan at last. 'I see you don't want me to stay, and I should be very sorry to make myself disagreeable. I will go at once, but only on condition that you shall carry the money home yourself, so that I may not be put to shame before my friends.'

The words were hardly out of his mouth before the dragon had snatched up the sacks and piled them on his back. Then he and Stan set forth.

The way, though really not far, was yet too long for Stan, but at length he heard his children's voices, and stopped short. He did not wish the dragon to know where he lived, lest some day he should come to take back his treasure. Was there nothing he could say to get rid of the monster? Suddenly an idea came into Stan's head, and he turned round.

'I hardly know what to do,' said he. 'I have a hundred children, and I am afraid they may do you harm, as they are always ready for a fight. However, I will do my best to protect you.'

A hundred children! That was indeed no joke! The dragon let fall the sacks from terror, and then picked them up again. But the children, who had had nothing to eat since their father had left them, came rushing towards him, waving knives in their right hands and forks in their left, and crying, 'Give us dragon's flesh; we will have dragon's flesh.'

At this dreadful sight the dragon waited no longer: he flung down his sacks where he stood and took flight as fast as he could, so terrified at the fate that awaited him that from that day he has never dared to show his face in the world again.

[Adapted from Rumanische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

THE TWO FROGS

Once upon a time in the country of Japan there lived two frogs, one of whom made his home in a ditch near the town of Osaka, on the sea coast, while the other dwelt in a clear little stream which ran through the city of Kioto. At such a great distance apart, they had never even heard of each other; but, funnily enough, the idea came into both their heads at once that they should like to see a little of the world, and the frog who lived at Kioto wanted to visit Osaka, and the frog who lived at Osaka wished to go to Kioto, where the great Mikado had his palace.

So one fine morning in the spring they both set out along the road that led from Kioto to Osaka, one from one end and the other from the other. The journey was more tiring than they expected, for they did not know much about travelling, and half way between the two towns there arose a mountain which had to be climbed. It took them a long time and a great many hops to reach the top, but there they were at last, and what was the surprise of each to see another frog before him! They looked at each other for a moment without speaking, and then fell into conversation, explaining the cause of their meeting so far from their homes. It was delightful to find that they both felt the same wish--to learn a little more of their native country--and as there was no sort of hurry they stretched themselves out in a cool, damp place, and agreed that they would have a good rest before they parted to go their ways.

'What a pity we are not bigger,' said the Osaka frog; 'for then we could see both towns from here, and tell if it is worth our while going on.'

'Oh, that is easily managed,' returned the Kioto frog. 'We have only got to stand up on our hind legs, and hold on to each other, and then we can each look at the town he is travelling to.'

This idea pleased the Osaka frog so much that he at once jumped up and put his front paws on the shoulders of his friend, who had risen also. There they both stood, stretching themselves as high as they could, and holding each other tightly, so that they might not fall down. The Kioto frog turned his nose towards Osaka, and the Osaka frog turned his nose towards Kioto; but the foolish things forgot that when they stood up their great eyes lay in the backs of their heads, and that though their noses might point to the places to which they wanted to go their eyes beheld the places from which they had come.

'Dear me!' cried the Osaka frog, 'Kioto is exactly like Osaka. It is certainly not worth such a long journey. I shall go home!'

'If I had had any idea that Osaka was only a copy of Kioto I should never have travelled all this way,' exclaimed the frog from Kioto, and as he spoke he took his hands from his friend's shoulders, and they both fell down on the grass. Then they took a polite farewell of each other, and set off for home again, and to the end of their lives they believed that Osaka and Kioto, which are as different to look at as two towns can be, were as like as two peas.

[Japanische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

THE STORY OF A GAZELLE

Once upon a time there lived a man who wasted all his money, and grew so poor that his only food was a few grains of corn, which he scratched like a fowl from out of a dust-heap.

One day he was scratching as usual among a dust-heap in the street, hoping to find something for breakfast, when his eye fell upon a small silver coin, called an eighth, which he greedily snatched up. 'Now I can have a proper meal,' he thought, and after drinking some water at a well he lay down and slept so long that it was sunrise before he woke again. Then he jumped up and returned to the dust-heap. 'For who knows,' he said to himself, 'whether I may not have some good luck again.'

As he was walking down the road, he saw a man coming towards him, carrying a cage made of twigs. 'Hi! you fellow!' called he, 'what have you got inside there?'

'Gazelles,' replied the man.

'Bring them here, for I should like to see them.'

As he spoke, some men who were standing by began to laugh, saying to the man with the cage: 'You had better take care how you bargain with him, for he has nothing at all except what he picks up from a dust-heap, and if he can't feed himself, will he be able to feed a gazelle?'

But the man with the cage made answer: 'Since I started from my home in the country, fifty people at the least have called me to show them my gazelles, and was there one among them who cared to buy? It is the custom for a trader in merchandise to be summoned hither and thither, and who knows where one may find a buyer?' And he took up his cage and went towards the scratcher of dust-heaps, and the men went with him.

'What do you ask for your gazelles?' said the beggar. 'Will you let me have one for an eighth?'

And the man with the cage took out a gazelle, and held it out, saying, 'Take this one, master!'

And the beggar took it and carried it to the dust-heap, where he scratched carefully till he found a few grains of corn, which he divided with his gazelle. This he did night and morning, till five days went by.

Then, as he slept, the gazelle woke him, saying, 'Master.'

And the man answered, 'How is it that I see a wonder?'

'What wonder?' asked the gazelle.

'Why, that you, a gazelle, should be able to speak, for, from the beginning, my father and mother and all the people that are in the world have never told me of a talking gazelle.'

'Never mind that,' said the gazelle, 'but listen to what I say! First, I took you for my master. Second, you gave for me all you had in the world. I cannot run away from you, but give me, I pray you, leave to go every morning and seek food for myself, and every evening I will come back to you. What you find in the dust-heaps is not enough for both of us.'

'Go, then,' answered the master; and the gazelle went.

When the sun had set, the gazelle came back, and the poor man was very glad, and they lay down and slept side by side.

In the morning it said to him, 'I am going away to feed.'

And the man replied, 'Go, my son,' but he felt very lonely without his gazelle, and set out sooner than usual for the dust-heap where he generally found most corn. And glad he was when the evening came, and he could return home. He lay on the grass chewing tobacco, when the gazelle trotted up.

'Good evening, my master; how have you fared all day? I have been resting in the shade in a place where there is sweet grass when I am hungry, and fresh water when I am thirsty, and a soft breeze to fan me in the heat. It is far away in the forest, and no one knows of it but me, and to-morrow I shall go again.'

So for five days the gazelle set off at daybreak for this cool spot, but on the fifth day it came to a place where the grass was bitter, and it did not like it, and scratched, hoping to tear away the bad blades. But, instead, it saw something lying in the earth, which turned out to be a diamond, very large and bright. 'Oh, ho!' said the gazelle to itself, 'perhaps now I can do something for my master who bought me with all the money he had; but I must be careful or they will say he has stolen it. I had better take it myself to some great rich man, and see what it will do for me.'

Directly the gazelle had come to this conclusion, it picked up the diamond in its mouth, and went on and on and on through the forest, but found no place where a rich man was likely to dwell. For two more days it ran, from dawn to dark, till at last early one morning it caught sight of a large town, which gave it fresh courage.

The people were standing about the streets doing their marketing, when the gazelle bounded past, the diamond flashing as it ran. They called after it, but it took no notice till it reached the palace, where the sultan was sitting, enjoying the cool air. And the gazelle galloped up to him, and laid the diamond at his feet.

The sultan looked first at the diamond and next at the gazelle; then he ordered his attendants to bring cushions and a carpet, that the gazelle might rest itself after its long journey. And he likewise ordered milk to be brought, and rice, that it might eat and drink and be refreshed.

And when the gazelle was rested, the sultan said to it: 'Give me the news you have come with.'

And the gazelle answered: 'I am come with this diamond, which is a pledge from my master the Sultan Darai. He has heard you have a daughter, and sends you this small token, and begs you will give her to him to wife.'

And the sultan said: 'I am content. The wife is his wife, the family is his family, the slave is his slave. Let him come to me empty-handed, I am content.'

When the sultan had ended, the gazelle rose, and said: 'Master, farewell; I go back to our town, and in eight days, or it may be in eleven days, we shall arrive as your guests.'

And the sultan answered: 'So let it be.'

All this time the poor man far away had been mourning and weeping for his gazelle, which he thought had run away from him for ever.

And when it came in at the door he rushed to embrace it with such joy that he would not allow it a chance to speak.

'Be still, master, and don't cry,' said the gazelle at last; 'let us sleep now, and in the morning, when I go, follow me.'

With the first ray of dawn they got up and went into the forest, and on the fifth day, as they were resting near a stream, the gazelle gave its master a sound beating, and then bade him stay where he was till it returned. And the gazelle ran off, and about ten o'clock it came near the sultan's palace, where the road was all lined with soldiers who were there to do honour to Sultan Darai. And directly they caught sight of the gazelle in the distance one of the soldiers ran on and said, 'Sultan Darai is coming: I have seen the gazelle.'

Then the sultan rose up, and called his whole court to follow him, and went out to meet the gazelle, who, bounding up to him, gave him greeting. The sultan answered politely, and inquired where it had left its master, whom it had promised to bring back.

'Alas!' replied the gazelle, 'he is lying in the forest, for on our way here we were met by robbers, who, after beating and robbing him, took away all his clothes. And he is now hiding under a bush, lest a passing stranger might see him.'

The sultan, on hearing what had happened to his future son-in-law, turned his horse and rode to the palace, and bade a groom to harness the best horse in the stable and order a woman slave to bring a bag of clothes, such as a man might want, out of the chest; and he chose out a tunic and a turban and a sash for the waist, and fetched himself a gold-hilted sword, and a dagger and a pair of sandals, and a stick of sweet-smelling wood.

'Now,' said he to the gazelle, 'take these things with the soldiers to the sultan, that he may be able to come.'

And the gazelle answered: 'Can I take those soldiers to go and put my master to shame as he lies there naked? I am enough by myself, my lord.'

'How will you be enough,' asked the sultan, 'to manage this horse and all these clothes?'

'Oh, that is easily done,' replied the gazelle. 'Fasten the horse to my neck and tie the clothes to the back of the horse, and be sure they are fixed firmly, as I shall go faster than he does.'

Everything was carried out as the gazelle had ordered, and when all was ready it said to the sultan: 'Farewell, my lord, I am going.'

'Farewell, gazelle,' answered the sultan; 'when shall we see you again?'

'To-morrow about five,' replied the gazelle, and, giving a tug to the horse's rein, they set off at a gallop.

The sultan watched them till they were out of sight: then he said to his attendants, 'That gazelle comes from gentle hands, from the house of a sultan, and that is what makes it so different from other gazelles.' And in the eyes of the sultan the gazelle became a person of consequence.

Meanwhile the gazelle ran on till it came to the place where its master was seated, and his heart laughed when he saw the gazelle.

And the gazelle said to him, 'Get up, my master, and bathe in the stream!' and when the man had bathed it said again, 'Now rub yourself well with earth, and rub your teeth well with sand to make them bright and shining.' And when this was done it said, 'The sun has gone down behind the hills; it is time for us to go': so it went and brought the clothes from the back of the horse, and the man put them on and was well pleased.

'Master!' said the gazelle when the man was ready, 'be sure that where we are going you keep silence, except for giving greetings and asking for news. Leave all the talking to me. I have provided you with a wife, and have made her presents of clothes and turbans and rare and precious things, so it is needless for you to speak.'

'Very good, I will be silent,' replied the man as he mounted the horse. 'You have given all this; it is you who are the master, and I who am the slave, and I will obey you in all things.'

'So they went their way, and they went and went till the gazelle saw in the distance the palace of the sultan. Then it said, 'Master, that is the house we are going to, and you are not a poor man any longer: even your name is new.'

'What IS my name, eh, my father?' asked the man.

'Sultan Darai,' said the gazelle.

Very soon some soldiers came to meet them, while others ran off to tell the sultan of their approach. And the sultan set off at once, and the viziers and the emirs, and the judges, and the rich men of the city, all followed him.

Directly the gazelle saw them coming, it said to its master: 'Your father-in-law is coming to meet you; that is he in the middle, wearing a mantle of sky-blue. Get off your horse and go to greet him.'

And Sultan Darai leapt from his horse, and so did the other sultan, and they gave their hands to one another and kissed each other, and went together into the palace.

The next morning the gazelle went to the rooms of the sultan, and said to him: 'My lord, we want you to marry us our wife, for the soul of Sultan Darai is eager.'

'The wife is ready, so call the priest,' answered he, and when the ceremony was over a cannon was fired and music was played, and within the palace there was feasting.

'Master,' said the gazelle the following morning, 'I am setting out on a journey, and I shall not be back for seven days, and perhaps not then. But be careful not to leave the house till I come.'

And the master answered, 'I will not leave the house.'

And it went to the sultan of the country and said to him: 'My lord, Sultan Darai has sent me to his town to get the house in order. It will take me seven days, and if I am not back in seven days he will not leave the palace till I return.'

'Very good,' said the sultan.

And it went and it went through the forest and wilderness, till it arrived at a town full of fine houses. At the end of the chief road was a great house, beautiful exceedingly, built of sapphire and turquoise and marbles. 'That,' thought the gazelle, 'is the house for my master, and I will call up my courage and go and look at the people who are in it, if any people there are. For in this town have I as yet seen no people. If I die, I die, and if I live, I live. Here can I think of no plan, so if anything is to kill me, it will kill me.'

Then it knocked twice at the door, and cried 'Open,' but no one answered. And it cried again, and a voice replied:

'Who are you that are crying "Open"?'

And the gazelle said, 'It is I, great mistress, your grandchild.'

'If you are my grandchild,' returned the voice, 'go back whence you came. Don't come and die here, and bring me to my death as well.'

'Open, mistress, I entreat, I have something to say to you.'

'Grandchild,' replied she, 'I fear to put your life in danger, and my own too.'

'Oh, mistress, my life will not be lost, nor yours either; open, I pray you.' So she opened the door.

'What is the news where you come from, my grandson,' asked she.

'Great lady, where I come from it is well, and with you it is well.'

'Ah, my son, here it is not well at all. If you seek a way to die, or if you have not yet seen death, then is to-day the day for you to know what dying is.'

'If I am to know it, I shall know it,' replied the gazelle; 'but tell me, who is the lord of this house?'

And she said: 'Ah, father! in this house is much wealth, and much people, and much food, and many horses. And the lord of it all is an exceeding great and wonderful snake.'

'Oh!' cried the gazelle when he heard this; 'tell me how I can get at the snake to kill him?'

'My son,' returned the old woman, 'do not say words like these; you risk both our lives. He has put me here all by myself, and I have to cook his food. When the great snake is coming there springs up a wind, and blows the dust about, and this goes on till the great snake glides into the courtyard and calls for his dinner, which must always be ready for him in those big pots. He eats till he has had enough, and then drinks a whole tankful of water. After that he goes away. Every second day he comes, when the sun is over the house. And he has seven heads. How then can you be a match for him, my son?'

'Mind your own business, mother,' answered the gazelle, 'and don't mind other people's! Has this snake a sword?'

'He has a sword, and a sharp one too. It cuts like a dash of lightning.'

'Give it to me, mother!' said the gazelle, and she unhooked the sword from the wall, as she was bidden. 'You must be quick,' she said, 'for he may be here at any moment. Hark! is not that the wind rising? He has come!'

They were silent, but the old woman peeped from behind a curtain, and saw the snake busy at the pots which she had placed ready for him in the courtyard. And after he had done eating and drinking he came to the door:

'You old body!' he cried; 'what smell is that I smell inside that is not the smell of every day?'

'Oh, master!' answered she, 'I am alone, as I always am! But to-day, after many days, I have sprinkled fresh scent all over me, and it is that which you smell. What else could it be, master?'

All this time the gazelle had been standing close to the door, holding the sword in one of its front paws. And as the snake put one of his heads through the hole that he had made so as to get in and out comfortably, it cut it of so clean that the snake really did not feel it. The second blow was not quite so straight, for the snake said to himself, 'Who is that who is trying to scratch me?' and stretched out his third head to see; but no sooner was the neck through the hole than the head went rolling to join the rest.

When six of his heads were gone the snake lashed his tail with such fury that the gazelle and the old woman could not see each other for the dust he made. And the gazelle said to him, 'You have climbed all sorts of trees, but this you can't climb,' and as the seventh head came darting through it went rolling to join the rest.

Then the sword fell rattling on the ground, for the gazelle had fainted.

The old woman shrieked with delight when she saw her enemy was dead, and ran to bring water to the gazelle, and fanned it, and put it where the wind could blow on it, till it grew better and gave a sneeze. And the heart of the old woman was glad, and she gave it more water, till by-and-by the gazelle got up.

'Show me this house,' it said, 'from beginning to end, from top to bottom, from inside to out.'

So she arose and showed the gazelle rooms full of gold and precious things, and other rooms full of slaves. 'They are all yours, goods and slaves,' said she.

But the gazelle answered, 'You must keep them safe till I call my master.'

For two days it lay and rested in the house, and fed on milk and rice, and on the third day it bade the old woman farewell and started back to its master.

And when he heard that the gazelle was at the door he felt like a man who has found the time when all prayers are granted, and he rose and kissed it, saying: 'My father, you have been a long time; you have left sorrow with me. I cannot eat, I cannot drink, I cannot laugh; my heart felt no smile at anything, because of thinking of you.'

And the gazelle answered: 'I am well, and where I come from it is well, and I wish that after four days you would take your wife and go home.'

And he said: 'It is for you to speak. Where you go, I will follow.'

'Then I shall go to your father-in-law and tell him this news.'

'Go, my son.'

So the gazelle went to the father-in-law and said: 'I am sent by my master to come and tell you that after four days he will go away with his wife to his own home.'

'Must he really go so quickly? We have not yet sat much together, I and Sultan Darai, nor have we yet talked much together, nor have we yet ridden out together, nor have we eaten together; yet it is fourteen days since he came.'

But the gazelle replied: 'My lord, you cannot help it, for he wishes to go home, and nothing will stop him.'

'Very good,' said the sultan, and he called all the people who were in the town, and commanded that the day his daughter left the palace ladies and guards were to attend her on her way.

And at the end of four days a great company of ladies and slaves and horses went forth to escort the wife of Sultan Darai to her new home. They rode all day, and when the sun sank behind the hills they rested, and ate of the food the gazelle gave them, and lay down to sleep. And they journeyed on for many days, and they all, nobles and slaves, loved the gazelle with a great love--more than they loved the Sultan Darai.

At last one day signs of houses appeared, far, far off. And those who saw cried out, 'Gazelle!'

And it answered, 'Ah, my mistresses, that is the house of Sultan Darai.'

At this news the women rejoiced much, and the slaves rejoiced much, and in the space of two hours they came to the gates, and the gazelle bade them all stay behind, and it went on to the house with Sultan Darai.

When the old woman saw them coming through the courtyard she jumped and shouted for joy, and as the gazelle drew near she seized it in her arms, and kissed it. The gazelle did not like this, and said to her: 'Old woman, leave me alone; the one to be carried is my master, and the one to be kissed is my master.'

And she answered, 'Forgive me, my son. I did not know this was our master,' and she threw open all the doors so that the master might see everything that the rooms and storehouses contained. Sultan Darai looked about him, and at length he said:

'Unfasten those horses that are tied up, and let loose those people that are bound. And let some sweep, and some spread the beds, and some cook, and some draw water, and some come out and receive the mistress.'

And when the sultana and her ladies and her slaves entered the house, and saw the rich stuffs it was hung with, and the beautiful rice that was prepared for them to eat, they cried: 'Ah, you gazelle, we have seen great houses, we have seen people, we have heard of things. But this house, and you, such as you are, we have never seen or heard of.'

After a few days, the ladies said they wished to go home again. The gazelle begged them hard to stay, but finding they would not, it brought many gifts, and gave some to the ladies and some to their slaves. And they all thought the gazelle greater a thousand times than its master, Sultan Darai.

The gazelle and its master remained in the house many weeks, and one day it said to the old woman, 'I came with my master to this place, and I have done many things for my master, good things, and till to-day he has never asked me: "Well, my gazelle, how did you get this house? Who is the owner of it? And this town, were there no people in it?" All good things I have done for the master, and he has not one day done me any good thing. But people say, "If you want to do any one good, don't do him good only, do him evil also, and there will be peace between you." So, mother, I have done: I want to see the favours I have done to my master, that he may do me the like.'

'Good,' replied the old woman, and they went to bed.

In the morning, when light came, the gazelle was sick in its stomach and feverish, and its legs ached. And it said 'Mother!'

And she answered, 'Here, my son?'

And it said, 'Go and tell my master upstairs the gazelle is very ill.'

'Very good, my son; and if he should ask me what is the matter, what am I to say?'

'Tell him all my body aches badly; I have no single part without pain.'

The old woman went upstairs, and she found the mistress and master sitting on a couch of marble spread with soft cushions, and they asked her, 'Well, old woman, what do you want?'

'To tell the master the gazelle is ill,' said she.

'What is the matter?' asked the wife.

'All its body pains; there is no part without pain.'

'Well, what can I do? Make some gruel of red millet, and give to it.'

But his wife stared and said: 'Oh, master, do you tell her to make the gazelle gruel out of red millet, which a horse would not eat? Eh, master, that is not well.'

But he answered, 'Oh, you are mad! Rice is only kept for people.'

'Eh, master, this is not like a gazelle. It is the apple of your eye. If sand got into that, it would trouble you.'

'My wife, your tongue is long,' and he left the room.

The old woman saw she had spoken vainly, and went back weeping to the gazelle. And when the gazelle saw her it said, 'Mother, what is it, and why do you cry? If it be good, give me the answer; and if it be bad, give me the answer.'

But still the old woman would not speak, and the gazelle prayed her to let it know the words of the master. At last she said: 'I went upstairs and found the mistress and the master sitting on a couch, and he asked me what I wanted, and I told him that you, his slave, were ill. And his wife asked what was the matter, and I told her that there was not a part of your body without pain. And the master told me to take some red millet and make you gruel, but the mistress said, 'Eh, master, the gazelle is the apple of your eye; you have no child, this gazelle is like your child; so this gazelle is not one to be done evil to. This is a gazelle in form, but not a gazelle in heart; he is in all things better than a gentleman, be he who he may.'

And he answered her, 'Silly chatterer, your words are many. I know its price; I bought it for an eighth. What loss will it be to me?'

The gazelle kept silence for a few moments. Then it said, 'The elders said, "One that does good like a mother," and I have done him good, and I have got this that the elders said. But go up again to the master, and tell him the gazelle is very ill, and it has not drunk the gruel of red millet.'

So the old woman returned, and found the master and the mistress drinking coffee. And when he heard what the gazelle had said, he cried: 'Hold your peace, old woman, and stay your feet and close your eyes, and stop your ears with wax; and if the gazelle bids you come to me, say your legs are bent, and you cannot walk; and if it begs you to listen, say your ears are stopped with wax; and if it wishes to talk, reply that your tongue has got a hook in it.'

The heart of the old woman wept as she heard such words, because she saw that when the gazelle first came to that town it was ready to sell its life to buy wealth for its master. Then it happened to get both life and wealth, but now it had no honour with its master.

And tears sprung likewise to the eyes of the sultan's wife, and she said, 'I am sorry for you, my husband, that you should deal so wickedly with that gazelle'; but he only answered, 'Old woman, pay no heed to the talk of the mistress: tell it to perish out of the way. I cannot sleep, I cannot eat, I cannot drink, for the worry of that gazelle. Shall a creature that I bought for an eighth trouble me from morning till night? Not so, old woman!'

The old woman went downstairs, and there lay the gazelle, blood flowing from its nostrils. And she took it in her arms and said, 'My son, the good you did is lost; there remains only patience.'

And it said, 'Mother, I shall die, for my soul is full of anger and bitterness. My face is ashamed, that I should have done good to my master, and that he should repay me with evil.' It paused for a moment, and then went on, 'Mother, of the goods that are in this house, what do I eat? I might have every day half a basinful, and would my master be any the poorer? But did not the elders say, "He that does good like a mother!" '

And it said, 'Go and tell my master that the gazelle is nearer death than life.'

So she went, and spoke as the gazelle had bidden her; but he answered, 'I have told you to trouble me no more.'

But his wife's heart was sore, and she said to him: 'Ah, master, what has the gazelle done to you? How has he failed you? The things you do to him are not good, and you will draw on yourself the hatred of the people. For this gazelle is loved by all, by small and great, by women and men. Ah, my husband! I thought you had great wisdom, and you have not even a little!'

But he answered, 'You are mad, my wife.'

The old woman stayed no longer, and went back to the gazelle, followed secretly by the mistress, who called a maidservant and bade her take some milk and rice and cook it for the gazelle.

'Take also this cloth,' she said, 'to cover it with, and this pillow for its head. And if the gazelle wants more, let it ask me, and not its master. And if it will, I will send it in a litter to my father, and he will nurse it till it is well.'

And the maidservant did as her mistress bade her, and said what her mistress had told her to say, but the gazelle made no answer, but turned over on its side and died quietly.

When the news spread abroad, there was much weeping among the people, and Sultan Darai arose in wrath, and cried, 'You weep for that gazelle as if you wept for me! And, after all, what is it but a gazelle, that I bought for an eighth?'

But his wife answered, 'Master, we looked upon that gazelle as we looked upon you. It was the gazelle who came to ask me of my father, it was the gazelle who brought me from my father, and I was given in charge to the gazelle by my father.'

And when the people heard her they lifted up their voices and spoke:

'We never saw you, we saw the gazelle. It was the gazelle who met with trouble here, it was the gazelle who met with rest here.

So, then, when such an one departs from this world we weep for ourselves, we do not weep for the gazelle.'

And they said furthermore:

'The gazelle did you much good, and if anyone says he could have done more for you he is a liar! Therefore, to us who have done you no good, what treatment will you give? The gazelle has died from bitterness of soul, and you ordered your slaves to throw it into the well. Ah! leave us alone that we may weep.'

But Sultan Darai would not heed their words, and the dead gazelle was thrown into the well.

When the mistress heard of it, she sent three slaves, mounted on donkeys, with a letter to her father the sultan, and when the sultan had read the letter he bowed his head and wept, like a man who had lost his mother. And he commanded horses to be saddled, and called the governor and the judges and all the rich men, and said:

'Come now with me; let us go and bury it.'

Night and day they travelled, till the sultan came to the well where the gazelle had been thrown. And it was a large well, built round a rock, with room for many people; and the sultan entered, and the judges and the rich men followed him. And when he saw the gazelle lying there he wept afresh, and took it in his arms and carried it away.

When the three slaves went and told their mistress what the sultan had done, and how all the people were weeping, she answered:

'I too have eaten no food, neither have I drunk water, since the day the gazelle died. I have not spoken, and I have not laughed.'

The sultan took the gazelle and buried it, and ordered the people to wear mourning for it, so there was great mourning throughout the city.

Now after the days of mourning were at an end, the wife was sleeping at her husband's side, and in her sleep she dreamed that she was once more in her father's house, and when she woke up it was no dream.

And the man dreamed that he was on the dust-heap, scratching. And when he woke, behold! that also was no dream, but the truth.

[Swahili Tales.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

HOW A FISH SWAM IN THE AIR AND A HARE IN THE WATER.

Once upon a time an old man and his wife lived together in a little village. They might have been happy if only the old woman had had the sense to hold her tongue at proper times. But anything which might happen indoors, or any bit of news which her husband might bring in when he had been anywhere, had to be told at once to the whole village, and these tales were repeated and altered till it often happened that much mischief was made, and the old man's back paid for it.

One day, he drove to the forest. When he reached the edge of it he got out of his cart and walked beside it. Suddenly he stepped on such a soft spot that his foot sank in the earth.

'What can this be?' thought he. 'I'll dig a bit and see.'

So he dug and dug, and at last he came on a little pot full of gold and silver.

'Oh, what luck! Now, if only I knew how I could take this treasure home with me----but I can never hope to hide it from my wife, and once she knows of it she'll tell all the world, and then I shall get into trouble.'

He sat down and thought over the matter a long time, and at last he made a plan. He covered up the pot again with earth and twigs, and drove on into the town, where he bought a live pike and a live hare in the market.

Then he drove back to the forest and hung the pike up at the very top of a tree, and tied up the hare in a fishing net and fastened it on the edge of a little stream, not troubling himself to think how unpleasant such a wet spot was likely to be to the hare.

Then he got into his cart and trotted merrily home.

'Wife!' cried he, the moment he got indoors. 'You can't think what a piece of good luck has come our way.'

'What, what, dear husband? Do tell me all about it at once.'

'No, no, you'll just go off and tell everyone.'

'No, indeed! How can you think such things! For shame! If you like I will swear never to----'

'Oh, well! if you are really in earnest then, listen.'

And he whispered in her ear: 'I've found a pot full of gold and silver in the forest! Hush!----'

'And why didn't you bring it back?'

'Because we'll drive there together and bring it carefully back between us.'

So the man and his wife drove to the forest.

As they were driving along the man said:

'What strange things one hears, wife! I was told only the other day that fish will now live and thrive in the tree tops and that some wild animals spend their time in the water. Well! well! times are certainly changed.'

'Why, you must be crazy, husband! Dear, dear, what nonsense people do talk sometimes.'

'Nonsense, indeed! Why, just look. Bless my soul, if there isn't a fish, a real pike I do believe, up in that tree.'

'Gracious!' cried his wife. 'How did a pike get there? It IS a pike--you needn't attempt to say it's not. Can people have said true----'

But the man only shook his head and shrugged his shoulders and opened his mouth and gaped as if he really could not believe his own eyes.

'What are you standing staring at there, stupid?' said his wife. 'Climb up the tree quick and catch the pike, and we'll cook it for dinner.'

The man climbed up the tree and brought down the pike, and they drove on.

When they got near the stream he drew up.

'What are you staring at again?' asked his wife impatiently. 'Drive on, can't you?'

'Why, I seem to see something moving in that net I set. I must just go and see what it is.'

He ran to it, and when he had looked in it he called to his wife:

'Just look! Here is actually a four-footed creature caught in the net. I do believe it's a hare.'

'Good heavens!' cried his wife. 'How did the hare get into your net? It IS a hare, so you needn't say it isn't. After all, people must have said the truth----'

But her husband only shook his head and shrugged his shoulders as if he could not believe his own eyes.

'Now what are you standing there for, stupid?' cried his wife. 'Take up the hare. A nice fat hare is a dinner for a feast day.'

The old man caught up the hare, and they drove on to the place where the treasure was buried. They swept the twigs away, dug up the earth, took out the pot, and drove home again with it.

And now the old couple had plenty of money and were cheery and comfortable. But the wife was very foolish. Every day she asked a lot of people to dinner and feasted them, till her husband grew quite impatient. He tried to reason with her, but she would not listen.

'You've got no right to lecture me!' said she. 'We found the treasure together, and together we will spend it.'

Her husband took patience, but at length he said to her: 'You may do as you please, but I sha'n't give you another penny.'

The old woman was very angry. 'Oh, what a good-for-nothing fellow to want to spend all the money himself! But just wait a bit and see what I shall do.'

Off she went to the governor to complain of her husband.

'Oh, my lord, protect me from my husband! Ever since he found the treasure there is no bearing him. He only eats and drinks, and won't work, and he keeps all the money to himself.'

The governor took pity on the woman, and ordered his chief secretary to look into the matter.

The secretary called the elders of the village together, and went with them to the man's house.

'The governor,' said he, 'desires you to give all that treasure you found into my care.'

The man shrugged his shoulders and said: 'What treasure? I know nothing about a treasure.'

'How? You know nothing? Why your wife has complained of you. Don't attempt to tell lies. If you don't hand over all the money at once you will be tried for daring to raise treasure without giving due notice to the governor about it.'

'Pardon me, your excellency, but what sort of treasure was it supposed to have been? My wife must have dreamt of it, and you gentlemen have listened to her nonsense.'

'Nonsense, indeed,' broke in his wife. 'A kettle full of gold and silver, do you call that nonsense?'

'You are not in your right mind, dear wife. Sir, I beg your pardon. Ask her how it all happened, and if she convinces you I'll pay for it with my life.'

'This is how it all happened, Mr. Secretary,' cried the wife. 'We were driving through the forest, and we saw a pike up in the top of a tree----'

'What, a PIKE?' shouted the secretary. 'Do you think you may joke with me, pray?'

'Indeed, I'm not joking, Mr. Secretary! I'm speaking the bare truth.'

'Now you see, gentlemen,' said her husband, 'how far you can trust her, when she chatters like this.'

'Chatter, indeed? I!! Perhaps you have forgotten, too, how we found a live hare in the river?'

Everyone roared with laughter; even the secretary smiled and stroked his beard, and the man said:

'Come, come, wife, everyone is laughing at you. You see for yourself, gentlemen, how far you can believe her.'

'Yes, indeed,' said the village elders, 'it is certainly the first time we have heard that hares thrive in the water or fish among the tree tops.'

The secretary could make nothing of it all, and drove back to the town. The old woman was so laughed at that she had to hold her tongue and obey her husband ever after, and the man bought wares with part of the treasure and moved into the town, where he opened a shop, and prospered, and spent the rest of his days in peace.

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

TWO IN A SACK

What a life that poor man led with his wife, to be sure! Not a day passed without her scolding him and calling him names, and indeed sometimes she would take the broom from behind the stove and beat him with it. He had no peace or comfort at all, and really hardly knew how to bear it.

One day, when his wife had been particularly unkind and had beaten him black and blue, he strolled slowly into the fields, and as he could not endure to be idle he spread out his nets.

What kind of bird do you think he caught in his net? He caught a crane, and the crane said, 'Let me go free, and I'll show myself grateful.'

The man answered, 'No, my dear fellow. I shall take you home, and then perhaps my wife won't scold me so much.'

Said the crane: 'You had better come with me to my house,' and so they went to the crane's house.

When they got there, what do you think the crane took from the wall? He took down a sack, and he said:

'Two out of a sack!'

Instantly two pretty lads sprang out of the sack. They brought in oak tables, which they spread with silken covers, and placed all sorts of delicious dishes and refreshing drinks on them. The man had never seen anything so beautiful in his life, and he was delighted.

Then the crane said to him, 'Now take this sack to your wife.'

The man thanked him warmly, took the sack, and set out.

His home was a good long way off, and as it was growing dark, and he was feeling tired, he stopped to rest at his cousin's house by the way.

The cousin had three daughters, who laid out a tempting supper, but the man would eat nothing, and said to his cousin, 'Your supper is bad.'

'Oh, make the best of it,' said she, but the man only said: 'Clear away!' and taking out his sack he cried, as the crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack!'

And out came the two pretty boys, who quickly brought in the oak tables, spread the silken covers, and laid out all sorts of delicious dishes and refreshing drinks.

Never in their lives had the cousin and her daughters seen such a supper, and they were delighted and astonished at it. But the cousin quietly made up her mind to steal the sack, so she called to her daughters: 'Go quickly and heat the bathroom: I am sure our dear guest would like to have a bath before he goes to bed.'

When the man was safe in the bathroom she told her daughters to make a sack exactly like his, as quickly as possible. Then she changed the two sacks, and hid the man's sack away.

The man enjoyed his bath, slept soundly, and set off early next morning, taking what he believed to be the sack the crane had given him.

All the way home he felt in such good spirits that he sang and whistled as he walked through the wood, and never noticed how the birds were twittering and laughing at him.

As soon as he saw his house he began to shout from a distance, 'Hallo! old woman! Come out and meet me!'

His wife screamed back: 'You come here, and I'll give you a good thrashing with the poker!'

The man walked into the house, hung his sack on a nail, and said, as the crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack!'

But not a soul came out of the sack.

Then he said again, exactly as the crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack!'

His wife, hearing him chattering goodness knows what, took up her wet broom and swept the ground all about him.

The man took flight and rushed oft into the field, and there he found the crane marching proudly about, and to him he told his tale.

'Come back to my house,' said the crane, and so they went to the crane's house, and as soon as they got there, what did the crane take down from the wall? Why, he took down a sack, and he said:

'Two out of the sack!'

And instantly two pretty lads sprang out of the sack, brought in oak tables, on which they laid silken covers, and spread all sorts of delicious dishes and refreshing drinks on them.

'Take this sack,' said the crane.

The man thanked him heartily, took the sack, and went. He had a long way to walk, and as he presently got hungry, he said to the sack, as the crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack!'

And instantly two rough men with thick sticks crept out of the bag and began to beat him well, crying as they did so:

'Don't boast to your cousins of what you have got, One--two--Or you'll find you will catch it uncommonly hot, One--two--'

And they beat on till the man panted out:

'Two into the sack.'

The words were hardly out of his mouth, when the two crept back into the sack.

Then the man shouldered the sack, and went off straight to his cousin's house. He hung the sack up on a nail, and said: 'Please have the bathroom heated, cousin.'

The cousin heated the bathroom, and the man went into it, but he neither washed nor rubbed himself, he just sat there and waited.

Meantime his cousin felt hungry, so she called her daughters, and all four sat down to table. Then the mother said:

'Two out of the sack.'

Instantly two rough men crept out of the sack, and began to beat the cousin as they cried: 'Greedy pack! Thievish pack!

One--two--Give the peasant back his sack!

One--two--'

And they went on beating till the woman called to her eldest daughter: 'Go and fetch your cousin from the bathroom. Tell him these two ruffians are beating me black and blue.'

'I've not finished rubbing myself yet,' said the peasant.

And the two ruffians kept on beating as they sang:

'Greedy pack! Thievish pack! One--two--Give the peasant back his sack!

One--two--'

Then the woman sent her second daughter and said: 'Quick, quick, get him to come to me.'

'I'm just washing my head,' said the man.

Then she sent the youngest girl, and he said: 'I've not done drying myself.'

At last the woman could hold out no longer, and sent him the sack she had stolen.

NOW he had quite finished his bath, and as he left the bathroom he cried:

'Two into the sack.'

And the two crept back at once into the sack.

Then the man took both sacks, the good and the bad one, and went away home.

When he was near the house he shouted: 'Hallo, old woman, come and meet me!'

His wife only screamed out:

'You broomstick, come here! Your back shall pay for this.'

The man went into the cottage, hung his sack on a nail, and said, as the crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack.'

Instantly two pretty lads sprang out of the sack, brought in oak tables, laid silken covers on them, and spread them with all sorts of delicious dishes and refreshing drinks.

The woman ate and drank, and praised her husband.

'Well, now, old man, I won't beat you any more,' said she.

When they had done eating, the man carried off the good sack, and put it away in his store-room, but hung the bad sack up on the nail. Then he lounged up and down in the yard.

Meantime his wife became thirsty. She looked with longing eyes at the sack, and at last she said, as her husband had done:

'Two out of the sack.'

And at once the two rogues with their big sticks crept out of the sack, and began to belabour her as they sang:

'Would you beat your husband true?

Don't cry so! Now we'll beat you black and blue! Oh! Oh!'

The woman screamed out: 'Old man, old man! Come here, quick! Here are two ruffians pommelling me fit to break my bones.'

Her husband only strolled up and down and laughed, as he said: 'Yes, they'll beat you well, old lady.'

And the two thumped away and sang again:

'Blows will hurt, remember, crone, We mean you well, we mean you well; In future leave the stick alone,

For how it hurts, you now can tell, One--two--'

At last her husband took pity on her, and cried:

'Two into the sack.'

He had hardly said the words before they were back in the sack again.

From this time the man and his wife lived so happily together that it was a pleasure to see them, and so the story has an end.

[From Russiche Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

THE ENVIOUS NEIGHBOUR

Long, long ago an old couple lived in a village, and, as they had no children to love and care for, they gave all their affection to a little dog. He was a pretty little creature, and instead of growing spoilt and disagreeable at not getting everything he wanted, as even children will do sometimes, the dog was grateful to them for their kindness, and never left their side, whether they were in the house or out of it.

One day the old man was working in his garden, with his dog, as usual, close by. The morning was hot, and at last he put down his spade and wiped his wet forehead, noticing, as he did so, that the animal was snuffling and scratching at a spot a little way off. There was nothing very strange in this, as all dogs are fond of scratching, and he went on quietly with his digging, when the dog ran up to his master, barking loudly, and back again to the place where he had been scratching. This he did several times, till the old man wondered what could be the matter, and, picking up the spade, followed where the dog led him. The dog was so delighted at his success that he jumped round, barking loudly, till the noise brought the old woman out of the house.

Curious to know if the dog had really found anything, the husband began to dig, and very soon the spade struck against something. He stooped down and pulled out a large box, filled quite full with shining gold pieces. The box was so heavy that the old woman had to help to carry it home, and you may guess what a supper the dog had that night! Now that he had made them rich, they gave him every day all that a dog likes best to eat, and the cushions on which he lay were fit for a prince.

The story of the dog and his treasure soon became known, and a neighbour whose garden was next the old people's grew so envious of their good luck that he could neither eat nor sleep. As the dog had discovered a treasure once, this foolish man thought he must be able to discover one always, and begged the old couple to lend him their pet for a little while, so that he might be made rich also.

'How can you ask such a thing?' answered the old man indignantly.

'You know how much we love him, and that he is never out of our sight for five minutes.'

But the envious neighbour would not heed his words, and came daily with the same request, till at last the old people, who could not bear to say no to anyone, promised to lend the dog, just for a night or two. No sooner did the man get hold of the dog than he turned him into the garden, but the dog did nothing but race about, and the man was forced to wait with what patience he could.

The next morning the man opened the house door, and the dog bounded joyfully into the garden, and, running up to the foot of a tree, began to scratch wildly. The man called loudly to his wife to bring a spade, and followed the dog, as he longed to catch the first glimpse of the expected treasure. But when he had dug up the ground, what did he find? Why, nothing but a parcel of old bones, which smelt so badly that he could not stay there a moment longer. And his heart was filled with rage against the dog who had played him this trick, and he seized a pickaxe and killed it on the spot, before he knew what he was doing. When he remembered that he would have to go with his story to the old man and his wife he was rather frightened, but there was nothing to be gained by putting it off, so he pulled a very long face and went to his neighbour's garden.

'Your dog,' said he, pretending to weep, 'has suddenly fallen down dead, though I took every care of him, and gave him everything he could wish for. And I thought I had better come straight and tell you.'

Weeping bitterly, the old man went to fetch the body of his favourite, and brought it home and buried it under the fig-tree where he had found the treasure. From morning till night he and his wife mourned over their loss, and nothing could comfort them.

At length, one night when he was asleep, he dreamt that the dog appeared to him and told him to cut down the fig-tree over his grave, and out of its wood to make a mortar. But when the old man woke and thought of his dream he did not feel at all inclined to cut down the tree, which bore well every year, and consulted his wife about it. The woman did not hesitate a moment, and said that after what had happened before, the dog's advice must certainly be obeyed, so the tree was felled, and a beautiful mortar made from it. And when the season came for the rice crop to be gathered the mortar was taken down from its shelf, and the grains placed in it for pounding, when, lo and behold! in a twinkling of an eye, they all turned into gold pieces. At the sight of all this gold the hearts of the old people were glad, and once more they blessed their faithful dog.

But it was not long before this story also came to the ears of their envious neighbour, and he lost no time in going to the old people and asking if they happened to have a mortar which they could lend him. The old man did not at all like parting with his precious treasure, but he never could say no, so the neighbour went off with the mortar under his arm.

The moment he got into his own house he took a great handful of rice, and began to shell off the husks, with the help of his wife. But, instead of the gold pieces for which they looked, the rice turned into berries with such a horrible smell that they were obliged to run away, after smashing the mortar in a rage and setting fire to the bits.

The old people next door were naturally very much put out when they learned the fate of their mortar, and were not at all comforted by the explanations and excuses made by their neighbour. But that night the dog again appeared in a dream to his master, and told him that he must go and collect the ashes of the burnt mortar and bring them home. Then, when he heard that the Daimio, or great lord to whom this part of the country belonged, was expected at the capital, he was to carry the ashes to the high road, through which the procession would have to pass. And as soon as it was in sight he was to climb up all the cherry-trees and sprinkle the ashes on them, and they would soon blossom as they had never blossomed before.

This time the old man did not wait to consult his wife as to whether he was to do what his dog had told him, but directly he got up he went to his neighbour's house and collected the ashes of the burnt mortar. He put them carefully in a china vase, and carried it to the high road, Sitting down on a seat till the Daimio should pass. The cherry-trees were bare, for it was the season when small pots of them were sold to rich people, who kept them in hot places, so that they might blossom early and decorate their rooms. As to the trees in the open air, no one would ever think of looking for the tiniest bud for more than a month yet. The old man had not been waiting very long before he saw a cloud of dust in the far distance, and knew that it must be the procession of the Daimio. On they came, every man dressed in his finest clothes, and the crowd that was lining the road bowed their faces to the ground as they went by. Only the old man did not bow himself, and the great lord saw this, and bade one of his courtiers, in anger, go and inquire why he had disobeyed the ancient customs. But before the messenger could reach him the old man had climbed the nearest tree and scattered his ashes far and wide, and in an instant the white flowers had flashed into life, and the heart of the Daimio rejoiced, and he gave rich presents to the old man, whom he sent for to his castle.

We may be sure that in a very little while the envious neighbour had heard this also, and his bosom was filled with hate. He hastened to the place where he had burned the mortar, collected a few of the ashes which the old man had left behind, and took them to the road, hoping that his luck might be as good as the old man's, or perhaps even better. His heart beat with pleasure when he caught the first glimpses of the Daimio's train, and he held himself ready for the right moment. As the Daimio drew near he flung a great handful of ashes over the trees, but no buds or flowers followed the action: instead, the ashes were all blown back into the eyes of the Daimio and his warriors, till they cried out from pain. Then the prince ordered the evil-doer to be seized and bound and thrown into prison, where he was kept for many months. By the time he was set free everybody in his native village had found out his wickedness, and they would not let him live there any longer; and as he would not leave off his evil ways he soon went from bad to worse, and came to a miserable end.

[Japanische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

THE FAIRY OF THE DAWN

Once upon a time what should happen DID happen; and if it had not happened this tale would never have been told.

There was once an emperor, very great and mighty, and he ruled over an empire so large that no one knew where it began and where it ended. But if nobody could tell the exact extent of his sovereignty everybody was aware that the emperor's right eye laughed, while his left eye wept. One or two men of valour had the courage to go and ask him the reason of this strange fact, but he only laughed and said nothing; and the reason of the deadly enmity between his two eyes was a secret only known to the monarch himself.

And all the while the emperor's sons were growing up. And such sons! All three like the morning stars in the sky!

Florea, the eldest, was so tall and broad-shouldered that no man in the kingdom could approach him.

Costan, the second, was quite different. Small of stature, and slightly built, he had a strong arm and stronger wrist.

Petru, the third and youngest, was tall and thin, more like a girl than a boy. He spoke very little, but laughed and sang, sang and laughed, from morning till night. He was very seldom serious, but then he had a way when he was thinking of stroking his hair over his forehead, which made him look old enough to sit in his father's council!

'You are grown up, Florea,' said Petru one day to his eldest brother; 'do go and ask father why one eye laughs and the other weeps.'

But Florea would not go. He had learnt by experience that this question always put the emperor in a rage.

Petru next went to Costan, but did not succeed any better with him.

'Well, well, as everyone else is afraid, I suppose I must do it myself,' observed Petru at length. No sooner said than done; the boy went straight to his father and put his question.

'May you go blind!' exclaimed the emperor in wrath; 'what business is it of yours?' and boxed Petru's ears soundly.

Petru returned to his brothers, and told them what had befallen him; but not long after it struck him that his father's left eye seemed to weep less, and the right to laugh more.

'I wonder if it has anything to do with my question,' thought he.

'I'll try again! After all, what do two boxes on the ear matter?'

So he put his question for the second time, and had the same answer; but the left eye only wept now and then, while the right eye looked ten years younger.

'It really MUST be true,' thought Petru. 'Now I know what I have to do. I shall have to go on putting that question, and getting boxes on the ear, till both eyes laugh together.'

No sooner said than done. Petru never, never forswore himself.

'Petru, my dear boy,' cried the emperor, both his eyes laughing together, 'I see you have got this on the brain. Well, I will let you into the secret. My right eye laughs when I look at my three sons, and see how strong and handsome you all are, and the other eye weeps because I fear that after I die you will not be able to keep the empire together, and to protect it from its enemies. But if you can bring me water from the spring of the Fairy of the Dawn, to bathe my eyes, then they will laugh for evermore; for I shall know that my sons are brave enough to overcome any foe.'

Thus spoke the emperor, and Petru picked up his hat and went to find his brothers.

The three young men took counsel together, and talked the subject well over, as brothers should do. And the end of it was that Florea, as the eldest, went to the stables, chose the best and handsomest horse they contained, saddled him, and took leave of the court.

'I am starting at once,' said he to his brothers, 'and if after a year, a month, a week, and a day I have not returned with the water from the spring of the Fairy of the Dawn, you, Costan, had better come after me.' So saying he disappeared round a corner of the palace.

For three days and three nights he never drew rein. Like a spirit the horse flew over mountains and valleys till he came to the borders of the empire. Here was a deep, deep trench that girdled it the whole way round, and there was only a single bridge by which the trench could be crossed. Florea made instantly for the bridge, and there pulled up to look around him once more, to take leave of his native land Then he turned, but before him was standing a dragon--oh! SUCH a dragon!--a dragon with three heads and three horrible faces, all with their mouths wide open, one jaw reaching to heaven and the other to earth.

At this awful sight Florea did not wait to give battle. He put spurs to his horse and dashed off, WHERE he neither knew nor cared.

The dragon heaved a sigh and vanished without leaving a trace behind him.

A week went by. Florea did not return home. Two passed; and nothing was heard of him. After a month Costan began to haunt the stables and to look out a horse for himself. And the moment the year, the month, the week, and the day were over Costan mounted his horse and took leave of his youngest brother.

'If I fail, then you come,' said he, and followed the path that Florea had taken.

The dragon on the bridge was more fearful and his three heads more terrible than before, and the young hero rode away still faster than his brother had done.

Nothing more was heard either of him or Florea; and Petru remained alone.

'I must go after my brothers,' said Petru one day to his father.

'Go, then,' said his father, 'and may you have better luck than they'; and he bade farewell to Petru, who rode straight to the borders of the kingdom.

The dragon on the bridge was yet more dreadful than the one Florea and Costan had seen, for this one had seven heads instead of only three.

Petru stopped for a moment when he caught sight of this terrible creature. Then he found his voice.

'Get out of the way!' cried he. 'Get out of the way!' he repeated again, as the dragon did not move. 'Get out of the way!' and with this last summons he drew his sword and rushed upon him. In an instant the heavens seemed to darken round him and he was surrounded by fire--fire to right of him, fire to left of him, fire to front of him, fire to rear of him; nothing but fire whichever way he looked, for the dragon's seven heads were vomiting flame.

The horse neighed and reared at the horrible sight, and Petru could not use the sword he had in readiness.

'Be quiet! this won't do!' he said, dismounting hastily, but holding the bridle firmly in his left hand and grasping his sword in his right.

But even so he got on no better, for he could see nothing but fire and smoke.

'There is no help for it; I must go back and get a better horse,' said he, and mounted again and rode homewards.

At the gate of the palace his nurse, old Birscha, was waiting for him eagerly.

'Ah, Petru, my son, I knew you would have to come back,' she cried. 'You did not set about the matter properly.'

'How ought I to have set about it?' asked Petru, half angrily, half sadly.

'Look here, my boy,' replied old Birscha. 'You can never reach the spring of the Fairy of the Dawn unless you ride the horse which your father, the emperor, rode in his youth. Go and ask where it is to be found, and then mount it and be off with you.'

Petru thanked her heartily for her advice, and went at once to make inquiries about the horse.

'By the light of my eyes!' exclaimed the emperor when Petru had put his question. 'Who has told you anything about that? It must have been that old witch of a Birscha? Have you lost your wits? Fifty years have passed since I was young, and who knows where the bones of my horse may be rotting, or whether a scrap of his reins still lie in his stall? I have forgotten all about him long ago.'

Petru turned away in anger, and went back to his old nurse.

'Do not be cast down,' she said with a smile; 'if that is how the affair stands all will go well. Go and fetch the scrap of the reins; I shall soon know what must be done.'

The place was full of saddles, bridles, and bits of leather. Petru picked out the oldest, and blackest, and most decayed pair of reins, and brought them to the old woman, who murmured something over them and sprinkled them with incense, and held them out to the young man.

'Take the reins,' said she, 'and strike them violently against the pillars of the house.'

Petru did what he was told, and scarcely had the reins touched the pillars when something happened--HOW I have no idea--that made Petru stare with surprise. A horse stood before him--a horse whose equal in beauty the world had never seen; with a saddle on him of gold and precious stones, and with such a dazzling bridle you hardly dared to look at it, lest you should lose your sight. A splendid horse, a splendid saddle, and a splendid bridle, all ready for the splendid young prince!

'Jump on the back of the brown horse,' said the old woman, and she turned round and went into the house.

The moment Petru was seated on the horse he felt his arm three times as strong as before, and even his heart felt braver.

'Sit firmly in the saddle, my lord, for we have a long way to go and no time to waste,' said the brown horse, and Petru soon saw that they were riding as no man and horse had ever ridden before.

On the bridge stood a dragon, but not the same one as he had tried to fight with, for this dragon had twelve heads, each more hideous and shooting forth more terrible flames than the other. But, horrible though he was, he had met his match. Petru showed no fear, but rolled up his sleeves, that his arms might be free.

'Get out of the way!' he said when he had done, but the dragon's heads only breathed forth more flames and smoke. Petru wasted no more words, but drew his sword and prepared to throw himself on the bridge.

'Stop a moment; be careful, my lord,' put in the horse, 'and be sure you do what I tell you. Dig your spurs in my body up to the rowel, draw your sword, and keep yourself ready, for we shall have to leap over both bridge and dragon. When you see that we are right above the dragon cut off his biggest head, wipe the blood off the sword, and put it back clean in the sheath before we touch earth again.'

So Petru dug in his spurs, drew his sword, cut of the head, wiped the blood, and put the sword back in the sheath before the horse's hoofs touched the ground again.

And in this fashion they passed the bridge.

'But we have got to go further still,' said Petru, after he had taken a farewell glance at his native land.

'Yes, forwards,' answered the horse; 'but you must tell me, my lord, at what speed you wish to go. Like the wind? Like thought? Like desire? or like a curse?'

Petru looked about him, up at the heavens and down again to the earth. A desert lay spread out before him, whose aspect made his hair stand on end.

'We will ride at different speeds,' said he, 'not so fast as to grow tired nor so slow as to waste time.'

And so they rode, one day like the wind, the next like thought, the third and fourth like desire and like a curse, till they reached the borders of the desert.

'Now walk, so that I may look about, and see what I have never seen before,' said Petru, rubbing his eyes like one who wakes from sleep, or like him who beholds something so strange that it seems as if . . . Before Petru lay a wood made of copper, with copper trees and copper leaves, with bushes and flowers of copper also.

Petru stood and stared as a man does when he sees something that he has never seen, and of which he has never heard.

Then he rode right into the wood. On each side of the way the rows of flowers began to praise Petru, and to try and persuade him to pick some of them and make himself a wreath.

'Take me, for I am lovely, and can give strength to whoever plucks me,' said one.

'No, take me, for whoever wears me in his hat will be loved by the most beautiful woman in the world,' pleaded the second; and then one after another bestirred itself, each more charming than the last, all promising, in soft sweet voices, wonderful things to Petru, if only he would pick them.

Petru was not deaf to their persuasion, and was just stooping to pick one when the horse sprang to one side.

'Why don't you stay still?' asked Petru roughly.

'Do not pick the flowers; it will bring you bad luck; answered the horse.

'Why should it do that?'

'These flowers are under a curse. Whoever plucks them must fight the Welwa [*1] of the woods.'

'What kind of a goblin is the Welwa?'

'Oh, do leave me in peace! But listen. Look at the flowers as much as you like, but pick none,' and the horse walked on slowly.

Petru knew by experience that he would do well to attend to the horse's advice, so he made a great effort and tore his mind away from the flowers.

But in vain! If a man is fated to be unlucky, unlucky he will be, whatever he may do!

The flowers went on beseeching him, and his heart grew ever weaker and weaker.

'What must come will come,' said Petru at length; 'at any rate I shall see the Welwa of the woods, what she is like, and which way I had best fight her. If she is ordained to be the cause of my death, well, then it will be so; but if not I shall conquer her though she were twelve hundred Welwas,' and once more he stooped down to gather the flowers.

'You have done very wrong,' said the horse sadly. 'But it can't be helped now. Get yourself ready for battle, for here is the Welwa!'

Hardly had he done speaking, scarcely had Petru twisted his wreath, when a soft breeze arose on all sides at once. Out of the breeze came a storm wind, and the storm wind swelled and swelled till everything around was blotted out in darkness, and darkness covered them as with a thick cloak, while the earth swayed and shook under their feet.

'Are you afraid?' asked the horse, shaking his mane.

'Not yet,' replied Petru stoutly, though cold shivers were running down his back. 'What must come will come, whatever it is.'

'Don't be afraid,' said the horse. 'I will help you. Take the bridle from my neck, and try to catch the Welwa with it.'

The words were hardly spoken, and Petru had no time even to unbuckle the bridle, when the Welwa herself stood before him; and Petru could not bear to look at her, so horrible was she.

She had not exactly a head, yet neither was she without one. She did not fly through the air, but neither did she walk upon the earth. She had a mane like a horse, horns like a deer, a face like a bear, eyes like a polecat; while her body had something of each. And that was the Welwa.

Petru planted himself firmly in his stirrups, and began to lay about him with his sword, but could feel nothing.

A day and a night went by, and the fight was still undecided, but at last the Welwa began to pant for breath.

'Let us wait a little and rest,' gasped she.

Petru stopped and lowered his sword.

'You must not stop an instant,' said the horse, and Petru gathered up all his strength, and laid about him harder than ever.

The Welwa gave a neigh like a horse and a howl like a wolf, and threw herself afresh on Petru. For another day and night the battle raged more furiously than before. And Petru grew so exhausted he could scarcely move his arm.

'Let us wait a little and rest,' cried the Welwa for the second time, 'for I see you are as weary as I am.'

'You must not stop an instant,' said the horse.

And Petru went on fighting, though he barely had strength to move his arm. But the Welwa had ceased to throw herself upon him, and began to deliver her blows cautiously, as if she had no longer power to strike.

And on the third day they were still fighting, but as the morning sky began to redden Petru somehow managed--how I cannot tell--to throw the bridle over the head of the tired Welwa. In a moment, from the Welwa sprang a horse--the most beautiful horse in the world.

'Sweet be your life, for you have delivered me from my enchantment,' said he, and began to rub his nose against his brother's. And he told Petru all his story, and how he had been bewitched for many years.

So Petru tied the Welwa to his own horse and rode on. Where did he ride? That I cannot tell you, but he rode on fast till he got out of the copper wood.

'Stay still, and let me look about, and see what I never have seen before,' said Petru again to his horse. For in front of him stretched a forest that was far more wonderful, as it was made of glistening trees and shining flowers. It was the silver wood.

As before, the flowers began to beg the young man to gather them.

'Do not pluck them,' warned the Welwa, trotting beside him, 'for my brother is seven times stronger than I'; but though Petru knew by experience what this meant, it was no use, and after a moment's hesitation he began to gather the flowers, and to twist himself a wreath.

Then the storm wind howled louder, the earth trembled more violently, and the night grew darker, than the first time, and the Welwa of the silver wood came rushing on with seven times the speed of the other. For three days and three nights they fought, but at last Petru cast the bridle over the head of the second Welwa.

'Sweet be your life, for you have delivered me from enchantment,' said the second Welwa, and they all journeyed on as before.

But soon they came to a gold wood more lovely far than the other two, and again Petru's companions pleaded with him to ride through it quickly, and to leave the flowers alone. But Petru turned a deaf ear to all they said, and before he had woven his golden crown he felt that something terrible, that he could not see, was coming near him right out of the earth. He drew his sword and made himself ready for the fight. 'I will die!' cried he, 'or he shall have my bridle over his head.'

He had hardly said the words when a thick fog wrapped itself around him, and so thick was it that he could not see his own hand, or hear the sound of his voice. For a day and a night he fought with his sword, without ever once seeing his enemy, then suddenly the fog began to lighten. By dawn of the second day it had vanished altogether, and the sun shone brightly in the heavens. It seemed to Petru that he had been born again.

And the Welwa? She had vanished.

'You had better take breath now you can, for the fight will have to begin all over again,' said the horse.

'What was it?' asked Petru.

'It was the Welwa,' replied the horse, 'changed into a fog 'Listen! She is coming!'

And Petru had hardly drawn a long breath when he felt something approaching from the side, though what he could not tell. A river, yet not a river, for it seemed not to flow over the earth, but to go where it liked, and to leave no trace of its passage.

'Woe be to me!' cried Petru, frightened at last.

'Beware, and never stand still,' called the brown horse, and more he could not say, for the water was choking him.

The battle began anew. For a day and a night Petru fought on, without knowing at whom or what he struck. At dawn on the second, he felt that both his feet were lame.

'Now I am done for,' thought he, and his blows fell thicker and harder in his desperation. And the sun came out and the water disappeared, without his knowing how or when.

'Take breath,' said the horse, 'for you have no time to lose. The Welwa will return in a moment.'

Petru made no reply, only wondered how, exhausted as he was, he should ever be able to carry on the fight. But he settled himself in his saddle, grasped his sword, and waited.

And then something came to him--WHAT I cannot tell you. Perhaps, in his dreams, a man may see a creature which has what it has not got, and has not got what it has. At least, that was what the Welwa seemed like to Petru. She flew with her feet, and walked with her wings; her head was in her back, and her tail was on top of her body; her eyes were in her neck, and her neck in her forehead, and how to describe her further I do not know.

Petru felt for a moment as if he was wrapped in a garment of fear; then he shook himself and took heart, and fought as he had never yet fought before.

As the day wore on, his strength began to fail, and when darkness fell he could hardly keep his eyes open. By midnight he knew he was no longer on his horse, but standing on the ground, though he could not have told how he got there. When the grey light of morning came, he was past standing on his feet, but fought now upon his knees.

'Make one more struggle; it is nearly over now,' said the horse, seeing that Petru's strength was waning fast.

Petru wiped the sweat from his brow with his gauntlet, and with a desperate effort rose to his feet.

'Strike the Welwa on the mouth with the bridle,' said the horse, and Petru did it.

The Welwa uttered a neigh so loud that Petru thought he would be deaf for life, and then, though she too was nearly spent, flung herself upon her enemy; but Petru was on the watch and threw the bridle over her head, as she rushed on, so that when the day broke there were three horses trotting beside him.

'May your wife be the most beautiful of women,' said the Welwa, 'for you have delivered me from my enchantment.' So the four horses galloped fast, and by nightfall they were at the borders of the golden forest.

Then Petru began to think of the crowns that he wore, and what they had cost him.

'After all, what do I want with so many? I will keep the best,' he said to himself; and taking off first the copper crown and then the silver, he threw them away.

'Stay!' cried the horse, 'do not throw them away! Perhaps we shall find them of use. Get down and pick them up.' So Petru got down and picked them up, and they all went on.

In the evening, when the sun is getting low, and all the midges are beginning to bite, Peter saw a wide heath stretching before him.

At the same instant the horse stood still of itself.

'What is the matter?' asked Petru.

'I am afraid that something evil will happen to us,' answered the horse.

'But why should it?'

'We are going to enter the kingdom of the goddess Mittwoch, [*2] and the further we ride into it the colder we shall get. But all along the road there are huge fires, and I dread lest you should stop and warm yourself at them.'

'And why should I not warm myself?'

'Something fearful will happen to you if you do,' replied the horse sadly.

'Well, forward!' cried Petru lightly, 'and if I have to bear cold, I must bear it!'

With every step they went into the kingdom of Mittwoch, the air grew colder and more icy, till even the marrow in their bones was frozen. But Petru was no coward; the fight he had gone through had strengthened his powers of endurance, and he stood the test bravely.

Along the road on each side were great fires, with men standing by them, who spoke pleasantly to Petru as he went by, and invited him to join them. The breath froze in his mouth, but he took no notice, only bade his horse ride on the faster.

How long Petru may have waged battle silently with the cold one cannot tell, for everybody knows that the kingdom of Mittwoch is not to be crossed in a day, but he struggled on, though the frozen rocks burst around, and though his teeth chattered, and even his eyelids were frozen.

At length they reached the dwelling of Mittwoch herself, and, jumping from his horse, Petru threw the reins over his horse's neck and entered the hut.

'Good-day, little mother!' said he.

'Very well, thank you, my frozen friend!'

Petru laughed, and waited for her to speak.

'You have borne yourself bravely,' went on the goddess, tapping him on the shoulder. 'Now you shall have your reward,' and she opened an iron chest, out of which she took a little box.

'Look!' said she; 'this little box has been lying here for ages, waiting for the man who could win his way through the Ice Kingdom. Take it, and treasure it, for some day it may help you.

If you open it, it will tell you anything you want, and give you news of your fatherland.'

Petru thanked her gratefully for her gift, mounted his horse, and rode away.

When he was some distance from the hut, he opened the casket.

'What are your commands?' asked a voice inside.

'Give me news of my father,' he replied, rather nervously.

'He is sitting in council with his nobles,' answered the casket.

'Is he well?'

'Not particularly, for he is furiously angry.'

'What has angered him?'

'Your brothers Costan and Florea,' replied the casket. 'It seems to me they are trying to rule him and the kingdom as well, and the old man says they are not fit to do it.'

'Push on, good horse, for we have no time to lose!' cried Petru; then he shut up the box, and put it in his pocket.

They rushed on as fast as ghosts, as whirlwinds, as vampires when they hunt at midnight, and how long they rode no man can tell, for the way is far.

'Stop! I have some advice to give you,' said the horse at last.

'What is it?' asked Petru.

'You have known what it is to suffer cold; you will have to endure heat, such as you have never dreamed of. Be as brave now as you were then. Let no one tempt you to try to cool yourself, or evil will befall you.'

'Forwards!' answered Petru. 'Do not worry yourself. If I have escaped without being frozen, there is no chance of my melting.'

'Why not? This is a heat that will melt the marrow in your bones--a heat that is only to be felt in the kingdom of the Goddess of Thunder.'[3]

[3] In the German 'Donnerstag'--the day of the Thunder God, i.e. Jupiter.

And it WAS hot. The very iron of the horse's shoes began to melt, but Petru gave no heed. The sweat ran down his face, but he dried it with his gauntlet. What heat could be he never knew before, and on the way, not a stone's throw from the road, lay the most delicious valleys, full of shady trees and bubbling streams. When Petru looked at them his heart burned within him, and his mouth grew parched. And standing among the flowers were lovely maidens who called to him in soft voices, till he had to shut his eyes against their spells.

'Come, my hero, come and rest; the heat will kill you,' said they.

Petru shook his head and said nothing, for he had lost the power of speech.

Long he rode in this awful state, how long none can tell. Suddenly the heat seemed to become less, and, in the distance, he saw a little hut on a hill. This was the dwelling of the Goddess of Thunder, and when he drew rein at her door the goddess herself came out to meet him.

She welcomed him, and kindly invited him in, and bade him tell her all his adventures. So Petru told her all that had happened to him, and why he was there, and then took farewell of her, as he had no time to lose. 'For,' he said, 'who knows how far the Fairy of the Dawn may yet be?'

'Stay for one moment, for I have a word of advice to give you. You are about to enter the kingdom of Venus;[4] go and tell her, as a message from me, that I hope she will not tempt you to delay. On your way back, come to me again, and I will give you something that may be of use to you.'

[4] 'Vineri ' is Friday, and also 'Venus.'

So Petru mounted his horse, and had hardly ridden three steps when he found himself in a new country. Here it was neither hot nor cold, but the air was warm and soft like spring, though the way ran through a heath covered with sand and thistles.

'What can that be?' asked Petru, when he saw a long, long way off, at the very end of the heath, something resembling a house.

'That is the house of the goddess Venus,' replied the horse, 'and if we ride hard we may reach it before dark'; and he darted off like an arrow, so that as twilight fell they found themselves nearing the house. Petru's heart leaped at the sight, for all the way along he had been followed by a crowd of shadowy figures who danced about him from right to left, and from back to front, and Petru, though a brave man, felt now and then a thrill of fear.

'They won't hurt you,' said the horse; 'they are just the daughters of the whirlwind amusing themselves while they are waiting for the ogre of the moon.'

Then he stopped in front of the house, and Petru jumped off and went to the door.

'Do not be in such a hurry,' cried the horse. 'There are several things I must tell you first. You cannot enter the house of the goddess Venus like that. She is always watched and guarded by the whirlwind.'

'What am I to do then?'

'Take the copper wreath, and go with it to that little hill over there. When you reach it, say to yourself, "Were there ever such lovely maidens! such angels! such fairy souls!" Then hold the wreath high in the air and cry, "Oh! if I knew whether any one would accept this wreath from me . . . if I knew! if I knew!" and throw the wreath from you!'

'And why should I do all this?' said Petru.

'Ask no questions, but go and do it,' replied the horse. And Petru did.

Scarcely had he flung away the copper wreath than the whirlwind flung himself upon it, and tore it in pieces.

Then Petru turned once more to the horse.

'Stop!' cried the horse again. 'I have other things to tell you.

Take the silver wreath and knock at the windows of the goddess Venus. When she says, "Who is there?" answer that you have come on foot and lost your way on the heath. She will then tell you to go your way back again; but take care not to stir from the spot. Instead, be sure you say to her, "No, indeed I shall do nothing of the sort, as from my childhood I have heard stories of the beauty of the goddess Venus, and it was not for nothing that I had shoes made of leather with soles of steel, and have travelled for nine years and nine months, and have won in battle the silver wreath, which I hope you may allow me to give you, and have done and suffered everything to be where I now am." This is what you must say. What happens after is your affair.'

Petru asked no more, but went towards the house.

By this time it was pitch dark, and there was only the ray of light that streamed through the windows to guide him, and at the sound of his footsteps two dogs began to bark loudly.

'Which of those dogs is barking? Is he tired of life?' asked the goddess Venus.

'It is I, O goddess!' replied Petru, rather timidly. 'I have lost my way on the heath, and do not know where I am to sleep this night.'

'Where did you leave your horse?' asked the goddess sharply.

Petru did not answer. He was not sure if he was to lie, or whether he had better tell the truth.

'Go away, my son, there is no place for you here,' replied she, drawing back from the window.

Then Petru repeated hastily what the horse had told him to say, and no sooner had he done so than the goddess opened the window, and in gentle tones she asked him:

'Let me see this wreath, my son,' and Petru held it out to her.

'Come into the house,' went on the goddess; 'do not fear the dogs, they always know my will.' And so they did, for as the young man passed they wagged their tails to him.

'Good evening,' said Petru as he entered the house, and, seating himself near the fire, listened comfortably to whatever the goddess might choose to talk about, which was for the most part the wickedness of men, with whom she was evidently very angry. But Petru agreed with her in everything, as he had been taught was only polite.

But was anybody ever so old as she! I do not know why Petru devoured her so with his eyes, unless it was to count the wrinkles on her face; but if so he would have had to live seven lives, and each life seven times the length of an ordinary one, before he could have reckoned them up.

But Venus was joyful in her heart when she saw Petru's eyes fixed upon her.

'Nothing was that is, and the world was not a world when I was born,' said she. 'When I grew up and the world came into being, everyone thought I was the most beautiful girl that ever was seen, though many hated me for it. But every hundred years there came a wrinkle on my face. And now I am old.' Then she went on to tell Petru that she was the daughter of an emperor, and their nearest neighbour was the Fairy of the Dawn, with whom she had a violent quarrel, and with that she broke out into loud abuse of her.

Petru did not know what to do. He listened in silence for the most part, but now and then he would say, 'Yes, yes, you must have been badly treated,' just for politeness' sake; what more could he do?

'I will give you a task to perform, for you are brave, and will carry it through,' continued Venus, when she had talked a long time, and both of them were getting sleepy. 'Close to the Fairy's house is a well, and whoever drinks from it will blossom again like a rose. Bring me a flagon of it, and I will do anything to prove my gratitude. It is not easy! no one knows that better than I do! The kingdom is guarded on every side by wild beasts and horrible dragons; but I will tell you more about that, and I also have something to give you.' Then she rose and lifted the lid of an iron-bound chest, and took out of it a very tiny flute.

'Do you see this?' she asked. 'An old man gave it to me when I was young: whoever listens to this flute goes to sleep, and nothing can wake him. Take it and play on it as long as you remain in the kingdom of the Fairy of the Dawn, and you will be safe.

At this, Petru told her that he had another task to fulfil at the well of the Fairy of the Dawn, and Venus was still better pleased when she heard his tale.

So Petru bade her good-night, put the flute in its case, and laid himself down in the lowest chamber to sleep.

Before the dawn he was awake again, and his first care was to give to each of his horses as much corn as he could eat, and then to lead them to the well to water. Then he dressed himself and made ready to start.

'Stop,' cried Venus from her window, 'I have still a piece of advice to give you. Leave one of your horses here, and only take three. Ride slowly till you get to the fairy's kingdom, then dismount and go on foot. When you return, see that all your three horses remain on the road, while you walk. But above all beware never to look the Fairy of the Dawn in the face, for she has eyes that will bewitch you, and glances that will befool you.

She is hideous, more hideous than anything you can imagine, with owl's eyes, foxy face, and cat's claws. Do you hear? do you hear? Be sure you never look at her.'

Petru thanked her, and managed to get off at last.

Far, far away, where the heavens touch the earth, where the stars kiss the flowers, a soft red light was seen, such as the sky sometimes has in spring, only lovelier, more wonderful.

That light was behind the palace of the Fairy of the Dawn, and it took Petru two days and nights through flowery meadows to reach it. And besides, it was neither hot nor cold, bright nor dark, but something of them all, and Petru did not find the way a step too long.

After some time Petru saw something white rise up out of the red of the sky, and when he drew nearer he saw it was a castle, and so splendid that his eyes were dazzled when they looked at it. He did not know there was such a beautiful castle in the world.

But no time was to be lost, so he shook himself, jumped down from his horse, and, leaving him on the dewy grass, began to play on his flute as he walked along.

He had hardly gone many steps when he stumbled over a huge giant, who had been lulled to sleep by the music. This was one of the guards of the castle! As he lay there on his back, he seemed so big that in spite of Petru's haste he stopped to measure him.

The further went Petru, the more strange and terrible were the sights he saw--lions, tigers, dragons with seven heads, all stretched out in the sun fast asleep. It is needless to say what the dragons were like, for nowadays everyone knows, and dragons are not things to joke about. Petru ran through them like the wind. Was it haste or fear that spurred him on?

At last he came to a river, but let nobody think for a moment that this river was like other rivers? Instead of water, there flowed milk, and the bottom was of precious stones and pearls, instead of sand and pebbles. And it ran neither fast nor slow, but both fast and slow together. And the river flowed round the castle, and on its banks slept lions with iron teeth and claws; and beyond were gardens such as only the Fairy of the Dawn can have, and on the flowers slept a fairy! All this saw Petru from the other side.

But how was he to get over? To be sure there was a bridge, but, even if it had not been guarded by sleeping lions, it was plainly not meant for man to walk on. Who could tell what it was made of? It looked like soft little woolly clouds!

So he stood thinking what was to be done, for get across he must.

After a while, he determined to take the risk, and strode back to the sleeping giant. 'Wake up, my brave man!' he cried, giving him a shake.

The giant woke and stretched out his hand to pick up Petru, just as we should catch a fly. But Petru played on his flute, and the giant fell back again. Petru tried this three times, and when he was satisfied that the giant was really in his power he took out a handkerchief, bound the two little fingers of the giant together, drew his sword, and cried for the fourth time, 'Wake up, my brave man.'

When the giant saw the trick which had been played on him he said to Petru. 'Do you call this a fair fight? Fight according to rules, if you really are a hero!'

'I will by-and-by, but first I want to ask you a question! Will you swear that you will carry me over the river if I fight honourably with you?' And the giant swore.

When his hands were freed, the giant flung himself upon Petru, hoping to crush him by his weight. But he had met his match. It was not yesterday, nor the day before, that Petru had fought his first battle, and he bore himself bravely.

For three days and three nights the battle raged, and sometimes one had the upper hand, and sometimes the other, till at length they both lay struggling on the ground, but Petru was on top, with the point of his sword at the giant's throat.

'Let me go! let me go!' shrieked he. 'I own that I am beaten!'

'Will you take me over the river?' asked Petru.

'I will,' gasped the giant.

'What shall I do to you if you break your word?'

'Kill me, any way you like! But let me live now.'

'Very well,' said Petru, and he bound the giant's left hand to his right foot, tied one handkerchief round his mouth to prevent him crying out, and another round his eyes, and led him to the river.

Once they had reached the bank he stretched one leg over to the other side, and, catching up Petru in the palm of his hand, set him down on the further shore.

'That is all right,' said Petru. Then he played a few notes on his flute, and the giant went to sleep again. Even the fairies who had been bathing a little lower down heard the music and fell asleep among the flowers on the bank. Petru saw them as he passed, and thought, 'If they are so beautiful, why should the Fairy of the Dawn be so ugly?' But he dared not linger, and pushed on.

And now he was in the wonderful gardens, which seemed more wonderful still than they had done from afar. But Petru could see no faded flowers, nor any birds, as he hastened through them to the castle. No one was there to bar his way, for all were asleep. Even the leaves had ceased to move.

He passed through the courtyard, and entered the castle itself.

What he beheld there need not be told, for all the world knows that the palace of the Fairy of the Dawn is no ordinary place. Gold and precious stones were as common as wood with us, and the stables where the horses of the sun were kept were more splendid than the palace of the greatest emperor in the world.

Petru went up the stairs and walked quickly through eight-and-forty rooms, hung with silken stuffs, and all empty. In the forty-ninth he found the Fairy of the Dawn herself.

In the middle of this room, which was as large as a church, Petru saw the celebrated well that he had come so far to seek. It was a well just like other wells, and it seemed strange that the Fairy of the Dawn should have it in her own chamber; yet anyone could tell it had been there for hundreds of years. And by the well slept the Fairy of the Dawn--the Fairy of the Dawn--herself!

And as Petru looked at her the magic flute dropped by his side, and he held his breath.

Near the well was a table, on which stood bread made with does' milk, and a flagon of wine. It was the bread of strength and the wine of youth, and Petru longed for them. He looked once at the bread and once at the wine, and then at the Fairy of the Dawn, still sleeping on her silken cushions.

As he looked a mist came over his senses. The fairy opened her eyes slowly and looked at Petru, who lost his head still further; but he just managed to remember his flute, and a few notes of it sent the Fairy to sleep again, and he kissed her thrice. Then he stooped and laid his golden wreath upon her forehead, ate a piece of the bread and drank a cupful of the wine of youth, and this he did three times over. Then he filled a flask with water from the well, and vanished swiftly.

As he passed through the garden it seemed quite different from what it was before. The flowers were lovelier, the streams ran quicker, the sunbeams shone brighter, and the fairies seemed gayer. And all this had been caused by the three kisses Petru had given the Fairy of the Dawn.

He passed everything safely by, and was soon seated in his saddle again. Faster than the wind, faster than thought, faster than longing, faster than hatred rode Petru. At length he dismounted, and, leaving his horses at the roadside, went on foot to the house of Venus.

The goddess Venus knew that he was coming, and went to meet him, bearing with her white bread and red wine.

'Welcome back, my prince,' said she.

'Good day, and many thanks,' replied the young man, holding out the flask containing the magic water. She received it with joy, and after a short rest Petru set forth, for he had no time to lose.

He stopped a few minutes, as he had promised, with the Goddess of Thunder, and was taking a hasty farewell of her, when she called him back.

'Stay, I have a warning to give you,' said she. 'Beware of your life; make friends with no man; do not ride fast, or let the water go out of your hand; believe no one, and flee flattering tongues. Go, and take care, for the way is long, the world is bad, and you hold something very precious. But I will give you this cloth to help you. It is not much to look at, but it is enchanted, and whoever carries it will never be struck by lightning, pierced by a lance, or smitten with a sword, and the arrows will glance off his body.'

Petru thanked her and rode off, and, taking out his treasure box, inquired how matters were going at home. Not well, it said. The emperor was blind altogether now, and Florea and Costan had besought him to give the government of the kingdom into their hands; but he would not, saying that he did not mean to resign the government till he had washed his eyes from the well of the Fairy of the Dawn. Then the brothers had gone to consult old Birscha, who told them that Petru was already on his way home bearing the water. They had set out to meet him, and would try to take the magic water from him, and then claim as their reward the government of the emperor.

'You are lying!' cried Petru angrily, throwing the box on the ground, where it broke into a thousand pieces.

It was not long before he began to catch glimpses of his native land, and he drew rein near a bridge, the better to look at it. He was still gazing, when he heard a sound in the distance as if some one was calling hit by his name.

'You, Petru!' it said.

'On! on!' cried the horse; 'it will fare ill with you if you stop.'

'No, let us stop, and see who and what it is!' answered Petru, turning his horse round, and coming face to face with his two brothers. He had forgotten the warning given him by the Goddess of Thunder, and when Costan and Florea drew near with soft and flattering words he jumped straight off his horse, and rushed to embrace them. He had a thousand questions to ask, and a thousand things to tell. But his brown horse stood sadly hanging his head.

'Petru, my dear brother,' at length said Florea, 'would it not be better if we carried the water for you? Some one might try to take it from you on the road, while no one would suspect us.'

'So it would,' added Costan. 'Florea speaks well.' But Petru shook his head, and told them what the Goddess of Thunder had said, and about the cloth she had given him. And both brothers understood there was only one way in which they could kill him.

At a stone's throw from where they stood ran a rushing stream, with clear deep pools.

'Don't you feel thirsty, Costan?' asked Florea, winking at him.

'Yes,' replied Costan, understanding directly what was wanted. 'Come, Petru, let us drink now we have the chance, and then we will set out on our way home. It is a good thing you have us with you, to protect you from harm.'

The horse neighed, and Petru knew what it meant, and did not go with his brothers.

No, he went home to his father, and cured his blindness; and as for his brothers, they never returned again.

[From Rumanische Marchen.]

Footnotes

^1 A goblin.

^2 In German 'Mittwoch,' the feminine form of Mercury.

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

THE ENCHANTED KNIFE

Once upon a time there lived a young man who vowed that he would never marry any girl who had not royal blood in her veins. One day he plucked up all his courage and went to the palace to ask the emperor for his daughter. The emperor was not much pleased at the thought of such a match for his only child, but being very polite, he only said:

'Very well, my son, if you can win the princess you shall have her, and the conditions are these. In eight days you must manage to tame and bring to me three horses that have never felt a master. The first is pure white, the second a foxy-red with a black head, the third coal black with a white head and feet. And besides that, you must also bring as a present to the empress, my wife, as much gold as the three horses can carry.'

The young man listened in dismay to these words, but with an effort he thanked the emperor for his kindness and left the palace, wondering how he was to fulfil the task allotted to him. Luckily for him, the emperor's daughter had overheard everything her father had said, and peeping through a curtain had seen the youth, and thought him handsomer than anyone she had ever beheld.

So returning hastily to her own room, she wrote him a letter which she gave to a trusty servant to deliver, begging her wooer to come to her rooms early the next day, and to undertake nothing without her advice, if he ever wished her to be his wife.

That night, when her father was asleep, she crept softly into his chamber and took out an enchanted knife from the chest where he kept his treasures, and hid it carefully in a safe place before she went to bed.

The sun had hardly risen the following morning when the princess's nurse brought the young man to her apartments. Neither spoke for some minutes, but stood holding each other's hands for joy, till at last they both cried out that nothing but death should part them. Then the maiden said:

'Take my horse, and ride straight through the wood towards the sunset till you come to a hill with three peaks. When you get there, turn first to the right and then to the left, and you will find yourself in a sun meadow, where many horses are feeding. Out of these you must pick out the three described to you by my father. If they prove shy, and refuse to let you get near them, draw out your knife, and let the sun shine on it so that the whole meadow is lit up by its rays, and the horses will then approach you of their own accord, and will let you lead them away. When you have them safely, look about till you see a cypress tree, whose roots are of brass, whose boughs are of silver, and whose leaves are of gold. Go to it, and cut away the roots with your knife, and you will come to countless bags of gold. Load the horses with all they can carry, and return to my father, and tell him that you have done your task, and can claim me for your wife.'

The princess had finished all she had to say, and now it depended on the young man to do his part. He hid the knife in the folds of his girdle, mounted his horse, and rode off in search of the meadow. This he found without much difficulty, but the horses were all so shy that they galloped away directly he approached them. Then he drew his knife, and held it up towards the sun, and directly there shone such a glory that the whole meadow was bathed in it. From all sides the horses rushed pressing round, and each one that passed him fell on its knees to do him honour.

But he only chose from them all the three that the emperor had described. These he secured by a silken rope to his own horse, and then looked about for the cypress tree. It was standing by itself in one corner, and in a moment he was beside it, tearing away the earth with his knife. Deeper and deeper he dug, till far down, below the roots of brass, his knife struck upon the buried treasure, which lay heaped up in bags all around. With a great effort he lifted them from their hiding place, and laid them one by one on his horses' backs, and when they could carry no more he led them back to the emperor. And when the emperor saw him, he wondered, but never guessed how it was the young man had been too clever for him, till the betrothal ceremony was over. Then he asked his newly made son-in-law what dowry he would require with his bride. To which the bridegroom made answer, 'Noble emperor! all I desire is that I may have your daughter for my wife, and enjoy for ever the use of your enchanted knife.'

[Volksmarchen der Serben.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

JESPER WHO HERDED THE HARES

There was once a king who ruled over a kingdom somewhere between sunrise and sunset. It was as small as kingdoms usually were in old times, and when the king went up to the roof of his palace and took a look round he could see to the ends of it in every direction. But as it was all his own, he was very proud of it, and often wondered how it would get along without him. He had only one child, and that was a daughter, so he foresaw that she must be provided with a husband who would be fit to be king after him. Where to find one rich enough and clever enough to be a suitable match for the princess was what troubled him, and often kept him awake at night.

At last he devised a plan. He made a proclamation over all his kingdom (and asked his nearest neighbours to publish it in theirs as well) that whoever could bring him a dozen of the finest pearls the king had ever seen, and could perform certain tasks that would be set him, should have his daughter in marriage and in due time succeed to the throne. The pearls, he thought, could only be brought by a very wealthy man, and the tasks would require unusual talents to accomplish them.

There were plenty who tried to fulfil the terms which the king proposed. Rich merchants and foreign princes presented themselves one after the other, so that some days the number of them was quite annoying; but, though they could all produce magnificent pearls, not one of them could perform even the simplest of the tasks set them. Some turned up, too, who were mere adventurers, and tried to deceive the old king with imitation pearls; but he was not to be taken in so easily, and they were soon sent about their business. At the end of several weeks the stream of suitors began to fall off, and still there was no prospect of a suitable son-in-law.

Now it so happened that in a little corner of the king's dominions, beside the sea, there lived a poor fisher, who had three sons, and their names were Peter, Paul, and Jesper. Peter and Paul were grown men, while Jesper was just coming to manhood.

The two elder brothers were much bigger and stronger than the youngest, but Jesper was far the cleverest of the three, though neither Peter nor Paul would admit this. It was a fact, however, as we shall see in the course of our story.

One day the fisherman went out fishing, and among his catch for the day he brought home three dozen oysters. When these were opened, every shell was found to contain a large and beautiful pearl. Hereupon the three brothers, at one and the same moment, fell upon the idea of offering themselves as suitors for the princess. After some discussion, it was agreed that the pearls should be divided by lot, and that each should have his chance in the order of his age: of course, if the oldest was successful the other two would be saved the trouble of trying.

Next morning Peter put his pearls in a little basket, and set off for the king's palace. He had not gone far on his way when he came upon the King of the Ants and the King of the Beetles, who, with their armies behind them, were facing each other and preparing for battle.

'Come and help me,' said the King of the Ants; 'the beetles are too big for us. I may help you some day in return.'

'I have no time to waste on other people's affairs,' said Peter; 'just fight away as best you can;' and with that he walked off and left them.

A little further on the way he met an old woman.

'Good morning, young man,' said she; 'you are early astir. What have you got in your basket?'

'Cinders,' said Peter promptly, and walked on, adding to himself, 'Take that for being so inquisitive.'

'Very well, cinders be it,' the old woman called after him, but he pretended not to hear her.

Very soon he reached the palace, and was at once brought before the king. When he took the cover off the basket, the king and all his courtiers said with one voice that these were the finest pearls they had ever seen, and they could not take their eyes off them. But then a strange thing happened: the pearls began to lose their whiteness and grew quite dim in colour; then they grew blacker and blacker till at last they were just like so many cinders. Peter was so amazed that he could say nothing for himself, but the king said quite enough for both, and Peter was glad to get away home again as fast as his legs would carry him. To his father and brothers, however, he gave no account of his attempt, except that it had been a failure.

Next day Paul set out to try his luck. He soon came upon the King of the Ants and the King of the Beetles, who with their armies had encamped on the field of battle all night, and were ready to begin the fight again.

'Come and help me,' said the King of the Ants; 'we got the worst of it yesterday. I may help you some day in return.'

'I don't care though you get the worst of it to-day too,' said Paul. 'I have more important business on hand than mixing myself up in your quarrels.'

So he walked on, and presently the same old woman met him. 'Good morning,' said she; 'what have YOU got in your basket?'

'Cinders,' said Paul, who was quite as insolent as his brother, and quite as anxious to teach other people good manners.

'Very well, cinders be it,' the old woman shouted after him, but Paul neither looked back nor answered her. He thought more of what she said, however, after his pearls also turned to cinders before the eyes of king and court: then he lost no time in getting home again, and was very sulky when asked how he had succeeded.

The third day came, and with it came Jesper's turn to try his fortune. He got up and had his breakfast, while Peter and Paul lay in bed and made rude remarks, telling him that he would come back quicker than he went, for if they had failed it could not be supposed that he would succeed. Jesper made no reply, but put his pearls in the little basket and walked off.

The King of the Ants and the King of the Beetles were again marshalling their hosts, but the ants were greatly reduced in numbers, and had little hope of holding out that day.

'Come and help us,' said their king to Jesper, 'or we shall be completely defeated. I may help you some day in return.'

Now Jesper had always heard the ants spoken of as clever and industrious little creatures, while he never heard anyone say a good word for the beetles, so he agreed to give the wished-for help. At the first charge he made, the ranks of the beetles broke and fled in dismay, and those escaped best that were nearest a hole, and could get into it before Jesper's boots came down upon them. In a few minutes the ants had the field all to themselves; and their king made quite an eloquent speech to Jesper, thanking him for the service he had done them, and promising to assist him in any difficulty.

'Just call on me when you want me,' he said, 'where-ever you are. I'm never far away from anywhere, and if I can possibly help you, I shall not fail to do it.'

Jesper was inclined to laugh at this, but he kept a grave face, said he would remember the offer, and walked on. At a turn of the road he suddenly came upon the old woman. 'Good morning,' said she; 'what have YOU got in your basket?'

'Pearls,' said Jesper; 'I'm going to the palace to win the princess with them.' And in case she might not believe him, he lifted the cover and let her see them.

'Beautiful,' said the old woman; 'very beautiful indeed; but they will go a very little way towards winning the princess, unless you can also perform the tasks that are set you. However,' she said, 'I see you have brought something with you to eat. Won't you give that to me: you are sure to get a good dinner at the palace.'

'Yes, of course,' said Jesper, 'I hadn't thought of that'; and he handed over the whole of his lunch to the old woman.

He had already taken a few steps on the way again, when the old woman called him back.

'Here,' she said; 'take this whistle in return for your lunch. It isn't much to look at, but if you blow it, anything that you have lost or that has been taken from you will find its way back to you in a moment.'

Jesper thanked her for the whistle, though he did not see of what use it was to be to him just then, and held on his way to the palace.

When Jesper presented his pearls to the king there were exclamations of wonder and delight from everyone who saw them. It was not pleasant, however, to discover that Jesper was a mere fisher-lad; that wasn't the kind of son-in-law that the king had expected, and he said so to the queen.

'Never mind,' said she, 'you can easily set him such tasks as he will never be able to perform: we shall soon get rid of him.'

'Yes, of course,' said the king; 'really I forget things nowadays, with all the bustle we have had of late.'

That day Jesper dined with the king and queen and their nobles, and at night was put into a bedroom grander than anything of the kind he had ever seen. It was all so new to him that he could not sleep a wink, especially as he was always wondering what kind of tasks would be set him to do, and whether he would be able to perform them. In spite of the softness of the bed, he was very glad when morning came at last.

After breakfast was over, the king said to Jesper, 'Just come with me, and I'll show you what you must do first.' He led him out to the barn, and there in the middle of the floor was a large pile of grain. 'Here,' said the king, 'you have a mixed heap of wheat, barley, oats, and rye, a sackful of each. By an hour before sunset you must have these sorted out into four heaps, and if a single grain is found to be in a wrong heap you have no further chance of marrying my daughter. I shall lock the door, so that no one can get in to assist you, and I shall return at the appointed time to see how you have succeeded.'

The king walked off, and Jesper looked in despair at the task before him. Then he sat down and tried what he could do at it, but it was soon very clear that single- handed he could never hope to accomplish it in the time. Assistance was out of the question--unless, he suddenly thought--unless the King of the Ants could help. On him he began to call, and before many minutes had passed that royal personage made his appearance. Jesper explained the trouble he was in.

'Is that all?' said the ant; 'we shall soon put that to rights.' He gave the royal signal, and in a minute or two a stream of ants came pouring into the barn, who under the king's orders set to work to separate the grain into the proper heaps.

Jesper watched them for a while, but through the continual movement of the little creatures, and his not having slept during the previous night, he soon fell sound asleep. When he woke again, the king had just come into the barn, and was amazed to find that not only was the task accomplished, but that Jesper had found time to take a nap as well.

'Wonderful,' said he; 'I couldn't have believed it possible. However, the hardest is yet to come, as you will see to-morrow.'

Jesper thought so too when the next day's task was set before him. The king's gamekeepers had caught a hundred live hares, which were to be let loose in a large meadow, and there Jesper must herd them all day, and bring them safely home in the evening: if even one were missing, he must give up all thought of marrying the princess. Before he had quite grasped the fact that this was an impossible task, the keepers had opened the sacks in which the hares were brought to the field, and, with a whisk of the short tail and a flap of the long ears, each one of the hundred flew in a different direction.

'Now,' said the king, 'as he walked away, 'let's see what your cleverness can do here.'

Jesper stared round him in bewilderment, and having nothing better to do with his hands, thrust them into his pockets, as he was in the habit of doing. Here he found something which turned out to be the whistle given to him by the old woman. He remembered what she had said about the virtues of the whistle, but was rather doubtful whether its powers would extend to a hundred hares, each of which had gone in a different direction and might be several miles distant by this time. However, he blew the whistle, and in a few minutes the hares came bounding through the hedge on all the four sides of the field, and before long were all sitting round him in a circle. After that, Jesper allowed them to run about as they pleased, so long as they stayed in the field.

The king had told one of the keepers to hang about for a little and see what became of Jesper, not doubting, however, that as soon as he saw the coast clear he would use his legs to the best advantage, and never show face at the palace again. It was therefore with great surprise and annoyance that he now learned of the mysterious return of the hares and the likelihood of Jesper carrying out his task with success.

'One of them must be got out of his hands by hook or crook,' said he. 'I'll go and see the queen about it; she's good at devising plans.'

A little later, a girl in a shabby dress came into the field and walked up to Jesper.

'Do give me one of those hares,' she said; 'we have just got visitors who are going to stay to dinner, and there's nothing we can give them to eat.'

'I can't,' said Jesper. 'For one thing, they're not mine; for another, a great deal depends on my having them all here in the evening.'

But the girl (and she was a very pretty girl, though so shabbily dressed) begged so hard for one of them that at last he said:

'Very well; give me a kiss and you shall have one of them.'

He could see that she didn't quite care for this, but she consented to the bargain, and gave him the kiss, and went away with a hare in her apron. Scarcely had she got outside the field, however, when Jesper blew his whistle, and immediately the hare wriggled out of its prison like an eel, and went back to its master at the top of its speed.

Not long after this the hare-herd had another visit. This time it was a stout old woman in the dress of a peasant, who also was after a hare to provide a dinner for unexpected visitors. Jesper again refused, but the old lady was so pressing, and would take no refusal, that at last he said:

'Very well, you shall have a hare, and pay nothing for it either, if you will only walk round me on tiptoe, look up to the sky, and cackle like a hen.'

'Fie,' said she; 'what a ridiculous thing to ask anyone to do; just think what the neighbours would say if they saw me. They would think I had taken leave of my senses.'

'Just as you like,' said Jesper; 'you know best whether you want the hare or not.'

There was no help for it, and a pretty figure the old lady made in carrying out her task; the cackling wasn't very well done, but Jesper said it would do, and gave her the hare. As soon as she had left the field, the whistle was sounded again, and back came long-legs-and-ears at a marvellous speed.

The next to appear on the same errand was a fat old fellow in the dress of a groom: it was the royal livery he wore, and he plainly thought a good deal of himself.

'Young man,' said he, 'I want one of those hares; name your price, but I MUST have one of them.'

'All right,' said Jesper; 'you can have one at an easy rate. Just stand on your head, whack your heels together, and cry "Hurrah," and the hare is yours.'

'Eh, what!' said the old fellow; 'ME stand on my head, what an idea!'

'Oh, very well,' said Jesper, 'you needn't unless you like, you know; but then you won't get the hare.'

It went very much against the grain, one could see, but after some efforts the old fellow had his head on the grass and his heels in the air; the whacking and the 'Hurrah' were rather feeble, but Jesper was not very exacting, and the hare was handed over. Of course, it wasn't long in coming back again, like the others.

Evening came, and home came Jesper with the hundred hares behind him. Great was the wonder over all the palace, and the king and queen seemed very much put out, but it was noticed that the princess actually smiled to Jesper.

'Well, well,' said the king; 'you have done that very well indeed. If you are as successful with a little task which I shall give you to-morrow we shall consider the matter settled, and you shall marry the princess.'

Next day it was announced that the task would be performed in the great hall of the palace, and everyone was invited to come and witness it. The king and queen sat on their thrones, with the princess beside them, and the lords and ladies were all round the hall. At a sign from the king, two servants carried in a large empty tub, which they set down in the open space before the throne, and Jesper was told to stand beside it.

'Now,' said the king, 'you must tell us as many undoubted truths as will fill that tub, or you can't have the princess.'

'But how are we to know when the tub is full?' said Jesper.

'Don't you trouble about that,' said the king; 'that's my part of the business.'

This seemed to everybody present rather unfair, but no one liked to be the first to say so, and Jesper had to put the best face he could on the matter, and begin his story.

'Yesterday,' he said, 'when I was herding the hares, there came to me a girl, in a shabby dress, and begged me to give her one of them. She got the hare, but she had to give me a kiss for it; AND THAT GIRL WAS THE PRINCESS. Isn't that true?' said he, looking at her.

The princess blushed and looked very uncomfortable, but had to admit that it was true.

'That hasn't filled much of the tub,' said the king. 'Go on again.'

'After that,' said Jesper, 'a stout old woman, in a peasant's dress, came and begged for a hare. Before she got it, she had to walk round me on tiptoe, turn up her eyes, and cackle like a hen; AND THAT OLD WOMAN WAS THE QUEEN. Isn't that true, now?'

The queen turned very red and hot, but couldn't deny it.

'H-m,' said the king; 'that is something, but the tub isn't full yet.' To the queen he whispered, 'I didn't think you would be such a fool.'

'What did YOU do?' she whispered in return.

'Do you suppose I would do anything for HIM?' said the king, and then hurriedly ordered Jesper to go on.

'In the next place,' said Jesper, 'there came a fat old fellow on the same errand. He was very proud and dignified, but in order to get the hare he actually stood on his head, whacked his heels together, and cried "Hurrah"; and that old fellow was the----'

'Stop, stop,' shouted the king; 'you needn't say another word; the tub is full.' Then all the court applauded, and the king and queen accepted Jesper as their son-in- law, and the princess was very well pleased, for by this time she had quite fallen in love with him, because he was so handsome and so clever. When the old king got time to think over it, he was quite convinced that his kingdom would be safe in Jesper's hands if he looked after the people as well as he herded the hares.

[Scandinavian.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

THE UNDERGROUND WORKERS

On a bitter night somewhere between Christmas and the New Year, a man set out to walk to the neighbouring village. It was not many miles off, but the snow was so thick that there were no roads, or walls, or hedges left to guide him, and very soon he lost his way altogether, and was glad to get shelter from the wind behind a thick juniper tree. Here he resolved to spend the night, thinking that when the sun rose he would be able to see his path again.

So he tucked his legs snugly under him like a hedgehog, rolled himself up in his sheepskin, and went to sleep. How long he slept, I cannot tell you, but after awhile he became aware that some one was gently shaking him, while a stranger whispered, 'My good man, get up! If you lie there any more, you will be buried in the snow, and no one will ever know what became of you.'

The sleeper slowly raised his head from his furs, and opened his heavy eyes. Near him stood a long thin man, holding in his hand a young fir tree taller than himself. 'Come with me,' said the man, 'a little way off we have made a large fire, and you will rest far better there than out upon this moor.' The sleeper did not wait to be asked twice, but rose at once and followed the stranger. The snow was falling so fast that he could not see three steps in front of him, till the stranger waved his staff, when the drifts parted before them. Very soon they reached a wood, and saw the friendly glow of a fire.

'What is your name?' asked the stranger, suddenly turning round.

'I am called Hans, the son of Long Hans,' said the peasant.

In front of the fire three men were sitting clothed in white, just as if it was summer, and for about thirty feet all round winter had been banished. The moss was dry and the plants green, while the grass seemed all alive with the hum of bees and cockchafers. But above the noise the son of Long Hans could hear the whistling of the wind and the crackling of the branches as they fell beneath the weight of the snow.

'Well! you son of Long Hans, isn't this more comfortable than your juniper bush?' laughed the stranger, and for answer Hans replied he could not thank his friend enough for having brought him here, and, throwing off his sheepskin, rolled it up as a pillow. Then, after a hot drink which warmed both their hearts, they lay down on the ground. The stranger talked for a little to the other men in a language Hans did not understand, and after listening for a short time he once more fell asleep.

When he awoke, neither wood nor fire was to be seen, and he did not know where he was. He rubbed his eyes, and began to recall the events of the night, thinking he must have been dreaming; but for all that, he could not make out how he came to be in this place.

Suddenly a loud noise struck on his ear, and he felt the earth tremble beneath his feet. Hans listened for a moment, then resolved to go towards the place where the sound came from, hoping he might come across some human being. He found himself at length at the mouth of a rocky cave in which a fire seemed burning. He entered, and saw a huge forge, and a crowd of men in front of it, blowing bellows and wielding hammers, and to each anvil were seven men, and a set of more comical smiths could not be found if you searched all the world through! Their heads were bigger than their little bodies, and their hammers twice the size of themselves, but the strongest men on earth could not have handled their iron clubs more stoutly or given lustier blows.

The little blacksmiths were clad in leather aprons, which covered them from their necks to their feet in front, and left their backs naked. On a high stool against the wall sat the man with the pinewood staff, watching sharply the way the little fellows did their work, and near him stood a large can, from which every now and then the workers would come and take a drink. The master no longer wore the white garments of the day before, but a black jerkin, held in its place by a leathern girdle with huge clasps.

From time to time he would give his workmen a sign with his staff, for it was useless to speak amid such a noise.

If any of them had noticed that there was a stranger present they took no heed of him, but went on with what they were doing. After some hours' hard labour came the time for rest, and they all flung their hammers to the ground and trooped out of the cave.

Then the master got down from his seat and said to Hans:

'I saw you come in, but the work was pressing, and I could not stop to speak to you. To-day you must be my guest, and I will show you something of the way in which I live. Wait here for a moment, while I lay aside these dirty clothes.' With these words he unlocked a door in the cave, and bade Hans pass in before him.

Oh, what riches and treasures met Hans' astonished eyes! Gold and silver bars lay piled on the floor, and glittered so that you could not look at them! Hans thought he would count them for fun, and had already reached the five hundred and seventieth when his host returned and cried, laughing:

'Do not try to count them, it would take too long; choose some of the bars from the heap, as I should like to make you a present of them.'

Hans did not wait to be asked twice, and stooped to pick up a bar of gold, but though he put forth all his strength he could not even move it with both hands, still less lift it off the ground.

'Why, you have no more power than a flea,' laughed the host; 'you will have to content yourself with feasting your eyes upon them!'

So he bade Hans follow him through other rooms, till they entered one bigger than a church, filled, like the rest, with gold and silver. Hans wondered to see these vast riches, which might have bought all the kingdoms of the world, and lay buried, useless, he thought, to anyone.

'What is the reason,' he asked of his guide, 'that you gather up these treasures here, where they can do good to nobody? If they fell into the hands of men, everyone would be rich, and none need work or suffer hunger.'

'And it is exactly for that reason,' answered he, 'that I must keep these riches out of their way. The whole world would sink to idleness if men were not forced to earn their daily bread. It is only through work and care that man can ever hope to be good for anything.'

Hans stared at these words, and at last he begged that his host would tell him what use it was to anybody that this gold and silver should lie mouldering there, and the owner of it be continually trying to increase his treasure, which already overflowed his store rooms.

'I am not really a man,' replied his guide, 'though I have the outward form of one, but one of those beings to whom is given the care of the world. It is my task and that of my workmen to prepare under the earth the gold and silver, a small portion of which finds its way every year to the upper world, but only just enough to help them carry on their business. To none comes wealth without trouble: we must first dig out the gold and mix the grains with earth, clay, and sand. Then, after long and hard seeking, it will be found in this state, by those who have good luck or much patience. But, my friend, the hour of dinner is at hand. If you wish to remain in this place, and feast your eyes on this gold, then stay till I call you.'

In his absence Hans wandered from one treasure chamber to another, sometimes trying to break off a little lump of gold, but never able to do it. After awhile his host came back, but so changed that Hans could not believe it was really he. His silken clothes were of the brightest flame colour, richly trimmed with gold fringes and lace; a golden girdle was round his waist, while his head was encircled with a crown of gold, and precious stones twinkled about him like stars in a winter's night, and in place of his wooden stick he held a finely worked golden staff.

The lord of all this treasure locked the doors and put the keys in his pocket, then led Hans into another room, where dinner was laid for them. Table and seats were all of silver, while the dishes and plates were of solid gold. Directly they sat down, a dozen little servants appeared to wait on them, which they did so cleverly and so quickly that Hans could hardly believe they had no wings. As they did not reach as high as the table, they were often obliged to jump and hop right on to the top to get at the dishes. Everything was new to Hans, and though he was rather bewildered he enjoyed himself very much, especially when the man with the golden crown began to tell him many things he had never heard of before.

'Between Christmas and the New Year,' said he, 'I often amuse myself by wandering about the earth watching the doings of men and learning something about them. But as far as I have seen and heard I cannot speak well of them. The greater part of them are always quarrelling and complaining of each other's faults, while nobody thinks of his own.'

Hans tried to deny the truth of these words, but he could not do it, and sat silent, hardly listening to what his friend was saying. Then he went to sleep in his chair, and knew nothing of what was happening.

Wonderful dreams came to him during his sleep, where the bars of gold continually hovered before his eyes. He felt stronger than he had ever felt during his waking moments, and lifted two bars quite easily on to his back. He did this so often that at length his strength seemed exhausted, and he sank almost breathless on the ground. Then he heard the sound of cheerful voices, and the song of the blacksmiths as they blew their bellows--he even felt as if he saw the sparks flashing before his eyes. Stretching himself, he awoke slowly, and here he was in the green forest, and instead of the glow of the fire in the underworld the sun was streaming on him, and he sat up wondering why he felt so strange.

At length his memory came back to him, and as he called to mind all the wonderful things he had seen he tried in vain to make them agree with those that happen every day. After thinking it over till he was nearly mad, he tried at last to believe that one night between Christmas and the New Year he had met a stranger in the forest, and had slept all night in his company before a big fire; the next day they had dined together, and had drunk a great deal more than was good for them--in short, he had spent two whole days revelling with another man. But here, with the full tide of summer around him, he could hardly accept his own explanation, and felt that he must have been the plaything or sport of some magician.

Near him, in the full sunlight, were the traces of a dead fire, and when he drew close to it he saw that what he had taken for ashes was really fine silver dust, and that the half burnt firewood was made of gold.

Oh, how lucky Hans thought himself; but where should he get a sack to carry his treasure home before anyone else found it? But necessity is the mother of invention: Hans threw off his fur coat, gathered up the silver ashes so carefully in it that none remained behind, laid the gold sticks on top, and tied up the bag thus made with his girdle, so that nothing should fall out. The load was not, in point of fact, very heavy, although it seemed so to his imagination, and he moved slowly along till he found a safe hiding-place for it.

In this way Hans suddenly became rich--rich enough to buy a property of his own. But being a prudent man, he finally decided that it would be best for him to leave his old neighbourhood and look for a home in a distant part of the country, where nobody knew anything about him. It did not take him long to find what he wanted, and after he had paid for it there was plenty of money left over. When he was settled, he married a pretty girl who lived near by, and had some children, to whom on his death-bed he told the story of the lord of the underworld, and how he had made Hans rich.

[Ehstnische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

THE HISTORY OF DWARF LONG NOSE

It is a great mistake to think that fairies, witches, magicians, and such people lived only in Eastern countries and in such times as those of the Caliph Haroun Al-Raschid. Fairies and their like belong to every country and every age, and no doubt we should see plenty of them now--if we only knew how.

In a large town in Germany there lived, some couple of hundred years ago, a cobbler and his wife. They were poor and hard-working. The man sat all day in a little stall at the street corner and mended any shoes that were brought him. His wife sold the fruit and vegetables they grew in their garden in the Market Place, and as she was always neat and clean and her goods were temptingly spread out she had plenty of customers.

The couple had one boy called Jem. A handsome, pleasant-faced boy of twelve, and tall for his age. He used to sit by his mother in the market and would carry home what people bought from her, for which they often gave him a pretty flower, or a slice of cake, or even some small coin.

One day Jem and his mother sat as usual in the Market Place with plenty of nice herbs and vegetables spread out on the board, and in some smaller baskets early pears, apples, and apricots. Jem cried his wares at the top of his voice:

'This way, gentlemen! See these lovely cabbages and these fresh herbs! Early apples, ladies; early pears and apricots, and all cheap. Come, buy, buy!'

As he cried an old woman came across the Market Place. She looked very torn and ragged, and had a small sharp face, all wrinkled, with red eyes, and a thin hooked nose which nearly met her chin. She leant on a tall stick and limped and shuffled and stumbled along as if she were going to fall on her nose at any moment.

In this fashion she came along till she got to the stall where Jem and his mother were, and there she stopped.

'Are you Hannah the herb seller?' she asked in a croaky voice as her head shook to and fro.

'Yes, I am,' was the answer. 'Can I serve you?'

'We'll see; we'll see! Let me look at those herbs. I wonder if you've got what I want,' said the old woman as she thrust a pair of hideous brown hands into the herb basket, and began turning over all the neatly packed herbs with her skinny fingers, often holding them up to her nose and sniffing at them.

The cobbler's wife felt much disgusted at seeing her wares treated like this, but she dared not speak. When the old hag had turned over the whole basket she muttered, 'Bad stuff, bad stuff; much better fifty years ago--all bad.'

This made Jem very angry

'You are a very rude old woman,' he cried out. 'First you mess all our nice herbs about with your horrid brown fingers and sniff at them with your long nose till no one else will care to buy them, and then you say it's all bad stuff, though the duke's cook himself buys all his herbs from us.'

The old woman looked sharply at the saucy boy, laughed unpleasantly, and said:

'So you don't like my long nose, sonny? Well, you shall have one yourself, right down to your chin.'

As she spoke she shuffled towards the hamper of cabbages, took up one after another, squeezed them hard, and threw them back, muttering again, 'Bad stuff, bad stuff.'

'Don't waggle your head in that horrid way,' begged Jem anxiously. 'Your neck is as thin as a cabbage-stalk, and it might easily break and your head fall into the basket, and then who would buy anything?'

'Don't you like thin necks?' laughed the old woman. 'Then you sha'n't have any, but a head stuck close between your shoulders so that it may be quite sure not to fall off.'

'Don't talk such nonsense to the child,' said the mother at last.

'If you wish to buy, please make haste, as you are keeping other customers away.'

'Very well, I will do as you ask,' said the old woman, with an angry look. 'I will buy these six cabbages, but, as you see, I can only walk with my stick and can carry nothing. Let your boy carry them home for me and I'll pay him for his trouble.'

The little fellow didn't like this, and began to cry, for he was afraid of the old woman, but his mother ordered him to go, for she thought it wrong not to help such a weakly old creature; so, still crying, he gathered the cabbages into a basket and followed the old woman across the Market Place.

It took her more than half an hour to get to a distant part of the little town, but at last she stopped in front of a small tumble-down house. She drew a rusty old hook from her pocket and stuck it into a little hole in the door, which suddenly flew open. How surprised Jem was when they went in! The house was splendidly furnished, the walls and ceiling of marble, the furniture of ebony inlaid with gold and precious stones, the floor of such smooth slippery glass that the little fellow tumbled down more than once.

The old woman took out a silver whistle and blew it till the sound rang through the house. Immediately a lot of guinea pigs came running down the stairs, but Jem thought it rather odd that they all walked on their hind legs, wore nutshells for shoes, and men's clothes, whilst even their hats were put on in the newest fashion.

'Where are my slippers, lazy crew?' cried the old woman, and hit about with her stick. 'How long am I to stand waiting here?'

They rushed upstairs again and returned with a pair of cocoa nuts lined with leather, which she put on her feet. Now all limping and shuffling was at an end. She threw away her stick and walked briskly across the glass floor, drawing little Jem after her. At last she paused in a room which looked almost like a kitchen, it was so full of pots and pans, but the tables were of mahogany and the sofas and chairs covered with the richest stuffs.

'Sit down,' said the old woman pleasantly, and she pushed Jem into a corner of a sofa and put a table close in front of him. 'Sit down, you've had a long walk and a heavy load to carry, and I must give you something for your trouble. Wait a bit, and I'll give you some nice soup, which you'll remember as long as you live.'

So saying, she whistled again. First came in guinea pigs in men's clothing. They had tied on large kitchen aprons, and in their belts were stuck carving knives and sauce ladles and such things. After them hopped in a number of squirrels. They too walked on their hind legs, wore full Turkish trousers, and little green velvet caps on their heads. They seemed to be the scullions, for they clambered up the walls and brought down pots and pans, eggs, flour, butter, and herbs, which they carried to the stove. Here the old woman was bustling about, and Jem could see that she was cooking something very special for him. At last the broth began to bubble and boil, and she drew off the saucepan and poured its contents into a silver bowl, which she set before Jem.

'There, my boy,' said she, 'eat this soup and then you'll have everything which pleased you so much about me. And you shall be a clever cook too, but the real herb--no, the REAL herb you'll never find. Why had your mother not got it in her basket?'

The child could not think what she was talking about, but he quite understood the soup, which tasted most delicious. His mother had often given him nice things, but nothing had ever seemed so good as this. The smell of the herbs and spices rose from the bowl, and the soup tasted both sweet and sharp at the same time, and was very strong. As he was finishing it the guinea pigs lit some Arabian incense, which gradually filled the room with clouds of blue vapour. They grew thicker and thicker and the scent nearly overpowered the boy. He reminded himself that he must get back to his mother, but whenever he tried to rouse himself to go he sank back again drowsily, and at last he fell sound asleep in the corner of the sofa.

Strange dreams came to him. He thought the old woman took off all his clothes and wrapped him up in a squirrel skin, and that he went about with the other squirrels and guinea pigs, who were all very pleasant and well mannered, and waited on the old woman.

First he learned to clean her cocoa-nut shoes with oil and to rub them up. Then he learnt to catch the little sun moths and rub them through the finest sieves, and the flour from them he made into soft bread for the toothless old woman.

In this way he passed from one kind of service to another, spending a year in each, till in the fourth year he was promoted to the kitchen. Here he worked his way up from under-scullion to head-pastrycook, and reached the greatest perfection. He could make all the most difficult dishes, and two hundred different kinds of patties, soup flavoured with every sort of herb--he had learnt it all, and learnt it well and quickly.

When he had lived seven years with the old woman she ordered him one day, as she was going out, to kill and pluck a chicken, stuff it with herbs, and have it very nicely roasted by the time she got back. He did this quite according to rule. He wrung the chicken's neck, plunged it into boiling water, carefully plucked out all the feathers, and rubbed the skin nice and smooth. Then he went to fetch the herbs to stuff it with. In the store-room he noticed a half-opened cupboard which he did not remember having seen before. He peeped in and saw a lot of baskets from which came a strong and pleasant smell. He opened one and found a very uncommon herb in it. The stems and leaves were a bluish green, and above them was a little flower of a deep bright red, edged with yellow. He gazed at the flower, smelt it, and found it gave the same strong strange perfume which came from the soup the old woman had made him. But the smell was so sharp that he began to sneeze again and again, and at last--he woke up!

There he lay on the old woman's sofa and stared about him in surprise. 'Well, what odd dreams one does have to be sure!' he said to himself. 'Why, I could have sworn I had been a squirrel, a companion of guinea pigs and such creatures, and had become a great cook, too. How mother will laugh when I tell her! But won't she scold me, though, for sleeping away here in a strange house, instead of helping her at market!'

He jumped up and prepared to go: all his limbs still seemed quite stiff with his long sleep, especially his neck, for he could not move his head easily, and he laughed at his own stupidity at being still so drowsy that he kept knocking his nose against the wall or cupboards. The squirrels and guinea pigs ran whimpering after him, as though they would like to go too, and he begged them to come when he reached the door, but they all turned and ran quickly back into the house again.

The part of the town was out of the way, and Jem did not know the many narrow streets in it and was puzzled by their windings and by the crowd of people, who seemed excited about some show. From what he heard, he fancied they were going to see a dwarf, for he heard them call out: 'Just look at the ugly dwarf!' 'What a long nose he has, and see how his head is stuck in between his shoulders, and only look at his ugly brown hands!' If he had not been in such a hurry to get back to his mother, he would have gone too, for he loved shows with giants and dwarfs and the like.

He was quite puzzled when he reached the market-place. There sat his mother, with a good deal of fruit still in her baskets, so he felt he could not have slept so very long, but it struck him that she was sad, for she did not call to the passers-by, but sat with her head resting on her hand, and as he came nearer he thought she looked paler than usual.

He hesitated what to do, but at last he slipped behind her, laid a hand on her arm, and said: 'Mammy, what's the matter? Are you angry with me?'

She turned round quickly and jumped up with a cry of horror.

'What do you want, you hideous dwarf?' she cried; 'get away; I can't bear such tricks.'

'But, mother dear, what's the matter with you?' repeated Jem, quite frightened. 'You can't be well. Why do you want to drive your son away?'

'I have said already, get away,' replied Hannah, quite angrily. 'You won't get anything out of me by your games, you monstrosity.'

'Oh dear, oh dear! she must be wandering in her mind,' murmured the lad to himself. 'How can I manage to get her home? Dearest mother, do look at me close. Can't you see I am your own son Jem?'

'Well, did you ever hear such impudence?' asked Hannah, turning to a neighbour. 'Just see that frightful dwarf--would you believe that he wants me to think he is my son Jem?'

Then all the market women came round and talked all together and scolded as hard as they could, and said what a shame it was to make game of Mrs. Hannah, who had never got over the loss of her beautiful boy, who had been stolen from her seven years ago, and they threatened to fall upon Jem and scratch him well if he did not go away at once.

Poor Jem did not know what to make of it all. He was sure he had gone to market with his mother only that morning, had helped to set out the stall, had gone to the old woman's house, where he had some soup and a little nap, and now, when he came back, they were all talking of seven years. And they called him a horrid dwarf! Why, what had happened to him? When he found that his mother would really have nothing to do with him he turned away with tears in his eyes, and went sadly down the street towards his father's stall.

'Now I'll see whether he will know me,' thought he. 'I'll stand by the door and talk to him.'

When he got to the stall he stood in the doorway and looked in. The cobbler was so busy at work that he did not see him for some time, but, happening to look up, he caught sight of his visitor, and letting shoes, thread, and everything fall to the ground, he cried with horror: 'Good heavens! what is that?'

'Good evening, master,' said the boy, as he stepped in. 'How do you do?'

'Very ill, little sir, replied the father, to Jem's surprise, for he did not seem to know him. 'Business does not go well. I am all alone, and am getting old, and a workman is costly.'

'But haven't you a son who could learn your trade by degrees?' asked Jem.

'I had one: he was called Jem, and would have been a tall sturdy lad of twenty by this time, and able to help me well. Why, when he was only twelve he was quite sharp and quick, and had learnt many little things, and a good-looking boy too, and pleasant, so that customers were taken by him. Well, well! so goes the world!'

'But where is your son?' asked Jem, with a trembling voice.

'Heaven only knows!' replied the man; 'seven years ago he was stolen from the market-place, and we have heard no more of him.'

'SEVEN YEARS AGO!' cried Jem, with horror.

'Yes, indeed, seven years ago, though it seems but yesterday that my wife came back howling and crying, and saying the child had not come back all day. I always thought and said that something of the kind would happen. Jem was a beautiful boy, and everyone made much of him, and my wife was so proud of him, and liked him to carry the vegetables and things to grand folks' houses, where he was petted and made much of. But I used to say, "Take care--the town is large, there are plenty of bad people in it--keep a sharp eye on Jem." And so it happened; for one day an old woman came and bought a lot of things--more than she could carry; so my wife, being a kindly soul, lent her the boy, and--we have never seen him since.'

'And that was seven years ago, you say?'

'Yes, seven years: we had him cried--we went from house to house. Many knew the pretty boy, and were fond of him, but it was all in vain. No one seemed to know the old woman who bought the vegetables either; only one old woman, who is ninety years old, said it might have been the fairy Herbaline, who came into the town once in every fifty years to buy things.'

As his father spoke, things grew clearer to Jem's mind, and he saw now that he had not been dreaming, but had really served the old woman seven years in the shape of a squirrel. As he thought it over rage filled his heart. Seven years of his youth had been stolen from him, and what had he got in return? To learn to rub up cocoa nuts, and to polish glass floors, and to be taught cooking by guinea pigs! He stood there thinking, till at last his father asked him:

'Is there anything I can do for you, young gentleman? Shall I make you a pair of slippers, or perhaps' with a smile--'a case for your nose?'

'What have you to do with my nose?' asked Jem. 'And why should I want a case for it?'

'Well, everyone to his taste,' replied the cobbler; 'but I must say if I had such a nose I would have a nice red leather cover made for it. Here is a nice piece; and think what a protection it would be to you. As it is, you must be constantly knocking up against things.'

The lad was dumb with fright. He felt his nose. It was thick, and quite two hands long. So, then, the old woman had changed his shape, and that was why his own mother did not know him, and called him a horrid dwarf!

'Master,' said he, 'have you got a glass that I could see myself in?'

'Young gentleman,' was the answer, 'your appearance is hardly one to be vain of, and there is no need to waste your time looking in a glass. Besides, I have none here, and if you must have one you had better ask Urban the barber, who lives over the way, to lend you his. Good morning.'

So saying, he gently pushed Jem into the street, shut the door, and went back to his work.

Jem stepped across to the barber, whom he had known in old days.

'Good morning, Urban,' said he; 'may I look at myself in your glass for a moment?'

'With pleasure,' said the barber, laughing, and all the people in his shop fell to laughing also. 'You are a pretty youth, with your swan-like neck and white hands and small nose. No wonder you are rather vain; but look as long as you like at yourself.'

So spoke the barber, and a titter ran round the room. Meantime Jem had stepped up to the mirror, and stood gazing sadly at his reflection. Tears came to his eyes.

'No wonder you did not know your child again, dear mother,' thought he; 'he wasn't like this when you were so proud of his looks.'

His eyes had grown quite small, like pigs' eyes, his nose was huge and hung down over his mouth and chin, his throat seemed to have disappeared altogether, and his head was fixed stiffly between his shoulders. He was no taller than he had been seven years ago, when he was not much more than twelve years old, but he made up in breadth, and his back and chest had grown into lumps like two great sacks. His legs were small and spindly, but his arms were as large as those of a well-grown man, with large brown hands, and long skinny fingers.

Then he remembered the morning when he had first seen the old woman, and her threats to him, and without saying a word he left the barber's shop.

He determined to go again to his mother, and found her still in the market-place. He begged her to listen quietly to him, and he reminded her of the day when he went away with the old woman, and of many things in his childhood, and told her how the fairy had bewitched him, and he had served her seven years. Hannah did not know what to think--the story was so strange; and it seemed impossible to think her pretty boy and this hideous dwarf were the same. At last she decided to go and talk to her husband about it. She gathered up her baskets, told Jem to follow her, and went straight to the cobbler's stall.

'Look here,' said she, 'this creature says he is our lost son. He has been telling me how he was stolen seven years ago, and bewitched by a fairy.'

'Indeed!' interrupted the cobbler angrily. 'Did he tell you this? Wait a minute, you rascal! Why I told him all about it myself only an hour ago, and then he goes off to humbug you. So you were bewitched, my son were you? Wait a bit, and I'll bewitch you!'

So saying, he caught up a bundle of straps, and hit out at Jem so hard that he ran off crying.

The poor little dwarf roamed about all the rest of the day without food or drink, and at night was glad to lie down and sleep on the steps of a church. He woke next morning with the first rays of light, and began to think what he could do to earn a living. Suddenly he remembered that he was an excellent cook, and he determined to look out for a place.

As soon as it was quite daylight he set out for the palace, for he knew that the grand duke who reigned over the country was fond of good things.

When he reached the palace all the servants crowded about him, and made fun of him, and at last their shouts and laughter grew so loud that the head steward rushed out, crying, 'For goodness sake, be quiet, can't you. Don't you know his highness is still asleep?'

Some of the servants ran off at once, and others pointed out Jem.

Indeed, the steward found it hard to keep himself from laughing at the comic sight, but he ordered the servants off and led the dwarf into his own room.

When he heard him ask for a place as cook, he said: 'You make some mistake, my lad. I think you want to be the grand duke's dwarf, don't you?'

'No, sir,' replied Jem. 'I am an experienced cook, and if you will kindly take me to the head cook he may find me of some use.'

'Well, as you will; but believe me, you would have an easier place as the grand ducal dwarf.'

So saying, the head steward led him to the head cook's room.

'Sir,' asked Jem, as he bowed till his nose nearly touched the floor, 'do you want an experienced cook?'

The head cook looked him over from head to foot, and burst out laughing.

'You a cook! Do you suppose our cooking stoves are so low that you can look into any saucepan on them? Oh, my dear little fellow, whoever sent you to me wanted to make fun of you.'

But the dwarf was not to be put off.

'What matters an extra egg or two, or a little butter or flour and spice more or less, in such a house as this?' said he. 'Name any dish you wish to have cooked, and give me the materials I ask for, and you shall see.'

He said much more, and at last persuaded the head cook to give him a trial.

They went into the kitchen--a huge place with at least twenty fireplaces, always alight. A little stream of clear water ran through the room, and live fish were kept at one end of it. Everything in the kitchen was of the best and most beautiful kind, and swarms of cooks and scullions were busy preparing dishes.

When the head cook came in with Jem everyone stood quite still.

'What has his highness ordered for luncheon?' asked the head cook.

'Sir, his highness has graciously ordered a Danish soup and red Hamburg dumplings.'

'Good,' said the head cook. 'Have you heard, and do you feel equal to making these dishes? Not that you will be able to make the dumplings, for they are a secret receipt.'

'Is that all!' said Jem, who had often made both dishes. 'Nothing easier. Let me have some eggs, a piece of wild boar, and such and such roots and herbs for the soup; and as for the dumplings,' he added in a low voice to the head cook, 'I shall want four different kinds of meat, some wine, a duck's marrow, some ginger, and a herb called heal-well.'

'Why,' cried the astonished cook, 'where did you learn cooking? Yes, those are the exact materials, but we never used the herb heal-well, which, I am sure, must be an improvement.'

And now Jem was allowed to try his hand. He could not nearly reach up to the kitchen range, but by putting a wide plank on two chairs he managed very well. All the cooks stood round to look on, and could not help admiring the quick, clever way in which he set to work. At last, when all was ready, Jem ordered the two dishes to be put on the fire till he gave the word. Then he began to count: 'One, two, three,' till he got to five hundred when he cried, 'Now!' The saucepans were taken off, and he invited the head cook to taste.

The first cook took a golden spoon, washed and wiped it, and handed it to the head cook, who solemnly approached, tasted the dishes, and smacked his lips over them. 'First rate, indeed!' he exclaimed. 'You certainly are a master of the art, little fellow, and the herb heal-well gives a particular relish.'

As he was speaking, the duke's valet came to say that his highness was ready for luncheon, and it was served at once in silver dishes. The head cook took Jem to his own room, but had hardly had time to question him before he was ordered to go at once to the grand duke. He hurried on his best clothes and followed the messenger.

The grand duke was looking much pleased. He had emptied the dishes, and was wiping his mouth as the head cook came in. 'Who cooked my luncheon to-day?' asked he. 'I must say your dumplings are always very good; but I don't think I ever tasted anything so delicious as they were to-day. Who made them?'

'It is a strange story, your highness,' said the cook, and told him the whole matter, which surprised the duke so much that he sent for the dwarf and asked him many questions. Of course, Jem could not say he had been turned into a squirrel, but he said he was without parents and had been taught cooking by an old woman.

'If you will stay with me,' said the grand duke, 'you shall have fifty ducats a year, besides a new coat and a couple of pairs of trousers. You must undertake to cook my luncheon yourself and to direct what I shall have for dinner, and you shall be called assistant head cook.'

Jem bowed to the ground, and promised to obey his new master in all things.

He lost no time in setting to work, and everyone rejoiced at having him in the kitchen, for the duke was not a patient man, and had been known to throw plates and dishes at his cooks and servants if the things served were not quite to his taste. Now all was changed. He never even grumbled at anything, had five meals instead of three, thought everything delicious, and grew fatter daily.

And so Jem lived on for two years, much respected and considered, and only saddened when he thought of his parents. One day passed much like another till the following incident happened.

Dwarf Long Nose--as he was always called--made a practice of doing his marketing as much as possible himself, and whenever time allowed went to the market to buy his poultry and fruit. One morning he was in the goose market, looking for some nice fat geese. No one thought of laughing at his appearance now; he was known as the duke's special body cook, and every goose-woman felt honoured if his nose turned her way.

He noticed one woman sitting apart with a number of geese, but not crying or praising them like the rest. He went up to her, felt and weighed her geese, and, finding them very good, bought three and the cage to put them in, hoisted them on his broad shoulders, and set off on his way back.

As he went, it struck him that two of the geese were gobbling and screaming as geese do, but the third sat quite still, only heaving a deep sigh now and then, like a human being. 'That goose is ill,' said he; 'I must make haste to kill and dress her.'

But the goose answered him quite distinctly:

'Squeeze too tight And I'll bite, If my neck a twist you gave I'd bring you to an early grave.'

Quite frightened, the dwarf set down the cage, and the goose gazed at him with sad wise-looking eyes and sighed again.

'Good gracious!' said Long Nose. 'So you can speak, Mistress Goose. I never should have thought it! Well, don't be anxious. I know better than to hurt so rare a bird. But I could bet you were not always in this plumage--wasn't I a squirrel myself for a time?'

'You are right,' said the goose, 'in supposing I was not born in this horrid shape. Ah! no one ever thought that Mimi, the daughter of the great Weatherbold, would be killed for the ducal table.'

'Be quite easy, Mistress Mimi,' comforted Jem. 'As sure as I'm an honest man and assistant head cook to his highness, no one shall harm you. I will make a hutch for you in my own rooms, and you shall be well fed, and I'll come and talk to you as much as I can. I'll tell all the other cooks that I am fattening up a goose on very special food for the grand duke, and at the first good opportunity I will set you free.'

The goose thanked him with tears in her eyes, and the dwarf kept his word. He killed the other two geese for dinner, but built a little shed for Mimi in one of his rooms, under the pretence of fattening her under his own eye. He spent all his spare time talking to her and comforting her, and fed her on all the daintiest dishes. They confided their histories to each other, and Jem learnt that the goose was the daughter of the wizard Weatherbold, who lived on the island of Gothland. He fell out with an old fairy, who got the better of him by cunning and treachery, and to revenge herself turned his daughter into a goose and carried her off to this distant place. When Long Nose told her his story she said:

'I know a little of these matters, and what you say shows me that you are under a herb enchantment--that is to say, that if you can find the herb whose smell woke you up the spell would be broken.'

This was but small comfort for Jem, for how and where was he to find the herb?

About this time the grand duke had a visit from a neighbouring prince, a friend of his. He sent for Long Nose and said to him:

'Now is the time to show what you can really do. This prince who is staying with me has better dinners than any one except myself, and is a great judge of cooking. As long as he is here you must take care that my table shall be served in a manner to surprise him constantly. At the same time, on pain of my displeasure, take care that no dish shall appear twice. Get everything you wish and spare nothing. If you want to melt down gold and precious stones, do so. I would rather be a poor man than have to blush before him.'

The dwarf bowed and answered:

'Your highness shall be obeyed. I will do all in my power to please you and the prince.'

From this time the little cook was hardly seen except in the kitchen, where, surrounded by his helpers, he gave orders, baked, stewed, flavoured and dished up all manner of dishes.

The prince had been a fortnight with the grand duke, and enjoyed himself mightily. They ate five times a day, and the duke had every reason to be content with the dwarf's talents, for he saw how pleased his guest looked. On the fifteenth day the duke sent for the dwarf and presented him to the prince.

'You are a wonderful cook,' said the prince, 'and you certainly know what is good. All the time I have been here you have never repeated a dish, and all were excellent. But tell me why you have never served the queen of all dishes, a Suzeraine Pasty?'

The dwarf felt frightened, for he had never heard of this Queen of Pasties before. But he did not lose his presence of mind, and replied:

'I have waited, hoping that your highness' visit here would last some time, for I proposed to celebrate the last day of your stay with this truly royal dish.'

'Indeed,' laughed the grand duke; 'then I suppose you would have waited for the day of my death to treat me to it, for you have never sent it up to me yet. However, you will have to invent some other farewell dish, for the pasty must be on my table to-morrow.'

'As your highness pleases,' said the dwarf, and took leave.

But it did not please HIM at all. The moment of disgrace seemed at hand, for he had no idea how to make this pasty. He went to his rooms very sad. As he sat there lost in thought the goose Mimi, who was left free to walk about, came up to him and asked what was the matter? When she heard she said:

'Cheer up, my friend. I know the dish quite well: we often had it at home, and I can guess pretty well how it was made.' Then she told him what to put in, adding: 'I think that will be all right, and if some trifle is left out perhaps they won't find it out.'

Sure enough, next day a magnificent pasty all wreathed round with flowers was placed on the table. Jem himself put on his best clothes and went into the dining hall. As he entered the head carver was in the act of cutting up the pie and helping the duke and his guests. The grand duke took a large mouthful and threw up his eyes as he swallowed it.

'Oh! oh! this may well be called the Queen of Pasties, and at the same time my dwarf must be called the king of cooks. Don't you think so, dear friend?'

The prince took several small pieces, tasted and examined carefully, and then said with a mysterious and sarcastic smile:

'The dish is very nicely made, but the Suzeraine is not quite complete--as I expected.'

The grand duke flew into a rage.

'Dog of a cook,' he shouted; 'how dare you serve me so? I've a good mind to chop off your great head as a punishment.'

'For mercy's sake, don't, your highness! I made the pasty according to the best rules; nothing has been left out. Ask the prince what else I should have put in.'

The prince laughed. 'I was sure you could not make this dish as well as my cook, friend Long Nose. Know, then, that a herb is wanting called Relish, which is not known in this country, but which gives the pasty its peculiar flavour, and without which your master will never taste it to perfection.'

The grand duke was more furious than ever.

'But I WILL taste it to perfection,' he roared. 'Either the pasty must be made properly to-morrow or this rascal's head shall come off. Go, scoundrel, I give you twenty-four hours respite.'

The poor dwarf hurried back to his room, and poured out his grief to the goose.

'Oh, is that all,' said she, 'then I can help you, for my father taught me to know all plants and herbs. Luckily this is a new moon just now, for the herb only springs up at such times. But tell me, are there chestnut trees near the palace?'

'Oh, yes!' cried Long Nose, much relieved; 'near the lake--only a couple of hundred yards from the palace--is a large clump of them. But why do you ask?'

'Because the herb only grows near the roots of chestnut trees,' replied Mimi; 'so let us lose no time in finding it. Take me under your arm and put me down out of doors, and I'll hunt for it.'

He did as she bade, and as soon as they were in the garden put her on the ground, when she waddled off as fast as she could towards the lake, Jem hurrying after her with an anxious heart, for he knew that his life depended on her success. The goose hunted everywhere, but in vain. She searched under each chestnut tree, turning every blade of grass with her bill--nothing to be seen, and evening was drawing on!

Suddenly the dwarf noticed a big old tree standing alone on the other side of the lake. 'Look,' cried he, 'let us try our luck there.'

The goose fluttered and skipped in front, and he ran after as fast as his little legs could carry him. The tree cast a wide shadow, and it was almost dark beneath it, but suddenly the goose stood still, flapped her wings with joy, and plucked something, which she held out to her astonished friend, saying: 'There it is, and there is more growing here, so you will have no lack of it.'

The dwarf stood gazing at the plant. It gave out a strong sweet scent, which reminded him of the day of his enchantment. The stems and leaves were a bluish green, and it bore a dark, bright red flower with a yellow edge.

'What a wonder!' cried Long Nose. 'I do believe this is the very herb which changed me from a squirrel into my present miserable form. Shall I try an experiment?'

'Not yet,' said the goose. 'Take a good handful of the herb with you, and let us go to your rooms. We will collect all your money and clothes together, and then we will test the powers of the herb.'

So they went back to Jem's rooms, and here he gathered together some fifty ducats he had saved, his clothes and shoes, and tied them all up in a bundle. Then he plunged his face into the bunch of herbs, and drew in their perfume.

As he did so, all his limbs began to crack and stretch; he felt his head rising above his shoulders; he glanced down at his nose, and saw it grow smaller and smaller; his chest and back grew flat, and his legs grew long.

The goose looked on in amazement. 'Oh, how big and how beautiful you are!' she cried. 'Thank heaven, you are quite changed.'

Jem folded his hands in thanks, as his heart swelled with gratitude. But his joy did not make him forget all he owed to his friend Mimi.

'I owe you my life and my release,' he said, 'for without you I should never have regained my natural shape, and, indeed, would soon have been beheaded. I will now take you back to your father, who will certainly know how to disenchant you.'

The goose accepted his offer with joy, and they managed to slip out of the palace unnoticed by anyone.

They got through the journey without accident, and the wizard soon released his daughter, and loaded Jem with thanks and valuable presents. He lost no time in hastening back to his native town, and his parents were very ready to recognise the handsome, well-made young man as their long-lost son. With the money given him by the wizard he opened a shop, which prospered well, and he lived long and happily.

I must not forget to mention that much disturbance was caused in the palace by Jem's sudden disappearance, for when the grand duke sent orders next day to behead the dwarf, if he had not found the necessary herbs, the dwarf was not to be found. The prince hinted that the duke had allowed his cook to escape, and had therefore broken his word. The matter ended in a great war between the two princes, which was known in history as the 'Herb War.' After many battles and much loss of life, a peace was at last concluded, and this peace became known as the 'Pasty Peace,' because at the banquet given in its honour the prince's cook dished up the Queen of Pasties--the Suzeraine--and the grand duke declared it to be quite excellent.

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

THE NUNDA, EATER OF PEOPLE

Once upon a time there lived a sultan who loved his garden dearly, and planted it with trees and flowers and fruits from all parts of the world. He went to see them three times every day: first at seven o'clock, when he got up, then at three, and lastly at half-past five. There was no plant and no vegetable which escaped his eye, but he lingered longest of all before his one date tree.

Now the sultan had seven sons. Six of them he was proud of, for they were strong and manly, but the youngest he disliked, for he spent all his time among the women of the house. The sultan had talked to him, and he paid no heed; and he had beaten him, and he paid no heed; and he had tied him up, and he paid no heed, till at last his father grew tired of trying to make him change his ways, and let him alone.

Time passed, and one day the sultan, to his great joy, saw signs of fruit on his date tree. And he told his vizir, 'My date tree is bearing;' and he told the officers, 'My date tree is bearing;' and he told the judges, 'My date tree is bearing;' and he told all the rich men of the town.

He waited patiently for some days till the dates were nearly ripe, and then he called his six sons, and said: 'One of you must watch the date tree till the dates are ripe, for if it is not watched the slaves will steal them, and I shall not have any for another year.'

And the eldest son answered, 'I will go, father,' and he went.

The first thing the youth did was to summon his slaves, and bid them beat drums all night under the date tree, for he feared to fall asleep. So the slaves beat the drums, and the young man danced till four o'clock, and then it grew so cold he could dance no longer, and one of the slaves said to him: 'It is getting light; the tree is safe; lie down, master, and go to sleep.'

So he lay down and slept, and his slaves slept likewise.

A few minutes went by, and a bird flew down from a neighbouring thicket, and ate all the dates, without leaving a single one. And when the tree was stripped bare, the bird went as it had come. Soon after, one of the slaves woke up and looked for the dates, but there were no dates to see. Then he ran to the young man and shook him, saying:

'Your father set you to watch the tree, and you have not watched, and the dates have all been eaten by a bird.'

The lad jumped up and ran to the tree to see for himself, but there was not a date anywhere. And he cried aloud, 'What am I to say to my father? Shall I tell him that the dates have been stolen, or that a great rain fell and a great storm blew? But he will send me to gather them up and bring them to him, and there are none to bring! Shall I tell him that Bedouins drove me away, and when I returned there were no dates? And he will answer, "You had slaves, did they not fight with the Bedouins?" It is the truth that will be best, and that will I tell him.'

Then he went straight to his father, and found him sitting in his verandah with his five sons round him; and the lad bowed his head.

'Give me the news from the garden,' said the sultan.

And the youth answered, 'The dates have all been eaten by some bird: there is not one left.'

The sultan was silent for a moment: then he asked, 'Where were you when the bird came?'

The lad answered: 'I watched the date tree till the cocks were crowing and it was getting light; then I lay down for a little, and I slept. When I woke a slave was standing over me, and he said, "There is not one date left on the tree!" And I went to the date tree, and saw it was true; and that is what I have to tell you.'

And the sultan replied, 'A son like you is only good for eating and sleeping. I have no use for you. Go your way, and when my date tree bears again, I will send another son; perhaps he will watch better.'

So he waited many months, till the tree was covered with more dates than any tree had ever borne before. When they were near ripening he sent one of his sons to the garden: saying, 'My son, I am longing to taste those dates: go and watch over them, for to-day's sun will bring them to perfection.'

And the lad answered: 'My father, I am going now, and to-morrow, when the sun has passed the hour of seven, bid a slave come and gather the dates.'

'Good,' said the sultan.

The youth went to the tree, and lay down and slept. And about midnight he arose to look at the tree, and the dates were all there--beautiful dates, swinging in bunches.

'Ah, my father will have a feast, indeed,' thought he. 'What a fool my brother was not to take more heed! Now he is in disgrace, and we know him no more. Well, I will watch till the bird comes. I should like to see what manner of bird it is.'

And he sat and read till the cocks crew and it grew light, and the dates were still on the tree.

'Oh my father will have his dates; they are all safe now,' he thought to himself. 'I will make myself comfortable against this tree,' and he leaned against the trunk, and sleep came on him, and the bird flew down and ate all the dates.

When the sun rose, the head-man came and looked for the dates, and there were no dates. And he woke the young man, and said to him, 'Look at the tree.'

And the young man looked, and there were no dates. And his ears were stopped, and his legs trembled, and his tongue grew heavy at the thought of the sultan. His slave became frightened as he looked at him, and asked, 'My master, what is it?'

He answered, 'I have no pain anywhere, but I am ill everywhere. My whole body is well, and my whole body is sick I fear my father, for did I not say to him, "To-morrow at seven you shall taste the dates"? And he will drive me away, as he drove away my brother! I will go away myself, before he sends me.'

Then he got up and took a road that led straight past the palace, but he had not walked many steps before he met a man carrying a large silver dish, covered with a white cloth to cover the dates.

And the young man said, 'The dates are not ripe yet; you must return to-morrow.'

And the slave went with him to the palace, where the sultan was sitting with his four sons.

'Good greeting, master!' said the youth.

And the sultan answered, 'Have you seen the man I sent?'

'I have, master; but the dates are not yet ripe.'

But the sultan did not believe his words, and said; 'This second year I have eaten no dates, because of my sons. Go your ways, you are my son no longer!'

And the sultan looked at the four sons that were left him, and promised rich gifts to whichever of them would bring him the dates from the tree. But year by year passed, and he never got them. One son tried to keep himself awake with playing cards; another mounted a horse and rode round and round the tree, while the two others, whom their father as a last hope sent together, lit bonfires. But whatever they did, the result was always the same. Towards dawn they fell asleep, and the bird ate the dates on the tree.

The sixth year had come, and the dates on the tree were thicker than ever. And the head-man went to the palace and told the sultan what he had seen. But the sultan only shook his head, and said sadly, 'What is that to me? I have had seven sons, yet for five years a bird has devoured my dates; and this year it will be the same as ever.'

Now the youngest son was sitting in the kitchen, as was his custom, when he heard his father say those words. And he rose up, and went to his father, and knelt before him. 'Father, this year you shall eat dates,' cried he. 'And on the tree are five great bunches, and each bunch I will give to a separate nation, for the nations in the town are five. This time, I will watch the date tree myself.' But his father and his mother laughed heartily, and thought his words idle talk.

One day, news was brought to the sultan that the dates were ripe, and he ordered one of his men to go and watch the tree. His son, who happened to be standing by, heard the order, and he said:

'How is it that you have bidden a man to watch the tree, when I, your son, am left?'

And his father answered, 'Ah, six were of no use, and where they failed, will you succeed?'

But the boy replied: 'Have patience to-day, and let me go, and to-morrow you shall see whether I bring you dates or not.'

'Let the child go, Master,' said his wife; 'perhaps we shall eat the dates--or perhaps we shall not--but let him go.'

And the sultan answered: 'I do not refuse to let him go, but my heart distrusts him. His brothers all promised fair, and what did they do?'

But the boy entreated, saying, 'Father, if you and I and mother be alive to-morrow, you shall eat the dates.'

'Go then,' said his father.

When the boy reached the garden, he told the slaves to leave him, and to return home themselves and sleep. When he was alone, he laid himself down and slept fast till one o'clock, when he arose, and sat opposite the date tree. Then he took some Indian corn out of one fold of his dress, and some sandy grit out of another.

And he chewed the corn till he felt he was growing sleepy, and then he put some grit into his mouth, and that kept him awake till the bird came.

It looked about at first without seeing him, and whispering to itself, 'There is no one here,' fluttered lightly on to the tree and stretched out his beak for the dates. Then the boy stole softly up, and caught it by the wing.

The bird turned and flew quickly away, but the boy never let go, not even when they soared high into the air.

'Son of Adam,' the bird said when the tops of the mountains looked small below them, 'if you fall, you will be dead long before you reach the ground, so go your way, and let me go mine.'

But the boy answered, 'Wherever you go, I will go with you. You cannot get rid of me.'

'I did not eat your dates,' persisted the bird, 'and the day is dawning. Leave me to go my way.'

But again the boy answered him: 'My six brothers are hateful to my father because you came and stole the dates, and to-day my father shall see you, and my brothers shall see you, and all the people of the town, great and small, shall see you. And my father's heart will rejoice.'

'Well, if you will not leave me, I will throw you off,' said the bird.

So it flew up higher still--so high that the earth shone like one of the other stars.

'How much of you will be left if you fall from here?' asked the bird.

'If I die, I die,' said the boy, 'but I will not leave you.'

And the bird saw it was no use talking, and went down to the earth again.

'Here you are at home, so let me go my way,' it begged once more; 'or at least make a covenant with me.'

'What covenant?' said the boy.

'Save me from the sun,' replied the bird, 'and I will save you from rain.'

'How can you do that, and how can I tell if I can trust you?'

'Pull a feather from my tail, and put it in the fire, and if you want me I will come to you, wherever I am.'

And the boy answered, 'Well, I agree; go your way.'

'Farewell, my friend. When you call me, if it is from the depths of the sea, I will come.'

The lad watched the bird out of sight; then he went straight to the date tree. And when he saw the dates his heart was glad, and his body felt stronger and his eyes brighter than before. And he laughed out loud with joy, and said to himself, 'This is MY luck, mine, Sit-in-the-kitchen! Farewell, date tree, I am going to lie down. What ate you will eat you no more.'

The sun was high in the sky before the head-man, whose business it was, came to look at the date tree, expecting to find it stripped of all its fruit, but when he saw the dates so thick that they almost hid the leaves he ran back to his house, and beat a big drum till everybody came running, and even the little children wanted to know what had happened.

'What is it? What is it, head-man?' cried they.

'Ah, it is not a son that the master has, but a lion! This day Sit-in-the-kitchen has uncovered his face before his father!'

'But how, head-man?'

'To day the people may eat the dates.'

'Is it true, head-man?'

'Oh yes, it is true, but let him sleep till each man has brought forth a present. He who has fowls, let him take fowls; he who has a goat, let him take a goat; he who has rice, let him take rice.' And the people did as he had said.

Then they took the drum, and went to the tree where the boy lay sleeping.

And they picked him up, and carried him away, with horns and clarionets and drums, with clappings of hands and shrieks of joy, straight to his father's house.

When his father heard the noise and saw the baskets made of green leaves, brimming over with dates, and his son borne high on the necks of slaves, his heart leaped, and he said to himself 'To-day at last I shall eat dates.' And he called his wife to see what her son had done, and ordered his soldiers to take the boy and bring him to his father.

'What news, my son?' said he.

'News? I have no news, except that if you will open your mouth you shall see what dates taste like.' And he plucked a date, and put it into his father's mouth.

'Ah! You are indeed my son,' cried the sultan. 'You do not take after those fools, those good-for-nothings. But, tell me, what did you do with the bird, for it was you, and you only who watched for it?'

'Yes, it was I who watched for it and who saw it. And it will not come again, neither for its life, nor for your life, nor for the lives of your children.'

'Oh, once I had six sons, and now I have only one. It is you, whom I called a fool, who have given me the dates: as for the others, I want none of them.'

But his wife rose up and went to him, and said, 'Master, do not, I pray you, reject them,' and she entreated long, till the sultan granted her prayer, for she loved the six elder ones more than her last one.

So they all lived quietly at home, till the sultan's cat went and caught a calf. And the owner of the calf went and told the sultan, but he answered, 'The cat is mine, and the calf mine,' and the man dared not complain further.

Two days after, the cat caught a cow, and the sultan was told, 'Master, the cat has caught a cow,' but he only said, 'It was my cow and my cat.'

And the cat waited a few days, and then it caught a donkey, and they told the sultan, 'Master, the cat has caught a donkey,' and he said, 'My cat and my donkey.' Next it was a horse, and after that a camel, and when the sultan was told he said, 'You don't like this cat, and want me to kill it. And I shall not kill it. Let it eat the camel: let it even eat a man.'

And it waited till the next day, and caught some one's child. And the sultan was told, 'The cat has caught a child.' And he said, 'The cat is mine and the child mine.' Then it caught a grown-up man.

After that the cat left the town and took up its abode in a thicket near the road. So if any one passed, going for water, it devoured him. If it saw a cow going to feed, it devoured him. If it saw a goat, it devoured him. Whatever went along that road the cat caught and ate.

Then the people went to the sultan in a body, and told him of all the misdeeds of that cat. But he answered as before, 'The cat is mine and the people are mine.' And no man dared kill the cat, which grew bolder and bolder, and at last came into the town to look for its prey.

One day, the sultan said to his six sons, 'I am going into the country, to see how the wheat is growing, and you shall come with me.' They went on merrily along the road, till they came to a thicket, when out sprang the cat, and killed three of the sons.

'The cat! The cat!' shrieked the soldiers who were with him. And this time the sultan said:

'Seek for it and kill it. It is no longer a cat, but a demon!'

And the soldiers answered him, 'Did we not tell you, master, what the cat was doing, and did you not say, "My cat and my people"?'

And he answered: 'True, I said it.'

Now the youngest son had not gone with the rest, but had stayed at home with his mother; and when he heard that his brothers had been killed by the cat he said, 'Let me go, that it may slay me also.' His mother entreated him not to leave her, but he would not listen, and he took his sword and a spear and some rice cakes, and went after the cat, which by this time had run of to a great distance.

The lad spent many days hunting the cat, which now bore the name of 'The Nunda, eater of people,' but though he killed many wild animals he saw no trace of the enemy he was hunting for. There was no beast, however fierce, that he was afraid of, till at last his father and mother begged him to give up the chase after the Nunda.

But he answered: 'What I have said, I cannot take back. If I am to die, then I die, but every day I must go and seek for the Nunda.'

And again his father offered him what he would, even the crown itself, but the boy would hear nothing, and went on his way.

Many times his slaves came and told him, 'We have seen footprints, and to-day we shall behold the Nunda.' But the footprints never turned out to be those of the Nunda. They wandered far through deserts and through forests, and at length came to the foot of a great hill. And something in the boy's soul whispered that here was the end of all their seeking, and to-day they would find the Nunda.

But before they began to climb the mountain the boy ordered his slaves to cook some rice, and they rubbed the stick to make a fire, and when the fire was kindled they cooked the rice and ate it. Then they began their climb.

Suddenly, when they had almost reached the top, a slave who was on in front cried:

'Master! Master!' And the boy pushed on to where the slave stood, and the slave said:

'Cast your eyes down to the foot of the mountain.' And the boy looked, and his soul told him it was the Nunda.

And he crept down with his spear in his hand, and then he stopped and gazed below him.

'This MUST be the real Nunda,' thought he. 'My mother told me its ears were small, and this one's are small. She told me it was broad and not long, and this is broad and not long. She told me it had spots like a civet-cat, and this has spots like a civet-cat.'

Then he left the Nunda lying asleep at the foot of the mountain, and went back to his slaves.

'We will feast to-day,' he said; 'make cakes of batter, and bring water,' and they ate and drank. And when they had finished he bade them hide the rest of the food in the thicket, that if they slew the Nunda they might return and eat and sleep before going back to the town. And the slaves did as he bade them.

It was now afternoon, and the lad said: 'It is time we went after the Nunda.' And they went till they reached the bottom and came to a great forest which lay between them and the Nunda.

Here the lad stopped, and ordered every slave that wore two cloths to cast one away and tuck up the other between his legs. 'For,' said he, 'the wood is not a little one. Perhaps we may be caught by the thorns, or perhaps we may have to run before the Nunda, and the cloth might bind our legs, and cause us to fall before it.'

And they answered, 'Good, master,' and did as he bade them. Then they crawled on their hands and knees to where the Nunda lay asleep.

Noiselessly they crept along till they were quite close to it; then, at a sign from the boy, they threw their spears. The Nunda did not stir: the spears had done their work, but a great fear seized them all, and they ran away and climbed the mountain.

The sun was setting when they reached the top, and glad they were to take out the fruit and the cakes and the water which they had hidden away, and sit down and rest themselves. And after they had eaten and were filled, they lay down and slept till morning.

When the dawn broke they rose up and cooked more rice, and drank more water. After that they walked all round the back of the mountain to the place where they had left the Nunda, and they saw it stretched out where they had found it, stiff and dead. And they took it up and carried it back to the town, singing as they went, 'He has killed the Nunda, the eater of people.'

And when his father heard the news, and that his son was come, and was bringing the Nunda with him, he felt that the man did not dwell on the earth whose joy was greater than his. And the people bowed down to the boy and gave him presents, and loved him, because he had delivered them from the bondage of fear, and had slain the Nunda.

[Adapted from Swahili Tales.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

THE STORY OF HASSEBU

Once upon a time there lived a poor woman who had only one child, and he was a little boy called Hassebu. When he ceased to be a baby, and his mother thought it was time for him to learn to read, she sent him to school. And, after he had done with school, he was put into a shop to learn how to make clothes, and did not learn; and he was put to do silversmith's work, and did not learn; and whatsoever he was taught, he did not learn it. His mother never wished him to do anything he did not like, so she said: 'Well, stay at home, my son.' And he stayed at home, eating and sleeping.

One day the boy said to his mother: 'What was my father's business?'

'He was a very learned doctor,' answered she.

'Where, then, are his books?' asked Hassebu.

'Many days have passed, and I have thought nothing of them. But look inside and see if they are there.' So Hassebu looked, and saw they were eaten by insects, all but one book, which he took away and read.

He was sitting at home one morning poring over the medicine book, when some neighbours came by and said to his mother: 'Give us this boy, that we may go together to cut wood.' For wood-cutting was their trade, and they loaded several donkeys with the wood, and sold it in the town.

And his mother answered, 'Very well; to-morrow I will buy him a donkey, and you can all go together.'

So the donkey was bought, and the neighbours came, and they worked hard all day, and in the evening they brought the wood back into the town, and sold it for a good sum of money. And for six days they went and did the like, but on the seventh it rained, and the wood-cutters ran and hid in the rocks, all but Hassebu, who did not mind wetting, and stayed where he was.

While he was sitting in the place where the wood-cutters had left him, he took up a stone that lay near him, and idly dropped it on the ground. It rang with a hollow sound, and he called to his companions, and said, 'Come here and listen; the ground seems hollow!'

'Knock again!' cried they. And he knocked and listened.

'Let us dig,' said the boy. And they dug, and found a large pit like a well, filled with honey up to the brim.

'This is better than firewood,' said they; 'it will bring us more money. And as you have found it, Hassebu, it is you who must go inside and dip out the honey and give to us, and we will take it to the town and sell it, and will divide the money with you.'

The following day each man brought every bowl and vessel he could find at home, and Hassebu filled them all with honey. And this he did every day for three months.

At the end of that time the honey was very nearly finished, and there was only a little left, quite at the bottom, and that was very deep down, so deep that it seemed as if it must be right in the middle of the earth. Seeing this, the men said to Hassebu, 'We will put a rope under your arms, and let you down, so that you may scrape up all the honey that is left, and when you have done we will lower the rope again, and you shall make it fast, and we will draw you up.'

'Very well,' answered the boy, and he went down, and he scraped and scraped till there was not so much honey left as would cover the point of a needle. 'Now I am ready!' he cried; but they consulted together and said, 'Let us leave him there inside the pit, and take his share of the money, and we will tell his mother, "Your son was caught by a lion and carried off into the forest, and we tried to follow him, but could not." '

Then they arose and went into the town and told his mother as they had agreed, and she wept much and made her mourning for many months. And when the men were dividing the money, one said, 'Let us send a little to our friend's mother,' and they sent some to her; and every day one took her rice, and one oil; one took her meat, and one took her cloth, every day.

It did not take long for Hassebu to find out that his companions had left him to die in the pit, but he had a brave heart, and hoped that he might be able to find a way out for himself. So he at once began to explore the pit and found it ran back a long way underground. And by night he slept, and by day he took a little of the honey he had gathered and ate it; and so many days passed by.

One morning, while he was sitting on a rock having his breakfast, a large scorpion dropped down at his feet, and he took a stone and killed it, fearing it would sting him. Then suddenly the thought darted into his head, 'This scorpion must have come from somewhere! Perhaps there is a hole. I will go and look for it,' and he felt all round the walls of the pit till he found a very little hole in the roof of the pit, with a tiny glimmer of light at the far end of it. Then his heart felt glad, and he took out his knife and dug and dug, till the little hole became a big one, and he could wriggle himself through. And when he had got outside, he saw a large open space in front of him, and a path leading out of it.

He went along the path, on and on, till he reached a large house, with a golden door standing open. Inside was a great hall, and in the middle of the hall a throne set with precious stones and a sofa spread with the softest cushions. And he went in and lay down on it, and fell fast asleep, for he had wandered far.

By-and-by there was a sound of people coming through the courtyard, and the measured tramp of soldiers. This was the King of the Snakes coming in state to his palace.

They entered the hall, but all stopped in surprise at finding a man lying on the king's own bed. The soldiers wished to kill him at once, but the king said, 'Leave him alone, put me on a chair,' and the soldiers who were carrying him knelt on the floor, and he slid from their shoulders on to a chair. When he was comfortably seated, he turned to his soldiers, and bade them wake the stranger gently. And they woke him, and he sat up and saw many snakes all round him, and one of them very beautiful, decked in royal robes.

'Who are you?' asked Hassebu.

'I am the King of the Snakes,' was the reply, 'and this is my palace. And will you tell me who you are, and where you come from?'

'My name is Hassebu, but whence I come I know not, nor whither I go.'

'Then stay for a little with me,' said the king, and he bade his soldiers bring water from the spring and fruits from the forest, and to set them before the guest.

For some days Hassebu rested and feasted in the palace of the King of the Snakes, and then he began to long for his mother and his own country. So he said to the King of the Snakes, 'Send me home, I pray.'

But the King of the Snakes answered, 'When you go home, you will do me evil!'

'I will do you no evil,' replied Hassebu; 'send me home, I pray.'

But the king said, 'I know it. If I send you home, you will come back, and kill me. I dare not do it.' But Hassebu begged so hard that at last the king said, 'Swear that when you get home you will not go to bathe where many people are gathered.' And Hassebu swore, and the king ordered his soldiers to take Hassebu in sight of his native city. Then he went straight to his mother's house, and the heart of his mother was glad.

Now the Sultan of the city was very ill, and all the wise men said that the only thing to cure him was the flesh of the King of the Snakes, and that the only man who could get it was a man with a strange mark on his chest. So the Vizir had set people to watch at the public baths, to see if such a man came there.

For three days Hassebu remembered his promise to the King of the Snakes, and did not go near the baths; then came a morning so hot he could hardly breathe, and he forgot all about it.

The moment he had slipped off his robe he was taken before the Vizir, who said to him, 'Lead us to the place where the King of the Snakes lives.'

'I do not know it!' answered he, but the Vizir did not believe him, and had him bound and beaten till his back was all torn.

Then Hassebu cried, 'Loose me, that I may take you.'

They went together a long, long way, till they reached the palace of the King of the Snakes.

And Hassebu said to the King: 'It was not I: look at my back and you will see how they drove me to it.'

'Who has beaten you like this?' asked the King.

'It was the Vizir,' replied Hassebu.

'Then I am already dead,' said the King sadly, 'but you must carry me there yourself.'

So Hassebu carried him. And on the way the King said, 'When I arrive, I shall be killed, and my flesh will be cooked. But take some of the water that I am boiled in, and put it in a bottle and lay it on one side. The Vizir will tell you to drink it, but be careful not to do so. Then take some more of the water, and drink it, and you will become a great physician, and the third supply you will give to the Sultan. And when the Vizir comes to you and asks, "Did you drink what I gave you?" you must answer, "I did, and this is for you," and he will drink it and die! and your soul will rest.'

And they went their way into the town, and all happened as the King of the Snakes had said.

And the Sultan loved Hassebu, who became a great physician, and cured many sick people. But he was always sorry for the poor King of the Snakes.

[Adapted from Swahili Tales,]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

THE MAIDEN WITH THE WOODEN HELMET

In a little village in the country of Japan there lived long, long ago a man and his wife. For many years they were happy and prosperous, but bad times came, and at last nothing was left them but their daughter, who was as beautiful as the morning. The neighbours were very kind, and would have done anything they could to help their poor friends, but the old couple felt that since everything had changed they would rather go elsewhere, so one day they set off to bury themselves in the country, taking their daughter with them.

Now the mother and daughter had plenty to do in keeping the house clean and looking after the garden, but the man would sit for hours together gazing straight in front of him, and thinking of the riches that once were his. Each day he grew more and more wretched, till at length he took to his bed and never got up again.

His wife and daughter wept bitterly for his loss, and it was many months before they could take pleasure in anything. Then one morning the mother suddenly looked at the girl, and found that she had grown still more lovely than before. Once her heart would have been glad at the sight, but now that they two were alone in the world she feared some harm might come of it. So, like a good mother, she tried to teach her daughter all she knew, and to bring her up to be always busy, so that she would never have time to think about herself. And the girl was a good girl, and listened to all her mother's lessons, and so the years passed away.

At last one wet spring the mother caught cold, and though in the beginning she did not pay much attention to it, she gradually grew more and more ill, and knew that she had not long to live. Then she called her daughter and told her that very soon she would be alone in the world; that she must take care of herself, as there would be no one to take care of her. And because it was more difficult for beautiful women to pass unheeded than for others, she bade her fetch a wooden helmet out of the next room, and put it on her head, and pull it low down over her brows, so that nearly the whole of her face should lie in its shadow. The girl did as she was bid, and her beauty was so hidden beneath the wooden cap, which covered up all her hair, that she might have gone through any crowd, and no one would have looked twice at her. And when she saw this the heart of the mother was at rest, and she lay back in her bed and died.

The girl wept for many days, but by-and-by she felt that, being alone in the world, she must go and get work, for she had only herself to depend upon. There was none to be got by staying where she was, so she made her clothes into a bundle, and walked over the hills till she reached the house of the man who owned the fields in that part of the country. And she took service with him and laboured for him early and late, and every night when she went to bed she was at peace, for she had not forgotten one thing that she had promised her mother; and, however hot the sun might be, she always kept the wooden helmet on her head, and the people gave her the nickname of Hatschihime.

In spite, however, of all her care the fame of her beauty spread abroad: many of the impudent young men that are always to be found in the world stole softly up behind her while she was at work, and tried to lift off the wooden helmet. But the girl would have nothing to say to them, and only bade them be off; then they began to talk to her, but she never answered them, and went on with what she was doing, though her wages were low and food not very plentiful. Still she could manage to live, and that was enough.

One day her master happened to pass through the field where she was working, and was struck by her industry and stopped to watch her. After a while he put one or two questions to her, and then led her into his house, and told her that henceforward her only duty should be to tend his sick wife. From this time the girl felt as if all her troubles were ended, but the worst of them was yet to come.

Not very long after Hatschihime had become maid to the sick woman, the eldest son of the house returned home from Kioto, where he had been studying all sorts of things. He was tired of the splendours of the town and its pleasures, and was glad enough to be back in the green country, among the peach-blossoms and sweet flowers. Strolling about in the early morning, he caught sight of the girl with the odd wooden helmet on her head, and immediately he went to his mother to ask who she was, and where she came from, and why she wore that strange thing over her face.

His mother answered that it was a whim, and nobody could persuade her to lay it aside; whereat the young man laughed, but kept his thoughts to himself.

One hot day, however, he happened to be going towards home when he caught sight of his mother's waiting maid kneeling by a little stream that flowed through the garden, splashing some water over her face. The helmet was pushed on one side, and as the youth stood watching from behind a tree he had a glimpse of the girl's great beauty; and he determined that no one else should be his wife. But when he told his family of his resolve to marry her they were very angry, and made up all sorts of wicked stories about her. However, they might have spared themselves the trouble, as he knew it was only idle talk. 'I have merely to remain firm,' thought he, 'and they will have to give in.' It was such a good match for the girl that it never occurred to anyone that she would refuse the young man, but so it was. It would not be right, she felt, to make a quarrel in the house, and though in secret she wept bitterly, for a long while, nothing would make her change her mind. At length one night her mother appeared to her in a dream, and bade her marry the young man. So the next time he asked her--as he did nearly every day--to his surprise and joy she consented. The parents then saw they had better make the best of a bad business, and set about making the grand preparations suitable to the occasion. Of course the neighbours said a great many ill-natured things about the wooden helmet, but the bridegroom was too happy to care, and only laughed at them.

When everything was ready for the feast, and the bride was dressed in the most beautiful embroidered dress to be found in Japan, the maids took hold of the helmet to lift it off her head, so that they might do her hair in the latest fashion. But the helmet would not come, and the harder they pulled, the faster it seemed to be, till the poor girl yelled with pain. Hearing her cries the bridegroom ran in and soothed her, and declared that she should be married in the helmet, as she could not be married without. Then the ceremonies began, and the bridal pair sat together, and the cup of wine was brought them, out of which they had to drink. And when they had drunk it all, and the cup was empty, a wonderful thing happened. The helmet suddenly burst with a loud noise, and fell in pieces on the ground; and as they all turned to look they found the floor covered with precious stones which had fallen out of it. But the guests were less astonished at the brilliancy of the diamonds than at the beauty of the bride, which was beyond anything they had ever seen or heard of. The night was passed in singing and dancing, and then the bride and bridegroom went to their own house, where they lived till they died, and had many children, who were famous throughout Japan for their goodness and beauty.

[Japanische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

THE MONKEY AND THE JELLY-FISH

Children must often have wondered why jelly-fishes have no shells, like so many of the creatures that are washed up every day on the beach. In old times this was not so; the jelly-fish had as hard a shell as any of them, but he lost it through his own fault, as may be seen in this story.

The sea-queen Otohime, whom you read of in the story of Uraschimatoro, grew suddenly very ill. The swiftest messengers were sent hurrying to fetch the best doctors from every country under the sea, but it was all of no use; the queen grew rapidly worse instead of better. Everyone had almost given up hope, when one day a doctor arrived who was cleverer than the rest, and said that the only thing that would cure her was the liver of an ape. Now apes do not dwell under the sea, so a council of the wisest heads in the nation was called to consider the question how a liver could be obtained. At length it was decided that the turtle, whose prudence was well known, should swim to land and contrive to catch a living ape and bring him safely to the ocean kingdom.

It was easy enough for the council to entrust this mission to the turtle, but not at all so easy for him to fulfil it. However he swam to a part of the coast that was covered with tall trees, where he thought the apes were likely to be; for he was old, and had seen many things. It was some time before he caught sight of any monkeys, and he often grew tired with watching for them, so that one hot day he fell fast asleep, in spite of all his efforts to keep awake. By-and-by some apes, who had been peeping at him from the tops of the trees, where they had been carefully hidden from the turtle's eyes, stole noiselessly down, and stood round staring at him, for they had never seen a turtle before, and did not know what to make of it. At last one young monkey, bolder than the rest, stooped down and stroked the shining shell that the strange new creature wore on its back. The movement, gentle though it was, woke the turtle. With one sweep he seized the monkey's hand in his mouth, and held it tight, in spite of every effort to pull it away. The other apes, seeing that the turtle was not to be trifled with, ran off, leaving their young brother to his fate.

Then the turtle said to the monkey, 'If you will be quiet, and do what I tell you, I won't hurt you. But you must get on my back and come with me.'

The monkey, seeing there was no help for it, did as he was bid; indeed he could not have resisted, as his hand was still in the turtle's mouth.

Delighted at having secured his prize, the turtle hastened back to the shore and plunged quickly into the water. He swam faster than he had ever done before, and soon reached the royal palace. Shouts of joy broke forth from the attendants when he was seen approaching, and some of them ran to tell the queen that the monkey was there, and that before long she would be as well as ever she was. In fact, so great was their relief that they gave the monkey such a kind welcome, and were so anxious to make him happy and comfortable, that he soon forgot all the fears that had beset him as to his fate, and was generally quite at his ease, though every now and then a fit of home-sickness would come over him, and he would hide himself in some dark corner till it had passed away.

It was during one of these attacks of sadness that a jelly-fish happened to swim by. At that time jelly-fishes had shells. At the sight of the gay and lively monkey crouching under a tall rock, with his eyes closed and his head bent, the jelly-fish was filled with pity, and stopped, saying, 'Ah, poor fellow, no wonder you weep; a few days more, and they will come and kill you and give your liver to the queen to eat.'

The monkey shrank back horrified at these words and asked the jelly-fish what crime he had committed that deserved death.

'Oh, none at all,' replied the jelly-fish, 'but your liver is the only thing that will cure our queen, and how can we get at it without killing you? You had better submit to your fate, and make no noise about it, for though I pity you from my heart there is no way of helping you.' Then he went away, leaving the ape cold with horror.

At first he felt as if his liver was already being taken from his body, but soon he began to wonder if there was no means of escaping this terrible death, and at length he invented a plan which he thought would do. For a few days he pretended to be gay and happy as before, but when the sun went in, and rain fell in torrents, he wept and howled from dawn to dark, till the turtle, who was his head keeper, heard him, and came to see what was the matter. Then the monkey told him that before he left home he had hung his liver out on a bush to dry, and if it was always going to rain like this it would become quite useless. And the rogue made such a fuss and moaning that he would have melted a heart of stone, and nothing would content him but that somebody should carry him back to land and let him fetch his liver again.

The queen's councillors were not the wisest of people, and they decided between them that the turtle should take the monkey back to his native land and allow him to get his liver off the bush, but desired the turtle not to lose sight of his charge for a single moment. The monkey knew this, but trusted to his power of beguiling the turtle when the time came, and mounted on his back with feelings of joy, which he was, however, careful to conceal. They set out, and in a few hours were wandering about the forest where the ape had first been caught, and when the monkey saw his family peering out from the tree tops, he swung himself up by the nearest branch, just managing to save his hind leg from being seized by the turtle. He told them all the dreadful things that had happened to him, and gave a war cry which brought the rest of the tribe from the neighbouring hills. At a word from him they rushed in a body to the unfortunate turtle, threw him on his back, and tore off the shield that covered his body. Then with mocking words they hunted him to the shore, and into the sea, which he was only too thankful to reach alive. Faint and exhausted he entered the queen's palace for the cold of the water struck upon his naked body, and made him feel ill and miserable. But wretched though he was, he had to appear before the queen's advisers and tell them all that had befallen him, and how he had suffered the monkey to escape. But, as sometimes happens, the turtle was allowed to go scot-free, and had his shell given back to him, and all the punishment fell on the poor jelly-fish, who was condemned by the queen to go shieldless for ever after.

[Japanische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

THE HEADLESS DWARFS

There was once a minister who spent his whole time in trying to find a servant who would undertake to ring the church bells at midnight, in addition to all his other duties.

Of course it was not everyone who cared to get up in the middle of the night, when he had been working hard all day; still, a good many had agreed to do it. But the strange thing was that no sooner had the servant set forth to perform his task than he disappeared, as if the earth had swallowed him up. No bells were rung, and no ringer ever came back. The minister did his best to keep the matter secret, but it leaked out for all that, and the end of it was that no one would enter his service. Indeed, there were even those who whispered that the minister himself had murdered the missing men!

It was to no purpose that Sunday after Sunday the minister gave out from his pulpit that double wages would be paid to anyone that would fulfil the sacred duty of ringing the bells of the church. No one took the slightest notice of any offer he might make, and the poor man was in despair, when one day, as he was standing at his house door, a youth known in the village as Clever Hans came up to him. 'I am tired of living with a miser who will not give me enough to eat and drink,' said he, 'and I am ready to do all you want.' 'Very good, my son,' replied the minister, 'you shall have the chance of proving your courage this very night. To-morrow we will settle what your wages are to be.'

Hans was quite content with this proposal, and went straight into the kitchen to begin his work, not knowing that his new master was quite as stingy as his old one. In the hope that his presence might be a restraint upon them, the minister used to sit at the table during his servants' meals, and would exhort them to drink much and often, thinking that they would not be able to eat as well, and beef was dearer than beer. But in Hans he had met his match, and the minister soon found to his cost that in his case at any rate a full cup did not mean an empty plate.

About an hour before midnight, Hans entered the church and locked the door behind him, but what was his surprise when, in place of the darkness and silence he expected, he found the church brilliantly lighted, and a crowd of people sitting round a table playing cards. Hans felt no fear at this strange sight, or was prudent enough to hide it if he did, and, going up to the table, sat down amongst the players. One of them looked up and asked, 'My friend, what are you doing here?' and Hans gazed at him for a moment, then laughed and answered, 'Well, if anybody has a right to put that question, it is I! And if _I_ do not put it, it will certainly be wiser for you not to do so!'

Then he picked up some cards, and played with the unknown men as if he had known them all his life. The luck was on his side, and soon the money of the other gamblers found its way from their pockets into his. On the stroke of midnight the cock crew, and in an instant lights, table, cards, and people all had vanished, and Hans was left alone.

He groped about for some time, till he found the staircase in the tower, and then began to feel his way up the steps.

On the first landing a glimmer of light came through a slit in the wall, and he saw a tiny man sitting there, without a head. 'Ho! ho! my little fellow, what are you doing there?' asked Hans, and, without waiting for an answer, gave him a kick which sent him flying down the stairs. Then he climbed higher still, and finding as he went dumb watchers sitting on every landing, treated them as he had done the first.

At last he reached the top, and as he paused for a moment to look round him he saw another headless man cowering in the very bell itself, waiting till Hans should seize the bell-pull in order to strike him a blow with the clapper, which would soon have made an end of him.

'Stop, my little friend!' cried Hans. 'That is not part of the bargain! Perhaps you saw how your comrades walked down stairs, and you are going after them. But as you are in the highest place you shall make a more dignified exit, and follow them through the window!'

With these words he began to climb the ladder, in order to take the little man from the bell and carry out his threat.

At this the dwarf cried out imploringly, 'Oh, brother! spare my life, and I promise that neither I nor my comrades will ever trouble you any more. I am small and weak, but who knows whether some day I shall not be able to reward you.'

'You wretched little shrimp,' replied Hans, 'a great deal of good your gratitude is likely to do me! But as I happen to be feeling in a cheerful mood to-night I will let you have your life. But take care how you come across me again, or you may not escape so easily!'

The headless man thanked him humbly, slid hastily down the bell rope, and ran down the steps of the tower as if he had left a fire behind him. Then Hans began to ring lustily.

When the minister heard the sound of the midnight bells he wondered greatly, but rejoiced that he had at last found some one to whom he could trust this duty. Hans rang the bells for some time, then went to the hay-loft, and fell fast asleep.

Now it was the custom of the minister to get up very early, and to go round to make sure that the men were all at their work. This morning everyone was in his place except Hans, and no one knew anything about him. Nine o'clock came, and no Hans, but when eleven struck the minister began to fear that he had vanished like the ringers who had gone before him. When, however, the servants all gathered round the table for dinner, Hans at last made his appearance stretching himself and yawning.

'Where have you been all this time?' asked the minister.

'Asleep,' said Hans.

'Asleep!' exclaimed the minister in astonishment. 'You don't mean to tell me that you can go on sleeping till mid-day?'

'That is exactly what I do mean,' replied Hans. 'If one works in the night one must sleep in the day, just as if one works in the day one sleeps in the night. If you can find somebody else to ring the bells at midnight I am ready to begin work at dawn; but if you want me to ring them I must go on sleeping till noon at the very earliest.'

The minister tried to argue the point with him, but at length the following agreement was come to. Hans was to give up the ringing, and was to work like the rest from sunrise to sunset, with the exception of an hour after breakfast and an hour after dinner, when he might go to sleep. 'But, of course,' added the minister carelessly, 'it may happen now and then, especially in winter, when the days are short, that you will have to work a little longer, to get something finished.'

'Not at all!' answered Hans. 'Unless I were to leave off work earlier in summer, I will not do a stroke more than I have promised, and that is from dawn to dark; so you know what you have to expect.'

A few weeks later the minister was asked to attend a christening in the neighbouring town. He bade Hans come with him, but, as the town was only a few hours' ride from where he lived, the minister was much surprised to see Hans come forth laden with a bag containing food.

'What are you taking that for?' asked the minister. 'We shall be there before dark.'

'Who knows?' replied Hans. 'Many things may happen to delay our journey, and I need not remind you of our contract that the moment the sun sets I cease to be your servant. If we don't reach the town while it is still daylight I shall leave you to shift for yourself.'

The minister thought he was joking, and made no further remark. But when they had left the village behind them, and had ridden a few miles, they found that snow had fallen during the night, and had been blown by the wind into drifts. This hindered their progress, and by the time they had entered the thick wood which lay between them and their destination the sun was already touching the tops of the trees. The horses ploughed their way slowly through the deep soft snow and as they went Hans kept turning to look at the sun, which lay at their backs.

'Is there anything behind you?' asked the minister. 'Or what is it you are always turning round for?'

'I turn round because I have no eyes in the back of my neck,' said Hans.

'Cease talking nonsense,' replied the minister, 'and give all your mind to getting us to the town before nightfall.'

Hans did not answer, but rode on steadily, though every now and then he cast a glance over his shoulder.

When they arrived in the middle of the wood the sun sank altogether. Then Hans reined up his horse, took his knapsack, and jumped out of the sledge.

'What are you doing? Are you mad?' asked the minister, but Hans answered quietly, 'The sun is set and my work is over, and I am going to camp here for the night.'

In vain the master prayed and threatened, and promised Hans a large reward if he would only drive him on. The young man was not to be moved.

'Are you not ashamed to urge me to break my word?' said he. 'If you want to reach the town to-night you must go alone. The hour of my freedom has struck, and I cannot go with you.'

'My good Hans,' entreated the minister, 'I really ought not to leave you here. Consider what danger you would be in! Yonder, as you see, a gallows is set up, and two evil-doers are hanging on it. You could not possibly sleep with such ghastly neighbours.'

'Why not?' asked Hans. 'Those gallows birds hang high in the air, and my camp will be on the ground; we shall have nothing to do with each other.' As he spoke, he turned his back on the minister, and went his way.

There was no help for it, and the minister had to push on by himself, if he expected to arrive in time for the christening. His friends were much surprised to see him drive up without a coachman, and thought some accident had happened. But when he told them of his conversation with Hans they did not know which was the most foolish, master or man.

It would have mattered little to Hans had he known what they were saying or thinking of him. He satisfied his hunger with the food he had in his knapsack, lit his pipe, pitched his tent under the boughs of a tree, wrapped himself in his furs, and went sound asleep. After some hours, he was awakened by a sudden noise, and sat up and looked about him. The moon was shining brightly above his head, and close by stood two headless dwarfs, talking angrily. At the sight of Hans the little dwarfs cried out:

'It is he! It is he!' and one of them stepping nearer exclaimed, 'Ah, my old friend! it is a lucky chance that has brought us here. My bones still ache from my fall down the steps of the tower. I dare say you have not forgotten that night! Now it is the turn of your bones. Hi! comrades, make haste! make haste!'

Like a swarm of midges, a host of tiny headless creatures seemed to spring straight out of the ground, and every one was armed with a club. Although they were so small, yet there were such numbers of them and they struck so hard that even a strong man could do nothing against them. Hans thought his last hour was come, when just as the fight was at the hottest another little dwarf arrived on the scene.

'Hold, comrades!' he shouted, turning to the attacking party. 'This man once did me a service, and I am his debtor. When I was in his power he granted me my life. And even if he did throw you downstairs, well, a warm bath soon cured your bruises, so you must just forgive him and go quietly home.'

The headless dwarfs listened to his words and disappeared as suddenly as they had come. As soon as Hans recovered himself a little he looked at his rescuer, and saw he was the dwarf he had found seated in the church bell.

'Ah!' said the dwarf, seating himself quietly under the tree. 'You laughed at me when I told you that some day I might do you a good turn. Now you see I was right, and perhaps you will learn for the future not to despise any creature, however small.'

'I thank you from my heart,' answered Hans. 'My bones are still sore from their blows, and had it not been for you I should indeed have fared badly.'

'I have almost paid my debt,' went on the little man, 'but as you have suffered already, I will do more, and give you a piece of information. You need not remain any longer in the service of that stingy minister, but when you get home to-morrow go at once to the north corner of the church, and there you will find a large stone built into the wall, but not cemented like the rest. The day after to-morrow the moon is full, and at midnight you must go to the spot and get the stone out of the wall with a pickaxe. Under the stone lies a great treasure, which has been hidden there in time of war. Besides church plate, you will find bags of money, which have been lying in this place for over a hundred years, and no one knows to whom it all belongs. A third of this money you must give to the poor, but the rest you may keep for yourself.' As he finished, the cocks in the village crowed, and the little man was nowhere to be seen. Hans found that his limbs no longer pained him, and lay for some time thinking of the hidden treasure. Towards morning he fell asleep.

The sun was high in the heavens when his master returned from the town.

'Hans,' said he, 'what a fool you were not to come with me yesterday! I was well feasted and entertained, and I have money in my pocket into the bargain,' he went on, rattling some coins while he spoke, to make Hans understand how much he had lost.

'Ah, sir,' replied Hans calmly, 'in order to have gained so much money you must have lain awake all night, but I have earned a hundred times that amount while I was sleeping soundly.'

'How did you manage that?' asked the minister eagerly, but Hans answered, 'It is only fools who boast of their farthings; wise men take care to hide their crowns.'

They drove home, and Hans neglected none of his duties, but put up the horses and gave them their food before going to the church corner, where he found the loose stone, exactly in the place described by the dwarf. Then he returned to his work.

The first night of the full moon, when the whole village was asleep, he stole out, armed with a pickaxe, and with much difficulty succeeded in dislodging the stone from its place. Sure enough, there was the hole, and in the hole lay the treasure, exactly as the little man had said.

The following Sunday he handed over the third part to the village poor, and informed the minister that he wished to break his bond of service. As, however, he did not claim any wages, the minister made no objections, but allowed him to do as he wished. So Hans went his way, bought himself a large house, and married a young wife, and lived happily and prosperously to the end of his days.

[Ehstnische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

THE YOUNG MAN WHO WOULD HAVE HIS EYES OPENED

Once upon a time there lived a youth who was never happy unless he was prying into something that other people knew nothing about. After he had learned to understand the language of birds and beasts, he discovered accidentally that a great deal took place under cover of night which mortal eyes never saw. From that moment he felt he could not rest till these hidden secrets were laid bare to him, and he spent his whole time wandering from one wizard to another, begging them to open his eyes, but found none to help him. At length he reached an old magician called Mana, whose learning was greater than that of the rest, and who could tell him all he wanted to know. But when the old man had listened attentively to him, he said, warningly:

'My son, do not follow after empty knowledge, which will not bring you happiness, but rather evil. Much is hidden from the eyes of men, because did they know everything their hearts would no longer be at peace. Knowledge kills joy, therefore think well what you are doing, or some day you will repent. But if you will not take my advice, then truly I can show you the secrets of the night. Only you will need more than a man's courage to bear the sight.'

He stopped and looked at the young man, who nodded his head, and then the wizard continued, 'To-morrow night you must go to the place where, once in seven years, the serpent-king gives a great feast to his whole court. In front of him stands a golden bowl filled with goats' milk, and if you can manage to dip a piece of bread in this milk, and eat it before you are obliged to fly, you will understand all the secrets of the night that are hidden from other men. It is lucky for you that the serpent-king's feast happens to fall this year, otherwise you would have had long to wait for it. But take care to be quick and bold, or it will be the worse for you.'

The young man thanked the wizard for his counsel, and went his way firmly resolved to carry out his purpose, even if he paid for it with his life; and when night came he set out for a wide, lonely moor, where the serpent-king held his feast. With sharpened eyes, he looked eagerly all round him, but could see nothing but a multitude of small hillocks, that lay motionless under the moonlight. He crouched behind a bush for some time, till he felt that midnight could not be far off, when suddenly there arose in the middle of the moor a brilliant glow, as if a star was shining over one of the hillocks. At the same moment all the hillocks began to writhe and to crawl, and from each one came hundreds of serpents and made straight for the glow, where they knew they should find their king. When they reached the hillock where he dwelt, which was higher and broader than the rest, and had a bright light hanging over the top, they coiled themselves up and waited. The whirr and confusion from all the serpent-houses were so great that the youth did not dare to advance one step, but remained where he was, watching intently all that went on; but at last he began to take courage, and moved on softly step by step.

What he saw was creepier than creepy, and surpassed all he had ever dreamt of. Thousands of snakes, big and little and of every colour, were gathered together in one great cluster round a huge serpent, whose body was as thick as a beam, and which had on its head a golden crown, from which the light sprang. Their hissings and darting tongues so terrified the young man that his heart sank, and he felt he should never have courage to push on to certain death, when suddenly he caught sight of the golden bowl in front of the serpent-king, and knew that if he lost this chance it would never come back. So, with his hair standing on end and his blood frozen in his veins, he crept forwards. Oh! what a noise and a whirr rose afresh among the serpents. Thousands of heads were reared, and tongues were stretched out to sting the intruder to death, but happily for him their bodies were so closely entwined one in the other that they could not disentangle themselves quickly. Like lightning he seized a bit of bread, dipped it in the bowl, and put it in his mouth, then dashed away as if fire was pursuing him. On he flew as if a whole army of foes were at his heels, and he seemed to hear the noise of their approach growing nearer and nearer. At length his breath failed him, and he threw himself almost senseless on the turf. While he lay there dreadful dreams haunted him. He thought that the serpent-king with the fiery crown had twined himself round him, and was crushing out his life. With a loud shriek he sprang up to do battle with his enemy, when he saw that it was rays of the sun which had wakened him. He rubbed his eyes and looked all round, but nothing could he see of the foes of the past night, and the moor where he had run into such danger must be at least a mile away. But it was no dream that he had run hard and far, or that he had drunk of the magic goats' milk. And when he felt his limbs, and found them whole, his joy was great that he had come through such perils with a sound skin.

After the fatigues and terrors of the night, he lay still till mid-day, but he made up his mind he would go that very evening into the forest to try what the goats' milk could really do for him, and if he would now be able to understand all that had been a mystery to him. And once in the forest his doubts were set at rest, for he saw what no mortal eyes had ever seen before. Beneath the trees were golden pavilions, with flags of silver all brightly lighted up. He was still wondering why the pavilions were there, when a noise was heard among the trees, as if the wind had suddenly got up, and on all sides beautiful maidens stepped from the trees into the bright light of the moon. These were the wood-nymphs, daughters of the earth-mother, who came every night to hold their dances, in the forest. The young man, watching from his hiding place, wished he had a hundred eyes in his head, for two were not nearly enough for the sight before him, the dances lasting till the first streaks of dawn. Then a silvery veil seemed to be drawn over the ladies, and they vanished from sight. But the young man remained where he was till the sun was high in the heavens, and then went home.

He felt that day to be endless, and counted the minutes till night should come, and he might return to the forest. But when at last he got there he found neither pavilions nor nymphs, and though he went back many nights after he never saw them again. Still, he thought about them night and day, and ceased to care about anything else in the world, and was sick to the end of his life with longing for that beautiful vision. And that was the way he learned that the wizard had spoken truly when he said, 'Blindness is man's highest good.'

[Ehstnische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

THE BOYS WITH THE GOLDEN STARS

Once upon a time what happened did happen: and if it had not happened, you would never have heard this story.

Well, once upon a time there lived an emperor who had half a world all to himself to rule over, and in this world dwelt an old herd and his wife and their three daughters, Anna, Stana, and Laptitza.

Anna, the eldest, was so beautiful that when she took the sheep to pasture they forgot to eat as long as she was walking with them. Stana, the second, was so beautiful that when she was driving the flock the wolves protected the sheep. But Laptitza, the youngest, with a skin as white as the foam on the milk, and with hair as soft as the finest lamb's wool, was as beautiful as both her sisters put together--as beautiful as she alone could be.

One summer day, when the rays of the sun were pouring down on the earth, the three sisters went to the wood on the outskirts of the mountain to pick strawberries. As they were looking about to find where the largest berries grew they heard the tramp of horses approaching, so loud that you would have thought a whole army was riding by. But it was only the emperor going to hunt with his friends and attendants.

They were all fine handsome young men, who sat their horses as if they were part of them, but the finest and handsomest of all was the young emperor himself.

As they drew near the three sisters, and marked their beauty, they checked their horses and rode slowly by.

'Listen, sisters!' said Anna, as they passed on. 'If one of those young men should make me his wife, I would bake him a loaf of bread which should keep him young and brave for ever.'

'And if I,' said Stana, 'should be the one chosen, I would weave my husband a shirt which will keep him unscathed when he fights with dragons; when he goes through water he will never even be wet; or if through fire, it will not scorch him.'

'And I,' said Laptitza, 'will give the man who chooses me two boys, twins, each with a golden star on his forehead, as bright as those in the sky.'

And though they spoke low the young men heard, and turned their horses' heads.

'I take you at your word, and mine shall you be, most lovely of empresses!' cried the emperor, and swung Laptitza and her strawberries on the horse before him.

'And I will have you,' 'And I you,' exclaimed two of his friends, and they all rode back to the palace together.

The following morning the marriage ceremony took place, and for three days and three nights there was nothing but feasting over the whole kingdom. And when the rejoicings were over the news was in everybody's mouth that Anna had sent for corn, and had made the loaf of which she had spoken at the strawberry beds. And then more days and nights passed, and this rumour was succeeded by another one--that Stana had procured some flax, and had dried it, and combed it, and spun it into linen, and sewed it herself into the shirt of which she had spoken over the strawberry beds.

Now the emperor had a stepmother, and she had a daughter by her first husband, who lived with her in the palace. The girl's mother had always believed that her daughter would be empress, and not the 'Milkwhite Maiden,' the child of a mere shepherd. So she hated the girl with all her heart, and only bided her time to do her ill.

But she could do nothing as long as the emperor remained with his wife night and day, and she began to wonder what she could do to get him away from her.

At last, when everything else had failed, she managed to make her brother, who was king of the neighbouring country, declare war against the emperor, and besiege some of the frontier towns with a large army. This time her scheme was successful. The young emperor sprang up in wrath the moment he heard the news, and vowed that nothing, not even his wife, should hinder his giving them battle. And hastily assembling whatever soldiers happened to be at hand he set off at once to meet the enemy. The other king had not reckoned on the swiftness of his movements, and was not ready to receive him. The emperor fell on him when he was off his guard, and routed his army completely. Then when victory was won, and the terms of peace hastily drawn up, he rode home as fast as his horse would carry him, and reached the palace on the third day.

But early that morning, when the stars were growing pale in the sky, two little boys with golden hair and stars on their foreheads were born to Laptitza. And the stepmother, who was watching, took them away, and dug a hole in the corner of the palace, under the windows of the emperor, and put them in it, while in their stead she placed two little puppies.

The emperor came into the palace, and when they told him the news he went straight to Laptitza's room. No words were needed; he saw with his own eyes that Laptitza had not kept the promise she had made at the strawberry beds, and, though it nearly broke his heart, he must give orders for her punishment.

So he went out sadly and told his guards that the empress was to be buried in the earth up to her neck, so that everyone might know what would happen to those who dared to deceive the emperor.

Not many days after, the stepmother's wish was fulfilled. The emperor took her daughter to wife, and again the rejoicings lasted for three days and three nights.

Let us now see what happened to the two little boys.

The poor little babies had found no rest even in their graves. In the place where they had been buried there sprang up two beautiful young aspens, and the stepmother, who hated the sight of the trees, which reminded her of her crime, gave orders that they should be uprooted. But the emperor heard of it, and forbade the trees to be touched, saying, 'Let them alone; I like to see them there! They are the finest aspens I have ever beheld!'

And the aspens grew as no aspens had ever grown before. In each day they added a year's growth, and each night they added a year's growth, and at dawn, when the stars faded out of the sky, they grew three years' growth in the twinkling of an eye, and their boughs swept across the palace windows. And when the wind moved them softly, the emperor would sit and listen to them all the day long.

The stepmother knew what it all meant, and her mind never ceased from trying to invent some way of destroying the trees. It was not an easy thing, but a woman's will can press milk out of a stone, and her cunning will overcome heroes. What craft will not do soft words may attain, and if these do not succeed there still remains the resource of tears.

One morning the empress sat on the edge of her husband's bed, and began to coax him with all sorts of pretty ways.

It was some time before the bait took, but at length--even emperors are only men!

'Well, well,' he said at last, 'have your way and cut down the trees; but out of one they shall make a bed for me, and out of the other, one for you!'

And with this the empress was forced to be content. The aspens were cut down next morning, and before night the new bed had been placed in the emperor's room.

Now when the emperor lay down in it he seemed as if he had grown a hundred times heavier than usual, yet he felt a kind of calm that was quite new to him. But the empress felt as if she was lying on thorns and nettles, and could not close her eyes.

When the emperor was fast asleep, the bed began to crack loudly, and to the empress each crack had a meaning. She felt as if she were listening to a language which no one but herself could understand.

'Is it too heavy for you, little brother?' asked one of the beds.

'Oh, no, it is not heavy at all,' answered the bed in which the emperor was sleeping. 'I feel nothing but joy now that my beloved father rests over me.'

'It is very heavy for me!' said the other bed, 'for on me lies an evil soul.'

And so they talked on till the morning, the empress listening all the while.

By daybreak the empress had determined how to get rid of the beds. She would have two others made exactly like them, and when the emperor had gone hunting they should be placed in his room. This was done and the aspen beds were burnt in a large fire, till only a little heap of ashes was left.

Yet while they were burning the empress seemed to hear the same words, which she alone could understand.

Then she stooped and gathered up the ashes, and scattered them to the four winds, so that they might blow over fresh lands and fresh seas, and nothing remain of them.

But she had not seen that where the fire burnt brightest two sparks flew up, and, after floating in the air for a few moments, fell down into the great river that flows through the heart of the country. Here the sparks had turned into two little fishes with golden scales, and one was so exactly like the other that everyone could tell at the first glance that they must be twins. Early one morning the emperor's fishermen went down to the river to get some fish for their master's breakfast, and cast their nets into the stream. As the last star twinkled out of the sky they drew them in, and among the multitude of fishes lay two with scales of gold, such as no man had ever looked on.

They all gathered round and wondered, and after some talk they decided that they would take the little fishes alive as they were, and give them as a present to the emperor.

'Do not take us there, for that is whence we came, and yonder lies our destruction,' said one of the fishes.

'But what are we to do with you?' asked the fisherman.

'Go and collect all the dew that lies on the leaves, and let us swim in it. Then lay us in the sun, and do not come near us till the sun's rays shall have dried off the dew,' answered the other fish.

The fisherman did as they told him--gathered the dew from the leaves and let them swim in it, then put them to lie in the sun till the dew should be all dried up.

And when he came back, what do you think he saw? Why, two boys, two beautiful young princes, with hair as golden as the stars on their foreheads, and each so like the other, that at the first glance every one would have known them for twins.

The boys grew fast. In every day they grew a year's growth, and in every night another year's growth, but at dawn, when the stars were fading, they grew three years' growth in the twinkling of an eye. And they grew in other things besides height, too. Thrice in age, and thrice in wisdom, and thrice in knowledge. And when three days and three nights had passed they were twelve years in age, twenty-four in strength, and thirty-six in wisdom.

'Now take us to our father,' said they. So the fisherman gave them each a lambskin cap which half covered their faces, and completely hid their golden hair and the stars on their foreheads, and led them to the court.

By the time they arrived there it was midday, and the fisherman and his charges went up to an official who was standing about. 'We wish to speak with the emperor,' said one of the boys.

'You must wait until he has finished his dinner,' replied the porter.

'No, while he is eating it,' said the second boy, stepping across the threshold.

The attendants all ran forward to thrust such impudent youngsters outside the palace, but the boys slipped through their fingers like quicksilver, and entered a large hall, where the emperor was dining, surrounded by his whole court.

'We desire to enter,' said one of the princes sharply to a servant who stood near the door.

'That is quite impossible,' replied the servant.

'Is it? let us see!' said the second prince, pushing the servants to right and left.

But the servants were many, and the princes only two. There was the noise of a struggle, which reached the emperor's ears.

'What is the matter?' asked he angrily.

The princes stopped at the sound of their father's voice.

'Two boys who want to force their way in,' replied one of the servants, approaching the emperor.

'To FORCE their way in? Who dares to use force in my palace? What boys are they?' said the emperor all in one breath.

'We know not, O mighty emperor,' answered the servant, 'but they must surely be akin to you, for they have the strength of lions, and have scattered the guards at the gate. And they are as proud as they are strong, for they will not take their caps from their heads.'

The emperor, as he listened, grew red with anger.

'Thrust them out,' cried he. 'Set the dogs after them.'

'Leave us alone, and we will go quietly,' said the princes, and stepped backwards, weeping silently at the harsh words. They had almost reached the gates when a servant ran up to them.

'The emperor commands you to return,' panted he: 'the empress wishes to see you.'

The princes thought a moment: then they went back the way they had come, and walked straight up to the emperor, their caps still on their heads.

He sat at the top of a long table covered with flowers and filled with guests. And beside him sat the empress, supported by twelve cushions. When the princes entered one of the cushions fell down, and there remained only eleven.

'Take off your caps,' said one of the courtiers.

'A covered head is among men a sign of honour. We wish to seem what we are.'

'Never mind,' said the emperor, whose anger had dropped before the silvery tones of the boy's voice. 'Stay as you are, but tell me WHO you are! Where do you come from, and what do you want?'

'We are twins, two shoots from one stem, which has been broken, and half lies in the ground and half sits at the head of this table. We have travelled a long way, we have spoken in the rustle of the wind, have whispered in the wood, we have sung in the waters, but now we wish to tell you a story which you know without knowing it, in the speech of men.'

And a second cushion fell down.

'Let them take their silliness home,' said the empress.

'Oh, no, let them go on,' said the emperor. 'You wished to see them, but I wish to hear them. Go on, boys, sing me the story.'

The empress was silent, but the princes began to sing the story of their lives.

'There was once an emperor,' began they, and the third cushion fell down.

When they reached the warlike expedition of the emperor three of the cushions fell down at once.

And when the tale was finished there were no more cushions under the empress, but the moment that they lifted their caps, and showed their golden hair and the golden stars, the eyes of the emperor and of all his guests were bent on them, and they could hardly bear the power of so many glances.

And there happened in the end what should have happened in the beginning. Laptitza sat next her husband at the top of the table. The stepmother's daughter became the meanest sewing maid in the palace, the stepmother was tied to a wild horse, and every one knew and has never forgotten that whoever has a mind turned to wickedness is sure to end badly.

[Rumanische Marchen.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

THE FROG

Once upon a time there was a woman who had three sons. Though they were peasants they were well off, for the soil on which they lived was fruitful, and yielded rich crops. One day they all three told their mother they meant to get married. To which their mother replied: 'Do as you like, but see that you choose good housewives, who will look carefully after your affairs; and, to make certain of this, take with you these three skeins of flax, and give it to them to spin. Whoever spins the best will be my favourite daughter-in-law.'

Now the two eldest sons had already chosen their wives; so they took the flax from their mother, and carried it off with them, to have it spun as she had said. But the youngest son was puzzled what to do with his skein, as he knew no girl (never having spoken to any) to whom he could give it to be spun. He wandered hither and thither, asking the girls that he met if they would undertake the task for him, but at the sight of the flax they laughed in his face and mocked at him. Then in despair he left their villages, and went out into the country, and, seating himself on the bank of a pond began to cry bitterly.

Suddenly there was a noise close beside him, and a frog jumped out of the water on to the bank and asked him why he was crying. The youth told her of his trouble, and how his brothers would bring home linen spun for them by their promised wives, but that no one would spin his thread.

Then the frog answered: 'Do not weep on that account; give me the thread, and I will spin it for you.' And, having said this, she took it out of his hand, and flopped back into the water, and the youth went back, not knowing what would happen next.

In a short time the two elder brothers came home, and their mother asked to see the linen which had been woven out of the skeins of flax she had given them. They all three left the room; and in a few minutes the two eldest returned, bringing with them the linen that had been spun by their chosen wives. But the youngest brother was greatly troubled, for he had nothing to show for the skein of flax that had been given to him. Sadly he betook himself to the pond, and sitting down on the bank, began to weep.

Flop! and the frog appeared out of the water close beside him.

'Take this,' she said; 'here is the linen that I have spun for you.'

You may imagine how delighted the youth was. She put the linen into his hands, and he took it straight back to his mother, who was so pleased with it that she declared she had never seen linen so beautifully spun, and that it was far finer and whiter than the webs that the two elder brothers had brought home.

Then she turned to her sons and said: 'But this is not enough, my sons, I must have another proof as to what sort of wives you have chosen. In the house there are three puppies. Each of you take one, and give it to the woman whom you mean to bring home as your wife. She must train it and bring it up. Whichever dog turns out the best, its mistress will be my favourite daughter-in-law.'

So the young men set out on their different ways, each taking a puppy with him. The youngest, not knowing where to go, returned to the pond, sat down once more on the bank, and began to weep.

Flop! and close beside him, he saw the frog. 'Why are you weeping?' she said. Then he told her his difficulty, and that he did not know to whom he should take the puppy.

'Give it to me,' she said, 'and I will bring it up for you.' And, seeing that the youth hesitated, she took the little creature out of his arms, and disappeared with it into the pond.

The weeks and months passed, till one day the mother said she would like to see how the dogs had been trained by her future daughters-in-law. The two eldest sons departed, and returned shortly, leading with them two great mastiffs, who growled so fiercely, and looked so savage, that the mere sight of them made the mother tremble with fear.

The youngest son, as was his custom, went to the pond, and called on the frog to come to his rescue.

In a minute she was at his side, bringing with her the most lovely little dog, which she put into his arms. It sat up and begged with its paws, and went through the prettiest tricks, and was almost human in the way it understood and did what it was told.

In high spirits the youth carried it off to his mother. As soon as she saw it, she exclaimed: 'This is the most beautiful little dog I have ever seen. You are indeed fortunate, my son; you have won a pearl of a wife.'

Then, turning to the others, she said: 'Here are three shirts; take them to your chosen wives. Whoever sews the best will be my favourite daughter-in-law.'

So the young men set out once more; and again, this time, the work of the frog was much the best and the neatest.

This time the mother said: 'Now that I am content with the tests I gave, I want you to go and fetch home your brides, and I will prepare the wedding-feast.'

You may imagine what the youngest brother felt on hearing these words. Whence was he to fetch a bride? Would the frog be able to help him in this new difficulty? With bowed head, and feeling very sad, he sat down on the edge of the pond.

Flop! and once more the faithful frog was beside him.

'What is troubling you so much?' she asked him, and then the youth told her everything.

'Will you take me for a wife?' she asked.

'What should I do with you as a wife,' he replied, wondering at her strange proposal.

'Once more, will you have me or will you not?' she said.

'I will neither have you, nor will I refuse you,' said he.

At this the frog disappeared; and the next minute the youth beheld a lovely little chariot, drawn by two tiny ponies, standing on the road. The frog was holding the carriage door open for him to step in.

'Come with me,' she said. And he got up and followed her into the chariot.

As they drove along the road they met three witches; the first of them was blind, the second was hunchbacked, and the third had a large thorn in her throat. When the three witches beheld the chariot, with the frog seated pompously among the cushions, they broke into such fits of laughter that the eyelids of the blind one burst open, and she recovered her sight; the hunchback rolled about on the ground in merriment till her back became straight, and in a roar of laughter the thorn fell out of the throat of the third witch. Their first thought was to reward the frog, who had unconsciously been the means of curing them of their misfortunes.

The first witch waved her magic wand over the frog, and changed her into the loveliest girl that had ever been seen. The second witch waved the wand over the tiny chariot and ponies, and they were turned into a beautiful large carriage with prancing horses, and a coachman on the seat. The third witch gave the girl a magic purse, filled with money. Having done this, the witches disappeared, and the youth with his lovely bride drove to his mother's home. Great was the delight of the mother at her youngest son's good fortune. A beautiful house was built for them; she was the favourite daughter-in-law; everything went well with them, and they lived happily ever after.

[From the Italian.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f30]

THE PRINCESS WHO WAS HIDDEN UNDERGROUND

Once there was a king who had great riches, which, when he died, he divided among his three sons. The two eldest of these lived in rioting and feasting, and thus wasted and squandered their father's wealth till nothing remained, and they found themselves in want and misery. The youngest of the three sons, on the contrary, made good use of his portion. He married a wife and soon they had a most beautiful daughter, for whom, when she was grown up, he caused a great palace to be built underground, and then killed the architect who had built it. Next he shut up his daughter inside, and then sent heralds all over the world to make known that he who should find the king's daughter should have her to wife. If he were not capable of finding her then he must die.

Many young men sought to discover her, but all perished in the attempt.

After many had met their death thus, there came a young man, beautiful to behold, and as clever as he was beautiful, who had a great desire to attempt the enterprise. First he went to a herdsman, and begged him to hide him in a sheepskin, which had a golden fleece, and in this disguise to take him to the king. The shepherd let himself be persuaded so to do, took a skin having a golden fleece, sewed the young man in it, putting in also food and drink, and so brought him before the king.

When the latter saw the golden lamb, he asked the herd: 'Will you sell me this lamb?'

But the herd answered: 'No, oh king; I will not sell it; but if you find pleasure therein, I will be willing to oblige you, and I will lend it to you, free of charge, for three days, after that you must give it back to me.'

This the king agreed to do, and he arose and took the lamb to his daughter. When he had led it into her palace, and through many rooms, he came to a shut door. Then he called 'Open, Sartara Martara of the earth!' and the door opened of itself. After that they went through many more rooms, and came to another closed door. Again the king called out: 'Open, Sartara Martara of the earth!' and this door opened like the other, and they came into the apartment where the princess dwelt, the floor, walls, and roof of which were all of silver.

When the king had embraced the princess, he gave her the lamb, to her great joy. She stroked it, caressed it, and played with it.

After a while the lamb got loose, which, when the princess saw, she said: 'See, father, the lamb is free.'

But the king answered: 'It is only a lamb, why should it not be free?'

Then he left the lamb with the princess, and went his way.

In the night, however, the young man threw off the skin. When the princess saw how beautiful he was, she fell in love with him, and asked him: 'Why did you come here disguised in a sheepskin like that?'

Then he answered: 'When I saw how many people sought you, and could not find you, and lost their lives in so doing, I invented this trick, and so I am come safely to you.'

The princess exclaimed: 'You have done well so to do; but you must know that your wager is not yet won, for my father will change me and my maidens into ducks, and will ask you, "Which of these ducks is the princess?" Then I will turn my head back, and with my bill will clean my wings, so that you may know me.'

When they had spent three days together, chatting and caressing one another, the herd came back to the king, and demanded his lamb. Then the king went to his daughter to bring it away, which troubled the princess very much, for she said they had played so nicely together.

But the king said: 'I cannot leave it with you, my daughter, for it is only lent to me.' So he took it away with him, and gave it back to the shepherd.

Then the young man threw the skin from off him, and went to the king, saying: 'Sire, I am persuaded I can find your daughter.'

When the king saw how handsome he was, he said: 'My lad, I have pity on your youth. This enterprise has already cost the lives of many, and will certainly be your death as well.'

But the young man answered, 'I accept your conditions, oh king; I will either find her or lose my head.'

Thereupon he went before the king, who followed after him, till they came to the great door. Then the young man said to the king: 'Speak the words that it may open.'

And the king answered: 'What are the words? Shall I say something like this: "Shut; shut; shut"?'

'No,' said he; 'say "Open, Sartara Martara of the earth." '

When the king had so said, the door opened of itself, and they went in, while the king gnawed his moustache in anger. Then they came to the second door, where the same thing happened as at the first, and they went in and found the princess.

Then spoke the king and said: 'Yes, truly, you have found the princess. Now I will turn her as well as all her maidens into ducks, and if you can guess which of these ducks is my daughter, then you shall have her to wife.'

And immediately the king changed all the maidens into ducks, and he drove them before the young man, and said: 'Now show me which is my daughter.'

Then the princess, according to their understanding, began to clean her wings with her bill, and the lad said: 'She who cleans her wings is the princess.'

Now the king could do nothing more but give her to the young man to wife, and they lived together in great joy and happiness.

[From the German.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f31]

THE GIRL WHO PRETENDED TO BE A BOY

Once upon a time there lived an emperor who was a great conqueror, and reigned over more countries than anyone in the world. And whenever he subdued a fresh kingdom, he only granted peace on condition that the king should deliver him one of his sons for ten years' service.

Now on the borders of his kingdom lay a country whose emperor was as brave as his neighbour, and as long as he was young he was the victor in every war. But as years passed away, his head grew weary of making plans of campaign, and his people wanted to stay at home and till their fields, and at last he too felt that he must do homage to the other emperor.

One thing, however, held him back from this step which day by day he saw more clearly was the only one possible. His new overlord would demand the service of one of his sons. And the old emperor had no son; only three daughters.

Look on which side he would, nothing but ruin seemed to lie before him, and he became so gloomy, that his daughters were frightened, and did everything they could think of to cheer him up, but all to no purpose.

At length one day when they were at dinner, the eldest of the three summoned up all her courage and said to her father:

'What secret grief is troubling you? Are your subjects discontented? or have we given you cause for displeasure? To smooth away your wrinkles, we would gladly shed our blood, for our lives are bound up in yours; and this you know.'

'My daughter,' answered the emperor, 'what you say is true. Never have you given me one moment's pain. Yet now you cannot help me. Ah! why is not one of you a boy!'

'I don't understand,' she answered in surprise. 'Tell us what is wrong: and though we are not boys, we are not quite useless!'

'But what can you do, my dear children? Spin, sew, and weave--that is all your learning. Only a warrior can deliver me now, a young giant who is strong to wield the battle-axe: whose sword deals deadly blows.'

'But WHY do you need a son so much at present? Tell us all about it! It will not make matters worse if we know!'

'Listen then, my daughters, and learn the reason of my sorrow. You have heard that as long as I was young no man ever brought an army against me without it costing him dear. But the years have chilled my blood and drunk my strength. And now the deer can roam the forest, my arrows will never pierce his heart; strange soldiers will set fire to my houses and water their horses at my wells, and my arm cannot hinder them. No, my day is past, and the time has come when I too must bow my head under the yoke of my foe! But who is to give him the ten years' service that is part of the price which the vanquished must pay?'

'_I_ will,' cried the eldest girl, springing to her feet. But her father only shook his head sadly.

'Never will I bring shame upon you,' urged the girl. 'Let me go. Am I not a princess, and the daughter of an emperor?'

'Go then!' he said.

The brave girl's heart almost stopped beating from joy, as she set about her preparations. She was not still for a single moment, but danced about the house, turning chests and wardrobes upside down. She set aside enough things for a whole year--dresses embroidered with gold and precious stones, and a great store of provisions. And she chose the most spirited horse in the stable, with eyes of flame, and a coat of shining silver.

When her father saw her mounted and curvetting about the court, he gave her much wise advice, as to how she was to behave like the young man she appeared to be, and also how to behave as the girl she really was. Then he gave her his blessing, and she touched her horse with the spur.

The silver armour of herself and her steed dazzled the eyes of the people as she darted past. She was soon out of sight, and if after a few miles she had not pulled up to allow her escort to join her, the rest of the journey would have been performed alone.

But though none of his daughters were aware of the fact, the old emperor was a magician, and had laid his plans accordingly. He managed, unseen, to overtake his daughter, and throw a bridge of copper over a stream which she would have to cross. Then, changing himself into a wolf, he lay down under one of the arches, and waited.

He had chosen his time well, and in about half an hour the sound of a horse's hoofs was heard. His feet were almost on the bridge, when a big grey wolf with grinning teeth appeared before the princess. With a deep growl that froze the blood, he drew himself up, and prepared to spring.

The appearance of the wolf was so sudden and so unexpected, that the girl was almost paralysed, and never even dreamt of flight, till the horse leaped violently to one side. Then she turned him round, and urging him to his fullest speed, never drew rein till she saw the gates of the palace rising before her.

The old emperor, who had got back long since, came to the door to meet her, and touching her shining armour, he said, 'Did I not tell you, my child, that flies do not make honey?'

The days passed on, and one morning the second princess implored her father to allow her to try the adventure in which her sister had made such a failure. He listened unwillingly, feeling sure it was no use, but she begged so hard that in the end he consented, and having chosen her arms, she rode away.

But though, unlike her sister, she was quite prepared for the appearance of the wolf when she reached the copper bridge, she showed no greater courage, and galloped home as fast as her horse could carry her. On the steps of the castle her father was standing, and as still trembling with fright she knelt at his feet, he said gently, 'Did I not tell you, my child, that every bird is not caught in a net?'

The three girls stayed quietly in the palace for a little while, embroidering, spinning, weaving, and tending their birds and flowers, when early one morning, the youngest princess entered the door of the emperor's private apartments. 'My father, it is my turn now. Perhaps I shall get the better of that wolf!'

'What, do you think you are braver than your sisters, vain little one? You who have hardly left your long clothes behind you!' but she did not mind being laughed at, and answered,

'For your sake, father, I would cut the devil himself into small bits, or even become a devil myself. I think I shall succeed, but if I fail, I shall come home without more shame than my sisters.'

Still the emperor hesitated, but the girl petted and coaxed him till at last he said,

'Well, well, if you must go, you must. It remains to be seen what I shall get by it, except perhaps a good laugh when I see you come back with your head bent and your eyes on the ground.'

'He laughs best who laughs last,' said the princess.

Happy at having got her way, the princess decided that the first thing to be done was to find some old white-haired boyard, whose advice she could trust, and then to be very careful in choosing her horse. So she went straight to the stables where the most beautiful horses in the empire were feeding in the stalls, but none of them seemed quite what she wanted. Almost in despair she reached the last box of all, which was occupied by her father's ancient war-horse, old and worn like himself, stretched sadly out on the straw.

The girl's eyes filled with tears, and she stood gazing at him. The horse lifted his head, gave a little neigh, and said softly, 'You look gentle and pitiful, but I know it is your love for your father which makes you tender to me. Ah, what a warrior he was, and what good times we shared together! But now I too have grown old, and my master has forgotten me, and there is no reason to care whether my coat is dull or shining. Yet, it is not too late, and if I were properly tended, in a week I could vie with any horse in the stables!'

'And how should you be tended?' asked the girl.

'I must be rubbed down morning and evening with rain water, my barley must be boiled in milk, because of my bad teeth, and my feet must be washed in oil.'

'I should like to try the treatment, as you might help me in carrying out my scheme.'

'Try it then, mistress, and I promise you will never repent.'

So in a week's time the horse woke up one morning with a sudden shiver through all his limbs; and when it had passed away, he found his skin shining like a mirror, his body as fat as a water melon, his movement light as a chamois.

Then looking at the princess who had come early to the stable, he said joyfully,

'May success await on the steps of my master's daughter, for she has given me back my life. Tell me what I can do for you, princess, and I will do it.'

'I want to go to the emperor who is our over-lord, and I have no one to advise me. Which of all the white-headed boyards shall I choose as counsellor?'

'If you have me, you need no one else: I will serve you as I served your father, if you will only listen to what I say.'

'I will listen to everything. Can you start in three days?'

'This moment, if you like,' said the horse.

The preparations of the emperor's youngest daughter were much fewer and simpler than those of her sisters. They only consisted of some boy's clothes, a small quantity of linen and food, and a little money in case of necessity. Then she bade farewell to her father, and rode away.

A day's journey from the palace, she reached the copper bridge, but before they came in sight of it, the horse, who was a magician, had warned her of the means her father would take to prove her courage.

Still in spite of his warning she trembled all over when a huge wolf, as thin as if he had fasted for a month, with claws like saws, and mouth as wide as an oven, bounded howling towards her. For a moment her heart failed her, but the next, touching the horse lightly with her spur, she drew her sword from its sheath, ready to separate the wolf's head from its body at a single blow.

The beast saw the sword, and shrank back, which was the best thing it could do, as now the girl's blood was up, and the light of battle in her eyes. Then without looking round, she rode across the bridge.

The emperor, proud of this first victory, took a short cut, and waited for her at the end of another day's journey, close to a river, over which he threw a bridge of silver. And this time he took the shape of a lion.

But the horse guessed this new danger and told the princess how to escape it. But it is one thing to receive advice when we feel safe and comfortable, and quite another to be able to carry it out when some awful peril is threatening us. And if the wolf had made the girl quake with terror, it seemed like a lamb beside this dreadful lion.

At the sound of his roar the very trees quivered and his claws were so large that every one of them looked like a cutlass.

The breath of the princess came and went, and her feet rattled in the stirrups. Suddenly the remembrance flashed across her of the wolf whom she had put to flight, and waving her sword, she rushed so violently on the lion that he had barely time to spring on one side, so as to avoid the blow. Then, like a flash, she crossed this bridge also.

Now during her whole life, the princess had been so carefully brought up, that she had never left the gardens of the palace, so that the sight of the hills and valleys and tinkling streams, and the song of the larks and blackbirds, made her almost beside herself with wonder and delight. She longed to get down and bathe her face in the clear pools, and pick the brilliant flowers, but the horse said 'No,' and quickened his pace, neither turning to the right or the left.

'Warriors,' he told her, 'only rest when they have won the victory. You have still another battle to fight, and it is the hardest of all.'

This time it was neither a wolf nor a lion that was waiting for her at the end of the third day's journey, but a dragon with twelve heads, and a golden bridge behind it.

The princess rode up without seeing anything to frighten her, when a sudden puff of smoke and flame from beneath her feet, caused her to look down, and there was the horrible creature twisted and writhing, its twelve heads reared up as if to seize her between them.

The bridle fell from her hand: and the sword which she had just grasped slid back into its sheath, but the horse bade her fear nothing, and with a mighty effort she sat upright and spurred straight on the dragon.

The fight lasted an hour and the dragon pressed her hard. But in the end, by a well-directed side blow, she cut off one of the heads, and with a roar that seemed to rend the heavens in two, the dragon fell back on the ground, and rose as a man before her.

Although the horse had informed the princess the dragon was really her own father, the girl had hardly believed him, and stared in amazement at the transformation. But he flung his arms round her and pressed her to his heart saying, 'Now I see that you are as brave as the bravest, and as wise as the wisest. You have chosen the right horse, for without his help you would have returned with a bent head and downcast eyes. You have filled me with the hope that you may carry out the task you have undertaken, but be careful to forget none of my counsels, and above all to listen to those of your horse.'

When he had done speaking, the princess knelt down to receive his blessing, and they went their different ways.

The princess rode on and on, till at last she came to the mountains which hold up the roof of the world. There she met two Genii who had been fighting fiercely for two years, without one having got the least advantage over the other. Seeing what they took to be a young man seeking adventures, one of the combatants called out, 'Fet-Fruners! deliver me from my enemy, and I will give you the horn that can be heard the distance of a three days' journey;' while the other cried, 'Fet-Fruners! help me to conquer this pagan thief, and you shall have my horse, Sunlight.'

Before answering, the princess consulted her own horse as to which offer she should accept, and he advised her to side with the genius who was master of Sunlight, his own younger brother, and still more active than himself.

So the girl at once attacked the other genius, and soon clove his skull; then the one who was left victor begged her to come back with him to his house and he would hand her over Sunlight, as he had promised.

The mother of the genius was rejoiced to see her son return safe and sound, and prepared her best room for the princess, who, after so much fatigue, needed rest badly. But the girl declared that she must first make her horse comfortable in his stable; but this was really only an excuse, as she wanted to ask his advice on several matters.

But the old woman had suspected from the very first that the boy who had come to the rescue of her son was a girl in disguise, and told the genius that she was exactly the wife he needed. The genius scoffed, and inquired what female hand could ever wield a sabre like that; but, in spite of his sneers, his mother persisted, and as a proof of what she said, laid at night on each of their pillows a handful of magic flowers, that fade at the touch of man, but remain eternally fresh in the fingers of a woman.

It was very clever of her, but unluckily the horse had warned the princess what to expect, and when the house was silent, she stole very softly to the genius's room, and exchanged his faded flowers for those she held. Then she crept back to her own bed and fell fast asleep.

At break of day, the old woman ran to see her son, and found, as she knew she would, a bunch of dead flowers in his hand. She next passed on to the bedside of the princess, who still lay asleep grasping the withered flowers. But she did not believe any the more that her guest was a man, and so she told her son. So they put their heads together and laid another trap for her.

After breakfast the genius gave his arm to his guest, and asked her to come with him into the garden. For some time they walked about looking at the flowers, the genius all the while pressing her to pick any she fancied. But the princess, suspecting a trap, inquired roughly why they were wasting the precious hours in the garden, when, as men, they should be in the stables looking after their horses. Then the genius told his mother that she was quite wrong, and his deliverer was certainly a man. But the old woman was not convinced for all that.

She would try once more she said, and her son must lead his visitor into the armoury, where hung every kind of weapon used all over the world--some plain and bare, others ornamented with precious stones--and beg her to make choice of one of them. The princess looked at them closely, and felt the edges and points of their blades, then she hung at her belt an old sword with a curved blade, that would have done credit to an ancient warrior. After this she informed the genius that she would start early next day and take Sunlight with her.

And there was nothing for the mother to do but to submit, though she still stuck to her own opinion.

The princess mounted Sunlight, and touched him with her spur, when the old horse, who was galloping at her side, suddenly said:

'Up to this time, mistress, you have obeyed my counsels and all has gone well. Listen to me once more, and do what I tell you. I am old, and--now that there is someone to take my place, I will confess it--I am afraid that my strength is not equal to the task that lies before me. Give me leave, therefore, to return home, and do you continue your journey under the care of my brother. Put your faith in him as you put it in me, and you will never repent. Wisdom has come early to Sunlight.'

'Yes, my old comrade, you have served me well; and it is only through your help that up to now I have been victorious. So grieved though I am to say farewell, I will obey you yet once more, and will listen to your brother as I would to yourself. Only, I must have a proof that he loves me as well as you do.'

'How should I not love you?' answered Sunlight; 'how should I not be proud to serve a warrior such as you? Trust me, mistress, and you shall never regret the absence of my brother. I know there will be difficulties in our path, but we will face them together.'

Then, with tears in her eyes, the princess took leave of her old horse, who galloped back to her father.

She had ridden only a few miles further, when she saw a golden curl lying on the road before her. Checking her horse, she asked whether it would be better to take it or let it lie.

'If you take it,' said Sunlight, 'you will repent, and if you don't, you will repent too: so take it.' On this the girl dismounted, and picking up the curl, wound it round her neck for safety.

They passed by hills, they passed by mountains, they passed through valleys, leaving behind them thick forests, and fields covered with flowers; and at length they reached the court of the over-lord.

He was sitting on his throne, surrounded by the sons of the other emperors, who served him as pages. These youths came forward to greet their new companion, and wondered why they felt so attracted towards him.

However, there was no time for talking and concealing her fright.

The princess was led straight up to the throne, and explained, in a low voice, the reason of her coming. The emperor received her kindly, and declared himself fortunate at finding a vassal so brave and so charming, and begged the princess to remain in attendance on his person.

She was, however, very careful in her behaviour towards the other pages, whose way of life did not please her. One day, however, she had been amusing herself by making sweetmeats, when two of the young princes looked in to pay her a visit. She offered them some of the food which was already on the table, and they thought it so delicious that they even licked their fingers so as not to lose a morsel. Of course they did not keep the news of their discovery to themselves, but told all their companions that they had just been enjoying the best supper they had had since they were born. And from that moment the princess was left no peace, till she had promised to cook them all a dinner.

Now it happened that, on the very day fixed, all the cooks in the palace became intoxicated, and there was no one to make up the fire.

When the pages heard of this shocking state of things, they went to their companion and implored her to come to the rescue.

The princess was fond of cooking, and was, besides, very good-natured; so she put on an apron and went down to the kitchen without delay. When the dinner was placed before the emperor he found it so nice that he ate much more than was good for him. The next morning, as soon as he woke, he sent for his head cook, and told him to send up the same dishes as before. The cook, seized with fright at this command, which he knew he could not fulfil, fell on his knees, and confessed the truth.

The emperor was so astonished that he forgot to scold, and while he was thinking over the matter, some of his pages came in and said that their new companion had been heard to boast that he knew where Iliane was to be found--the celebrated Iliane of the song which begins:

'Golden Hair The fields are green,'

and that to their certain knowledge he had a curl of her hair in his possession.

When he heard that, the emperor desired the page to be brought before him, and, as soon as the princess obeyed his summons, he said to her abruptly:

'Fet-Fruners, you have hidden from me the fact that you knew the golden-haired Iliane! Why did you do this? for I have treated you more kindly than all my other pages.'

Then, after making the princess show him the golden curl which she wore round her neck, he added: 'Listen to me; unless by some means or other you bring me the owner of this lock, I will have your head cut off in the place where you stand. Now go!'

In vain the poor girl tried to explain how the lock of hair came into her possession; the emperor would listen to nothing, and, bowing low, she left his presence and went to consult Sunlight what she was to do.

At his first words she brightened up. 'Do not be afraid, mistress; only last night my brother appeared to me in a dream and told me that a genius had carried off Iliane, whose hair you picked up on the road. But Iliane declares that, before she marries her captor, he must bring her, as a present, the whole stud of mares which belong to her. The genius, half crazy with love, thinks of nothing night and day but how this can be done, and meanwhile she is quite safe in the island swamps of the sea. Go back to the emperor and ask him for twenty ships filled with precious merchandise. The rest you shall know by-and-by.'

On hearing this advice, the princess went at once into the emperor's presence.

'May a long life be yours, O Sovereign all mighty!' said she. 'I have come to tell you that I can do as you command if you will give me twenty ships, and load them with the most precious wares in your kingdom.'

'You shall have all that I possess if you will bring me the golden-haired Iliane,' said the emperor.

The ships were soon ready, and the princess entered the largest and finest, with Sunlight at her side. Then the sails were spread and the voyage began.

For seven weeks the wind blew them straight towards the west, and early one morning they caught sight of the island swamps of the sea.

They cast anchor in a little bay, and the princess made haste to disembark with Sunlight, but, before leaving the ship, she tied to her belt a pair of tiny gold slippers, adorned with precious stones. Then mounting Sunlight, she rode about till she came to several palaces, built on hinges, so that they could always turn towards the sun.

The most splendid of these was guarded by three slaves, whose greedy eyes were caught by the glistening gold of the slippers. They hastened up to the owner of these treasures, and inquired who he was. 'A merchant,' replied the princess, 'who had somehow missed his road, and lost himself among the island swamps of the sea.'

Not knowing if it was proper to receive him or not, the slaves returned to their mistress and told her all they had seen, but not before she had caught sight of the merchant from the roof of her palace. Luckily her gaoler was away, always trying to catch the stud of mares, so for the moment she was free and alone.

The slaves told their tale so well that their mistress insisted on going down to the shore and seeing the beautiful slippers for herself. They were even lovelier than she expected, and when the merchant besought her to come on board, and inspect some that he thought were finer still, her curiosity was too great to refuse, and she went.

Once on board ship, she was so busy turning over all the precious things stored there, that she never knew that the sails were spread, and that they were flying along with the wind behind them; and when she did know, she rejoiced in her heart, though she pretended to weep and lament at being carried captive a second time. Thus they arrived at the court of the emperor.

They were just about to land, when the mother of the genius stood before them. She had learnt that Iliane had fled from her prison in company with a merchant, and, as her son was absent, had come herself in pursuit. Striding over the blue waters, hopping from wave to wave, one foot reaching to heaven, and the other planted in the foam, she was close at their heels, breathing fire and flame, when they stepped on shore from the ship. One glance told Iliane who the horrible old woman was, and she whispered hastily to her companion. Without saying a word, the princess swung her into Sunlight's saddle, and leaping up behind her, they were off like a flash.

It was not till they drew near the town that the princess stooped and asked Sunlight what they should do. 'Put your hand into my left ear,' said he, 'and take out a sharp stone, which you must throw behind you.'

The princess did as she was told, and a huge mountain sprang up behind them. The mother of the genius began to climb up it, and though they galloped quickly, she was quicker still.

They heard her coming, faster, faster; and again the princess stooped to ask what was to be done now. 'Put your hand into my right ear,' said the horse, 'and throw the brush you will find there behind you.' The princess did so, and a great forest sprang up behind them, and, so thick were its leaves, that even a wren could not get through. But the old woman seized hold of the branches and flung herself like a monkey from one to the others, and always she drew nearer--always, always--till their hair was singed by the flames of her mouth.

Then, in despair, the princess again bent down and asked if there was nothing more to be done, and Sunlight replied 'Quick, quick, take off the betrothal ring on the finger of Iliane and throw it behind you.'

This time there sprang up a great tower of stone, smooth as ivory, hard as steel, which reached up to heaven itself. And the mother of the genius gave a howl of rage, knowing that she could neither climb it nor get through it. But she was not beaten yet, and gathering herself together, she made a prodigious leap, which landed her on the top of the tower, right in the middle of Iliane's ring which lay there, and held her tight. Only her claws could be seen grasping the battlements.

All that could be done the old witch did; but the fire that poured from her mouth never reached the fugitives, though it laid waste the country a hundred miles round the tower, like the flames of a volcano. Then, with one last effort to free herself, her hands gave way, and, falling down to the bottom of the tower, she was broken in pieces.

When the flying princess saw what had happened she rode back to the spot, as Sunlight counselled her, and placed her finger on the top of the tower, which was gradually shrinking into the earth. In an instant the tower had vanished as if it had never been, and in its place was the finger of the princess with a ring round it.

The emperor received Iliane with all the respect that was due to her, and fell in love at first sight besides.

But this did not seem to please Iliane, whose face was sad as she walked about the palace or gardens, wondering how it was that, while other girls did as they liked, she was always in the power of someone whom she hated.

So when the emperor asked her to share his throne Iliane answered:

'Noble Sovereign, I may not think of marriage till my stud of horses has been brought me, with their trappings all complete.'

When he heard this, the emperor once more sent for Fet-Fruners, and said:

'Fet-Fruners, fetch me instantly the stud of mares, with their trappings all complete. If not, your head shall pay the forfeit.'

'Mighty Emperor, I kiss your hands! I have but just returned from doing your bidding, and, behold, you send me on another mission, and stake my head on its fulfilment, when your court is full of valiant young men, pining to win their spurs. They say you are a just man; then why not entrust this quest to one of them? Where am I to seek these mares that I am to bring you?'

'How do I know? They may be anywhere in heaven or earth; but, wherever they are, you will have to find them.'

The princess bowed and went to consult Sunlight. He listened while she told her tale, and then said:

'Fetch quickly nine buffalo skins; smear them well with tar, and lay them on my back. Do not fear; you will succeed in this also; but, in the end, the emperor's desires will be his undoing.'

The buffalo skins were soon got, and the princess started off with Sunlight. The way was long and difficult, but at length they reached the place where the mares were grazing. Here the genius who had carried off Iliane was wandering about, trying to discover how to capture them, all the while believing that Iliane was safe in the palace where he had left her.

As soon as she caught sight of him, the princess went up and told him that Iliane had escaped, and that his mother, in her efforts to recapture her, had died of rage. At this news a blind fury took possession of the genius, and he rushed madly upon the princess, who awaited his onslaught with perfect calmness. As he came on, with his sabre lifted high in the air, Sunlight bounded right over his head, so that the sword fell harmless. And when in her turn the princess prepared to strike, the horse sank upon his knees, so that the blade pierced the genius's thigh.

The fight was so fierce that it seemed as if the earth would give way under them, and for twenty miles round the beasts in the forests fled to their caves for shelter. At last, when her strength was almost gone, the genius lowered his sword for an instant. The princess saw her chance, and, with one swoop of her arm, severed her enemy's head from his body. Still trembling from the long struggle, she turned away, and went to the meadow where the stud were feeding.

By the advice of Sunlight, she took care not to let them see her, and climbed a thick tree, where she could see and hear without being seen herself. Then he neighed, and the mares came galloping up, eager to see the new comer--all but one horse, who did not like strangers, and thought they were very well as they were. As Sunlight stood his ground, well pleased with the attention paid him, this sulky creature suddenly advanced to the charge, and bit so violently that had it not been for the nine buffalo skins Sunlight's last moment would have come. When the fight was ended, the buffalo skins were in ribbons, and the beaten animal writhing with pain on the grass.

Nothing now remained to be done but to drive the whole stud to the emperor's court. So the princess came down from the tree and mounted Sunlight, while the stud followed meekly after, the wounded horse bringing up the rear. On reaching the palace, she drove them into a yard, and went to inform the emperor of her arrival.

The news was told at once to Iliane, who ran down directly and called them to her one by one, each mare by its name. And at the first sight of her the wounded animal shook itself quickly, and in a moment its wounds were healed, and there was not even a mark on its glossy skin.

By this time the emperor, on hearing where she was, joined her in the yard, and at her request ordered the mares to be milked, so that both he and she might bathe in the milk and keep young for ever. But they would suffer no one to come near them, and the princess was commanded to perform this service also.

At this, the heart of the girl swelled within her. The hardest tasks were always given to her, and long before the two years were up, she would be worn out and useless. But while these thoughts passed through her mind, a fearful rain fell, such as no man remembered before, and rose till the mares were standing up to their knees in water. Then as suddenly it stopped, and, behold! the water was ice, which held the animals firmly in its grasp. And the princess's heart grew light again, and she sat down gaily to milk them, as if she had done it every morning of her life.

The love of the emperor for Iliane waxed greater day by day, but she paid no heed to him, and always had an excuse ready to put off their marriage. At length, when she had come to the end of everything she could think of, she said to him one day: 'Grant me, Sire, just one request more, and then I will really marry you; for you have waited patiently this long time.'

'My beautiful dove,' replied the emperor, 'both I and all I possess are yours, so ask your will, and you shall have it.'

'Get me, then,' she said, 'a flask of the holy water that is kept in a little church beyond the river Jordan, and I will be your wife.'

Then the emperor ordered Fet-Fruners to ride without delay to the river Jordan, and to bring back, at whatever cost, the holy water for Iliane.

'This, my mistress,' said Sunlight, when she was saddling him, 'is the last and most difficult of your tasks. But fear nothing, for the hour of the emperor has struck.'

So they started; and the horse, who was not a wizard for nothing, told the princess exactly where she was to look for the holy water.

'It stands,' he said, 'on the altar of a little church, and is guarded by a troop of nuns. They never sleep, night or day, but every now and then a hermit comes to visit them, and from him they learn certain things it is needful for them to know. When this happens, only one of the nuns remains on guard at a time, and if we are lucky enough to hit upon this moment, we may get hold of the vase at once; if not, we shall have to wait the arrival of the hermit, however long it may be; for there is no other means of obtaining the holy water.'

They came in sight of the church beyond the Jordan, and, to their great joy, beheld the hermit just arriving at the door. They could hear him calling the nuns around him, and saw them settle themselves under a tree, with the hermit in their midst--all but one, who remained on guard, as was the custom.

The hermit had a great deal to say, and the day was very hot, so the nun, tired of sitting by herself, lay down right across the threshold, and fell sound asleep.

Then Sunlight told the princess what she was to do, and the girl stepped softly over the sleeping nun, and crept like a cat along the dark aisle, feeling the wall with her fingers, lest she should fall over something and ruin it all by a noise. But she reached the altar in safety, and found the vase of holy water standing on it. This she thrust into her dress, and went back with the same care as she came. With a bound she was in the saddle, and seizing the reins bade Sunlight take her home as fast as his legs could carry him.

The sound of the flying hoofs aroused the nun, who understood instantly that the precious treasure was stolen, and her shrieks were so loud and piercing that all the rest came flying to see what was the matter. The hermit followed at their heels, but seeing it was impossible to overtake the thief, he fell on his knees and called his most deadly curse down on her head, praying that if the thief was a man, he might become a woman; and if she was a woman, that she might become a man. In either case he thought that the punishment would be severe.

But punishments are things about which people do not always agree, and when the princess suddenly felt she was really the man she had pretended to be, she was delighted, and if the hermit had only been within reach she would have thanked him from her heart.

By the time she reached the emperor's court, Fet-Fruners looked a young man all over in the eyes of everyone; and even the mother of the genius would now have had her doubts set at rest. He drew forth the vase from his tunic and held it up to the emperor, saying: 'Mighty Sovereign, all hail! I have fulfilled this task also, and I hope it is the last you have for me; let another now take his turn.'

'I am content, Fet-Fruners,' replied the emperor, 'and when I am dead it is you who will sit upon my throne; for I have yet no son to come after me. But if one is given me, and my dearest wish is accomplished, then you shall be his right hand, and guide him with your counsels.'

But though the emperor was satisfied, Iliane was not, and she determined to revenge herself on the emperor for the dangers which he had caused Fet-Fruners to run. And as for the vase of holy water, she thought that, in common politeness, her suitor ought to have fetched it himself, which he could have done without any risk at all.

So she ordered the great bath to be filled with the milk of her mares, and begged the emperor to clothe himself in white robes, and enter the bath with her, an invitation he accepted with joy. Then, when both were standing with the milk reaching to their necks, she sent for the horse which had fought Sunlight, and made a secret sign to him. The horse understood what he was to do, and from one nostril he breathed fresh air over Iliane, and from the other, he snorted a burning wind which shrivelled up the emperor where he stood, leaving only a little heap of ashes.

His strange death, which no one could explain, made a great sensation throughout the country, and the funeral his people gave him was the most splendid ever known. When it was over, Iliane summoned Fet-Fruners before her, and addressed him thus:

'Fet-Fruners! it is you who brought me and have saved my life, and obeyed my wishes. It is you who gave me back my stud; you who killed the genius, and the old witch his mother; you who brought me the holy water. And you, and none other, shall be my husband.'

'Yes, I will marry you,' said the young man, with a voice almost as soft as when he was a princess. 'But know that in OUR house, it will be the cock who sings and not the hen!'

[From Sept Contes Roumains, Jules Brun and Leo Bachelin.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f32]

THE STORY OF HALFMAN

In a certain town there lived a judge who was married but had no children. One day he was standing lost in thought before his house, when an old man passed by.

'What is the matter, sir, said he, 'you look troubled?'

'Oh, leave me alone, my good man!'

'But what is it?' persisted the other.

'Well, I am successful in my profession and a person of importance, but I care nothing for it all, as I have no children.'

Then the old man said, 'Here are twelve apples. If your wife eats them, she will have twelve sons.'

The judge thanked him joyfully as he took the apples, and went to seek his wife. 'Eat these apples at once,' he cried, 'and you will have twelve sons.'

So she sat down and ate eleven of them, but just as she was in the middle of the twelfth her sister came in, and she gave her the half that was left.

The eleven sons came into the world, strong and handsome boys; but when the twelfth was born, there was only half of him.

By-and-by they all grew into men, and one day they told their father it was high time he found wives for them. 'I have a brother,' he answered, 'who lives away in the East, and he has twelve daughters; go and marry them.' So the twelve sons saddled their horses and rode for twelve days, till they met an old woman.

'Good greeting to you, young men!' said she, 'we have waited long for you, your uncle and I. The girls have become women, and are sought, in marriage by many, but I knew you would come one day, and I have kept them for you. Follow me into my house.'

And the twelve brothers followed her gladly, and their father's brother stood at the door, and gave them meat and drink. But at night, when every one was asleep, Halfman crept softly to his brothers, and said to them, 'Listen, all of you! This man is no uncle of ours, but an ogre.'

'Nonsense; of course he is our uncle,' answered they.

'Well, this very night you will see!' said Halfman. And he did not go to bed, but hid himself and watched.

Now in a little while he saw the wife of the ogre steal into the room on tiptoe and spread a red cloth over the brothers and then go and cover her daughters with a white cloth. After that she lay down and was soon snoring loudly. When Halfman was quite sure she was sound asleep, he took the red cloth from his brothers and put it on the girls, and laid their white cloth over his brothers. Next he drew their scarlet caps from their heads and exchanged them for the veils which the ogre's daughters were wearing. This was hardly done when he heard steps coming along the floor, so he hid himself quickly in the folds of a curtain. There was only half of him!

The ogress came slowly and gently along, stretching out her hands before her, so that she might not fall against anything unawares, for she had only a tiny lantern slung at her waist, which did not give much light. And when she reached the place where the sisters were lying, she stooped down and held a corner of the cloth up to the lantern. Yes! it certainly was red! Still, to make sure that there was no mistake, she passed her hands lightly over their heads, and felt the caps that covered them. Then she was quite certain the brothers lay sleeping before her, and began to kill them one by one. And Halfman whispered to his brothers, 'Get up and run for your lives, as the ogress is killing her daughters.' The brothers needed no second bidding, and in a moment were out of the house.

By this time the ogress had slain all her daughters but one, who awoke suddenly and saw what had happened. 'Mother, what are you doing?' cried she. 'Do you know that you have killed my sisters?'

'Oh, woe is me!' wailed the ogress. 'Halfman has outwitted me after all!' And she turned to wreak vengeance on him, but he and his brothers were far away.

They rode all day till they got to the town where their real uncle lived, and inquired the way to his house.

'Why have you been so long in coming?' asked he, when they had found him.

'Oh, dear uncle, we were very nearly not coming at all!' replied they. 'We fell in with an ogress who took us home and would have killed us if it had not been for Halfman. He knew what was in her mind and saved us, and here we are. Now give us each a daughter to wife, and let us return whence we came.'

'Take them!' said the uncle; 'the eldest for the eldest, the second for the second, and so on to the youngest.'

But the wife of Halfman was the prettiest of them all, and the other brothers were jealous and said to each other: 'What, is he who is only half a man to get the best? Let us put him to death and give his wife to our eldest brother!' And they waited for a chance.

After they had all ridden, in company with their brides, for some distance, they arrived at a brook, and one of them asked, 'Now, who will go and fetch water from the brook?'

'Halfman is the youngest,' said the elder brother, 'he must go.'

So Halfman got down and filled a skin with water, and they drew it up by a rope and drank. When they had done drinking, Halfman, who was standing in the middle of the stream, called out: 'Throw me the rope and draw me up, for I cannot get out alone.' And the brothers threw him a rope to draw him up the steep bank; but when he was half-way up they cut the rope, and he fell back into the stream. Then the brothers rode away as fast as they could, with his bride.

Halfman sank down under the water from the force of the fall, but before he touched the bottom a fish came and said to him, 'Fear nothing, Halfman; I will help you.' And the fish guided him to a shallow place, so that he scrambled out. On the way it said to him, 'Do you understand what your brothers, whom you saved from death, have done to you?'

'Yes; but what am I to do?' asked Halfman.

'Take one of my scales,' said the fish, 'and when you find yourself in danger, throw it in the fire. Then I will appear before you.'

'Thank you,' said Halfman, and went his way, while the fish swam back to its home.

The country was strange to Halfman, and he wandered about without knowing where he was going, till he suddenly found the ogress standing before him. 'Ah, Halfman, have I got you at last? You killed my daughters and helped your brothers to escape. What do you think I shall do with you?'

'Whatever you like!' said Halfman.

'Come into my house, then,' said the ogress, and he followed her.

'Look here!' she called to her husband, 'I have got hold of Halfman. I am going to roast him, so be quick and make up the fire!'

So the ogre brought wood, and heaped it up till the flames roared up the chimney. Then he turned to his wife and said: 'It is all ready, let us put him on!'

'What is the hurry, my good ogre?' asked Halfman. 'You have me in your power, and I cannot escape. I am so thin now, I shall hardly make one mouthful. Better fatten me up; you will enjoy me much more.'

'That is a very sensible remark,' replied the ogre; 'but what fattens you quickest?'

'Butter, meat, and red wine,' answered Halfman.

'Very good; we will lock you into this room, and here you shall stay till you are ready for eating.'

So Halfman was locked into the room, and the ogre and his wife brought him his food. At the end of three months he said to his gaolers: 'Now I have got quite fat; take me out, and kill me.'

'Get out, then!' said the ogre.

'But,' went on Halfman, 'you and your wife had better go to invite your friends to the feast, and your daughter can stay in the house and look after me!'

'Yes, that is a good idea,' answered they.

'You had better bring the wood in here,' continued Halfman, 'and I will split it up small, so that there may be no delay in cooking me.'

So the ogress gave Halfman a pile of wood and an axe, and then set out with her husband, leaving Halfman and her daughter busy in the house.

After he had chopped for a little while he called to the girl, 'Come and help me, or else I shan't have it all ready when your mother gets back.'

'All right,' said she, and held a billet of wood for him to chop.

But he raised his axe and cut off her head, and ran away like the wind. By-and-by the ogre and his wife returned and found their daughter lying without her head, and they began to cry and sob, saying, 'This is Halfman's work, why did we listen to him?' But Halfman was far away.

When he escaped from the house he ran on straight before him for some time, looking for a safe shelter, as he knew that the ogre's legs were much longer than his, and that it was his only chance. At last he saw an iron tower which he climbed up. Soon the ogre appeared, looking right and left lest his prey should be sheltering behind a rock or tree, but he did not know Halfman was so near till he heard his voice calling, 'Come up! come up! you will find me here!'

'But how can I come up?' said the ogre, 'I see no door, and I could not possibly climb that tower.'

'Oh, there is no door,' replied Halfman.

'Then how did you climb up?'

'A fish carried me on his back.'

'And what am I to do?'

'You must go and fetch all your relations, and tell them to bring plenty of sticks; then you must light a fire, and let it burn till the tower becomes red hot. After that you can easily throw it down.'

'Very good,' said the ogre, and he went round to every relation he had, and told them to collect wood and bring it to the tower where Halfman was. The men did as they were ordered, and soon the tower was glowing like coral, but when they flung themselves against it to overthrow it, they caught themselves on fire and were burnt to death. And overhead sat Halfman, laughing heartily. But the ogre's wife was still alive, for she had taken no part in kindling the fire.

'Oh,' she shrieked with rage, 'you have killed my daughters and my husband, and all the men belonging to me; how can I get at you to avenge myself?'

'Oh, that is easy enough,' said Halfman. 'I will let down a rope, and if you tie it tightly round you, I will draw it up.'

'All right,' returned the ogress, fastening the rope which Halfman let down. 'Now pull me up.'

'Are you sure it is secure?'

'Yes, quite sure.'

'Don't be afraid.'

'Oh, I am not afraid at all!'

So Halfman slowly drew her up, and when she was near the top he let go the rope, and she fell down and broke her neck. Then Halfman heaved a great sigh and said, 'That was hard work; the rope has hurt my hands badly, but now I am rid of her for ever.'

So Halfman came down from the tower, and went on, till he got to a desert place, and as he was very tired, he lay down to sleep. While it was still dark, an ogress passed by, and she woke him and said, 'Halfman, to-morrow your brother is to marry your wife.'

'Oh, how can I stop it?' asked he. 'Will you help me?'

'Yes, I will,' replied the ogress.

'Thank you, thank you!' cried Halfman, kissing her on the forehead. 'My wife is dearer to me than anything else in the world, and it is not my brother's fault that I am not dead long ago.'

'Very well, I will rid you of him,' said the ogress, 'but only on one condition. If a boy is born to you, you must give him to me!'

'Oh, anything,' answered Halfman, 'as long as you deliver me from my brother, and get me my wife.'

'Mount on my back, then, and in a quarter of an hour we shall be there.'

The ogress was as good as her word, and in a few minutes they arrived at the outskirts of the town where Halfman and his brothers lived. Here she left him, while she went into the town itself, and found the wedding guests just leaving the brother's house. Unnoticed by anyone, the ogress crept into a curtain, changing herself into a scorpion, and when the brother was going to get into bed, she stung him behind the ear, so that he fell dead where he stood. Then she returned to Halfman and told him to go and claim his bride. He jumped up hastily from his seat, and took the road to his father's house. As he drew near he heard sounds of weeping and lamentations, and he said to a man he met: 'What is the matter?'

'The judge's eldest son was married yesterday, and died suddenly before night.'

'Well,' thought Halfman, 'my conscience is clear anyway, for it is quite plain he coveted my wife, and that is why he tried to drown me.' He went at once to his father's room, and found him sitting in tears on the floor. 'Dear father,' said Halfman, 'are you not glad to see me? You weep for my brother, but I am your son too, and he stole my bride from me and tried to drown me in the brook. If he is dead, I at least am alive.'

'No, no, he was better than you!' moaned the father.

'Why, dear father?'

'He told me you had behaved very ill,' said he.

'Well, call my brothers,' answered Halfman, 'as I have a story to tell them.' So the father called them all into his presence. Then Halfman began: 'After we were twelve days' journey from home, we met an ogress, who gave us greeting and said, "Why have you been so long coming? The daughters of your uncle have waited for you in vain," and she bade us follow her to the house, saying, "Now there need be no more delay; you can marry your cousins as soon as you please, and take them with you to your own home." But I warned my brothers that the man was not our uncle, but an ogre.

'When we lay down to sleep, she spread a red cloth over us, and covered her daughters with a white one; but I changed the cloths, and when the ogress came back in the middle of the night, and looked at the cloths, she mistook her own daughters for my brothers, and killed them one by one, all but the youngest. Then I woke my brothers, and we all stole softly from the house, and we rode like the wind to our real uncle.

'And when he saw us, he bade us welcome, and married us to his twelve daughters, the eldest to the eldest, and so on to me, whose bride was the youngest of all and also the prettiest. And my brothers were filled with envy, and left me to drown in a brook, but I was saved by a fish who showed me how to get out. Now, you are a judge! Who did well, and who did evil--I or my brothers?'

'Is this story true?' said the father, turning to his sons.

'It is true, my father,' answered they. 'It is even as Halfman has said, and the girl belongs to him.'

Then the judge embraced Halfman and said to him: 'You have done well, my son. Take your bride, and may you both live long and happily together!'

At the end of the year Halfman's wife had a son, and not long after she came one day hastily into the room. and found her husband weeping. 'What is the matter?' she asked.

'The matter?' said he.

'Yes, why are you weeping?'

'Because,' replied Halfman, 'the baby is not really ours, but belongs to an ogress.'

'Are you mad?' cried the wife. 'What do you mean by talking like that?'

'I promised,' said Halfman, 'when she undertook to kill my brother and to give you to me, that the first son we had should be hers.'

'And will she take him from us now?' said the poor woman.

'No, not quite yet,' replied Halfman; 'when he is bigger.'

'And is she to have all our children?' asked she.

'No, only this one,' returned Halfman.

Day by day the boy grew bigger, and one day as he was playing in the street with the other children, the ogress came by. 'Go to your father,' she said, 'and repeat this speech to him: "I want my forfeit; when am I to have it?" '

'All right,' replied the child, but when he went home forgot all about it. The next day the ogress came again, and asked the boy what answer the father had given. 'I forgot all about it,' said he.

'Well, put this ring on your finger, and then you won't forget.'

'Very well,' replied the boy, and went home.

The next morning, as he was at breakfast, his mother said to him, 'Child, where did you get that ring?'

'A woman gave it to me yesterday, and she told me, father, to tell you that she wanted her forfeit, and when was she to have it?'

Then his father burst into tears and said, 'If she comes again you must say to her that your parents bid her take her forfeit at once, and depart.'

At this they both began to weep afresh, and his mother kissed him, and put on his new clothes and said, 'If the woman bids you to follow her, you must go,' but the boy did not heed her grief, he was so pleased with his new clothes. And when he went out, he said to his play-fellows, 'Look how smart I am; I am going away with my aunt to foreign lands.'

At that moment the ogress came up and asked him, 'Did you give my message to your father and mother?'

'Yes, dear aunt, I did.'

'And what did they say?'

'Take it away at once!'

So she took him.

But when dinner-time came, and the boy did not return, his father and mother knew that he would never come back, and they sat down and wept all day. At last Halfman rose up and said to his wife, 'Be comforted; we will wait a year, and then I will go to the ogress and see the boy, and how he is cared for.'

'Yes, that will be the best,' said she.

The year passed away, then Halfman saddled his horse, and rode to the place where the ogress had found him sleeping. She was not there, but not knowing what to do next, he got off his horse and waited. About midnight she suddenly stood before him.

'Halfman, why did you come here?' said she.

'I have a question I want to ask you.'

'Well, ask it; but I know quite well what it is. Your wife wishes you to ask whether I shall carry off your second son as I did the first.'

'Yes, that is it,' replied Halfman. Then he seized her hand and said, 'Oh, let me see my son, and how he looks, and what he is doing.'

The ogress was silent, but stuck her staff hard in the earth, and the earth opened, and the boy appeared and said, 'Dear father, have you come too?' And his father clasped him in his arms, and began to cry. But the boy struggled to be free, saying 'Dear father, put me down. I have got a new mother, who is better than the old one; and a new father, who is better than you.'

Then his father sat him down and said, 'Go in peace, my boy, but listen first to me. Tell your father the ogre and your mother the ogress, that never more shall they have any children of mine.'

'All right,' replied the boy, and called 'Mother!'

'What is it?'

'You are never to take away any more of my father and mother's children!'

'Now that I have got you, I don't want any more,' answered she.

Then the boy turned to his father and said, 'Go in peace, dear father, and give my mother greeting and tell her not to be anxious any more, for she can keep all her children.'

And Halfman mounted his horse and rode home, and told his wife all he had seen, and the message sent by Mohammed--Mohammed the son of Halfman, the son of the judge.

[Marchen und Gedichte aus der Stadt Tripolis. Hans von Stumme.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f33]

THE PRINCE WHO WANTED TO SEE THE WORLD

There was once a king who had only one son, and this young man tormented his father from morning till night to allow him to travel in far countries. For a long time the king refused to give him leave; but at last, wearied out, he granted permission, and ordered his treasurer to produce a large sum of money for the prince's expenses. The youth was overjoyed at the thought that he was really going to see the world, and after tenderly embracing his father he set forth.

He rode on for some weeks without meeting with any adventures; but one night when he was resting at an inn, he came across another traveller, with whom he fell into conversation, in the course of which the stranger inquired if he never played cards. The young man replied that he was very fond of doing so. Cards were brought, and in a very short time the prince had lost every penny he possessed to his new acquaintance. When there was absolutely nothing left at the bottom of the bag, the stranger proposed that they should have just one more game, and that if the prince won he should have the money restored to him, but in case he lost, should remain in the inn for three years, and besides that should be his servant for another three. The prince agreed to those terms, played, and lost; so the stranger took rooms for him, and furnished him with bread and water every day for three years.

The prince lamented his lot, but it was no use; and at the end of three years he was released and had to go to the house of the stranger, who was really the king of a neighbouring country, and be his servant. Before he had gone very far he met a woman carrying a child, which was crying from hunger. The prince took it from her, and fed it with his last crust of bread and last drop of water, and then gave it back to its mother. The woman thanked him gratefully, and said:

'Listen, my lord. You must walk straight on till you notice a very strong scent, which comes from a garden by the side of the road. Go in and hide yourself close to a tank, where three doves will come to bathe. As the last one flies past you, catch hold of its robe of feathers, and refuse to give it back till the dove has promised you three things.'

The young man did as he was told, and everything happened as the woman had said. He took the robe of feathers from the dove, who gave him in exchange for it a ring, a collar, and one of its own plumes, saying: 'When you are in any trouble, cry "Come to my aid, O dove!" I am the daughter of the king you are going to serve, who hates your father and made you gamble in order to cause your ruin.'

Thus the prince went on his way, and in course of time he arrived at the king's palace. As soon as his master knew he was there, the young man was sent for into his presence, and three bags were handed to him with these words:

'Take this wheat, this millet, and this barley, and sow them at once, so that I may have loaves of them all to-morrow.'

The prince stood speechless at this command, but the king did not condescend to give any further explanation, and when he was dismissed the young man flew to the room which had been set aside for him, and pulling out his feather, he cried: 'Dove, dove! be quick and come.'

'What is it?' said the dove, flying in through the open window, and the prince told her of the task before him, and of his despair at being unable to accomplish it. 'Fear nothing; it will be all right,' replied the dove, as she flew away again.

The next morning when the prince awoke he saw the three loaves standing beside his bed. He jumped up and dressed, and he was scarcely ready when a page arrived with the message that he was to go at once into the king's chamber. Taking the loaves in his arm he followed the boy, and, bowing low, laid them down before the king. The monarch looked at the loaves for a moment without speaking, then he said:

'Good. The man who can do this can also find the ring which my eldest daughter dropped into the sea.'

The prince hastened back to his room and summoned the dove, and when she heard this new command she said: 'Now listen. To-morrow take a knife and a basin and go down to the shore and get into a boat you will find there.'

The young man did not know what he was to do when he was in the boat or where he was to go, but as the dove had come to his rescue before, he was ready to obey her blindly.

When he reached the boat he found the dove perched on one of the masts, and at a signal from her he put to sea; the wind was behind them and they soon lost sight of land. The dove then spoke for the first time and said, 'Take that knife and cut off my head, but be careful that not a single drop of blood falls to the ground. Afterwards you must throw it into the sea.'

Wondering at this strange order, the prince picked up his knife and severed the dove's head from her body at one stroke. A little while after a dove rose from the water with a ring in its beak, and laying it in the prince's hand, dabbled itself with the blood that was in the basin, when its head became that of a beautiful girl. Another moment and it had vanished completely, and the prince took the ring and made his way back to the palace.

The king stared with surprise at the sight of the ring, but he thought of another way of getting rid of the young man which was surer even than the other two.

'This evening you will mount my colt and ride him to the field, and break him in properly.'

The prince received this command as silently as he had received the rest, but no sooner was he in his room than he called for the dove, who said: 'Attend to me. My father longs to see you dead, and thinks he will kill you by this means. He himself is the colt, my mother is the saddle, my two sisters are the stirrups, and I am the bridle. Do not forget to take a good club, to help you in dealing with such a crew.'

So the prince mounted the colt, and gave him such a beating that when he came to the palace to announce that the animal was now so meek that it could be ridden by the smallest child, he found the king so bruised that he had to be wrapped in cloths dipped in vinegar, the mother was too stiff to move, and several of the daughters' ribs were broken. The youngest, however, was quite unharmed. That night she came to the prince and whispered to him:

'Now that they are all in too much pain to move, we had better seize our chance and run away. Go to the stable and saddle the leanest horse you can find there.' But the prince was foolish enough to choose the fattest: and when they had started and the princess saw what he had done, she was very sorry, for though this horse ran like the wind, the other flashed like thought. However, it was dangerous to go back, and they rode on as fast as the horse would go.

In the night the king sent for his youngest daughter, and as she did not come he sent again; but she did not come any the more for that. The queen, who was a witch, discovered that her daughter had gone off with the prince, and told her husband he must leave his bed and go after them. The king got slowly up, groaning with pain, and dragged himself to the stables, where he saw the lean horse still in his stall.

Leaping on his back he shook the reins, and his daughter, who knew what to expect and had her eyes open, saw the horse start forward, and in the twinkling of an eye changed her own steed into a cell, the prince into a hermit, and herself into a nun.

When the king reached the chapel, he pulled up his horse and asked if a girl and a young man had passed that way. The hermit raised his eyes, which were bent on the ground, and said that he had not seen a living creature. The king, much disgusted at this news, and not knowing what to do, returned home and told his wife that, though he had ridden for miles, he had come across nothing but a hermit and a nun in a cell.

'Why those were the runaways, of course,' she cried, flying into a passion, 'and if you had only brought a scrap of the nun's dress, or a bit of stone from the wall, I should have had them in my power.'

At these words the king hastened back to the stable, and brought out the lean horse who travelled quicker than thought. But his daughter saw him coming, and changed her horse into a plot of ground, herself into a rose-tree covered with roses, and the prince into a gardener. As the king rode up, the gardener looked up from the tree which he was trimming and asked if anything was the matter. 'Have you seen a young man and a girl go by?' said the king, and the gardener shook his head and replied that no one had passed that way since he had been working there. So the king turned his steps homewards and told his wife.

'Idiot!' cried she, 'if you had only brought me one of the roses, or a handful of earth, I should have had them in my power. But there is no time to waste. I shall have to go with you myself.'

The girl saw them from afar, and a great fear fell on her, for she knew her mother's skill in magic of all kinds. However, she determined to fight to the end, and changed the horse into a deep pool, herself into an eel, and the prince into a turtle. But it was no use. Her mother recognised them all, and, pulling up, asked her daughter if she did not repent and would not like to come home again. The eel wagged 'No' with her tail, and the queen told her husband to put a drop of water from the pool into a bottle, because it was only by that means that she could seize hold of her daughter. The king did as he was bid, and was just in the act of drawing the bottle out of the water after he had filled it, when the turtle knocked against and spilt it all. The king then filled it a second time, but again the turtle was too quick for him.

The queen saw that she was beaten, and called down a curse on her daughter that the prince should forget all about her. After having relieved her feelings in this manner, she and the king went back to the palace.

The others resumed their proper shapes and continued their journey, but the princess was so silent that at last the prince asked her what was the matter. 'It is because I know you will soon forget all about me,' said she, and though he laughed at her and told her it was impossible, she did not cease to believe it.

They rode on and on and on, till they reached the end of the world, where the prince lived, and leaving the girl in an inn he went himself to the palace to ask leave of his father to present her to him as his bride; but in his joy at seeing his family once more he forgot all about her, and even listened when the king spoke of arranging a marriage for him.

When the poor girl heard this she wept bitterly, and cried out, 'Come to me, my sisters, for I need you badly!'

In a moment they stood beside her, and the elder one said, 'Do not be sad, all will go well,' and they told the innkeeper that if any of the king's servants wanted any birds for their master they were to be sent up to them, as they had three doves for sale.

And so it fell out, and as the doves were very beautiful the servant bought them for the king, who admired them so much that he called his son to look at them. The prince was much pleased with the doves and was coaxing them to come to him, when one fluttered on to the top of the window and said, 'If you could only hear us speak, you would admire us still more.'

And another perched on a table and added, 'Talk away, it might help him to remember!'

And the third flew on his shoulder and whispered to him, 'Put on this ring, prince, and see if it fits you.'

And it did. Then they hung a collar round his neck, and held a feather on which was written the name of the dove. And at last his memory came back to him, and he declared he would marry the princess and nobody else. So the next day the wedding took place, and they lived happy till they died.

[From the Portuguese.]

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f34]

VIRGILIUS THE SORCERER

Long, long ago there was born to a Roman knight and his wife Maja a little boy called Virgilius. While he was still quite little, his father died, and the kinsmen, instead of being a help and protection to the child and his mother, robbed them of their lands and money, and the widow, fearing that they might take the boy's life also, sent him away to Spain, that he might study in the great University of Toledo.

Virgilius was fond of books, and pored over them all day long. But one afternoon, when the boys were given a holiday, he took a long walk, and found himself in a place where he had never been before. In front of him was a cave, and, as no boy ever sees a cave without entering it, he went in. The cave was so deep that it seemed to Virgilius as if it must run far into the heart of the mountain, and he thought he would like to see if it came out anywhere on the other side. For some time he walked on in pitch darkness, but he went steadily on, and by-and-by a glimmer of light shot across the floor, and he heard a voice calling, 'Virgilius! Virgilius!'

'Who calls?' he asked, stopping and looking round.

'Virgilius!' answered the voice, 'do you mark upon the ground where you are standing a slide or bolt?'

'I do,' replied Virgilius.

'Then,' said the voice, 'draw back that bolt, and set me free.'

'But who are you?' asked Virgilius, who never did anything in a hurry.

'I am an evil spirit,' said the voice, 'shut up here till Doomsday, unless a man sets me free. If you will let me out I will give you some magic books, which will make you wiser than any other man.'

Now Virgilius loved wisdom, and was tempted by these promises, but again his prudence came to his aid, and he demanded that the books should be handed over to him first, and that he should be told how to use them. The evil spirit, unable to help itself, did as Virgilius bade him, and then the bolt was drawn back. Underneath was a small hole, and out of this the evil spirit gradually wriggled himself; but it took some time, for when at last he stood upon the ground he proved to be about three times as large as Virgilius himself, and coal black besides.

'Why, you can't have been as big as that when you were in the hole!' cried Virgilius.

'But I was!' replied the spirit.

'I don't believe it!' answered Virgilius.

'Well, I'll just get in and show you,' said the spirit, and after turning and twisting, and curling himself up, then he lay neatly packed into the hole. Then Virgilius drew the bolt, and, picking the books up under his arm, he left the cave.

For the next few weeks Virgilius hardly ate or slept, so busy was he in learning the magic the books contained. But at the end of that time a messenger from his mother arrived in Toledo, begging him to come at once to Rome, as she had been ill, and could look after their affairs no longer.

Though sorry to leave Toledo, where he was much thought of as showing promise of great learning, Virgilius would willingly have set out at once, but there were many things he had first to see to. So he entrusted to the messenger four pack-horses laden with precious things, and a white palfrey on which she was to ride out every day. Then he set about his own preparations, and, followed by a large train of scholars, he at length started for Rome, from which he had been absent twelve years.

His mother welcomed him back with tears in her eyes, and his poor kinsmen pressed round him, but the rich ones kept away, for they feared that they would no longer be able to rob their kinsman as they had done for many years past. Of course, Virgilius paid no attention to this behaviour, though he noticed they looked with envy on the rich presents he bestowed on the poorer relations and on anyone who had been kind to his mother.

Soon after this had happened the season of tax-gathering came round, and everyone who owned land was bound to present himself before the emperor. Like the rest, Virgilius went to court, and demanded justice from the emperor against the men who had robbed him. But as these were kinsmen to the emperor he gained nothing, as the emperor told him he would think over the matter for the next four years, and then give judgment. This reply naturally did not satisfy Virgilius, and, turning on his heel, he went back to his own home, and, gathering in his harvest, he stored it up in his various houses.

When the enemies of Virgilius heard of this, they assembled together and laid siege to his castle. But Virgilius was a match for them. Coming forth from the castle so as to meet them face to face, he cast a spell over them of such power that they could not move, and then bade them defiance. After which he lifted the spell, and the invading army slunk back to Rome, and reported what Virgilius had said to the emperor.

Now the emperor was accustomed to have his lightest word obeyed, almost before it was uttered, and he hardly knew how to believe his ears. But he got together another army, and marched straight off to the castle. But directly they took up their position Virgilius girded them about with a great river, so that they could neither move hand nor foot, then, hailing the emperor, he offered him peace, and asked for his friendship. The emperor, however, was too angry to listen to anything, so Virgilius, whose patience was exhausted, feasted his own followers in the presence of the starving host, who could not stir hand or foot.

Things seemed getting desperate, when a magician arrived in the camp and offered to sell his services to the emperor. His proposals were gladly accepted, and in a moment the whole of the garrison sank down as if they were dead, and Virgilius himself had much ado to keep awake. He did not know how to fight the magician, but with a great effort struggled to open his Black Book, which told him what spells to use. In an instant all his foes seemed turned to stone, and where each man was there he stayed. Some were half way up the ladders, some had one foot over the wall, but wherever they might chance to be there every man remained, even the emperor and his sorcerer. All day they stayed there like flies upon the wall, but during the night Virgilius stole softly to the emperor, and offered him his freedom, as long as he would do him justice. The emperor, who by this time was thoroughly frightened, said he would agree to anything Virgilius desired. So Virgilius took off his spells, and, after feasting the army and bestowing on every man a gift, bade them return to Rome. And more than that, he built a square tower for the emperor, and in each corner all that was said in that quarter of the city might be heard, while if you stood in the centre every whisper throughout Rome would reach your ears.

Having settled his affairs with the emperor and his enemies, Virgilius had time to think of other things, and his first act was to fall in love! The lady's name was Febilla, and her family was noble, and her face fairer than any in Rome, but she only mocked Virgilius, and was always playing tricks upon him. To this end, she bade him one day come to visit her in the tower where she lived, promising to let down a basket to draw him up as far as the roof. Virgilius was enchanted at this quite unexpected favour, and stepped with glee into the basket. It was drawn up very slowly, and by-and-by came altogether to a standstill, while from above rang the voice of Febilla crying, 'Rogue of a sorcerer, there shalt thou hang!' And there he hung over the market-place, which was soon thronged with people, who made fun of him till he was mad with rage. At last the emperor, hearing of his plight, commanded Febilla to release him, and Virgilius went home vowing vengeance.

The next morning every fire in Rome went out, and as there were no matches in those days this was a very serious matter. The emperor, guessing that this was the work of Virgilius, besought him to break the spell. Then Virgilius ordered a scaffold to be erected in the market-place, and Febilla to be brought clothed in a single white garment. And further, he bade every one to snatch fire from the maiden, and to suffer no neighbour to kindle it. And when the maiden appeared, clad in her white smock, flames of fire curled about her, and the Romans brought some torches, and some straw, and some shavings, and fires were kindled in Rome again.

For three days she stood there, till every hearth in Rome was alight, and then she was suffered to go where she would.

But the emperor was wroth at the vengeance of Virgilius, and threw him into prison, vowing that he should be put to death. And when everything was ready he was led out to the Viminal Hill, where he was to die.

He went quietly with his guards, but the day was hot, and on reaching his place of execution he begged for some water. A pail was brought, and he, crying 'Emperor, all hail! seek for me in Sicily,' jumped headlong into the pail, and vanished from their sight.

For some time we hear no more of Virgilius, or how he made his peace with the emperor, but the next event in his history was his being sent for to the palace to give the emperor advice how to guard Rome from foes within as well as foes without. Virgilius spent many days in deep thought, and at length invented a plan which was known to all as the 'Preservation of Rome.'

On the roof of the Capitol, which was the most famous public building in the city, he set up statues representing the gods worshipped by every nation subject to Rome, and in the middle stood the god of Rome herself. Each of the conquered gods held in its hand a bell, and if there was even a thought of treason in any of the countries its god turned its back upon the god of Rome and rang its bell furiously, and the senators came hurrying to see who was rebelling against the majesty of the empire. Then they made ready their armies, and marched against the foe.

Now there was a country which had long felt bitter jealousy of Rome, and was anxious for some way of bringing about its destruction. So the people chose three men who could be trusted, and, loading them with money, sent them to Rome, bidding them to pretend that they were diviners of dreams. No sooner had the messengers reached the city than they stole out at night and buried a pot of gold far down in the earth, and let down another into the bed of the Tiber, just where a bridge spans the river.

Next day they went to the senate house, where the laws were made, and, bowing low, they said, 'Oh, noble lords, last night we dreamed that beneath the foot of a hill there lies buried a pot of gold. Have we your leave to dig for it?' And leave having been given, the messengers took workmen and dug up the gold and made merry with it.

A few days later the diviners again appeared before the senate, and said, 'Oh, noble lords, grant us leave to seek out another treasure, which has been revealed to us in a dream as lying under the bridge over the river.'

And the senators gave leave, and the messengers hired boats and men, and let down ropes with hooks, and at length drew up the pot of gold, some of which they gave as presents to the senators.

A week or two passed by, and once more they appeared in the senate house.

'O, noble lords!' said they, 'last night in a vision we beheld twelve casks of gold lying under the foundation stone of the Capitol, on which stands the statue of the Preservation of Rome. Now, seeing that by your goodness we have been greatly enriched by our former dreams, we wish, in gratitude, to bestow this third treasure on you for your own profit; so give us workers, and we will begin to dig without delay.'

And receiving permission they began to dig, and when the messengers had almost undermined the Capitol they stole away as secretly as they had come.

And next morning the stone gave way, and the sacred statue fell on its face and was broken. And the senators knew that their greed had been their ruin.

From that day things went from bad to worse, and every morning crowds presented themselves before the emperor, complaining of the robberies, murders, and other crimes that were committed nightly in the streets.

The emperor, desiring nothing so much as the safety of his subjects, took counsel with Virgilius how this violence could be put down.

Virgilius thought hard for a long time, and then he spoke:

'Great prince,' said he, 'cause a copper horse and rider to be made, and stationed in front of the Capitol. Then make a proclamation that at ten o'clock a bell will toll, and every man is to enter his house, and not leave it again.'

The emperor did as Virgilius advised, but thieves and murderers laughed at the horse, and went about their misdeeds as usual.

But at the last stroke of the bell the horse set off at full gallop through the streets of Rome, and by daylight men counted over two hundred corpses that it had trodden down. The rest of the thieves--and there were still many remaining--instead of being frightened into honesty, as Virgilius had hoped, prepared rope ladders with hooks to them, and when they heard the sound of the horse's hoofs they stuck their ladders into the walls, and climbed up above the reach of the horse and its rider

Then the emperor commanded two copper dogs to be made that would run after the horse, and when the thieves, hanging from the walls, mocked and jeered at Virgilius and the emperor, the dogs leaped high after them and pulled them to the ground, and bit them to death.

Thus did Virgilius restore peace and order to the city.

Now about this time there came to be noised abroad the fame of the daughter of the sultan who ruled over the province of Babylon, and indeed she was said to be the most beautiful princess in the world.

Virgilius, like the rest, listened to the stories that were told of her, and fell so violently in love with all he heard that he built a bridge in the air, which stretched all the way between Rome and Babylon. He then passed over it to visit the princess, who, though somewhat surprised to see him, gave him welcome, and after some conversation became in her turn anxious to see the distant country where this stranger lived, and he promised that he would carry her there himself, without wetting the soles of his feet.

The princess spent some days in the palace of Virgilius, looking at wonders of which she had never dreamed, though she declined to accept the presents he longed to heap on her. The hours passed as if they were minutes, till the princess said that she could be no longer absent from her father. Then Virgilius conducted her himself over the airy bridge, and laid her gently down on her own bed, where she was found next morning by her father.

She told him all that had happened to her, and he pretended to be very much interested, and begged that the next time Virgilius came he might be introduced to him.

Soon after, the sultan received a message from his daughter that the stranger was there, and he commanded that a feast should be made ready, and, sending for the princess delivered into her hands a cup, which he said she was to present to Virgilius herself, in order to do him honour.

When they were all seated at the feast the princess rose and presented the cup to Virgilius, who directly he had drunk fell into a deep sleep.

Then the sultan ordered his guards to bind him, and left him there till the following day.

Directly the sultan was up he summoned his lords and nobles into his great hall, and commanded that the cords which bound Virgilius should be taken off, and the prisoner brought before him. The moment he appeared the sultan's passion broke forth, and he accused his captive of the crime of conveying the princess into distant lands without his leave.

Virgilius replied that if he had taken her away he had also brought her back, when he might have kept her, and that if they would set him free to return to his own land he would come hither no more.

'Not so!' cried the sultan, 'but a shameful death you shall die!' And the princess fell on her knees, and begged she might die with him.

'You are out in your reckoning, Sir Sultan!' said Virgilius, whose patience was at an end, and he cast a spell over the sultan and his lords, so that they believed that the great river of Babylon was flowing through the hall, and that they must swim for their lives. So, leaving them to plunge and leap like frogs and fishes, Virgilius took the princess in his arms, and carried her over the airy bridge back to Rome.

Now Virgilius did not think that either his palace, or even Rome itself, was good enough to contain such a pearl as the princess, so he built her a city whose foundations stood upon eggs, buried far away down in the depths of the sea. And in the city was a square tower, and on the roof of the tower was a rod of iron, and across the rod he laid a bottle, and on the bottle he placed an egg, and from the egg there hung chained an apple, which hangs there to this day. And when the egg shakes the city quakes, and when the egg shall be broken the city shall be destroyed. And the city Virgilius filled full of wonders, such as never were seen before, and he called its name Naples.

[Adapted from 'Virgilius the Sorcerer.']

The Violet Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1901], at sacred-texts.com

[f35]

MOGARZEA AND HIS SON

There was once a little boy, whose father and mother, when they were dying, left him to the care of a guardian. But the guardian whom they chose turned out to be a wicked man, and spent all the money, so the boy determined to go away and strike out a path for himself.

So one day he set off, and walked and walked through woods and meadows till when evening came he was very tired, and did not know where to sleep. He climbed a hill and looked about him to see if there was no light shining from a window. At first all seemed dark, but at length he noticed a tiny spark far, far off, and, plucking up his spirits, he at once went in search of it.

The night was nearly half over before he reached the spark, which turned out to be a big fire, and by the fire a man was sleeping who was so tall he might have been a giant. The boy hesitated for a moment what he should do; then he crept close up to the man, and lay down by his legs.

When the man awoke in the morning he was much surprised to find the boy nestling up close to him.

'Dear me! where do you come from?' said he.

'I am your son, born in the night,' replied the boy.

'If that is true,' said the man, 'you shall take care of my sheep, and I will give you food. But take care you never cross the border of my land, or you will repent it.' Then he pointed out where the border of his land lay, and bade the boy begin his work at once.

The young shepherd led his flock out to the richest meadows and stayed with them till evening, when he brought them back, and helped the man to milk them. When this was done, they both sat down to supper, and while they were eating the boy asked the big man: 'What is your name, father?'

'Mogarzea,' answered he.

'I wonder you are not tired of living by yourself in this lonely place.'

'There is no reason you should wonder! Don't you know that there was never a bear yet who danced of his own free will?'

'Yes, that is true,' replied the boy. 'But why is it you are always so sad? Tell me your history, father.'

'What is the use of my telling you things that would only make you sad too?'

'Oh, never mind that! I should like to hear. Are you not my father, and am I not your son?'

'Well, if you really want to know my story, this is it: As I told you, my name is Mogarzea, and my father is an emperor. I was on my way to the Sweet Milk Lake, which lies not far from here, to marry one of the three fairies who have made the lake their home. But on the road three wicked elves fell on me, and robbed me of my soul, so that ever since I have stayed in this spot watching my sheep without wishing for anything different, without having felt one moment's joy, or ever once being able to laugh. And the horrible elves are so ill-natured that if anyone sets one foot on their land he is instantly punished. That is why I warn you to be careful, lest you should share my fate.'

'All right, I will take great care. Do let me go, father,' said the boy, as they stretched themselves out to sleep.

At sunrise the boy got up and led his sheep out to feed, and for some reason he did not feel tempted to cross into the grassy meadows belonging to the elves, but let his flock pick up what pasture they could on Mogarzea's dry ground.

On the third day he was sitting under the shadow of a tree, playing on his flute--and there was nobody in the world who could play a flute better--when one of his sheep strayed across the fence into the flowery fields of the elves, and another and another followed it. But the boy was so absorbed in his flute that he noticed nothing till half the flock were on the other side.

He jumped up, still playing on his flute, and went after the sheep, meaning to drive them back to their own side of the border, when suddenly he saw before him three beautiful maidens who stopped in front of him, and began to dance. The boy understood what he must do, and played with all his might, but the maidens danced on till evening.

'Now let me go,' he cried at last, 'for poor Mogarzea must be dying of hunger. I will come and play for you to-morrow.'

'Well, you may go!' they said, 'but remember that even if you break your promise you will not escape us.'

So they both agreed that the next day he should come straight there with the sheep, and play to them till the sun went down. This being settled, they each returned home.

Mogarzea was surprised to find that his sheep gave so much more milk than usual, but as the boy declared he had never crossed the border the big man did not trouble his head further, and ate his supper heartily.

With the earliest gleams of light, the boy was off with his sheep to the elfin meadow, and at the first notes of his flute the maidens appeared before him and danced and danced and danced till evening came. Then the boy let the flute slip through his fingers, and trod on it, as if by accident.

If you had heard the noise he made, and how he wrung his hands and wept and cried that he had lost his only companion, you would have been sorry for him. The hearts of the elves were quite melted, and they did all they could to comfort him.

'I shall never find another flute like that, moaned he. 'I have never heard one whose tone was as sweet as mine! It was cut from the centre of a seven-year-old cherry tree!'

'There is a cherry tree in our garden that is exactly seven years old,' said they. 'Come with us, and you shall make yourself another flute.'

So they all went to the cherry tree, and when they were standing round it the youth explained that if he tried to cut it down with an axe he might very likely split open the heart of the tree, which was needed for the flute. In order to prevent this, he would make a little cut in the bark, just large enough for them to put their fingers in, and with this help he could manage to tear the tree in two, so that the heart should run no risk of damage. The elves did as he told them without a thought; then he quickly drew out the axe, which had been sticking into the cleft, and behold! all their fingers were imprisoned tight in the tree.

It was in vain that they shrieked with pain and tried to free themselves. They could do nothing, and the young man remained cold as marble to all their entreaties.

Then he demanded of them Mogarzea's soul.

'Oh, well, if you must have it, it is in a bottle on the window sill,' said they, hoping that they might obtain their freedom at once. But they were mistaken.

'You have made so many men suffer,' answered he sternly, 'that it is but just you should suffer yourselves, but to-morrow I will let you go.' And he turned towards home, taking his sheep and the soul of Mogarzea with him.

Mogarzea was waiting at the door, and as the boy drew near he began scolding him for being so late. But at the first word of explanation the man became beside himself with joy, and he sprang so high into the air that the false soul which the elves had given him flew out of his mouth, and his own, which had been shut tightly into the flask of water, took its place.

When his excitement had somewhat calmed down, he cried to the boy, 'Whether you are really my son matters nothing to me; tell me, how can I repay you for what you have done for me?'

'By showing me where the Milk Lake is, and how I can get one of the three fairies who lives there to wife, and by letting me remain your son for ever.'

The night was passed by Mogarzea and his son in songs and feasting, for both were too happy to sleep, and when day dawned they set out together to free the elves from the tree. When they reached the place of their imprisonment, Mogarzea took the cherry tree and all the elves with it on his back, and carried them off to his father's kingdom, where everyone rejoiced to see him home again. But all he did was to point to the boy who had saved him, and had followed him with his flock.

For three days the boy stayed in the palace, receiving the thanks and praises of the whole court. Then he said to Mogarzea:

'The time has come for me to go hence, but tell me, I pray you, how to find the Sweet Milk Lake, and I will return, and will bring my wife back with me.'

Mogarzea tried in vain to make him stay, but, finding it was useless, he told him all he knew, for he himself had never seen the lake.

For three summer days the boy and his flute journeyed on, till one evening he reached the lake, which lay in the kingdom of a powerful fairy. The next morning had scarcely dawned when the youth went down to the shore, and began to play on his flute, and the first notes had hardly sounded when he saw a beautiful fairy standing before him, with hair and robes that shone like gold. He gazed at her in wonder, when suddenly she began to dance. Her movements were so graceful that he forgot to play, and as soon as the notes of his flute ceased she vanished from his sight. The next day the same thing happened, but on the third he took courage, and drew a little nearer, playing on his flute all the while. Suddenly he sprang forward, seized her in his arms and kissed her, and plucked a rose from her hair.

The fairy gave a cry, and begged him to give her back her rose, but he would not. He only stuck the rose in his hat, and turned a deaf ear to all her prayers.

At last she saw that her entreaties were vain, and agreed to marry him, as he wished. And they went together to the palace, where Mogarzea was still waiting for him, and the marriage was celebrated by the emperor himself. But every May they returned to the Milk Lake, they and their children, and bathed in its waters.

[Olumanische Marchen.]

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: vkk.txt =====


    
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE VAMPIRE

  

HIS KITH AND KIN

  

by Montague Summers

  

London, K. Paul Trench, Trubner [1928]

  

New York, E.P. Dutton & Co. [1929]

  

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, January, 2002.

     
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

CONTENTS

          INTRODUCTION

       <page v>

     
      I. THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE

       <page 1>

     
      II. THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE

       <page 77>

     
      III. THE TRAITS AND PRACTICE OF VAMPIRISM

       <page 140>

     
      IV. THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, THE EAST, AND SOME ANCIENT COUNTRIES

       <page 217>

     
      V. THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE

       <page 271>

     
      BIBLIOGRAPHY

       <page 341>

     
      INDEX

       349

     
   
     
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

 

[p. v]

  

INTRODUCTION

IN all the darkest pages of the malign supernatural there is no more terrible tradition than that of the Vampire, a pariah even among demons. Foul are his ravages; gruesome and seemingly barbaric are the ancient and approved methods by which folk must rid themselves of this hideous pest. Even to-day in certain quarters of the world, in remoter districts of Europe itself, Transylvania, Slavonia, the isles and mountains of Greece, the peasant will take the law into his own bands and utterly destroy the carrion who--as it is yet firmly believed--at night will issue from his unhallowed grave to spread the infection of vampirism throughout the countryside. Assyria knew the vampire long ago, and he lurked amid the primaeval forests of Mexico before Cortes came. He is feared by the Chinese, by the Indian, and the Malay alike; whilst Arabian story tells us again and again of the ghouls who haunt ill-omened sepulchres and lonely cross-ways to attack and devour the unhappy traveller.

The tradition is world wide and of dateless antiquity. Travellers and various writers upon several countries have dealt with these dark and perplexing problems, sometimes cursorily, less frequently with scholarship and perception, but in every case the discussion of the vampire has occupied a few paragraphs, a page or two, or at most a chapter of an extensive and divaricating study, where other circumstances and other legends claimed at least an equal if not a more important and considerable place in the narrative. It maybe argued, indeed, that the writers upon Greece have paid especial attention to this tradition, and that the vampire figures prominently in their works. This is true, but on the other band the treatise of Leone Allacci, De Graecorum hodie quorundam opinationibus, 1645, is of considerable rarity, nor are even such volumes as Father Francois Richard's Relation de ce qui s'est passe de plus remarquable a Sant-Erini, 1657, the Voyage au Levant (1705)

[p. vi]

of Paul Lucas, and Tournefort's Relation d'un Voyage du Levant (1717), although perhaps not altogether uncommon and certainly fairly well known by repute, generally to be met with in every library. The study of the Modern Greek Vampire in Mr. J. G. Lawson's Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion has, of course, taken its place as a classic, but save incidentally and in passing Mr. Lawson does not touch upon the tradition in other countries and at other times, for this lies outside his purview.

Towards the end of the seventeenth century, and even more particularly during the first half of the eighteenth century when in Hungary, Moravia, and Galicia, there seemed to be a veritable epidemic of vampirism. the report of which was bruited far and wide engaging the attention of curia and university, ecclesiastic and philosopher, scholar and man of letters, journalist and virtuoso in all lands, there appeared a large number of academic theses and tractates, the majority of which had been prelected at Leipzig, and these formally discussed and debated the question in well-nigh all its aspects, dividing, sub-dividing, inquiring, ratiocinating upon the most approved scholastic lines. Thus we have the monographs of such professors as Philip Rohr, whose "Dissertatio Historico-Philosophica" De Masticatione Mortuorum was delivered at Leipzig on 16 August, 1679, and issued the same year from the press of Michael Vogt; the Dissertatio de Uampyris Seruiensibus of Zopfius and van Dalen, printed at Duisburg in 1733; and the De absolutione mortuorum excommunicatorum of Heineccius, published at Helmstad in 1709. Of especial value are Michael Ranft's De Masticatione Mortuorum in Tumulis Liber, Leipzig, 1728, and the Dissertatio de Cadaueribus Sanguisugis, Jena, 1732, of John Christian Stock. These dissertations, however, are extremely scarce and hardly to be found, whilst even so encyclopaedic a bibliography as Caillet does not include either Philip Rohr, Michael Ranft, or Stock, all of whom should therein assuredly have found a place. In this connexion must not be omitted the De Miraculis Mortuorum, Leipzig, Kirchner, 1670, and second edition, Weidmann, 1687, a treatise by Christian Frederic Garmann, a noted physician, who was born at Mersebourg about 1640 and who practised with great repute at Chemnitz. Garmann discusses many curious details and continued to amass so vast a collection of notes that after his

[p. vii]

death there was published in 1709 at Dresden by Zimmerman a very much enlarged edition of his work, "exornatum, diu desideratum et expetitum, beato autoris obitu interueniente."

During the eighteenth century the tradition of the Vampire was dealt with by two famous authors, of whom both concentrated upon this as their main theme, that is to say by Dom Augustin Calmet, O.S.B., in his Dissertations sur les Apparitions des Anges, des Demons et des Esprits et sur les revenants et vampires de Hongrie, de Boheme, de Moravie, e de Silesie, Paris, 1740, and by Gioseppe Davanzati, Archbishop of Trani and Patriarch of Alexandria, in his Dissertazione sopra I Vampire, Naples, 1774. As I have very fully considered both these important works they require no more than a bare mention here.

Of a later date we find in French a few books such as the Histoire des Vampires (1820) of the enormously prolific Collin de Plancy, the Spectriana (1817) and Les ombres sanglantes (1820) of J. p. R. Cuisin, and Gabrielle de Paban's Histoire des Fantomes et des Demons (1819) and Demoniana (1820), but these with many more of that class and epoch, although they are sometimes written not without elegance and industry and one may here and there meet with a curious anecdote or local legend, will not, I think, long engage the consideration and regard of the more serious student.

In English there is a little book entitled Vampires and Vampirism by Mr. Dudley Wright, which was first published in 1914; second edition (with additional matter), 1924. It may, of course, be said that this is not intended to be more than a popular and trifling collection and that one must not look for accuracy and research from the author of Roman Catholicism and Freemasonry. However that may be, it were not an easy task to find a more insipid olio than Vampires and Vampirism, of which the ingredients, so far as I am able to judge, are most palpably derived at second, and even at third hand. Dom Calmet, sometimes with and sometimes without acknowledgement, is frequently quoted and continually misunderstood, In what the "additional matter" of the second edition consists I cannot pretend to say but I have noticed that the same anecdotes are repeated, e.g. on p. 9 we are told the story of a shepherd of "Blow, near Kadam, in Bohemia," and the relation is said to be taken (via Calmet, it is plain,)

[p. viii]

from "De Schartz [rather Charles Ferdinand de Schertz], in his Magia Postuma, published at Olmutz in 1706." On p. 166 this story, as given by "E. p. Evans, in his interesting work on the Criminal Prosecution and Capital Punishment of Animals," is told of "a herdsman near the town of Cadan," and dated 1337. Pages 60-62 are occupied with an Oriental legend related by "Fornari, in his History of Sorcerers," by which is presumably intended the Histoire curieuse et pittoresque des sorciers . . . Revue et augmentee par Fornari, Paris, 1846, and other editions, a book usually catalogued under Giraldo, as by Caillet and Yve-Plessis, although the latter certainly has a cross-reference to Fornari. In greater detail Mr. Dudley Wright narrates this legend which be has already told (pp. 60-62), on pp. 131-137. Such repetition seems superfluous. In the Bibliography we have such entries as "Leo Allatius," Encyclopaedia Britannica"; "Frazer's Golden Bough," Nider's Formicarius," "Phlegon's Fragments," "William of Newbury," all of which are not merely unscholarly and slovenly, but entirely useless from the point of view of reference. I also remark blunders such as "Philip Rehrius," "Nicolas Ramy's Demonolatrie," "Rymer's Varney the Vampire." Who Rymer might be I cannot tell. Varney the Vampire was written by Thomas Preskett Prest.

It may, I think, not unfairly be claimed that the present work is the first serious study in English of the Vampire, and kindred traditions from a general, as well as from a theological and philosophical point of view. I have already pointed out that it were impossible to better such a chapter as Mr. J. C. Lawson has given us in his Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion, a book to which as also to Bernhard Schmidt's Das Volksleben der Neugriechen und das Hellenische Alterthum, I am greatly indebted. But any wider survey of the vampire tradition will soon be found o demand an examination of legend, customs, and history which extend far beyond Greece, although in such an inquiry the beliefs and practice of modern Greece must necessarily assume a prominent and most material significance.

In the present work I have endeavoured to set forth what might be termed "the philosophy of vampirism," and however ghastly and macabre they may appear I have felt that here one must not tamely shrink from a careful and detailed consideration

[p. ix]

of the many cognate passions and congruous circumstances which--there can be no reasonable doubt--have throughout the ages played no impertinent and no trivial but a very vital and very memorable part in consolidating the vampire legend, and in perpetuating the vampire tradition among the darker and more secret mysteries of belief that prevail in the heart of man.

In many countries there is thought to be a close connexion between the vampire and the werewolf, and I would remark that I have touched upon this but lightly as I am devoting a separate study to the werewolf and lycanthropy.

The Vampire, his Kith and Kin will be shortly followed by The Vampire in Europe, in which work I have collected and treat of numerous instances of vampirism old and new, concretely illustrating the prevalence and phases of the tradition in England and Ireland, in ancient Greece and Rome as well as in modern Greece, in Hungary and Bohemia, in Jugo-Slavia, Russia, and many other lands. In this volume will be found related in detail such famous cases as that of Arnold Paul, Stanoska Sovitzo, Millo the Hungarian, the vampires of Temeswar, Kisilova, Buckingham, Berwick, Melrose Abbey, Croglin Grange, and many more.

A survey of "The Vampire in Literature" which I attempt in Chapter V of the present volume has not, to the best of my belief, been usefully essayed by any English writer. I cannot hope that my purview is complete, for I feel confident that several pieces must inevitably have escaped me. Here too one is faced with the question what to notice and what to exclude. Vampirism is so wide a term that in some senses it might arguably be held to cover no small range of ghost stories and witch sagas where the victims peak and pine and waste away until they fall into an early grave. The choice is bound to be somewhat arbitrary, and so open to censure and objections, both on account of inclusions and omissions, and, superficially at least, these criticisms will hardly seem a little rigid and unfair. There is one vampire story, an excellent fiction and admirably discoursed, which I heard very many years ago, and which I believe is in print, but it has till now completely baffled all my recent explorations. I have no doubt that some of my readers will know the tale.

The Bibliography has offered its own difficulties with

[p. x]

reference to the choice of books for inclusion, and a certain amount of selection seemed inevitable. I have, I hope, duly listed the majority of those works which deal with the Vampire and the vampire tradition at any length, or which even if they devote but a few pages to the Vampire have given the subject serious and scholarly consideration. The denizens of Grub Street, ever busily agog, have from time to time attempted to scribble something on sorcery, on the invisible world, on occult crafts, and of late they seem to have been especially pretentious and prolific. I am well aware that in a number of trivial and catch-penny compositions it may be found that actually more space has been devoted to the vampire than is afforded in several of the volumes I mention, important studies which cover a fairly wide range in travel, in folk-lore, in demonology. Whilst, obviously enough, all the titles I include have by no means the same value even the least remarkable owns a particular reason to justify its presence. Under fiction it seemed to me that one should cast the net a little wider, and accordingly--on account of its very rarity if for no other reason--I have found a place for so poor a book as Smyth Upton's The Last of the Vampires, and what is more a rampant tract such as The Vampyre (1858) is not excluded. It will be remarked that many of the books to which I refer in my chapters and whence I quote are not to be found in this Bibliography as they lie something outside its scope. Moreover to rehearse books of reference and the standard authors seemed entirely superfluous.

During the course of a long and arduous task I have been much helped by the kindly and valuable suggestions of many friends amongst whom I must particularly mention Mrs. Agnes Murgoci, the late Chevalier W. H. Grattan Flood, Dr. Havelock Ellis, Dr. Rouse, Mr. Edward Hutton, Mr. W. J. Lawrence, and Mr. N. M. Penzer. I am especially grateful to Dr. R. Campbell Thompson for generous permission to quote at length the exorcisms from his classic works upon Babylonian demonology and Semitic magic. Both Mr. G. Willoughby-Meade and his publishers have put me under great obligations by allowing me so extensively to use his work Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, Constable and Co., 1928.

I cordially thank my friend Mr. Laurence Housman for giving me leave to reproduce his drawing "Cauchemar," as also

[p. xii]

Messrs. Macmillan for a similar permission with regard to the illustration of Malay vampires, which originally appeared in Dr. W. W. Skeat's Malay Magic.

The little cylinder delineated upon the cover of the book is a reproduction from the Revue d'Assyriologie, vol. VII, and represents a Babylonian vampire. The original is in the Louvre collections.

IN FESTO B.M.V. del Divino Aiuto.
                   1928.

     
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

CHAPTER I

  

THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE

THROUGHOUT the whole vast shadowy world of ghosts and demons there is no figure so terrible, no figure so dreaded and abhorred, yet dight with such fearful fascination, as the vampire, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. Around the vampire have clustered the most sombre superstitions, for he is a thing which belongs to no world at all; he is not a demon, for the devils have a purely spiritual nature, they are beings without any body, angels, as is said in S. Matthew xxv. 41, "the devil and his angels."[1] And although S. Gregory writes of the word Angel, "nomen est officii, non naturae,"--the designation is that of an office not of a nature, it is clear that all angels were in the beginning created good in order to act as the divine messengers (aggeloi), and that afterwards the fallen angels lapsed from their original state. The authoritative teaching of the Fourth Lateran Council under Innocent III in 1215, dogmatically lays down: "Diabolus enim et alii daemones a Deo quidem natura creati sunt boni, sed ipsi per se facti sunt mali." And it is also said, Job iv. 18: "Ecce qui seruiunt ei, non sunt stabiles, et in Angelis suis reperit prauitatem." (Behold they that serve him are not steadfast, and in his angels he found wickedness.)

John Heinrich Zopfius in his Dissertatio de Uampiris Seruiensibus, Halle, 1733, says: "Vampires issue forth from their graves in the night, attack people sleeping quietly in their beds, suck out all their blood from their bodies and destroy them. They beset men, women and children alike, sparing neither age nor sex. Those who are under the fatal malignity of their influence complain of suffocation and a total deficiency of spirits, after which they soon expire. Some

[p. 2]

who, when at the point of death, have been asked if they can tell what is causing their decease, reply that such and such persons, lately dead, have arisen from the tomb to torment and torture them." Scoffern in his Stray Leaves of Science and Folk Lore writes: "The best definition I can give of a vampire is a living, mischievous and murderous dead body. A living dead body! The words are idle, contradictory, incomprehensible, but so are Vampires." Horst, Schriften und Hypothesen uber die Vampyren, (Zauberbibliothek, III) defines a Vampire as "a dead body which continues to live in the grave; which it leaves, however, by night, for the purpose of sucking the blood of the living, whereby it is nourished and preserved in good condition, instead of becoming decomposed like other dead bodies."

A demon has no body, although for purposes of his own he may energize, assume, or seem to assume a body, but it is not his real and proper body.[2] So the vampire is not strictly a demon, although his foul lust and horrid propensities be truly demoniacal and of hell.

Neither may the vampire be called a ghost or phantom, strictly speaking, for an apparition is intangible, as the Latin poet tells us:

Par leuibus uentis uolucrique simillima somno.[3]

And upon that first Easter night when Jesus stood in the midst of His disciples and they were troubled and frightened, supposing they had seen a spirit, He said: "Uidete manus meas, et pedes, quia ego ipse sum: palpate, et uidete: quia spiritus carnem, et ossa non habet, sicut ne uidetis habere." (See my hands and feet, that it is I myself; handle and see: for a spirit hath not flesh and bone, as you see me to have.)[4]

There are, it is true, upon record some few instances when persons have been able to grasp, or have been grasped by and felt the touch of, a ghost, but these phenomena must be admitted as exceptions altogether, if indeed, they are not to be explained in some other way, as for example, owing to the information of a body by some spirit or familiar under very rare and abnormal conditions.

In the case of the very extraordinary and horrible hauntings of the old Darlington and Stockton Station, Mr. James Durham, the night-watchman, when one winter evening in the porter's cellar was surprised by the entry of a stranger

[p. 3]

followed by a large black retriever. This visitor without uttering a word dealt him a blow and he had the impression of a violent concussion. Naturally he struck back with his fist which seemed however to pass through the figure and his knuckles were grazed against the wall beyond. None the less the man uttered an unearthly squeak at which the dog gripped Mr. Durham in the calf of the leg causing considerable pain. In a moment the stranger had called off the retriever by a curious click of the tongue, and both man and animal hurried into the coal-house whence there was no outlet. A moment later upon examination neither was to be seen. It was afterwards discovered that many years before an official who was invariably accompanied by a large black dog had committed suicide upon the premises, if not in the very cellar, where at least his dead body had been laid. The full account with the formal attestation dated 9th December, 1890, may be read in W. T. Stead's Real Ghost Stories, reprint, Grant Richards, 1897, Chapter XI, pp. 210-214.

Major C. G. MacGregor of Donaghadee, County Down, Ireland, gives an account of a house in the north of Scotland which was haunted by an old lady, who resided there for very many years and died shortly after the beginning of the nineteenth century. Several persons who slept in the room were sensibly pushed and even smartly slapped upon the face. He himself on feeling a blow upon the left shoulder in the middle of the night turned quickly and reaching out grasped a human hand, warm, soft, and plump. Holding it tight he felt the wrist and arm which appeared clothed in a sleeve and lace cuff. At the elbow all trace ceased, and in his astonishment he released the hand. When a light was struck nobody could be seen in the room.

In a case which occurred at a cottage in Girvan, South Ayrshire, a young woman lost her brother, a fisher, owing to the swamping of his boat in a storm, When the body was recovered it was found that the right hand was missing. This occasioned the poor girl extraordinary sorrow, but some few nights later when she was undressing, preparatory to bed, she suddenly uttered a piercing shriek which immediately brought the other inmates of the house to her room. She declared that she had felt a violent blow dealt with an open hand upon her shoulder. The place was examined,

[p. 4]

and distinctly marked in livid bruises there was seen the impression of a man's right hand.

Andrew Lang in his Dreams and Ghosts (new edition, 1897), relates the story of "The Ghost that Bit," which might seem to have been a vampire, but which actually cannot be so classed since vampires have a body and their craving for blood is to obtain sustenance for their body. The narrative is originally to be found in Notes and Queries, 3rd September 1864, and the correspondent asserts that he took it "almost verbatim from the lips of the lady" concerned, a person of tried veracity. Emma S------ was asleep one morning in her room at a large house near Cannock Chase. It was a fine August day in 1840, but although she had bidden her maid call her at an early hour she was surprised to hear a sharp knocking upon her door about 3.30. In spite of her answer the taps continued, and suddenly the curtains of her bed were slightly drawn, when to her amaze she saw the face of an aunt by marriage looking through upon her. Half unconsciously she threw out her hand, and immediately one of her thumbs was sensibly premed by the teeth of the apparition. Forthwith she arose, dressed, and went downstairs, where not a creature was stirring. Her father upon coming down rallied her a little upon being about at cockcrow and inquired the cause. When she informed him he determined that later in the day he would pay a visit to his sister-in-law who dwelt at no great distance. This he did, only to discover that she had unexpectedly died at about 3.30 that morning. She had not been in any way ailing, and the shook was fearfully sudden. On one of the thumbs of the corpse was found a mark as if it had been bitten in the last agony.

The disturbances at the Lamb hostelry, Lawford's Gate, Bristol, which aroused something more than local interest in the years 1761-62, were not improbably due to witchcraft and caused by the persecutions of a woman who trafficked in occultism of the lowest order, although on the other hand they may have been poltergeist manifestations. The two little girls, Molly and Debby Giles, who were the subjects of these phenomena, were often severely bitten and pinched. The impressions of eighteen or twenty teeth were seen upon their arms, the marks being clammy with saliva and warm spittle, "and the children were roaring out for the pain of the

[p. 5]

pinches and bites." On one occasion whilst an observer was talking to Dobby Giles she cried out that she was bitten in the neck when there suddenly appeared "the mark of teeth, about eighteen, and wet with spittle." That the child should have nipped herself was wholly impossible, and nobody was near her save Mr. Henry Durbin who recorded these events, and whose account was first printed in 1800, the year after his death, since he did not wish his notes to be given to the public during his lifetime. On 2nd January, 1762, Mr. Durbin notes: "Dobby cried the hand was about her sister's throat, and I saw the flesh at the side of her throat pushed in, whitish as if done with fingers, though I saw none. Her face grew red and blackish presently, as if she was strangled, but without any convulsion or contraction of the muscles." Thursday, 7th January, 1762, we have: "Dobby was bitten most and with deeper impressions than Molly. The impression of the teeth on their arms formed an oval, which measured two inches in length." All this certainly looks as if sorcery were at work. It may be remembered that in Salem during the epidemic of witchcraft the afflicted persons were tormented "by Biting, Pinching, Strangling, etc." When Goodwife Corey was on trial, "it was observed several times, that if she did but bite her under lip in time of examination, the Persons afflicted were bitten on their arms and Wrists, and produced the Marks before the Magistrates, Minister, and others."

In The Proceedings of the National Laboratory of Psychical Research, Vol. I., 1927, will be found an account of the phenomena connected with Eleonore Zugun, a young Rumanian peasant girl, who in the autumn of 1926, when only thirteen years old was brought to London by the Countess Wassilko-Serecki, in order that the manifestations might be investigated at "The National Laboratory of Psychical Research," Queensberry Place, South Kensington. The child was said to be persecuted by some invisible force or agent, which she knew as Dracu, Anglice the Devil. There were many extraordinary happenings and she was continually being scratched and bitten by this unseen intelligence. It must suffice to give but two or three instances of the very many "biting phenomena." On the afternoon of Monday, 4th October, 1926, Captain Neil Gow an investigator in his report, notes:

[p. 6]

"3.20. Eleonore cried out. Showed marks on back of left hand like teeth-marks which afterwards developed into deep weals. . . . 4.12. Eleonore was just raising a cup of tea to her lips, but suddently  gave a cry and put the cup down hastily: there was a mark on her right hand similar to that caused by a bite. Both rows of teeth were indicated." Of the same incident, Mr. Clapham Palmer, an investigator who was also present writes: "Eleonore was in the act of raising the cup to her lips when she suddenly gave a little cry of pain, put down her cup and rolled up her sleeve. On her forearm I then saw what appeared to be the marks of teeth indented deeply in the flesh, as if she or someone had fiercely bitten her arm. The marks turned from red to white and finally took the form of white raised weals. They gradually faded but were still noticeable after an hour or so." Such bitings not infrequent occurred, and photographs have been taken of the marks.

It were an interesting question to discuss the cause of these indentations and no doubt it is sufficiently remarkable, but however that may be such inquiry were impertinent here, for it is clearly not vampirism, nor indeed cognate thereto. The object of the Vampire is to suck blood, and in these cases if blood was ever drawn it was more in the nature of a scratch or slight dental puncture, there was no effusion. Again the agent who inflicted these bites was not sufficiently material to be visible, at any rate he was able to remain unseen. The true vampire is corporeal.

The vampire has a body, and it is his own body. He is neither dead nor alive; but living in death. He is an abnormality; the androgyne in the phantom world; a pariah among the fiends.

Even the Pagan poet taught his hearers and his readers that death was a sweet guerdon of repose, a blessed oblivion after the toil and struggle of life. There are few things more beautiful and there are few things more sad than the songs of our modern Pagans who console their aching hearts with the wistful vision of eternal sleep. Although perhaps they themselves know it not, their delicate but despairing melancholy is an heritage from the weary yet tuneful singers of the last days of Hellas, souls for whom there was no dawn of hope in the sky. But we have a certain knowledge and a fairer surety

[p. 7]

for "now Christ is risen from the dead, the first-fruits of them that sleep." Yet Gray, half Greek, seems to promise to his rustics and his hinds as their richest reward after life of swink and toil dear forgetfulness and eternal sleep. Swinburne was glad:

That no life lives for ever
 That dead men rise up never;
 That even the weariest river
 Winds somewhere safe to sea.
 .    .    .    .    .
     Only the eternal sleep
 In an eternal night.

Emily Bronte lusted for mere oblivion:

Oh, for the time when I shall sleep
 Without identity.
 And never care how rain may steep,
 Or snow may cover me!

Flecker in utter despair wails out:

I know dead men are deaf, and cannot hear
 The singing of a thousand nightingales . . .
 I know dead men are blind and cannot see
 The friend that shuts in horror their big eyes,
 And they are witless--

Even more beautifully than the poets have sung, a weaver of exquisite prose has written: "Death must be so beautiful. To lie in the soft brown earth, with the grasses waving above one's head, and listen to silence. To have no yesterday, and no to-morrow. To forget time." Poor sorry souls! How arid, how empty are such aspirations when we think of the ardent glowing phrase of the Little Flower: "Je veux passer mon ciel a faire du bien sur la terre!" And "Even in the bosom of the Beatific Vision the Angels watch over us. No, I shall never be able to take any rest until the end of the world. But when the Angel shall have said 'Time is no more,' then I shall rest, then I shall be able to rejoice, since the number of the elect will be complete."

So we see that even for those who take the most pagan, the most despairing, the most erroneous views, the ideal is oblivion and rest. How fearful a destiny then is that of the vampire who has no rest in the grave, but whose doom it is to come forth

[p. 8]

and prey upon the living. In the first place it may briefly be inquired how the belief in vampirism originated, and here it is not impertinent to remark that the careful investigations in connexion with psychic phenomena which have been so fruitful of recent years, and even modern scientific discovery, have proved the essential truth of many an ancient record and old superstition, which were until yesterday dismissed by the level-headed as the wildest sensationalism of melodramatic romance. The origins of a belief in vampirism, although, of course, very shadowy, unformed and unrelated, may probably be said to go back to the earliest times when primitive man observed the mysterious relations between soul and body. The division of an individual into these two parts must have been suggested to man by his observation, however crude and rough, of the phenomenon of unconsciousness, as exhibited in sleep and more particularly in death. He cannot but have speculated concerning that something, the loss of which withdraws man for ever from the living and waking world. He was bound to ask himself if there was any continuance in any circumstances at present veiled from, and unknown to, him of that life and that personality which had obviously passed elsewhere. The question was an eternal one, and it was, moreover, a personal one which concerned him most intimately, since it related to an experience he could not expect to escape. It was clear to him before long that the process called death was merely a passage to another world, and naturally enough he pictured that world as being very like the one he knew, only man would there enjoy extended powers over the forces with which he waged such ceaseless war for the mastery during his period on earth. It might be that the world was not so very far away, and it was not to be supposed that persons who had passed over would lose their interest in and affection for those who for a little while had been left behind. Relations must not be forgotten just because they did not happen to be visibly present, any more than to-day we forget one of the family who has gone on a voyage for a week or a month or a year. Naturally those whose age and position during their lifetime had entitled them to deference and respect must be treated with the same consideration, nay, with even more ample honours since their authority had become mysteriously greater and they would be

[p. 9]

more active to punish any disrespect or neglect. Hence as a family venerated the father of the house both in life and after death, which was the germ of ancestral worship, so the tribe would venerate the great men, the chieftains and the heroes, whose exploits had won so much not only for their own particular houses, but for the whole clan. The Shilluk, a tribe who dwell upon the western bank of the White Nile, and who are governed by a single king, still maintain the worship of Nyakang, the hero who founded the dynasty and settled this people in their present territory. Nyakang is conceived as having been a man, although he did not actually die but vanished from sight. Yet he is not altogether divine, for the great god of the Shilluk, the creator of mankind and the world, Juok, is without form, invisible and omnipresent. He is far greater than and far above Nyakang, and he reigns in those highest heavens where neither the prayers of man can reach his ears, nor can he smell the sweet savour of sacrifice.

Not only Nyakang, but each of the Shilluk kings after death is worshipped, and the grave of the monarch becomes a sanctuary, so that throughout the villages there are many shrines tended by certain old men and old women, where a ritual which is practically identical in each separate place is elaborately conducted. Indeed, the principal element in the religion of the Shilluk may be said to be the veneration of their dead kings.[5]

Other African tribes also worship their dead kings. The Baganda, whose country Uganda lies at the actual source of the Nile, think of their dead kings as being equal to the gods, and the temples of the deceased monarchs are built and maintained with the utmost care. Formerly when a king died hundreds of men were killed so that their spirits might attend upon the spirit of their master, and what is very significant as showing that these people believe the king and his ghostly followers could return in forms sufficiently corporeal to perform the very material function of eating is that on certain solemn days at earliest dawn the sacred tomtom is beaten at the temple gates and crowds of worshippers bring baskets of food for the dead king and his followers lest being hungry he should become angered and punish the whole tribe.[6]

In Kiziba, which lies on the western side of the Lake Victoria Nyanza, the religion of the natives consists of the worship

[p. 10]

of their dead kings, although there is a supreme god Rugada, who created the world, man and beasts, but even their hierarchs know little about him and he receives no sacrifice, the business of the priests being to act as intermediaries between the people and the dead monarchs.[7]

So the Bantu. tribes of Northern Rhodesia acknowledge a supreme deity, Leza, whose power is manifested in the storm, in the torrential rain clouds, in the roar of thunder and the flash of lightning, but to whom there is no direct access by prayer or by sacrifice. The gods, then, whom these tribes worship are sharply divided into two classes, the spirits of departed chiefs, who are publicly venerated by the whole tribe, and the spirits of relations who are privately honoured by a family, whose head performs the sacerdotal functions upon these occasions. "Among the Awemba there is no special shrine for these purely family spirits, who are worshipped inside the hut, and to whom family sacrifices of a sheep, a goat, or a fowl is made, the spirit receiving the blood spilt upon the ground, while all the members of the family partake of the flesh together. For a religious Wemba man the cult of the spirit of his nearest relations (of his grandparents, or of his deceased father, mother, elder brother or maternal uncle) is considered quite sufficient. Out of these spirit relatives a man will worship one whom he considers as a special familiar, for various reasons. For instance, the diviner may have told him that his last illness was caused because he had not respected the spirit of his uncle; accordingly he will be careful in the future to adopt his uncle as his tutelary spirit. As a mark of such respect he may devote a cow or a goat to one of the spirits of his ancestors."[8] This custom is very significant, and two points should be especially noted. The first is that the deceased, or the spirit of the deceased, is not merely propitiated by, but partakes of, blood, which is spilt for his benefit. Secondly, the deceased, if not duly honoured, can cause illness, and therefore is capable of exercising a certain vengeful or malevolent power. The essential conception that underlies these customs is not so very far removed from the tradition of a vampire who craves to suck blood and causes sickness through his malignancy.

Very similar ideas prevail among the Herero, a Bantu tribe of German South-West Africa, who believe that Ndjambi [p. 11] Karunga, the great good god who dwells in heaven above is far too remote to be accessible, wherefore he neither receives nor requires worship and offerings. "It is their ancestors (Ovakuru) whom they must fear; it is they who are angry and can bring danger and misfortune on a man . . . it is in order to win and keep their favour, to avert their displeasure and wrath, in short to propitiate them, that the Herero bring their many offerings; they do so not out of gratitude, but out of fear, not out of love, but out of terror."[9] The Rev. G. Viehe, a missionary among the tribe writes: "The religious customs and ceremonies of the Ovaherero are all rooted in the presumption that the deceased continue to live, and that they have a great influence on earth, and exercise power over the life and death of man."[10]

The religion of the Ovambo, another Bantu tribe of German South-West Africa, runs on practically the same lines. The supreme being, Kalunga, the creator, desires neither adoration nor fear. The whole religion is the worship, or rather the propitiation, of the spirits of the dead. Every man at death leaves behind him a phantom form which continues a certain kind of life (not very clearly defined) upon earth, and this spirit has power over the living. Especially may it cause various kinds of sickness. The spirits of private persons can only exert their influence over the members of their own families; the souls of chiefs and great warriors have a much wider scope, they can influence the whole clan for weal or woe; they can even to some extent control the powers of nature and ensure a bountiful corn-crop by their careful provision of rain, since under their kindly direction there shall be neither too little nor too great an abundance. Moreover, they can ward off disease, but if on the other hand they be offended they can visit the tribe with pestilence and famine. It may be particularly noted that among the Ovambo the phantoms of dead magicians are dreaded and feared in no ordinary manner. The only way to prevent the increase of these dangerous spirit folk is by depriving the body of its limbs, a precaution which must be taken immediately after death. So it is customary to sever the arms and legs from the trunk and to cut the tongue out of the mouth, in order that the spirit may have no power either of movement or of speech, since the mutilation of the corpse has rendered a ghost, who would

[p. 12]

assuredly be both powerful and truculent, inoperative and incapable.[11] It will later be seen that the mutilation, the cutting off of the head, and especially the driving of a stake through the body with other dismemberments, were resorted to as the most effective means, short of complete cremation, of dealing with a vampire, whilst according to Theosophists only those become vampires who have during their lifetime been adepts in black magic, and Miss Jessie Adelaide Middleton says that the people who become vampires are witches, wizards and suicides.[12]

Canon Callaway has recorded some very interesting details of Amatongo or Ancestor Worship among the Zulus.[13] A native account runs as follows: "The black people do not worship all Amatongo indifferently, that is, all the dead of their tribes. Speaking generally, the head of each house is worshipped by the children of that house; for they do not know the ancients who are dead, nor their laud-giving names, nor their names. But their father whom they knew is the head by whom they begin and end in their prayer, for they know him best, and his love for his children; they remember his kindness to them whilst he was living, they compare his treatment of them whilst he was living, support themselves by it and say, 'He will still treat us in the same way now he is dead. We do not know why he should regard others besides us; he will regard us only.' So it is then although they worship the many Amatongo of their tribe, making a great fence around them for their protection; yet their father is far before all others when they worship the Amatongo. Their father is a great treasure to them even when he is dead." It would appear that among the Zulus the spirits of those who are recently deceased, especially the fathers and mothers of families, are most generally venerated and revered. As is natural, the spirits of the remoter dead are forgotten, for time passes and their memory perishes when those who knew them and sang their praises follow them into the world beyond. As we have remarked, in nearly every case we find recognized the existence of a supreme being, who is certainly a high spiritual power that had never been a man, and the homage paid to whom (in those very rare instances[14] where such worship is conceived of as desirable or even possible) differs entirely from the cult of the dead, be they family ancestors

[p. 13]

or some line of ancient kings. There are, of course, many other gods in the African pantheon, and although the natives will not allow that these were ever men, and indeed sharply differentiate in ritual practice their worship from the cult of the spirits and phantoms, yet in nearly all cases it is to be suspected, and in many cases it is certain, that these gods were heroes of old whose legend instead of becoming faint with years and dying away grew more and more splendid until the monarch or the warrior passed into pure deity. A similar process holds forth in heathen religions the wide world over. and with regard to the Baganda polytheism the Rev. J. Roscoe remarks "The principal gods appear to have been at one time human beings, noted for their skill and bravery, who were afterwards deified by the people and invested with supernatural powers."[13]

It is said that the Caffres believe that men of evil life after death may return during the night in coporeal form and attack the living, often wounding and killing them. It seems that these revenants are much attracted by blood which enables them more easily to effect their purpose, and even a few red drops will help to vitalize their bodies. So a Caffre has the greatest horror of blood, and will never allow even a spot fallen from a bleeding nose or a cut to lie uncovered, but should it stain the ground it must be instantly hidden with earth, and if it splotch upon their bodies they must purify themselves from the pollution with elaborate lustral ceremonies.[16] Throughout the whole of West Africa indeed the natives are careful to stamp out any blood of theirs which happens to have fallen to the ground, and if a cloth or a piece of wood should be marked thereby these articles are most carefully burned.[17] They openly admit that the reason for this is lest a drop of blood might come into the hands of a magician who would make evil use of it, or else it might be caught up by a bad spirit and would then enable him to form a tangible body. The same fear of sorcery prevails in New Guinea, where the natives if they have been wounded will most carefully collect the bandages and destroy them by burning or casting them far into the sea, a circumstance which has not infrequently been recorded by missionaries and travellers.[18]

There are, indeed, few if any peoples who have not realized the mysterious significance attached to blood, and examples

[p. 14]

of this belief are to be found in the history of every clime. It is expressed by the Chinese writers on medicine[19]; it was held by the Arabs[20], and it is prominent among the traditions of the Romans.[21] Even with regard to animals the soul or life of the animal was in the blood, or rather actually was the blood. So we have the divine command, Leviticus xvii. 10-14: "Homo quilibet de domo Israel, et de aduenis qui peregrinantur inter eos, si comederit sanguinem, obfirmabo faciem meam contra animam illius, et dispertam eam de populo suo. Quia anima carnis in sanguine est: et ego dedi illum uobis, ut super altare in eo expietis pro animabus uestris, et sanguis pro animae piaculo sit. Idcirco dixi filiis Israel: Omnis anima ex uobis non comedet sanguinem, nec ex aduenis, qui peregrinantur apud uos. Homo quicumque ex filiis Israel, et de aduenis, qui peregrinantur apud uos, si uenatione atque aucupio ceperit feram uel auem, quibus esci licitum est, fundat sanguinem eius, et operiat illum terra. Anima enim omnis carnis in sanguine est: unde dixi filiis Israel: Sanguinem uniuersae carnis non comedetis, quia anima carnis in sanguine est: et quicumque comederit illum, interibit." (If any man whosoever of the house of Israel, and of the strangers that sojourn among them, eat blood I will set my face against his soul, and will cut him off from among his people: Because the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you, that you may make atonement with it upon the altar for your souls, and the blood may be for an expiation for the soul. Therefore I have said to the children of Israel: No soul of you, nor of the strangers that sojourn among you, shall eat blood. Any man whatsoever of the children of Israel, and of the strangers that sojourn among you, if by hunting or by fowling, he take a wild beast or a bird, which is lawful to eat, let him pour out its blood, and cover it with earth. For the life of all flesh is in the blood: therefore I said to the children of Israel: You shall not eat the blood of any flesh at all, because the life of the flesh is in the blood, and whosoever eateth it, shall be cut off.)[22] The Hebrew word which is translated "life"[23] in this passage and particularly in the phrase "Because the life of the flesh is in the blood," also signifies "Soul," and the Revised Version has a marginal note: "Heb. soul." Since then the very essence of life, and even more, the spirit or the soul in some mysterious way lies in the blood we have

[p. 15]

a complete explanation why the vampire should seek to vitalize and rejuvenate his own dead body by draining the blood from the veins of his victims.

It will be remembered that in a famous necromantic passage in the Odyssey[24], when Ulysses calls up the ghosts from the underworld, in order that they may recover the power of speech, he has to dig deep a trench and therein pour the blood of sacrifice, black rams, and it is only after they have quaffed their fill of this precious liquor that the phantoms may converse with him and enjoy something of their human powers and mortal faculties.

Among the many references to funereal customs and the rites of mourning in Holy Writ there is one which has a very distinct bearing upon this belief that blood might benefit the deceased. The prophet Jeremias in fortelling the utter ruin of the Jews and the complete desolation of their land says: "Et morientur grandes, et parui in terra ista: non sepelientur neque plangentur, et non se incident, neque caluitium fiet pro eis."[25] (Both the great and little shall die in this land; they shall not be buried nor lamented, and men shall not cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them.) And again the same prophet tells us that after the Jews had been carried away in captivity of Babylon: "Uenerunt uiri de Sichem et de Silo, et de Samaria octoginta uiri: rasi barba, et scissis uestibus et squallentes: et munera, et thus habebant in manu, ut offerrent in domo Domini."[26] The word "squallentes" which the Douai Version renders "mourning" is translated by the Authorised Version as "having cut themselves" and the same rendering is given in the Revised Version. These customs of shaving part of the head and the beard which is referred to in the words "nor make themselves bald for them" and more particularly the practice of cutting or wounding the body in token of mourning were strictly forbidden as savouring of heathenish abuse. Thus in Leviticus xix. 28, we read: "Et super mortuo non incidetis carnem uestrum, neque figuras aliquas, aut stigmata facietis uobis. Ego Dominus." (You shall not make any cuttings in your flesh, for the dead, neither shall you make in yourselves any figures or marks: I am the Lord.) And again (xxi. 5) the same command with regard to mourning is enforced: "Non radent caput, nec barbam, neque in carnibus suis facient incisuras." (Neither shall

[p. 16]

they shave their head, nor their beard, nor make incisions in their flesh.) S. Jerome, however, tells us that the custom persisted. For he says in his Commentary on Jeremias, xvi. 6, which may be dated 415-420:[27] "Mos hic fuit apud ueteres, et usque hodie in quibusdam permanet Iudaeorum, ut in luctibus incidant lacertos, et caluitium faciant, quod Iob fecisse legimus."[28] And yet these observances had been, as we saw, most sternly forbidden, nay, and that most emphatically and more than once. Thus in Deuteronomy they are sternly reprobated as smacking of the grossest superstition: "Non comedetis cum sanguine. Non augurabimini, nec obseruabitis somnia. Neque in rotundum attondebitis comam: nec radetis barbam. Et super mortuo non incidetis carnem uestram, neque figuras aliquas, aut stigmata facietis uobis. Ego Dominus." (You shall not eat with blood. You shall not divine nor observe dreams. Nor shall you cut your hair round-wise: nor shave your beard. You shall not make any cuttings in your flesh, for the dead, neither shall you make in yourselves any figures or marks: I am the Lord.) "Filii estote Domini Dei uestri: non uos incidetis, nec facietis, caluitium super mortuo. Quoniam populus sanctus es Domino Deo tuo: et te elegit ut sis ei in populum peculiarem de cunctis gentibus, quae sunt super terram." (Be ye children of the Lord your God: you shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness for the dead; because thou art a holy people to the Lord thy God: and he chose thee to be his peculiar people of all nations that are upon the earth.)

Presumably these two customs were thus sternly prohibited as largely borrowed by the Jews from the Pagan people around them, who might indeed as having no hope make such extravagant and even indecent exhibition of their mourning for the departed, but which practices would at the least be highly unbecoming in the chosen people of Jehovah. Assuredly, even if they go no deeper, these observances are tainted with such savagery and seem so degrading that it is not surprising to find ordinances among other peoples, for instance the code of Solon at Athens, forbidding mourners to wound and scratch their faces and persons. The laws of the Ten Tables also which were largely based on this earlier legislation do not permit women to tear and disfigure their faces during the funeral rites. These two customs, shaving the head and

[p. 17]

lacerating the face, are found the whole world over at all times and among all races. The former hardly concerns us here, but it is interesting to inquire into the idea which lay at the root of this "cuttings in the flesh for the dead." This practice existed in antiquity among the Assyrians, the Arabs, the Scythians and such peoples as the Moabites, the Philistines, and the Phoenicians.[29] Jordanes tells us that Attila was lamented, "not with womanly wailing, empty coronach and tears, but with the blood of warriors and strong men."[31] Among many African tribes, among the Polynesians of Tahiti, the Sandwich Islands and the whole Pacific Archipelago; among the Aborigines of Australia, New Zealand and Tasmania; among the Patagonians; among the Indians of California and North America; as. among very many other races, mourning for the dead is always accompanied by the laceration of the body until blood freely flows, and it is even not unknown for relatives of the deceased to inflict terrible mutilations upon themselves, and he who is most pitiless and most barbarous is esteemed to show the greater honour and respect to the departed. The important point lies in the fact, that blood must be shed, and this appears to constitute some covenant with the dead, so that by freely bestowing what he requires they prevent him from returning to deprive them of it forcibly and in the most terrifying circumstances. If they are not willing to feed him with their blood he will come back and take it from them, so naturally it is believed to be far better to give without demur and gain the protection of the ghost, rather than to refuse what the phantom will inevitably seize upon in vengeance and in wrath.

Many Australian tribes considered blood to be the best remedy for a sick and weakly person, and there is, of course, no small modicum of truth in the idea when we consider the scientific transfusion of blood as is practised in certain cases by doctors at the present time, a remedy of which there are many examples in the middle ages and in later medicine.[31] Bonney, the Australian traveller, tells us that among certain tribes on the Darling River in New South Wales, "a very sick or weak person is fed upon blood which the male friends provide, taken from their bodies in the way already described"[32] that is to say by opening a vein of the forearm and allowing the blood to run into a wooden bowl or some similar vessel. "It

[p. 18]

is generally taken in a raw state by the invalid, who lifts it to his mouth like jelly between his fingers and thumb." It must be remembered that the Aborigines firmly believe in the existence of the soul after death, and since blood during the life proves the most helpful and sustaining nourishment it will communicate the same vitalizing qualities if bestowed upon one who has passed beyond, for they do not entertain the idea that death is any great severance and separation.

This certainly gives us a clue to the belief underlying the practice of scratching the body and shedding blood upon the occasion of a death, and there can be no doubt that, although possibly the meaning was obscured and these lacerations came to evince nothing more than a proof of sorrow at the bereavment, yet fundamentally the blood was offered by mourners for the refreshment of the departed to supply him with strength and vigour under his new conditions.[33] These practices, then, involved a propitiation of the dead; further, a certain intimate communication with the dead, and assuredly bear a necromantic character, and have more than a touch of vampirism, the essence of which consists in the belief that the dead man is able to sustain a semi-life by preying upon the vitality, that is to say, by drinking the blood of the living. Accordingly we are fully able to understand why these customs, heathenish and worse, were so uncompromisingly denounced and forbidden in the Mosaic legislation. It was no mere prohibition of indecorous lamentations tinged with Paganism, but it went something deeper, for such observances are not free from the horrid superstition of black magic and the feeding of the vampire till he suck his full of hot salt blood and be gorged and replete like some demon leech.

The word Vampire (also vampyre) is from the Magyar vampir, a word of Slavonic origin occuring in the same form in Russian, Polish, Czech, Serbian, and Bulgarian with such variants as Bulgarian, vapir, vepir; Ruthenian vepyr, vopyr, opyr; Russian upir, upyr; South Russian upuir; Polish upier. Miklosich[34] suggests the Turkish uber, witch, as a possible source. Another derivation, which is less probable is from the root Pi--to drink, with the prefix va, or av. From the root Pi--come the Greek pinu I drink, some tenses of which are formed from the root Po--, such as a perfect pepuka[35]; a future passive pothesomai[36]; to which must be added the perfect infinitive

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] peposthai[36] which occurs in Theognis.[37] Hence we have the Aeolic punu, and also probably potamos, properly perhaps of fresh, drinkable water potimon ydur.[38]

The Sanskrit is pa, pi, pi-bami (bibo); pa-nam (potus) pa-tra (poculum); Latin po-tus, po-to, po-culum, etc., with which are connected bibo and its many forms and compounds (root--bi-); Slavonic, pi-ti (bibere); Lithuanian, po-ta (ebriositas), and a vast number of other variants.

Ralston must certainly be quoted in this connexion, although it should be borne in mind that he is a little out of date in some details. The Songs of the Russian People from which (p. 410) I cite the following passage was published early in 1872. Of Vampires he writes: "The name itself has never been satisfactorily explained. In its form of vampir [South Russian upuir, anciently upir], it has been compared with the Lithuanian wempti = to drink, and wempti, wampiti = to growl, to mutter, and it has been derived from a root pi [to drink] with the prefix u = av, va. If this derivation is correct, the characteristic of the vampire is a kind of blood-drunkenness. In accordance with this idea the Croatians called the vampire pijauica; the Servians say of a man whose face is coloured by constant drinking, that he is 'blood-red as a vampire'; and both the Servians and the Slovaks term a hard drinker a Vlkodlak. The Slovenes and Kashubes call the vampire vieszey, a name akin to that borne by the witch in our own language as well as in Russian. The Poles name him upior or upir, the latter being his designation among the Czekhs also." The Istrian vampire is strigon, and among the Wallachians there is a vampire called murony. In Greece there are some local names for the vampire, (Cyprus), sarkumenos, "the one who has put on flesh"; (Tenos), anaikathoumenos, "he who sits up in his grave" in Cythnos, alytos "incorrupt"; in Cythera, anarraxo, lampasma, and lampastro, three words of which I can suggest no satisfactory explanation and which ever so great an authority on Greece as Mr. J. C. Lawson finds unintelligible. Newton, Travels and Discoveries in the Levant (I, p. 212) and more particularly Pashley, Travels in Crete (II, p. 207), mention a term used in Rhodes and generally in Crete, kataxanos, the derivation of which is uncertain. Pashley thinks it may have meant a "destroyer," but Mr. Lawson connects it with Kara and the root xan-, I gape or yawn, in

[p. 20]

allusion to the gaping mouth of the vampire, os hians, dentes candidi, says Leone Allacci.

St. Clair and Brophy in their Twelve Years' Study of the Eastern Question in Bulgaria, 1877, have a note (p. 29, n. 1): "The pure Bulgarians call this being [the Vampire] by the genuine Slavonic name of Upior, the Gagaous (or Bulgarians of mixed race) by that of Obour, which is Turkish; in Dalmatia it is known as Wrikodlaki, which appears to be merely a corruption of the Romaic brykolax."

The word vampir, vampyr, is apparently unknown in Greece proper and the general modem term is brykolakas, which may be transliterated as vrykolakas (plural vrykolakes). Tozer gives the Turkish name as vurkolak, and Hahn records that amongst some of the Albanians boyrbolak-oy is used of the restless dead. It is true that in parts of Macedonia where the Greek population is in constant touch with Slavonic neighbours, especially in Melenik in the North-East, a form bampyras or bompyras has been adopted," and is there used as a synonym of vrykolakas in its ordinary Greek sense, but strangely enough with this one exception throughout the whole of Greece and the Greek islands the form "Vampire" does not appear. Coraes denies the Slavonic origin of the word vrykolakas, and he seeks to connect a local variant borbolakas with a hypothetical ancient word mormolyx[40] alleged to be the equivalent of mormoluke which is used by the geographer Strabo, and mormolykeia used by Arrianus of Nicomedia in his Diatribai Epiktetoy[41] and the more usual mormolykeion[42] found in Aristophanes, Thesmophoriazuasae (417):

ei'ta dia touton tais gynaikunitisin
 sfragidas epiballoysin ede kai moxlous,
 terountes emas, kai proseti Molottikous
 trefoysi, mormolykeia tois moixois, kunas.

The word occurs again in Plato, Phaedo[43]: "touton oun peirumetha peithein me dedienai ton thanaton usper ta mormolukeia". It is, of course, a derivation and diminutive of Mormo (Mormu), a hobgoblin, or worse, a ghoul of hideous appearance. The theory is patriotic and ingenious, but Bernard Schmidt and all other authorities agree that it is entirely erroneous and the modern Greek word vrykolakas must undoubtedly be identified with a word which is common

[p. 21]

to the whole Slavonic group of languages. This word Slovenian volkodlak, vukodlak, vulkodlak, is a compound form of which the first half means "wolf," whilst the second half has been identified, although the actual relation is not quite demonstrable, with blaka, which in Old Slavonic, New Slavonic, and Serbian signifies the "hair" of a cow or a horse or a horse's mane.[44] Yet whatsoever the analytical signification of the compound may precisely be, the synthesis in the actual employment of all Slavonic tongues, save one, is the equivalent of the English "werewolf"; Scotch "warwulf"; German "Werwolf" and French "loup-garou." The one language in which this word does not bear this interpretation is the Serbian, for here it signifies "a vampire."[45] But it should be remarked in this connexion that the Slavonic peoples, and especially the Serbians believe that a man who has been a werewolf in his life will become a vampire after death, and so the two are very closely related.[46] It was even thought in some districts, especially Elis[47] that those who had eaten the flesh of a sheep killed by a wolf might become vampires after death.[48] However, it must be remembered that although the superstitions of the werewolf and the vampire in many respects agree, and in more than one point are indeed precisely similar, there is, especially in Slavonic tradition, a very great distinction, for the Slavonic vampire is precisely defined and it is the incorrupt and re-animated dead body which returns from its grave, otherwise it cannot be said strictly to be a vampire. As we shall have occasion to observe it were, perhaps, no exaggeration to say that the conception of the vampire proper is peculiar to Slavonic peoples, and especially found in the Balkan countries, in Greece, in Russia, in Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia. There are, of course, many variants, both Western and Oriental; and other countries have tales of vampires which exactly fit the Slavonic norm, but outside the districts we have specified the appearances of the vampire are rare, whilst in his own domain even now he holds horrid sway, and people fear not so much the ghost as the return of the dead body floridly turgescent and foully swollen with blood, endued with some abominable and devilish life.

In Danish and Swedish we have vampyr; the Dutch is vampir; the French le vampire; Italian, Spanish, Portuguese,

[p. 22]

vampiro; modem Latin, vampyrus.[49] The Oxford English Dictionary thus defines vampire: "A preternatural being of a malignant nature (in the original unusual form of the belief an animated Corpse), supposed to seek nourishment and do harm by sucking the blood of sleeping persons; a man or woman abnormally endowed with similar habits." The first example which has been traced of the use of the word in literature seems to be that which occurs in The Travels of Three English Gentlemen, written about 1734, which was printed in Vol. IV. of the Harleian Miscellany, 1745, where the following passage occurs: "We must not omit Observing here, that our Landlord [at Laubach] seems to pay some regard to what Baron Valvasor has related of the Vampyres, said to infest some Parts of this Country. These Vampyres are supposed to be the Bodies of deceased Persons, animated by evil Spirits, which come out of the Graves, in the Night-time, suck the Blood of many of the Living, and thereby destroy them." The word and the idea soon became quite familiar, and in his Citizen of the World (1760-2) Oliver Goldsmith writes in every-day phrase: "From a meal he advances to a surfeit, and at last sucks blood like a vampire."

Johnson, edited by Latham, 1870, has: "Vampire. Pretended demon, said to delight in sucking human blood, and to animate the bodies of dead persons, which, when dug up, are said to be found florid and full of blood." A quotation is given from Forman's Observations on the Revolution in 1688, 1741, which shows that so early the word had acquired its metaphorical sense: "These are the vampires of the publick and riflers of the kingdom." David Mallet in his Zephyr, or the Stratagem, has:

Can Russia, can the Hungarian vampire
 With whom call in the hordes and empire,
 Can four such powers, who one assail
 Deserve our praise should they prevail?

A few travellers and learned authors had written of vampires in the seventeenth century. Thus we have the famous De Graecorum hodie quorundam opinationibus of Leone Allacci,[51] published at Cologne in 1645; there are some detailed accounts in the Relation de ce qui s'est passe a Sant-Erini Isle de l'Archipel[51] by Father Francois Richard, a Jesuit

[p. 23]

priest of the island of Santorini (Thera), whose work was published at Paris in 1657; Paul Ricaut, sometime English Consul at Smyrna in his The Present State of the Greek and Armenian Churches Anno Christi, 1678, 8vo, London, 1679,[52] mentions the tradition with a very striking example, but he does not actually use the word vampire. In 1679 Philip[53] Rohr published at Leipzig his thesis De Masticatione Mortuorum, which in the eighteenth century was followed by a number of academic treatises, such as the Dissertatio de Hominibus post mortem Sanguisugis, uulgo dictis Vampyren, by John Christopher Rohl and John Hertel, Leipzig, 17 32; the Dissertatio de cadaueribus sanguisugis of John Christian Stock, published at Jena in the same year; the Dissertatio de Uampyris Seruiensibus of John Heinrich Zopfius and Charles Francis van Dalen which appeared in the following year; all of which in some sense paved the way for John Christian Harenberg's Von Vampyren.[54]

In 1744 was published at Naples "presso i fratelli Raimondi" the famous Dissertazione sopra I Vampiri of Gioseppe Davanzati, Archbishop of Trani. This book had already widely circulated in manuscript--"la sua Dissertazione sopra i Vampiri s'era sparsa per tutta l'Italia benche manoscritta," says the anonymous biographer--and a copy had even been presented to the Holy Father, the learned Benedict XIV, who in a letter of 12th January, 1743, graciously thanked the author with generous compliment upon his work. "L'abbiamo subito letta con piacere, e nel medesimo Tempo ammirata si per la dottrina, che per la vasta erudizione, di cui ella e fornita"; wrote the Pope. It will not then be unfitting here to supply some brief notice--of the Dissertazione sopra I Vampiri, which although it ran into a second edition, "Napoli. M.DCC.LXXXIX. Presso Filippo Raimondi," in England seems almost entirely unknown since strangely enough even the British Museum Library lacks a copy. We would premise that as the good Archbishop's arguments and conclusions are philosophical it is quite allowable for us, whilst fully recognizing his scholarship and skill in handling his points, not to accept these but rather to maintain the contrary.

Gioseppe Davanzati was born at Bari on 29th August, 1665. After having commenced his studies at the Jesuit [p. 24] College in his native town, he passed at the age of fifteen to the University of Naples. Already had he resolved to seek the priesthood, and after a course of three years, his parents being now dead, he entered the University of Bologna, when he greatly distinguished himself in Science and Mathematics. Some few years were next spent in travelling, during which period he made his headquarters at Paris, "essendo molto innamorato delle maniere, e de'costumi de' Francesi." Spain, Portugal, the Low Countries, Germany, Switzerland were visited in turn, and we are told that he repeatedly expressed his wish to cross over to England, "nobil sede dell 'Arti e delle Scienze" but that by some accident his desire was again and again frustrated. Early in the reign of Clement XI, (1700-1721) he was recalled to Italy, and having been raised to the priesthood by the Bishop of Montemartino (Salerno) he was appointed Treasurer of the famous Sanctuary of S. Nicholas at Bari. His genius speedily attracted attention, and before long he was sent by the Pope as Legate Extraordinary to the Emperor Charles VI, to Vienna, a difficult and important mission which he discharged so admirably well that upon his return he was rewarded with the Archbishopric of Trani and other honours. This noble prelate remained high in favour with the successors of Clement XI, Innocent XIII (1721-1724), Benedict XIII (1724-1730), and Clement XII (1730-1740), and when on the death of this latter Pontiff Cardinal Prospero Lorenzo Lambertini was elected and took the title of Benedict XIV an old and intimate friend of his own was sitting in the chair of S. Peter. Although five and seventy years of age, Archbishop Davanzati journeyed to Rome to kiss the feet of the new Pope by whom he was welcomed with the utmost kindness and every mark of distinction. Upon the death of Monsignor Crispi, Archbishop of Ferrara, the Supreme Pontiff on 2nd August, 1746, preconized Gioseppe Davanzati as Patriarch of Alexandria, a dignity vacant by the aforesaid prelate's decease. Early in February, 1755, Archbishop Davanzati contracted a severe chill which turned to inflammation of the lungs. Upon the night of the sixteenth of that month, having been fortified with the Sacraments of the Church be slept peacefully away, being aged 89 years, 5 months, and 16 days.

The Dissertazione sopra I Vampiri owed its first suggestion

[p. 25]

to the various discussions which were held at Rome during the years 1738-39 in the apartments of Cardinal Schrattembach, Bishop of Olmutz, and which arose from the official reports of vampirism submitted to him by the chapter of his diocese. The cardinal sought the advice and co-operation of various learned members of the Sacred College and other prelates of high repute for experience and sagacity. Amongst these was Davanzati who frankly confesses that until the Cardinal consulted him and explained the whole business at length he had no idea at all what a vampire might be. Davanzati commences his work by relating various well-known and authenticated cases of vampires, especially those which had recently occurred in Germany during the years 1720-1739. He shows a good knowledge of the literature of the subject, and decides that the phenomena cannot enter into the category of apparitions and ghosts but must be explained in a very different way, He finds that with but few exceptions both ancient and modern philosophers seem ignorant of vampirism, which he justly argues with pertinent references to the Malleus Maleficarum and to Delrio must be diabolical in origin be it an illusion or no. He next considers at some length in several chapters of great interest the extent of the demon's power. Chapter XIII discusses "Della forza della Fantasia," and in Chapter XIV be argues "Che le apparizioni de'fantasmi, e dell' ombre de' Morti, di cui fanno menzione gli Storici, non siano altro che effetto di fantasia." Here we take leave to join issue with him, and to-day it will very generally be agreed that his line of argument is at least perilous. Nor can we accept "Che l'apparizione de' Vampiri non sia altro che paro effetto di Fantasia." The truth lies something deeper than that as Leone Allacci so well knew. Yet with all its faults and limitations the Dissertazione sopra I Vampiri is deserving of careful consideration for there is much that is well presented, much that is of value, although in the light of fuller investigations and clearer knowledge the author's conclusion cannot be securely maintained.

Even better known than the volume of Davanzati is the Dissertations sur les Apparitions des Anges, des Demons et des Esprits, et sur les Revenants et Vampires de Hongrie, de Boheme, de Moravie, et de Silesie, published at Paris,

[p. 26]

chez Debure l'aine, 2 vols., 12mo, 1746.[55] The work was frequently reprinted, and translated into English 1759; into German 1752; second edition 1757-8. In its day it exercised a very great influence, and as it is still constantly referred to, it may not be impertinent to give a brief account of the eminent authority, its author.

Dom Augustin Calmet, who is so famous as a biblical exegetist, was born at Menil-la-Horgne, near Commercy, Lorraine, on 26th February, 1672; and died at the Abbey of Senones, near Saint-Die, 25th October, 1757. He was educated by the monks of the Benedictine Priory of Breuil, and in 1688 he joined this learned order in the abbey of St. Mansuy at Toul, being professed in the following year, and ordained 17th March, 1696. At the Abbey of Moyen-Moutier, where he taught philosophy and theology, he soon engaged the help of the whole community to gather the material for his vast work on the Bible. The first volume of this huge commentary appeared at Paris in 1707, Commentaire litteral sur tous les livres de l'Ancien et du Nouveau Testament; and the last of the twenty-three quarto volumes was published only in 1716. Several most important reprints were issued throughout the eighteenth century, including two Latin versions, the one by F. Vecelli which came from houses at Venice and Frankfort, six volumes folio, 1730; the other by Mansi, Lucca, 9 vols., folio, 1730-1738 of which version there are at least two subsequent editions It is impossible that in some small points so encyclopaedic a work should not be open to criticism, but its merits are permanent and the erudition truly amazing. Yet this was only one of many learned treatises which Dom Calmet published on Biblical subjects, and so greatly was their value esteemed that his dissertations were rapidly translated into Latin and the principal modern European languages. When we add to these his historical and philosophical writings the output of this great scholar is well-nigh incredible. So remarkable a man could not fail to hold high honours in his own Congregation, and it was only at his earnest prayer that Pope Benedict XIII refrained from compelling him to accept a mitre, since this Pontiff on more than one occasion expressed himself anxious to reward the merits and the learning of the Abbot of Senones.

To-day, perhaps the best known of Dom Calmet's works

[p. 27]

in his Traite sur les Apparitions des Esprits, et sur les Vampires, and in his preface he tells us the reasons which induced him to undertake this examination. One point which lie emphasizes must carefully be borne in mind and merits detailed consideration. Vampires, as we have seen, particularly infest Slavonic countries, and it does not appear that this species of apparition was well known in western Europe until towards the end of the seventeenth century. There undoubtedly were cases of vampirism, as will be recorded in their due order, and certain aspects of witchcraft have much in common with the vampire tradition, especially the exercise of that malign power whereby the witch caused her enemies to dwindle, peak and pine, draining them dry as hay. But this is not vampirism proper. The fuller knowledge of these horrors reached western Europe in detail during the eighteenth century, and it at once threw very considerable light upon unrelated cases that had been recorded from time to time, but which appeared isolated and belonging to no particular category. Writing in 1746, Dom Calmet, who had long studied the subject, remarks that certain events, certain movements, certain fanaticisms, certain phenomena, it may be in the physical or in the supernatural order, distinguish and characterise certain several centuries. He continues: "In this present age and for about sixty years past, we have been the hearers and the witnesses of a new series of extraordinary incidents and occurrences. Hungary, Moravia, Silesia, Poland, are the principal theatre of these happenings. For here we are told that dead men, men who have been dead for several months, I say, return from the tomb, are heard to speak, walk about, infest hamlets and villages, injure both men and animals, whose blood they drain thereby making them sick and ill, and at length actually causing death. Nor can men deliver themselves from these terrible visitations, nor secure themselves from these horrid attacks, unless they dig the corpses up from the graves, drive a sharp stake through these bodies, cut off the heads, tear out the hearts; or else they burn the bodies to ashes. The name given to these ghosts is Oupires, or Vampires, that is to say, blood-suckers, and the particulars which are related of them are so singular, so detailed, accompanied with circumstances so probable and so likely, as well as with the most weighty and well-attested legal deposition

[p. 28]

that it seems impossible not to subscribe to the belief which prevails in these countries that these Apparitions do actually come forth from their graves and that they are able to produce the terrible effects which are so widely and so positively attributed to them. . . . The Brucolaques (vrykolakes) of Greece and the Archipelago are Apparitions of quite a new kind." The author then says that he has solid reasons for treating the subject of Vampires, and especially for dealing with those who infest Hungary, Moravia, Silesia and Poland, although he well knows that he is laying himself open to damaging criticism on both sides. Many persons will accuse him of temerity and presumption for having dared to cast doubts upon certain details in these well-authenticated accounts, whilst others will attack him for having wasted his time in writing seriously on a subject which appears to them frivolous and inept. "Howbeit," he continues, "whatever line anyone may choose to adopt, it is to my mind useful and indeed necessary to investigate a question which seems to have an important bearing upon Religion. For if it be a truth that Vampires may actually thus return from their graves, then it becomes necessary to write in defence of, and to prove, this truth; if it be an error and an illusion, it follows in the interests of religion that those who credit it must be undeceived and that we should expose a groundless superstition, a fallacy, which may easily have very serious and very dangerous consequences."

In the first chapter of his Second Volume, which section directly discusses Vampires,--the first volume being preliminary and generally concerned with apparitions of various kinds,--Don Calmet again defines a Vampire, and at the risk of a certain amount of repetition his words must once again be quoted[56]: The Apparitions (Revenans) of Hungary, or Vampires . . . are men who have been dead for some considerable time, it may be for a long period or it may be for a shorter period, and these issue forth from their graves and come to disturb the living, whose blood they suck and drain. These vampires visibly appear to men, they knock loudly at their doors and cause the sound to re-echo throughout the whole house, and once they have gained a foothold death generally follows. To this sort of Apparition is given the name Vampire or Oupire, which in the Slavonic tongues means

[p. 29]

a blood-sucker. The only way to obtain deliverance from their molestations is by disinterring the dead body, by cutting off the head, by driving a stake through the breast, by transfixing the heart, or by burning the corpse to ashes."

It may be remarked here that although in the course of this book there will be occasion to deal with many ghosts of the vampire family and to treat of cognate superstitions and traditions the essential feature of the Vampire proper lies in the fact that he is a dead body re-animated with an awful life, who issues from his tomb to prey upon the living by sticking their blood which lends him new vitality and fresh energies. Since he is particularly found in Greece it is to a Greek writer we may go for a description of this pest. One of the earliest--if indeed he were not actually the first--of the writers of the seventeenth century who deals with vampires is Leone Allacci, (Alacci), more commonly known as Leo Allatius.[57] This learned scholar and theologian was born on the island of Chios in 1586, and died at Rome 19th January, 1669. At the age of fourteen he entered the Greek College in Rome, and when he had finished his academic course with most honourable distinction, returned to Chios where he proved of the greatest assistance to the Latin Bishop Marco Giustiniani. In 1616 Allacci received the degree Doctor of Medicine from the Sapienza, and a little later, after having been attached to the Vatican library, be professed rhetoric at the Greek College. In 1622 Pope Gregory XV sent him to Germany to superintend the transportation to Rome of the Palatinate library of Heidelberg, which Maximillian I had presented to the Pope in return for large subsidies that enabled the war to be carried on against the federation of Protestant Princes. This important task, which owing to a disturbed state of the country was one of immense difficulty, Allacci accomplished most successfully, and during the reigns of Urban VIII and Innocent X he continued his work in the Vatican library, especially concentrating upon the Palatinate manuscripts. In 1661 Alexander VI, as a recognition of his vast researches and eminent scholarship, appointed him custodian of the Library. He was an earnest labourer for reunion, in which cause he wrote his great work De Ecclesiae Occidentalis atque Orientalis perpetua consensione, published at Cologne in 1648, a dissertation wherein all points of agreement are emphasized, whilst the differences are treated as lightly as possible.

[p. 30]

Allacci, in his treatise De Graecorum hodie quorundam opinationibus, Cologne, 1645, discusses many traditions, and amongst others he deals at some length with the vampire, concerning whom he says: "The vrykolakas is the body of a man of wicked and debauched life, very often of one who has been excommunicated by his bishop. Such bodies do not like other corpses suffer decomposition after burial nor fall to dust, but having, so it seems, a skin of extreme toughness become swollen and distended all over, so that the joints can scarcely be bent; the skin becomes stretched like the parchment of a drum, and when struck gives out the same sound, from which circumstance the vrykolakas has received the name tympaniaios ('drum-like ')." According to this author a demon takes possession of such a body, which issues from the tomb, and, generally at night, goes about the streets of a village, knocking sharply upon doors, and summoning one of the household by name. But if the person called unwittingly answers he is sure to die on the following day. Yet a vrykolakas never cries out a name twice, and so the people of Chios, at all events, always wait to hear the summons repeated before they reply to anyone who raps at their door of a night." This monster is said to be so fearfully destructive to men, that it actually makes its appearance in the daytime, even at high noon,[58] nor does it then confine its visits to houses, but even in fields and in hedged vineyards and upon the open highway it will suddenly advance upon persons who are labouring or travellers as they walk along, and by the horror of its hideous aspect it will slay them without laying hold on them or even speaking a word." Accordingly a sudden death from no obvious cause is to be regarded with the gravest suspicion, and should there be any kind of molestation, or should any story of an apparition be bruited abroad they hasten to exhume the corpse which is often found in the state that has been described. Thereupon without any delay "it is taken up out of the grave, the priests recite the appointed prayers, and it is thrown on to a fiercely blazing pyre. Before the orisons are finished skin will desquamate and the members fall apart, when the whole body is utterly consumed to ashes." Allacci proceeds to point out that this tradition in Greece is by no means new nor of any recent growth, for he tells us "in ancient and modern times alike holy men and men of great piety who have received the

[p. 31]

confessions of Christians have tried to disabuse them of such superstitions and to root this belief out of the popular imagination." Indeed a nomocanon or authoritative ordinance[59] of the Greek church is cited to the following effect: "Concerning a dead man, if he be found whole, the which they call vrykolakas.

"It is impossible that a dead man should become a vrykolakas, unless it be by the power of the Devil who, wishing to mock and delude some that they may incur the wrath of Heaven, causeth these dark wonders, and so very often at night he casteth a glamour whereby men imagine that the dead man whom they knew formerly, appears and holds converse with them, and in their dreams too they see strange visions. At other times they may behold him in the road, yea, even in the highway walking to and fro or standing still, and what is more than this he is even said to have strangled men and to have slain them.

"Immediately there is sad trouble, and the whole village is in a riot and a racket, so that they hasten to the grave and they unbury the body of the man . . . and the dead man--one who has long been dead and buried--appears to them to have flesh and blood . . . so they collect together a mighty pile of dry wood and set fire to this and lay the body upon it so that they burn it and they destroy it altogether."

What is exceedingly curious is that after so emphatically declaring these phenomena to be a superstition and an idle fantasy, the nomocanon continueth as follows: "Be it known unto you, however, that when such an incorrupt body shall be discovered, the which, as we have said is the work of the Devil, ye must without delay summon the priests to chant an invocation to the All Holy Mother of God . . . and solemnly to perform memorial services for the dead with funeral-meats."[60] This provision is at any rate pretty clear evidence that the author or authors of this ordinance must have had some belief in the vrykolakas, and it appears to me that they would not have added so significant a cautel unless they had deemed it absolutely necessary, and having salved their consciences by speaking with rigid officialism, they felt it incumbent upon them to suggest precautions in case of the, expected happening and the consequence of difficulties and mistrust. In fact, they were most obviously safeguarding themselves.

[p. 32]

Allacci, at any rate, had no hesitation about declaring his own views, and he thoroughly believed in the vampire. He says, and says with perfect truth: "It is the height of folly to attempt to deny that such bodies are not infrequently found in their graves incorrupt and that by use of them the Devil, if God permit him, devises most horrible complots and schemes to the hurt and harm of mankind." Father Francois Richard, reference to whose important work has been made above, distinctly lays down that particularly in Greece the devil may operate by means of dead bodies as well. as by sorcerers, all this being allowed by some inscrutable design of providence. And there can be no doubt that the vampire does act under satanic influence and by satanic direction. For the wise words of S. Gregory the Great, although on another occasion,[61] may most assuredly be applied here: "Qui tamen non esse incredibilia ista cognoscimus, si in illo et alia facta pensamus. Certe iniquorum omnium caput diabolus est: et huius capitis membra sunt omnes iniqui." All this, of course, under divine permission. The authors of the Malleus Maleficarum in the First Part teach us how there are "Three Necessary Concomitants of Witchcraft, which are the Devil, a Witch, and the Permission of God." So are these three necessary concomitants of Vampirism, to wit, the Devil, the Dead Body, and the Permission of God." Father Richard writes: "The Devil revitalizes and energizes these dead bodies which he preserves for a long time in their entirety; he appears with the actual face and in the likeness of the dead, stalking abroad up and down the streets, and presently he will parade the country roads and the fields; he bursts his way into men's houses, filling many with awful fear, leaving others dumb with horror, whilst others are even killed; he proceeds to acts of violence and blood, and strikes terror into every heart." The good Father proceeds to say that at first he believed these appearances to be merely ghosts from Purgatory returning to ask for help, masses and pious prayers"; but on learning the details of the case he soon found that he had to deal with something very other, for such ghosts never commit excesses, violent assaults, wreaking the destruction of cattle and goods, and even causing death. These appearances then are clearly diabolical, and the matter is taken in hand by the priests who assemble on a Saturday, that being the only

[p. 33]

day of the week on which a vrykolakas rests in his grave and cannot walk abroad.

It may be remembered that Saturday was the one day of the week which was particularly avoided by witches for their assemblies, and that no Sabbat was held on this day. for Saturday is sacred to the Immaculate Mother of God.[63] "It is well known," says that great Doctor S. Alphonsus,[64] "that Saturday is dedicated by Holy Church to Mary, because, as S. Bernard tells us, on that day, the day after the death of Her Son, She remained constant in faith." (Per illud triste Sabbatum stetit in fide, et saluata fuit Ecclesia in ipsa sola; propter quod, aptissime tota Ecclesia, in laudem et gloriam eiusdem Uirginis, diem Sabbati per totius anni circulum celebrare consueuit.)[61] In England this excellent practice of devotion was known as early as Anglo-Saxon times, since in the Leofric Missal a special mass is assigned to Saturdays in honour of Our Lady.

Mr. G. F. Abbott, in his Macedonian Folklore,[66] relates that in Northern Greece "People born on a Saturday (hence called Sabbatianoi or Sabbatarians) are believed to enjoy the doubtful privilege of seeing ghosts and phantasms, and of possessing great influence over vampires. A native of Socho assured the writer that such a one was known to have lured a vrykolakas into a barn and to have set him to count the grains of a heap of millet." While the demon was thus engaged, the Sabbatarian attacked him and succeeded in nailing him to the wall . . . At Liakkovikia it is held that the Sabbatarian owes his power to a little dog, which follows him every evening and drives away the vrykolakas. It is further said that the Sabbatarian on these occasions is invisible to all but the little dog."

The priests then on a Saturday go in procession to the grave where lies the body which is suspect. It is solemnly disinterred, "and when they find it whole, they take it for certain that it was serving as an instrument of the Devil."

This abnormal condition of the dead is held to be a sure mark of the vampire, and is essential to vampirism proper. In the Greek Church it is often believed to be the result of excommunication, and this is indeed an accepted and definite doctrine of the Orthodox Church, which must be considered in turn a little later.

[p. 34]

It is not impossible, I think, that cases of catalepsy, or suspended animation which resulted in premature burial may have helped to reinforce the tradition of the vampire and the phenomenon of vampirism. Some authorities consider catalepsy as almost entirely, if not wholly, psychic, and certainly not a disease in any correct sense of the word, although it may be a symptom of obscure diseases arising from nervous disorders. A celebrated medical authority has pronounced that "in itself catalepsy is never fatal." It belongs to the domain of hypnotism, and is said to be refreshing to the subject, especially when he is exhausted by long mental exertion or physical toil. Very often it arises from conscious or subconscious auto-suggestion, and it has been described as "the supreme effort of nature to give the tired nerves their needed repose." No doubt the fatal mistake so often made in the past was that of endeavouring by drastic measures to hasten restoration to consciousness., instead of allowing nature to recuperate at will. If the attempt is successful it comes as a fearful shock to the nerves which are craving for rest; if the effort is seemingly without result the patient is in imminent danger of an autopsy or of being buried alive, a tragedy which, it is to be feared, has happened to very many. It is clear that as yet serious attention has not been adequately given to this terrible accident. A quarter of a century ago it was computed that in the United States an average of not less than one case a week of premature burial was discovered and reported. This means that the possibility of such danger is appalling. In past centuries when knowledge was less common, when adequate precautions were seldom, if ever, employed, the cases of premature burial, especially at such times as the visitation of the plague and other pestilences must have been far from uncommon. Two or three examples of recent date, that is to say occuring at the end of the last century, may profitably be quoted as proving extremely significant in this connexion.

A young lady, who resided near Indianopolis, came to life after fourteen days of suspended animation. No less than six doctors had applied the usual tests, and all unhesitatingly signed certificates to witness that she was dead. Her little brother against this consensus of opinion clung to her and declared that she had not died. The parents were in bitter

[p. 35]

agony, but at length it was necessary to remove the body. The boy endeavoured to prevent this, and in the excitement the bandage which tied up the jaw was loosened and pushed out of place, when it appeared that her lips were quivering and the tongue gently moving. "What do you want, what do you want?" cried the child. "Water," distinctly, if faintly, came the answer from the supposed corpse. Water was administered, the patient revived, and lived her full span of years, healthy and normal until she was an old woman.

A lady who is now the head matron of one of the largest orphan asylums in the United States has been given over as dead no less than twice by the physicians in attendance; her body has twice been shrouded in the decent cerements of the grave; and twice has she been resuscitated by her friends. On the second occasion, in view of the former experience, extraordinary precautions were taken. All known tests were applied by the physicians, and humanly speaking all possible doubt was set at rest. The doctors had actually left the house, and the undertaker was at his sad business. It chanced that the body was pierced by a pin, and to the joy of her friends it was noted that a small drop of blood shortly afterwards oozed from the puncture. The family insisted upon the preparations being stayed; vigorous treatment was unremittingly applied, and the patient returned to life. To-day she is an exceptionally active and energetic administratrix. It should be remarked that the lady declared that she had never for a moment lost consciousness, that she was fully cognizant of all that went on around her, that she perfectly understood the meaning of all the tests which were so assiduously employed, but that all the while she felt the utmost indifference with regard to the result. The verdict of the physicians that she was dead did not cause her either the slightest surprise or the smallest alarm. A very similar accident occurred to a gentleman of good estate, one of the most prominent citizens of Harrisburg, in Pennsylvania. After a long illness he apparently died from inflamatory rheumatism, which was complicated with heart trouble. All preparations were made for the funeral, but his wife determined that this should not take place for at I-east a week, so great was her fear of premature burial. In the course of two or three days it was noticed that the body had moved; the eyes were wide open, and

[p. 36]

one of the arms had altered the position in which it had been carefully placed. His wife shrieked out his name, upon which he slowly arose, and with assistance was supported to a chair. Even before the arrival of the physicians, who were instantly summoned, he had regained a marked degree of strength, together with an ability of movement which had not been possible throughout the whole course of his illness. He was soon in excellent health, and what is very remarkable, he stated that during the time of suspended animation he was perfectly aware of everything that was going on all around, that the grief of his family filled him with terrible agony, and he dreaded the preparations for interment, but that he was unable to move a muscle or utter a word.

The death of Washington Irving Bishop, the well-known thought-reader, caused a great sensation at the time. On many occasions he had been in a cataleptic state for several hours, and once, at least, his trance was so long that two physicians pronounced him to be dead. There is little doubt that eventually the autopsy was performed with irregular haste, and that the unfortunate subject was not dead before the surgeon's knife had actually penetrated his brain.

Although through the ages few cases have been actually recorded the incidents of premature burial and of autopsy performed on the living must be numberless. One such accident nearly occurred to the great humanist Marc-Antoine Muret,[68] who, falling ill upon a journey, was conveyed to the local hospital as a sick stranger, name unknown. Whilst he lay, not even unconscious, upon the rough pallet, the physicians, who had been lecturing upon anatomy and were anxious to find a subject to illustrate their theories, gathered round in full force. They eagerly discussed the points to be argued, and deeming the patient dead, the senior physician gravely pronounced, pointing to the patient: "Faciamus experimentum in anima uili." The eyes of the supposed corpse opened widely, and a low, but distinct voice answered: "Uilem animam appellas pro qua Christus non dedignatus est mori."

As was customary in the case of prelates, when Cardinal Diego de Espinosa, Bishop of Sigeunza and Grand Inquisitor of Spain under Philip II died after a short illness, the body was embalmed before it lay in state. Accordingly in the presence of several physicians the surgeon proceeded to operate

[p. 37]

for that purpose. He had made a deep incision, and it is said that the heart had actually been brought into view and was observed to beat. The Cardinal recovered consciousness at the fatal moment, and even then had sufficient strength to grasp with his hand the scalpel of the anatomist. In the earlier years of the nineteenth century both Cardinal Spinola and the octogenarian Cardinal della Somaglia were prepared for embalmment before life was extinct.

In the Seventh Book of the Historia Naturalis, (liii, 52, ed. Brotier, Barbou, 1779), Pliny relates many instances of persons who, being deemed dead, revived. "Auiola consularis in rogo reuixit: et quoniam subueniri non potuerat prae ualente flamma, uiuus crematus est. Similis causa in L. Lamia praetorio uiro traditur. Nam C. Aelium Tuberonem praetura functum a rogo relatum, Messala Rufus, et plerique tradunt. Haec est conditio mortalium: ad has, et eiusmodi occasiones fortunae gignimur, uti de homine ne morti quidem debeat credi. Reperimus inter exempla, Hermotini Clazomenii animam relicto corpore errare solitam, uagamque e longinquo multa annunitiare, quae nisi a praesente nosci non possent, corpore interim semianimi: donec cremato eo inimici (qui Cantharidae uocabantur) remeanti animae uelut uaginam ademerint. Aristeae etiam uisam euolantem ex ore in Proconneso, corui effigie, magna quae sequitur fabulositate. Quam equidem et in Gnossio Epimenide simili modo accipio: Puerum aestu et itinere fessum in specu septem et quinquaginta dormisse annis: rerum faciem mutationemque mirantem uelut postero experrectum die: hinc pari numero dierum senio ingruente, ut tamen in septimum et quinquagesimum atque centesimum uitae duraret annum. Feminarum sexus huic malo uidetur maxime opportunus, conuersione uuluae: quae si corrigatur, spiritus restituitur. Hue pertinet nobile apud Graecos uolumen Heraclidis, septem diebus feminae exanimis ad uitam reuocatae.

Uarro quoque auctor est, xx. uiro se agros diuidente Capuae, quemdam qui efferretur, foro domum remaasse pedibus. Hoc idem Aquini accidisse. Romae quoque Corsidium materterae suae maritum sumere locato reuixisse, et locatorem funeris ab eo elatum. Adiicit miracula, quae tota indicasse conueniat. E duobus fratribus equestris ordinis, Corsidio maiori accidisse, ut uideretur exspirasse, apertoque testamento recitatum

[p. 38]

heredem minorem funeri institisse; interim cum, qui uidebatur extinctus, plaudendo conciuisse ministeria, et narrasse "a fratre se uenisse, commendatum sibi filiam ab eo. Demonstratum praeterea, quo in loco defodisset aurum nullo conscio, et rogasse ut iis funebribus, quae comparasset, efferretur." Hoc eo narrante, fratris domestici propere annuntiauere exanimatum illum: et aurum, ubi dixerat, repertum est. Plena praeterea uita est his uaticiniis, sed non conferenda, cum saepius falsa sint, sicut ingenti exemplo docebimus. Bello Siculo Gabienus Caesaris classiarus fortissimus captus a Sex. Pompeio, iussu eius incisa ceruice, et uix cohaerente, iacuit in litore toto die. Deinde cum aduesperauisset, cum gemitu precibusque congregata multitudine petiit, uti Pompeius ad se ueniret, aut aliquem ex arcanis mitteret: se enim ab inferis remissum, habere quae nuntiaret. Misit plures Pompeius ex amicis, quibus Gabienus dixit: "Inferis diis placere Pompeii causas et partes pias: proinde euentum futurum, quem optaret: hoc se nuntiare iussum: argumentum fore ueritatis, quod peractis mandatis, protinus exspiraturus esset": idque ita euenit. Post sepulturam quoque uisorum exempla, sunt: nisi quod naturae opera, non prodigia consectamur.

It was truly said by Pliny that "Such is the condition of humanity, and so uncertain is men's judgement that they cannot determine even death itself." The words of the wise old Roman have been re-echoed by many a modern authority. Sabetti in his Tractatus XVI, "De Extrema Unctione," Compendium Theologiae Moralis, (ed. recognita T. Barrett; Pustet; 1916; p. 776) asks: "Quid sacerdoti agendum sit, si ad aegrotum accedat, eumque modo mortuum, ut uulgo dicitur, inueniat? In the course of resolving this, he lays down: "Iam age ex sententia plurimorum medicorum doctissimorum probabile est homines in omnibus ferme casibus post instans mortis, ut uulgo dicitur, seu post ultimam respirationem, intus aliquamdiu uiuere, breuius uel diutius, iuxta naturam causae quae mortem induxit. In casibus mortis ex morbis lenti progressus probabile est uitarn interne perdurare aliquot momenta, sex circiter, uel, iuxta quosdam peritos, unam dimidiam horam: in casibus uero mortis repentinae uita, interna perdurat longius, forte non improbabiliter, usque ad putrefactionem." Professor Huxley wrote: "The evidence

[p. 39]

of ordinary observers on such a point as this (that a person is really dead) is absolutely worthless. And, even medical evidence, unless the physician is a person of unusual knowledge and skill, may have little more value." The British Medical Journal[70] remarks: "It is true that hardly any one sign of death, short of putrefaction, can be relied upon as infallible." Sir Henry Thompson wrote: "It should never be forgotten that there is but one really trustworthy proof that death has occurred in any given instance, viz., the presence of a manifest sign of commencing decomposition." And Professor p. Brouardel emphatically declares: "We are obliged to acknowledge that we have no sign or group of signs sufficient to determine the moment of death with scientific certainty in all cases." Colonel E. p. Vollum, M.D., Medical Inspector of the United States Army, and Corresponding Member of the New York Academy of Sciences, who himself was upon one occasion almost buried alive, most emphatically declared that "even stoppage of the beating of the heart, and breathing, for a considerable time, with all other appearances of death, excepting decomposition, do not make it certain that a person is dead," and he also added the terrible warning that "the suspended activity of life may return after the body has been interred." It is unnecessary to enter into these partial cases of premature burial, but there is overwhelming evidence that such accidents were far from uncommon. Dr. Thouret, who was present at the destruction of the famous vaults of Les Innocens, told Mons. Desgenettes that there could be no doubt many of the persons must have been interred alive, since the skeletons were found in positions which showed the dead must have turned in their coffins. Kempner supplies similar particulars when describing disinterments which have taken place in New York and other districts of the United States, also in Holland and elsewhere.

The celebrated investigator, Dr. Franz Hartmann, collected particulars of more than seven hundred cases of premature burial and of narrow escapes from it, some of which occurred in his own neighbourhood. In his great work Premature Burial[71] he tells us of the terrible incident which happened to the famous French tragedienne, Mile. Rachel, who on 3rd January, 1858, "died" near Cannes, and who was to be embalmed, but after the proceedings had commenced she suddenly

[p. 40]

returned to life, only to expire in reality some ten hours later from the shock and from the injuries which had been inflicted upon her. Another case which is of particular interest as having occurred in Moravia, where the belief in vampires is particularly strong, is that of the postmaster in a small town who, as it was thought, died in a fit of epilepsy. About a year afterwards it became necessary to disinter some of the bodies from the graveyard in order to enlarge one of the transepts of the parish church, and the dreadful fact was revealed that the unfortunate postmaster must have been buried whilst still alive, a discovery which so horrified the physician who had signed the death certificate that he lost his reason.

In the chancel of S. Giles, Cripplegate, there is still to be seen a monument sacred to the memory of Constance Whitney, whose many virtues are described in somewhat rhetorical fashion upon a marble tablet. A figure above this scroll represents the lady in the act of rising from her coffin. This might be taken to be a beautiful symbolism, but such is not the case, for it represents an actual circumstance. The unfortunate lady had been buried while in a condition of suspended animation, and consciousness returned to her when the sexton opened the coffin and desecrated the body in order to steal a valuable ring which had been left upon one of her fingers.[72] In former years when the rifling of tombs and body-snatching were by no means an infrequent practice, many similar cases came to light, and there can be no doubt that no inconsiderable proportion of persons were buried in a state of trance or catalepsy.

The story of Gabrielle de Launay, a lady whose cause was tried before the High Court of Paris, about 1760, caused a profound sensation throughout the whole of France. When eighteen years of age Gabrielle, the daughter of M. de Launay, the President of the Civil Tribunal of Toulouse, was betrothed to Captain Maurice de Serres. Unhappily the latter was suddenly ordered abroad to the Indies on active service. The President, fearing that his child might die in a foreign land, refused to allow the marriage to be celebrated immediately so that she might accompany her husband under his protection. The lovers parted heart-broken, and in about two years' time news reached France of the gallant young soldier's death. [p. 41] This, however, proved to be false, although his safety was not known until, after an absence of well-nigh five years, be presented himself once more in Paris. Here he happened to pass the church of S. Roch, the entire facade of which was heavily draped with black and shrouded for the funeral of some person of distinction. Upon enquiry, he learned that the mourning was on account of a young and beautiful lady who had died suddenly after two days' illness, the wife of the President du Bourg, who before her marriage had been Mlle. Gabrielle de Launay. It appeared that, owing to the report of the death of Maurice de Serres, M. de Launay had compelled his daughter to marry this gentleman, who although nearly thirty years her senior was a figure of great wealth and importance. As may be imagined, the young captain was distracted with grief, but that night, taking a considerable sum in gold, he visited the sexton of the cemetery of S. Roch and with great difficulty bribed him to exhume the corpse of Madame du Bourg in order that he might once more look upon the features of the woman whom he had so passionately loved. With every precaution, under the pale light of a waning moon, the terrible task was completed, the coffin was silently unscrewed, and the unhappy lover threw himself upon his, knees in an agony of grief. At last the grave-digger suggested that everything must be replaced in order, when with a terrible cry the young officer suddenly seized the cold, clay body and, before the bewildered sexton could prevent him, threading his rapid course among the tombs, with lightning speed he disappeared into the darkness. Pursuit was useless, and nothing remained but for the poor man to replace the empty shell in the grave, to shovel back the earth and arrange the spot so that there might be no trace of any disturbance. He felt sure, at least, that his accomplice in so terrible a crime, a sacrilege which would inevitably bring the severest punishment upon those concerned in it, must maintain silence, if only for his own sake.

Nearly five years had passed when M. du Bourg, who upon the anniversary of his wife's death each June attended a solemn requiem, as he was passing through a somewhat unfrequented street in the suburbs of Paris came face to face with a lady in whom he recognised none other than the wife whose death he had mourned so tenderly and so long. [p. 42] As he attempted to speak, she with averted looks swept past him as swiftly as the wind and, leaping into a carriage with emblazoned panels, was driven quickly away before he could reach the spot. However, M. du Bourg had noticed the arms of the noble house of de Serres, and he determined that inquiry should at once be made. It was no difficult task for a man of his position to obtain an order that the grave of his wife might be examined, and when this was done the empty broken coffin turned suspicion into certainty. The fact that the sexton had resigned his post and had gone no one knew where, but seemingly in comfortable circumstances shortly after the funeral of Madame du Bourg lent its weight to the investigations which were now taken in hand. Experienced lawyer that he was, M. du Bourg accumulated evidence of the first importance. He found that it was said that Captain Maurice de Serres had married his young and lovely wife, Madame Julie de Serres, some five years previously and, as it was supposed, then brought her back with him from some foreign country, to Paris.

The whole city was astounded when the President du Bourg demanded from the High Court the dissolution of the illegal marriage between Captain Maurice de Serres and the pretended Julie de Serres, who, as the plaintiff steadfastly declared, was Gabrielle du Bourg, his lawful wife. The novelty of the circumstances caused the profoundest sensation, and vast numbers of pamphlets were exchanged by the faculty, many of whom maintained that a prolonged trance had given rise to the apparent death of Madame du Bourg, and it was stated that although she had continued to exist for a great number of hours in her grave, cases of similar lethargies had been recorded, and even if such fits were of the rarest, yet the circumstance was possible. Madame Julie de Serres was summoned to appear in Court and answer the questions of the Judges. She stated that she was an orphan born in South America, and had never left her native country until her marriage. Certificates were produced, and on every side lengthy arguments were heard, which it is unnecessary to detail. Many romantic incidents ensued, but these, however interesting, must be passed over, for it shall suffice to say that eventually, mainly through the sudden introduction of her little daughter, amid a pathetic scene, the identity of Julie

[p. 43]

de Serres with Gabrielle du Bourg, nee Launay, was established and acknowledged. In vain did her advocate plead that her marriage to M. du Bourg had been dissolved by death, although this fact most certainly ought to have been accepted as consonant with sound theology.[78] None the less the result was that, in spite of her prayer to be allowed to enter a cloister, she was ordered to return to her first husband. Two days after, the President du Bourg awaited her arrival in the great hall of his mansion. She appeared, but could scarcely totter through the gates, for she had but a few moments previously drained a swift poison. Crying "I restore to you what you have lost," she fell a corpse at his feet. At the same moment Captain de Serres died by his own hands.

It cannot escape notice that these events very closely resemble that novella of Bandello (II, 9), which relates the true history of Elena and Gerardo, adventures nearly resembling the tragic tale of Romeo and Juliet. Elena and Gerardo are the children of two nobles of Venice, Messer Pietro and Messer Paolo, whose palaces fronted each other on the Grand Canal. Gerardo chances to see Elena at her window, and from that hour he knows neither happiness nor sleep until he has declared his consuming passion. A kindly nurse brings them together, and in her presence they exchange rings and vows of tenderest love before the statue of Madonna the Virgin, spending long nights in amorous ecstasy and bliss. For these unions were fast binding, although not a sacrament, indeed, until then had received the benison of Holy Church. It is a common saying to apply to any man: "Si, e ammogliato; ma il matrimonio non e stato benedetto." Wherefore the spousals of the lovers remained a secret.

In a little while Messer Paolo, thinking great things of his son's career in the world, dispatches the young man to Beirut, and Gerardo needs must go. But when he had been absent some six months Messer Pietro informs his daughter that he has appointed a day for her marriage with a young man of ancient house and fair estate, and not daring to tell her father what had passed, she sunk under her silent grief, and upon the evening before her new nuptials she fell into a swoon across her bed, so that in the morning she was found cold and stark as a stiffening corpse. The physicians assembled in numbers and talked learnedly; remedies of every sort were applied

[p. 44]

without avail; and no one doubted she was dead. So they carried her to church for burial and not for marriage. That night they bore in sombre and silent procession upon a black gondola to the Campo which is hard by San Pietro in Castello, where lies the Sacred Body of Venice's great patriarch, San Lorenzo Giustiniani. They left her there in a marble sarcophagus outside the church, with torches blazing around.

Now it happened that Gerardo's galley bad returned from Syria, and was newly anchored at the port of Lido. Many friends came to greet him, and as they talked, marking the funeral cortege, he idly asked who was gone. When be learned it was Elena, grief fell upon him like a cloud of night. But he dissembled until all had departed, when, calling his friend the captain of the galley, he told him the whole story of his love, and swore he would once again kiss his wife, even if he had to break open her monument. The captain tried in vain to dissuade him, but seeing it was of no avail the two men took a boat and rowed together to San Pietro. It was long after midnight when they landed and made their way to the place of sepulture. Pushing back the massive lid, Gerardo flung himself upon the body of his Elena. At length the good captain, who feared the Signors of the Night would visit the spot and put them under arrest, compelled the hapless lover to return to the boat, but he could no whit persuade him to leave Elena's body, and this Gerardo bore in his arms and reverently laid it in the boat, himself clasping it in his arms with many a sad kiss and bitter sigh. The captain, much alarmed, scarce dared to make for the galley, but rowed up and down and out to the open lagoon, the dying husband yet laid by his dead wife. However, the sea-breezes freshened with their salt tang, and far over the waters the horizon lightened towards dawn. It was then that the spark of life awoke in Elena's face; she moved gently, and Gerardo, starting from his grief, began to chafe her hands and feet. They carried her secretly to the house of the captain's mother; here she was put in a warm bed, possets and food were administered; presently she opened her eyes, and lived. A gracious and lordly feast was made by Messer Paolo for his son's return, and when all the company were assembled Gerardo entered, leading Elena in bridal array, and kneeling at his father's feet he said: "Lo, my father, I bring you my wedded wife whom I have this day

[p. 45]

saved from death." Great were the rejoicings, and Messer Pietro was summoned from his house of mourning to a home of gladness. So when the whole truth had been told him and he welcomed back not only his dead daughter but her husband also with a joyful heart and with thanksgiving, he blessed the young couple, and on the morrow morn Holy Church with solemn rite hallowed the bond of matrimony whose, joys had already been sweetly consummated.

The parallels between the two adventures are very striking. Our main interest in the sad story of de Serres and his love, which assuredly might have ended far otherwise, lies in the fact that the unfortunate Gabrielle du Bourg was actually buried as dead in her coffin, and only restored to life after several days had passed. Occasionally epitaphs may be seen both abroad and in England, which record some premature burial. Such a one was placed over the tomb of a Mrs. Blunden in the cemetery of Basingstoke, Hampshire, and this tells how the unfortunate lady was prematurely interred, but the original inscription is to a large extent obliterated.[71] Unfortunately overwhelming evidence proves that such terrible accidents are far from rare, for Mr. William Tebb, in his authoritative work Premature Burial[76] had collected of recent years from medical sources alone two hundred and nineteen narrow escapes from being buried alive; one hundred and forty-nine premature interments that actually took place; ten cases of bodies being dissected before life was extinct; three cases in which this shocking error was very nearly made; and two cases where the work of embalmment had already begun when consciousness returned.

There is no greater mistake than to suppose that most cases of premature burial, and of escape from premature burial, happened long ago, and that even then the majority of these took place under exceptional conditions, and for the most part in small towns or remoter villages on the continent. Amazing as it may appear in these days of enlightenment, the number of instances of narrowest escapes from premature burial, and also of this terrible fate itself, has not decreased of recent years, but it has, on the contrary, increased. In a letter on page 1,104 of the Lancet, 14th June, 1884, the witness describes in detail the appearance presented by two bodies which he saw in the crypt of the cathedral of Bordeaux, when

[p. 46]

part of the cemetery there had been dug up and many graves disinterred. In La Presse Medicale, Paris, 17th August, 1904, there is an article, "The Danger of Apparent Death," by Doctor Icard of Marseilles, whose study La Mort reelle et la Mort apparente when published in 1897 attracted great attention. The writer, an eminent figure in the medical world, describes in detail some twelve cases of the revival of persons who had been certified as dead by their doctors, the body in one instance recovering consciousness when several physicians were present and the funeral ceremonies had actually commenced. It should be remarked that Dr. M. K. Boussakis, Professor of Physiology at the Faculty of Medicine of Athens, was one of the eye-witnesses upon that occasion, and a similar case is mentioned on the authority of Dr. Zacutus Lusitanus, who was also present. It should be remembered that Greece is the country where belief in the vampire still most strongly survives.

A terrible case of actual interment whilst still alive is described in a letter published in the Sunday Times, 6th September, 1896. Some years ago the Paris Figaro, in an article of some length considered the terrible possibilities of being buried alive, and within fifteen days the editor received over four hundred letters from different parts of France, and all these were from persons who had either themselves been buried alive, or been on the point of being so interred, or who had escaped a premature grave through some fortunate accident.

In September, 1895, a boy named Ernest Wicks was found lying on the grass in Regent's Park, apparently dead, and after being laid out in the S. Marylebone mortuary was brought back to life by the keeper, Mr. Ellis. When the doctor arrived the lad was breathing freely though still insensible, and a little later he was removed to the Middlesex Hospital. Here the surgeon pronounced him to be "recovering from a fit." At an inquest held at Wigan, 21st December, 1902, Mr. Brighouse, one of the County Coroners for Lancashire, remarked with great emphasis upon the extraordinary circumstances, for he informed the jury that the child upon whom they sat had "died" four times, and the mother had obtained no less than three medical certificates of death, any one of which would have been sufficient for the subject to have been buried. In 1905, a Mrs. Holden, aged twenty-eight, living at Hapton, near Accrington, "died," and the doctor did not hesitate

[p. 47]

to give a certificate of death, when all the arrangements for the funeral were made. Fortunately, the undertaker noticed a slight twitch of the eyelids, and eventually the woman's life was saved, and she lived well and strong under perfectly normal conditions. On 7th January, 1907, the Midland Daily Telegraph reported the case of a child who "to all intents and purposes died" whilst an operation was being performed upon it. However, the patient who had been certified dead more than half-an-hour before recovered. On 14th September, 1908, the papers published the details of an extraordinary trance of a Mrs. Rees, Nora Street, Cardiff, who appeared to have had a very narrow escape from premature burial. To go back some forty years, there may be found fully reported in the British Medical Journal, 31st October, 1885, the famous case of a child at Stamford Hill who fell into convulsions and passing into a trance was supposed to have died, recovering consciousness only after five days. Hufeland, dealing with these instances of trance, remarks that "Six or seven days are often required to restore such cases. Dr. Charles Londe[76] says that fits of this kind "last for days and days together," and that "it seems not improbable that people may have been buried in this state in mistake for death." A case of exceptional interest is described as occurring in 1883 by the Professor of Medicine in the University of Glasgow, Dr. W. T. Gairdner.[77] The person whom he was treating remained in a trance which lasted twenty-three consecutive weeks, and so remarkable a circumstance attracted very considerable attention at the time, giving rise to a lengthy controversy.

It should be more widely known that the ordinary simulacra of death are utterly deceptive and Dr. John Oswald remarks in his profound work Suspended Animal Life,[78] "in consequence of an ignorant confidence placed in them [the signs of death] persons who might have been restored to life . . . have been consigned to the grave." In September, 1903, Dr. Forbes Winslow emphasized the fact that "all the appearances of death may be so strikingly displayed in a person in a cataleptic condition that it is quite possible for burial to take place while life is not extinct," and he added "I do not consider that the ordinary tests employed to ascertain that life is extinct are sufficient; I maintain that the only satisfactory proof of death is decomposition."

[p. 48]

Even from this very hasty review, and examples might be multiplied, indeed are multiplying in every direction almost daily, terrible truth though it may be, it is obvious that premature burial is by no means an uncommon thing, whilst recovery from catalepsy or deep trances, sometimes lasting very many days, is even more frequent, and such cases have been recorded in all ages, times without number. It is, I think, exceedingly probable that extraordinary accidents of this kind, which would have been gossiped and trattled throughout large districts, and, passing from old to young, whispered round many a winter's fireside, were bound soon to have assumed the proportions of a legend which must, consciously or unconsciously, have continually gathered fresh accretions of horror and wonder in its train. It is possible, I say, that hence may have been evolved some few details which notably helped to swell the vampire tradition. I do not for a moment wish to imply that these circumstances, which we have just considered at some length, however striking and ghastly, were in any way the foundation of the belief in vampires. I would rather emphasize that the tradition goes far deeper and contains far more dark and scathful reality than this. I would not even suggest that premature burial and resuscitation from apparent death added anything essentially material to the vampire legend, but I do conceive it probable that these macabre happenings, ill-understood and unexplained, did serve to fix the vampire tradition more firmly in the minds of those who had been actual witnesses of, or who by reliable report knew of similar occurrences, and were fearful and amazed.

There are to be read examples of persons who, after death, have given evident signs of life by their movements. One such case is related by Tertullian,[79] who tell s us that he himself witnessed it, "de meo didici." A young woman, who had once been in slavery, a Christian, after she had been married but a few months died suddenly in the very flower of her age and happiness. The body was carried to the church, and before it was entrusted to the earth, a service was held. When the priest, who was saying the requiem "praesente cadauere," raised his hands in prayer, to the astonishment of all the young girl who was lying upon her bier with her hands laid in repose at her side, also lifted her hands and gently clasped them as if she too were taking part

[p. 49]

in the supplication of the Mass, and then toward the end she refolded them in the original position.

Tertullian also says that on one occasion, when a body was about to be interred, a body which was already in the grave seemed to draw to one side as though to make place for the newcomer.

In the life of S. John the Almsgiver, Patriarch of Alexandria, written by Leontius Archbishop of Cyprus, we are told that when the saint who was aged sixty-four, died at Amanthus in Cyprus, 11th November, 616,[80] his body was brought with great veneration and holy observance to the principal church of that place. Here was opened a magnificent tomb in which two bishops had already been buried. It is said that out of respect the two bodies drew one to the right and one to the left, and that this took place in the sight of all who were present, "non unus, neque decem, neque centum uiderunt, sed omnis turba, quae conuenit ad eius sepulturam." It must be remembered that Archbishop Leontius had his facts from those who had actually been present at the interment, and the same account may be found in the Menology of Symeon Metaphrastes.

Evagrius Ponticus relates[81] the legend of a certain Anchorite named Thomas, who died in the Nosokomeion at Daphne, a suburb of Antioch, where was the shrine of the martyr S. Babylas.[82] The hermit, a stranger, was buried in that part of the cemetery used for beggars and the very poor. In the morning, however, the body was found to be lying by a rich Mausoleum in the most honourable part of the grounds. It was again interred, but when on the following day it was found by the sexton that the same thing had happened a second time, the people hastened to the patriarch Ephraim[83] and told him of the marvel. Thereupon the body was borne with great rejoicing with an attendance of wax flambeaux and fuming frankincense into the town, and honourably enshrined with worship meet in one of the churches, and for many years the city annually observed the festival of the Translation of S. Thomas Eremita. The same story is related by the ascetical writer, the monk Johannes Moschus, in his very beautiful treatise Deimun Pratum spirituale, "The Spiritual Meadow,"[84] but Moschus says that the remains of the hermit rested in his grave whilst in veneration for his

[p. 50]

sanctity the bodies of those who were buried near had been found to have issued forth and modestly lay at some considerable distance.

In Hagiology there are many instances of the dead hearing, speaking and moving. Thus in the life of S. Donatus, the patron of Arezzo, who succeeded the first bishop S. Satyrus towards the end of the third century, we are told that Eustasius, receiver-general of the revenues of Tuscany, being called away on a journey, for safety sake left the public funds in the hands of his wife, Euphrosina. This lady, being afraid that her house might be robbed, secretly buried the chests in the earth. She told the matter to no one, but unhappily before her husband's return she expired suddenly in the night, and it was quite unknown where she had concealed her charge. Eustasius was beside himself with grief and fear, for it seemed inevitable that be should be accused of peculation by his enemies, and condemned to death. In his despair he betook himself to S. Donatus, and the holy man asked him that they might visit the grave of Euphrosina. A great company gathered in the church, when the saint, going up to the grave, said in a loud voice that might be heard by all: "Euphrosina, tell us we pray thee, where thou didst put the public funds." The woman answered from her tomb, and certainly her accents were heard revealing the hiding-place. S. Donatus went with the receiver-general to the spot indicated, and there they found the money carefully secured.[85]

It is related in the life of the famous Anchorite, S. Macarius of Egypt, who died A.D. 394,[86] that one of the monks of his laura was accused of murder, and as those who lay the charge spoke with great gravity and sureness, S. Macarius bade them all resort to the grave of the deceased, where, striking his staff upon the ground, he adjured the dead man in these words: "The Lord by me bids you tell us whether this man, who is now accused of your murder, in truth committed the crime, or was in any way consenting thereto?" Immediately a hollow voice issuing from the tomb declared: "Of a truth he is wholly innocent, and had no hand at all in my death." "Who then," inquired the saint, "is the guilty one?" The dead man replied: "It is not for me, my father, to bear witness; let it suffice to know that he who has been accused is innocent. Leave the guilty in the hands of God. Who

[p. 51]

can say whether the all-holy and compassionate God may not have mercy upon him and bring him to repentance."[87]

In the history of S. Rheticus, as related by C. Vettius Aquilinus Juvencus, the Latin poet of the fourth century, who was so popular in the Middle Ages,[88] we are told that when the saint had expired," his body was carried in solemn procession to the grave of his deceased wife, and suddenly, to the amazement of all present, the dead mail arose on his bier and said: "Dost thou remember well, my dear wife, that which thou didst ask me upon thy death-bed? Lo, here am I come to fulfil the promise made so long syne. Receive me then whom you have sweetly expected all this while." At these words it appeared as if the deceased wife, who had been dead for many years, revived again, and breaking the linen bands which enswathed her, she stretched forth her hands to her husband. (Deprensa est laeuam protendens femina palmam, inuitans socium gestu uiuentis amoris.) The corpse was lowered into the tomb, and there the twain lie in peace, awaiting the resurrection of the just.[90]

Not unsimilar is the legend of S. Injurieux, whose dead body moved out of its own grave to repose in that of his wife Scholastica. Injurieux was a noble senator of Clermont in Auvergne, who married in virgin wedlock a lady of rank, Scholastica. S. Gregory of Tours, in his Historia Francorum,[91] tells us that Scholastica died first, and Injurieux, standing by the coffin in which her body was laid, as she was about to be carried forth to burial said in the presence of all: "I thank Thee, O, God, for having bestowed upon me this maiden treasure, which I return into Thy hands unspotted, even as I received it." The dead wife smiled at these words, and her voice was heard to reply: "Why dost thou speak, O my husband, of these things which concern no one but ourselves?" Hardly had the lady been buried in a magnificent tomb, when the husband died also, and for some reason was temporarily interred in a separate grave, at a distance from the monument of his wife. On the next morning it was found that Injurieux had left the place where he had been laid, and his dead body reposed by the side of that of Scholastica. No man dared disturb the two corpses, and to the present day the senator and his wife are popularly called "The Two Lovers."[92]

In his Vies des Saints[93] Monsignor Guerin relates the following

[p. 52]

story S. Patrick[94]: "St. Patrice commande a la mort de rendre ses victimes afin que leur propre bouche proclame devant le peuple la verite des doctrines qu'il leur annonce; ou bien il s'assure si son ordre de planter une croix sur la tombe des chretiens, et non des infideles, a ete fidelement execute, en interrogeant les morts eux-memes, et en apprenant de leur bouche s'ils ont merite ce consolant hommage."

In this connexion--the tradition of a dead person who speaks--the story of S. Melor may be not impertinent. About the year 400 A.D., there was a certain Duke of Cornwall named Melian, whose brother, Rivold, conspired against him and put him to death. The duke had left a young son, Melor, whom the usurper feared to slay, but sent to be brought up under the strictest rule in one of the Cornish monasteries, where the novice continually edified the community by his holy life, having (so it is said) the gift of miracles. After a few years Rivold, being afraid lest the boy should depose him, bribed a soldier named Cerialtan to murder Melor secretly. This was accordingly done. The assassin cut off the head of Melor, and carried it to the duke. He had murdered the boy in the depths of the forest, whither he had enticed him, and as he was making his way through the thicket lie chanced to look back his eyes being attracted by a great light. And lo, all around the body stood a company of angels, robed in white albs, and holding in their hands tapers which glistered as golden stars. When he had gone a little further, the wretched murderer was overcome by parching thirst, and almost fainting on his path he cried out in an agony: "Wretched man that I am! I die for a draught of cool water." Then the head of the murdered boy spoke to him, saving: "Cerialtan, strike upon the grass of this lawn with thy stick, and a fountain shall spring forth for thy need." The man did so, and having quenched his thirst at the miraculous well, be went swiftly on his way. Now when the head was brought into the presence of Duke Rivold this evil tyrant smote it with his hand, but he instantly sickened, and three days afterwards he died. The head was then taken back to the body and was honourably buried with it. And not many years afterwards the relics were translated with great worship to the town of Amesbury, which is in Wiltshire.[95]

In his Histoire hagiologique du diocese de Valence,[96] l'abbe

[p. 53]

Nadal tells us that when S. Paulus[97] succeeded S. Torquatus as bishop of St-Paul-Trois-Chateaux, shortly after his consecration a certain Jew, a common usurer, came up to him in the streets of the city and loudly demanded a large sum of money which, as he said, had been lent to Bishop Torquatus, the predecessor of Paulus. In order to ascertain whether this claim was equitable or not, S. Paulus, robed in full pontificals, visited the tomb of S. Torquatus in the cathedral, and touching the place of sepulture with his crozier requested Torquatus to declare whether the money had been repaid or no. The voice of the dead bishop immediately answered from the grave: "Verily hath the Jew received his money, returned unto him at the appointed time, with interest, ay, and double interest." The chronicles tell us that this undoubtedly took place, for many were present and bear witness that they both saw and heard these things.

Eugippius, who succeeded the martyr S. Vigilius in the see of Trent, has left us a life of S. Severinus, who was one of the last Christian bishops among the Roman inhabitants of the district of the Danube, immediately before the withdrawal to Italy. On one occasion S. Severinus having watched all night by the bier of a priest named Silvanus bade him at dawn once more speak to his brethren who longed to hear his voice, for he had been an eloquent and fervent preacher. Silvanus opened his eyes and the saint asked him if he wished to return to life. But the dead man answered: "My father, detain me no longer here I pray thee, nor delay for me that hour of everlasting rest which those who sleep in Jesus most sweetly enjoy." And then, closing his eyes, in this world he woke no more.

This happening must at once bring to mind the famous miracle of S. Philip Neri, who was the spiritual director of the Massimo family. In 1583 the son and heir of Prince Fabrizio Massimo died of a fever at the age of fourteen, and when, amid the lamentations of the bereaved parents and the weeping relatives, S. Philip entered the room, he laid his hand upon the brow of the youth, and called him by name. Upon this the dead boy returned to life, opened his eyes, and sat up in the bed. "Art thou unwilling to die?" asked the saint. "No," sighed the youth gently. "Art thou resigned to yield they soul?" "I am." "Then go," said S. Philip. "Va,

[p. 54]

che sii benedetto, e prega Dio per noi!" The boy sank back on his pillow with a heavenly smile, and a second time expired. On 16th March every year a festa is held in the family chapel within Palazzo Massimo in memory of this miracle.[98]

It is related in the life of S. Theodosius the Cenobite, written by Bishop Theodore of Petra[99] (536), that a large sepulchre having been made near the monastery, S. Theodosius said: "The tomb is now finished indeed, but who will be the first among us to occupy it?" Whereupon a certain monk named Basil, falling upon his knees, prayed that this honour might be his, and within the space of about a month, without pain or disease, he passed away as a man who takes his rest in sleep. Yet for full forty days afterwards S. Theodosius, at matins and at the other hours, saw the dead monk still occupying his place in the choir. It was he alone who saw the monk, but others, especially one Aetius, heard his voice. Whereupon Theodosius prayed that all might see the apparition of Basil, and assuredly the eyes of all were opened so that they beheld him in his wonted place in their midst. When Aetius would joyfully have embraced the figure it vanished from his touch, saying the words: "Hold, Aetius. God be with You, my father and my brethren. But me shall ye see and hear no more."

It was the custom of S. Gregory, Bishop of Langres,[100] to rise from his bed at night, when everyone else was fast in repose, and going quietly into the church to spend several hours at his devotions. This was long unobserved, but it so happened that one night one of the brethren lay awake, and he observed the bishop on his way down the corridors. From curiosity he stole softly after him, and presently saw him enter the Baptistry, the door of which seemed to open to him of its own accord. For some time there was silence; and then the voice of the bishop was heard chanting aloud the antiphon, when immediately afterwards many voices took up the psalm, and the singing, decani and cantori, continued for the space of three hours. "I, for my part;" says S. Gregory of Tours, "think that the Saints, whose Relics were there venerated and preserved, revealed themselves to the blessed man, and hymned praises to God in company with him."

Examples of later date when under exceptional conditions dead persons have returned to life, are not infrequently to

[p. 55]

be found. S. Stanislaus the Martyr, Bishop of Cracow,[101] had bought for church purposes very ample estates from one Peter. This man died some few years afterwards, whereupon his heirs claimed the property. They had discovered that the bishop had taken no acquittance, and accordingly as he had no document to show in proof of his right, the courts ordered him to return the land to the plaintiffs. But the saint went to the tomb of the deceased, and having touched the body he bade it to arise and follow him. Peter instantly obeyed the summons, and this pale and ghastly figure accompanied the bishop into the King's Court. Whilst all trembled and were sore amazed Stanislaus said to the Judge: "Behold, my lord, here is Peter himself who sold me the estate. He has come even from the grave to vindicate the truth." In hollow accents the phantom or corpse confirmed the statement of the bishop in every particular, and fearful as they sat the judges reversed their former decision. When this bad been done the figure seemed to fade away from their sight. The body had returned to the tomb, and here it lay decently composed, having yielded up his breath a second time.[102]

A not dissimilar incident is said to have occurred in the life of S. Antony of Padua, whose father was accused at Lisbon of having been privy to the death of a certain nobleman, even if he had not actually slain him, as was implied. The saint, having requested that the body of the murdered man should be brought into court, solemnly adjured him saying: "Is it true that my father in any way consented unto or contrived thy assassination?" With a deep groan the body made reply: "In no wise is the accusation true. It is altogether false and framed of malice." Whereupon the magistrates convinced by this positive declaration set free the prisoner.[103]

On 9th March, 1463, S. Catherine of Bologna, a Poor Clare, died at the convent there, and so great was her reputation for sanctity that rather more than a fortnight after her burial, her body was disinterred and placed in the church upon an open bier for the veneration of all. The vast, crowds who came were struck with the fact that her face retained a fresh and glowing colour, far more lively, indeed, than during her life. Amongst others who visited the remains was a little maid of eleven years old by name Leonora Poggi. As out of reverence she stood at some distance, it was noticed that the

[p. 56]

body not only opened wide its eyes, but made a sign with the hand, saying: "Leonora, come hither." The girl advanced trembling, but S. Catherine added: "Do not be afraid; you will be a professed nun of this community, and all in the convent will love you. Nay, more, you shall be the guardian of this, my body." Eight years afterwards Leonora refused the hand of a wealthy suitor of high rank, and took the veil in the house of Corpus Domini. Here she lived for no less than five and fifty years, reaching an extreme old age with the love and respect of the whole sisterhood. She was indeed for half a century the guardian of the most holy relic of the body of S. Catherine.[104]

Immediately after the death of that great ecstatica, S. Maria Maddelena de Pazzi, who expired 25th May, 1607, the body of the holy Carmelite was honourably laid upon a catafalque in the nuns' church of S. Maria degli Angeli, whilst all Florence thronged thither to kiss her feet and touch were it but her raiment with medals and rosaries. Among the first who visited the convent and who were favoured by being allowed to venerate the body before the multitude won admittance was a certain pious Jesuit, Father Seripandi, and in his company chanced to be a young man of noble family whom he was striving to turn from the most dissolute courses. Whilst the good priest knelt in prayer the youth scanned intently the countenance of the Saint, but she frowning slightly gently turned away her face as if offended at his gaze. He stood abashed and dumbfounded, when Father Seripandi said: "Verily, my son, this Saint would not suffer your eyes to behold her, inasmuch as your life is so licentious and lewd." "It is true," cried the young man, "but God helping me I will amend my ways in every particular." He did so, and before long was distinguished by no ordinary piety and observance of religion.[105]

Similar cases of the resuscitation of the dead, corpses that arose from their graves, the movement of dead bodies, might indeed be almost indefinitely multiplied. And it is not at all impossible that as these extraordinary circumstances happened in the lives of the Saints, so they would be imitated and parodied by the demon, for, as Tertullian has said, "diabolus simia Dei."

It has been well remarked that man has always held the

[p. 57]

dead in respect and in fear. The Christian Faith, moreover, has its seal upon the sanctity of death. Even from the very infancy of humanity the human intelligence, inspired by some shadow of the divine truth, has refused to believe that those whom death has taken are ought but absent for a while, parted but not for ever. It has been argued, and not without sound sense, that primitive man desired to keep the dead, to preserve the mortal shell, and what are the tomb, the cave of prehistoric man, the dolmen of the Gaulish chieftain, the pyramid of Pharaoh, but the final dwelling-place, the last home? As for the actual corpse, this still had some being, it yet existed in the primitive idea. There can be nothing more horrible, no crime more repellent, than the profanation of the dead.

Dr. Epaulard says: "Les vraies et graves profanations, de veritables crimes, reconnaissent pour mobile les grandes forces impulsives qui font agir l'etre humain. Je nommerai cela vampirisme, quitte a expliquer par la suite l'origine de cette appellation.

"L'instinct sexuel, le plus perturbateur de tons les instincts, doit etre cite en premiere ligne comme, l'un des facteurs les plus importants du vampirisme.

"La faim, besoin fondamental de tout etre vivant, aboutit dans quelques circonstances a des actes du vampirisme. On pourait citer maint naufrage et maint siege celebre on la necessite fit loi. Le cannibalisme du bien des tribes savages n'a pas d'autre origine que la faim a satisfaire.

Chez l'homme se developpe enormement l'instinct de propriete. D'ou le travail, d'ou, chez certains, le vol. Nous venons de voir que la coutume de tons les temps fut d'orner les morts de ce qu'ils aimaient a posseder. Les voleurs n'ont pas hesite a depouiller les cadavres. . . . Les parlements et les tribunaux eurent assez souvent a chatier des voleurs sacrileges."[106]

Vampirism, then, in its extended and more modern sense, may be understood to mean any profanation of a dead body, and it must accordingly be briefly considered under this aspect. "On doit, entendre par vampirisme toute profanation de cadavres, quel que soit son mode et quelle que soit son origine."

In France there have been many cases of sacriligious theft from the dead. In 1664 Jean Thomas was broken on the wheel for having disinterred the body of a woman and stolen

[p. 58]

the jewels in which she was buried; and well-nigh a century before, in 1572, a grave-digger Jean Regnault was condemned to the galleys for having stolen jewels and even winding-sheets from corpses. In 1823, Pierre Renaud was sentenced at Riom for having opened a tomb with intent to steal. Not many years after, the police captured the band "de la rue Mercadier," seven ruffians who made it their business to violate graves and the vaults of rich families and who thus had stolen gems and gold to the value of no less than 300,000 francs. It is well-known that the notorious Ravachol forced open the tomb of Madame de Rochetaillee in the expectation that she had been buried in her jewels, but found nothing of this kind, as the lady was merely wrapped in her shroud of lawn.

On 12th July, 1663, the Parliament of Paris heavily sentenced the son of the sexton of the cemetery attached to Saint-Sulpice. This young wretch was in the habit of exhuming corpses and selling them to the doctors. In the seventeenth century the Faculty of Paris was allowed one dead body a year, and the famous physician, Mauriccau lay under grave suspicion of having illegally procured bodies to dissect for his anatomical studies.

In England the Resurrection Men added a new terror to death. Even the bodies of the wealthy, when every precaution had been taken, were hardly safe against the burgling riflers of vault and tomb, whilst to the poor it was a monstrous horror as they lay on their sick beds to know that their corpses were ever in danger of being exhumed by ghouls, carted to the dissection theatre, sold to 'prentice doctors to hack and carve. In his novel, The Mysteries of London, G. W. M. Reynolds gives a terrible, but perhaps not too highly coloured, picture of these loathsome thefts. Irregular practitioners and rival investigators in the anatomy schools were always ready to buy without asking too many questions. Body-snatching became a regular trade of wide activities. One of the wretches who plied the business most successfully even added a word to the English language. William Burke, of the firm Burke and Hare, who was hanged 28th January, 1829,[107] began his career in November, 1827. This seems to have commenced almost accidentally. Hare was the keeper of a low lodging-house in an Edinburgh slum, and here died an old soldier owing a considerable amount for his rent. With

[p. 59]

the help of Burke, another of his guests, they carried the corpse to Dr. Robert Knox, of 10 Surgeon's Square, who promptly paid L7 10s. for it. The Scotch had the utmost horror of Resurrection Men, and bodies were not always easy to procure, although the vile Knox boasted that he could always get the goods he required. It is said that relations would take it in turns to stand guard over newly-dug graves, and the precaution was not unnecessary. Another lodger at Hare's fell ill, and it was decided that he should be disposed of in the same way. But he lingered, and so Burke smothered him with a pillow, Hare holding the victim's legs. Dr. Knox paid L10 for the remains. Since money is so quickly earned they do not hesitate to supply the wares. A friendless beggar woman; her grandson, a dumb-mute; a sick Englishman; a prostitute named Mary Paterson, and many more were enticed to the lodgings and murdered. Quite callously Burke confessed his method. He used to lie on the body while Hare held nose and mouth; "in a very few minutes the victims would make no resistance, but would convulse and make a rumbling noise in their bellies for some time. After they had ceased crying and making resistance we let them die by themselves." Dr. Knox contracted that he would pay L10 in winter and L8 in summer for every corpse produced. At last the whole foul business comes to light.

Up the close and down the stair,
 But and ben with Burke and Hare,
 Burke's the butcher, Hare's the thief,
 Knox the boy that buys the beef.

So sang the street urchins. Burke confessed, and was hanged. Hare turned King's evidence, but it would seem that was hardly needed, for the suspicion which connected these ruffians with the numerous disappearances was overwhelming from the first, and soon became certainty. It was a grave scandal that both the villains and their paramours, together with Dr. Knox, who, in spite of his denials, undoubtedly was well aware of the whole circumstances, were not all five sent to the gallows. It is true that the mob endeavoured to catch them and would have torn them to pieces. To the mob they should have been duly thrown. That they escaped by some legal quibble or flaw speaks ill indeed for the age.

[p. 60]

That species of Vampirism known as Necrophagy or Necrophagism, which is Cannibalism, is very often connected with the religious rites of savage people and also finds a place in the sabbat of the witches. Sir Spenser St. John, in his description of Haiti, gives curious details of the Voodoo cult when cannibalism mingles with the crudest debauchery. Among the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia the cannibals (Hamatsas) are the most powerful of all the Secret Societies. They tear corpses asunder and devour them, bite pieces out of living people, and formerly they ate slaves who had been killed for their banquet.[103] The Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands practise a very similar religion of necrophagy.[109] Among the ancient Mexicans the body of the youth whom they sacrificed in the character of the god Tetzcatlipoca was chopped up into small pieces and distributed amongst the priests and nobles as a sacred food.[110] In Australia the Bibinga tribe cut up the bodies of the dead and eat them in order to secure the reincarnation of the deceased. The same ceremony was observed by the Arunta.[111] Casper, Vierteljahrschrift, viii (p. 163) mentions the case of an idiot who killed and ate a baby in order to impart to himself the vitality of the child. It should be remarked that necrophagy enters very largely into the passions of the werewolf, and there are innumerable examples of lycanthropists who have devoured human flesh, and slain men to feed upon their bodies. Boguet recounts that in the year 1538 four persons charged with sorcery, Jacques Bocquet, Claude Jamprost, Clauda Jamguillaume and Thievenne Paget, confessed that they had transformed themselves into wolves and in this shape had killed and eaten several children. Francoise Secretain, Pierre Gandillon and George Gandillon also confessed that they had assumed the form of wolves and caught several children whom they had stripped naked and then devoured. The children's clothes were found without rent or tear in the fields, "tellement qu'il sembloit bien que ce fust vne personne, qui les leur eut deuestus."[112]

A remarkable instance of necrophagy which caused a great noise in the eighteenth century is said to have given de Sade a model for Minski, "l'ermite des Appenins," in Juliette, iii (p. 313). The horrible abode of this Muscovite giant is amply described. The tables and chairs are made of human bones,

[p. 61]

and the rooms are hung with skeletons. This monster was suggested by Blaise Ferrage, or Seye, who in 1779 and 1780 lived in the Pyrenees, and captured men and women whom he devoured.[113]

One of the most terrible and extraordinary cases of cannibalism was that of Sawney Beane, the son of peasants in East Lothian, who was born in a village at no great distance from Edinburgh towards the close of the fourteenth century. He and a girl in the same district wandered away in company, and took up their abode in a cave on the coast of Galloway. It is said this cavern extended nearly a mile under the sea. Here they lived by robbing travellers, and carrying off their bodies to their lair they cooked and ate them. Eight sons and six daughters they gendered, and the whole tribe used to set forth upon marauding expeditions, sometimes attacking as many as five and six persons travelling in company. Grandchildren were born to this savage, and it is said that for more than five and twenty years these cannibals killed men on the highway and dragging the prey to their lair fed upon human flesh. Suspicion was often aroused, and even panic ensued, but so skilfully had nature concealed the opening to the cave that it was long ere the gang could be traced and captured. The whole family were put to death amid the most horrible torments in the year 1435 at Edinburgh. It is probable that in the first place Beane and his female companion were driven to necrophagy by starvation, and the horrid craving for human flesh once tasted became a mad passion. The children born into such conditions would be cannibalistic as a matter of course.

Sawney Beane was made the subject of a romance--Sawney Beane, the Man-eater of Midlothian, by Thomas Preskett Prest, who, between the years 1840 and 1860 was the most famous and most popular purveyor of the "shocker" which circulated in immense numbers. Prest's greatest success was Sweeney Todd, a character who was once supposed actually to have lived, but who is almost certainly fiction. It will be remembered that Todd's victims disappeared through a revolving trap-door into the cellars of his house. Their bodies, when stripped and rifled, were handed over to be used by Mrs. Lovett, who resided next door and kept a pie-shop which was greatly frequented. Once it so happened that the supply ran short

[p. 62]

for a while, as Todd for some reason was unable to dispatch his customers, and mutton was actually used in the pies. Complaints were made that the quality of the pies had deteriorated, the meat had lost its usual succulence and flavour.

In a manuscript, which has never been printed,[114] written about 1625 by the brother of Henry Percy, ninth Earl of Northumberland,[115] George Percy, who was twice Deputy-Governor of Virginia, and entitled A Trewe Relatyon of the Proceedings and Occurrences of Momente which have Happened in Virginia from . . . 1609 untill 1612, details are given of the terrible conditions under which the early colonists had to live. Starvation sometimes faced them, and not only were corpses then dug out of graves and eaten, but "one of our colony murdered his wife . . . and salted her for his food, the same not being discovered before he had eaten part thereof, for which cruel and inhuman fact I adjudged him to be executed, the acknowledgment of the deed being enforced from him by torture, having hung by the thumbs, with weights at his feet a quarter of an hour before he would confess the same."

As is often recorded in history during long and terrible sieges, starvation has driven the wretched citizens of a beleagured town to devour human flesh. An example of this may be found in the Bible, which tells us of the horrors when Jerusalem was encompassed by Benadad of Syria during the reign of King Joram (B.C. 892), Kings IV (A. V. Kings II), vi, 24-30: "Congregauit Benadad rex Syriae, uniuersum exercitum suum, et ascendit, et obsidebat Samariam. Factaque est fames magna in Samaria: et tamdiu obsessa est, donec uenundaretur caput asini octoginta argenteis, et quarta pars cabi stercoris columbarum quinque argenteis. Cumque rex Israel transiret per murum, mulier quaedam exclamauit ad eum; dicens: Salua me domine mi rex. Qui ait: Non te saluat Dominus: unde te possum saluare? de area, uel de torculari? Dixitque ad eam rex: Quid tibi uis? Quae respondit: Mulier ista dixit mihi: Da filium tuum, ut comedamus eum hodie, et filium meum comedemus eras. Coximus ergo filium meum, et comedimus. Dixique ei die altera: Da filium tuum ut comedamus eum. Quae abscondit filium suum. Quod cum audisset rex, scidit uestimenta sua, et transibat per murum. Uiditque omnis populus cilicium, quo uestitus erat ad carnem intrinsecus."

[p. 63]

(Benadad king of Syria gathered together all his army, and went up, and besieged Samaria. And there was a great famine in Samaria; and so long did the siege continue, till the head of an ass was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a cabe of pigeon's dung, for five pieces of silver. And as the king of Israel was passing by the wall, a certain woman cried out to him, saying: Save me, my lord O king. And he said: If the Lord doth not save thee how can I save thee? Out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress? And the king said to her: What aileth thee? And she answered: This woman said to me: give thy son, that we may eat him to-day, and we will eat my son to-morrow. So we boiled my son, and ate him. And I said to her on the next day: Give thy son that we may eat him. And she hath hid her son. When the king heard this, he rent his garments, and passed by upon the wall. And all the people saw the hair-cloth which he wore within next to his flesh.)

W. A. F. Browne, sometime Commissioner for Lunacy in Scotland, has a very valuable paper Necrophilism, which was read at the Quarterly Meeting of the Medico-Psychological Association, Glasgow, 21st May, 1874. He points out that in Ireland, under the savagery of Queen Elizabeth, when the rich pastures were burned into a wilderness, "the miserable poor . . . out of every corner of the woods and glens came creeping forth upon thin hands, for their legs could not bear them, they looked like anatomes of death; they spoke like ghosts crying out of their graves; they did eat the dead carrions; happy when they could find them; yea, they did eat one another soon after; insomuch as the very carcasses they spared not to scrape out of their very graves." During the Siege of Jerusalem by Titus, during the Plague in Italy in 450, cannibalism was rife. During a famine in France in the eleventh century "human flesh was openly exposed for sale in the market-place of Tournus." A man had built a hut in the forest of Macon and here he murdered all whom he could entice within his doors, afterwards roasting the bodies and feeding on them. Browne says that there came under his notice in the West Indies two females who frequented graveyards at night. It does not appear that they exhumed bodies but they used to sleep among the tombs, and these dark wanderings, as might be expected, thoroughly scared

[p. 64]

the native population. He also adds: "The abodes of the dead have been visited, violated; the exhumed corpses, or parts of them, have been kissed, caressed, or appropriated, and carried to the homes of the ravisher, although belonging to total strangers." He also says: "I was much struck, when frequenting the Parisian asylums as a student, with the numbers of anaemic, dejected females who obtruded upon me the piteous confession that they had eaten human flesh, devoured corpses, that they were vampires, etc." Dr. Legrande du Saulle says that in many members of a Scottish family there appeared connate necrophagism.[116] Prochaska mentions a woman of Milan also tempted children to her house and ate them at her leisure. A girl of fourteen, belonging to Puy de Drome, is described as having displayed on all occasions an extraordinary avidity for human blood and as sucking greedily recently inflicted wounds. The brigand Gaetano Mammone, who long terrorized South Italy, was accustomed as a regular habit to drain with his lips the blood of his unhappy captives.[117] In another instance a man who dwelt apart in a cave in the South of France seized a girl of twelve years old, strangled her, violated the corpse, and then inflicting deep gashes upon it with a knife drank the blood and devoured the flesh. He kept the remains in his retreat but subsequently interred them. He was judged insane.[118]

In the sixteenth century there dwelt in Hungary a terrible ogress, the Countess Elisabeth Ba'thory, who for her necro-sadistic abominations was known as "la comtesse hongroise sanguinaire." The comte de Charolais (1700-1760), "de lugubre memoire," loved nothing better than to mingle murder with his debauches, and many of the darkest scenes in Juliette but reproduce the orgies he shared with his elder brother, the Duke of Burgundy.

Dr. Lacassagne, in his study Vacher l'eventreur et les crime's sadiques, Lyon-Paris, 1899, has collected many cases of necro-sadism. Joseph Vacher, who was born at Beaufort (Isere), 16th November, 1869, was guilty of a series of crimes which lasted from May, 1894, to August, 1897. He was tramping during those years up and down France, immediately after his release as cured from an asylum where be had been confined for attempting to rape a young servant who refused his hand in marriage. Vacher's first crime seems to have been committed

[p. 65]

19th May, 1894, when in a lonely place he killed a working girl of twenty-one. He strangled her and then violated the body. on 20th November of the same year he throttled a farmer's daughter aged sixteen at Vidauban (Var), violated the body and mutilated it with his knife. In the same way on 1st September, 1895 at Benonces (Ain), he killed a lad of sixteen, Victor Portalier, and slashed open the stomach. Three weeks later he strangled a shepherd boy of fourteen, Pierre Massot-Pellet, and mutilated the body. In all some eleven murders with violation were traced to Vacher, the last being that of a shepherd lad aged thirteen, Pierre Laurent, at Courzieu (Rhone), 18th June, 1897. The body was indescribably hacked and bitten. Probably this maniac was guilty of many more assaults which did not come to light.

In England the sensation caused by the mysterious mutilations by Jack the Ripper will not easily be forgotten. The first body was found at Whitechapel, 1st December, 1887; the second, which had thirty-nine wounds, 7th August, 1888. On 31st of the same month a woman's corpse was found horribly mutilated; 8th September a fourth body bearing the same marks, a fifth on 30th September; a sixth on 30th November. On the 1st June, 1889, human remains were dredged from the Thames; 17th July a body still warm was discovered in a Whitechapel slum; on 10th September of the same year the last body.

The classic instance of "vampirism," Serjeant Bertrand, will be fully dealt with in a later chapter.

Andreas Bickel killed women after having both raped and mutilated them in an indescribable manner. Dr. Epaulard quoting from Feuerbach, Ahtenmoesigen Darstellung merkwurdzer Verbrechen says that Bichel declared: "Je puis dire qu'en ouvrant la poitrine, j'etais tellement, excite que je tressaillais et que j'aurais voulu trancher un morceau de chair pour le manger." In the year 1825 a vine-dresser named Leger, a stalwart fellow of four and twenty, left his home to find work. He wandered about the woods for a week or more, and was then seized with a terrible craving to eat human flesh. "Il rencontre une petite fille de douze ans, la viole, lui dechire les organes genitaux, lui arrache le coeur, le mange et boit son sang, puis enterre le cadavre. Arrete peu apres, il fait tranquillement l'aveu de son crime, est condamne et execute."[119]

[p. 66]

A famous case was that of Vincenzo Verzeni,[120] a necrophagist and necrosadist, who was born at Bottanuco of an ailing and impoverished stock and arrested in 1872 for the following crimes: an attempt to strangle his cousin Marianna, a girl of twelve years old; a similar attempt to throttle Signora Aruffi; aged twenty-seven; a similar attempt upon Signora Gala; the murder of Giovanna Motta (les visceres et les parties genitales sont arrachees du corps, les cuisses lacerees, un mollet detache. Le cadavre est nu); the murder and mutilation of Signora Frizoni, aged twenty-eight; an attempt to strangle his cousin Maria Previtali, aged nineteen. Whilst he was committing these crimes "pour prolonger le plaisir, il mutila ses victimes, leur suca le sang, et detacha meme des lambeaux pour les manger."

Those vampirish atrocities which are urged by sexual mania are generally classified as necrophilia and necrosadism--"La necrophilie est la profanation qui tend a toute union sexuelle avec le cadavre: coit normal ou sodomique, masturbation, etc. Le necrosadisme est la mutilation des cadavres destinee a provoquer un erethisme genital. Le necrosadisme differe du sadisme en ce qu'il ne recherche pas la douleur, mais la simple destruction d'un corps humain. Les necrosadisme aboutit parfois a des actes de cannibalisme qui peuvent prendre le nom de necrophagie . . . . Necrophiles et necrosadiques sont la plupart du temps des degeneres impulsifs on debiles mentaux, ce que prouvent lour vie anterieure et leurs tares hereditaires. Ce sont en outre bien souvent des hommes auxquels un contact professionel avec le cadavre a fait perdre toute repugnance (fossoyeurs, pretres, etudiants en medicine)." The word necrophilie seems, to have been first suggested by a Belgian alienist of the nineteenth century, Dr. Guislain; necrosadisme is used by Dr. Epaulard.

Necrophilia was not unknown in ancient Egypt, and was carefully provided against as Herodotus tells us, Book II, lxxxix: Tasde gynaikas tun epifaneun andrun, epean teleytesusi, oy paraytika didousi tarixeuein oydi o?`sai a?'n e?`usi eyeidees karta kai logoy pleunos gynaikes?: all'epean tritaiai e?` tetartraiai genuntai, oy?'tu paradidousi toisi tarixeuoysi. touto de poieusi oy?'tu toude ei?'neken, i?'na me sfi oi tarixeytai misguntai teisi gynaixi?: lamftheinai gar tina fasi misgomenon nekrui prosfatui gynaikos kateipein de ton omotexnon. Wives of noblemen and women

[p. 67]

of great beauty and quality are not given over at once to the embalmers; but only after they have been dead three or four days; and this is done in order that the embalmers may not have carnal connexion with the corpse. For it is said that one was discovered in the act of having intercourse with a fair woman newly dead, and was denounced by his fellow-workman."

It was said that after Periander, tyrant of Corinth, had slain his wife he entered her bed as a husband. In the Praxis Rerum Criminalium of Damhouder, at the end of the sixteenth century we have: "Casu incidit in memoriam execrandus ille libidinis ardor, quo quidam feminam cognoscunt mortuam."

A very large number of cases of necrophilia has been collected by various authorities, of which it will suffice to give but a few examples. "En 1787, pres de Dijon, a Citeaux, un mien aieul, qui etait medecin de cette celebre abbaye, sortait un jour du convent pour aller voir, dans une cabane situee au milieu des bois, la femme d'un bucheron que la veille il avait trouvee mourante. Le mari, occupe a de rudes travaux, loin de sa cabane, se trouvait force d'abandonner sa femme qui n'avait ni enfants, ni parents ni voisins autour d'elle. En ouvrant la porte du logis, mon grand-pere fut frappe d'un spectacle monstrueux. Un moine queteur accomplissait l'acte du coit sur le corps de la femme qui n'etait plus qu'un cadavre."[121]

In 1849 the following case was reported: "Il venait de mourir une jeune personne de seize ans qui appartenait a une des premieres familles de la ville. Une partie de la nuit s'etait ecoulee lorsqu'on entendit dans la chambre de la morte le bruit d'un meuble qui tombait. La mere, dont l'appartement etait voisin, s'empressa d'accourir. En entrant, elle appercut un homme qui s'echappait en chemise du lit de sa fille. Son effroi lui fit pousser de grands cris qui reunirent autour d'elle toutes les personnes de la maison. On saisit l'inconnu qui ne repondait que confusement aux questions qu'on lui posait. La premiere pensee fut que c'etait un voleur, mais son habillement, certains signes dirigerent les recherches d'un autre cote et l'on reconnut bientot que la jeune fille avait ete defloree et polluee plusiers fois. L'instruction apprit que la garde avait ete gagnee a prix d'argent: et bientot d'autres revelations prouverent que ce malheureux, qui avait

[p. 68]

recu une education distinguee, jouissait d'une tres grande aisance et etait lui-meme d'une bonne famille n'en etait pas a son coup d'essai. Les debats montrerent qu'il s'etait glisse un assez grand nombre de fois dans le lit de jeunes filles mortes et s'y etait livre a sa detestable passion."[122]

In 1857 the case of Alexandre Simeon, a necrophilist who was always feeble-minded--he was born in 1829, a foundling--and who eventually became wholly insane, attracted considerable attention. His habits were of the most revolting nature, and "Simeon, trompant la surveillance, s'introduisait dans la salle de morts quand il savait que le corps d'une femme venait d'y etre depose. La, il se livrait aux plus indignes profanations. Il se vanta publiquement de ces faits."[123]

Dr. Morel, Gazette hebdomadaire de medicine et de chirurgie, 13th March, 1857, relates: "Un acte semblable a, celui de Simeon a ete commis a la suite d'un pari monstrueux, par un eleve d'une ecole secondaire de medicine, en presence de ses camarades. Il est bon d'ajouter que cot individu, quelques annees plus tard, est mort aliene."

Dr. Moreau, of Tours, in his famous study Aberrations du sens genesique, 1880, quoting from the Evenement, 26th April, 1875, relates an extraordinary case at Paris in which the culprit, L-----, was a married man and the father of six children. The wife of a neighbour having died, L-----undertook to watch in the death chamber, whilst the family were arranging the details of the interment. "Alors une idee incomprehensible, hors nature, passa par l'esprit du veilleur de la morte. il souffla, les bougies allumees pres du lit, et ce cadavre, glace, raidi, deja, au decomposition fut le proie de ce vampire sans nom." The profanation was almost immediately discovered owing to the disorder of the bed and other signs. L----- fled, but at the instance of Dr. Pousson and the husband, who was half mad with grief and rage, he was arrested and inquiry made. A quel delire a-t-il obei?

In Les causes criminelles et mondaines, 1886, Albert Bataille gives an account of Henri Blot, "un assez joli garcon de vingt-six ans, a figure un peu bleme. Ses cheveux sont ramenes sur le front, a la chien. Il porte a la levre superieure une fine moustache soigneusement effilee. Ses yeux, profondement noirs, enfonces dans l'orbite, sont clignotants. Il a quelque chose de felin dans l'ensemble de la physionomie; quelque

[p. 69]

chosi aussi de l'oiseau de nuit." "Le 25 mars, 1886, dans la soiree, entre 11 heures et minuit Blot escalade une petite porte donnant dans le cimetiere Saint-Ouen, se dirige vers la fosse commune, enleve la cloison qui retient la terre sur la derniere biere de la rangee. Une croix piquee au-dessus de la fosse lui apprend quo le cercueil est le corps d'une jeune femme de dix-huit ans, Fernando Mery, dite Carmanio, figurante de theatre, enterree la veille.

"Il deplace la biere, l'ouvre, retire le corps de la jeune fille qu'il emporte a l'extremite de la tranchee, sur le remblai. La, il pose, par precaution, ses genoux sur des feuilles de papier blanc enlevees a des bouquets et pratique le colt sur le cadavre. Ensuite, il s'endort probablement, et ne se reveille que pour sortir du cimitiere assez a temps pour ne pas etre vu, mais trop tard pour replacer le corps." A curious point is that when the profanation was discovered a man named Duhamel wrote a letter avowing that he had committed the violation. He was confined at Mazas, since he gave such full details that he was truly believed to have been guilty. Whilst under the observation of two doctors he proved to be of unsound mind. On 12th June Blot again violated a tomb, he fell asleep, was discovered and arrested. On 27th August, when brought to trial, and the judge expressed his horror of such acts, he replied callously: "Que voulez-vous, chacun a ses passions. Moi le cadavre, c'est la mienne!" Dr. Motet was unable to certify him insane, and he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

Dr. Tiberius of Athens communicated the following case. A young medical student, some seven years ago, made his way at night into the mortuary chapel where lay the body of a beautiful actress who had just died, and for whom he had long nourished an insensate passion. Covering the cold clay with passionate kisses he violated the corpse of his inamorata. It should be remarked that the body had been dressed in the richest costume and covered with jewels, as it was to be carried thus in the funeral procession.

Necrophilia is said to be common in certain Eastern countries. "En Turquie, dans les endroits ou les cimetieres sont mal gardes, on a souvent vu, parait-il d'abjects individus, la lie du peuple, contenter sur des cadavres qu'ils exhumaient leurs desirs sexuels."

[p. 70]

The case of Victor Ardisson, who was called by the papers "le vampire du Muy," and who was arrested in 1901 upon multiplied charges of the exhumation and violation of dead bodies, was studied in great detail by Dr. Epaulard, who summed up his verdict in these words: "Ardisson est un debile mental inconscient des actes qu'il accomplit. Il a viole des cadavres parce que, fossoyeur, il lui etait facile de se procurer des apparences de femme sous forme de cadavres auxquels il pretait une sorte d'existence."[124]

The motive of the Leopold and Loeb case which occurred at Chicago, and which was so widely discussed throughout America in 1924 was necrosadism. Having killed the unfortunate boy the two wretched degenerates violated the body. It may not untruly be said that this morbid crime sprang in the first place from a false philosophy. With ample money at their command, their minds rotted with the backwash of Freud, these two young supermen conceived themselves above all laws. They had exhausted every erotic emotion, and sought something new to thrill their jaded nerves. These vilenesses and abominations would be ended by a return to the true philosophy, the lore of the Schoolmen and Doctors.

There are not unknown--in fact there are not uncommon--amazing cases of what may be called "mental necrophilia," a morbid manifestation for which suitable provision is made in the more expensive and select houses of accomodation.

In his study La Corruption Fin-de-Siecle Leo Taxil remarks: "Une passion sadiste des plus effrayantes est celle des detraques auxquels on a donne le nom. de 'vampire.' Ces insenses veulent violer des cadavres. Cette depravation du sens genesique, dit le docteur Paul Moreau de Tours constitue le degre le plus extreme des deviations de l'appetit venerien." He also speaks of "chambres funebres" as being not uncommon in certain brothels. "D'ordinaire, on dispose, dans une piece de l'etablissement des tentures noires, un lit mortuaire, en un mot, tout un appareil lugubre. Mais l'un des principaux lupanars de Paris a, en permanence, une chambre speciale, destinee aux clients qui desirent tater du vampirisme.

"Les murs de la chambre sout tendus de satin noir, parsemi de larmes d'argent. Au milieu est un catafalque, tres riche. Une femme, paraissant inerte, est la, couchee dans un cercueil decouvert, la tete reposant sur un coussin de velours. Tout

[p. 71]

autour, de longs cierges, plantes dans de grandes chandeliers d'argent. Aux quatre coins de la piece, des urnes funeraires et des cassolettes, brulant, avec des parfums, un melange d'alcool et de sel gris, dont les flammes blafardes, qui eclairent le catafalque, donnent a la chair de la pseudo-morte la couleur cadaverique.

"Le fou luxurieux, qui a paye dix louis pour cette seance, est introduit. Il y a un prie-dieu ou'il s' agenouille. Un harmonium, place dans un cabinet voisin, joue le Dies irae ou le De Profundis. Alors, aux accords de cette musique de funerailles le vampire se rue sur la fille qui simule la defunte et qui a ordre de ne pas faire un mouvement, quoiqu'il advienne."

It might not unreasonably be thought that the catafalque, the bier, the black pall, would arouse solemn thoughts and kill desire, but on the contrary this funeral pomp and the trappings of the dead are considered in certain circles the most elegant titillation, the most potent and approved of genteel aphrodisiacs.

  

NOTES. CHAPTER I.

[1. Porey esthe ap' emou, kateramenoi, eis to pur to aiuyion to etoimasmenon tui diabolui kai tois allelois aytou. Discedite a me maledicti in ignem aeternum, qui paratus est diabolo, et angelis eius.

2. See Sinistrari, De Daemonialitate, xxiv (English translation by the present writer, Demoniality, Fortune Press, 1927, pp. 11-12), for the coitus of witches with the demon. who assumes the corpse of a human being.

3. Aeneid, II, 794. Vergil repeats this line Aeneid, V1, 702.

4. S. Luke, xxiv, 39.

5. p. W. Hofmayr, "Religion der Schilluk," Anthropos (Ephemeris Internationalis Ethnologica et Linguistica), vi (1911), pp. 120-125.

6. Journal of the Anthropological Institute; Rev. J. Roscoe, "Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda," xxxi (1901), p. 130; xxxii (1902), p. 46; and The Baganda, London, 1911.

7. Hermann Rehse, Kiziba, Land und Leute, Stuttgart, 1910.

8. C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, The Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia, London, 1911, pp. 80, seq.

9. Missionar J. Irle, Die Herero, ein Beitrag zur Landes-Volks-und-Missions-kunde, Gutersloh, 1906, p. 75.

10. South African Folk-lore Journal, Cape Town, 1879, I, "Some Customs of the Ovaherero," pp. 64, sqq.

11. Hermann Tonjes, Ovamboland, Land, Leute, Mission, Berlin, 1911, pp. 193-197.

12. Another Grey Ghost Book.

13. Rev. Henry Callaway, The Religious System of the Amazulu, Natal, Springvale, etc., 1868-1870, Part II, pp. 144-146.

14. The Niel Dinka, a tribe in the valley of the White Nile, regard this supreme being, Dengdit, as their ancestor, and accordingly sacrifice is offered to him at shrines builded in his honour.

[p. 72]

15. The Baganda, London, 1911, p. 271.

16. A. Kropf, "Die religiosen Anschauungen der Kaffern," Verhandlungen der Berliner Gescllschaft fur Anthropologic, Ethnologic und Urgeschichte, 1888, p. 46.

17. R. H. Nassau, Fetichism in West Africa, London, 1904.

18. Pere Guis, "Les Nepis on Sorciers," Missions Catholiques, xxxvi (1904.), p. 370. And M. J. Erdweg, "Die Bewohner der Insul Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch-Neu-Guinea," Mittheilungen du Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien, xxxii (1902), p. 287.

19. Professor J. J. M. de Groot, Religious System of China, Leyden, 1892.

20. J. Welhausen, Reste arabischen Heidentumes, Berlin, 1887.

21. Servius on the Aeneid, V, 77-79:

Hie duo rite mero libans carchesia Baccho
 Fundit humi, duo lacte nouo, duo sanguine sacro,
 Purpureosque iacit flares . . .

Also the same commentator on Aeneid, III, 66-68:

Inferimus tepido spumantia cymbia lacte
 Sanguinis et sacri pateras, animamque sepulcro
 Condimus et magna supremum uoce ciemus.

22. Cf. Genesis, ix, 4, and 1 Kings (A.V. 1 Samuel), xiv, 33.

23. Both Douai and A.V.

24. X, 487, seq., and XI. This passage is dealt with in detail in chapter III.

25 Jeremias, xvi, 6.

26 Jeremias, xli, 5.

27. Pierre de Labriolle, Histoire de la Litterature Latina Chretienne, Paris, 1920, Tableau No. 7 (43).

28. Migne Patrologia Latina, vol. xxiv, column 782.

29. Cf. the grief of Anna at the death of Queen Dido, Aeneid, IV, 673

unguibus ora soror foedans et pectora pugnis.

So Homer describes Briseis at the funeral of Patroelus , Iliad, xxiii, 284-5.

"Amf' aytui xymene, li g' ekukye, xersi d' amysse
 Stetheat', ed' apaley deirey, idi kala prosupa.

30. De Getarum (Gothorum) Origine et Rebus Gestis, ed. Theodor Mommsen, Berlin, 1882, p. 124.

31 A famous example is that of Innocent VIII, ob. 25th July, 1492. Infessura says that whilst the Pope lay dying a Hebrew physician proposed to reinvigorate him by the transfusion of young blood. Three boys in the prime of health and strength were selected for the experiment. Each lad received one ducat. "Et paulo post mortui sunt; ludaeus quidem aufugit, et Papa non sanatus est."

32. F. Bonney, "On some Customs of the Aborigines of the River Darling, New South Wales." Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xiii (1884), p. 132.

33. There can be no doubt that the clipping of the hair was also considered to supply the deceased with energy and vigour. The hair was regarded by many nations as the seat of strength. Cf. the history of Sam on and Delilah.

34. Etymologie Worterbuch des Slav. spr.

35. Aeschylus, Septom contra Thebas, 820-821:

              basileoin d' omosporoin
 pepuken aima gai' ym' allelun fonui.

36. Aristophanes, Uespae, 1502: all' outos ge katapothesetai

37. I. 477.

38. Yet in early geographical notions the Ocean, ukeanos, is itself potamos, but Homer regards Oceanus as a great River which compasses the earth's disc, returning into itself, apsorroos, and to Ocean are given the epithets of a river. This idea was retained in later myths where Ocean often has the attributes of a river-god. Cf. Euripides, Orestes, 1377-79

    pontoy, Ukeanos on
 tayrokranos agkalais elis--
 suy kyklou xthona.

39. Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, p. 217.

40. Geographica, ad. Casaubon, p. 19.

[p. 73]

41. Apud Schweighauser, Epicteteae Philosophiae Monumenta, vol. III, and also in Coraes, Parerga Ellen. biblioth, vol. VIII.

42. In MSS. sometimesmormolukion.

43. 77, E. Platonis Opera, "recognouit Ioannes Buenet," vol. I.

44. Bernard Schmidt, Das Volksleben der Neugriechen, p. 159.

45. Lawson, Modern Greek Folklore, p. 378.

46. Ralston, Songs of the Russian People, p. 409.

47. It may be remarked that the story of the murdered Pelops who was served up at a banquet to the gods by his father Tantalus when Demeter, absorbed with grief for Persephone, ate the shoulder has its locale at Elis. As soon as the lad was restored to life the goddess supplied the missing shoulder with one of ivory, and this relic was shown at Elis even in historical times as Pliny tells us: "Et Elide solebat ostendi Pelopis costa, quam eburncam adfirmabant." Historia Naturalis, xxviii, 4, vij, ad. Gabriel Brotier, Barbou, 1779, vol. V, p. 112. The reading "costa" is just possible in this passage, as meaning the shoulder and side. But Brotier has a gloss: "Pelopsis costa. Corrupte. In MSS. Reg. Pelopis ostiliam: in editione principe, Pelopis hasta. Emendauere recentiores, Pelopis costa. Legendum potius, Pelopis scapula. Est enim tests Uergilio, Georg. III, 7.

Humero Pelops insignis eburno."

One might suggest that in the editio princeps hasta was pro pene; translatum a re militari, quad frequentissimum. Ausonius, Cento nuptialis, 117, has: "Intorquet summis adnixus uiribus hastam." Joannes Secundus in his Epithalamium writes:

Huc, illuc agilis feratur hasta,
 Quam crebro furibunda uerset ictu
 Non Martis soror, ast amica Martis
 Semper laeta nauo cruore Cypris.

48. This belief seems mainly confined to Elis. Curtius Wachsmutt, Das alte Griechenland im Neuen, p. 117.

49. Vampyrus is not recorded by Du Cange; nor by Forcellini, ed. Furlanetto and De-Vit, 1871; nor in the Petit Supplement by Schmidt, 1906.

50. 1586-1669.

51. Relation de ce qui s'est passe de plus remarquable a Sant-Erini Isle do l'Archipel, depuis l'etablissement des Peres de la compagnie de Jesus en icelle, Paris, MDCLVII.

52 Imprimatur, Hic Liber cui Titulus, The Present State, &c. Car. Trumball Rev. in Christo Pat. ac Dom. Gul. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Dom. Ex Aed. Lamb, 8 Feb. 1678-9. Term Catalogues; Easter (May), 1629.

53. Rohr also wrote with John Henry Rumpel, De Spiritibus in fodinis apparentibus, seu de Uirunculis metallicis, the first edition of which seems to be 4to, 1668, but I have only seen those of Leipzig, 1672 and re-issue 1677.

54. 8vo, 1739. He also wrote Philosophicae et Christianae Cogitationes de Uampiris, 1739.

55. I have used the "Nouvelle edition revue, corrigee and augmentee par l'Auteur." 2 vols., Paris, Chez Debure l'aine, 1751.

56. Vol. II, p. 2.

57. Life by Gradius in Mai, Bibliotheca Noua Patrum, vi, Rome, 1853; see also Legrand's Bibliographie hellenique du xvii siecle, Paris, 1893.

58. "Scuto circumdabit te ueritas eius: non timebis a timore nocturno. A sagitta uolante in die, a negotio perambulante in tenebris: ab incursu, et daemonio meridiano." Psalm xc.

59. Of uncertain authorship.

60. In Greece at the present day a funeral usually concludes with a distribution of baked-meats and wine to the company assembled by the grave, and a share both of food and of drink is set aside for the dead. Frequently this is more than a light collation, and the cemetery is the scene of many a substantial meal. These repasts are generally known as makaria, whilst the supper to relatives and friends which follows at home in the evening is the paregoria "comforting," or to xeston, "the warming."

61. The discourse on the temptation of Our Lord. Homilia xvi in Evangelium.

[p. 74]

62. Such apparitions are frequent. See Faber's The Foot of the Cross: or, The Sorrows of Mary, Fourth Edition, 1872, p. 209, Le Vicomte Hippolyte de Gouvello's Apparitions d'une ame du Purgatoire en Bretagne, Tequi, Paris, 4me edition, 1919, may be read with profit. Dante says, Purgatorio, xi, 34-36:

Ben si deo loro aitar lavar le note,
 che portar quinci, si che mondi e lievi
 possano uscire alle stellate rote.

63. W. W. Story, Roba di Roma, 8vo, London, 1863, remarks: "Saturday is considered lucky by the Italians, as the day of the Virgin." On a Saturday the sun always shines, if it be but for a moment. Orlando Pescetti, Proverbi Italiani, 12mo, Venice, 1603, has: "Ne donna senza amore no Sabbato senza sole." The Spaniards have a similar proverb, and the French rhyme runs:

En hiver comme en ete
 jamais Samedi n'est passe
 que le soleil n'y ait mis son nez.

Aveyron, Proverbes et Dictous Agricoles de France, 12mo, Paris, 1872, quotes several saws to this effect. In the Cote d'Or, Meuse, they say

Le soleil fait par excellence
 le Samedi la reverence.

Another proverb runs:

Il n'y pas de Samedi sans soleil
 ni de viele sans conseil.

64. The Glories of Mary. "Practices of Devotion. . . . Fourth Devotion, of Fasting."

65. De Passione Domini, c. ii.

66. Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, pp. 221-222.

67. F. S. Krauss, "Vampyre im sudslavischen Volksglauben," Globus, lxi (1892), p. 326, says that in some parts of Bosnia, when peasant women pay a visit of condolence to a house, in which a death has occurred they put a little sprig of hawthorn behind their headcloth, and on leaving the house throw away the flower into the street. The vampire will be so busy gathering together the leaves and picking up the buds that he will not be able to follow them to their own homes.

68. 1526-1585. See G. Dejob, Marc-Antoine Muset, Paris, 1881.

69. Historia Naturalis, VII, liii, 52.

70. 31st October, 1885, p. 841.

71. p. 80.

72. Horace Welby, The Mysteries of Life and Death.

73. In Monsignor's Benson's A Winnowing, 1910, Jack Weston dies, and returns to life. But his death would have dissolved the contract of matrimony, a point not appreciated by the author.

74. Cooper's The Uncertainty of the Signs of Death.

75. Second Edition by Walter R. Hadwen, M.D., London, 1905.

76. La Morte Apparente, p. 16.

77. Lancet, 22nd December, 1883, pp. 1078-80.

78. p. 65.

79. De Anima, v.

80. As this is the feast of S. Martin some Martyrologics  transfer the commemoration of S. John Eleemosinarius to 23rd January, others to 3rd February, and a few assign 13th July. Among the Greeks 11th November is the feast of S. Mennas, so S. John is transferred to the following day.

81. Born circa 345; died 399. One of the most important ascetical writers of the fourth century. His works will be found in Migne, Patrologia Graeca, xl. It must be noted, however, that S. Jerome (Epistola 133 ad Ctesiphontem, n. 3) charges him with Originistic errors and deems him the precursor of Pelagius.

82. S. Babylas, Bishop of Antioch, with other Christians, suffered during the Decian persecution, 250 A.D. His burial-place was very celebrated. Caesar Gallus built a church dedicated in the Martyr's honour at Daphne to put an end to the abomination and demonism of the famous Temple and oracle there. [p. 75] The bones of the Saint being transferred to the new fane Apollo's oracle ceased. When Julian the Apostate consulted his pagan god no answer was received. The Holy Relics of S. Babylas in after years were carried to Cremona. His feast is kept on 24th January; by the Greeks 4th September.

83. Ephraim of Antioch succeeded Euphrasius as Patriarch, 527. He distinguished himself as one of the defenders of the Faith of Chalcedon (451) against the Monophysites. Most of his writings are lost. He died in 545.

84 First edited by Frouton du Duc in Auctarium biblioth. patrum, II, 1057-1159, Paris, 1624. Cotelier issued a superior text in Ecclesiae Graecae Monumenta, II., Paris, 1681; and this has been reprinted by Migne, Patres Graeci, lxxxvii, III, 2851-3112, who in the Patres Latini, lxxiv, 121-240, also reprints the Latin version of Blessed Ambrogio Traversari, first published at Venice, 1475; at Vicenza 1479.

85. Edward Kinesman, Lives of the Saints, 1623, p. 591.

86. There are two Saints of this name. Both are commemorated together by the Greeks on 19th January. The Roman Martyrology commemorates S. Macarius of Alexandria on 2nd January; and S. Macarius the Egyptian on 15th January.

87. Mgr. Guerin, Les Petits Bollandistes, vol. I, 2nd January.

88. Editions by Marold in the Bibliotheca Trubneriana, Leipzig, 1886; and by Humer Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticonon latinorum, Vienna, 1891.

89. 15 May, 334.

90. This work may be spurious. Migne, Patres Latini, XIX, p. 381. (Appendix ad opera Iuuenci.)

91. Arndt and Krusch, Scriptores Renum Merouingiuanum in Monumenta Germ. Hist. (1884-5), I, pt. 1, pp. 1-30. Historia Francorum, I, xlii.

92. There is a poem by Guerrier de Dumast, "The Tomb of the Two Lovers of Clermont," 1836.

93. Vol. III, p. 476.

94. 387-493.

95. The English Martyrologies commemorate S. Melor on 3rd January, though he was killed on 1st October, under which date he is mentioned by Usuardus, a monk of St. Germain-des-Pres, who died in 876. The best edition of Usuardus is that of Solerius, Antwerp, 1714-1717. The feast of S. Melor is 3rd October, possibly because S. Remi is 1st October. Although I have given the old English legend it is probable that S. Melor belonged to Brittany, not Cornwall. "L'eveque de Cornouaille" (in Brittany) is referred to as "tuteur devoue de Saint Melar." The shrine of S. Melor is at Lanmeur, some ten miles from Morlaix. He is buried in the crypt of this church, and here is venerated his statue. There can be no doubt that important Relics of the Saint were given to Amesbury, and in Les Vies des Saints de la Bretagne we read: "Plusiers reliques de Saint Melor passerent a differentis Eglises qui les demanderent; Orleans, Meaux (chez les chanoines reguliers de Notre Dame de Chayes), Ambresbury en Angleterre (dans un Monastere de religieuses), etc." There is an old fresco of S. Melor on a pillar of Amesbury Church. I am indebted to the Vicar of Amesbury for this item of information. See A Pilgrimage to the Shrine of S. Melor.

96. Valence, 1855.

97. Duchesne puts S. Paulus in the fourth or the sixth century.

98. This miracle forms the subject of a fine canvas by Pomarancio in the Oratorian Chiesa Nuova, S. Maria Vallicella. The room, now converted into a chapel, where the miracle took place is on the second floor of the Palazzo Massimo. Under the date 16th March is the Diario Romano we have the entry: "Nella chiesa entro il palazzo Massimo al Corso Vittorio Emanuele festa di S. Filippo Neri, in memoria del miracolo col quale il santo fece ritornare in vita Paolo Massimo (1583).

99. Petra is a titular metropolitan see of Palaestrina Tertia. In the seventh century it was a flourishing monastic contra, but commercially the city had already decayed.

100. His life was written by S. Gregory of Tours. The date of his death is uncertain. Galesinius says 524, which must be incorrect. Some Gallican [p. 76] Martyrologies have 535, but S. Gregory of Langres was present that year at the Council of Clermont, and in 538 by his deputy, Evantius the priest, he signed the decrees of the third Council of Orleans. However since he did not appear at, nor send a deputy to the fourth Council of Orleans, 541, it is probable that the see was then vacant by his death.

101. He was murdered 8th May, 1079, and canonized in 1253.

102. Flos Sanctorum by Pedro de Ribadeneira, S.J.

103. Lives of the Saints, 1623, by Edward Kinesman.

104. Vita di S. Caterina di Bologna, by Fra Paleotti, O.M. The body of S. Catherine, which is still incorrupt, I have often venerated at the Convent of Poor Clares, Bologna.

105. La Santa di Firenze da una Religiosa del suo Monastero, Firenze, 1906. The incorrupt body of S. Maria Maddalena de Pazzi now lies under the High Attar of the Carmelite Convent, Piazza Savonarola, Florence.

106. Epaulard, Le Vampirisme, pp. 4-5.

107. It is said that an old blind man who used to beg in Regent Street, London, was to be identified with Hare. He at length became a charge on the parish in London, where he was sent since he had been born at Carlingford, Co. Louth, to the workhouse at Kilheel, Co. Down, and here he ended his days, being buried among the other paupers in the "Workhouse Banks." The graves lie east and west, but Hare's grave, owing, it is said, to the doctor's directions, was dug north and south. This is a mark of infamy. It is unlucky to be buried on the north side of the churchyard, called the devil's side, says Robert Hunt in his Popular Romances of the West of England, or the Drolls, Traditions and Superstitions of Old Cornwall, London, 8vo, 1865. It has been noted that graves facing north and south are found at Cowden (Kent) and Bergholt (Suffolk), and are reported to be the tombs of suicides.

108. Fr. Boas, "The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians," Report of the U.S. National Museum for 1895, Washington, 1897; pp. 610 and 611.

109. G. M. Dawson, Report on the Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878; Montreal, 1880; pp. 125B; 128B.

110. Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana, lib. x. c. 14, vol. II, pp. 259 seq.; Madrid, 1723. See also Brasseur de Bourbourg, Histoire des Nations civiliseco du Mexique et de l'Amerique Centrale, Paris, 1857-1859; vol. III, pp. 510-512.

111. Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 473-475.

112. Boguet, Discours des Sorciers, c. xlvii. Lyons, 1603, p. 163.

113. A. Moll, Recherches sur la "libido sexualis," Berlin, 1898, p. 701.

114. From Petworth House, Sussex. In Sotheby's sale, 23 and 24 April, 1928.

115. 1564-1632.

116. "Essai sur l'Anthropophagie," par M. le Dr. Legrande du Saulle. Annales Medico-Psychologiques, 3me Series; t. viii; p. 472, July, 1862.

117. William Hilton Wheeler, Brigandage in South Italy, 1864.

118. Causes Celebres, Paris, t. vii, p. 117.

119. Georget, Examen medical des proces criminels des nommes Leger, etc., 1826.

120. Cesare Lombroso, Verzeni e Agnoletti, Rome, 1873. There is a more recent study by Pasquale Ponta, I pervertimenti sessuali nel uomo e Vincenzo Verzeni strangalatore di donne, 1893.

121. Michea, Union medicale, 17 juillet, 1849.

122. Brierre de Boismont: Gazette medicale, 21 juillet, 1849.

123. Baillanger, "Rapport du Dr. Bedor de Troyes"; Bulletins de l'Academie de medicine, 1857.

124. Vampirisme, pp. 20-37.

115. 6me mille, pp. 236-245. It may be said that Taxil's evidence is suspect. But not upon these subjects. Moreover his statements find ample support in other writers.]

     
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

  

CHAPTER II

  

THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE

IT may now be asked how a human being becomes or is transformed into a vampire, and it will be well here to tabulate the causes which are generally believed to predispose persons to this demoniacal condition. It may be premised that as the tradition is so largely Slavonic and Greek many of these causes which are very commonly assigned and accredited in Eastern Europe will not be found to prevail elsewhere.

The Vampire is one who has led a life of more than ordinary immorality and unbridled wickedness; a man of foul, gross and selfish passions, of evil ambitions, delighting in cruelty and blood. Arthur Machen has very shrewdly pointed out that "Sorcery and sanctity are the only realities. Each is an ecstasy, a withdrawal from the common life." The spiritual world cannot be confined to the supremely good, "but the supremely wicked, necessarily, have their portion in it. The ordinary man can no more be a great sinner than he can be a great saint. Most of us are just indifferent, mixed-up creatures; we muddle through the world without realizing the meaning and the inner sense of things, and, consequently our wickedness and our goodness are alike second-rate unimportant . . . the saint endeavours to recover a gift which he has lost; the sinner tries to obtain something which was never his. In brief, he repeats the Fall . . . it is not the mere liar who is excluded by those words[1]; it is, above all, the "sorcerers" who use the material life, who use the failings incidental to material life as instruments to obtain their infinitely wicked ends. And let me tell you this; our higher senses are so blunted, we are so drenched with materialism, that we should probably fail to recognize real wickedness if we encountered it.)"[2]

Huysmans has said in La Bas: "Comme il est tres difficile d'etre un saint, il reste a devenir un santanique. C'est un

[p. 78]

des deux extremes. On peut avoir l'orgueil de valoir en crimes ce qu'un saint vaut en virtus."

It has been said that a saint is a person who always choses  the better of the two courses open to him at every step. And so the man who is truly wicked is he who deliberately always choses the worse of the two courses. Even when he does things which would be considered right he always does them for some bad reason. To identify oneself in this way with any given course requires intense concentration and an iron strength of will, and it is such persons who become vampires.

The vampire is believed to be one who has devoted himself during his life to the practice of Black Magic, and it is hardly to be supposed that such persons would rest undisturbed, while it is easy to believe that their malevolence had set in action forces which might prove powerful for terror and destruction even when they were in their graves. It was sometimes said, but the belief is rare, that the Vampire was the offspring of a witch and the devil.

Throughout the trials and in the confessions of witches there are many details of the coitus of the devil and the witch, but those examples given by Henri Boguet in his great and authoritative work Discours des Sorciers (Third edition, Lyons, 1590) may stand for many. He devotes Chapter XII to the connexion of the devil and the witch: "L'accouplement du Demon avec la Sorciere et le Sorcier . . . 1. Le Demon cognoit toutes les Sorcieres, & pourquoy. 2. Il se met aussi en femme pour les Sorciers, & pourquoy. 3. Autres raisons pour les quelles le Demon cognoit les Sorciers, & Sorcieres." More than one witch acknowledged that Satan had known her sexually, and in Chapter XIII Boguet decides: "L'accouplement de Satan auce le Sorcier est reel and non imaginaire. . . . Les uns donc s'on mocque###126###t . . . mais les confessions des Sorciers que j'ay eu en main, me font croire qu'il en est quelque chose. Lautant qu'ils ont tout recogneu, qu'ils auoient este couplez auec le Diable, & que la semeuce qu'il iettoit estoit fort froide . . . Iaquema Paget adioustoit, qu'elle auoit empoigne plusiers fois auec la main le me###126###bre du Demon, qui la cognoissoit, & que le membre estoit froid comme glace, lo###126###g d'un bon doigt, & moindre en grosseur que celuy d'vn homme: Tieuenne Paget, & Antoine Tornier adioustoient aussi, qui le membre de leurs Demons

[p. 79]

estoit long, & gros comme l'un de leurs doigts." That eminent scholar and demonologist, Ludovico, Maria Sinistrari, O.S.F., tells us in his De Demonialitate "it is undoubted by Theologians and philosophers that carnal intercourse between mankind and the Demon sometimes gives birth to human beings; and that is how Antichrist is to be born, according to some doctors, for example, Bellarmine, Suarez, and Thomas Malvenda. They further observe that, from a natural cause, the children thus begotten by Incubi are tall, very hardy and bloodily bold, arrogant beyond words, and desperately wicked." S. Augustine, De Ciuitate Dei, XV, 23, says: "Creberrima fama est multique se expertos uel ab eis, qui experto essent, de quorum fide dubitandum non esset, audisse confirmant, Siluanos et Panes, quos uulgo incubos uocant, inprobos saepe extitisse mulieribus et earum adpetisse ac perigisse concubitum; et quodsam daemones, quos Dusios Galli nuncupant, adsidue hanc immunditiam et tentare et efficere, plures talesque adseuerant, ut hoc negare impudentiae uideatur." "And seeing it is so general a report, and so many view it either from their own experience or from others, that are of indubitable honesty and credit, that the sylvans and fawns, commonly called incubi, have often swived women, desiring and acting carnally with them; and that certain devils whom the Gauls called 'Duses' do continually practise this uncleanness and lure others to it, which is affirmed by such persons and with such weight that it were the height of impudence to deny it." Charles Rene Billuart, the celebrated Dominican (1685-1757) in his Tractatus de Angelis tells us: "The same evil spirit may serve as a succubus to a man, and as an incubus to a woman." The great authority of S. Alphonsus Liguori in his Praxis confessariorum, VII, n. iii, lays down: "Some deny that there are evil spirits, incubi and succubi, but writers of weight, eminence and learning, for the most part lay down that such is verily the case." Sinistrari, as we have noted, says that the children born of the devil and a witch are "desperately wicked," and we have just seen that persons of more than ordinarily evil life are said to become Vampires.

With the exception of England,--for witches were invariably hanged among us,--the universal penalty for witchcraft

[p. 80]

was the stake; and cremation, the burning of the dead body, is considered to be one of the few ways, and perhaps the most efficacious manner, in which vampirisin can be stamped out and brought to an end. That witches were hanged in England is a fact which has often been commented upon with some surprise, and persons who travelled in France and Italy were inclined to advise the same punishment should be inflicted at home as in all other countries. It was felt that unless the body were utterly consumed it might well prove that they had not stamped out the noxious thing. In Scotland, in 1649, when Lady Pittadro, who was incarcerated upon a charge of sorcery, died before her trial, her body was buried in the usual way. But considerable excitement followed and there were instant complaints to those in high places since the Scotch General Assembly considered that the body should have been burned and the following entry occurs among the records: "Concerning the matter of the buriall of the Lady Pittadro, who, being under a great scandall of witchcraft, and bein incarcerat in the Tolbuith of this burgh during her trialI before the Justice, died in prison. The Commission of the General Assembly, having considered the report of the Committee appointed for that purpose, Doe give their advyse to the Presbyterie of Dumferling to show their dislike of that fact of the buriall of the Lady Pittadro, in respect of the manner and place, and that the said Presbyterie may labour to make the persons who hes buried her sensible of their offence in so doeing; and some of the persons who buried hir, being personallie present, are desired by the Comission to show themselvis, to the Presbyterie sensible of their miscarriage therein."[3] Again in 1652 some persons who had been resident in France and who probably had followed the famous prosecutions at Louviers expressed their surprise that in England the gallows and not the stake was the penalty for this species of crime. In the Louviers case, a horrid record of diabolism, demoniac masses, lust and blasphemy, on 21 August, 1647, Thomas Boulle, a notorious Satanist, was burnt alive in the market-square at Rouen, and what is very notable the body of Mathurin Picard who had died five years before, and who had been buried near the choir grille in the chapel of the Franciscan nuns which was so fearfully haunted, was disinterred, being found (so it is said)

[p. 81]

intact. In any case it was burned to ashes in the same fire as consumed the wretched Boulle and it seems probable that this corpse was incinerated to put an end to the vampirish attacks upon the cloister. At Maidstone, in 1652, "Anne Ashby, alias Cobler, Anne Martyn, Mary Browne, Anne Wilson, and Mildred Wright of Cranbrooke and Mary Read, of Lenham, being legally convicted, were according to the Laws of this Nation, adjudged to be hanged, at the common place of Execution. Some there were that wished rather they might be burnt to Ashes; alledging that it was a received opinion among many, that the body of a witch being burnt, her bloud is prevented thereby from becomming hereditary to her Progeny in the same evill."[4]

It is even recorded that in one case the witch herself considered that she should be sent to the stake. A rich farmer in Northamptonshire had made an enemy of a woman named Anne Foster. Thirty of his sheep were discovered dead with their "Leggs broke in pieces, and their Bones all shattered in their Skins." Shortly after his house and several of his barns were found ablaze. It was suspected that Anne Foster had brought this about by sorcery. She was tried upon this charge at Northampton in 1674, and "After Sentence of Death was past upon her, she mightly desired to be Burned; but the Court would give no Ear to that, but that she should be hanged at the Common place of Execution."[5]

These two categories are those to which, it is generally believed, cases of vampirism may be assigned, and the remainmg classes are almost entirely peculiar to Czecho-Slovakia, Jugo-Slavia, Greece and Eastern Europe.

The vampire is believed to be one who for some reason is buried with mutilated rites. It will be remarked that this idea has a very distinct connexion with the anxious care taken by the Greek and Roman of classical times that the dead should be consigned to the tomb with full and solemn ceremony. Example might be multiplied upon example and it will suffice to refer to the passage in the Iliad where the soul of Patroclus is represented as urgently demanding the last ceremonial observances at the tomb.

"Sleep'st thou, Achilles, mindless of thy friend,
 Neglecting, not the living, but the dead?
 Hasten my funeral rites, that I may pass [p. 82]
 Through Hades' gloomy gates; ere those be done,
 The spirits and spectres of departed men
 Drive me far from them, nor allow to cross
 Th' abhorred river; but forlorn and sad
 I wander through the wide-spread realms of night.
 And give now thy hand, whereupon to weep;
 For never more, when laid upon the pyre,
 Shall I return from Hades; never more,
 Apart from all our comrades, shall we two,
 As friends, sweet counsel take; for me, stern Death,
 The common lot of man, has op'd his mouth;
 Thou too, Achilles, rival of the Gods,
 Art destin'd here beneath the walls of Troy
 To meet thy doom; yet one thing must I add,
 And make, if thou wilt grant it, one request.
 Let not my bones be laid apart from thine,
 Achilles, but together, as our youth
 Was spent together in thy father's house,
 Since first my Sire Menoetius me a boy
 From Opus brought, a luckless homicide,
 Who of Amphidamas, by evil chance,
 Had slain the son, disputing o'er the dice
 Me noble Peleus in his house receiv'd,
 And kindly nurs'd, and thine attendant nam'd;
 So in one urn be now our bones enclos'd
 The golden vase, thy Goddess-mother's gift."
 Whom answer'd thus Achilles, swift to foot:
 Why art thou here lov'd being? why on me
 These several charges lay? whate'er thou bidd'st
 Will I perform, and all in one short embrace,
 Let us, while yet we may, our grief indulge."
 Thus as he spoke, he spread his longing arms.
 But nought he clasp'd; and with a wailing cry,
 Vanish'd, like smoke, the spirit beneath the earth.[6]

Having slain her husband the atrocious Clytemnestra heaps sin upon sin and outrages not merely all decent feeling and human respect, but in some mysterious way insults the majesty of heaven itself in that, a supreme act of wanton insolence, she "dared to lay her husband in the tomb without mourning and without lamentation or dirge," for an adequate show of outward grief was considered an essential and religious part of any Greek funeral. In bitter accents Electra cries:[7]

        iu daia
 pantolme mater, daiais en ekforais
 aney politan anakt'
 aney de penthematun
 etlas anoimukt?'on andra thapsai.

[p. 83]

As Sophocles has shown us in that great drama which some not without reason consider the supremest excellence of Greek tragedy, the heroism of Antigone carries her to heights of dauntless strength in this cause of divine charity. To scatter a few handfuls of dust upon her brother's body which lies unburied on the Theban plain, she gladly lays down her own life, she flouts the man-made law of a weak and odious tyrant, resisting him to his very face, calmly as in stern duty bound without vaunt or show of audacity, appealing against the petty and precisian tribunals of a day to the eternal judgement-seat of powers more ancient and more awful than the throne of Zeus himself, casting away her plighted troth to Haemon as though it were a trifle, and less than a trifle of no account, going gladly and serenely to her tragic doom. This contempt of human ordinances, this icy despising of human passions, of love itself, give the figure of Antigone something statuesque, something superbly cold in the very loveliness of her nobility, and remind us, although in her utter detachment even she, the purest Greek maiden, is far far below the Spanish mystic, of S. Teresa, who in pages that are chilly as ice, yet glow like fire, descants upon the nullity of human affections and the inflexible demand of the eternal law. So in the grand yet hard enthusiasm of Antigone there is no room for sentiment. The only touches which might seem some concession to human weakness but serve to make the absence of romantic sympathies more notable and more terrible. In a passage of the Kommos she bewails her own virgin knot untied, yet she has no more than some six words to throw away upon her betrothed:

u filtath' Ai'mon, us s?` atimaxei pater

When we consider the steadfastness and inflexible purity of her purpose we shall to some extent realise how tremendous was the ideal that inspired her, and we are able to appreciate what price it seemed fitting to a Greek should be paid for the just and ritual performance of the last duties to the dead.

Pausanias tells us that Lysander's honour was for ever smirched, not because he put to death certain prisoners of war, but because "he did not even throw handfuls of earth upon their dead bodies."[9] It will be remarked that to the ancient Greek even this symbolism of inhumation sufficed, if

[p. 84]

nothing more could be done. Such indeed was the minimum but it was enough, and this little ceremony was by Attic Law enjoined upon all who happened to chance upon a corpse that lay unburied. To us it would seem wholly inadequate, if not nugatory and vain, but to the Greeks--and who knows how much wiser they were in this than are we?--this act had a mystical significance, for it was as Aelian has so happily expressed it "the fulfilment of some mysterious law of piety imposed by nature."[10] It was even believed that animals when they came upon the dead of their kind, would scrape with their paws a little earth over the body. To the modern man burial in the earth, or it may be cremation, is a necessary and decorous manner for the disposal of the dead. Yet in the Greek imagination these rites implied something far more, and they involved a certain provision for the welfare of that which was immaterial but permanent, the spirit or the soul. So long as the body remains the soul might be in some way tied and painfully linked with it, a belief which as we have noted, was held by Tertullian and many other of the early writers. But the dissolution of the body meant that the soul was no longer detained in this world where it had no appointed place, but that it was able to pass without let or hindrance to its own mansion prepared for it and for which it was prepared. Of old, men dutifully assisted the dead in this manner as a pious obligation, and as we have seen in the most famous case of all, that of Antigone, they were prepared to go to any length and to make any sacrifice to fulfil this obligation. It was in later years, especially under the influence of Slavonic tradition that not only love but fear compelled them to perform this duty to the dead, since it was generally thought that those whose bodies were not dissolved might return, reanimated corpses, the vampire eager to satisfy his vengeance upon the living, his lust for sucking hot reeking blood, and therefore the fulfilment of these funeral duties was a protection for themselves as well as a benefit to the departed.

Very closely linked with this idea is the belief that those persons become vampires who die under the ban of the church, that is to say who die excommunicate. Excommunication is the principal and most serious penalty that the Church can inflict, and being so severe a penalty it naturally presupposes some very grave offence. It may be roughly defined

[p. 85]

as a punishment that deprives the guilty of all participation in the common spiritual benefits enjoyed by all the members of the Christian society. There are certainly other corrective measures which entail the loss of certain particular rights; and among these are such censures as suspension for clerics, interdict for clerics and laymen and whole communities, irregularity ex delicto, and others. The excommunicated person does not cease to be a Christian, for his baptism can never be effaced but he is considered as an exile, and even, one may say, as non-existing, for a time at any rate, in the sight of ecclesiastical authority. But such exile comes to an end, and this the Church most ardently desires, so soon as the offender has given adequate satisfaction, yet meantime his status is that of an alien and a stranger.

Since excommunication is the forfeiture of the spiritual privileges of a certain society, it follows that those only can be excommunicated who by any right whatsoever belong to this society. Moreover, strictly speaking, excommunication can only be declared against baptized and living people, a point to be considered in detail later. Moreover, in order to fall within the jurisdiction of the forum externum, which alone can inflict excommunication, the offence incurring this penalty must be public and external. For there is a well-defined separation between those things appertaining to the forum externum, or public ecclesiastical tribunal, and the forum internum, or tribunal of conscience. At the same time, in the Bull "Exsurge Domine," 16th May, 1520, Leo X, rightly condemned the twenty-third proposition of Luther according to which "excommunications are merely external punishments, nor do they deprive a man of the common spiritual prayers of the Church." Pius VI, "Auctorem Fidei," 28th August, 1794, also condemned the forty-sixth proposition of the pseudo-synod of Pistoia, which maintained that the effect of excommunication is exterior only, because of its own nature it excludes only from exterior communion with the Church, as if, said the Pope, excommunication were not essentially also a spiritual penalty binding in heaven and affecting souls. The aforesaid proposition was therefore condemned as "falsa et perniciosa," false and pernicious, already reprobated and condemned in the twenty-third proposition of Luther, and, to say the very least, it incurs the technical mark

[p. 86]

"erronea" (erroneous), since it contradicts a certain (certa) theological conclusion or truth which is clearly and necessarily deducible from two premises, of which one is an article of faith, and the other naturally certain. Most assuredly the Church cannot (nor does she seek or wish to) oppose any obstacle to the interior and personal relation of the soul with its Creator. Nevertheless the rites of the Church are the regular and appointed channel through which divine grace is conveyed, and therefore it follows that exclusion from these rites inevitably entails the privation of this grace, to whose prescribed and availing sources the excommunicated person. no longer has access.

It should be mentioned that both from a moral and juridical standpoint the guilt requisite for the incurring of excommunication implies various conditions of which the three most important are, first the full use of reason; second sufficient, if not absolute, moral liberty; and thirdly a knowledge. of the law and even of the penalty, for it follows that if such knowledge be lacking there cannot be that disregard of the ecclesiastical law known as contumacy, the essence of which consists in deliberately performing an action whilst being very fully aware and conscious not merely that the action is forbidden but also that it is forbidden under a certain definite penalty, the exact nature of which is itself defined and known. Wherefore various causae excusantes, extenuating circumstances, are often present, and these so mitigate the culpability that they prevent the incurring of excommunication. It is hardly necessary to enter into an examination of such circumstances as in practice there may well be, and indeed are, many considerations and exemptions which have to be taken into account, but generally speaking lack of the full use of reason, lack of liberty resulting from fear--a person who is physically constrained or morally terrorized has no freedom of will and is not responsible--or ignorance, even affected ignorance, may anyone of them be obstacles to incurring that measure of peccability which is requisite to deserve an extreme spiritual penalty. Affected ignorance is a lack of knowledge in those who might reasonably and without grave difficulty inform and enlighten themselves, but they are not, bound to do so, and since every penal law is to be strictly interpreted, if such a statute positively and in set terms exacts knowledge on the part of

[p. 87]

the culprit, he is excused even by affected ignorance. Again, excommunication may be "occult," when the offence entailing it is known to no one or to almost no one at all. That is to say when no scandal has been given. This, it should be remarked, is valid in the forum internum only, and although he who has incurred occult communication should be absolved as soon as possible, he is not obliged to abstain from external acts connected with the exercise of jurisdiction, and moreover, since he has the right to judge himself and to be judged by his director according to the exact truth and his apprehension thereof, consequently in the tribunal of conscience he who is reasonably certain of his innocence cannot be compelled to treat himself as excommunicated, albeit he must be reasonably and justly persuaded.

It may now be briefly inquired, who can excommunicate? The general principle is that whoever enjoys jurisdiction in the forum externum can excommunicate, but only his own subjects. Therefore whether excommunications be technically a iure or ab homine they may come from the supreme Pontiff alone or from a general council for the whole Church; from the Bishop for his diocese; from a Prelate nullius for quasi-diocesan territories; and from regular Prelates for their subjects, that is to say for religious orders. Yet further anyone can excommunicate who has jurisdiction in the forum externum by virtue of his office even although this be delegated, for instance, legates, vicars capitular, and vicars-general can exercise this power. But a parish priest cannot inflict this penalty, nor may he even declare that it is incurred which is to say he may not pronounce this in an official manner as a judge. The right to absolve evidently belongs to him who can excommunicate and who has imposed the censure, and obviously it belongs to any person delegated by him to this effect, since the power, being of jurisdiction, may be committed to another. Technically, excommunications are divided into four classes: those particularly reserved to the supreme Pontiff; those simply reserved to the supreme Pontiff; those reserved to the Bishop (to the ordinary); and those nemini reseruatae, that are not reserved. Accordingly, generally speaking, only the Holy Father can absolve from the first two kinds of excommunication, although naturally his power extends to all kinds; Bishops (and ordinaries)

[p. 88]

can rescind excommunications of the third class; whilst the fourth kind, nemini reseruatae, can be revoked by any priest having authority without the need of a particular delegation. Over and above this, there exist in practice certain concessions since bishops enjoy very liberal faculties and indults, which are moreover, most widely communicable whereby they are empowered to absolve in foro interno from all cases except those which are most definitely and nominatim reserved to the Supreme Pontiff. There are also the circumstances technically known as "Urgent Cases," when the power granted is valid for all cases, without exception, legally reserved though they may be to the highest authorities, even to the Pope himself, and even for the absolution of an accomplice (Holy Office, 7th June, 1899). Finally canon law lays down that at the point of death or in danger of death, all reservations cease and all necessary jurisdiction is supplied by the Church. "At the point of death," says the Council of Trent (Session XIV, c. vii), "in danger of death," says the Rituale Romanum, any priest can absolve from all sins and censures, even if he be without the ordinary faculty of confessor or if he himself be excommunicated. He may even do this in the presence of another priest who is duly and canonically authorized, enjoying jurisdiction (Holy Office, 29th July, 1891).

It has been said by a modern historian: "The awful import of Excommunication barely can be realized at the present time. People idly wonder why the excommunicated take their case so seriously--why they do not turn to find amusement, or satisfaction, in another channel,--why they persist in lying prone in the mire where the fulmination struck them. And, indeed, in modem times the formal sentence rarely is promulgated, and only against persons of distinction like the German Dr. Dollinger or the Sabaudo King Vittoremanuele II di Savoja, whose very circumstances provided them with the means to allay the temporal irritation of the blow."[11] The immediate effects of excommunication are summed up in the two famous verses:

Res sacrae, ritus, communio, crypta, potestas,
 praedia, sacra, forum, ciuilia iura uetantur.

It may be well now to glance very briefly at the history of the actual practice of excommunication. Among the Jews

[p. 89]

exclusion from the synagogue was a real excommunication, and it is this to which reference is made in 1 Esdras x, 7 and 8: "and proclamation was made in Juda and Jerusalem to all the children of the captivity, that they should assemble together into Jerusalem. And that whosoever would not come within three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the ancients, all his substance should be taken away, and he should be cast out of the company of them that were returned from captivity." It was this exclusion which was feared by the parents of the man who was born blind, who when they were questioned by the Pharisees would give no definite answer with reference to the healing of their son, "because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had already agreed among themselves, that if any man should confess him to be Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue."[12] Again we are told, "many of the chief men also believed in him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, that they might not be cast out of the synagogue." The Apostles were told: "they will put you out of the synagogues; yea, the hour cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think that he doth a service to God."[14] This penalty exercised by the Jews foreshadowed later censures, for it is said: "in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may stand. And if he will not hear them: tell the Church. And if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the heathen and Publican. Amen I say to you, whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound also in Heaven; and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth shall be loosed also in heaven."[15] According to the Orthodox Church this power was transmitted to the successors of the apostles that is to say the bishops, so that they too had the faculty of binding and loosing. But something very definite was further implied. This faculty had actual physical consequences and the Greeks held that excommunication arrested the decomposition of a body after death. In fact the incorruptibility of the body of any person bound by a curse was made a definite doctrine of the Orthodox Church. The very wording of the text certainly admitted of such an interpretation. amen legu ymin, osa ean desete epi teis geis estai dedemena en tui oyranui. Kai osa ean lusete epi teis geis, estai lelymena en tui oyranui.

The word luu "loose" expresses equally the ideas of dissolution

[p. 90]

and of absolution, while deu "bind" signifies their respective and several opposites. Accordingly forms of absolution had to be provided which might be read over bodies found in such a condition, for it was thought that this might be brought about by well-nigh any curse, although an episcopal anathema was considered the most weighty and the most terrible. Nevertheless it might be that these conditions resulted from the curse of a parent even from an imprecation uttered by a man against himself, or from the ban of a priest, for in the Orthodox Church the power of excommunicating belonged to priests as well as to bishops, but they should not exercise it without episcopal sanction.[16] One such absolution runs thus: "Yea, O Lord our God, let Thy great mercy and marvellous compassion prevail; and, whether this Thy servant lieth under curse of father or mother, or under his own imprecation, or did provoke one of Thy holy ministers and sustained at his hands a bond that hath not been loosed, or did incur the most grievous ban of excommunication by a bishop, and through heedlessness and sloth obtained not pardon, pardon Thou him by the hand of Thy sinful and unworthy servant; resolve Thou his body into that from which it was made; and stablish his soul in the tabernacle of saints."[17] So in the burial service an orison is made that the body may be dissolved into the dust of which it was made, dial?yson eis ta ex u?! synetethe, and in a solemn Requiem, is offered the supplication, "Unbind the curse, be it of priest or of arch-presbyter," Luson kataran, eite iereus eite arxiereus.

Naturally, as is clearly expressed, the curse which the Orthodox Church regarded as most weighty and most effective was the ban of excommunication by a bishop, and therefore the formula of excommunication doomed the offender to remain whole after death, and the body was not freed until absolution had been read over it and the excommunication formally revoked.

However, a considerable difficulty arose. It was discovered that excommunication sometimes failed to produce the expected physical result, and the body crumbled to dust in the ordinary way. Accordingly this had to be reckoned with and explained and Leone Allacci in his De quorundam Graecorum opinationibus[18] cites a nomocanon de excommunicatis which sets out to explain how it is that sometimes excommunication

[p. 91]

can fail of its result. "Concerning persons excommunicate the which sadly incur episcopal excommunication and after death are found with their bodies 'not loosed' (alyta)."

Certain persons have been duly, rightly, and lawfully excommunicated by their bishops, as evil doers and transgressors of the divine law, and they have without penance and amendment, or without receiving absolution died in the state of excommunication, and so have been buried, and in a short time after their bodies have been found "loosed" (lelymena) and shredded joint from joint, bone from bone.

Exceeding strange and marvellous is this that he who hath been lawfully excommunicated should after his death be found with his body "loosed" (lelymenos to suma) and the joints of the body separate.

So extraordinary a circumstance was immediately submitted to a conclave of expert theologians, who after long debate decided that any excommunicated person whose body did not remain whole had no more hope of salvation because he was no longer in a state to be "loosed" and absolved by the bishop who had excommunicated him, but that he was already damned in hell. If not absolutely essential, the removal of the ban was if possible to be affected by the same person who had pronounced it, and this provides, against an excommunicated person obtaining absolution too easily.[19] Of course a superior might rescind the anathema pronounced by one of his subjects, a bishop could always remove an excommunication pronounced by a simple priest, but under certain conditions this regulation must certainly prove excessively awkward. There is, f or example, the well known instance told by Christophorus Angelus in his Egxeiridion peri teis katastaseus tun semeron eyriskomenun Ellenun,[20] who relates that a bishop was excommunicated by a council of his peers, and his body remained "bound, as it were iron, for the space of a hundred years," after which time a second council of bishops at the same place pronounced absolution, and immediately as they spoke the words the body "crumbled to dust."

The nomocanon de excommunicatis goes on to say that those that are found excommunicate, namely with their bodies whole and 'not loosed' (alyta), these require absolution, in order that the body also may attain freedom from the

[p. 92]

bond (desmon) of excommunication. For even as the body is found bound (dedemenon) in the earth, so is the soul bound (dedemine) and tormented by Satan. And whensoever the body receives absolution and is loosed (lythei), from excommunication, by the power of God the soul likewise is set free from the bondage of the Devil, and receiveth the life eternal, the light that hath no evening, and the joy ineffable."

Leone Allacci[21] considered this Orthodox dogma of the physical results of excommunication and a subsequent absolution to be certain beyond any matter of dispute, and he mentions several cases, which he says were well known and proved, which demonstrate the truth of this belief. Athanasius, Metropolitan of Imbros, recorded that at the request of the citizens of Thasos he read a solemn absolution over several bodies, and before the holy words were even finished all had dissolved into dust. Very similar was the example of a converted Turk who was subsequently excommunicated at Naples, and who had been dead some years before he obtained absolution from two Patriarchs, and his body dissolved, so that he was at rest.

An even more remarkable instance is that of a priest who had pronounced a sentence of excommunication, and who afterwards turned Mohammedan. This did not affect the victim of his curse, who though he had died in the Christian faith, yet remained "bound." This circumstance which caused the greatest alarm was reported to the Metropolitan Raphael, and at his earnest request the Mohammedan, though after much delay and hesitation consented to read the absolution over the body of the dead Christian. As he was pronouncing the final words the body fell completely to dust, The Mohammedan thereupon returned to his former faith and was put to death for so doing.

I do not know whether this is the same tradition as is recorded by Mr. Abbott in his Macedonian Folk-lore, p. 211, but I gather that the examples are not identical, although they have various points of similarity. I quote Mr. Abbott's most striking account at length. "How great is the dread of an ecclesiastic's wrath can be realized from the following anecdote related to the writer as a 'true story' by a person who entertained no doubts as to its authenticity. 'Many years ago there was an Archbishop of Salonica who once in a moment of anger cursed a man of his diocese: "May the earth refuse to

[p. 93]

receive thee." (e geis na me se dextei). Years went by, and the Archbishop embraced Islam. Owing to his erudition and general ability, he was raised by the Mohammedans to the office of head Mullah. Meanwhile, the individual who had incurred the prelate's wrath died, and was buried in the usual fashion. Now it came to pass that when, at the expiration of three years, the tomb was opened, the inmate was found intact, just as if he had been buried the day before. Neither prayers nor offerings availed to bring about the desired dissolution. He was inhumed once more; but three years later he was still found in the same condition. It was then recalled to mind by the widow that her late husband had been anathematized by the apostate Archbishop. She forthwith went to the ex-prelate and implored him to revoke the sentence. This dignitary promised to exert his influence, which it appears had not been diminished a whit by his apostasy; for once a bishop always a bishop. Having obtained the Pasha's permission, he repaired to the open tomb, knelt beside it, lifted up his hands and prayed for a few minutes. He had hardly risen to his feet when, wondrous to relate, the flesh of the corpse crumbled away from the bones, and the skeleton remained bare and clean as if it had never known pollution.'"

It will not be impertinent here to give c. xiii, of the Power of Excommunication, and upon what frivolous occasions it is made use of, from Ricaut's The Present Stale of the Greek and Armenian Churches, 8vo, 1679.

"The Third Command of the Church is Obedience towards their Spiritual Pastors and Teachers, 1 Cor. iv, 1, Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God: which is text that they often repeat in their Churches.. and raise consequences from thence of the sublimity of their Office, and of the reverence and honour due from the people toward their Clergy; so that though they want the advantages of Riches and Ornament to render them respected in the eyes of the Vulgar; yet their people being affected with their divine and separated Qualifications, do not submit only in spiritual matters, but even in Temporals refer themselves to the determination of their Bishop, or Metropolite, according to that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. vi. 1, Dare any of you having a matter against another, go to Law before the unjust, and not before the Saints? But that which most enforces this

[p. 94]

Duty of Obedience, is a sense of the Power of Excommunication, which rests in the Church, of which they so generally stand in fear, and the most profligate and obdurate conscience in other matters startles at this sentence, to which whilst any is subjected, he is not only expelled the limits of the Church., but his conversation is scandalous, and his person denied the common benefits of Charity and assistance, to which Christian or Humane duty doth oblige us.

"In the Exercise of this censure of Excommunication, the Greek Church is so ready and frequent, that the common use of it might seem to render it the more contemptible; but that the Sentence is pronounced with so much horrour, and the same effects which have ensued thereupon, not only to the living, but also to the Corps and Carcasses of such who have dyed under Excommunication, are related with that evidence and certainty as still confirms in the people the efficacy of that Authority which the Church exercises therein. The form of Excommunication is either expressive of the party with his name and condition, secluding him from the use of Divine Ordinances, or otherwise indefinite of any person who is guilty of such or such a Crime or Misdemeanour. As. for Example, if any person is guilty of Theft, which is not discovered, an Excommunication is taken out against him, whosoever he be, that hath committed the Theft, which is not to be remitted until Restitution is made; and so the fault is published and repeated at a full Congregation, and then follows the Sentence of Excommunication in this form.

"If they restore not to him that which is his own, and possess him peaceably of it, but suffer him to remain injured and damnifyed; let him be separated from the Lord God Creatour, and be accursed, and unpardoned, and undissolvable after death in this World, and in the other which is to come. Let Wood, Stones, and Iron be dissolved but not they: May they inherit the Leprosie of Gehazi, and the Confusion of Judas; may the earth be divided and devour them like Dathan and Abiram; may they fight and tremble on earth like Cain, and the wrath of God be upon their heads and Countenances; may they see nothing of that for which they labour, and beg their Bread all the days of their lives; may their Works, Possessions, Labours, a Services be accursed; always without effect or success, and blown away like dust; may they have the curses of the holy

[p. 95]

and righteous Patriarchs Abram, Isaac and Jacob; of the 318 Saints who were the Divine Fathers of the Synod of Nice, and of all other holy Synods; and being without the Church of Christ, let no man administer unto them the things of the Church, or bless them, or offer Sacrifice for them, or give them the Antiduron or the blessed Bread, or eat, or drink, or work with them, or converse with them; and after death, let no man bury them, in penalty of being under the same state of Excommunication, for so let them remain until they have performed what is here written.

"The effect of this dreadful Sentence is reported by the Greek Priests to have been in several instances so evident, that none doubts or disbelieves the consequences of all those maledictions repeated therein; and particularly, that the body of an excommunicated person is not capable of returning to its first Principles until the Sentence of Excommunication is taken off. It would be esteemed no Curse amongst us to have our Bodies remain uncorrupted and entire in the Grave, who endeavour by Art, and Aromatic spices, and Gums, to preserve them from Corruption: And it is also accounted, amongst the Greeks themselves, as a miracle and particular grace and favour of God to the Bodies of such whom they have Canonized for Saints to continue unconsumed, and in the moist damps of a Vault, to dry and desiccate like the Mummies in Egypt, or in the Hot sands of Arabia. But they believe that the Bodies of the Excommunicated are possessed in the Grave by some evil spirit, which actuates and preserves them from Corruption, in the same manner as the Soul informes and animates the living body; and that they feed in the night, walk, digest, and are nourished, and have been found ruddy in Complexion, and their Veins, after forty days Burial, extended with Blood, which, being opened with a Lancet, have yielded a gore as plentiful, fresh, and quick, as that which issues from the Vessels of young and sanguine persons. This is so generally believed and discoursed of amongst the Greeks, that there is scarce one of their Country Villages, but what can witness and recount several instances of this nature, both by the relation of their Parents, and Nurses, as well as of their own knowledge, which they tell with as much variety as we do the Tales of Witches and Enchantments, of which it is observed in Conversation, that scarce one story is ended before another begins of like wonder. But to let pass the

[p. 96]

common and various Reports of the Vulgar, this one may suffice for all, which was recounted to me with many asseverations of its truth, by a grave Candiot Kaloir, called Sofroino, a Preacher, and a person of no mean repute and learning at Smyrna.

"'I knew' (said he) 'a certain person, who for some misdemeanours committed in the Morea, fled to the Isle of Milo, where though he avoided the hand of Justice, yet could not avoid the Sentence of Excommunication, from which he could no more fly, than from the conviction of his own Conscience, or the guilt which ever attended him; for the fatal hour of his death being come, and the Sentence of the Church not being revoked, the Body was carelessly and without Solemnity interred in some retired and unfrequented place. In the mean time the Relations of the deceased were much afflicted, and anxious for the sad estate of their dead Friend, whilst the Paisants and Islanders were every night affrighted and disturbed with strange and unusual apparitions, which they immediately conclude arose from the Grave of the accursed Excommunicant, which, according to their Custom, they immediately opened, and therein found the Body uncorrupted, ruddy, and the Veins replete with Blood: The Coffin was furnished with Grapes, Apples, and Nuts, and such fruit as the season afforded: Whereupon Consultation being made, the Kaloires resolved to make use of the common remedy in those cases, which was to cut and dismember the Body into several parts, and to boyl it in Wine, as the approved means to dislodge the evil Spirit, and dispose the body to a dissolution: But the friends of the deceased, being willing and desirous that the Corps should rest in peace, and some ease given to the departed Soul, obtained a reprieve from the Clergy, and hopes, that for a sum of Money (they being Persons of a competent Estate) a Release might be purchased from the Excommunication under the hand of the Patriarch: In this manner the Corps were for a while freed from dissection, and Letters thereupon sent to Constantinople, with this direction, that in case the Patriarch should condescend to take off the Excommunication, that the day, hour and minute that he signed the Remission should be inserted in the Date. And now the Corps were taken into the Church (the Country-people not being willing they should

[p. 97]

remain in the Field) and Prayers and Masses daily said for its dissolution, and pardon of the Offender: When one day after many Prayers, Supplications and Offerings (as this Sofronio attested to me with many protestations) and whilst he himself was performing Divine Service, of a sudden was heard a rumbling noise in the Coffin of the dead party, to the fear and astonishment of all persons then present; which when they had opened, they found the Body consumed and dissolved as far into its first Principles of Earth, as if it had been seven years interred. The hour and minute of this dissolution was immediately noted and precisely observed, which being compared with the Date of the Patriarchs release, when it was signed at Constantinople, it was found exactly to agree with that moment in which the Body returned to its Ashes.' This story I should not have judged worth relating, but I heard it from the mouth of a grave person, who says, 'That his own eyes were Witnesses thereof; and though notwithstanding I esteem it a matter not assured enough to be believed by me, yet let it serve to evidence the esteem they entertain of the validity and force of Excommunication. I had once the curiosity to be present at the opening of a Grave of one lately dead, who, as the people of the Village reported, walked in the night, and affrighted them with strange Phantasmes; but it was not my fortune to see the Corps in that nature, nor to find the Provisions with which the spirit nourishes it, but only such a Spectacle as is usual after six or seven days Burial in the Grave; howsoever, Turks as well as Christians discourse of these matters with much confidence.'

"This high esteem and efficacy being put on Excommunication, one would believe that the Priests should endeavour to conserve the reverence thereof, being the Basis and main support of their Authority; and that therefore they should not so easily make use thereof on every frivolous occasion, that so familiarity might not render it contemptible and the salvation of men's Souls not seem to be played with on every slight and trivial Affair: But such is the much to be lamented poverty in this Church, that they are not only forced to sell Excommunications, but the very Sacraments; and to expose the most reverend and mysterious Offices of Religion unto sale for maintenance and support of Priesthood.

[p. 98]

"The taking off Excommunications after death hath been usual, but the Excommunicating after death may seem a strange kind of severity; for so we read that Theodosius, Bishop of Alexandria, excommunicated Origen two hundred years after his decease.

"On the same Authority of Excommunication depends the power of re-admission again into the Church, which according to the Greek Canon is not to be obtained easily, or at every cold request of the Penitent, but after proof of trial first made of a hearty and serious conversion, evidenced by the constant and repeated actions of a holy life, and the patient and obedient performance of Penance imposed and enjoined by the Church. Such as have apostatized from the Faith, by becoming Turks, under the age of 14 years, upon their repentance, and desire of return to the Church, sought earnestly with tears, signified and attested by forty days fasting with bread and water, accompanied with continual Prayer day and night, are afterwards received solemnly into the Church in presence of the Congregation, the Priest making a Cross on the Forehead of the Penitent with the Oyl of Chrism, or the muron Khrismatos usually administered to such who return from the ways of darkness and mortal sins.

"But of such who in riper years fall away from the Faith (as many Greeks do for the sake of Women, or escape of punishment) their re-admission or reception again into the Church is more difficult; for to some of them there is enjoined a Penance of six or seven years humbling themselves with extraordinary Fasts, and continual Prayer; during which time they remain in the nature of Catechumeni, without the use or comfort of the Eucharist, or Absolution, unless at the hour of death; in which the Church is so rigorous, that the Patriarch himself is not able to release a Penance of this nature, imposed only by a simple Priest; and for receiving Penitents of this nature there is a set Form or Office in the Greek Liturgy.

"But now we have few Examples of those Apostates who return from the Mohametan to the Christian faith; for none dares own such a Conversion but he who dares to dye for it; so that that practice and admirable part of Discipline is become obsolete and disused. Yet some there have been, even in my time, both of the Greek and Armenian Churches, who have afforded more Heroick Examples of Repentance, than any of

[p. 99]

those who have tryed themselves by the Rules and Canons prescribed; for after that they denyed the Faith, and for some years have carried on their heads the Badge or distinction of a Mohametan, feeling some remorses of Conscience, they have so improved the same by the sparks of some little grace remaining, that nothing could appease or allay the present torment of their minds, but a return to that Faith from whence they were fallen. In this manner, having communicated their anguish and desires to some Bishop or grave person of the Clergy, and signifying with all their Courage and Zeal to die for that faith, which they have denyed; they have been exhorted, as the most ready expiation of their sin, to confess Christ at that place where they have renounced him; and this they have resolutely performed by leaving off their Tulbants, and boldly presenting themselves in publick assemblies and at the time of publick prayers in the Church; and when the Turks have challenged them for having revolted or relapsed again from them, they have owned their Conversion, and boldly declared their resolution to dye in that old Faith wherein they were baptized; and, as a Token or Demonstration thereof, being carried before the Justice of the City or Province, they have not only by words owned the Christian doctrine, but also trampled their Turkish Tulbants or Sashes under their Feet, and withstood three times the demand, whether they should still continue to be Mohametans, according as it is required in the Mohametan Law: For which, being condemned to dye, they have suffered death with the same cheerfulness and courage that we read of the Primitive Martyrs, who daily Sacrificed themselves for the Christian Verity.

"Considering which, I have, with some astonishment, beheld in what manner some poor English men, who have fondly and vilely denyed the faith of Christ in Barbary and the parts of Turky, and become, as we term them Renegados, have afterwards (growing weary of the Customes of Turks to which they were strangers) found means of escape, and returned again into England, and there entered the Churches, and frequented the Assembly of God's people, as boldly as if they had been the most constant and faithful of the Sheepfold: At which confidence of ignorant and illiterate men I do not so much admire, as I do at the negligence of our

[p. 100]

Ministers, who acquaint not the Bishops herewith, to take their Counsel and Order herein: But perhaps they have either not learned, or so far forgot the ancient Discipline of ours, and all other Christian Churches, as to permit men, after so abominable a Lapse and Apostasie, boldly to intrude into the Sanctuary of God with the same unhallowed hands and blasphemous mouths, with which they denyed their Saviour and their Country. But what can we say hereunto? Alas! Many are dissenters from our Church; which by our divisions in Religion, hath lost much or its Power, Discipline and esteem amongst us; and men, being grown careles and cold in Religion, little dream or consider of such methods of Repentance; for whilst men condem the Authority, and censures of the Church, and disown the power of the Keys, they seem to deprive themselves of the ordinary means of Salvation, unless God, by some extraordinary light and eviction supplies that in a sublimer manner, which was anceintly effected by a rigorous observation of the Laws and Canons of the Church.

"It is a strange Vulgar Errour that we maintain in England, that the Greek Church doth yearly excommunicate the Roman, which is nothing so; and common reason will tell us, That a Church cannot excommunicate another, or any particular Member thereof, over which it pretends no Jurisdiction or Authority; and that the Greek Church hath no such Claim of Dominion or Superiority over the Roman, no more than it own a subjection to it, is plainly evinced in the third Chapter of this Book: and this I attest to be so, upon enquiry made into the truth thereof, and on Testimony of Greek Priests eminent and knowing in the Canons and Constitutions of their Church: Though we cannot deny but that anceintly one Patriarch might renounce the Communion of another, over whom he had no Jurisdiction, for his notorious Heresie; as S. Cyril did to Nestorius before the Assembly of the Council of Ephesus."

It has been said that excommunication can only be incurred by living persons, but in this the belief and practice of the Orthodox Church differ from the Catholic Church, since, as has already been remarked, Theodosius of Alexandria who died in 567 excommunicated Origen who died in 253 or 254.[22] Moreover, the fact that Theodosius was deposed for

[p. 101]

heresy by Pope S. Agapitus I[23] on that pontiff's arrival in Constantinople, in 536, would not according to the Greek idea invalidate this excommunication. With regard to living persons those who have never been baptized are not members of the Christian Society, and therefore obviously they cannot be deprived of rights they have never enjoyed; whilst as even the baptized cease, at death, to belong to the Church Militant, the dead cannot be excommunicated. This is not to say that technically, after the demise of some member of the Christian community it may be declared that such a person incurred excommunication whilst on earth. In the same strict sense he may be released from excommunication after his death, and the Rituale Romanum contains the following right for absolving an excommunicated person already dead.

"RITUS ABSOLUENDI EXCOMMUNICATUM IAM MORTUUM. If it so come to pass that any excommunicated person who has departed from this life gave evident signs of contrition, in order that he shall not be deprived of ecclesiastical burial in consecrated ground, but rather that he shall be holpen by the prayers of the Church, in so far as this may be done, let him be absolved after this manner.

"If the body be not yet buried, let it be lightly beaten with a rod or small cords after which it shall be absolved as followeth; and then having been absolved let it be buried in consecrated ground.

But if it hath been already buried in unconsecrated ground, if it may be conveniently done, let the body be exhumed, and after it hath been lightly beaten in like manner and then absolved let it be buried in consecrated ground; but if the body cannot conveniently be disinterred, then the grave shall be beaten lightly and the absolution shall be pronounced.

"And if the body be already buried in consecrated ground, it shall not be disinterred, but the grave shall be lightly beaten.

"Let the Priest say the Antiphon: The bones that have been humbled shall rejoice in the Lord; together with the psalm Miserere.

"And when they have made an end of the psalm let the body be absolved, and the Priest shall say: By the authority granted unto me I absolve thee from the bond of excommunication, which thou hast incurred (or, which thou art said to have

[p. 102]

incurred) on account of such and such a thing, and I restore thee to the communion of the faithful, in the, in the name of the Father, + , and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

"Then shall be said the psalm, De profundis, and at the end thereof:

V. Rest eternal grant unto him, O Lord.

R. And let perpetual light shine upon him.

Kyrie eleison. Christe eleison. Kyrie eleison. Our Father.

V. And lead us not into temptation.

R. But deliver us from evil.

V. From the gate of hell.

R. O Lord, deliver his soul.

V. May he rest in peace.

R. Amen.

V. O Lord hear my prayer.

R. And let my cry come to Thee.

V. The Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us pray.

Prayer. Grant, we beseech Thee O Lord, to the soul of thy servant, who hath been held in the bond of excommunication, a place of refreshment, rest and repose, and the brightness of Thy eternal light. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen."

It is now necessary to inquire into certain extraordinary cases which are recorded and which are true beyond all manner of doubt of persons who died excommunicated and whose bodies were seen to rise from the tomb and leave the sacred precincts where they were buried. In the first place we have the very famous account given by S. Gregory the Great[24] of the two dead nuns, generally called the "Suore Morte." Two ladies of an illustrious family had been admitted to the sisterhood of S. Scholastica. Although in most respects exemplary and faithful to their vows, they could not refrain from scandal, gossip, and vain talk. Now S. Benedict was the first to lay down the strictest and most definite laws concerning the observance of silence.[25] In all monasteries and convents, or every order, there are particular places, called the "Regular Places" (the Church, refectory, dormitory, etc.) and special times, above all the night hours, termed the "Great silence," wherein speaking is unconditionally prohibited. Outside these places and times there are usually

[p. 103]

accorded "recreations" during which conversation is not only permitted but encouraged, though it must be governed by rules of charity and moderation. Useless and idle prattling is universally forbidden at all times and in all places. Accordingly, when it was reported to S. Benedict that the two nuns were greatly given to brabble indiscreetly, the holy Abbot was sore displeased, and sent them the message to the effect that if they did not learn to refrain their tongues and give a better example to the community he must excommunicate them. At first the sisters were alarmed and penitent, and promised to amend their idle ways; but the treacherous habit was too strong for their good resolves; they continued to give offence by their naughty chatter, and in the midst of their folly they suddenly died. Being of a great and ancient house they were buried in the church near the high altar; and afterwards on a certain day, whilst a solemn High Mass was being sung, before the Liturgy of the Faithful began, and the Catechumens were dismissed by the Deacon crying: "Let those who are forbidden to partake, let those who are excommunicated, depart from hence and leave us!" Behold, in the sight of all the people the two nuns rose up from their graves, and with faces drooping and averted, they glided sadly out of the Church. And thus it happened every time the Holy Mysteries were celebrated, until their old nurse interceded with S. Benedict, and he had pity upon them and absolved. them from all their sins so that they might rest in peace.[26]

S. Augustine tells us[27] that the names of the Martyrs upon the diptychs were recited, but not to pray for them, whilst the names of nuns, who were recently deceased were recited in order to offer prayers on their behalf. Perhibet praeclarissimum testimonium Ecclesiastica auctoritas, in qua fidelibus notum at, quo loco Martyres, et quo defunctae Sanctimoniales ad Altaris Sacramenta recitantur. It has been suggested that it was at this point the two nuns may have withdrawn from the church, but S. Gregory expressly says that it was at the moment when the Deacon chanted in a loud voice the ritual praise bidding those who were not in full communion go forth from the holy place.

S. Gregory also relates that a young monk left the monastery without permission and without receiving any blessing

[p. 104]

or dismissal from the Abbot. Unhappily he died before he could be reconciled, and he was duly buried in consecrated ground. On the next morning his corpse was discovered lying huddled up and thrown out of his grave, and his relations in terror hastened to S. Benedict, who gave them a consecrated Host, and told them to put It with all possible reverence upon the breast of the young religious. This was done, and the tomb was never again found to have cast forth the body.[26]

This custom of putting a Eucharistic Particle in the grave with a dead person may seem to many very extraordinary, but it was by no means unknown in former centuries. in the Uita Basilii, the Life of S. Basil the Great, which was often attributed to Amphilochius of Iconium,[29] but is now recognized to be spurious and of about the ninth century, we are told that S. Basil reserved a portion of a consecrated Particle, even a third part, in order that It should be buried with him. Several Synods, howbeit assemblies of no supreme authority, had already condemned this practice, and others of a later date prohibited it as contrary to the end of the Blessed Sacrament as instituted by Jesus Christ.[30]

None the less in various places the custom persisted of reverently putting Particles in the graves of persons who were much honoured for their sanctity, and thus in the tomb of S. Othmar (Audomar), who died 16th November, 759, on the island of Werd in the Rhine, and whose body was transferred ten years later to the monastery of S. Gall, being solemnly entombed in 867 in the new Church of S. Othmar at S. Gall,[31] a number of Particles were found to have been placed on the spot where his head reposed.[32]

In a life of S. Cuthbert, Bishop of Lindisfarne, Patron of Durham, which is reprinted by the Bollandists,[33] it is said that at one of the Translations of his body a number of Particles were found in the coffin. Amalarius of Metz, upon the authority of the Venerable Bede says in his great treatise De ecclesiasticis officiis[34] that these Particles were put upon the breast of the saint before he was buried: "oblata super Sanctum pectus posita." This circumstance however, is not mentioned by Bede, but it occurs in the Uita S. Cuthberti, written between 698 and 705 by a monk of Lindisfarne. Amalarius considers that this custom was doubtless derived

[p. 105]

from the Roman Church, and that thence it was communicated to England. Nicholas-Hugues Menard, the famous Maurist,[35] in his glosses upon the S. Gregorii I Papae Liber Sacramentorum, which he printed, Paris, 1646,[36] from a manuscript Missal of S. Eligius, states that it was not this custom which was condemned by the various Councils, but an abuse which had crept up and which consisted in giving communion to the dead, and actually placing the Sacred Host in their mouths. However that may be, we know that Cardinal Humbert, of Silva Candida, legate of S. Leo IX, in the middle of the eleventh century, in his answer to the various objections and difficulties which had been raised by Michael Caerularius, Patriarch of Constantinople, author of the second and final schism of the Byzantine Church,[37] reproached the Greeks with the custom of burying any Particles which might remain over after the Communion of the people at Holy Mass.

It is said that even to-day in many places throughout Greece upon the lips of the dead is laid a crumb of consecrated bread from the Eucharist. Out of reverence this has often been replaced by a fragment of pottery on which is cut the sign of the Cross with the legend I.X.NI.KA. (Jesus Christ conquers) at the four angles. Theodore Burt, The Cyclades, informs us that locally in Naxos the object thus employed is a wax cross with the letters I.X.N. imprinted thereon, and this moreover still bears the name naulon, fare, showing that the tradition is closely connected with the old custom of placing the "ferryman's coin" in the mouth of a dead man, the fee for Charon. Now Charon, who has assumed the form Charos, is entirely familiar to the modem Greek peasant, but his is not merely as classical literature depicts him, Portitor Stygis, the boatman of Styx, he is Death itself, the lord of ghosts and shadows. Until recent years, at all events, the practice prevailed in many parts of Greece of placing in the mouth (more rarely on the breast) of a deceased person a small coin, and in the district of Smyrna this was actually known as "passage-money," to peratikion[38] Yet strangely enough although both custom and name survived the reason for the coin had been forgotten, and for a century or more (save it might be obscurely in some very remote spot)[39] it was not associated in any way with Charos. Possibly the original meaning of the coin has vanished in the mists of dateless

[p. 106]

antiquity, and even in classical days the original significance was lost, so it came then to be explained that the obol was Charon's fee, whereas this is but a late and incorrect interpretation of a custom whose meaning went deeper than that, which had existed before mythology knew of a ferryman of hell.

The soul was supposed to escape by the mouth, which as it is an exit from the body is also the entrance to the body, and naturally it is by this path that the soul, if it were to return to the body, would re-enter, or by which an evil spirit or demon would make its way into the body. The coin, then, or charm seems most likely to have been a safeguard against any happening of this kind. In Christian days the Holy Eucharist or a fragment inscribed with sacred names will be the best preventative. Moreover not infrequently the piece of pottery placed in the mouth of the dead has scratched upon it the pentacle of magic lore. It is extremely significant that in Myconos this sign is often carved on house doors to preserve the inmates from the vampire, vrykolakas. So in Greece at all events the custom of burying a consecrated Particle with a corpse, or of putting a crumb of the Host between the dead man's lips originated as a spell to counteract the possibility of vampirism.

It should be remarked that a consecrated Host placed in the tomb where a vampire is buried will assuredly prevent the vampire from issuing forth out of his grave, but for obvious reasons this is a remedy which is not to be essayed, since it savours of rashness and profanation of God's Body.

There are in history many other examples of excommunicated persons who have not been able to rest in consecrated ground. In the year 1030, S. Godard, Bishop of Hildesheim in Lower Saxony, was obliged to excommunicate certain persons for their crimes and filthy sacrileges. Nevertheless, so powerful were the barons and over-lords, their protectors, that they buried the bodies of their followers in the Cathedral itself, in the very sanctuary. Upon this the bishop launched the ban of excommunication against them also; but, none the less, utterly disregarding the censures they forced their way into the various churches. Upon the next high festival in truth, the rebellious nobles were present with a throng of armed attendants in the Cathedral itself. The aisles were

[p. 107]

packed with worshippers, and afar off spanned by the vaulted roof the High Altar blazed with a myriad tapers whose glow was reflected in the mirror of polished gold and the crystal heart of great reliquaries. The Bishop, his canons around him, pontificated the Mass. But after the Gospel, S. Godard turned from the altar, and in ringing tones of command bade all those who were under any censure or ban to leave the sacred building. The living smiled contemptuously, shrugged a little and did not stir, but down the aisles were seen to glide in awful silence dark shadowy figures, from whom the crowds shrank in speechless dread. They seemed to pass through the doors out of the sacred place. When the service was done the bishop absolved the dead, and lo, the ghastly train appeared to re-enter their tombs. Thereupon the living were so struck with fear that they sought to be reconciled, and after due penance absolution was granted them.

At the instigation of Abbot Odolric of Conques the Council of Limoges held in 1031 proclaimed the "Truce of God" that is to say a temporary suspension of hostilities, and the fathers threatened with general excommunication those feudal lords who would not swear to maintain it. There thence arose a consideration of the effects of excommunication, and it was agreed by all that although so severe a sentence must not be lightly denounced, once delivered the utmost respect must be paid to its provisions. In order to illustrate this, the Bishop of Cahors related a recent event which was known to his whole diocese and which could be proved by a number of independent witnesses. For his ceaseless rapine and unrepented murders, his evil examples of a lewd and licentious life, his blasphemies and infidelity, a certain nobleman whose castle was hard by the city had been excommunicated, and not long afterwards he had fallen in some midnight foray. The friends of the deceased never doubted that the bishop would give absolution, and they made great instance that he should do so, in order that the dead man might be buried with solemn dirge and requiem, with meed of trentals hereafter sung, in the vault of his ancestors, which was one of the most striking monuments in S. Peter's Church. However, the whole territory had for so long been harried by marauding violence that the bishop considered an example must be made in order to teach the rest of the plundering nobles a lesson,

[p. 108]

and he refused either to raise the ban or to permit the wonted ceremonies at the funeral. Nonetheless in defiance of his orders an armed band of soldiers marched into the town, and buried the dead body in the tomb, carefully closing it and mortarizing it after them. However, on the following morning the body was discovered naked, bruised and banged in the market square as though it had been violently thrown out of the church, although there was no mark or sign that the tomb had been in any way tampered with or touched. The soldiers, who had buried their leader, having opened the monument found only the cerements in which the corpse had been erstwhile wound, and so they buried it there a second time, placing seals and bars upon the church door inasmuch as it was impossible for anyone to enter. On the following morning, however, the body was discovered to have been thrown forth with even more contumely than before. Nevertheless they interred it a third time, but with the same result. This was repeated no less than five times in all, and at last they huddled the poor rotting carrion as best they might into a deep hole dug in some lonely spot far from consecrated ground. These terrible circumstances filled the hearts of all with such amaze that the neighbouring barons one and all, very humbly betook themselves to the bishop, and under most solemn promises made a treaty binding themselves to respect all the privileges of the church and amend their lives in every particular.

A very remarkable incident is related in the Greek Menion[40] that is to say the collection of the twelve books, one for every month, that contain the offices for immovable feasts in the Byzantine rite, and which in some wise correspond to the Propiuum sanctorum in the Roman breviary. The legend, it is true, offers certain difficulties which will be considered later, but it is certainly worth repeating as showing the extreme, and indeed exaggerated views the Greeks attached to excommunication. A certain coenobite of the desert near Alexandria had been excommunicated by the archimandrite for some act of disobedience, whereupon he forsook his monastery, left the desert and came to the city. No sooner, however, had he arrived here than he was arrested by the orders of the Governor, stripped of his habit, and ordered to offer sacrifice in the temple to idols. The Coenobite

[p. 109]

refused, and after having been long tortured in vain, at length he was put to death, his head being struck off, and the trunk thrown out beyond the town walls to be devoured by the wild beasts. But the Christians took it up during the night and having embalmed it with rich spices and shrouded it in fair linen, they buried it honourably in a prominent place in the Church, since they regarded him, and with justice, as a Martyr. But upon the next Sunday when the Deacon had chanted the ritual formula, bidding the Catechumens and those who should not be present to withdraw, all were sore amazed when the tomb suddenly opened and the body of the Martyr glided there from and was seen lingering in the narthex of the church. When the Mass was done the body seemed to return once more to its grave.

The whole community was filled with fearful awe and confusion, and a Basilian nun of great piety having fasted and prayed for the space of three days received a revelation from an angel who informed her that the Coenobite was still excommunicate since he had disobeyed his superior, and that he would remain under the ban until the superior himself granted him absolution. Thereupon a company of honourable persons journeyed to the monastery, and besought the archimandrite to pronounce the words. In all haste the holy old man accompanied them to the church. Here they opened the tomb of the Martyr and a full absolution was pronounced. Thereafter he lay at rest in his appointed place.

There are several details in this account which appear very suspicious. In the first place, at the period that the desert was the resort of Coenobites, the days of persecution, so far as Alexandria was concerned, at any rate, were a thing of the past. In the city complete toleration prevailed, and indeed if there had been any prosecutions, not Christianity but the Pagan rites would have been suppressed and the heathen temples closed. Christianity in this century was honoured throughout the whole of Egypt, and Alexandria was one of the strongholds. In the second place, the monks of the desert were not Coenobites, that is to say members of a definite religious community having a Superior, but they were rather solitary hermits, belonging to no religious family, each being independent, and no hermit would have had the power to excommunicate one of his fellows. In the third place, no

[p. 110]

details are given with regard to the reasons why this monk was supposed to have incurred a major excommunication, and this, the gravest of all censures, is the only ban which excludes from participation in the sacred Mysteries. It is true, perhaps, that if a Religious broke his vows, left his monastery, abandoned his habit, and disregarding the commands of the Church betook himself to some populous city where he proceeded to live, as a secular, a life that was far from careful, such a person would presumably give great scandal and by his actions he might indeed incur the major excommunication, but we are not told that in the case of the Coenobite anything of this sort happneed,  we are not informed of aggravating circumstances, and further it must be borne in mind that at the period these events were said to take place the hermits of the desert were not, as are Religious to-day, bound by vows of stability[41] and of obedience to their Superiors, who had not the right to pronounce a sentence of Major excommunication.

It should perhaps be explained that until recently excommunication was of two kinds, Major and Minor. Sabetti thus concisely explains:[42] "Excommunicatio est censura, per quam quis priuatur communione Ecclesiae; seu censura, qua Christianus bonis spiritualibus Ecelesiae communibus, quorum distributio ad ipsam pertinet, uel omninio uel ex parte priuatur. Separat igitur excommunicatum a societate seu communione uisibili fidelium et bonis quae eam, ut talis est, consequuntur.

Distinguitur excommunicatio in maiorem, quae priuat omnibus bonis Ecclesiae communibus, et minorem, quae bonis aliquibus tantum priuat. Maior in iure nonnunquam anathema uocatur; atque tunc praesertim, quando propter haeresim uel haeresis suspicionem infligitur, ant peculiaribus quibusdam adhibitis caerimoniis solemnius denuntiatur.--Insuper excommunicati excommunicatione maiori, alii dicuntur tolerati, quos fideles non tenentur uitare; alii non tolerati seu uitandi, quos uitare debent." Briefly this is to say that minor excommunication is a prohibition from receiving the sacraments, what we call in theology the passive use of the sacraments. Major excommunication is that which we have already defined, and which now practically remains in force, whilst the technical anathema does not differ essentially from excommunication but is emphasized with special

[p. 111]

ceremonies and the most solemn promulgation of this terrible sentence.

In a life of S. Augustine the Apostle of England, which has been printed by the Bollandists,[43] John Brompton relates the following history. S. Augustine had long been endeavouring to persuade a certain nobleman of great wealth to pay the appointed tithes, but out of obstinacy these were constantly refused, which did great mischief and caused others to become discontented and impudently follow so bad an example. On a certain great feast day whilst High Mass was being solemnly sung S. Augustine was inspired to pronounce to the people that all who had been excommunicated must leave the sacred edifice. To the horror and amaze of the assistants an ancient tomb was seen to open, and there issued forth the desiccated yet incorrupt body of a man who had been buried a century and a half before. When the service was done S. Augustine in solemn procession went to the tomb whither the dead man had been seen to glide back as "ite missa est" was chanted, and here he solemnly adjured him, bidding him say why he had appeared. The dead man replied that he was excommunicate. The Saint asked where was buried the priest who had pronounced the sentence. It appeared that the tomb was in the cathedral at no great distance. Going thither the Archbishop bade the priest declare why he had excommunicated the dead man. A dark shadowy figure was seen to hover among the pillars of the nave and a low far-off voice answered: "I excommunicated him for his misdeeds, and particularly because he robbed the church of her due, refusing to pay his tithes." "Let it suffice, brother," returned the Saint, "and do you now at our bidding and at our request absolve him and free him from the censure." The shadowy figure repeated the loosening words, and faded from sight. They then returned to the tomb of the dead man, who said in a gentle whisper: "I thank you, O my father, for now at last may I find rest and repose."

Certain authorities have cast very grave doubts upon this story, for they point out that firstly, even in the time of S. Augustine himself there was no obligation in Britain to pay tithes, and these were most assuredly not required under pain of excommunication. This is very true, but there is no

[p. 112]

reason at all why the legend should not be correct in detail although very considerably antedated. It is more than probable that the incident occured in a far later century, and that the chronicler of Canterbury attributed it, perhaps in geniune  error, for the tale had come down by word of mouth, or perhaps with pardonable inexactitude, to the days of S. Augustine around whose great and glorious figure had clustered so many reverend legends, so many ancient traditions.

Melchior, Abbot of the Cistercian house of Zwettl, in his work De Statu Mortuorum relates that a young scholar of the town of Saint-Pons, having unfortunately incurred the penalty of excommunication was killed, and shortly afterwards he appeared to one of his friends begging him to betake himself to the Bishop of Rhodez and from him to seek absolution. The friend did not hesitate to do as he was asked, and although it was mid-winter with the snow lying deep upon the ground, for it was a season of exceptional severity, he at once set out upon the journey. When he had gone some little distance the road branched, and he was undecided which path to take. With much hesitancy he proceeded towards the left, when he felt (as he thought) his cloak gently pulled, but at first he took no notice, deeming it merely the wind and the storm. A moment after his cloak was caught again and there could be no mistaking the tug. He turned and found himself gently guided into the other road. Eventually he reached the town, and obtained audience of the Bishop, who upon hearing his tale at once raised the ban with a full and plenary absolution. The young man discovered that had he continued the path to the left he must have wandered far among the snow-drifts where he would inevitably have perished of cold and exposure. That night his friend appeared to him with a glad and smiling countenance and thanking him for the pains he had been at assured him that he should by no means lose his reward.

Dom Augustin Calmet records at length a letter, dated 5 April, 1745, which he received from a correspondent who had read with great interest the manuscript of this learned writer's Dissertation sur les apparitions des anges, des demons et des esprits.[44] The writer says: "A man living at Letraye, a village which is not very many leagues from the town of Remiremont (Vosges),[45] lost his wife at the beginning of last [p. 113] February, but married again in the week before Lent. At eleven o'clock in the evening on his marriage day, the late wife appeared and spoke to the new bride, and the result of this was that the bride declared that she must on behalf of the dead woman undertake to perform seven pilgrimages.[46] Since that day and always at the very same hour the ghost has appeared and it was distinctly heard to speak by the parish priest as well as by a number of other persons. On the 15 March, at the very moment when the woman was about to proceed to the church of S. Nicolas to which the pilgrimage was to be made, the ghost suddenly stood in her path and bade her hasten, adding that she must not allow herself to be alarmed, or in any way deterred by any accident or sickness that might befall her on the way.

Accordingly the woman set out with her husband, her brother-in-law and her sister-in-law, and she is very certain that the dead wife remained by her side until she actually came to the door of the church of S. Nicolas. When these good people arrived at a distance of some two leagues from the place, S. Nicolas' church, they were obliged to halt at an inn by the wayside which is known as "The Shelter" (les Baraques). Here the woman suddenly became so ill that the two men were compelled to carry her right up to the church, but no sooner had she arrived at the door than she was able to walk without any difficulty and her pain vanished in a moment. "This amazing occurrence was related to me and also to the Father Sacristan by all the four pilgrims; and it was reported that the last thing which the dead woman told the new bride was that when one half of the pilgrimages had been duly accomplished she would be seen no more. The plain and straightforward way in which these good folk told us the story does not allow one to doubt that they were reporting actual facts." Upon this relation, Calmet comments: "It is not said that the young woman who died was under any sentence of excommunication; but apparently she was bound by a solemn promise or a vow that she must have made to perform these pilgrimages, which she obliged her successor to discharge on her behalf. It should be remarked that the ghost did not enter the church dedicated to S. Nicolas, but apparently for some reason remained at the door."

[p. 114]

A very extraordinary circumstance is related by Wipert, Archdeacon of the celebrated see of Toul, who wrote the life of Pope S. Leo IX, a Pontiff, who had been for more than twenty years Bishop of Toul,[47] and who died in March, 1054. The historian[48] tells us that some years before the death of S, Leo IX, the citizens of Narni, a little burgh which is picturesquely situated on a lofty rock at the point where the river Nera forces its way through a narrow ravine to join the Tiber, were one day greatly surprised and indeed alarmed to see a mysterious company of persons who appeared to be advancing towards the town. The magistrates, fearing some surprise, gave orders that the gates should be fast closed, whilst the inhabitants incontinently betook themselves to the walls. The procession, however, which was clothed in white and seemed from time to time to vanish among the morning mists and then once again to reappear, was obviously no inimical. band. They passed on their way without turning to right or to left, and it is said they seemed to be defiling with measured pace almost until eventide. All wondered who these persons could be, and at last one of the most prominent citizens, a man of great resolution and courage resolved to address them. To his amazement he saw among them a certain person who had been his host many years before Ascoli, and of whose death he had been not recently informed. Calling upon him loudly by his name he asked: "Who are you, and whence cometh this throng?" "I am your old friend," was the reply, "and this multitude is phantom; we have not yet atoned for the sins we committed whilst on earth, and we are not yet deemed worthy to enter the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore are we sent forth as humble penitents, lowly palmers, whose lot it is with pains and with much moil to visit the holy sanctuaries of the world, such as are appointed unto us in order. At this hour we come from the shrine of S. Martin, and we are on our way to the sanctuary of Our Lady of Farfa."[49] The goodman was so terrified at these words that he fell as in a fit, and he remained ill for a full twelvemonth. It was he who related this extraordinary event to Pope S. Leo IX. With regard to the company there could be no mistake; it was seen not by one person or even by a few, but by the whole town. Although naturally enough the appearance of so vast a number would give rise

[p. 115]

to no little alarm since hostile designs would be suspected, so crowded a pilgrimage in the eleventh century would not by any means be a unique, even if it were an exceptional event. Whole armies of pious persons were traversing Europe from shrine to shrine, whilst the enthusiasism  for the pilgrimage to Jerusalem was greatly on the increase and was, before many years had passed to culminate in the Crusades. Even by the end of the tenth century hospices had been built throughout the whole valley of the Danube, the favoured route to the Holy Land, where pilgrims could replenish their provisions. In 1026, Richard, Abbot of Saint-Vannes, led seven hundred pilgrims into Palestine, all expenses being discharged by Richard II, Duke of Normandy. In 1065, over twelve thousand Germans, who had crossed Europe, under the command of Gunther, Bishop of Bamberg, while on their way through Palestine had to seek shelter in a ruined fortress where they defended themselves against troops of marauding Bedouins.[50] Gunther actually died in this year at Odenberg (Sopron) in Hungary while engaged on a Crusade. In 1073, Pope S. Gregory VII was seriously contemplating the leading of a force of fifty thousand men to the East, military pilgrims who would repulse the Turks, rescue the Holy Sepulchre, and re-establish Christian unity. Therefore in itself the appearance of this company of pilgrims outside the walls of Narni, if remarkable, would be a very possible and understandable circumstance.

In his Antidote against Atheism, III, 12, Dr. Henry More relates some remarkable instances of multitudinous phantoms. He says: "Our English Chronicles also tell us of Apparitions, armed men, foot and horse, fighting upon the ground in the North part of England, and in Ireland, for many evenings together, seen by many hundreds of men at once, and that the grass was trodden down in the places where they were seen to fight their Battles: which agreeth with Nicolea Langbernhard her Relation of the cloven-footed Dancers, that left the print of their hoofs in the ring they trod down for a long time after.

"But this skirmishing upon the Earth, puts me in mind of the last part of this argument, and bids me look up into the Air. Where, omitting all other Prodigies, I shall only take notice of what is most notorious, and of which there can by

[p. 116]

no means be given any other account, than that it is the effect of the Spirits. And this is the Appearance of armed Men fighting and encountering one another in the Sky. There are so many examples of these Prodigies in Historians, that it were superfluous to instance in any. That before the great slaughter of no less than fourscore thousand made by Antiochus in Jerusalem, recorded in the second of Maccabees Chapter 5. is famous. The Historian there writes, 'That through all the City, for the space almost of fourty days, there were seen Horsemen running in the Air in cloth of Gold, and arm'd with Lances, like a band of Soldiers, and Troops of Horsemen in array, encountring and running one against another, with shaking of shields, and multitude of pikes, and drawing of swords, and casting of darts, and glittering of golden ornaments, and harness of all sorts.' And Josephus writes also concerning the like Prodigies that happen'd before the destruction of the City by Titus, prefacing first, that they were incredible, were it not that they were recorded by those that were Eve-Witnesses of them.

"The like Apparitions were seen before the Civil Wars of Marius and Sylla. And Melanchthon affirms, that a world of such Prodigies were seen all over Germany, from 1524 to 1548. Snellius, amongst other places, doth particularize in Amortsfort, where these fightings were seen not much higher than the house-tops; as also in Amsterdam, where there was also a Sea-fight appearing in the Air for an hour or two together, many thousands of men looking on."

It is not said that it was actually the bodies of those who were dead who were thus seen passing by the walls of Narni, on the contrary we are given to understand that it was a spectral host, but with regard to those persons who were excommunicated we are to believe that physically they are bound by the ban, and that in the cases of resuscitation it is the actual body which appears. It is related in the life of Libentius I, Archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen, who died 4 January, 1013, ruling his see during the reign of King Svend Tdeskaeg,[51] that he excommunicated a number of pirates, and that one of them having been slain was buried on the Norwegian coast. Here by some chance well-nigh fifty years later the body was dug up, and being found intact most widespread terror ensued, until at length a bishop

[p. 117]

was found who understanding the circumstances pronounced the necessary absolutions, when the corpse crumbled to dust. One account states that this prelate was Alured of Winchester, although it seems difficult to suppose that this is correct. It is related that the bodies of those who have been struck by lightning are very often found intact, an opinion maintained by the medical writer Zachias, but Ambroise Pare explained this since he says that such persons are as it were embalmed with the sulphur, which is a preventative of corruption acting in the same way as salt. During a terrible fire at Quebec in 1705, the Ursuline Convent was destroyed and unhappily five nuns perished. More than twenty years later their bodies which had been buried in a layer of hot ashes were not merely found intact but even bled copiously in a thick stream.

Malva relates in his Turco-graecia[52] that at the time of a certain Patriarch of Constantinople, who he names Maximus or Emanuel, and whom he places towards the end of the fifteenth century, the Ottoman Sultan was desirous of inquiring into the truth of this belief which was so universally held by the Greeks, namely that the body of a person who had died excommunicate remained whole. The Patriarch caused to be opened, the tomb of a woman, who was notorious as having been the mistress of an Archbishop of Constantinople, and the body was found entire. The Turkish officials then enclosed it in a coffin which was bound round and hermetically sealed with the Emperor's own signet. The Patriarch after having said the appointed prayers, pronounced a solemn absolution over the dead woman, and three days afterwards when the coffin was opened there was only to be seen a handful of dust. Upon this Calmet aptly remarks: "I do not see any miracle here, since everybody knows that sometimes bodies are found entire and complete in a monument or sarcophagus, and that they crumble to dust immediately they are exposed to the air," and the learned Abbot very pertinently adds: "I do not see how the Archbishop of Constantinople could after death validly absolve a person who was presumably impenitent and who had died excommunicate."[53] It will readily be remembered in this connexion that the famous vaults of S. Michan's church in Dublin, for some reason possess the horrid property of preserving corpses from decay for centuries. As Mr. H. F. [p. 118] Berry tells us in his Preface (p. vi) to The Registers of the Church of S. Michan, Dublin, 1907: "As is well-known the preservative qualities of the vaults under S. Michan's Church are most remarkable, and decay in the bodies committed to them is strangely arrested. The latest writer on the subject (D. A. Chart, Story of Dublin) in a short notice of the Church, speaks of being struck (among others) "by a pathetic baby corpse, from whose plump mists still hang the faded white ribbons of its funeral." This coffin bears the date, 1679; yet the very finger and toe nails of the child are still distinct. The antiseptic qualities are believed to be largely attributable to the extreme dryness of the vaults and to the great freedom of their atmosphere from dust particles."

It is generally admitted that the circumstances which attend the decomposition of the human body are very difficult in their manifold complications since atmosphere, situation with other accidents play so important and obscure a part, whence these laws are still very imperfectly understood owing to the immense practical difficulties, one might almost say the impossibility, of systematic investigation. Doctors A. C. Taylor and F. J. Smith in their Medical Jurisprudence[54] which is universally accepted as a standard and completely authoritative work, comment on these phenomena in very plain terms, frankly acknowledging the doubts and uncertainty that still envelop the whole question." The action of the environment, the inherent potentialities of the microbes, and the state of their vitality at any moment involve such an enormous number of varying and variable factors that it becomes quite impossible to explain on a rational basis of ascertained fact . . . the extraordinary variations in the circumstances of putrefaction that have been observed." And a little later the same authorities tell us that "sometimes one body has been found more decomposed after six or eight months burial than another which has lain interred for a period of eighteen months or two years."[55] An eminent American medical expert, Dr. H. p. Loomis, says: "I have seen bodies buried two months that have shown fewer of the changes produced by putrefaction than others dead but a week."[56]

The Greeks, as we have seen in some detail, generally regarded the fact that a body was found intact as a sign that the person

[p. 119]

had died excommunicate or under some curse, and was at any rate in a state of unhappiness, of painful detention or probation. It is now necessary to consider an aspect of the question which is diametrically and entirely opposed to this idea, namely those cases where incorruption is an evidence of extraordinary sanctity, when the mortal remains of some great saint having been exhumed after death are found to be miraculously preserved for the veneration of the faithful. It is not perhaps even to-day generally recognized how solemn and weighty, how lengthy and detailed a process is that inquiry which must precede those decrees regarding religious honour paid to a deceased person distinguished for eminent holiness of life whether it be that permissive cultus known as Beatification, or that complete preceptive universal cultus known as Canonization. The real trial of a subject proposed for Canonization may be said to begin when a number of very exhaustive examinations have already been made, which for all their rigour are preliminary and ordinary, and the Apostolic process commences which investigates the Virtues and Miracles of the person. S. Thomas defines a miracle as an effect which is beyond the "Order of the whole of created nature." And he explains this by telling us that, if a man throws a stone up into the air, such a motion is no wise miraculous, for though it exceed the powers in a nature of a stone, it is produced by the natural power of man, and therefore it does not exceed the power of the whole of created nature. Besides genuine miracles a number of marvellous phenomena may be and indeed are exhibited, many of which are due to natural powers, as yet imperfectly known or entirely unknown, to hallucination, or to fraud. Therefore miracles do not constitute sanctity of themselves, and Benedict XIV discusses in his great work De Seruorum Dei Beatificatione et Beatorum Canonizatione, IV, pars. I, c. iv, De Fine Miraculorum, et de differentiis inter uera et falsa Miracula.[57] The same great authority lays down that heroic virtues are the first and most decisive witness to sanctity; "visions, prophecies and miracles are only of secondary importance, and they are absolutely ignored if proof of heroic virtues is not forthcoming." This is further insisted upon by Scacchus,[58] and Castellinus[59] prudently says: "Not all the just are to be canonized by the Church, but those who have shone forth with heroic

[p. 120]

virtues." However, the value of miracles must not be underestimated, and unfortunately in many directions there seems a tendency to fall into this grave error. Benedict XIV has a very important and weighty chapter, De Miraculorum necessitate in causis Beatificationis et Canonizationis, which might be studied with profit and instruction. It is not possible to give in detail here the various classes of Causes whose circumstances require a various number of miracles, but it may suffice to say that if the virtues or the martyrdom of the subject are proved by eye-witnesses two miracles are required for beatification and two for canonization. If, however, the virtues or the miracles have been established by evidence which is not that of eye-witnesses (testes de auditu), four miracles are required for beatification and two for canonization. It should be remarked that in all cases the miracles required for canonization must be wrought after beatification, and must be proved by eye-witnesses. Among these miracles which have to be established by evidence before a decree of Beatification is pronounced, the supernatural preservation of the body of a saint is sometimes admitted, and although such a miracle is investigated with the most scrupulous care none the less it is regarded as a high and exceptional distinction. It is generally hoped that at the exhumation of a person whose cause has been begun the body may be found to be preserved incorrupt, but this is by no means invariably the case. Thus Monsignor Benson in a letter dated 4 March, 1904, written from Rome, says: "Mr.----- and I went yesterday to the exhuming of the body of Elizabeth Sanna,[60] who died thirty-five years ago in the odour of sanctity. They hoped to find the body incorrupt; but it was not so . . . it was very interesting to see the actual bones of the Saint, and the Franciscan habit in which she was buried as a Tertiary of S. Francis; and to think that very possibly every one of the fragments would be a venerated relic some day."[61]

It must then be carefully borne in mind that the preservation of the bodies of saints is a very remarkable miracle, and is in no wise to be compared with that preservation of bodies which may occur from time to time under conditions with which we are imperfectly acquainted. It may be well to give a few examples of this supernatural phenomenon. [p. 121] Not altogether unconnected and certainly deserving of a brief consideration are those cases of irradiation when the bodies or the garments, or perhaps the rooms of great saints and mystics became luminous, emitting rays of light, a fact which although certainly it did not originate the introduction of the nimbus or aureola into art may probably have influenced painting to a very large extent. It is a great mistake to say with Gerard Gietmann[62] that all such symbols are suggested by natural phenomena, scientifically accounted for in text books on physics. Although the nimbus was early in use in the monuments of Hellenic and Roman art this had little, if any, influence in the Middle Ages and in earlier Christian times. For as Durandus tells us, and correctly, it was to passages in the Scriptures that reference was made for authority to depict the halo as signifying holiness and dignity.[63] "Sic omnes sancti pinguntur coronati, quasi dicerunt. Filiae Hierusalem., uenite et uidete martyres cum coronis quibus coronauit eas Dominus. Et in Libro Sapientiae: Iusti accipient regnum decoris et diadema speciei de manu Domini. Corona autem huisusmodi depingitur in forma scuti rotundi, quia sancti Dei protectione diuina fruuntur unde cantant gratulabundi: Domine ut scuto bonae uoluntatis tuae coronasti nos" (For thus are all the Saints depicted, crowned, as if they were to say: "O daughters of Jerusalem, come ye and see the Martyrs with the crowns with which their Lord crowned them."[64] And in the Book of Wisdom: "The Just shall receive a kingdom of glory and a crown of beauty at the hands of the Lord."[65] Now a crown of this kind is depicted in the form of a round buckler, because they enjoy the heavenly protection of God, wherefore they sing in perfect happiness: "O Lord thou hast crowned us as with the shield of thy good-will.") It may be remarked that Pope Gregory the Great (about 600) allowed himself to be painted with a square nimbus, and Johannes Diaconus[66] tells us that this was the sign for a living person and not a crown. Other examples of this ornamentation have come down to us from the following centuries and they show that even children were sometimes represented with this square nimbus.

It were impertinent to trace the development of the nimbus halo, glory, and aureola in art, but this cannot fail to have been affected by the irradiation of the mystics and ecstaticas. [p. 122] The Dominican convent of Adelhausen, which was founded by the Consort of Egon II of Urach, Count of Freiburg (1218-36), is famous in the history of German mysticism and was the theatre of the most amazing phenomena. Christina Mechthild Tuschelin, a nun of this house who, it is said, only broke silence once during the whole of her religious life,[67] was very frequently illumined with such a glory of brightness that nobody could look upon her, and at times the community were obliged to request her to absent herself from the choir in order that they might recite their office without distraction.

Another famous Dominican, S. Vincent Ferrer, was often surrounded by light, and on more than one occasion it was thought that either he, or indeed the whole room was ablaze, and persons ran there in great alarm to extinguish the fire, Often too, his white habit was actually scorched although there was no fire in the room.

It may be worth noting that the appearance of a room or a building upon fire has been remarked under very different conditions and proceeding from a very different origin. When the notorious Dr. John Dee was Warden of Manchester College, a position he obtained in 1595 and resigned on account of failing health in 1602 or 1603, he often excited suspicion by the extraordinary, and some whispered unhallowed, nature of his studies which he often pursued in spite of his seventy years and more until the break of day. One mid-night, the whole college was aroused by the fierce glare of a mighty fire, and it was seen that the warden's lodgings were bursting into flame in every direction. In a few moments a crowd had hastily rushed to the spot and buckets of water were brought, when the flames suddenly died away, and almost immediately Dr. Dee appeared from his house to thank them for their care and assure them that he had been able to subdue the conflagration. It is said that on the next day the building bore no mark of fire, which circumstance together with the fact that he had so mysteriously extinguished the flames went far to increase his sombre reputation in the town.

The halo is by no means merely an artistic symbolism. A bright glow was often perceived to surround the head of S. Rose of Lima, and the same was not infrequently remarked in the cases of Thomas Lombard and the lay brother Barnaby of Pistoia. This is also recorded of S. Ravello, a Bishop of

[p. 123]

Ferrara, and of S. Afra of Augsburg, whose Passio is not later than the end of the fourth century. The Olivetan chronicles in their record of the founder of this austere reform, Bernardo Ptolomei, say that he was often seen to be encircled with light, a phenomenon which also distinguished Giovanni-Battista de Lanuza, and the Poor Clare, Antonia of Florence, who died in 1472. A glory in the shape of a star was observed on the forehead of Diego Lauda, and this is also related of that marvellous ecstatic Cecilia Baldi of Bologna. The description of S. Dominic which Cecilia Cesarini used to give must be very familiar to all. She loved to tell how, save when the sorrow of others moved him to compassion, he was always joyous and happy, and very frequently a radiant light played about his temples and illumined his sweet smiles. The countenance of Dominica of S. Mary literally blazed with light when she received Holy Communion, and the same marvel was observed in the case of Ida of Louvain, a stigmatized Cistercian nun of the Convent of Valrose, who died in 1300.

There are many more recent examples of this supernatural light, as for instance in the case of S. Alphonsus Liguori whose countenance when he preached one day in the Cathedral of Foggia, a ferverino in honour of Our Lady became exceedingly luminous and beamed with rays of dazzling brilliance. Again the Venerable Antony Claret, who died 24 October, 1870, was not infrequently seen to be haloed in a great splendour of golden glory whilst saying Mass in the Royal Chapel at Madrid. This miracle was witnessed by many, and Queen Isabella II solemnly took oath to that effect, requiring it to be placed upon record. The same phenomenon was witnessed by the whole congregation when the Venerable Claret was addressing them from the pulpit in the Cathedral at Vichy.[68]

It will not appear surprising that this irradiation often seems to reach its greatest intensity at the hour of death when the last bonds which tie man to the earth are being broken. S. John of the Cross in his last moments was surrounded by so brilliant a corruscation that those who were present were bound to turn away their eyes dazzled and blinded. When a pious widow, Gentile of Ravenna was dying the whole room appeared to shine, a phenomenon which was repeated in the case of Diego Ortiz, whilst the same is recorded of the [p. 124] Dominican nun, Maria Villani of Naples (1584-1670), who has had few rivals in her profound works on mysticism.

Very many other examples might be given, but we will now mention a few instances in which the irradiation continued even after the soul had left the body. Such was the case with S. Alfrida, a daughter of King Offa of Mercia; whilst the bodies of S. Juventius and S. Maximus reflected so penetrating a brilliance that nobody could bear to gaze upon them. Similar circumstances are said to have occurred at the tomb of S. Wilfred who was enshrined in the Church of S. Peter at Ripon, and also at the tomb of S. Kunigunde, who is buried in the Cathedral of Bamberg.

Of Blessed Walter the Premonstratensian Abbot of Ilfeld in Hanover, who died in 1229, the Nobertine chronicle tell us that when the holy body was being carried on its bier to the tomb, so great a glory shone all around it that the religious who were inceding in solemn procession after the remains of their dead father were fain to veil their eyes. "B. Walterus. . . Moriens cum ad sepulchrum deferretur, tanta lux diuinitus immissa defuncti corpus irradiauit, ut religiosi adsistentes eam uix ferre possent." Upon this an old poet wrote the following lines:

De B. Waltero circa cuius feretrum coposia lux resplenduit.

Corporis bos radios pia gens stupet, immemor ante
     Illius aetherea cor rutilasse face.
 Et quid-ni stupeat, solem dum mergitur undis,
     Clarius exstinctam spargere posse facem?
 Ecce suae carnis WALTERVS lege solutus,
     Ad tumulum moestis fratribus abripitur.
 Non patitur uirtus, indignaturque sepulcro
     Claudier, in cincres, non abitura leues:
 Ucrum oritur, radio circumfulgente Feretrum,
     Ut solet Eois Lucifer ortus aquis.
 O uir Sancte, tuis si lux hic tanta fuisti,
     In coelo qualis quantaque stella micas![69]

It is not surprising that persons whose holiness and asceticism bad been so great during their lives, that their bodies were subjected to so extraordinary a phenomenon as irradiation, should after death have remained incorrupt. The connexion between the two is very obvious, and it should be remarked that incorruption is one of the commonest circumstances

[p. 125]

recorded in hagiology. Although it is impossible to give more than a few examples from very many, it may be mentioned that in the case of S. Edward the Confessor, who died 5 January, 1066, when the body was examined in 1102, it was found to be incorrupt, the limbs flexible, and the cerements fresh and clean: whilst two years after canonization (1161) the body, stiff incorrupt, was translated to a tomb of the greatest magnificence. When eighty years after the first deposition the body of S. Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln, who died 1200 and was buried in Lincoln Cathedral, was taken up to be translated to a richer shrine it was found to be wholly intact. Perhaps one of the most remarkable instances of the mortal remains of a Saint which are yet supernaturally preserved is that of the Poor Clare, S. Catherine of Bologna, who died 9 March, 1463 and whose body is venerated in a small yet exquisitely elegant sanctuary attached to the convent of Corpus Domini at Bologna. It is a remarkable circumstance that here it is not preserved under crystal or glass but is seated, dressed in sumptuous brocades, jewelled and crowned, in an embroidered chair in the centre of the room. The body is desiccated, but in no sense decayed. In the Carmelite Convent of the Piazza Savonarola at Florence is the body of S. Maria Madalena de'Pazzi who died 25 May, 1607. This was exhumed in 1608, on account of the damp, when it was found to be entire and flexible, and it was officially certified to be intact in 1639 and again in 1663. It is still perfect and whole where it repose; in an elaborate shrine of crystal and gold. In the same Church is the incorrupt body of Maria Bartolomea Bagnesi, a Dominican Tertiary, whose death took place on Whit-Tuesday 1577. The body of another great Saint of Florence, S. Antoninus, which was unburied for eight days, remained flexible. This great Archbishop died 2 May, 1459, and in 1589, when his tomb was examined the holy remains were found to be still intact.

In Montefalco, high among the Umbrian uplands, lies the body of the Augustinian S. Clare, one of the glories of that ancient Order so rich in hallowed and venerable names, and one of the most marvellous ecstaticas of all time. Born about 1275, perhaps a few years earlier, she became Abbess of the Convent of Montefalco and seemed to dwell more in Heaven than on earth. Gifted with the spirit of prophecy

[p. 126]

and the grace of working miracles, she was the subject of extraordinary ecstasies and raptures, which were prolonged from days to weeks. She died, 17 August, 1308, at three o'clock in the morning, and when her heart was extracted from her body this was opened and therein impressed upon the very flesh were seen a figure of Christ crucified, the scourge, the Crown of Thorns, the column, the lance, three nails, the sponge and reed. This relic is venerated at Montefalco to-day. Even now her body lies there perfect and intact. The hands and face are clearly visible, exquisitely pale and lovely, untouched by any fleck of corruption. It has not been embalmed, but Lorenzo Tardy says that throughout Italy of all the bodies of Saints which are venerated incorrupt the body of S. Clare of Montefalco is the loveliest and most free from any spot or blemish during the passing years.

Moreover when her heart was opened the blood flowed forth in great abundance and was carefully collected in a glass vial. Although normally coagulated it has preserved in colour a bright fresh red as though newly spilled. At rare intervals this blood liquefies and becomes from being opaque and congealed, humid, lucent, transparent, and freely-flowing. On occasion it has been known actually to spume and bubble. There are ample records that this took place in 1495, 1500, 1508, 1570, 1600, and 1618.[70]

It is known that new blood has frequently oozed from the arm of S. Nicolas, O.S.A., which is preserved at Tolentino, but the most famous of these blood-miracles is, of course, that of S. Januarius, the Patron of Naples. Here the blood of the Saint which is contained in two phials, enclosed in a silver reliquary, is held out by the officiating priest eighteen times in the year before the congregation in the Cathedral. Upon the altar is exposed the silver bust containing the Head of the Saint. After an interval, sometimes a space of hardly more than two minutes and sometimes (but very rarely) well nigh an hour the congealed mass in the phials becomes crimson and liquid, and on occasion froths and bubbles up within the ampolla.[71] Science having exhausted itself to find some explanation of the phenomenon confesses a miracle. The same liquefaction takes place with regard to some other Relics of peculiar sanctity, the blood of S. [p. 127] John Baptist, of S. Stephen, the Proto-Martyr, of S. Patricia, and especially of S. Pantaleone, Relics of whose blood preserved at the Convent of the Incoronazione, Madrid, at Naples, and at Ravello, liquefy upon the feast day of the Saint afterwards returning to a congealed substance. It would appear a relic of the blood of S. Pantaleone at Valle della Lucarina remains liquid all the year round. As one might expect, sceptics both without--and alas! within the Church have attempted to find some natural explanation, but without avail. One notoriously rationalistic writer is "strongly inclined to believe that such alleged blood-relics always liquefied if they were exposed long enough to light and air," a suggestion which is demonstrably false. The same maggot-monger has audaciously ventured to declare: "If we could suppose some substance or mixture had been accidentally discovered which hardened when shut up in the dark, but melted more or less rapidly when exposed to the light of day in a warmer atmosphere, it would be easy to understand the multiplication of alleged relics of this character, which undoubtedly seems to have taken place in the latter part of the sixteenth century." It is instructive to remark what wild hypotheses men will build and what shifts men will seek who endeavour to escape from facts.

On 20 May, 1444, the celebrated missionary and reformer S. Bernardine of Siena died at Aquila in the Abruzzi. It was the Vigil of the Ascension and in the choir the friars were just chanting the Antiphon to the Magnificat, Pater, manifestaui nomen tuum hominibus . . . ad Te uenio, alleluja. The body was kept in the Church for twenty-six days after death, and what is very remarkable there was a copious flow of blood after twenty-four days. The people of Siena requested that so great a treasure might be handed over to them, but the local magistrates refused to do this, and with obsequies of the greatest splendour, S. Bernardine was laid to rest in the Church of the Coventuals. Six years later, 24 May, 1450, the Saint was solemnly canonized by Nicolas V. On 17 May, 1472, the body, yet without speck or mar, was translated to the new Church of the Observants at Aquila, which had been especially built to receive it, and here it was enclosed in a costly shrine presented by Louis XI of France. This Church having been completely destroyed by an earthquake

[p. 128]

in 1703, was replaced by another edifice where the relics of S. Bernardine are still venerated. The body was still intact in the seventeenth century.

With regard to the flow of blood, the same phenomenon was observed and even yet continues in the case of S. Nicolas of Tolentino, who died 10 September, 1306, and who is buried in his Basilica there. Two hundred years after his death some persons who had concealed themselves in the church over night endeavoured to cut off an arm and carry it as a relic. No sooner had they commenced this operation and gashed the flesh with a knife than blood flowed freely as from a living body.

The first Patriarch of Venice, S. Lorenzo Giustiniani, died I January, 1455, and so great was the concourse of people to venerate his remains that the body lay in the Church of San Pietro di Castello (formerly SS. Sergio e Bacco) for no less than sixty-seven days, exposed to the air. Although it had not been embalmed the face continued of a fresh and ruddy complexion as in life. The body of the Franciscan, S. John Capistran, who died 23 October, 1456, was found to be incorrupt in 1765; and the body of the Augustinian nun, S. Rita of Cascia is still intact in her convent shrine among the Tuscan Hills. The body of S. Didacus, a lay brother of the Friars Minor who died at Alcala on 12 November, 1463 was exhumed four days after death and remained above ground for six months, supple and whole; it was still without blemish in 1562. As late as 1867, the body of the foundress of the Ursulines, S. Angela Merici, who died at Brescia, 27 January, 1540, was found to be entire.

It may not impertinently be remarked here that the Orthodox Russian Church includes in its calendar a number of bishops, monks, and holy hermits, whose bodies have been discovered to be intact at some considerable period after death, and if not actually in these days an entirely necessary condition for canonization incorruption is at any rate regarded as evidence of extraordinary sanctity. At Kieff there is (or was) a famous sanctuary which contained the bodies of no less than seventy-three venerable religious. I have been told by those who have visited this shrine that these are incorrupt, although dark and mummified. They are robed in rich vestments and laid out in open coffins for general honour and

[p. 129]

worship. Hassert speaks of the body of S. Basil of Ostrog, which was entire although much desiccated." At Cetienje Schwarz saw the body of S. Peter I, the Vladika, who died in 1830.[73] "Dieser durre, steinharte Kadaver," he calls it. It should be remarked that these remains are always described as parched, sere and withered, and in no way retaining the freshness, the natural colour and complexion of life, which so often distinguishes the incorrupt bodies of Saints of the Catholic Church.

Perhaps to these mummified Relics, there could be few contrasts more striking indeed than the body of S. Catherine of Genoa--to take the first example that occurs--which, when I venerated it some years ago in the chapel of her own Ospedale seemed as though the Saint were but reposing in her shrine, as though she might open her eyes and gently smile upon her clients who knelt in humblest prayer. The extraordinary phenomena connected with the body of S. Teresa who died at Alba de Tormes, 4 October, 1582, are so well-known and have been so often described in detail that it is only necessary slightly to refer to them. The nuns fearing that this great treasure would be taken from them hastily buried her on the morrow after her death. A mass of bricks, stones, mortar and lime was hurriedly piled on the coffin lid. For many days strange knockings were heard as from the grave itself. There issued a mysterious perfume which varied not only in degree but in kind, for sometimes it was like lilies, sometimes like roses, sometimes like violets and often like jasmin. The community upbraided themselves that they had not given their mother more honourable burial, and at length it was resolved that the body should be secretly exhumed. This took place on 4 July, 1583. It was discovered that the lid of the coffin had been broken by the rubble heaped upon it, and the wood was rotten and decayed. The habit was stained and smelt of damp and earth, but the holy remains were as sound and entire as on the day they were laid in earth. They removed the mouldering clothes, washed the body, scraping off the earth with knives, and it was remarked that the scrapings of earth were redolent of the same perfumes as filled the grave. Moreover, both earth and cerements were saturated with a fragrant oil that exuded from the body. Yepes who wrote in 1614, the

[p. 130]

year the Saint was beatified particularly draws attention to this fragrant effusion, and later when the remains were again examined it was found that a sheet of fair linen with which the body had been covered was odorous from the same defluxion. This phenomenon classes S. Teresa among the Saints who are technically known as Myroblites (myroblytes,) from whose Relics exude balm and aromatic ichors. Of these perhaps S. Nicolas of Myra, who lies at Bari, is the most famous. There may also be named S. Willibrord, the Apostle of Holland; S. Vitalian; S. Lutgarde; S. Walbruga; S. Rose, of Viterbo; the Blessed Mathia de' Nazzarei, a poor Clare of Matelica; S. Hedwige, of Poland; S. Eustochium; S. Agnes of Montepulciano, the Dominican nun; S. Maria Maddalena de'Pazzi; and the ecstatic Carmelite Marguerite Van Valkenissen, foundress of the convent of Oirschot in Brabant.

It was this incorruptibility which was the immediate cause of the first official steps being taken to secure the beatification and canonization of Teresa de Jesus. Before the body was replaced after exhumation the Provincial, Father Geronymo de la Madre de Dios, better known as Gracian, cut off the left hand and bore it away with him to Avila in a locked casket, when blood flowed freely from the wound. Two years later it was decreed by the general Carmelite Chapter that the body should be translated to the convent of Avila, which as the birthplace of the Saint and as her first foundation undoubtedly had the best claim to these Relics. But in order to spare the nuns of Alba the fathers decided that the transference should be performed secretly, and accordingly the officials who were entrusted with this business opened the tomb at nine o'clock on the night of 24th November, 1585, and in fulfilment of their orders, whilst the sisterhood was engaged at Matins in the choir above, exhumed the body. To mitigate the grief of the convent it was decided that the left arm should be severed and that they should be allowed to retain this. Fray Gregorio de Nacianceno who was entrusted with this overcome with emotion, drew a sharp knife and severed the limb. He afterwards told Ribera that it was the greatest sacrifice of himself God had ever called upon him to make. It was remarked that the bone was as sound, and the flesh as soft, and its colour as natural as

[p. 131]

if the saint were alive. When the precious remains arrived at the convent of San Jose of Avila it was laid on record that the body without sign of corruption, for when they lifted it out of the chest it seemed that of one asleep. Ribera has left us a minute description of the remains which he examined thoroughly on 25th March, 1588, and his account is so interesting it will not be impertinent to quote it in full. He writes: "I saw the sainted body, greatly to my satisfaction, on 25th March of this year of 1588, as I examined it thoroughly, it being my intention to give the testimony I give here. I can describe it well. It is erect, although bent somewhat forward, as is usual with old people; and by it, it can well be seen that she was of very good stature. By placing a hand behind it to lean against, it stands up, and can be dressed and undressed as if she were alive. The whole body is of the colour of dates, although in some parts a little whiter. The face is of a darker colour than the rest, since, the veil having fallen over it, and gathered together a great quantity of dust, it was much worse treated than other parts of the body; but it is absolutely entire, so that not even the tip of the nose has received any injury. The head is as thickly covered with hair as when they buried her. The eyes are dried up, the moisture they possessed having evaporated, but as for the rest entire. Even the hairs on the moles on her face are there. The mouth is slightly shut, so that it cannot be opened. The shoulders, especially, are very fleshy. The place whence the arm was out is moist, and the moisture clings to the hand, and leaves the same odour as the body. The hand exceedingly shapely, and raised as if in the action of benediction, although the fingers are not entire. They did ill in taking them, since the hand that did such great things, and that God had left entire, ought for ever to have remained so. The feet are very beautiful and shapely, and, in short, the whole body is covered with flesh. The fragrance of the body is the same as that of the arm, but stronger. So great a consolation was it to me to see this hidden treasure, that to my thinking it was the best day I ever had in my life, and I could not gaze at her enough. One anxiety I have, lest some day they should separate it, either at the request of great personages or at the importunity of the monasteries; for by no means should this be done, but it should remain as God left it, as a testimony

[p. 132]

of his greatness, and the most pure virginity and admirable sanctity of the Mother Teresa de Jesus. To my thinking, neither he who asks it nor he who grants it, will act like true sons of hers."

Having dealt with so celebrated a case in some detail we may very briefly pass in review some four or five other instances more premising that these have been selected from a very great many, something at random, and not because they present any remarkable or unique phenomena which it would not be tolerably easy to parallel in other accounts. On the other hand they are no less memorable than is the case of S. Teresa herself: For example, the body of S. Pascal Baylon, who died at Villa Reale, 15th May, 1592, although covered with quick-lime, was found nine months later to be entire and incorrupt, and in 1611 expert surgeons declared that the preservation was miraculous. Again the body of S. Philip Neri, who died 25th May, 1595, was discovered perfectly intact eight months after burial, and was still entire when examined in 1599, 1602, and 1639. In the cases of two saints who died in 1608, Francis Caracciolo, who expired at Agnone in the Abruzzi, 4th June, 160 8; and Andrea Avellino, who was struck down by apoplexy at Naples on 10th November of the same year, there were noticed curious blood phenomena. The body of S. Francis remained flexible, and when an incision was made blood freely flowed. The body of S. Andrea was found incorrupt more than a year after he had been buried. A quantity of blood that had been received in a phial did not congeal, but is constantly observed to be still liquid. In the case of S. Camillus de Lellis who died at Rome, 14th July, 1614, the body remained soft and flexible. At her convent in the Umbrian aerie of Citta di Castello reposes the unflecked and whole body of the Capuchiness, S. Veronica Giuliam, who died 9th July, 1727. There it may be seen, reposing as though she were not dead, but slept.

This list might be greatly prolonged without much research or difficulty; however, it is no doubt already sufficiently ample, and I have thought it worth while to treat the subject of the incorruptibility of the bodies of saints in some detail, as though of course, this phenomenon is in itself not to be regarded as evidence of sanctity, the preservation of the body of a person who has led a life of heroic virtue when this

[p. 133]

eminent holiness has been officially and authoritatively recognized, may be admitted as a miracle, that is to say as supernatural. More than once attention has been drawn to the fact that there exist parodies of these phenomena, and as incorruptibility is often attached to sanctity so is it an essential of the very opposite of holiness, the demonism of the vampire. It has been said that the vampire, as a demon reanimates the corpses of entirely innocent people, but this is very doubtful and it is probable that the only bodies thus to be infested and preserved by dark agency are those of persons who during their lives were distinguished by deeds of no ordinary atrocity. Very often too the vampire is a corpse reanimated by his own spirit who seeks to continue his own life in death by preying upon others and feeding himself upon their vitality that is to say by absorbing their blood since blood is the principle of life.

Dr. T. Claye Shaw in his study, A Prominent Motive in Murder[74] has given us a most valuable and suggestive paper upon the natural fascination of blood which may be repelling or attractant, and since Dr. Havelock Ellis has acutely remarked that "there is scarcely any natural object with so profoundly emotional an effect as blood,"[75] it is easy to understand how nearly blood is connected with the sexual manifestations, and how distinctly erotic and provocative the sight or even the thought of blood almost inevitably proves. It would appear to be Plumroder, who in 1830 was the first to draw definite attention to the connexion between sexual passions and blood. The voluptuous sensations excited by blood give rise to that lust for blood which Dr. Shaw terms hemothymia. A vast number of cases have been recorded in which persons who are normal, find intense pleasure in the thought of blood during their sexual relations, although perhaps if blood were actually flowing they might feel repulsion. Yet "normally the fascination of blood, if present at all during sexual excitement, remains more or less latent, either because it is weak or because the checks that inhibit it are inevitably very powerful."[76]

Blood is the vital essence, and even without any actual sucking of blood there is a vampire who can--consciously, or perhaps unconsciously--support his life and re-energize his frame by drawing upon the vitality of others. He may

[p. 134]

be called a spiritual vampire, or as he has been dubbed a "psychic sponge." Such types are by no means uncommon. Sensitive people will after complain of weariness and loss of spirits when they have been for long in the company of certain others, and Laurence Oliphant in his Scientific Religion has said: "Many persons are so constituted that they have, unconsciously to themselves, an extraordinary faculty for sucking the life-principle from others, who are constitutionally incapable of retaining their vitality." Breeders tell us that young animals should not be herded with old ones; Doctors forbid young children being put to sleep with aged individuals. It will be remembered that when King David was old and ailing his forces were recruited by having a young maiden brought into closest contact with him, although he was no longer able to copulate. Et rex Dauid senuerat, habebatque aetatis plurimos dies: cumque operiretur uestibus, non calefiebat. Dixerunt ergo ei serui sui: Quaeremus domino nostro regi adolescentulam uirginem, et stet coram rege, et foueat eam, dormiatque in sinu suo, et calefaciat dominum nostrum regem. Quaesierunt igitur adolescentulam speciosam in omnibus finibus Israel, et inuenerunt Abisag Sunamitidem, et adduxerunt eam ad regem. Erat autem puella pulchra nimis, dormiebatque cum rege, et ministrabat ei, rex uero non cognouit eam, III Kings (AV. I Kings) 1, 1-4. (Now King David was old, and advanced in years; and when he was covered with clothes he was not warm. His servants therefore said to him: "Let us seek for our lord the king, a young virgin, and let her stand before the king, and cherish him, and sleep in his bosom, and warm our lord the king." So they sought a beautiful young woman in all the coasts of Israel, and they found Abisag, a Sunamitess, and brought her to the king. And the damsel was exceeding beautiful, and she slept with the king; and served him, but the king did not know her.) The vitality of the young and lovely maiden served to re-energize the old Monarch, who thus drew upon her freshness and youth, although there was no coitus.

In an article on Vampires, Borderland, Vol. III, No. 3, July, 1896, pp. 353-358, Dr. Franz Hartmann, mentions the "psychic sponge" or mental vampire. He says: "They unconsciously vampirize every sensitive person with whom

[p. 135]

they come in contact, and they instinctively seek out such persons and invite them to stay at their houses. I know of an old lady, a vampire, who thus ruined the health of a lot of robust servant girls, whom she took into her service and made them sleep in her room. They were all in good health when they entered, but soon they began to sicken, they became emaciated and consumptive and had to leave the service."

Vampirism in some sort and to some degree may be said to leave its trace throughout almost all nature. Just as we have the parasitic men and women, so have we the parasitic plants, and at this point there imposes itself upon us some mention of the animal which directly derives a name from habits which exactly resemble those of the Slavonic Vampire--the Vampire Bat. There has been much exaggeration in the accounts which travellers have given of these bats and many of the details would seem to have been very inaccurately observed by earlier inquirers. The Encyclopaedia Britannica says[77] that there are only two species of blood-sucking bats known--Desmodus rufus and Diphylla ecaudata. These inhabit the tropical and part of the sub-tropical regions of the New World, and are restricted to South and Central America. Their attacks on men and other warm-blooded animals were noticed by very early writers. Thus Peter Martyr (Anghiera)

who wrote soon after the conquest of South America, says that in the Isthmus of Darien there were bats which sucked the blood of men and cattle when asleep to such a degree as even to kill them. Condamine in the eighteenth century remarks that at Borja, Ecuador, and in other districts they had wholly destroyed the cattle introduced by the missionaries. Sir Robert Schomburgh relates that at Wicki, on the river Berlice, no fowls could be kept on account of the ravages of these creatures, which attacked their combs making them appear white from loss of blood.

Although long known to Europeans the exact species to which these bats belonged were not to be determined for a long time, and in the past writers have claimed many frugivorous bats, especially Vampyrus spectrum, a large bat of most forbidding appearance, to be the true Vampire. Charles Darwin was able to fix at least one of the blood-sucking species. He says that the whole circumstance was much doubted in

[p. 136]

England, but "we were bivouacking late one night near Coquimbo in Chile, when my servant, noticing that one of the horses was very restive went to see what was the matter, and fancying he could detect something, suddenly put his hand on the beast's withers, and secured the vampire." (Naturalist's Voyage Round the World, p. 22.)

Travellers say the wounds inflicted by these bats are similar in character to a cut from a sharp razor when shaving. A portion of the skin is taken off, and a large number of severed capillary vessels being thus exposed, a constant flow of blood is maintained. From this source the blood is drawn through the exceedingly small gullet of the bat into the intestine-like stomach, whence it is, probably, gradually drawn off during the slow progress of digestion, while the animal sated with food, is hanging in a state of torpidity from the roof of its cave or from the inner side of a hollow tree.

This is exactly the Vampire who with his sharp white teeth bites the neck of his victim and sucks the blood from the wounds he has made, gorging himself, like some great human leech, until he is replete and full, when he retires to his grave to repose, lethargic and inert until such time as he shall again sally forth to quench his lust at the veins of some sleek and sanguine juvenal.

  

NOTES TO CHAPTER II.

[1. Apocalypse, xxi, 8: "But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers and sorcerers, and idolaters and all liars, they shall have their portion in the pool burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death." Also, xxii, 15: "Without are dogs, and sorcerers, and unchaste, and murderers, and servers of idols, and everyone that loveth and maketh a lie."

2. The House of Souls, London, 1906, pp. 113-118.

3. Scotch Historical Society, xxv, p. 348.

4. A Prodigious and Tragicall History of the Arraignment . . . of six Witches at Maidstone . . . by H. F. Gent, 1652, p. 7.

5. A Full and True Relation of the Tryal, Condemnation, and Execution of Ann Poster, 1674, p. 8.

6. The Iliad of Homer, "Rendered into English Blank Verse. By Edward Earl of Derby." John Murray, 1864. Vol. II, Book xxiii, ll. 92-119.

7. Choephorae, 429-433.

8. One may compare the corresponding passage in the Antigone of Alfieri:

         Emone, ah! tutto io sento,
 Tutto l'amor, che a te portava: io sento
 Il dolor tutto, a cui ti lascio.

9. Pausanias, IX. 32. 6.

10. Aelian, Peri Zuun idiotetos, V, 49.

[p. 137]

11. Chronicles of the House of Borgia, Baron Corvo, p. 283.

12. S. John, ix, 22, seq.

13. S. John, xii, 42.

14. S. John, xvi, 2; and S. Luke, vi, 22.

15. S. Matthew, xviii, 16-18.

16. Theodore Balsamon, I, 27 and 569; apud Migne.

17. Jacques Goar, "Eyxologion, siue Rituale Graecorum," Paris, 1667, p. 685.

18. C, xiii.

19. Balsamon, I, 64-5 and 437.

20. Cambridge, 1619.

21. Op. cit., xv.

22. "Under Justinian, Theodore Askidas and Domitian of Caesarea refused to condemn Origen. It remains an open question whether Origen and Origenism were ever anathematized. Authorities are divided, and modern writers hesitate to pronounce. The balance of opinion seems to be that Origen. was not condemned, at least it does not appear that Popes Vigilius, Pelagius I, Pelagius II, S. Gregory the Great, recognized any such condemnation.

23. Reigned 535-36.

24. Dialogues, Book II, c. xxiii.

25. The Holy Rule; especially cs. vi-vii.

26. This subject was painted by Lucio Massari, a pupil of Ludovico Caracci, in the cloisters of the Benedictine convent of San Michele-in-Bosco, Bologna. Unfortunately the fresco has perished, but it is to some extent known from engravings.

27. De Sancta Uirginitate, xlv.

28. Dialogues, Book II, c, xxiv.

29. Born 339 or 340; died between 394 and 403.

30. The Council of Constantinople held in 692 under Justinian II, commonly called the Council in Trullo. The Orthodox Greek Church reckons this Council to be oecumenical, but this was not so recognized in the West. S. Bede (De sexta mundi aetate) even terms it a reprobate synod; and Paul the Deacon (Hist. Lang., VI, p. 11) an erratic assembly.

Also the Third Council of Carthage.

31. The cult of S. Othmar began to spread almost immediately after his death.

32. Iso of S. Gall wrote De miraculis S. Othmari, libri duo, which is given by Migni Patres Latini, cxxi, 779-796, and in the Monumenta Germaniae Historiae Scriptorum, II, 47-54.

33. The Historia Translationis Sancti Cuthberti as printed by the Bollandists and by Stevenson (Eng. Hist. Soc., 1838) is superseded by the fuller text in the Rolls Series and in the Surtees Society, LI, London, 1868.

34. IV, xli.

35. 1585-1644.

36. This also appears in the edition of the Works of S. Gregory of 1705. Muratori (De rebus liturgicis, vi) highly praises the Commentary of Dom Menard.

37. He died 1058. See Will, Aeta et Scripta quae de controuersiis ecclesiae graccae et latinae saeculo XI composita extant, Leipsig, 1861; and Adrian Fortescue, The Orthodox Eastern Church, London, 1907.

38. Or to peratiki. Schmidt, Das Volksleben der Neugriechen suggests that in the local dialect it may be peratikin.

39. Protodikos, Peri teis par' emin tafeis, 1860, says that in certain districts of Asia Minor the custom was still connected with Charos; and in the same year Skordeles, Pandura, xi, p. 449, stated that "until a short time ago" the coin for Charos was placed in the month of the dead at Stenimachos in Thrace.

Such a practice even prevailed in England, and in some country places was observed far later than might be supposed. I have been shown by a friend a silver coin of the reign of Queen Anne which was placed in the mouth of his

[p. 138]

great-grandmother when she lay dead, and only removed immediately before the nailing down of the coffin.

40. Menaion (menaion from men "month") is the name of each separate book, whence the set of Offices is generally called Menaia. The first printed edition was made by Andrew and James Spinelli at Venice, 1528-1596; and reprinted, 1596-1607. The latest Greek editions were published at Venice in 1873, Orthodox rite; and at Rome in 1888, Uniate rite.

41. The Vow of Stability, stabilitas loci, which unites the monk for life to the particular monastery in which his vows were made, was insisted upon by S. Benedict, who thus greatly altered the pre-existing practice and put an end to the Sarabaites and Gyrovagi against whom the holy patriarch inveighes so sternly in the first chapter of the Rule.

42. Compendium Theologiae Moralis. Sabetti-Barrett. Editio Uicesima Quinta. Pustet, 1916, p. 984.

43. sub die 26 Maii.

44. First edition, 1746.

45. Remiremont, a monastery and nunnery of the Rule of S. Benedict, was founded by SS. Romanicus and Amatus in 620. The monastery became a Priory of the Canons Regular of S. Augustine who, in 1623, bestowed upon the Benedictines of the Congregation of S. Vannes. Both houses were suppressed during the French Revolution. See Gallia Christiana, Paris, 1785, xiii, 1416; and Guinot's 'Etude historique sur l'abbaye de Remiremont Epinal, 1886.

46. The place of pilgrimage was Notre Dame du Tresor, one of the most famous sanctuaries of the diocese of Sainte-Die (S. Deodatus).

47. He was consecrated in 1027; and enthroned as Pope, 12th February, 1049.

48. Apud Watterich, Pontificum Romanorum Uitae, I. Leipzig, 1862.

49. The Abbey of Farfa is about twenty-pix miles from Rome. It is said that in the days of the Emperor Julian or of Gratian Caesar the Syrian S. Laurentius dedicated a church to Our Lady here. Archaeological discoveries in 1888 seem to show that the first monastery, devastated by the Vandals circa 457, had been built on the site of a heathen temple. The principal founder of Farfa was Thomas de Mauricume. He had spent three years as a humble palmer at Jerusalem, and whilst in prayer before the Holy Sepulchre, Our Lady appeared to him and bade him return to Italy, and there to restore Farfa. The Duke of Spoleto, Faroald, was also commanded to help in the good work. Since 1842 the Cardinal Bishop of Sabina, a suburbicarian bishop, bears also the title of Abbot of Farfa.

The body of S. Martin was venerated in his basilica at Tours. This sanctuary was famous as a place of pilgrimage until 1562, when the Protestant hordes attacked and demolished it, the shrine and the Holy Relics, the special object of their hate, being destroyed. The church was restored but again devastated under the French Revolution. Of recent years a basilica, which is unfortunately of small dimensions, has been erected and here, on 11th November, the solemnity of S. Martin is celebrated with much pomp and a great concourse of the faithful.

50. Lambert of Hersfeld, apud Monumenta Germaniae Historiae Scriptorum, V, 168.

51. 960-1014.

52. Lib. I, pp. 26-27.

53. Calmet, op. cit., vol. II, c. xxx, p. 125.

54. Vol. I, p. 282, ed. 1920.

55. Op. cit., p. 295.

56. Apud Witthaus and Becker, Medical Jurisprudence, Vol. I, p. 446.

57. Romas, MDCCXC, vol. VII, pp. 51-68.

58. De notis et signis Sanctitatis, c. iv, 2.

59. De certitudine gloriae Sanctorum, in app. ad. c. iv.

60. The beatification of this great Servant of God is confidently awaited.

61. The Life of Monsignor Hugh Benson, by C. C. Martindale, S. J., London, 1016, vol. II, p. 180.

[p. 139]

62 Professor of Aesthetics, S. Ignatius College, Valkenburg, Holland.

63. Rationale diuinorum Officiorum, I, iii, 19 seq.

64. Canticles, iii, 2.

65. Wisdom, v, 17.

66. Migne, Patres Latini, LXXV, 231.

67. One night in summer at the conclusion of Matins when the community were all surprised to see daylight, Mechtild involuntarily exclaimed: "Why, dear sisters, it is already day!" The Spirit of the Dominican Order, by Mother Frances Raphael, O.S.D., Second Edition, London, 1910, p. 144.

68. Life of the Venerable Anthony M. Claret, by the Rev. Eugene Sugranes, C.M.F., Texas [1921].

69. Epigrammata de Uiris Uitae Sanctimonia Illustribus ex Ordire Premonstratensi, Augustini Wickmans, C.R.P., Taminiae, 1895, p. 30, and pp. 16-17.

70. Vita di Santa Chiara di Montefalco . . . scritta dal Rmo. p. Maestro Lorenzo Tardy. Roma, 1881.

71. Memorie Istoriche della Vita, Miracoli, e Culto di S. Gianuario Martire . . raccolte da D. Camillo Tutini. Napoli, 1710.

72. Reise Luich Montenegro, Vienna, 1893, p. 27.

73. Montenegro, Leipzig, 1883, pp. 81-82.

74 The Lancet, 19th June, 1909.

75. Studies in the Psychology of Sex. Vol. III. "Analysis of the Sexual Impulse," pp. 120-121. Second Edition. Philadelphia. 1926.

76. Dr. Havelock Ellis, op. cit., p. 121.

77. Whence I take the following account of the vampire bat.]

     
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 140]

  

CHAPTER III

  

THE TRAITS AND PRACTICE OF VAMPIRISM

IT was generally supposed that all suicides might after death become vampires; and this was easily extended to those who met with any violent or sudden death. Mr. Lawson tells us that there persists a tradition in Maina, where the Vendetta is still maintained, that a man whose murder has not been avenged is liable to become a vrykolakas.[1] The Mainotes who derive their name from the place Maina, near Cape Taenaron (Matapan), even yet preserve many of the customs and characteristics of their ancestors, and historically are known to be of a more pure Greek descent than the inhabitants of any other district. Indeed, the peninsula which thrusts into the sea the headland of Taenaron has both social and religious customs of its own. The population is distributed into small villages, while here and there a white fortress will denote the residence of a chief. A traveller writing in 1858, remarks: "The Maina country is wild and beautiful, singularly well cultivated, considering the difficulties to be surmounted, and producing crops that put to shade the rich plains of Argos and Arcadia; whilst the interesting mountain people exercise the highland virtues of hospitality and independance to an extent unknown in the low countries." It has been said that the last traveller who saw Maina while retaining some remains of its primitive cateran glories was Lord Carnarvon, who in 1839 explored the Morea and has left us an extraordinarily interesting account of his journey.

The population of this district continued the worship of the Pagan deities for full five hundred years after the rest of the Roman Empire had embraced Christianity, and they were not finally converted until the reign of the vigorous Emperor Basil I, 867-886. Gibbon described them as "a domestic and perhaps original race, who, in some degree, might derive their blood from the much-injured Helotes."[2] And even yet

[p. 141]

they boast of their descent from the ancient Spartans, whilst the histories of Leonidas and Lycurgus, who figure partly as saints and partly as gallant brigands, are still retold round the winter fireside. The whole district, including Kaka Voulia (the Land of Evil Counsel), is formed by the hummocks and escarpments of Mount Taygetos, and, with the exception of a long strip of coast line, which the Venetians called Bassa Maina, it is steep and hilly and for the most part barren. The conquest of the Morea was completed by Mahomet II in 1456-1460, but Maina could never be thoroughly subdued, and its inhabitants remained as entirely independent as were the Highlanders before Culloden.

As has been remarked, ancient traditions still persevere, and among these customs not the least obstinate is the Vendetta. A man who has been murdered is unable to rest in his grave until he has been avenged. Accordingly he issues forth as a vampire, thirsting for the blood of his enemy. In order to bring about his physical dissolution and to secure his repose it is necessary for the next of kin to slay the murderer, or at least some near relative of the murderer. Unless this is done the man upon whom the duty of avenging blood devolves is banned by the curse of the dead, and if so be that he is himself cut off before he can satify the desires of the deceased, the curse will yet cling to him even in death, and he too must become a vampire. It should be remarked that this view of blood-guilt is found in the Attic dramatists, and is in fact the mainspring of the whole story of Orestes. In the tragedy of this name by Euripides, Tyndareus, the father of Clytemnestra, remonstrates very reasonably, and indeed unanswerably with Orestes. But the hero replies and argues that if he has not avenged his father

Had not his hate's Erinyes haunted me?[3]

Again in the Choephoroe of Aeschylus Orestes pursues the same idea saying that unless he avenges his father, a stern duty which has devolved upon him, lie will be punished in turn by the avengers of his father's wrongs. It may be remarked that in Maina to-day no recourse must be had to law for such cases, nor must the injured person satisfy himself by calling upon the aid of the police. To do this were incredibly base, the subterfuge of a recreant and a craven. Even if it be a life's whole work a man is expected, either secretly

[p. 142]

or by an open attack, to slay the murderer of his relative, and he is highly applauded when he has accomplished this pious deed. It must be appreciated that he is regarded as herein directed and inspired by the dead man who returns from his grave as a vampire craving for blood. Even if no other motive or incentive prevailed, in spite of natural shrinking and may be even cowardice, a man would undoubtedly prefer to shed blood for blood, especially when this might be done in secrecy or by craft, rather than run the terrible risk of himself becoming a vampire, finding no rest in the grave, but returning to haunt and persecute even those who were most dear to him, an unclean thing accursed. of God, a foul goblin of dread most hateful to man.

So great is the horror which the act of suicide, although considered admirable in the decadence of Greece and Rome, inspires in every man of sane mind that it, is not at all surprising it should be deemed that the unfortunate wretches who have destroyed themselves become vampires after death. According to the Zoroastrian creed, suicide is a most fearful crime, and is classed among the marg-arzan, the abominable offences. Aristotle in his Ethics, V, xv, terms suicide a sin against the State, and as Cicero tells us Pythagoras forbade men to depart from their guard or sentry-go in life without an order from their commanding-officer, who is God. "Uetatque Pythagoras iniussu imperatoris, id est, dei, de praesidio et statione uitae decedere." (De Senectute, XX, 73). The highest pagan argument against suicide will be found in Plato's Phaedo (61E-62E), but it is drowned in the mighty voice of the great Saint of Hippo, which peals in no unwavering tones down the centuries: "For if it be not lawful for a private man to kill any man, however guilty, unless the law have granted a special allowance for it, theft surely whosoever kills himself is guilty of homicide: and so much the more guilty doth that killing of himself make himself, by how much the more guiltless he was in that cause for which he killed himself. For if the act of Judas be worthily detested, and yet the Truth saith, that by hanging of himself, he did rather augment than expiate the guilt of his wicked treachery, because his despair of God's mercy in his damnable repentance, left no place in his soul for saving repentance; how much more ought he to

[p. 143]

forbear from being cause of his own death, that hath no guilt in him worthy of such a punishment as death; for Judas in hanging himself, hanged but a wicked man and died guilty, not only of Christ's death, but of his own also; adding the wickedness of being his own death, to that other wickedness of his, for which he died." (De Ciuitate Dei, I, xvii.)

It may be well very briefly to present the teaching of the Church concerning positive and direct suicide. If done without God's permission this always constitutes a grave injustice towards Him. To destroy a thing is in effect to dispose of it as an absolute master and to act with regard to it as one who has full and independent dominion over it. But God has reserved to Himself dominion over life. Man cannot create life, and he does not possess this full and absolute right over his own life. Consequently suicide must be reckoned as an attempt against the dominion and right of ownership of the Author of life. To this injustice is super-added a serious offence against the charity owed by man to himself, since by self-murder he deprives himself of the greatest good in his possession. Moreover this sin may be aggravated by other circumstances, such as an offence against conjugal, paternal, or filial duty; an offence against justice or charity; if by taking his own life a man eludes existing obligations of justice or acts of charity which he could and should perform. That suicide is unlawful is the general teaching of Holy Scripture which condemns the act as a most terrible crime, and to arouse the horror of all against Holy Church denies the suicide the rites of Christian burial. Again, suicide is directly opposed to the most natural and powerful tendency of all created things, and especially of intelligent man, the preservation of life. Indeed very large numbers of physicians, moralists, and jurists lay it down as a general rule that suicide is always due to dementia, so great is the horror which this atrocious deed inspires in every man of sane mind. As a generalization this may be admitted to be true, for it is impossible to think that those who have the calm and right use of their reason should deliberately destroy themselves, and the conditions which are necessary to incur the full culpability of an act can only in exceptional instances be conceived of as being present in the case of a suicide. Sabetti inquires: "Quaenam ad peccatum mortale

[p. 144]

requirantur?" And his answer is given as follows: "Tria necessario requiruntur, scilicet materia grauis uel in se, uel ob circumstantias; aduertentia plena ad malitiam grauem actus; consensus plenus uoluntatis in praeuaricationem. Itaque,

Requiritur 1 degrees. materia grauis, secus non posset haberi lex obligans sub graui.

Requiritur 2 degrees. plena aduertentia mentis, secus non habebitur plena deliberatio.

Requiritur 3 degrees. plenus consensus uoluntatis, quia nisi peccator cum pleno consensu plenaque deliberatione obiectum peccati Deo praeferat, et sic finem suum ultimum in creatura constituat, nequit dici a Deo totaliter recedere. Insuper a bonitate diuina prorsus alienum est, hominem aeternae damnationi addicere siue propter transgressionem leuem siue propter actum non perfecte liberum et uoluntarium.--Cf. S. Alphons, nn. 5, 6 et 53."[5]

The Christian Middle Ages were free from the terrible tendency of suicide, but with the loss of Faith it re-appeared, and Masaryk in his study Der Selbstmord als sociale Massenerscheinung der modernen Civilisation (Vienna, 1881), considered it to be the special evil of these later days. Sad to relate self-destruction has fearfully increased since the Great War, but it may perhaps be mitigatingly advanced that the reason of the world tottered almost to eternal delirium during the chaos and welter of blood, and the balance is not recovered yet.

It is true that among certain nations there appears to be an indifference to human life, nay, a contempt of death itself, which often takes the most extravagant and the most outrageous forms. The Goths, the heathen Vandals, and Norse savages not only approved but sought suicide and violent death. It is, of course, only among the utterly benighted that it is possible for such abominable ideas to obtain. For example, there existed among a tribe of robbers in Southern India customs of the utmost ferocity. Such practices as the following certainly prevailed during the eighteenth century, but they have no doubt, long since been happily suppressed. If two persons had quarrelled, sometimes for the most trifling reasons, a man would kill himself merely in order to be revenged on his adversary. He believed that

[p. 145]

his ghost would be able to return and harry the surviver , or at least that some dire retribution must fall on the head of his enemy who drove him to such extreme measures.[6] Again, custom required that if a man committed suicide, letting it be known that it was on this account, the person with whom he had had the difference that led to this abominable act must immediately follow his example.[7]

Lord Avebury's statement:[8] "It is said that in China, if a rich man is condemned to death, he can sometimes purchase a willing substitute at a very small expense," has been traversed and Professor Parker would not commit himself any further than by saying: "It is popularly stated that substitutes can be bought for Taels fifty, and most certainly this statement is more than true, so far as the price of human life is concerned; but it is quite another question whether the gaolers and judges can always be bribed."[9] Dr. W. T. A. Barber, who had been a missionary in China, relates that he had known very large numbers of persons who committed suicide out of spite against some one else, "the idea being, first, the trouble given by minions of the law to the survivor; second that the dead would gain a vantage ground by becoming a ghost, and thus able to plague his enemy in the flesh."[10]

It is not surprising to learn that in ancient times, before the advent of Christianity, among such savage people as the Celts and the Thracians suicide was not only common but treated with the most appalling lightness and even flippancy. Thus Athenaeus, speaking of the banquets of the Thracians, quotes from Seleueus as follows: "And Seleueus says, 'that some of the Thracians at their drinking parties play the game of hanging; and fix a round noose to some high place, exactly beneath which they place a stone which is easily turned round when any one stands upon it; and then they cast lots, and he who draws the lot, holding a sickle in his hand, stands upon the stone, and puts his neck into the halter; and then another person comes and raises the stone, and the man who is suspended, when the stone moves from under him, if he is not quick enough in cutting the rope with his sickle, is killed and the rest laugh, thinking his death good sport.'"[11]

Upon the authority of the famous Stoic philosopher, Posidonius, Athenaeus tells us of similar brutalities which took place among the Celts. He writes: "But Posidonius,[12] in the

[p. 146]

third, and also in the twentieth book of his Histories, says 'The Celtae sometimes have single combats at their entertainments. For being collected in arms, they go through the exercise, and make feints at, and sometimes they even go so far as to wound one another. And being irritated by this, if the bystanders do not stop them, they will proceed even to kill one another. But in olden times,' he continues, 'there was a custom that a hind quarter of pork was put on the table, and the bravest man took it; and if any one else laid claim to it, then the two rose up to fight, till one of them was slain. And other men in the theatre having received some silver or gold money, and some even for a number of earthen vessels full of wine, having taken pledges that the gifts promised shall really be given, and having distributed them among their nearest connexions, have laid themselves down on doors with their faces upwards, and then allowed some bystander to cut their throats with a sword.'

"And Euphorion the Chalcidian, in his Historical Memorials, writes as follows: 'But among the Romans it is common for five minae[13] to be offered to any one who chooses to take it, to allow his head to be cut off with an axe, so that his heirs might receive the reward: and very often many have returned their names as willingly, so that there has been a regular contest between them as to who had the best right to be beaten to death.'"[14] These atrocious examples serve to show us something of the evil and the corruption of which Christianity cleansed the pagan world, although it is to be feared that the battle is not yet won, since it is a notorious and deplorable fact that at the hour of such a crisis as the Great War the respect due to human life became cheapened in men's eyes, with the consequence that murder and deeds of violence once more broke out in every direction showing that savage instincts were dominated indeed, but in many cases not wholly eradicated. It does not require a keen perception to see the direct agency of the devil here, and these atrocities which bred so callous and cruel a spirit are by no means altogether unconnected with the recrudescence of necromancy and black magic which foul arts once more grew green and were almost openly pursued on every side.

The belief that a man has not complete dominion over his own life and that it is unlawful for him to take it is certainly a

[p. 147]

feeling naturally implanted in the human breast, and it was only when nations were entirely barbarian or had became decadent and corrupt that the notion of suicide was held up as noble and even heroic. Whatever certain among the later Greeks may have practised and taught, in earlier days, as we have seen, the act of suicide was regarded as a dark and presumptuous deed. They truly felt that there was in it something of asebeia,[15] something of that ybris which so surely stirred the wrath of heaven and inevitably called down righteous vengeance. Indeed the evil and malice of suicide did not end with death but continued beyond the grave. The umbra of a man who had slain himself was dreaded and feared. So in ancient Athens it was the custom to cut off the hand of a suicide and to cremate it or at least to bury it far from his body, the object of such mutilation being to prevent his ghost from attacking the living.[16]

Similar beliefs exist among native African tribes. Thus the Wajagga of East Africa dread the spectres of suicides. When a man has hanged himself a certain complicated ceremonial becomes imperative. They take the rope from his neck and suspend a goat in the noose, after which the animal is swiftly slain. The idea seems that hereby the phantom will be in some way appeased, and he will not be so likely to tempt human beings to follow his evil example.[17]

The Baganda of Central Africa have an even greater horror of the ghosts of suicides, and the most elaborate precautions are invariably taken to protect themselves against these dangerous visitors. The body of a man who has destroyed himself is removed as far from all human habitation as possible, to waste land or to a cross-road, and there is utterly consumed with fire. Next the wood of the house in which the horrid deed has been done is burned to ashes and scattered to the winds; whilst if the man has hanged himself upon a tree this is hewn to the ground and committed to the flames, trunk, roots, branches and all. Even this is hardly deemed to be sufficient. Curiously enough there is a lurking idea that the ghost of a suicide may survive after the cremation of the body, so horrible is this crime felt to be and so irradicated the taint that this terrible deed establishes. This is extremely significant since the cases in which cremation, a complete purgation and destruction by fire, cannot obliterate guilt and

[p. 148]

destroy the evil infection are indeed exceptional, and it might be no easy task to find a parallel instance. However, the Baganda when passing by the spot where the body of a suicide has been burned always take good care to pelt it with sticks and clods of earth to prevent the ghost from catching them. Although these places in particular are dangerous to the last degree, there are other graves that may be haunted by phantoms, which as they have no bodies are not strictly vampires, but which certainly belong to the vampire family. Such are those remote places where persons who have been accused of black magic and who failed to satisfy the ritual ordeals have been burned to death, as also those spots where persons of evil and atrocious life have been cremated or interred.[18] The Maraves, a tribe of South Africa, who also burned witches alive, whenever they had occasion to pass the place of doom, pelted it with stones, and it is said that in some instances of spots considered particularly ill-omened a regular cairn or tumulus of loose stones has arisen." In Madagascar too, certain solitary graves bear an exceedingly ill-repute, so that the chance traveller with averted face throws stones at them or large lumps of earth in order to prevent the ghost following in his tracks and seizing on him.[20] It must be remarked, and this is very important, that the sticks and stones, or heavy clods of earth with which a grave is pelted are not meant merely as a symbolical insult and expression of righteous indignation, but are actually missiles which will strike and hurt the being who haunts the spot of interment. So since the haunter can be struck and injured by these very material objects,--the heavier they are the better,--he must himself possess a certain concrete substantiality, and inasmuch as objects make an impression upon him he must exist under some kind of physical condition. Doubtless the exact idea is not very clearly defined in the minds of those who are so careful to pelt the grave, yet if stones will not merely ward off an attack from the haunter, but when in the course of time they become piled up into a small cairn they serve to keep the deceased in his place, that is to say in the grave, there must be some sort of material entity which can be so materially frustrated and obstructed. Here then we have the essential and complete vampire.

It is recorded by a traveller about the middle of the last

[p. 149]

century that when he was journeying in company with two Mussulmans from Sidon to Tyre, as he drew near the latter city he noticed a great pile of stones by the wayside, whereupon his companions began to pick up all the loose pebbles that came to hand and discharged them violently at the heap at the same time uttering the most fearful imprecations. When they had passed and were at some little distance they explained that a notorious brigand, whose hands were stained with the hideous cruelties and innocent blood, had been slain there, and buried on the spot half a century before. The stones they threw and their curses were directed against this villain. It might be thought in this case that the missiles were a mark of loathing and contempt, but it seems far more probable that they were intended to serve a very utilitarian purpose, that is actually to keep off the wretch who would still be haunting the pit into which his body had been cast fifty years since.[21]

It even appears that in many parts of Syria when brigands are killed by the highway, or vagrom murderers are dispatched in the open country side beyond the walls of a city the body is left to rot unburied where it lies, and after a while it is merely covered over with a heap of stones; moreover everyone who passes by is bound to quoit a stone or stick to add to the pile under the penalty of incurring some dreadful misfortune. It is supposed that heaven will horribly curse the person who fails to throw his flinty tribute as he goes.[22]

It is not only among rude African tribes and in the East that the graves of persons who have led cruel and anti-social lives, particularly the spots where suicides have been buried, are thus places of execration and fear, but in Pomerania and in West Prussia, not to instance many other districts, the spots where persons who have wrought their own destruction happen to be interred are regarded as unlucky in the highest degree, and there is no more malevolent and harmful spectre than the suicide's ghost. A man who has destroyed himself must not defile God's acre, in no wise may he be buried in the churchyard but at the place where the desperate deed was done, and everybody who passes by will cast a stone on the spot unless he wishes the ghost of the suicide to plague him nightly and to give him no rest until he is driven to the same dreadful fate. It is said that, as in Africa piles of sticks

[p. 150]

and stones accumulate to a great size, so similar cairns rise upon these haunted spots in the more remote districts along the cold shores washed by the Baltic Sea.

It is not surprising to find that in a country such as Russia, which through the ages has so often tottered to madness and of late years fallen into stark lunacy, during the seventeenth century an epidemic of suicide raged. It persisted, indeed, at spasmodic intervals throughout the eighteenth and even the nineteenth centuries, but it was somewhat earlier than this that the troubles of that luckless nation blazed out in furious frenzy. As when the year 1000 approached a fearful apocalyptic mania inflamed many parts of Europe, and men imagining that the world was about to come to an end, that almost any hour, any moment the Angel's clarion would blare, heaven and earth shrivel like some parching scroll and the Judge be set on His awful throne, in their hundreds deserted cities and homes to wander abroad preaching fevered repentance and the most extravagent  forms of penance, or else in frantic despair abandoned themselves to debauchery and violence, so in Russia some mad visionary who proclaimed that the crack of doom was appointed for the year 1666[23] set the whole country aflame with terror. In many parts, men ceased to labour in the fields, relinquished their businesses and all social intercourse, barricaded themselves in their houses behind closed windows and fast-barred doors, awaiting the end with the gloomiest forebodings. As might have been expected, great numbers completely lost their senses and scores of dangerous lunatics not only infested the highroad but even invaded villages and towns preaching that the only way to escape the wrath to come was to prevent the final day by self-destruction. They were, moreover, very willing and eager to help those who shrank from so severe a test, and before long red murder was rife in every direction. Their services, however, were not required as frequently as might have been supposed for the delirium spread with such alarming rapidity that not merely households but whole communities eagerly devoted themselves to death. If in some paroxysm of wild hysteria a man had declared his intention of becoming a martyr, for so these poor wretches were deemed, the pious duty devolved upon his friends and relations of seeing that he scrupulously fulfilled his vow. Should he

[p. 151]

wish to change his mind or in any way seek to escape his fate he was pursued and saved in spite of himself by being put to death in the most atrocious torments. A veritable reign of terror ensued, and northern Russia seemed well-nigh depopulated. It were superfluous to enter into the horrible details, but it may suffice to say that at first starvation was the usual method by which these maniacs committed suicide. In the forest of Vetlouga, one fanatic at huge expense actually built a tower without doors and windows, into the body of which persons were lowered through a trap in the roof. But this was too long a process; it gave space for reflection and with the pangs of hunger reason resumed her sway. Those within yelled to be released, but all in vain. To shouts and clamour succeeded groans and fainter lamentations, until as the days passed all was still. Another remedy was found and presently the method which was preferred and which was officially prescribed as safer and more pleasing to God was immolation by fire. Accordingly, the missionaries of this horrible impiety proclaimed safety through the flame; as the prophet Elias had ascended to heaven in a blazing chariot, so the deluded wretches were taught they would ascend to a glorious and delightful eternity from the midst of the conflagration. Hundreds and even thousands perished in huge holocausts. Whole areas were strictly enclosed, the candidates took their places therein and the compound having been previously drenched with pitch, bitumen, and inflammable oils torches were applied at many points. If any overcome by agony escaped with scorched and blackened limbs they were caught and hurled back into the heart of the pyre. These immolations generally took place during the dark winter season and from midnight until the faint streaks of dawn the red glow of these horrid furnaces could be seen in every direction. For hundreds of verstas the land became a veritable Tophet. As the morning broke, hordes of wolves attracted by the stench of roasting flesh assembled to pull trunks and limbs from the embers; a dark cloud of suffocating smoke, greasy with human fat that fouled both ground and houses, hung low in the sky, and ere many days were past the plague was stalking abroad with fatal voracity. It was not until the most vigorous measures had been taken that these terrible practices could be checked, and it seems that the

[p. 152]

venom of the madness persisted long and late, for as recently as 1860, fifteen persons in the district of Olonetz committed suicide by fire, whilst during the winter of 1896-1897, twenty-four religious fanatics buried themselves alive in a pit near Tiraspol.[24] The monk, Falaley, constantly preached that death was man's only means of salvation and that he must have done with this life of sin. One night under his influence, eighty-four persons congregated near the river Perevozinka and began to pray. Many of them were already half-crazed through excessive fasting, and they almost covered themselves with brambles and brushwood to which fire was to be set at a given signal. A woman, taking alarm at the thought of so horrible a death, escaped and informed the authorities. When the police arrived the fanatics shrieked that Antichrist was approaching, and setting fire to the pile most perished in the flames. A few who were rescued received sentences of imprisonment and deportation, but a fanatic called Souchkoff, managed to escape and continued to preach the gospel of death. Maddened by his doctrine in one locality alone, sixty families resolved to commit suicide at a certain moment, and a peasant, named Petroff, entering a neighbour's house cut down his wife and children with a hatchet. In a barn hard by, a dozen men with their wives had assembled and amid hymns of triumph they laid their heads upon an improvised block to be hacked off by Petroff. In another hut a woman and three children were dispatched at their own earnest request. At length when he was weary, Petroff himself kneeled down and was slain by Souchkoff. Between 1860 and 1870, a maniac named Chadkin, proclaimed that Antichrist was here, and all most follow him to the forests and there die of hunger. A large number assembled and his most devoted followers saw to it that nobody could escape. After a few days the sufferings of the crowds were fearful and the place rang with their screams and groans. Nevertheless Chadkin and his apostles did not waver. When some poor creature, frantic with agony, managed to break away and informed the police, the devotees at once began to kill all who had gathered together, and by the time the authorities had arrived in the utmost haste there were found but three survivors.

Buddhist monks in China are often recorded to have

[p. 153]

sought their Nirvana through an act of self -immolation by fire, and it is said that every year among the lamaresais of Tien-tai, in the province of Tai-chow, some half-a-dozen bonzes thus devote themselves to death. These unfortunate persons believe that their voluntary destruction crowns the monastery with honours and blessing, they are aware that they will be worshipped after their suicide, and they suppose that they will become the divinities of the district and possess the power to protect the whole neighbourhood, to grant fair weather and lucky seasons, a bounteous harvest and all prosperity. Such public incinerations are conducted with great ceremony, and take place upon a major festival which is bound to attract crowds of pilgrims and reverent suppliants to the spot.[25] It is said that among the Eskimo of Bering Strait a sorcerer has been known to burn himself alive, fully believing that thus he will return to life as a shaman with much greater powers and a far fuller knowledge of magic than he had hitherto enjoyed.[26] It may be remembered that even such low motives as vanity and a craving for mere notoriety have proved an incentive sufficiently powerful to induce men to seek a dramatic, if painful death by fire. Thus the charlatan Peregrinus after a career of the most braggart ostentation courted undying fame by self-immolation upon a pyre at the Olympic festival, which extraordinary performance attracted throngs not only of sensible persons who despised and mocked him but of encomiasts and apologists who regarded him as at the least a hero, if not something nearly approaching to deity.[27] It can hardly be argued that higher motives inspired Empedocles if the account preserved by Diogenes Laertius[28] to which Horace[29] makes reference be true, namely that hoping by a sudden disappearance he might be accounted a god, the philosopher flung himself into the crater of Mount Aetna, but that the suicide was revealed owing to the fact that the volcano almost immediately after threw up one of his sandals, and thus betrayed the manner of his death.

Josephus states that the Jews used not to bury the bodies of those who had destroyed themselves until after sunset. In Scotland it is still thought that the body of a suicide will not fall to dust until the time when he should have died in the order of nature,[30] and it is very generally held that a such

[p. 154]

a one must be buried with the grave facing north and south. This belief also existed in England and there are graves facing north and south to be seen at Cowden (Kent) and Bergholt (Suffolk), which are locally said to be those of persons who have destroyed themselves, for it is almost universally declared that Christian burial should be with the head in west, looking eastward[31]. As is well-known, in England until the time of George IV, it was the general practice to bury suicides at the cross-roads, where a stake was driven through the body. In the year 1823, it was enacted that the body of a suicide should be buried privately between the hours of nine o'clock and twelve at night with no religious ceremony. In 1882, this law was altered, and the body may now be committed to the earth at any time and with such rites or prayers those in charge of the funeral think fit or may be able to procure. In certain country places it is still supposed that the spirit of the last person buried in a graveyard has to keep watch lest any suicide should be interred there. One explanation of the reason why persons who had taken their own lives should be buried at the cross-roads was that the ghosts of murdered persons were supposed to walk until the bodies had been recovered and committed to the churchyard with Christian rites, and since this was impossible in the case of suicides, a stake was driven through them when deposited at the cross-roads in order to keep the ghost from wandering abroad.[32] It is certain that the idea here is the same as that of driving a stake through the vampire, for sometimes this precaution was taken in the case of persons who might perchance become vampires, an operation performed not as an indignity but as a preventitive. Burchard of Worms tells us: "Cum aliquis, femina parere debit, et non potest, in ipso dolore si mortem obierit, in ipso sepulchro matrem cum infante palo in terram transfigunt." And again: "Fecisti quod quaedam mulieres instinctu diaboli facere solent, cum aliquis infans sine baptismo mortuus fuerit, tollunt cadauer paruuli, et ponunt in aliquo secreto loco, et palo corpusculum transfigunt, dicentes, si sic non fecissent, quod infantulus surgeret et multos laedere posset." The reason for the selected spot of the suicide's grave being a cross-road is further explained by the belief that when the ghost or the body issues from the grave and finds that there

[p. 155]

are four paths stretching in as many directions he will be puzzled to know which way to take and will stand debating until dawn compels him to return to the earth, but woe betide the unhappy being who happens to pass by when he is lingering there perplexed and confused. Accordingly after sunset, every sensible person will avoid all crossroads since there are no localities more certainly and more fearfully haunted and disturbed. It will readily be remembered that the Romans were far more precise than we used to be in their definition of cross-roads and employed no less than three terms, biuium when the road branched into two, triuium when the road forked into three, and quadriuium when the intersection of the ways gave four arms. The prophet Ezechiel tells us that Esarhaddon took his stand in biuio when he wished to divine: "Stetit enim rex Babylonis in biuio, in capite duarum uiarum, diuinationem quaerens, commiscens sagittas: interrogauit idola, exta consuluit." (xxi, 21.) "For the king of Babylon stood in the highway, at the head of two ways, seeking divination, shuffling arrows: he enquired of the idols, and consulted entrails." Triuia is the common name given to Diana, when as Hecate she was invoked at the crossways. Chariclides Comicus in Meineke's Comicorum Fragmenta, IV, p. 556, has trioditas, and invokes: Ekate trioditi, trimorfe, triprosupe.

Varro, De Lingua Latina, VII, 16, writes "Titanis Triuia, Diana est, ab eo dicta Triuia, quod in triuio ponitur fere in oppodis Graecis, uel quod luna dicitur esse, quae in caelo tribus uiis mouetur in altitudinem et latitudinem et longitudinem." Macrobius, Saturnalia, I, ix, notes: "Dianae uero ut Triuiae uiarum omnium iidem tribuunt potestatem."

In Wales it was said that witches slept by day under any boulder that might be at a cross-road, and when dusk had fallen they crept forth to steal little children and feast upon their flesh. The gallows was often erected at the cross-roads, and here the criminal hung in chains, and nourished by his rotting flesh the mandrake grew. Many are the superstitions which cluster around the mandrake or mandragora--"the semi-human" as Columella (De re rustica, x, 19) calls it. It was the plant of fertility, the plant of magical virtue and occult power. In Germany it bears the name of the Little Gallows Man, and it was believed that when a murderer or

[p. 156]

thief was hanged and his semen or urine fell to the ground there grew up the mandrake. In England the same superstition prevailed, and in his pasquil A Character of an Ugly Woman or a Hue and Cry after Beauty, 1678, the Duke of Buckingham wrote: "Imprimis, as to her Descent, some Heralds derive her Pedigree from that of the Scotch Barnacles, and say, that she dropt from some teeming Gallows, or sprung up like Mandrakes from the S--- of some gibbitid Raggamuffian." No one must dare uproot the mandrake for it moans and shrieks so fearfully that the digger will die with the yells ringing in his ears. A dog is taken and round his tail is tied a string, one end of which is attached to the plant. A man whose ears are fast stopped with wax and wool, tempts the dog away with some dainty. As the animal tugs at the cord the mandrake will be pulled from the ground, but the poor beast will fall dead at the horrid scream it gives. But there has been secured a talisman, nay, more a familiar.

Even in the mythology of Ceylon the cross-roads play an ominous part. Thus in the Yakkun Nattanawa, which is defined by its translator, John Callaway, as "a Cingalese poem descriptive of the Ceylon system of demonology," it is said of the Black She-Devil: "Thou female Devil, who acceptest the offerings at the place where three ways meet, thou causest the people to be sick by looking upon them at the place where four ways join together." The devil Maha-Sohon watches "to drink the blood of the elephant in the place where the two and three roads meet together." Maha-Sohon is the devil of the tombs, "therefore go not in the roads by night: if you do so you must not expect to escape with your life." Another devil, Oddy, stands where three ways meet, watching, and hot for mischief. Again the Devil of the Victim "watches and looks upon the people, and causes them to be sick at the place where three roads meet, and where four ways meet."

Ralstan[33] says that it is a common Russian belief that at cross-roads, or in the neighbourhood of cemeteries, an animated corpse often lurks watching for some unwary traveller whom it may be able to strangle and devour, eagerly quaffing the warm blood from his veins. In Cornwall to-day cross-roads are most carefully avoided after night-fall,[34] but this may be because it is commonly accepted that at the cross-roads

[p. 157]

witches from all the world over assemble for their sabbat. It seems more likely that these particular spots are avoided because of the vampires, for Henry Boguet tells us: "Les Sorciers tienne###126###t leurs sabbats indiffereme###126###t en tons lieux."[35] Bernhard Ragner says that if you go to a cross-road between eleven o'clock and midnight on Christmas eve and listen, you will hear what most concerns you for the coming year.[38] It may be pointed out that this is the one night throughout the year when strange wonders happen. It is then that the thorn that sprang at Glastonbury from the Sacred Crown which the holy old man, S. Joseph of Arimathea, brought with him from Palestine, when Avalon was still an island, bourgeons into fragrant blossoms. The Cornish miners seem to hear the sound of singing choirs that arise from submerged churches by the shore, and others said that bells, beneath the ground where villages had been, upon that eve yearly ring a glad peal. At midnight the oxen, the cattle, and all the beasts kneel and adore, as they adored in the stable-cave at Bethlehem. No evil thing hath power, and as the Officer in Hamlet[37] tells us:

Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
 Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
 The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
 And then, they say, no spirit can walk abroad;
 The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
 No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
 So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.

In certain districts of East Prussia on Christmas Eve candles are kept burning all night in the houses and no window is shuttered. It is supposed that the spirits of the dead will return in friendly-wise and the opportunity is given to them to warm themselves, so that on future occasions when they haunt the villages with more malicious intent they may remember those who are kind to them Christmas after Christmas and spare those houses from molestation and injury.[38]

Not only are those who die excommunicate, that is to say solemnly and officially cursed by the Church, liable to become vampires, but more, those who die under any kind of such ban, especially if it be the malison of a parent, or if it be a man who has perjured himself in a grave matter and called down upon his own head damnation and all manner of evil should

[p. 158]

what he asseverate be untrue. The belief in the fearful power of a curse, especially the curse of a father or a mother, which, whether rightfully or wrongfully adjured, works out its vengeance through the whole stock of kith and kin, involving in misfortunes and destruction, innocent and guilty alike, finds supreme illustration in the masterpieces of Greek tragedy. It is the mighty theme of the trilogy of the Oresteia, for from the very outset of the Agamemnon there is a brooding and oppressive sense of multitudinous crimes, of sins done long years ago which have swelled and accumulated their guilt like some black cloud of transgressions about to burst over the doomed race in a welter of tragedy and blood. The evil wrought by Thyestes, the crimes of his grandsire Tantalus, the atrocious banquet of Atreus, have yet to be expiated in misery, in anguish and affliction. When the weird Trojan woman approaches the threshold she scents the carnage of the shambles and horrors manifold, and as the pang of inspiration thrills her she shrieks aloud: "The Furies are in this house; blood-surfeited, but not assuaged, they hold perpetual revel here. It is the crime of Atreus and of Thyestes which they hunt, and woe will follow woe."

ten gar stegen tend' oypot' ekleipei xoros
 sumfthoggos oyk eyfunos?.? oy gar eu' legei,
 kai men pepukus g', us thradsunesthai pleon,
 broteion ai?!ma kumos en domois menei,
 duspemptos exu, syggonun Erinuun.

Sophocles also no less fearfully shows us the tale of Oedipus and his children, the legend of the house of Laius, whose family was as equally famous among the Greeks as the stock of Atreus for its overwhelming disasters, the bitter fruit of an undying curse which destroyed the whole race. Laius, the son of Labdacus, had wrought a mighty evil. Lusting after the beauty of Chrysippus, the son of Pelops, with violence he raped the lad who belonged to another, and thus had sinned the sin of ybris since he both betrayed another's love and used brute force in doing so.[39] For this crime his whole progeny was involved in destruction. He married Jocasta, the sister of Creon of Thebes, and the oracle warned him that his son should kill him. When a boy was born to the royal pair they cruelly exposed their child, a helpless infant, to the

[p. 159]

wild beasts on Mount Cithaeron, but the will of heaven is not frustrated by the impotence of man. Many years after as King Laius is riding privately in his chariot attended by only five servants they meet a young man upon the road. The king bids him make way, commanding him in rough and insolent terms. A quarrel arises. The stranger, a stalwart warrior, strikes down the master and certain of the servants, but one escapes and fled away for his life. Presently Oedipus solves the riddle of the monstrous Sphinx, when the Thebans, in gratitude, since their old monarch has been slain by robbers on the highway elect him to rule over them, giving him the lady Jocasta to wife. He governs the state in great prosperity, and four children are born to him, two sons, Polyneices and Eteocles; two daughters, Antigone and Ismene. It is the calm before the storm; a fearful plague afflicts the city, and when the divine Phoebus Apollo is consulted he answers that the murderer of Laius must be driven from the land. The old prophet, Teiresias, the mystic whose converse is in heaven, but who yet in his stern pride still retains much of humanity, is asked to rede the enigma. He answers with deep sighs and groans, seeking to be led home again, until goaded by the impatience and hot temper of the king he flashes forth the truth. But it is not immediately recognized, and Oedipus begins formally to inquire into the circumstances of the death of his predecessor. Detail is heaped upon detail and at last the horrible revelation forces itself upon his soul. Mad with terror, Jocasta hangs herself within her bed-chamber, and Oedipus tearing from her dress the buckles and clasps of gold strikes out his eyes that are unworthy to look upon the golden light of day. One moment a king, the next a beggar, red with parricide, polluted with the fires of incest, accursed of God and man, in the bitterness of utter dereliction he must go forth desolate and alone. He dare not even bid farewell to his sons and daughters for they are the children of doom, seed of that admixture too fearful to be named. In the next play, the Oedipus Coloneus, we find him many years afterwards, a mysterious figure set apart by heaven in awful loneliness. He is waiting in a place of peculiar sanctity, the reverent groves of the Semnai Theai, the holy goddesses of divine retribution, waiting for his silent passage to the shadowy world. And even here the evil ambitions of his sons would

[p. 160]

fain disturb him at the end. But he is far removed from the strife and passion of this world, and when young Polyneices, fair, false and fickle, endeavours to enlist his father's sympathies the lad receives the awful answer: "Dry were your eyes, hard as stone your heart, dumb your lips, when I went forth from Thebes friendless and alone. Here then is your reward: before the Walls of Thebes you shall perish, pierced by your brother's hand, and there your brother shall die slain by you." This terrible imprecation is only too terribly fulfilled, and defying the laws of King Creon, who would have the curse-polluted ghosts of the brothers seek for rest in vain even in Hades, Antigone meets her doom. Nor does Creon, the respectable Creon, weak and spiteful, impotent, yet a tyrant, escape scathless. His malice is sharply punished, owing to his own folly and cruelty he loses both wife and son, for he has forgotten that great truth which S. Thomas enunciated, that "reason is the first principle of all human works,"[40] and "the secular power is subject to the spiritual even as the body is subject to the soul." So owing to his impiety he is left without child to carry on his name, bereaved of all, broken and collapsed, piteously confessing himself--mataion andra--feckless and foolish old man.

It has seemed worth while thus very briefly and inadequately to review these two great themes of Greek tragedy, since in both instances they set forth in detail the terrible and relentless working of a curse, which it may be said has something of that divine vengeance that visits "the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation." And so something of this old Greek doctrine was very true, for who can foresee the end of the working of a curse? Even to-day there are places and there are properties in England which owing to deeds of blood and violence in their acquisition entail some dire misfortune upon all who seek to enjoy and possess them. Such a place is the ruined Abbey of Glastonbury, and of many another house--Tintern, Newstead, Cowdray, Waverley, Barlings, Croxton, Dureford--the tale is true. De male quaesita non gaudet tertius haeres, says the old adage, and it is well known that lands wrested from the Church will not descend in due course owing to a failure of heirs. Such a case has come under my own observation, and Aubrey in his Miscellanies cites Hinton Charterhouse

[p. 161]

on Mendip and Butleigh, near Glastonbury as never having passed to the third generation. So did Cromwell's generals and adherents transmit a troubled inheritance to their descendants. Fairfax House, Putney, had its haunted chamber which was never used.

It must be remembered that a solemn curse is not merely an expletive or an imprecatory exclamation, perhaps quite meaningless, but it is far more than this; it is significant and operative. The malediction is conceived as having a certain efficacious power, and it may be noted that this force if rightly launched does not seem to exhaust itself. No more terrible fate could be imagined than for a man to become a vampire, and this was the inevitable consequence if he were not cleared of a merited malison. The old proverb says:

Curses are like young chicken
 And still come home to roost.[41]

This adage is terribly exemplified in the vampire who is supposed when he returns from his grave first to attack those who on earth have been his nearest and dearest. Of all curses the parental malediction is most dreaded, and curiously enough in Macedonia, Mr. Abbott tells us that a godfather is regarded with even greater respect than the actual parents and his "malediction is dreaded even more than that of a Bishop."[42] At the present day in Greece many of the usual imprecations definitely refer to the fact that the person so cursed will become a vampire after death. Such imprecations as the following are in common use. "May the earth not receive him," (Na men ton dextei' e geis) "May the ground not consume him" (Na men ton falei to xuma) "May the earth not digest thee" (E gei na me de xynepsei): "May the black earth spew thee up" (E maure gei na s' anaxerasei) "Mayest thou remain incorrupt," (Na meineis alumtos); "May the earth not loose thee" which is to say may the body not decompose (Na me se lyusei e ge); "May the ground reject thee" (Na se blalei to xuma); "Mayest thou a become in the grave like rigid wood" (Koytouki na blei's); "May the ground reject him wholly" (To xuma 'xeras' tone), which last phrase is the most terrible of all since it is nothing other than an unspeakably impious parody of the prayer which is uttered by the mourners at every Greek funeral Otheos 'xures' tone, "May God forgive him."

[p. 162]

Since even the curse uttered by a man in moments of anger and impatience may have such terrible effects, in Greece it is necessary that there should be some expedient which may dissipate and dispel the forces to which these words have given an impetus capable of producing the most serious and horrible results. Accordingly at a Greek death-bed there is carried out a certain ritual to attain this end. A vessel of water is brought to the bedside and he throws into it a handful of salt, and when this is dissolved the sick man sprinkles with the lymph all those who are present saying: "As this salt dissolves so may my curses dissolve"; us lyunei t'alati, na lyusoyn ei katarais moy. This ceremony absolves all persons whom he may have cursed in his lifetime from the evil of a ban which after death he would no longer be able to revoke. The relations and friends then solemnly forgive the dying man for ought that he may have done against them and all present declare that they bear no grudge nor anger in their hearts. It is said that if the passage be a difficult one it is supposed that somebody whom the sick man has injured has not forgiven him. If it can be guessed who this may be, he is if possible, brought to the bed-side to declare his forgiveness of any injury he may have suffered. If, however, he be dead a portion of the cerements must be sought and burned to ashes in the bed-chamber of the dying person, who is fumigated with the smoke. These elaborate precautions and the extraordinary care which is taken, for it must often be a matter of very great difficulty either to secure the attendance of the living individual or to get hold of a portion of the necessary shroud, serve to show what immense importance the modern Greek attaches to the absolution from a curse, and what horror the thought of a vampire inspires.

It is obvious that those who die unbaptized or apostate will be liable to become vampires after death, and throughout the south of Europe there still persist large numbers of ceremonies and superstitions connected with a christening whose object it is to secure the child a long, happy and healthy life.

In England as in many other countries it is thought lucky to be born on one of the great church festivals, especially if it be a Sunday. In certain districts of Yorkshire even to-day it is commonly said that "Sunday children are secure from

[p. 163]

the malice of evil spirits."[43] Again a child born on a Saturday, although he may have "to work hard for his living" is considered to enjoy occult powers, to have the faculty of second sight, to be able to see ghosts and phantoms, and indeed to be so attuned to the supernatural that he can never be harmed even by the vampire. It is very probable that as Saturday is the seventh day of the week those born upon this day are considered as akin to a seventh son, who was so popularly believed to possess extraordinary powers of healing and the like. The old English rhyme is well known, and perhaps the following is one of the most usual forms:

Monday's child is fair of face,
 Tuesday's child is full of grace,
 Wednesday's child is sour and grum,
 Thursday's child has welcome home,
 Friday's child is free in giving,
 Saturday's child works hard for his living.
 And the child that is born on Christmas Day
 Is great, and good, and fair, and gay.

Although, as we have said, in England it is considered am omen of a happy life to be born upon some festival the exact opposite is the case in Slav countries.[44] In Greece, particularly, nothing could be more disastrous, and of all seasons Christmas Day is the most unlucky. In many districts it is accounted a terrible thing for any child to be born at any time between Christmas and the Epiphany; such babies are called eortopiasmata or "feast-blasted," and after death they will assuredly become vampires. Even during life such a child is a Callicantzaros.

The Callicantzaros is one of the most extraordinary and most horrible of all the creatures of popular superstition. Leone Allacci says that they only appear and have power during the week from Christmas to New Year's Day,[45] but other authorities extend this time until Twelfth Night. During the rest of the year it is vaguely supposed that they sojourn in some mysterious Hades or under-world. Local traditions differ as to whether they are actually demons or whether they are human. Allacci, who certainly inclines to the latter view, says that children born in the octave of Christmas are liable to be seized with a terrible mania, that they rush to and fro with the most amazing speed, that their nails grow to a

[p. 164]

terrible length like the talons of a bird of prey whilst their hands become as crooked claws. If they meet any person on the highway they seize him and put the question: "Tow or lead?" If he answer: "Tow" he may escape unharmed, but if he be inadvertent enough to reply: "Lead," they grip him with terrible force, mangle him with their talons and often tear him to pieces, devouring him wholemeal.[46] During the seventeenth century this belief so strongly prevailed that the most cruel precautions were taken in the case of children who might be suspected to be liable to become Callicantzari, since the soles of their feet were exposed to a fire until the nails were singed and so their claws clipped, and even to-day in parts of Greece these practices prevail in a highly modified form, for among the Aegean islanders it is said that the small Callicantzari are particularly prone to attack and devour their own brothers and sisters, which is another strong link with the tradition of the vampire who, as we have noted before, seeks the destruction of his own kin.[47]

It is difficult to convey any idea of the popular notions concerning the appearance of a Callicantzaros, as almost every local account differs from others in almost every particular. For the most part they are considered to be very gaunt[48] and of enormous strength. On the other hand there are some who are dwarfed and stunted. The larger variety generally appear as ineffably hideous monsters with black distorted faces, eyes glaring red like fire, huge ears such as those of a donkey, great gaping mouths furnished with a slobbering scarlet tongue and sharp gleaming teeth, from which streams their fetid breath in horrid gusts. Again the pigmy Callicantzaros may appear in the shape of a child, but in this case it is usually deformed in some grotesque and painful manner. On the other hand they are sometimes harmless hobgoblins, full of mischief maybe, but objects of laughter rather than fear, though they may play many a naughty and tiresome trick not unlike the kobold and the leprechaun. A hundred tales are told of their pranks, but it is the more gruesome and the fiercer monsters with whom we are mainly concerned since it is from their ranks that the vampire is recruited, for most of them become vampires after death (a fact which seems to point to their human origin), and not infrequently they are supposed to indulge their vampirish

[p. 165]

fancies during life. It will be noticed that in the various accounts of the Callicantzari there exist many contradictions, and we must bear in mind that such diversities are often due to the original conception of these creatures, whether they are regarded as demons or monsters who are suffered to plague the countryside for a certain number of days during the Christmas season, or whether they are regarded as human beings afflicted with a terrible curse, the victims of a most horrible possession, doomed never to rest not even in the grave.

Near akin to the latter conception is the werewolf, who may be regarded as a man or woman, who either of his or her own will through black magic is able to change into the form of a wolf, or who in classical times was believed to be so changed owing to the vengeance of the gods; and in later days was believed to be so changed owing to the enchantment of a witch or some manner of diabolic possession. Moreover, a werewolf may be a person who without any actual metamorphosis is obsessed with all the savage passions and ferocity of a wolf, so that he will attack human beings in the same way as the actual wild animal.

It may be asked, is it possible that a person should be so transformed? Henry Kramer and James Sprenger, the learned authors of the supremely authoritative Malleus Maleficarum, in discussing the question distinctly answer "No, it is not possible." They allow that by horrid charms and spells a certain subjective delusion or glamour may be caused, so that by the evil art of a sorcerer a man may appear to himself and to all others who gaze upon him to be a wolf, or indeed another kind of animal, but there cannot be any actual physical change of a man into an animal. This glamour or ocular illusion is sometimes known as "sight-shifting," a convenient correlative to the accepted term "shape-shifting" which is conceived of as an objective fact. Moreover, in his De Ciuitate Dei, XVIII, 18, S. Augustine says: "Nor can the devils create anything (whatever shows of theirs produce these doubts) but only cast a changed shape over that which God has made, altering only in show. Nor do I think the devil can form any soul or body into bestial or brutal members, and essences; but they have an unspeakable way of transporting man's phantasy in a bodily shape, unto other senses (this though it be not corporal, yet seems to carry itself in corporal

[p. 166]

forms through all these things) while the bodies of the men thus affected lie in another place, being alive, but yet in an ecstasy far more deep than any sleep. Now this phantasy may appear unto other senses in a bodily shape, and a man may seem to himself to be such an one as he often thinks himself to be in his dream, and to bear burdens, which if they be true burdens indeed, the devils bear them, to delude men's eyes with the appearance of true burdens, and false shapes." We must bear in mind that these explanations come from the highest authority, one of the greatest Doctors of the Church, and will, I think, very fairly cover most of the cases of the werewolf.

In early days it was recognized that a werewolf might be a person who was afflicted with a horrible mania, and Marcellus Sidetes, who lived in the reigns of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius, circa A.D. 117-161, wrote Peri lykanthrupoy, a long medical poem in Greek hexameter verse, consisting of forty-two books, of which only a couple of fragments remain. He says that Lycanthropy is a disease, a kind of insanity or mania when the patient was afflicted with hideous appetites, the ferocity, and other qualities of a wolf. He further tells us that men are attacked with this madness chiefly in the beginning of the year, and become most furious in February; retiring for the night to lone cemeteries and living precisely in the manner of ravening wolves.

Under Lycanthropia, Burton[49] notes as follows: "Lycanthropia, which Avicenna calls Cucubuth, others Lupinam Insaniam, or Wolf-Madness, when men run howling about graves and fields in the night, and will not be persuaded but that they are wolves, or some such beasts. Aetius (Lib. 6, cap. 11) and Paulus (Lib. 3, cap. 16) call it a kind of melancholy; but I should rather refer it to madness, as most do. Some make a doubt of it whether there be any such disease. Donat ab Altomari (Cap. 9, Art med.) saith, that he saw two of them in his time: Wierus (De praestig. Daemonum, 1, 3, cap. 21) tells a story of such a one at Padua, 1541, that would not believe to the contrary, but that he was a wolf.

He hath another instance of a Spaniard, who thought himself a bear; Forrestus (Obseruat. lib. 10, de morbis cerebri, cap. 15) confirms as much by many examples; one amongst the rest of which he was an eye-witness, at Alcmaer, in Holland, a poor

[p. 167]

husbandman that still hunted about graves, and kept in churchyards, of a pale, black, ugly, and fearful look . . . this malady, saith Avicenna, troubleth men most in February, and is now-a-days frequent in Bohemia and Hungary, according to Heurnius (Cap. de Man.). Schernitzius will have it common in Livonia. They lie hid most part all day, and go abroad in the night, barking, howling, at graves and deserts; they have usually hollow eyes, scabbed legs and thighs, very dry and pale (Ulcerata crura, sitis ipsis adest immodica, pallidi, lingua sicca) saith Altomarus (Cap. 9, Art. Hydrophobia); he gives a reason there of all the symptoms, and sets down a brief cure of them." It is remarkable that most of these features are found in the vampire, especially the unquenchable thirst, "sitis immodica" which is emphasized by the famous physician Antonio Donato Altomari, who was one of the most learned authorities of his day. It is also remarkable that the malady is reported as being very prevalent in Bohemia, Hungary, and Livonia, countries in which the vampire is most frequently found. There is in fact a very close connexion between the werewolf and the vampire, and the lycanthropist is liable to become a vampire when he dies.

In parts of Greece, particularly in Elis,[50] it is said that even those who eat the flesh of a sheep that has been killed by a wolf are apt to become vampires after their death, and this serves to show how powerful the pollution of the werewolf was supposed to be. In Norse saga, Ingiald, the son of King Aunund, was timid whilst a boy, but after eating the heart of a wolf he gained strength and courage and became the boldest of heroes.[51] It might be thought that so far from inspiring a person with a thirst for blood the flesh of a sheep would homoeopathically infuse qualities of gentleness, and indeed the Abipones of Paraguay were most careful to avoid mutton lest it should make them slack and fearful in the fight.[52] But in this instance it will be seen that the characteristics of a sheep have been absorbed, so to speak, and infected by the ferocity of the wolf. Curiously enough in Uganda the Baganda greatly fear the ghosts of sheep, which they believe would return and kill a man if they saw him give them the fatal blow. Hence when a sheep is to be killed one man occupies its attention in some way and another, whose presence the animal must not suspect, swiftly slaughters it before

[p. 168]

a glimpse of him can be caught. In this way the sheep is tricked because the ghost does not know whom to haunt and punish for its death. Moreover, sheep give health and protection to cattle, and a ram is almost invariably sent into the pastures with a herd of cows. Should a sheep die in a house nobody must dare openly to mention the fact, which may only be alluded to in the most covert and circumlocutionary phrase, for were anyone to say, "the sheep is dead," its ghost sorely angered would assuredly afflict the unlucky speaker with some disease and possibly even kill him outright.[53] It is worth noting that among the ancient Greeks it was thought that any garment made from the fleece of a sheep which had been worried or torn by a wolf would have a bad effect upon the wearer and set up some roseola and an intense irritation of the skin.[54] It is certainly curious to note the whole mass of tradition which, as it would seem, the wide world over is connected with the sheep, and in particular when this animal has been attacked or slain by a wolf.

Even as some kind of vampirish infection was held to proceed from the wolf, the vampire himself will even more strongly convey this taint, and therefore, unless the most drastic and immediate remedies are applied, a person who is attacked by a vampire and whose blood has been sucked will become a vampire in turn imbued with a craving to pass on the horrible pollution. This is perhaps, and with good reason, the most dreaded quality of the vampire, and examples thereof occur again and again in legend and history.

It is far more curious that it should be thought that those over whose dead bodies a cat or any other animal has passed should become vampires. This belief widely exists amongst Slavonic peoples, and is to be found in some parts of Greece. It also prevails in China where a cat is never allowed to enter a room with a corpse for the body still contains the Kuei, the lower or inferior soul of Yin original, and by leaping over it the cat will impart something of its original savage or tigerish nature and the dead man may become a vampire.[55] It should be explained that it is a common belief among the Chinese that there are two "souls"; the higher soul which after death seeks the divine life, the heavenly source of its being; and the lower soul, which is gross, returning to the

[p. 169]

earth and dwelling in the grave until the complete dissolution of the corpse.

It is believed among Slavonic nations, as it was firmly believed throughout England and in many districts of France, that witches turn themselves into cats, and among the Oraons (or Uraons) a primitive hill tribe of Bengal, we have a vampire cat who is a Chordewa, a witch who is able to change her soul into a black cat and who then visits and frequents the houses where there are sick and dying people. Such a cat has a peculiar way of mewing quite differently from the noise of other cats, and is easily recognized. It steals quietly into a house almost like a shadow leaps lightly on the bed, eats of the food that has been prepared for the sick man and gently licks his lips. When it is able to accomplish this latter the invalid has no chance of recovering, in which connexion we must remember, as has been remarked before, that the soul is supposed to take its departure from the mouth of a dying person. Even if this cat be seen it is extraordinarily difficult to catch it, since it has a supernatural activity and will fight and scratch with the malice of a demon. However, they say that persons have sometimes succeeded, and then the woman out of whom the cat (her soul) has come remains insensible, in a state of coma as deep as death, until the cat re-enters her body. Any wound inflicted upon the cat is produced upon her. For example if they cut it, or break a leg, or destroy its sight, the woman will simultaneously suffer the same mutilation. So great a horror had the Oraons of these witches that formerly they used to burn any person that was suspected to be a Chordewa.[56]

It is a circumstance of very frequent occurrence in the witch trials of all countries that a witch who has appeared in the likeness of a cat, a hare, or any other animal and has met with an accident or been mutilated under that form is found to be marked with the same wound or to be suffering from the same harm in her human shape when this is resumed.[57]

It is not difficult then to see why, if some animal of ill-omen,--and the cat seems to be particularly unfortunate,--leaps over a corpse, the dead person should be considered in danger of becoming a vampire. In Greece, particularly in Macedonia, the most pious care is taken to prevent any such calamity. The body is watched all night long by relatives and friends,

[p. 170]

and this is deemed a work of true charity by which they acquire great merit, it brings a blessing upon their own souls (psykiko), if, in spite of all their care some cat does jump across the body, the dead man must be pierced through with two long "sack-needles" (sakkorrafais), in order to secure his rest and to guard against his return. It is well to scatter mustard seed on the roof and on the threshold, and the wise man will barricade his door with brambles and thorns. Should the vampire return he cannot fail to occupy himself with counting the seeds, and it will be dawn, when he must return to his grave, long before he completes the tale. Should he endeavour to pass through the bushes he will inevitably be caught and held fast by the briars. Ralston tells us that the Serbs and the Bulgarians keep this vigil even more carefully than the Greeks. "In some places the jumping of a boy over the corpse is considered as fatal as that of a cat. The flight of a bird above the body may also be attended by the same terrible results; and so may--in the Ukraine--the mere breath of the wind from the Steppe."[58] What is extremely curious is that this tradition still lingers in the north of England, and if a cat or dog pass over a corpse the animal must be killed at once. The reason for this has been entirely forgotten, but the survival is very remarkable as showing that once there existed a dread of vampires in England which to-day is entirely forgotten. Thomas Pennant says that in Scotland: "No dog or cat must be allowed to leap over the corpse or enter the room. It is reckoned so ominous, their doing so that the poor animal is killed without mercy."[59] It is even still the custom that all animals shall be shut up till the funeral procession has left. It is believed that a cat will not remain in the house with an unburied corpse; and rooks (we know) will abandon the place till after the funeral, if the rookery be near the mansion. The explanation given by John Jamieson[60] that if a cat has leapt over a corpse the first person on to whose lap he may afterwards jump, or who may take him up in his arms, is stricken with blindness would seem to be a later invention, a reason made up to explain the ill-omen, when the vampire tradition had disappeared, and so the real reason had been entirely forgotten.

Having investigated the various reasons why any person

[p. 171]

should become a vampire, and discussed the fatal accident which may bring about this terrible doom various points present themselves which invite some inquiry. Although the belief varies in different parts of the world, and it is generally understood that vampires only operate by night, as King David says:[61] "Non timebis a timore nocturno" (Thou shalt not be afraid of the terror of the night), yet it is also supposed that under certain conditions vampires may wander abroad during the day, and that the vampire truly is daemonium meridianum (the noonday devil)." Therefore we may ask by what signs, if any, is a vampire to be recognized. Again, how does a vampire leave his grave? For we must remember that the vampire is tangible, and can make his presence felt in a very unmistakable and terrible manner. This difficulty has been very clearly stated by Dom Calmet who writes as follows: "How can a corpse which is covered with four or five feet of earth, which has no room even to move or to stretch a limb, which is wrapped in linen cerements, enclosed in a coffin of wood, how can it, I say, seek the upper air and return to the world walking upon the earth so as to cause those extraordinary effects which are attributed to it? And after all that how can it go back again into the grave, when it will be found fresh, incorrupt, full of blood exactly like a living body? Can it be maintained that these corpses pass through the earth without disturbing it, just as water and the damps which penetrate the soil or which exhale therefrom without perceptibly dividing or cleaving the ground? It were indeed to be wished that in the histories of the Return of Vampires which have been related, a certain amount of attention had been given to this point, and that the difficulty had been something elucidated.

"Let us suppose that these corpses do not actually stir from their tombs, that only the ghosts or spirits appear to the living, wherefor do these Phantoms present themselves and what is it that energizes them? Is it actually the soul of the dead man which has not yet departed to its final destination, or is it a demon who causes them to be seen in an assumed and phantastical body? And if there bodies are spectral, how do they suck the blood of the living? We are enmeshed in a sad dilemma when we ask if these apparitions are natural or miraculous.

[p. 172]

"A priest, who is recognized as possessing intellectual qualities far beyond the ordinary, told me that some little time since when he was travelling in Moravia, Mgr. Jeanin, a Canon of the, Cathedral of Olmutz, asked for his company to a village named Liebava, which the good canon was officially about to visit as Commissary of the Episcopal Court to investigate the well-authenticated reports concerning a Vampire who had recently caused much trouble and disorder in the village Liebava.

"They journeyed thither; witnesses were cited and heard; the ordinary canonical procedure was observed in every detail. The witnesses gave evidence that a certain well-known citizen who had formerly resided at Liebava after his death had sorely tormented the whole district, inasmuch as for a space of three or four years he had issued forth from the cemetery and had entered several houses. It was true these visitations were now ceased, because a certain Hungarian who passed through the village at the time when the terror was at its height avowed that he could cope with the evil and lay the Vampire to rest. In order to fulfil his promise he mounted the clock-tower of the church, and watched for the moment when the vampire came out of his grave, leaving behind him in the tomb his shroud and cerements, before he made his way to the village to plague and terrify the inhabitants.

"When the Hungarian from his coin of vantage had seen the Vampire depart on his prowl, he promptly descended from the tower possessed himself of the shroud and linen carrying them off with him back to the belfry. The Vampire in due course returned and not finding his sere-clothes cried out mightily against the thief, who from the top of the belfry was making signs to him that he should climb and recover his winding-sheet if be wished to get it back again. The Vampire, accordingly, began to clamber up the steep stair which led to the summit of the tower, but the Hungarian suddenly gave him such a blow that he fell from top to bottom. Thereupon they were able to strike off his head with the sharp edge of a sexton's spade, and that made an end of the whole business.

"The priest who related this history to me, himself saw nothing of these happenings, neither was anything witnessed

[p. 173]

by the Right Reverend Canon who was acting as Episcopal Commissioner. They only received the reports of the peasants of that district, a folk who were very ignorant, very credulous, very superstitious, and brimful of all kinds of wonderful stories concerning the aforesaid Vampire.

"For my part I think the whole history vain and utterly without foundation, and the more absurd and contradictory are the various tales which were told, the more strongly am I confirmed in the opinion which I have formed.

"Supposing, indeed, there were any truth in the accounts of these appearances of Vampires, are they to be attributed to the power of God, to the Angels, to the souls of those who return in this way, or to the Devil? If we adopt the last hypothesis it follows that the Devil can endue these corpses with subtilty and bestow upon them the power of passing through the earth without any disturbances of the ground, of gliding through the cracks and joints of a door, of slipping through a keyhole, of increasing, of diminishing, of becoming rarified as air or water to penetrate the earth; in fine of enjoying the same properties as we believe will be possessed by the Blessed after the Resurrection, and which distinguished the human Body of our Lord after the first Easter Day, inasmuch as He appeared to those to whom He would show Himself for 'Jesus cometh, the doors bein shut, and stood in the midst, and said: Peace be to you,' Jesus uenit ianuis clausis, S. John, xx, 26.

"Yet even if it be allowed that the Devil can re-energize dead bodies and give them movement for a certain time can he also bestow these powers of increasing, diminishing, becoming rarified, and so subtle that they can penetrate the earth, doors, windows? We are not told that God allows him the exercise of any such power, and it is hard to believe that a material body, gross and substantial can be endowed with this subtility and spirituality without some destruction or alteration of the general structure and without damage to the configuration of the body. But this would not be in accord with the intention of the Devil, for such a change would prevent this body from appearing, from manifesting itself, from motion and speech, ay, indeed from being eventually cut to pieces and burned as so often happens in the case of Vampires in Moravia, Poland, and Silesia."[63]

[p. 174]

These difficulties which Dom Calmet with little perception has raised can be very briefly answered, and they are not only superficial, but also smack of heterodoxy. In the first place, the story that he tells is far from satisfactory, and even if it were--what it may be--much exaggerated one can hardly brush aside the vast vampire tradition because one instance proves to be overdrawn. In any case the business of the watcher from the belfry and the demand that the Vampire should regain his shroud by climbing the stairs to the top of the tower do not bear the mark of truth, but what is certainly significant is that the Vampire was decapitated and that then the hauntings ceased. I conceive that the story of the cerements is mere elaboration, but that the grave of the Vampire was traced, opened, and that his head was severed from his body. This eliminates some highly charged details whilst it does not touch the facts of the case. So we see that the story when divested of these trappings offers nothing impossible, that is to say nothing extraordinary or unusual in such histories.

Dom Calmet asks are the appearances of Vampires to be attributed to God, or to the souls of those who return or to the Devil? I answer that for the hauntings of a Vampire, three things are necessary: the Vampire, the Devil, and the Permission of Almighty God. Just as we know, for we learn this from the Malleus Maleficarum, that there are three necessary concomitants of witchcraft, and these are the Devil, a Witch, and the Permission of Almighty God (Part 1). So are these three necessary concomitants of Vampirism. Whether it be the Demon who is energizing the corpse[64] or whether it be the dead man himself who by some dispensation of Divine Providence has returned is a particular which must be decided severally for each case. So much then for Dom Calmet's question, to whom are the appearances of Vampires to be attributed.

Can the Devil endow a body with these qualities of subtilty, rarification, increase, and diminishing, so that it may pass through doors and windows? I answer that there is no doubt the Demon can do this, and to deny the proposition is hardly orthodox. For S. Thomas says of the devil that "just as he can from the air compose a body of any form and shape, and assume it so as to appear in it visibly, so, in the same way,

[p. 175]

he can clothe any corporeal thing with any corporeal form, so as to appear therein." Moreover almost any seance will be sufficient reply to Dom Calmet's question. In his Modern Spiritism (1904), Mr. T. Godfrey Raupert says: "Photographs, or small drawing-room ornaments have thus been seen to change their places, and articles kept in a room other than that occupied by the sensitive, have been brought through closed doors and deposited at a spot previously indicated--in some instances placed into the hands of the person requesting the apport of the article. Many such remarkable instances of apport and of matter passing through matter have been observed under the strictest possible test conditions, and will be found recorded in the late Leipzig Professor Zoellner's deeply interesting work Transcendental Physics. The writer has himself observed one instance of this kind in a private house, and in circumstances entirely precluding the possibility of deception. There is, perhaps, no phenomenon which so distinctly exhibits the action of extraneous and independent intelligence as this one." (pp. 35-36.) Matter, then, can pass through matter, and the seance answers Dom Calmet. We may, if we will, adopt the ectoplasmic theory to explain the mode whereby the Vampire issues from his grave, but although this is very probably true (in some instances at all events) it is not necessarily the only solution of the problem. According to Catholic theologians evil spirits, if permitted to materialize their invisible presence, to build up a tangible and active body, do not absolutely require the ectoplasm of some medium.

Not very dissimilar to the dilemma of Dom Calmet are the views hold by an eminent authority, Dr. Herbert Mayo, who was sometime Senior Surgeon of Middlesex Hospital, Professor of Anatomy and Physiology in King's College, Professor of Comparative Anatomy in the Royal College of Surgeons, London. In his well-known work, On the Truths contained in Popular Superstitions, he devotes his second Letter, or rather Chapter, to "Vampyrism," concerning which he says "The proper place of this subject falls in the midst of a philosophical disquisition," but he adds for the benefit of the inquirer that it is "a point on which, in my time, school-boys much your juniors entertained decided opinions." He continues to inform us that during the middle of the eighteenth

[p. 176]

century: "Vampyrism spread like a pestilence through Servia and Wallachia, causing numerous deaths, and disturbing all the land with fear of the mysterious visitation, against which no one felt himself secure.

"Here is something like a good solid practical popular delusion. Do I believe it? To be sure I do. The facts are matter of history: the people died like rotten sheep; and the cause and method of their dying was, in their belief, what has just been stated. You suppose, then, they died frightened out of their lives, as men have died whose pardon has been proclaimed when their necks were already on the block, of the belief that they were going to die? Well, if that were all, the subject would still be worth examining. But there is more in it than that." He then gives an account in very full detail of a Vampire at Belgrade in the year 1732, he describes the circumstances in which the body was disinterred, It leaned to one side, the skin was fresh and ruddy, the nails grown long and evilly crooked, the mouth slobbered with blood from its last night's repast. Accordingly a stake was driven through the chest of the Vampire who uttered a terrible screech whilst blood poured in quantities from the wound. Then it was burned to ashes. Moreover, a number of other persons throughout the district had been infected with vampirism. Of the facts there can be no question whatsoever. The documents are above suspicion, and in particular the most important of these which was signed by three regimental surgeons, and formally counter-signed by a lieutenant-colonel and sub-lieutenant. Even Dr. Mayo is obliged to allow: "No doubt can be entertained of its authenticity, or of its general fidelity; the less that it does not stand alone, but is supported by a mass of evidence to the same effect. It appears to establish beyond question, that where the fear of Vampyrism prevails, and there occur several deaths, in the popular belief connected with it, the bodies, when disinterred weeks after burial, present the appearance of corpses from which life has only recently departed." It is very instructive to note how the writer proceeds with the greatest subtility and no little cleverness to extract himself from logical consequences it might have seemed impossible to avoid, and how he explains an exceptional circumstance by circumstances which are far more

[p. 177]

amazing and difficult to believe. With the utmost suavity and breadth of mind he continues: "What inference shall we draw from this fact?--that Vampyrism is true in the popular sense?--and that these fresh-looking and well-conditioned corpses had some mysterious source of preternatural nourishment? That would be to adopt, not to solve the superstition. Let us content ourselves with a notion not so monstrous, but still startling enough: that the bodies, which were found in the so-called Vampyr state, instead of being in a new or mystical condition, were simply alive in the common way or had been so for some time subsequently to their interment that, in short, they were the bodies of persons who had been buried alive, and whose life, where it yet lingered, was finally extinguished through the ignorance and barbarity of those who disinterred them. . . . We have thus succeeded in interpreting one of the unknown terms in the Vampyr-theorem. The suspicious character, who had some dark way of nourishing himself in the grave, turns out to be an unfortunate gentleman (or lady) whom his friends had buried under a mistake while he was still alive, and who, if they afterwards mercifully let him alone, died sooner or later either naturally or of the premature interment--in either case, it is to be hoped, with no interval of restored consciousness." I submit that Dr. Mayo has not succeeded in solving any difficulty at all connected with vampirism. No doubt, as we have already considered in some detail, cases of premature burial, which were far more common than was generally supposed, would have helped to swell the tradition, but that they can have originated it is impossible, and it is absurd to put forward the terrible accident of premature burial as an explanation to cover all the facts. It is quite impossible that a person who had been interred when in a coma or trance should have survived in the grave.

Before we deal with the signs by which it is reputed a vampire may be recognized; the method in which a vampire presumably leaves his grave; and the way by which a vampire may be released or destroyed, we will briefly inquire into Dr. Mayo's explanation of the actual visit of the vampire to a victim and the subsequent consequences, the terrible anaemia and haemoplegia which may result in death followed by the vampire infection. And here we find that Dr. Mayo

[p. 178]

quite honestly and frankly confesses that he is completely at a loss to give any solution of the difficulty. It is most instructive to read those inconclusive pleas which he is driven to put forward but which his own good sense cannot accept. He writes: "The second element which we have yet to explain is the Vampyr visit and its consequences,--the lapse of the party visited into death-trance. There are two ways of dealing with this knot; one is to cut it, the other to untie it.

"It may be cut, by denying the supposed connexion between the Vampyr visit and the supervention of death-trance in the second party. Nor is the explanation thus obtained devoid of plausibility. There is no reason why death-trance should not, in certain persons and places, be epidemic. Then the persons most liable to it would be those of weak and irritable nervous systems. Again, a first effect of the epidemic might be further to shake the nerves of weaker subjects. These are exactly the persons who are likely to be infected with imaginary terrors, and to dream, or even to fancy, they have seen Mr. or Mrs. such a one, the last victim of the epidemic. The dream or impression upon the senses might again recur, and the sickening patient have already talked of it to his neighbours, before he himself was seized with death-trance. On this supposition the Vampyr visit would sink into the subordinate rank of a mere premonitory symptom.

"To myself, I must confess, this explanation, the best I am yet in a position to offer, appears barren and jejune; and not at all to do justice to the force and frequency, or, as tradition represents the matter, the universality of the Vampyr visit as a precursor of the victim's fate. Imagine how strong must have been the conviction of the reality of the apparition, how common a feature it must have been, to have led to the laying down of the unnatural and repulsive process customarily followed at the Vampyr's grave, as the regular and proper preventive of ulterior consequences." Dr. Mayo proposes therefore "to try and untie this knot" a result which he singularly fails to achieve. He quite erroneously states "in popular language, it was the ghost of the Vampyr that haunted its future victim." This is exactly what the Vampire is not. As we have seen there is some divergence of view whether the Vampire is the actual person. energized with some horrible mystical life in death

[p. 179]

who visits his victims, and there can be no doubt at all that this is the true and proper Vampire, or whether it is a demon who animates and informs the body. But in no circumstances whatsoever is the Vampire a phantom or ghost, save by a quite inadmissible extension of the term, which then may practically be regarded (as indeed it is often most mistakenly and reprehensively  regarded) as covering almost any malignant supernatural phenomenon. So an explanation which confuses a Vampire with a ghost is entirely impertinent.

We will now proceed to inquire into those physical traits by which a Vampire may be discerned.

A Vampire is generally described as being exceedingly gaunt and lean with a hideous countenance and eyes wherein are glinting the red fire of perdition. When, however, he has satiated his lust for warm human blood his body becomes horribly puffed and bloated, as though he were some great leech gorged and replete to bursting. Cold as ice, or it may be fevered and burning as a hot coal, the skin is deathly pale, but the lips are very full and rich, blub and red; the teeth white and gleaming, and the canine teeth wherewith he bites deep into the neck of his prey to suck thence the vital streams which re-animate his body and invigorate all his forces appear notably sharp and pointed. Often his mouth curls back in a vulpine snarl which bares these fangs, "a gaping mouth and gleaming teeth," says Leone Allacci, and so in many districts the hare-lipped are avoided as being certainly vampires. In Bulgaria, it is thought that the Vampire who returns from the tomb has only one nostril; and in certain districts of Poland he is supposed to have a sharp point at the end of his tongue, like the sting of a bee. It is said that the palms of a Vampire's hands are downy with hair,[65] and the nails are always curved and crooked, often well-nigh the length of a great bird's claw, the quicks dirty and foul with clots and gouts of black blood. His breath is unbearably fetid and rank with corruption, the stench of the charnel. Dr. Henry More in his An Antidote against Atheism, III, ix, tells us that when Johannes Cuntius, an alderman of Pentsch in Silesia and a witch returned as a Vampire he much tormented the Parson of the Parish. One evening, "when this Theologer was sitting with his wife and Children about him, exercising himself in Musick, according

[p. 180]

to his usual manner, a most grievous stink arose suddenly, which by degrees spread itself to every corner of the room. Here upon he commends himself and his family to God by Prayer. The smell nevertheless encreased, and became above all measure pestilently noisom, insomuch that he was forced to go up to his chamber. He and his Wife had not been in bed a quarter of an hour, but they find the same stink in the bedchamber; of which, while they are complaining one to another out steps the Spectre from the Wall, and creeping to his bedside, breathes upon him an exceeding cold breath, of so intolerable stinking and malignant a scent, as is beyond all imagination and expression. Here upon the Theologer, good soul, grew very ill, and was fain to keep his bed, his face, belly, and guts swelling as if he had been poysoned; whence he was also troubled with a difficulty of breathing, and with a putrid inflamation of his eyes, so that he could not well use them of a long time after."[66] In the Malleus Maleficarum, Part II, Qn. 1., Ch. 11, the following is related: "In the territory of the Black Forest, a witch was being lifted by a gaoler on to the pile of wood prepared for her burning and said: 'I will pay you,' and blew into his face. And he was at once afflicted with a horrible leprosy all over his body and did not survive many days." Boguet, Discours des Sorciers, gives as his rubric to Chapter XXV, Si les Sorciers tuent de leur souffle & haleine. He tells us: "Les Sorciers tuent & endommagent de lour souffle & haleine: en quoy Clauda Gaillard dicte la Fribolette nous seruita de tesmoignage; car ayant souffle contre Clauda Perrier, qu'elle r'encontra en l'Eglise d'Ebouchoux, tout aussi test ceste femme tomba malade, & fut rendue impotente, & en fin mourut apres auoir traine par l'espace d'vn an en toute pauuriete, & langueur: de mesme aussi comme Marie Perrier luy eut vne fois refuse l'aumosne, elle luy souffla fort rudement contre, de facon quo Marie tomba par terre, & s'estant releuee ause peine elle demeura malade par quelques iours, & iusques a tant que Pierre Perrier son neueu out menace la Sorciere."

Sinistrari in his Demoniality (24) says that if we ask how it is possible that the Demon, who has no body, yet can perform actual coitus with man or woman, most authorities answer that the demon assumes or animates the corpse of another human being, male or female, as the case may be, and Delrio

[p. 181]

(Disquisitiones Magicae, Liber II, Q. xxviii, sec. 1). comments: "Denique multae falsae resurrectiones gentilium huc sunt referendae; & constat cum sagis ut plurimum induto cadauere diabolum sine incubum, sine succubum, rem habere; unde & in hoc genere hominum, cadauerosus quidam faetor graueolentiae, cernitur."

Some remoter country districts, indeed, are apt to regard any poor wretch who is sadly deformed as a Vampire, especially if the distortion be altogether unsightly, prominent, or grotesque. It has even been known that a peasant whose face was deeply marked with wine-coloured pigment, owing it was thought to some accident which befell his mother during her late pregnancy,[67] was shunned and suspected of being a malignant vrykolakas. Chorea, they say, is a certain sign of vampirism, and it may be remarked that in Shoa this disorder is regarded as the result of demoniacal possession, or due to the magic spell of an enemy's shadow having fallen upon the sufferer.[68] An epileptic there is also often considered as being in the power of some devil, and unless proper precautions are taken he will assuredly not rest in his grave. The Vampire is endowed with strength and agility more than human, and he can run with excessive speed, outstripping the wind.

It is curious to find that in many countries persons with blue eyes are considered extremely liable to become vampires.[69] This is the case in some parts of Greece, but there does not seem to be preserved any oral tradition to explain the particular belief. It may, of course, have arisen owing to the fact that persons with eyes of this colour would seldom, if over, have been met with, and a stranger with blue eyes would be regarded with wonder and awe. (Thus in Ireland persons with bluish-grey eyes, especially if there be a streak of black on the pupil, which is common, are accounted to have the power of seeing ghosts.) We cannot, I think, connect the Greek idea with the Homeric epithet for the goddess Athene, glaykupis, which has been rendered "bright-eyed,"[70] "grey-eyed" or "blue-eyed," an old interpretation that proves utterly erroneous, since there can be no doubt that glaykupis means "owl-faced" (glaux;) and originally Athene was a deity who was literally imagined and represented as having the face of an owl, even if she did not, as is most probable,

[p. 182]

actually appear in the shape of an owl. Among the Australian aborigines the owl is regarded as a sex totem of women and is most jealously protected by them.[71] We find too, that the owl is a sacred bird among the Indians of North-West America, and in their ritual dances a solemnity revealed to them, as they suppose, by their guardian spirits, wherein they mime ancient story, the masqueraders often personate by dress, voice, and gesture the owl." The dukwally (i.e., lokoala) and other tamanawas[72] performances are exhibitions intended to represent incidents connected with their mythological legends. . . An Indian, for instance, who has been consulting with his guardian spirit, which is done by going through the washing and fasting process before described, will imagine or think he is called upon to represent the owl. He arranges in his mind the style of dress, the number of performers, the songs and dances or other movements, and, having the plan perfected, announces at a tamanawas meeting that he has had a revelation which he will impart to a select few. These are then taught and drilled in strict secrecy, and when they have perfected themselves, will suddenly make their appearance and perform before the astonished tribe."[73] The owl gives mystic qualities; for in Northern India it is believed that a man who eats the eyes of an owl will be able to see, even as that bird, in the dark.[74] In Nigeria, the owl is regarded with great awe, and the natives tremble even to pronounce its name on account of the ill omen, preferring to speak of "the bird that makes one afraid."[75] It may be remembered that Vampires are credited with being able to see in the dark, and that in many countries peasants dread to utter the word, employing some elaborate and often not very intelligible, periphrasis.

Those whose hair is red, of a certain peculiar shade, are unmistakably vampires. It is significant that in ancient Egypt, as Manetho tells us, human sacrifices were offered at the grave of Osiris, and the victims were red-haired men who were burned, their ashes being scattered far and wide by winnowing-fans. It is held by some authorities that this was done to fertilize the fields and produce a bounteous harvest, red-hair symbolizing the golden wealth of the corn. But these men were called Typhonians, and were representatives not of Osiris but of his evil rival Typhon, whose hair

[p. 183]

was red.[76] Francesco Redi says: "Fra gli Egizii era tradizione che Tifone, il genio della distruzione, simile al Arimane Persiano al Satano Ebriaco fosse di pelo rosso, forse per memoria di invasioni di barbari di pelo rosso e presso noi dura tutta via la tradizione, 'Guardati dal pelo rosso ne valse a toglierla la barba rossa del Redentore.'"[77] Red was the colour of the hair of Judas Iscariot,[78] and of Cain, and an old Latin rhyme of the thirteenth century has:

Monet nos haec fabula rufos euitare
 Quos color et fama notat, illis sociare.

The Italians say:

Capelli rossi
 O tutto foco, O tutto mosci.

John Wodroephe in The Spared Hours of a Soldier in hie Travels, Dort, 1623, quotes: "Garde toi bien des hommes rousseaux, des femmes barbues, et des ceux qui sont marques an visage."[70] I have not met with the following tradition save orally, but it is believed in Serbia, Bulgaria, and Rumania, that there are certain red-polled vampires who are called "Children of Judas," and that these, the foulest of the foul, kill their victim with one bite or kiss which drains the blood as it were at a single draught. The poisoned flesh of the victim is wounded with the Devil's stigmata, three hideous scars shaped thus, XXX, signifying the thirty pieces of silver, the price of blood.

It is curious to note that the ancient ideas of the physiognomy of amorous persons are not at all unlike the distinctive marks of the vampire. The old belief has thus been summed up by G. Tourdes, "Aphrodisie," Dictionnaire Encyclopedique des Sciences Medicales: "The erotic temperament has been described as marked by a lean figure, white and well-ranged teeth, a developed hairy system, a characteristic voice, air, and expression, and even a special odour."

Since the vampire bites his prey with sharp teeth and greedily sucks forth the blood it is not surprising to find that those who are born with teeth in their heads are considered to be already marked down as vampires. Even in countries where the vampire belief was lost this circumstance was considered of the unluckiest,[80] and in Chapman and Shirley's[81]

[p. 184]

Chabot, Admiral of France, V, 2, Master Advocate exposing the villainies of the Chancellor declares: "He was born with teeth in his head, by an affidavit of his midwife, to note his devouring, and hath one toe on his left foot crooked, and in the form of an eagle's talon, to foretel his rapacity. What shall I say? branded, marked, and designed in his birth for shame and obloquy, which appeareth further, by a mole under his right ear, with only three witch's hairs in it; strange and ominious predictions of nature!" According to Allacci those children who were thought likely to become Callicantzari were taken to a fire which had been lighted in the market-square, and here the soles of their feet were held to the flames until the nails were singed and the danger of their attacks averted. The allusion in Chabot to the "toe on his left foot crooked, and in the form of an eagle's talon" is particularly interesting in this connexion. It is evident that the old physical characteristics which mark a creature of demoniacal propensities had been remembered as of ill-omen and horror when exactly what they portended and betrayed had been lost in the mists of ancient lore. Moreover it should be noted that persons and animals attack with the hands or the claws, not generally with the feet to scratch and rend. Accordingly the custom in the days even of Allacci was practised but not understood, and it points to some belief reaching back to old Greek mythology, it is probably some. link between the Callicantzaros and the Centaurs as Lawson suggests in well-founded detail.

The vampire is, as we have said, generally believed to embrace his victim who has been thrown into a trance-like sleep, and after greedily kissing the throat suddenly to bite deep into the jugular vein and absorb the warm crimson blood. It has long since been recognized by medico-psychologists that there exists a definite connexion between the fascination of blood and sexual excitation. Owing to custom, to inhibitions and education this emotion generally remains latent, although a certain mental sadism is by no means a mark of degeneracy. Dr. Havelock Ellis says: "It is probable that the motive of sexual murders is nearly always to shed blood, and not to cause death,"[82] an extremely significant fact. Since the vampire is generally held to seize the throat it is very striking that Leppmann[83] points out

[p. 185]

that such murders are almost always produced by wounds in the neck or mutilation of the abdomen, never by wounds of the head.

Paul d'Enjoy defines the kiss as "a bite and a suction,"[84] and a high authority says: "The impulse to bite is also a part of the tactile element which lies at the origin of kissing."[85] The tactile kiss which doubtless is very primitive has developed into the olfactory and gustatory, extending thence into many elaborations and variants. Under the stress of strong sexual emotion when love is closely knit with pain there is often an overwhelming tendency to bite the partner of the act, and the love-bite is often referred to in Latin literature. Thus Plautus, Pseudolus, I, 1, ll. 62-66, speaks of amorous dalliance:

Nunc nostri amores, mores, consuetudines,
 Iocus, ludus, sermo, suauis suauiatio
 Compressiones arctae amantum comparum,
 Tencris labellis molles morsiunculae,
 Papillarum horridularum oppressiunculae.

And Catullus, VIII, 17, 18, writes after a quarrel:

Quem nunc amabis? cuius esse diceris?
 Quem basiabis? cui labella mordebis?

In a well-known Ode, Horace Carmin I, xiii, 11, 12:

       siue puer furens
 impressit memorem dente labris notam.

which Francis Englishes:

I burn, when in excess of wine
 He soils those snowy arms of thine,
 Or on thy lips the fierce-fond boy
 Marks with his teeth the furious joy.

Tibullus, 1, vi, 14, 15, writes:

Tune succos herbasque dedi, queis liuor abiret,
     Quem facit impresso mutua dente Uenus.

And again, I, viii, 35-38:

At Uenus inueniet puero succumbere furtim,
     Dum tumet, et teneros conserit usque sinus.
 Et dare anhelanti pugnantibus humida linguis
     Oscula, et in collo figere dente notas.
 But fav'ring Venus watchful o'er thy joy,
 Shall lay thee secret near th' impassion'd boy; [p. 186]
 His panting bosom shall be prest to thine,
 And his dear lips thy breathless lips shall join;
 With active tongue he'll dart the humid kiss,
 And on thy neck indent his eager bliss.

Ovid, Amores, III, xiv, 34, asks his mistress:

Cur plus, quam somno, turbatos esse capillos;
     Collaque conspicui dentis habere notam?

which is rendered by the translator in Dryden's Ovid, "by many hands":

Why do your looks and rumpled head-clothes show
 'Tis more than usual sleep that made them so?
 Why are the kisses which he gave betray'd,
 By the impression which his teeth has made?

Many further passages from the older Latin poets might be quoted, and amongst the moderns, Joannes Secundus[86] and Jean Bonnefons[87] have not neglected to celebrate the love-bite in their verses. From the latter it will suffice to cite the elegant Basium IV, Execratur dentes, quibus inter osculandum papillas Dominae laeserat, which commences:

O dens improbe, dire, ter sceleste,
 Dens sacerrime, dens inauspicate,
 Tun' tantum scelus ausus, ut papillas,
 Illas Pancharidis meae papillas,
 Quas Uenus ueneratur et Cupido,
 Feris morsibus ipse uulnerares?

Of Joannes Secundus the Basium VII in the Basium Liber is very celebrated:

Quis te furor, Neaera,
 Mepta quis iubebat,
 Sic inuolare nostram
 Sic uellicare linguam,
 Ferociente morsu?
 An, quas tot unus abs te
 Pectus per omne gesto
 Penetrabileis sagittas,
 Parum uidentur? istis.
 Ni dentibus proteruis
 Exerceas nefandum
 Membrum nefas in illud,
 Quo saepe solo prime,
 Quo saepe solo sere,
 Quo per dieisque longas
 Nocteisque amarulentas
 Laudes tuas canebam?

[p. 187]

This has been charmingly tuned by Nott:

Ah! what ungovern'd rage, declare,
 Neaera, too capricious fair!
 What unrevenged, unguarded wrong,
 Could urge thee thus to wound my tongue
 Perhaps you deem th' afflictive pains
 Too trifling, which my heart sustains;
 Nor think enough my bosom smarts
 With all the sure, destructive darts
 Incessant sped from every charm;
 That thus your wanton teeth must harm,
 Must harm that little tuneful thing,
 Which wont so oft thy praise to sing;
 What time the morn has streak'd the skies,
 Or evening's faded radiance dies;
 Through painful days consuming slow
 Through ling'ring night of amorous woe.

Dorat, Baiser XI, has daintily paraphrased, Secundus:

Tes dents, ces perles que j'adore,
 D'ou s'echappe a mon oeil trompe
 Ce sourire developpe,
 Transfuge des levres de flore;
 Devroient-elles blesser, dis moi,
 Une organe tendre et fidelle,
 Qui t'assure ici de ma foi,
 Et nomma Thais la plus belle?

The Supplementum Lexicorum Eroticorum Linguae Latinae, Paris, 1911, has: "Morsiunculae.--Gallice: Sucons.". Much Oriental erotic literature gives attention to this subject. The Indian Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana devotes no less than one chapter to the love-bite, and there are many references to be found in such manual as the Arabic Perfumed Garden of the Sheik Nefzaoui. When it is borne in mind how markedly Slavonic a tradition is the bite of the vampire it becomes extremely significant to know that biting in amorous embraces is very common among the Southern Slavs.

The peasant women of Sicily, especially says Alonzi,[88] in the districts where crimes of blood are prevalent often in their affection for their children kiss them violently, even biting them and sucking their blood until the infant wails in pain. If a child has done wrong they will not only strike it, but also bite it fiercely on the face, ears, or arms, till blood flows. Both men and women often use the threat: "I will drink

[p. 188]

your blood." There is ocular evidence that a man who had knifed another in a quarrel licked the hot blood from the victim's hand.

A very curious case was reported in the London police news of 1894. A man aged thirty, was charged with ill-treating his wife's illegitimate daughter, aged three. The acts had lasted over a period of many months; her lips, eyes, and hands were bitten and covered with bruises from sucking, and often her little pinafore was stained with blood. "Defendant admitted he had bitten the child because he loved it." Here we have true vampirish qualities and inclinations.

The Daily Express, 17th April, 1925, gave the following:

"VAMPIRE BRAIN. PLAN TO PRESERVE IT FOR SCIENCE." Berlin. Thursday, April 16th. The body of Fritz Haarmann, executed yesterday at Hanover for twenty-seven murders, will not be buried until it has been examined at Gottingen University.

"Owing to the exceptional character of the crimes-most of Haarmann's victims were bitten to death--the case aroused tremendous interest among German scientists. It is probable that Haarmann's brain will be removed and preserved by the University authorities.--Central News."

The case of Fritz Haarmann, who was dubbed the "Hanover Vampire" was reported in some detail in The News Of the World, 21st December, 1924, under the heading: "VAMPIRE'S VICTIMS." Haarmann was born in Hanover, 26th October, 1879. The father, "Olle Harmann," a locomotive-stoker, was well-known as a rough, cross-grained, choleric man, whom Fritz, his youngest son, both hated and feared. As a youth, Fritz Haarmann was educated at a Church School, and then at a preparatory school for non-commissioned officers at New Breisach. It is significant that he was always dull and stupid, unable to learn; but it appears a good soldier. When released from military service owing to ill-health he returned home, only to be accused in a short while of offences against children. Being considered irresponsible for his actions the Court sent him to an asylum at Hildesheim, whence however he managed to escape and took refuge in Switzerland. Later he returned to Hanover, but the house became unbearable owing to the violent quarrels which were of daily occurrence between him and his father. Accordingly he enlisted and was

[p. 189]

sent to the crack 10th Jager Battalion, at Colmar in Alsace. Here he won golden opinions, and when released owing to illness, with a pension his papers were marked "Recht gut." When he reached home there were fresh scenes of rancour whilst blows were not infrequently exchanged, and in 1903 he was examined by a medical expert, Dr. Andrae, who considered him morally lacking but yet there were no grounds for sending him to an asylum. Before long he sank to the status of a tramp; a street hawker, at times; a pilferer and a thief. Again and again he was sent to jail, now charged with larceny, now with burglary, now with indecency, now with fraud. In 1918, he was released after a long stretch to find another Germany. He returned to Hanover, and was able to open a small cook shop in the old quarter of the town, where he also hawked meat which was eagerly sought at a time of general hunger and scarcity. He drove yet another trade, that of "copper's nark," an old lag who had turned spy and informer, who gave secret tips to the police as to the whereabouts of men they wanted. "Detective Haarmann" he was nicknamed by the women who thronged his shop because he always had plenty of fresh meat in store, and he invariably contrived to undersell the other butchers and victuallers of the quarter.

The centre of Hanover was the Great Railway Station, and Hanover was thronged especially at its centre with a vast ever-moving population, fugitive, wanderers and homeless from all parts of dislocated Germany. Runaway lads from towns in every direction made their way here, looking for work, looking for food, idly tramping without any definite object, without any definite goal, because they had nothing else to do. It can well be imagined that the police, a hopelessly inadequate force, kept as sharp a watch as possible on the Station and its purlieus, and Haarmann used to help them in their surveyance. At midnight, or in the early morning he would walk up and down among the rows of huddled sleeping forms in the third-class waiting halls and suddenly waking up some frightened youngster demand to see his ticket, ask to know whence he had come and where he was going. Some sad story would be sobbed out, and the kindly Haarmann was wont to offer a mattress and a meal in his own place down town.

[p. 190]

So far as could be traced the first boy he so charitably took to his rooms was a lad of seventeen named Friedel Rothe, who had run away from home. On 29th September, 1918, his mother received a postcard, and it so happened the very same day his father returned from the war. The parents were not going to let their son disappear without a search, and they soon began to hunt for him in real earnest. One of Friedel's pals told them that the missing boy had met a detective who offered him shelter. Other clues were traced and with extraordinary trouble, for the authorities had more pressing matters in hand than tracking truant schoolboys, the family obliged the police to search Cellarstrasse 27, where Haarmann lived. When a sudden entry was made Haarmann was found with another boy in such an unequivocal situation that his friends, the police, were obliged to arrest him there and then, and he received nine months imprisonment for gross indecency under Section 175 of the German Code. Four years later when Haarmann was awaiting trial for twenty-four murders he remarked: "At the time when the policeman arrested me the head of the boy Friedel Rothe was hidden under a newspaper behind the oven. Later on, I threw it into the canal."

In September, 1919, Haarmann first met Hans Grans, the handsome lad, who was to stand beside him in the dock. Grans, the type of abnormal and dangerous decadent which is only too common to-day, was one of the foulest parasites of society, pilferer and thief, bully, informer, spy, agent provocateur, murderer, renter, prostitute, and what is lower and fouler than all, blackmailer. The influence of this Ganymede over Haarmann was complete. It was he who instigated many of the murders--Adolf Harmappel a lad of seventeen was killed in November, 1923, because Grans wanted his pair of new trousers; Ernst Spiecker, likewise aged seventeen was killed on 5th January, 1924, because Grans coveted his "toff shirt"--it was he who arranged the details, who very often trapped the prey.

It may be said that in 1918, Hanover, a town of 450,000 inhabitants was well-known as being markedly homosexual. These were inscribed on the police lists no less than 500 "Mannliche Prostituierten," of whom the comeliest and best-dressed, the mannered and well-behaved elegants frequented

[p. 191]

the Cafe Kropeke in the Georgstrasse, one of the first boulevards of New Hanover; whilst others met their friends at the andrygonous balls in the Kalenberger Vorstadt, or in the old Assembly Rooms; and lowest of all there was a tiny dancing-place, "Zur schwulen Guste," "Hot-Stuff Gussie's" where poor boys found their clientele. It was here, for example, that Grans picked up young Ernst Spiecker whose tawdry shirt cost him his life.

With regard to his demeanour at the trial the contemporary newspapers[89] write: "Throughout the long ordeal Haarmann was utterly impassive and complacent. . . The details of the atrocious crimes for which Haarmann will shortly pay with his life were extremely revolting. All his victims were between 12 and 18 years of age,[90] and it was proved that accused actually sold the flesh for human consumption. He once made sausages in his kitchen, and, together with the purchaser, cooked and ate them. . . Some alienists hold that even then the twenty-four murders cannot possibly exhaust the full toll of Haarmann's atrocious crimes, and estimate the total as high as fifty. With the exception of a few counts, the prisoner made minutely detailed confessions and for days the court listened to his grim narrative of how he cut up the bodies of his victims and disposed of the fragments in various ways. He consistently repudiated the imputation of insanity, but at the same time maintained unhesitatingly that all the murders were committed when he was in a state of trance, and unaware of what he was doing. This contention was specifically brushed aside by the Bench, which in its judgement pointed out that according to his own account of what happened, it was necessary for him to hold down his victims by hand in a peculiar way before it was possible for him to inflict a fatal bite on their throats. Such action necessarily involved some degree of deliberation and conscious purpose." Another account[91] says with regard to Haarmann: "The killing of altogether twenty-seven young men is laid at his door, the horror of the deeds being magnified by the allegation that he sold to customers for consumption the flesh of those he did not himself eat. . . With Haarmann in the dock appeared a younger man, his friend Hans Grans, first accused of assisting in the actual murders but now charged with inciting to commit them and with receiving stolen

[p. 192]

property. The police are still hunting for a third man, Charles, also a butcher, who is alleged to have completed the monstrous trio. . . . the prosecuting attorney has an array of nearly 200 witnesses to prove that all the missing youths were done to death in the same horrible way. . . He would take them to his rooms, and after a copious meal would praise the looks of his young guests. Then he would kill them after the fashion of a vampire. Their clothes he would put up on sale in his shop, and the bodies would be cut up and disposed of with the assistance of Charles." "In open court, however, Haarmann admitted that Grans often used to select his victims for him. More than once, he alleged, Grans beat him for failing to kill the 'game' brought in, and Haarmann would keep the corpses in a cupboard until they could be got rid of, and one day the police were actually in his rooms when there was a body awaiting dismemberment. The back of the place abutted on the river, and the bones and skulls were thrown into the water. Some of them were discovered, but their origin was a mystery until a police inspector paid a surprise visit to prisoner's home to inquire into a dispute between Haarmann and an intended victim who escaped." Suspicion had at last fallen upon him principally, owing to skulls and bones found in the river Seine during May, June, and July, 1924. The newspapers said that during 1924, no less than 600 persons had disappeared, for the most part lads between 14 and 18. On the night of 22nd June at the railway station, sometime after midnight, a quarrel broke out between Haarmann and a young fellow named Fromm, who accused him of indecency. Both were taken to the central station, and meanwhile Haarmann's room in the Red Row was thoroughly examined with the result that damning evidence came to light. Before long he accused Grans as his accomplice, since at the moment they happened to be on bad terms. Haarmann was sentenced to be decapitated, a sentence executed with a heavy sword. Grans was condemned to imprisonment for life, afterwards commuted to twelve years' penal servitude. In accordance with the law, Haarmann was put to death on Wednesday, 15th April, 1925.

This is probably one of the most extraordinary cases of vampirism known. The violent eroticism, the fatal bite in

[p. 193]

the throat, are typical of the vampire, and it was perhaps something more than mere coincidence that the mode of execution should be the severing of the head from the body, since this was one of the efficacious methods of destroying a vampire.

Certainly in the extended sense of the word, as it is now so commonly used, Fritz Haarmann was a vampire in every particular.

To return to the more restricted connotation, we find that, as has been mentioned above, Dom Calmet in his famous work more than once emphasized that his great difficulty in accepting the tradition of the vampire, that is to say the vampire proper and not a mere malignant phantom, lies in the fact that it is physically impossible for a dead body to leave its grave since (he argues) if it has corporeity it cannot have subtilty, that is to say the power of passing through material objects.

Accordingly in the second volume of his great treatise he gives as the rubric to Chapter LX, Impossibilite morale, que les Revenans sortent de leurs tombeaux.[92] He commences: "I have already raised a serious objection, which is the impossibility that vampires should leave their graves, and should return thither, without any obvious disturbance of the ground, either when they are passing forth or when they are finding their way back again. Nobody has ever met this difficulty, and nobody ever will be able to meet it. To maintain that the devil subtilizes and renders unsubstantial the body of the vampire is merely an assertion which is made without any foundation and which is unsustained and untrue.

"The fluidity of the blood, the healthy red colour, and the absence of rigidity in the case of vampires are not circumstances which need cause us the slightest wonder, any more than the fact that the hair grows, and the bodies remain without dissolution. It is a matter of daily occurrence that bodies are found which do not crumble to dust and which for a very long time after death preserve the appearance of life. This is not in the least surprising in the cases of those who die suddenly without any illness, or indeed as the consequence of certain diseases which are well-known to medical men, sicknesses which do not affect the circulation of the blood or the elasticity of the body.

[p. 194]

"With regard to the growth of hair this is quite a natural condition.

"One might even compare these facts with the flowers, and in general with everything which depends upon the luxuriance of vegetation among the fauna and flora of nature."

These objections thus stated may seem very weighty, but perhaps if they are impartially examined it may be found that the good Benedictine has been a little too dogmatic in his assertions. The phenomenon that the soil of the grave was almost invariably undisturbed by the exit of the Vampire, who further could make his entry through doors and windows without opening or breaking them may yet admit of an explanation which will go far to solve the difficulty Don Calmet and many others have regarded as insurmountable. In the first place it is hardly correct so sweepingly to assert that the ground is wholly undisturbed. Where careful investigation was made it was generally found that there were discovered four or five little holes or tunnels, not much larger indeed than a man's finger which pierced through the earth to a very considerable depth. And here, perhaps in this one little detail, we may find the clue to the whole mystery. The wide spread growth of spiritualism has made even the ordinary public fairly familiar with the phenomena of a seance where materialization takes place, and where physical forms are solidly built up and disintegrated again within an exceedingly short space of time. This is done by some power or entity which awails  itself of the body of the passive medium and utilizes the ectoplasm which it can draw thence. Professor Ostwald writes: "Certain human beings are capable of transforming their physiological store of energy (which, as we know, is almost exclusively present in the form of chemical energy), of transmitting it through space, and of transforming it at prescribed points back into one of the known forms of energy. It results from this, that the mediums themselves are usually much exhausted, i.e., that they use up their bodily energy. A transformation into psychic energy seems also to be possible." The extreme exhaustion of a medium after such investigation and the production of forms of organic matter is a matter of common knowledge. Of one of the most famous mediums, Eusapia Paladino it is reported: "Eusapia during the sittings fell into a deep hysterical somnambulism, and was often in

[p. 195]

slightly dazed condition after the close. When the trance set in, she turned pale, and her head swerved to and fro, and the eyes were turned upwards and inwards. She was hypersensitive, especially to the touch, and also to light; she had hallucinations, delirium, fits of laughter, weeping, or deep sleep, and showed other typical hysterical convulsions. Digestive troubles also sometimes set in, especially when she had eaten before the sitting. In a sudden light, or at a sudden rough touch, she cried out and shuddered, as she would under unexpected violent pain."[93] And again: "Eusapia Paladino used to be very exhausted after every successful sitting, especially after she had been in a state of trance. She sometimes slept until the next mid-day, and was for the rest of the day apathetic, peevish, and monosyllabic. Her skin was usually cold after the sittings, her pulse rapid (100 degrees per minute), and she had a strong feeling of fatigue. Her subsequent sleep was often restless and interrupted by vivid dreams."[94] Speaking of another famous medium the same authority says: "In the case of Eva C. also, where the number of negative sittings is very considerable, she feels much exhausted, according to the degree of her performances, and after exhaustive positive sittings she usually needs from twenty-eight to forty-four hours to recover the deficit in her strength. Also, she is often, on the following day, dazed, and complains of headache and lack of appetite."[95] It is extremely significant, and one might say even more significant that these are the very symptoms exhibited by those who have been attacked by a Vampire.

Another fact which must be borne in mind is that the Vampire was often a person who during life had read deeply in poetic lore and practised black magic. For the connexion between spiritism and black magic one may refer to my History of Witchcraft when the matter is very amply discussed and made plain.[96]

With these pregnant and remarkable details in mind we may consider the explanation of vampirism given by Z. T. Pierart,[97] a well-known French spiritualist and sometime editor of La Revue Spiritualiste. He writes as follows: "As long as the astral form is not entirely liberated from the body there is a liability that it may be forced by magnetic attraction to re-enter it. Sometimes it will be only half-way out when

[p. 196]

the corpse, which presents the appearance of death, is buried. In such cases the terrified astral soul re-enters its casket, and then one of two things happen: the person buried either writhes in agony of suffocation, or, if he has been grossly material, becomes a vampire. The bi-corporeal life then begins. The ethereal form can go where it pleases, and as long as it does not break the link connecting it with the body can wander visible or invisible and feed on its victims. It then transmits the results of the suction by some mysterious invisible cord of connexion to the body, thus aiding it to perpetuate the state of catalepsy." Duly discounting the peculiar phraseology of "astral soul" and "ethereal form" this comment seems to point towards a possible and correct explanation.

There remain three hypotheses to be considered. Does the body of the Vampire actually dematerialize and then re-integrate outside the grave? Or, is another body built up by the Vampire quite independently of the body which remains behind in the grave? Thirdly, does the spirit of the Vampire withdraw ectoplasmic material from his own body, which enables him to form more permanent corporeity by drawing yet further material from his victims? The second of these suggestions we may dismiss without much consideration since it is not borne out by any of the facts which have been investigated with regard to the subject, and the truth seems to lie between the first and the third hypotheses, partaking of both. The body of the Vampire under certain conditions acquires subtilty and therefore it is able to pass through material objects, but in order to ensure not only its vitality but the permanence of this subtile quality it must draw this energy, no doubt very often in an ectoplasmic form, from its victim, as well as what is necessary for its rejuvenescence. The continual demand which a Vampire makes both physically and spiritually upon its victims must speedily result in the death of these persons, who being infected with the poison will in their turn visit others upon whom they will prey.

It must always be remembered that the word vampire is used so loosely that there are traditions and legends which hardly require even one of these three hypotheses for their explanation, and which, one cannot too frequently repeat the caution, refer to phantoms of the vampire family rather than to the Vampire proper.

[p. 197]

It certainly seems a possibility, and something more than a possibility, that vampiric entities may be on the watch and active to avail themselves of the chances to use the ectoplasmic emanations of mediums at seances, and this certainly constitutes a very formidable danger. It is even a fact that if a person who, consciously or unconsciously possesses the natural qualities of a materializing medium, is placed in certain nocuous circumstances, for example if he visits a house which is powerfully haunted by malefic influences, especially if he be fatigued and languid so as to offer little or no resistance, a vampirish entity may temporarily utilize his vitality to attempt a partial materialization. This seems clear from the many instances of persons who for no obvious reason are in certain spots, it may be a place, a house, or even a room overcome with a depression, which if they do not shake off by an act of will or by leaving the particular locality may develop into actual debility and enervation. A very striking example of an entity who in this way made an attempt at materialization is recorded by Miss Scatcherd in her contribution to Survival, a symposium which was published under the editorial care of Sir James Marchant. Miss Scatcherd relates: "I saw ectoplasm in solid form for the first time when looking for rooms in the neighbourhood of Russell Square. My friend, many years older than myself, was tired. She wore a black velvet cloak, and was sitting on a high chair, so that her mantle hung in long folds to the ground, while the light from the large windows fell full on her face. Suddenly I observed, on her left side, just above her waist, a patch of cloudy white substance, becoming bigger and denser as I watched its uncanny growth. Meanwhile, I was discussing terms with the landlady, a frail little woman, when a look of terror came into her eyes. She, too, was staring transfixed at the globular mass of white substance on my companion's black mantle. For out of it looked a living face, normal in size--a man's face with rolling eyes and leering grin that made one's blood run cold. When I mentally ordered him away, he grinned defiance. Fearing to startle my friend, I took the landlady aside and asked what was the matter. She burst into tears.

"'Oh, miss! did you not see him? He was my first. He come like this several times, and has never forgiven me for marrying again.'

[p. 198]

"'What do you mean?' I asked again, severely.

"'Oh!' she wailed. 'You must have seen his wicked face glaring at us from your friend's cloak, and now you will not take the rooms.'"[98]

In some traditions the Vampire is said to float into the house in the form of a mist, a belief which is found in countries so far separate as Hungary and China. In the latter empire wills-o'-the-wisp are thought to be an unmistakable sign of a place where much blood has been shed, such as an old battle field, and all mists and gaseous marsh-lights are connected with the belief in vampires and spectres which convey disease. Since the effluvia, the vapour and haze from a swamp or quaggy ground are notoriously unhealthy and malarial fevers result in delirium and anaemia it may be that in some legends the disease has been personified as a ghastly creature who rides on the infected air and sucks the life from his victims. But all this is mere fancy, and only deserves a passing mention as belonging to legend and story. Of the same nature is the notion that Vampires can command destructive animals and vermin such as flies, and, in the East the mosquito, whose bite may indeed convey some fever to the veins and whose long proboscis sucks the blood of animals and man. We may remember that at Accaron Beelzebub was the Lord of flies, and these insects were often regarded as having something of a diabolical nature. Pausanias V,14, tells us that the people of Elis offered sacrifice to Zeus, Averter of Flies, a ceremony which is also mentioned by Clement of Alexandria in his Protreptikos pros Ellenas, II, 38 (ed. Potter, p. 33). Pliny Historia Naturalis (X, 75), says: "The Eleans invoke the fly-catching god, because the swarms of these insects breed pestilence; and as soon as the sacrifice is made to the god the flies all perish." Pausanias (VIII, 26-7) further notes that at Aliphera in Arcadia the festival of Athene began with prayer and oblation to the Fly-catcher, and after this rite the flies gave no more trouble. Aelian (De Animalium Natura, XI, 8), tells us that at the festival of Apollo in the island of Leucas an ox was actually sacrificed to the flies, who when glutted with the warm blood, incontinently disappeared. Julius Solinus in his Collectanea Rerum Memorabilium (I, xi, ed. Th. Mommsem, Berlin, 1864), records that all flies were carefully excluded from the shrine of Hercules

[p. 199]

in the Forum Bovarium at Rome because when Hercules was handing the flesh to the priests he had prayed aloud to the Fly-catcher. It may be noted that when the demon, under whatsoever guise or name he might be adored, had received those divine honours he ever covets and filches to himself by so woefully deceiving his worshippers he withdraws his emissaries the tormenting flies who are often his imps in the form of insect. By their means he has striven to vex and molest the Saints--S. Bernard, by excommunicating the flies that buzzed about him struck them all down dead upon the floor of the church.

It now remains to inquire how the grave of a Vampire may be recognized, and in what way this terror may be checked and destroyed.

In this connexion it will not be impertinent to give a letter "d'un fort honnete homme et fort instruit de ce qui regarde les Revenants" which is cited at length by Dom Calmet. The letter is addressed to a near relative of the writer. "It is your wish, my dear cousin, that I should give you exact details of what has been happening in Hungary with regard to certain apparitions, who so often molest and slay people in that part of the world. I am in a position to afford you this information, for I have been living for some years in those very districts, and I am naturally of an inquiring disposition. From the time when I was a mere boy I have heard numbers of stories of ghosts and witches, but not once in a thousand have I believed one of them; it seems to me that it is almost impossible to be too careful in the investigation of matters where it is so easy to be mistaken--or deliberately tricked. However there are certain facts so well vouched for that one cannot but accept them as true. As to the apparitions of Hungary this is the usual account. A person is attached by a great languor and weariness, he loses all appetite, he visibly wastes and grows thin, and at the end of a week or ten days, may be a fortnight, he dies without any other symptom save anaemia and emaciation.

"In Hungary they say that a Vampire has attacked him and sucked his blood. Many of those who fall ill in this way declare that a white spectre is following them and cleaves to them as close as a shadow. When we were in our Kaloesa-Bacs quarters in the County of Temesvar[99] two officers of

[p. 200]

the regiment in which I was Cornet died from this languor, and several more were attacked and must have perished had not a Corporal of our regiment put a stop to these maladies by resorting to the remedial ceremonies which are practised by the local people. These are very unusual, and although they are considered an infallible cure I cannot remember even to have seen these in any Rituale.

"They select a young lad who is a pure maiden, that is to say, who, as they believe, had never performed the sexual act. He is set upon a young stallion who has not yet mounted his first mare, who has never stumbled, and who must be coal-black without a speck of white; the stud is ridden into the cemetery in and out among the graves and that grave over which the steed in spite of the blows they deal him pretty handsomely refuses to pass is where the Vampire lies.[100] The tomb is opened and they find a sleek, fat corpse, as healthily coloured as though the man wore quietly and happily sleeping in calm repose. With one single blow of a sharp spade they cut off the head, whereupon there gush forth warm streams of blood in colour rich red, and filling the whole grave. It would assuredly be supposed that they had just decapitated a stalwart fine fellow of most sanguine habit and complexion. When this business is done, they refill the grave with earth and then the ravages of the disease immediately cease whilst those who are suffering from this marasmus gradually recover their strength just as convalescents recuperating after a long illness, who have wasted and withered. This is exactly what occurred in the case of our young officers who had sickened. As the Colonel of the regiment, the Captain and Lieutenant wore all absent, I happened to be in command just then and I was heartily vexed to find that the Corporal had arranged the affair without my knowledge. I was within an ace of ordering him a severe military punishment, and these are common enough in the Imperial service. I would have given the world to have been present at the exhumation of the Vampire, but after all it is too late f or that now."

It has already been remarked that in a cemetery there were often found to be a number of small passages of the size of a man's finger pierced through the earth, and it was considered that the presence of such a soupirail in a grave was a certain

[p. 201]

sign that if investigation were made a body with all the marks of vampirism would be descovered  lying there.

When the corpse is exhumed, even though death has taken place long before there will be no decay, no trace of corruption, or decomposition, but rather it will be found to be plump and of a clear complexion; the face often ruddy; the whole person composed as if in a profound sleep. Sometimes the eyes are closed; more frequently open, glazed, fixed, and glaring fiercely. The lips which will be markedly full and red are drawn back from the teeth which gleam long, sharp, as razors, and ivory white. Often the gaping mouth is stained and foul with great slab gouts of blood, which trickles down from the corners on to the lawn shroudings and linen cerements, the offal of the last night's feast. In the case of an epidemic of vampirism it is recorded that whole graves have been discovered soaked and saturated with squelching blood, which the horrid inhabitant has gorged until he is replete and vomited forth in great quantities like some swollen leech discharges when thrown into the brine. In Greece it is thought that the corpse's skin becomes exceedingly tough and distended so that the joints can hardly be bent; the human pelt has stretched like the vellum tegument of a drum, and when struck returns the same sound; whence the Greek vrykolakas has received the name tympaniaios, (drum-like).[101] It was not infrequently seen that the dead person in his grave had devoured all about him, grinding them with his teeth, and (as it was supposed) uttering a low raucous noise like the grunting of a pig who roots among garbage. In his work, De Masticatione Mortuorum in tumulis, Leipzig, 1728, Michael Ranft treats at some length of this matter. He says that it is very certain that some corpses have devoured their cerements and even gnaw their own flesh. It has been suggested that this is the original reason why the jaws of the dead were tightly bound with linen bands. Ranft instances the case of a Bohemian woman who when disinterred in 1355 had devoured the greater part of her shroud. In another instance during the sixteenth century both a man and a woman seemed to have torn out their intestines and were actually ravening upon their entrails. In Moravia a corpse was exhumed which had devoured the grave-clothes of a woman buried not far from his tomb.

[p. 202]

The authors of the Malleus Maleficarum, Part I, Question xv, under the rubric, It is shown that, on account of the Sins Of Witches, the Innocent are often Bewitched, yea, Sometimes even for their Own Sins, relate an instance which came under their own observation. They say:

"Also the sin of one is passed on to another in the way of desert, as when the sins of wicked subjects are passed on to a bad Governor, because the sins of the subjects deserve a bad Governor. See Job: 'He makes Hypocrites to reign on account of the sins of the people.'

"Sin, and consequently punishment, can also be passed on through some consent or dissimulation. For when those in authority neglect to reprove sin, then very often the good are punished with the wicked, as S. Augustine says in the first book de Ciuitate Dei. An example was brought to our notice as Inquisitors. A town once was rendered almost destitute by the death of its citizens; and there was a rumour that a certain buried woman was gradually eating the shroud in which she had been buried, and that the plague could not cease until she had eaten the whole shroud and absorbed it into her stomach. A council was held, and the Podesta, with the Governor of the city dug up the grave, and found half the shroud absorbed through the mouth and throat into the stomach, and consumed. In horror at this sight, the Podesta, drew his sword and cut off her head and threw it out of the grave, and at once the plague ceased. Now the sins of that old woman were, by Divine permission, visited upon the innocent on account of the dissimulation of what had happened before. For when an Inquisition was held it was, found that during a long time of her life she had been a. Sorceress and Enchantress."

If it were suspected that a man might return as a Vampire or that his ghost would ]prove troublesome precautions were taken to prevent this. In the first place the grave must be dug twice as deep as usual. Indeed in Oldenburg the chances are that if the grave be shallow any ghost may walk.[102] The Chuwashe, a tribe in Finland, actually nail the corpse to the coffin.[103] The. Burmese tie together the two big toes, and usually also the two thumbs of the corpse.[104] The Arabs fasten the feet; in Voigtland it is considered sufficient to secure the hands.[105] The Californians[106] and Damasas[107] break the dead man's spine. In his Travels into Dalmatia (English

[p. 203]

translation, London, 1778), Alberto Fortis says: "When a man dies suspected of becoming a Vampire or Vukodlak, as they call it, they cut his hams, and prick his whole body with pins, pretending that, after this operation, he cannot walk about. These are even instances of Morlacchi, who, imagining that they may possibly thirst for children's blood after death, intreat their heirs, and sometimes oblige them to promise, to treat them as Vampires when they die."

When the Vampire was tracked to his lair one of the most approved methods to render him harmless was to transfix the corpse through the region of the heart with a stake which may be of aspen or maple as in Russia, or more usually of hawthorn or whitethorn. The aspen tree is held to be particularly sacred as according to one account of this was the wood of the Cross. In her Wood-walk, Mrs. Felicia Hemans says: "The aspen-tree shivers mystically in sympathy with the horror of that mother-tree in Palestine, which was compelled to furnish materials for the Cross."[108] With regard to hawthorn de la Charbonelais Chesnil tells us: "Cet arbre est regarde comme le privilegie des fees qui se rassemblant, dit-on, sous ses rameaux embaumees. En Normandie on croit aussi que la foudre ne le frappe jamais parcequ'on suppose, mais sans aucun fondement qu'il servit a former la couronne de Christ."[109] And again: "Dans plusiers contrees, ce vegetal [Mepsilus pyraneatha] est l'objet d'une sorte de veneration parcequ'on croit que c'est dans un buisson de cette espece qui Dieu apparut a Moise et que c'est pour cette raison que ses feuilles demeurent toujours vertes, et que ses fruits ne se detachent point de l'arbre durant l'hiver." Of whitethorn Sir John Mandeville says:[110] "Then was our Lord yled into a gardyn, and there the Jewes scorned Hym and maden Him a crown of the branches of the Albiespyne, that is, Whitethorn that grew in the same gardyn, and setten yt upon His heved. And therefore hath the Whitethorn many virtues. For he that beareth a branch on hym thereof, no thundre, ne no maner of tempest may dere him, ne in the house that is ynne may non evil ghost enter." The ancient Greeks believed that branches of whitethorn or buckthorn (rhamnus) fastened to a door or outside a window prevented the entry of witches and guarded the house against the evil spells of sorcerers.[111] Hence they suspended branches of it above their lintels when sacrifices

[p. 204]

were offered for the dead lost haply any vagrom ghost should be tempted to revisit his old home or make entry into the house of some other person."' The atheist Bion, as atheists use, when he was dying clutched at any superstition and asked for boughs of buckthorn and branches of laurel to be attached to the door to keep out death.[112] It should be remarked that the old Greek custom is widely practised among the peasantry of Europe to-day, and in Fletcher's The Faithfull Shepherdesse,[114] II, when Clorin is sorting her herbs she says:

        these rhamnus' branches are,
 Which, stuck in entries, or about the bar
 That holds the door fast, kill all enchantments, charms--
 Were they Medea's verses-that do harms
 To men or cattle.

Fanshaw in his elegant translation"' has:

       Hi rami sunt mollis Acanthi,
 Qui si uestibulis aut postibus affigantur,
 Unde fores pendent, incantamenta repellunt
 Omnia, pestiferae facient licet illa MEDEAe,
 Quae laedunt homines pecudesue.

In Dalmatia and Albania for the wooden stake is sometimes substituted a consecrated dagger, a poniard which has been laid upon the altar and ritually blessed by the priest with due sacring of holy orison, of frankincense and lustral asperges.

It is highly important that the body of the Vampire should be transfixed by a single blow, for two blows or three would restore it to life. This curious idea is almost universally found in tradition and folk-lore.[116] In The Thousand and One Nights (Burton, Vol. VII, p. 361) we have the story of "Sayf-al-Muluk and Badion al Jamal" where the hero cuts the ghoul in half by a single stroke through the waist. The ghost yells at him: "Oman, an thou desire to slay me, strike me a second stroke." The youth is just about to give the second slash with his scimitar when a certain old blind beggar whom he has befriended warns him. "Smite not a second time, for then will he not die, but will live and destroy us." He accordingly stays his hand and the ghoul expires.

Among Galland's manuscripts was a tale of the three sons of the Sultan of Samarcand. In the course of various adventures the third son, Badialzaman engages in a contest with the Djin Morhagean. The youngest daughter of the

[p. 205]

Djin who loves the prince informs him that her father can only be slain if he is dealt one single blow--no more--with the sword which is hanging at his head whilst he sleeps.

When the stake has pierced the Vampire he will utter the most terrible shrieks and blood will jet forth in every direction from his convulsed and writhing limbs as he impotently threshes the air with his quivering hands. There is a tradition that when he has been dead for many years and his mysterious life in death is thus ended the corpse has been known immediately to crumble into dust.

In some countries this operation usually takes place soon after dawn, as the Vampire may only leave his grave with the dusk and must return at cock-crow, so he will be caught when he has come back torpid and heavy from his night's banquet of blood. But, as we have mentioned in another place, this belief that his ravages are confined to the dark hours is by no means universal, for Paul Lucas in his Voyage au Levant, speaking of Corfu says: "Des personnes qui paroissent avoir le bon sons parlent d'un fait assez singulier qui arrive souvent en ce pays, aussi bien que dans l'Isle Santeriny; des gens morts disent-ils, reviennent, se font voir en plein jour, & vont meme chez eux, ce qui cause de grandes frayeurs a ceux qui les voyent."[117]Accordingly the Vampire may walk in full daylight. Yet he may not, so they hold in Epirus, in Crete, and among the Wallachians, leave his tomb on a Saturday. "Many believe that, even in the day-time, it is only once a week, on the Saturday, that he is allowed to occupy his burial-place. When it is discovered that such a Vurvulukas is about, the people go, on a Saturday, and open his tomb, when they always find his body just as it was buried, and entirely undecomposed."[118] Tozer, Researches in the Highlands of Turkey (II, p. 91) writes: "Saturday is the day of the week on which the exorcism ought by right to take place, because the spirit then rests in this tomb, and if he is out on his rambles when the ceremony takes place, it is unavailing. In most parts of the country, as the Vampire is regarded as only a night-wanderer, he has to be caught during the night between Friday and Saturday; but in some places when he is believed to roam abroad by day as well, the whole of Saturday is allotted to him for repose, and consequently is suitable for his capture."

[p. 206]

When the stake has been thrust with one drive through the Vampire's heart his head should be cut off, and this is to be done with the sharp edge of a sexton's spade, rather than with a sword. Ralston[119] tells us that to transfix the Vampire with a pile is not always considered effectual. "A strigon (or Istrian vampire) who was transfixed with a sharp thorn cudgel near Laibach in 1672, pulled it out of his body and flung it back contemptuously".[110] The only certain methods of destroying a Vampire appear to be either to consume him by fire, or to chop off his head with a grave-digger's shovel. The Wends say that if a Vampire is hit over the back of the head with an implement of that kind, he will squeal like a pig." It may be noted that the heads of murderers or warlocks were often struck off and destroyed, or else set between the legs or directly underneath the body.[121]

To burn the body of the Vampire is generally acknowledged to be by far the supremely efficacious method of ridding a district of this demoniacal pest, and it is the common practice all over the world. The bodies of all those whom he may have infected with the vampirish poison by sucking their blood are also for security sake cremated. Leone Allacci writes: "Quare ciues, cum uident homines, nulla grassante infirmitate, in tanta copia emori; suspicati quod est, sepulchra, in quibus recens defunctus sepultus est, aperiunt; aliquando statim, aliquando etiam tardius, cadauer nondum corruptum, inflatumque comperiunt; quod e sepulchro extractum, precibusque, effusis a sacerdotibus, in rogum ardentem coniiciunt; et nondum completa supplicatione, cadaueris iuncturae sensim dissoluuntur, et reliqua exusta in cineres conuertuntur."[122] Any animals which may come forth from the fire--worms, snakes, lice, beetles, birds of horrible and deformed shape--must be driven back into the flames for it may be the Vampire embodied in one of these, seeking to escape so that he can renew his foul parasitism of death. The ashes of the pyre should be scattered to the winds, or cast into a river swiftly flowing to the sea.

Sometimes the body was hacked to pieces before it was cast into the fire; very often the heart was torn from the breast and boiled to shreds in oil or vinegar. Quantities of boiling water or boiling oil were also poured into the grave. Mr. Abbott in his Macedonian Folklore (1903) tells us of a

[p. 207]

ceremony which took place when a Vampire had been tracked. He writes:[123] "I was creditably informed of a case of this description occurring not long ago at Alistrati, one of the principal villages between Serres and Drama. Someone was suspected of having turned into a Vampire. The corpse was taken out of the grave, was scalded with boiling oil, and was pierced through the navel with a long nail. Then the tomb was covered in and millet was scattered over it, that, if the Vampire came out again, he might waste his time in picking up the grains of millet and be thus overtaken by dawn. For the usual period of their wanderings is from about two hours before midnight till the first crowing of the morning cock. At the sound of which "fearful summons" the Vrykolakas like the Gaelic sithehe, or fairy, vanishes into his subterranean abode."

The Turks on occasion have had recourse to the remedy of burning to put to rest a Greek Vampire, for Crusius in his Turco-Graecia relates:[124] 'In sabbato pentecostes Turcae combusserunt Graecum, biennio ante defunctum: quod uulgo crederetur noctu sepulcro egredi, hominesque occidere. Alii autem ueram causam perhibent, quod quindecim pluresue homines spectrum eius uidentes mortui sint. Sepulcro extractus, consumpta carne cutem ossibus adhaerentem integram habuit."

William of Newbury speaking of the vampires which infested England in the twelfth century says that similar molestations had often happened and there were on record very many famous cases. The only way in which a district could be completely secured and an end put once and for all to these hideous visitations was by exhuming the body and burning the Vampire to ashes.[125]

The following form of exorcism is described as having been employed in Rhodes on a woman who returned as a Vrykolakas. "The priest of the village laid on the ground one of the dead woman's shifts, over the neck of which he walked, held up by two men, for fear the vampire should seize him. While in this position he read verses from the New Testament, till the shift swelled up and split. When this rent takes place the evil spirit is supposed to escape through the opening."[126]

The first precaution taken by the Wallachians to prevent the Vampire from ravaging is to drive a long nail through the

[p. 208]

skull and to lay the thorny stem of a wild rose bush upon the body, so that its winding sheet may become entangled with it should there be any attempt to rise.[127]

In Bulgaria "There is yet another method of abolishing a Vampire--that of bottling him. There are certain persons who make a profession of this; and their mode of procedure is as follows: The sorcerer, armed with a picture of some saint, lies in ambush until he sees the Vampire pass, when he pursues him with his Eikon; the poor Obour takes refuge in a tree or on the roof of a house, but his persecutor follows him up with the talisman, driving him away from all shelter, in the direction of a bottle specially prepared, in which is placed some of the vampire's favourite food. Having no other resource, he enters this prison, and is immediately fastened down with a cork, on the interior of which is a fragment of the Eikon. The bottle is then thrown into the fire, and the Vampire disappears for ever."

With reference to this enclosing of the Vampire in a bottle it may be remembered that it was once a common practice of sorcery to imprison familiar spirits in a vial. Among the articles put forth by Don Alfonso Manriquez, who on 10 September, 1523, succeeded as Grand Inquisiter Adrian, Bishop of Tortosa,[128] was the following which a man in duty bound must reveal to the Holy office should he become aware of any such offence: "If any person made or caused to be made mirrors, rings, phials of glass or other vessels therein to contain some spirit who should reply to his inquiries and aid his projects."[129]

Newton in his Travels and Discoveries in the Levant (Vol. I., p. 213) says that in Mitylene the bodies of those who will not lie quiet in their graves are transported to a small adjacent island, a mere eyot without inhabitants where they are re-interred. This is an effectual bar to any future molestation for the Vampire cannot cross salt water. Running water too he can only pass at the slack or the flood of the tide.

As all other demoniacal monsters the Vampire fears and shrinks from holy things. Holy Water burns him as some biting acid; he flies from the sign of the Cross, from the Crucifix, from Relics, and above all from the Host, the Body of God. All these, and other hallowed objects render him powerless. He is conquered by the fragrance of incense. [p. 209] Certain trees and herbs are hateful to him, the whitethorn (or buckthorn) as we have seen, and particularly garlic. Often when the Vampire is decapitated his mouth is stuffed full with garlic; garlic is scattered in and all over the coffin by handfuls; and he can do no harm. In China and among the Malays to wet a child's forehead with garlic is a sure protection against vampires. The West Indian negroes to-day smear themselves with garlic to neutralize the evil charms of witches and obeah men. It may be noted that the Battas or Bataks of Sumatra ascribe pining and wasting away, sickness, terror and death to the absence of the soul (Tendi) from the body and the soul must be lured back to his tenement. One of the most powerful soul-compelling herbs which is used by them in their mystic rites on these occasions is garlic. 130 At the S. John (Midsummer) Festival of fire, on the Vigil of the Major solemnity of that Saint, 23rd June, at Dragingnan, Var, the people roasted pods of garlic by the bonfires. These pods were afterwards distributed to every family, and were believed to bring good luck.[131]

In countries which are non-Christian the practices are naturally somewhat different, although it should be remarked that burning the body of the Vampire is universal. In China, corpses suspected of potential vampirism were allowed to decay in the open air before burial, or, when buried, were exhumed, as in other countries, and cremated. In the absence of the corpse from its grave the lid of the coffin was removed, since it was thought that the circulation of fresh air would prevent the Vampire from returning to it. Rice, red peas and scraps of iron were also scattered round the grave. These formed a mystical barrier the dead man could not surmount, he fell to the ground stiff and stark, and then could be taken up and burned to ashes.[132]

In some Slavonic countries it is thought that a Vampire, if prowling out of his tomb at night may be shot and killed with a silver bullet that has been blessed by a priest. But care must be taken that his body is not laid in the rays of the moon, especially if the moon be at her full, for in this case he will revive with redoubled vigour and malevolence.

It should perhaps be mentioned that the Macedonians believe in the existence of a vrykolakas of sheep and cattle as well as the more formidable vrykolakas who drains human

[p. 210]

blood. The vrykolakas of animals rides upon their shoulders and as the ordinary vampire sucks a vein, killing the unfortunate beasts and leaving them a mere fibrous mash of skin and bone. Vagrant Mohammedan dervishes profess to have the power of exterminating these inferior vampires, whence they are often saluted as "vampire-killers," and they tramp the countryside ostentatiously exhibiting an iron rod which ends in a sharp point (shish) to pierce through and destroy the pest, or a long lance-like stick furnished at the top with a small axe to strike him down.[138] But here we have descended to mere quackery. Although as we have seen there are many methods and many variants, it is certain that an effectual remedy against the Vampire is to transfix his heart with a stake driven through with one single blow, to strike off his head with a sexton's spade, and perhaps best of all to burn him to ashes and purge the earth of his pollutions by the incineration of fire.

  

NOTES TO CHAPTER III.

[1. Modern Greek Folklore, p. 375.

2. c. liii.

3, oy an me misun anexorey Erinusin; Orestes, 581.

4. ll. 924-925.

Kl. ora, fulaxai metros egkotoys kunas.
 Or. tas tou patros de pus fugu, pareis tade;

5. Compendium Theologiae Moralis, Sabetti-Barrett. Editio Uicesims Quinta; Pustet; 1916. p. 115.

6. "Rache als Selbstmordmotiv," R. Lasch; Globus, lxxiv (1898), pp. 37-39.

7. Lettres edifantes et curieuses, Nouvelle edition, xi, Paris, 1781, pp. 246-248. The letter in question was written by Fr. Martin, S.J., at Marava, in the mission of Madura, 8th November, 1709.

8. Origin of Civilization, pp. 378 seq.

9. China Past and Present, London, 1903, pp. 378, seq. Professor Parker was Professor of Chinese at the Owens College, Manchester.

10. In a letter. 3rd February, 1902, to Sir James George Frazer, which is cited by the latter.

11. I quote the translation by C. D. Yonge, Bohn's Classical Library, London, 1854, vol. I, pp. 250-251, The Deipnosophists, IV, 42.

12. Of Apamea in Syria. He was born circa B.C. 135, and died at Rome soon after B.C. 51. His knowledge was very varied and remarkable. None of his writings have come down to us entire, but the fragments were collected by Bahe, Lugdani Batauorum, 1810.

13. About L20.

14. Deipnosophists, IV, 40, Yonge's translation, vol. I, pp. 248-249.

15. Impiety; and later, as in Dio Cassius lvii, 9, disloyalty to the Emperor (as theos).

[p. 211]

16. Aeschines, Contra Ctesiphontem; 244, p. 193. Ed. F. Franke, Leipzig, 1863.

17 "Trauer und Begrabnissitten der Wadschagga," B. Gutmann. Globus. (Illustrierte Zitschrift fur Lander-und Volkerkunde). lxxxix; 1906; p. 200.

18. The Baganda; Rev. J. Roscoe, London, 1911.

19. "Der Muata Cazembe und die Volkerstamme der Maraves, Chevas, Muembas, Lundas, und andere von Sud-Afrika," Zeitschrift fur allgemeine Erdkunde, vi, (1856), p. 287.

20. Les Missions Catholiques, vii (1875), p. 328. Article by Fr. Finaz, S.J.

21. A note by G. p. Badger, p. 45, The Travels of Ludovico di Varttema, Hakluyt Society, 1863.

22. "Beitrage zur Kenntniss aberglaubischer Gebrauche in Syrien," Eijub Aboa. Zeitschrift des Deutschen Palaestrina-Vereins, 1884, vii, p. 102.

23. Satan is bound for a thousand years; The Apocalypse, xx, 1-3, "And after that, he must be loosed a little time." The number of the beast "is six hundred sixty-six." Apocalypse, xiii, 18.

24. Ivan Stchoukine, Le Suicide collectif dans le Raskol russe, Paris, 1903.

25. The Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal, xix, 1888, pp. 445-451; 502-521. "Self-immolation by Fire in China," by D. S. Macgowan, M.D.

26. Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, Part I, pp. 320; 433, seq. (Washington, 1899). "The Eskimo about Bering Strait," by E. W. Nelson.

27. Lucian, De morte Peregrini. Cf. Tertullian, Ad Martyres, iv: "Peregrinus qui non olim se rogo immisit."

28. VIII, 57-74.

29. Ars Poetica, 464-466:

        deus immortalis haberi
 dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem frigidus Aetnam
 insiluit.

30. Notes and Queries, vi, 216.

31. S. Bede, In Die S. Paschae, writes: "Debet autem quis sic sepeleri, ut capite ad occidentem posito, pedes dirigat ad orientem, in quo quasi ipsa positione orat: et innuit quod promptus est ut de occasu festinet ad ortum: de mundo ad sacculum."

32 John Brand, Popular Antiquities of Great Britain; Preface dated London, 1795. (First edition, 2 vols., 1813.) Edited by W. E. Hazlitt, 3 vols., London, 1870. Vol. iii, 67.

33. Folk Tales of the Russians, p. 311.

34. Folk Lore Journal, v, 218.

35. Discours des Sorciers, Lyons, 1603, p. 58, cxx. Marginal note: "Du lieu du Sabbat." There were, of course, favourite spots for the rendezvous of witches.

36. Legends and Customs of Christmas in The Chicago Tribune, European edition, Christmas Number, 1925.

37. I, i, 158-164.

38. Dr. A. Wuttke; Der Deutsche Volksaberglaube der Gegenwart, Hamburg, 1860.

39. Athenaeus, xiii, 79, notes: "The fashion of making favourites of boys was first introduced among the Grecians from Crete, as Timaeus informs us. But others say that Laius was the originator of the custom, when he was received in hospitality by Pelops; and that having become passionately enamoured of his Chrysippus, he put the lad in his chariot and so bore him away and fled with him to Thebes. But Praxilla the Sicyonian says that Chrysippus was carried off by Jupiter." Plato, Laws, i, 636, speaks of tou Laiou nomos, but Plutarch in his Life of Pelopidas (Clough, vol. ii, p. 219) argues against the view. Aeschylus wrote a Laius which probably dealt with this incident, and we know that it formed the subject of a tragedy by Euripides, Chrysippus, of which one only line is preserved:

gnumen exonta m' e fusis biaxetai.

Cicero, Tusculanarum Disputationum, Liber iv, xxxiii, writes: "Atque ut muliebres amores omittam, quibus maiorem licentiam natura concessit:

[p. 212]

quis aut de Ganymedis raptu dubitat, quid poetae uclint; aut non intelligit quid apud Euripidem et loquatur et cupiat Laius?"

40. S. Thomas, Summa, i-ii, 58, a. 2.

41. Quoted in Kwong Ki Chin, A Dictionary of English Phrases, etc., London and New York, 1881, 8vo.

42. Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, Cambridge, 1903.

43. William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders, London, 1866, 8vo.

44. In the case of many superstitions and omens a diametrically opposed explanation is often given in several countries. Thus for an English girl to dream of roses means the best of good luck, but roses if seen in sleep by a Breton maid bode dire misfortune.

45. De quorumdam Graecorum opinationibus, ix.

46 Allacci, op cit., x.

47. Ce redivive on Oupire sorti de son tombeau, on un Demon sons sa figure, va la nuit embrasser & serrer violemment ses proches on ses amis, & leur suce le sang, jusqu'a les affoiblir, les extenuer & leur causer enfin la mort. Cette persecution ne s'arrete pas ti une seule personne; elle s'etend jusqu'a la derniere personne de la famille."--Calmet, Traite sur les Apparitions . . ., ed. 1751; II, c. xiii; pp. 60-61.

48. So metaphorically the name "Callicantzaros" is sometimes applied to a very lean man. Polites, Paradoseis, 11, p. 1293.

49. Anatomy of Melancholy, Part I; Sect. I; Mem. 1; Subs. 4.

50. The belief is Slavonic, and Elis being particularly subject to Slav influence, acquired the tradition.

51. p. E. Muller, Saxo Grammaticus, Historia Danica, Copenhagen, 1839-1858, vol. ii. p. 60.

52. M. Dobrizhoffer, Historia de Abiponibus, Vienna, 1784; I, 289, sqq.

53. Rev. J. Roscoe, The Baganda, London, 1911; pp. 288 sqq.

54 Aelian, Le natura animalium, I, 38 (ed. R. Hercher. Paris, Didot, 1858).

55. G. Willoughby-Meade, Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, 1928; chap. ix, p. 223.

56. "Religion and Customs of the Uraons," by the Rev. p. Dehon, S.J., apud the Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. i, No. 9, (Calcutta 1906), p. 141.

57. Well-nigh innumerable examples might be cited, for the belief seems universal. In Petronius the soldier who was a werewolf when wounded one night in his animal form by a thrust in the neck from a pike, on the next morning lay in bed "like an ox in a stall" whilst the surgeon dressed a gash in his neck. Delrio, Disquisitiones Magicae, Liber II, q. xviii, discussing lycanthropy says: "Hoe autem ultimo casu nihil mirum est, si postmodum uere inueniantur saucii illis membris humanis quae in ferino corpore exceperant. Nam & leuiter cessit circumiectus aer, & uulnus uero corpori inhaesit. Uerum quando uerum corpus abfuit, tune Diabolus in absentium, corpore eam partem consauciat quam scit in ferino corpore sauciatam fuisse." Bartolomeo de Spina in his De Strigibus, xix, relates a case which came to his knowledge when at Ferrara, a hideous cat entered a house but was attacked, wounded and driven from a high window. The next day, an old hag, long suspect of witchcraft, was discovered in bed with bruised and broken limbs. "Etenim percussiones & plagae, quae in catto infixae sunt, in ills, uetula sunt inuentae quoad membrorum correspondentium." Bodin, De la Demonomanie des Sorciers, II, vi, writes . "veu que ceux qui ont este blessez en forme de bestes, se sont apres estre rechangez, trouuez blessez en forme humaine." In the Malleus Maleficarum, Part II, Qn. 1, Ch. 9. (translation by the present author, John Rodker, 1928, pp. 126-127) is told the history of the three cats who attacked a woodcutter. He drove them away with many blows, and afterwards it came to light how three respected matrons who were so bruised that they had to keep their beds complained that the workman had assaulted and beaten them. Glanvil in his Saducismus Triumphatus, London, 1681, Part II, p. 205, when relating the famous case of Julian Cox, a Somersetshire witch who was hanged at Taunton in 1663, speaks of "the Body of Julian

[p. 213]

being wounded by a stab at her Astral Spirit, as it is found also in Jane Brooks, and an old woman in Cambridgeshire, whose Astral Spirit coming into a Mans house, (as he was sitting alone at the fire) in the shape of a huge cat, and setting her self before the fire, not far from him, he stole a stroke at the back of it with a Fire-fork, and seemed to break the back of it, but it scrambled from him, and vanisht he knew not how. But such an Old Woman, a reputed Witch, was found dead in her Bed that very night, with her Back broken, as I have heard some years ago credibly reported." J. Ceredig Davies, Folk-lore of West and Mid-Wales, Aberystwyth, 1911, p. 243, says that throughout Wales "the possibility of injuring or marking the witch in her assumed shape so deeply that the bruise remained on her in her natural form was a common belief."

58. W. R. S. Ralston. Songs of the Russian People. London, 1872.

59. Thomas Pennant, A Tour in Scotland, 1769. 8vo. Chester, 1771.

60. Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language, 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1808; (and supplement, 2 vols., 1824).

61. Psalm xc.

62. Delrio, Disquisitiones Magicae, Liber II, Q. xxvii, sec. 2, speaks of the especial ferocity of the noonday devil: "A tempestate diei dicitur meridianus, eo quod hoc genus daemonum meridiano tempore & apparere solitum, & homines crudelius acriusque infestare; tum spirituali tentatione ac praelio, maxime luxuriae & acediae stimulis, quae duo peccata urgent uchementius hominem cibis distentum plenumque ut recte Nicetas in Nazian, orat. citatam [De sacro Baptismate], & Euthy. ac Theodoret, in Psal. tum etiam corporeis afflictionibus, quod potest collegi ex ucterum gentilium opinione qui Pana, (daemonum meridianorum hic, unus) tum maxime iracundum & formidabilem credebant, ut testatur Theocritus eidyl, I & colligitur ex historiis."

63. Op. cit. ed., 1751, vol. II, c. ll.

64. The Devil can effect no real resurrection of a dead person, that is he cannot restore to life, for this is the power of God alone. Delrio Disquisitiones Magicae, Liber II, q. xxix, sec. 1, asks: An diabolus, possit facere ut homo uere resurget? This great scholar says some very valuable things in this connexion. He writes: "Censeo minimam, uel nullam daemonis esse potestatem. Non potest facere ut homo a mortuis resurgat: sine non potest facere, ut anima hominis suum corpus subintret, & illud uiuificet, informetque . . . Posset daemon, si Deus permitterit, cogere animam damnatam subire corpus, ut illud moucat, & in illo actiones aliquas demonstret; quia sic ipse potest subire, & hanc animam inuitam cruciatu ad hoc posset compellere. Possunt etiam magi (ex pacto) per superiores daemones cogere inferiores, ut cadauer ingressi, illud gestent, moueant, ceteraque ad tempus faciant, quibus uideantur uiuere."

65. Venette in his Generation de l'Homme remarks that men who have much hair on the body are usually very amorous. It is indeed a widespread belief that in ardent natures the pilous system is notably luxuriant.

66. 1653; Second edition with Appendix, 1655.

67. The phenomenon of the psychic state in pregnancy, the French envie and German Versehen, has been fully discussed by Dr. Havelock Ellis, Studies in the Psychology of Sex, vol. v, Philadelphia, 192 7.

68. W. Cornwallis Harris, The Highlands of Aethiopia, i, p. 158, London, 1844.

69. Ottolenghi, Archivio di Psichiatria, facs. vi, 1888, p. 573 notes that whilst normal persons only show twenty per cent. of blue eyes and criminals generally thirty-six per cent., the sexual offenders show fifty per cent. of blue eyes.

70. Dr. Georg Autenrieth, An Homeric Dictionary, translated by Robert Porter Keep. London, 1896, s.u.

71. James Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 92. Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide, 1881.

72. A Chinook term signifying "guardian spirits."

73. James G. Swan, The Indians of Cape Flattery, p. 66. Report of the United States National Museum for 1895. Washington, 1897.

[p. 214]

74. W. Crooke, Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India, i, p. 279. Westminster, 1896.

75. A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, British Nigeria, p. 285; London, 1902.

76. Plutarch, Isis et Osiris, 33, 73; Dicdorus Siculus, i, 88.

77. Francesco Redi, Bacco in Toscana, London, 12mo, 1804.

78. In Middleton A Chaste Maid in Cheapside, 4to, 1630 (acted perhaps twenty twenty  years before), iii, 2, at the christening we have the prattle of the gossips:

Third Gossip: Now, by my faith, a fair high-standing cup
                 And two great postle spoons, one of them gilt.

First Puritan: Sure, that was Judas then with the red beard.

Cf. Dryden's lines on Jacob Tonson, the publisher:

With two left legs and Judas-coloured hair.

In As You Like It, iii, 4, Rosalind says: "His own hairs of the dissembling colour," to which Celia replies: "Something browner than Judas's."

Martial, xii, liv, has an epigram:

Crine ruber, niger ore, breuis pede, lumine laesus
 Rem magnam praesta, Zoile, si bonus es.

Upon which Lemaire glosses (Martialis Epigrammata; Parisus 1825, iii, p. 48): "Crine ruber. Hoc semper in malam partem acceptum, et ut pulchritudini, ita bonae indoli contrarium uisum. Et apud nos hodie exstat tritum prouerbium quo improbitatis arguuntur qui crinem rubrum habent." In folk-lore red hair is regarded as a mark of great sexuality, Kryptadia, vol. ii, p. 258.

79. p. 276.

80. Cf. Shakespeare, 3 Henry VI, v. 6:

Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
 And yet brought forth less than a mother's hope
 To wit, an indigest deformed lump . . .
 Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
 To signify thou camest to bite the world.

And again:

For I have often heard my mother say
 I came into the world with my legs forward . . .
 The midwife wonder'd, and the women cried
 "Oh! Jesus bless us! he is born with teeth!
 And so I was: which plainly signified
 That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog.

81. The Tragedie of Chabot Admirall of France: As it wag presented by her Majesties Servants, at the private House in Drury Lane. Written by George Chapman and James Shirley. 4to, 1639. This Tragedy was licensed by the Master of the Revels 29 April, 1635.

82. Studies in the Psychology of Sex, vol. iii. Philadelphia, 1926, p. 121. n2.

83. Bulletin Internationale de Droit Penal, vol. vi, 1896, p. 115.

84. "Le Baiser en Europe et en Chine," Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie, Paris, 1897, fasc. 2.

85. Studies in the Psychology of Sex, vol. iv, Philadelphia, 1927, p. 216.

86. Johannes Secundus Everard, 1511-1536.

87. Jean Bonnefons, born at Clermont in Auvergne, 1554; died 1614.

88. G. Alonzi, Archivio di Psichiatria, vol. vi., fasc. 4.

89. News of the World, 21 December, 1924. Under heading, "Vampire's Victims."

90. This is hardly correct. Hans Sennenfeld, who frequented "Zur Schwulen Guste" was twenty years old. Another victim, Hermann Bock, aged twenty-three, was a young rough, "a fellow well able to take care of himself."

91. News of the World, 7 December, 1924.

92. Traite sur les Apparitions. . . . Tome ii, Paris, 1751. p. 299.

93. Phenomena of Materialisation by Baron von Schrenck Notzing. Translated by E. E. Fournier d'Albe. London. Kegan Paul, 1923, p. 10.

94. Op. cit., p. 26.

[p. 215]

95. Op cit., p. 26.

96. London, 1926. c. vi. "Diabolic Possession and Modern Spiritism," especially pp. 248-269.

97. M. Pierart was a professor at the College of Maubeuse, and afterwards secretary to Baron du Potet. He founded La Revue Spiritualiste in 1858, and was esteemed as the rival of Allan Kardec. He died in l878.

98. Survival. By various Authors. Edited by Sir James Marchant, K.B.E., LL.D. Putnams, London and New York.

99. See Schwicker, Geschichte des Temeser Banates, Nagy-Beeskerek, 1861.

100. Afanasief, Poeticheskiya Vozzryeniya Slavyan na Prirodu ["Poetic Views of the Slavonians about Nature"], 3 vols., Moscow, 1865-69, 8vo, vol. iii, p. 576, quotes Vuk Haradjic to this effect.

101. Leone Allacci, De quorumdam Graecorum opinationibus, cap. xii, sqq.

102. L. Strackerjan, Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg, Oldenburg, 1867, I, p. 154.

103. M. Alex. Castron, Vorlesungen uber die finnische Mythologie. St. Petersburg. 1853. p. 337.

104. Shway Yoe (Sir T. G. Scott), The Burman; His Life and Notions, London, 1882, ii, p. 338. Captain C. J. F. S. Forbes, British Burma, London, 1878, p. 93.

105. J. A. E. Kohler, Volksbrauch Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Uberlieferungen im Voigtland; Leipzig, 1867, p. 251.

106. Adolf Bastian, Die Mensch in der Geschichte. Leipzig, 1860. ii, p. 331.

107. C. J. Anderson, Lake Ngami, Second Edition, London, 1856, p. 226.

108. An old line runs: Ligna Crucis palma, cedrus, cupressus, oliva. The gipsies say that the Cross was of ash-wood. According to Wiliam Ellis, The Timber-tree Improved, London, 1738, 8vo, p. 178, there was a local belief in Herefordshire that the Cross was of service wood. Some think the Cross was of pine.

109. Dictionnaire des Superstitions, Erreurs, Prejuges et Traditions populaires, Troisieme et derniere Encyclopedic Theologique. 2 vols., 4to, 1855.

110. The Voyage. and Travails, first printed Westminster, 4to, 1499. A convenient edition is London, 8vo, 1725.

111. Dioscorides, peri &Ygra?ve;'les Iatrikeis, De arte medica, I, 119, Ed. Sprengel, Leipzig, 1829-30.

112. The scholiast on the Theriaka (1. 861) of Nicander of Claroe. Keil's revision (1856) of the 1816 edition of Schneider, Leipzig.

113. Diogenes Laertius, Uitae philosophorum, iv, 54-57. Ed. C. G. Cobet, Paris (Didot), 1878.

114. The first quarto has no date, but is probably 1609-10. I quote from Dyce's recension.

115. La Fida Pastora. 12 mo. Londoni, 1658, p. 21.

116. E. S. Harland The Legend of Perseus, London, 1896. Vol. iii., p. 23.

117. Voyage du Sieur Paul Lucas au Levant. A la Haye. MDCCV. Vol. ii, p. 209.

118. R. Pashley, Travels in Crete, Cambridge and London, 1937. Vol. ii, p. 201.

119. Russian Folk Tales. London, 1873, p. 323.

120. Cf. c. vii. p.

121. The Cardinal Bishop of Olmutz gave Gioseppe Davanzati, Archbishop of Trani, the following account of the methods of dealing with vampires in his German diocese. Tribunals were summoned to take information and decide upon the course of action. "I ministri di questi predendone esatta informazione, e formandone un giuridico processo ne vengono ad una sentenza finale contro al sudetto Vampiro, mediante la quale viene solennemente e con tutte le formole legali decretato: che il publice Carnefice portandosi al luogo, ove si trova il Vampiro, apra il sepolcro, e con una sciabla o larga spada a vista di tutto il popolo spettatore recida il Vampiro il capo, e dopo con una lancia gli apri il petto, e trapassi col ferro da parte a parte il cuore del Vampiro strappandoglielo dal seno e poi ritorni di nuovo a chuidere l'avello. In tal maniera, mi disse il Porporato, cessava affatto di piu comparire il

[p. 216]

Vampiro, quantunque molti altri di questi, che non erano stati ancora giustiziati, ne esecutoriati non cessavano di comparire, e di produrre i calamitosi effeti come i primi. Ma quel, ch'era da notarsi, e di maraviglia insieme, secondo il medesimo Autore si era, che molti de'detti Vampiri giustiziati, si trovano ben colorati, rubicondi, con occhi aperti, e turgidi di vivo sangue, come se fossero attualmente vivi, e di prospera salute; a segno tale, che alcuni di questi al colpo della lanciata, che loro veniva inflitta, mandavano uno spaventoso grido, e scaturivano dal petto un copioso ruscello di sangue, il quale per la copia arrivava ad innaffiare non solo il catalette, ma spargendosi al di fuori guingeva a bagnare il prossimo terreno. Cosa non men orrida, e spaventosa a vedersi, che orribile a descriversi ed a concepirsi."

122. De Quorundam Graecorum Opinationibus, p. 142.

123. pp. 218-219.

134. vii, p. 490. Compare Heineccius, De absolutione mortuorum . . , p. 20.

135. Chronica rerum Anglicarum, Liber V, c. xxii. "Talia saepius in Anglia contigisse, et crebis clarere exemplis, quietem populo dari non posse, nisi miserrimi hominis corpore effosso et concremato."

126. H. F. Tozer, Highlands of Turkey, ii, 91, quoting Newton, Travels and Discoveries in the Levant (i. p. 212).

127. Arthur and Albert Schott. Walachische Maehrehen, p. 298.

128. Who ascended the Papal Chair as Adrian IV, 9 January, 1522.

129. In the Uniculum Spirituum it is related that Solomon imprisoned three millions of infernal spirits with seventy-two of their kings in a bottle of black glass, which he cast into a deep well near Babylon. The Babylonians, however, hoping to find a treasure in the well, descended, and broke the bottle, thus releasing these legions of darkness. The story of the Djin and the Fisherman is one of the most familiar tales of The Thousand and One Nights. The idea of enclosing spirits in a bottle would seem to be Oriental. Don Cleofas, the hero of El Diabolo Coxuelo, by Luis Velez de Guevara (first printed in 1611) having accidentally entered the house of an astrologer, delivers from a bottle where he had been confined by a potent charm el diabolo coxuelo who appropriately rewards his liberator. The situation is even better known owing to Le Diable Boiteux and the release of Asmodee, which Le Sage has amply borrowed from the Spanish romance. In China there is the story of a Vampire who is caught and imprisoned in a jar which is thrown into Lake T'ai. See G. Willoughby-Meade, Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, pp. 235-37.

130. Dr. R. Romer, "Bijdrage tot de Geneeskunst du Karo-Batak's," Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde, i, (1908), pp. 212, sqq.

131. Aubin-Louis Millin, Voyage dans les Departemens du Midi de la France, Paris, 1807-1811. Vol. iii, p. 28.

132. J. J. M. de Groot, The Religious System of China, v. 725, 744, 749, sqq.

133. G. F. Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, p. 221.]

     
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 217]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, THE EAST, AND SOME ANCIENT COUNTRIES

AMONG the elaborate and extensive demonology of Babylonia and Assyria the Vampire had a very prominent place. From the very earliest times Eastern races have always held that belief in the existence of dark and malignant powers, evil spirits and ghosts which is, we cannot doubt it, naturally implanted in the heart of man and which it remains for the ignorance and agnosticism of a later day to deny. The first inhabitants of Babylonia, the Sumerians, recognized three distinct classes of evil spirits, any one of whom was always ready to attack those who by any accident or negligence laid themselves open to these invasions. In particular was a man who had wandered far from his fellows into some haunted spot liable to these onsets, and Dr. R. Campbell Thompson tells us that this "is the interpretation of the word muttaliku, wanderer, which occurs so often in the magical text to indicate the patient."[1] Of the Babylonian evil spirits the first were those ghosts who were unable to rest in their graves and so perpetually walked up and down the face of the earth; the second class was composed of those horrible entities who were half human and half demon; whilst the third class were the devils, pure spirits of the same nature as the gods, fiends, who bestrode the whirlwind and the sand-storm, who afflicted mankind with plagues and pestilence. There were many subdivisions, and in fact there are few evil hierarchies so detailed and so fasciculated as the Assyrian cosmorama of the spiritual world.

The evil spirit who was known as Utukku was a phantom or ghost, generally but perhaps not invariably of a wicked and malevolent kind, since it was he whom the necromancers raised from the dead, and in an ancient Epic when the hero, Gilgamish, prays to the god, Nergal to restore his friend [p. 218] Ea-bani, the request is granted, for the ground gapes open and the Utukku of Ea-bani appears "like the wind,"[2] that is, says Dr. Campbell Thompson, "probably a transparent spectre in the human shape of Ea-bani, who converses with Gilgamish." The Ekimmu or Departed Spirit, was the soul of the dead person which for some reason could find no rest, and wandered over the earth lying wait to seize upon man. Especially did it lark in deserted and ill-omened places. Dr. Thompson tells us that it is difficult to say exactly in what respect the Ekimmu differed from the Utukku,[3] but it is extremely interesting to inquire into the causes owing to which a person became a Ekimmu, and here we shall find many parallels with the old Greek beliefs concerning those duties to the dead which are paramount and for which a man must risk his life and more. It was ordinarily believed among the Assyrians that after death the soul entered the Underworld, "the House of Darkness, the seat of the god, Irkalla, the House from which none that enter come forth again." Here they seem to have passed a miserable existence, enduring the pangs of hunger and thirst, and if their friends and relatives on earth were too niggardly to offer rich meats and pour forth bountiful libations upon their tombs they were compelled to satisfy their craving with dust and mud. But there were certain persons who were yet in worse case, for their souls could not even enter the Underworld. This is clear from the description given by the phantom of Ea-bani to his friend, the hero Gilgamish:

The man whose corpse lieth in the desert--
     Thou and I have often seen such an one--
 His spirit resteth not in the earth;
 The man whose spirit hath none to care for it--
     Thou and I have often seen such an one,
         The dregs of the vessel--the leavings of the feast,
     And that which is cast out into the street are his food.[4]

The Ekimmu-spirit of an unburied corpse could find no rest and remained prowling about the earth so long as its body was above ground."[5] This is exactly one phase of the Vampire, and in the various magical texts and incantations are given lists of those who are liable to return in this manner. As well as the ghosts of those whose bodies were uncared for or unburied, that is to say those who were lost or forgotten, there

[p. 219]

were the spirits of men and women who died violent or premature deaths, or who had left certain duties undone, and even youths or maidens who had loved but who had been snatched away before they had known happiness. In an exorcism various spirits are addressed individually:

Whether thou art a ghost unburied,
 Or a ghost that none careth for,
 Or a ghost with none to make offerings to it.
 Or a ghost that hath none to pour libations to it,
 Or a ghost that hath no prosperity.

Other phantoms who can obtain no rest are:

He that lieth in a ditch . . .
 He that no grave covereth . . .
 He that lieth uncovered,
 Whose head is uncovered with dust,
 The king's son that lieth in the desert,
 Or in the ruins,
 The hero whom they have slain with the sword.

And again:

He that hath died of hunger in prison,
 He that hath died of thirst in prison,
 The hungry man who in his hunger hath not smelt the smell of food,
 He whom the bank of a river hath made to perish,
 He that hath died in the desert or marshes,
 He that a storm hath overwhelmed in the desert,
 The Night-wraith that hath no husband,
 The Night-fiend that hath no wife,[6]
 He that hath posterity and he that hath none.

If the spirit of the dead man be forgotten and no offerings were made at the tomb, hunger and thirst would compel it to come forth from its abode in the Underworld to seek the nourishment of which A has been deprived, and, according to the old proverb, since a hungry man is an angry man it roams furiously to and fro and greedily devours whatsoever it may. "If it found a luckless man who had wandered far from his fellows into haunted places, it fastened upon him, plaguing and tormenting him until such time as a priest should drive it away with excorcism." This is clear from two tablets which have been translated as follows:

[p. 220]

The gods which seize (upon man)
     Have come forth from the grave
 The evil wind-gusts
     Have come forth from the grave
 To demand the payment of rites and the pouring out of libations,
     They have come forth from the grave;
 All that is evil in their hosts, like a whirlwind
     Hath come forth from their graves.

Or again:

The evil Spirit, the evil Demon, the evil Ghost, the evil Devil,
 From the earth have come forth
 From the Underworld unto the land they have come forth;
 In heaven they are unknown,
 On earth they are not understood,
 They neither stand nor sit,
 Nor eat nor drink."

Even as the Vampire of Eastern Europe to-day, the Babylonian Ekimmu was the most persistent of haunters and the most difficult to dislodge. If he could find no rest in the Underworld he would speedily return and attach himself to anyone who during life had held the least communication with him. Man's life was certainly surrounded with dangers when the mere act of sharing just once food, oil, or garments with another person gave the spirit of this individual a claim to consort with his friend, or it might be even the casual acquaintance, who had shown him some slight kindness. The link could be slighter yet than that since in a long and elaborate formula of priestly conjuration, a particularly solemn and ritual incantation for the exorcizing of evil spirits, especially Vampires, it is plainly said that merely to have eaten, to have drunk, to have anointed oneself, or dressed oneself in the society of another was enough to forge an extraordinary spiritual copula. In this imprecatory orison, which assumes a strictly liturgical character, various kinds of vampirish spectres are banned:

Whether thou are a ghost that has come from the earth,
 Or a phantom of night that hath no couch,
 Or a woman (that hath died) a virgin,
 Or a man (that hath died) unmarried,
 Or one that lieth dead in the desert, [p. 221]
 Or one that lieth dead in the desert, uncovered with earth,
 Or one that in the desert . . .
 (hiatus)
 Or one that hath been torn from a date palm,
 Or one that cometh through the waters in a boat,
 Or a ghost unburied,
 Or a ghost that none careth for,
 Or a ghost with none to make offerings,
 Or a ghost with none to pour libations,
 Or a ghost that hath no posterity,
 Or a hag-demon,
 Or a ghoul,
 Or a robber-sprite,
 Or a harlot (that hath died) whose body is sick,
 Or a woman (that hath died) in travail,
 Or a woman (that hath died) with a babe at her breast,
 Or a weeping woman (that hath died) with a babe at her breast,
 Or an evil man (that hath died),
 Or an (evil) spirit,
 Or one that haunteth (the neighbourhood),
 Or one that haunteth (the vicinity),
 Or whether thou be one with whom on a day (I have eaten),
 Or whether thou be one with whom on a day (I have drunk),
 Or with whom on a day I have anointed myself,
 Or with whom on a day I have clothed myself,
 Or whether thou be one with whom I have entered and eaten,
 Or with whom I have entered and drunk,
 Or with whom I have entered and anointed myself,
 Or with whom I have entered and clothed myself,
 Or whether thou be one with whom I have eaten food when I was hungry,
 Or with whom I have drunk water when I was thirsty,
 Or with whom I have anointed myself with oil when I was sore,
 Or with whom when I was cold I have clothed his nakedness with a garment,
 (Whatever thou be) until thou art removed,
 Until thou departest from the body of the man, the son of his god,
 Thou shalt have no food to eat,
 Thou shalt have no water to drink,

.    .    .    .    .

If thou wouldst fly up to heaven
 Thou shalt have no wings,
 If thou wouldst lurk in ambush on earth,
 Thou shalt secure no resting-place.
 Unto the man, the son of his god--come not nigh, [p. 222]
 Get thee hence!
 Place not thy head upon his head,
 Place not thy (hand) upon his hand,
 Place not thy foot upon his foot,
 With thy hand touch him not,
 Turn (not) thy back upon him,
 Lift not thine eyes (against him),
 Look not behind thee,
 Gibber not against him,
 Into the house enter thou not,
 Through the fence break thou not,
 Into the chamber enter thou not,
 In the midst of the city encircle him not,
 Near him make no circuit;
 By the Word of Ea,[7]
 May the man, the son of his god,
 Become pure, become clean, become bright!

.    .    .    .    .

May his welfare be secured at the kindly hands of the gods.[8]

This incantation is extremely important as here we see many of the ideas which have persisted through the ages. The Vampire, or restless spirit might be a man whose lay body dead in the desert, uncovered with earth, "a ghost unburied," and it is readily remembered that among the ancient Greeks there was no more reverent duty than to bury the dead. Again, to-day, the Slavs consider that brigands and highwaymen whose lives are passed in deeds of violence and rapine after death will probably in another mode continue their predatory habits as Vampires; so the Assyrian Vampire might be "a robber-sprite." It will be remarked that the threat which drives away the Ekimmu is that until he has departed no libation shall be poured over his grave, no baked meats offered there, and no saving rites performed.

It was even held that if a man but looked upon a corpse he established that mysterious psychic connexion which would render him liable to be attacked by the spirit of the deceased. Among the Ibo people in the district of Awka, Southern Nigeria, one of the most important taboos which has to be preserved by the priest of the Earth is that be may not see a corpse, so terrible is held to be the spiritual contagion. Should he by an unlucky chance meet one upon the road he must at once veil his eyes with his wristlet.[9] This wrist-band or bracelet is a most important periapt or charm since it is

[p. 223]

regarded as a spiritual fetter keeping the soul in the body, and to bind such a talisman upon the wrist is particularly appropriate, since many peoples believe that a soul resides wherever a pulse is felt beating. Moreover, not only does this amulet guard the soul securely within the body but it also keeps evil spirits and demons out of it, and therefore at the ceremonies of the cutting of hair of Siamese children, which is an extremely important and symbolical rite, a magic cord is tied round the wrist of the child to protect him from malignant and foul spectres who would invade him.[10] Accordingly by shrouding his eyes with his wristlet the Ibo priest protects himself against any molestation by the spirit of the corpse. Very similar protective powers are also ascribed to finger rings, and among the Lapps the person whose business it is to shroud a corpse receives from some relative of the departed a brass ring which he must wear fastened to his right arm until the funeral rites are over. This ring is believed to shield him from any onset on the part of the ghost.[12] In the Tyrol a woman--particularly if she be pregnant or in travail--must never take off her wedding-ring, or else witches and vampires will have power over her.[13] In England it is considered to be courting disaster if a woman takes off her wedding-ring, whilst actually to lose the wedding-ring is one of the worst possible misfortunes. It may be mentioned that to-day the Greeks of the Isle of Karpathos (Scarpanto) never bury a body which has rings upon it; "for the spirit, they say, can even be detained in the little finger, and cannot rest."[14] It is not suggested that anything so horrible might happen as that the spirit should become evil or a Vampire, but certainly it would not be in the full enjoyment of happiness and peace.

Among the Assyrians the Ekimmu might appear in a house. Just as the Vampire, it would pass through walls or doors, and whether it merely glided about as a silent phantom, or whether it gibbered uttering unintelligible and mocking words with hideous mop and mow, or whether it seemed to ask some question that required a response, in any case such an apparition was terribly unlucky. The direst misfortunes followed, certainly involving the destruction of the house, and it was seldom that the owner, if not many of his family as well would not die within very short space of time. It seems, indeed, that the Ekimmu would drain the life out of a household,

[p. 224]

which is purely a vampirish qualitty, although perhaps it does not appear that this was always a physical operation, the actual sucking of blood, as is believed to be the case with the vrykolokas. But Dr. Campbell-Thompson tells us that there were few superstitions which had obtained such a hold over the Assyrians as the belief in the Ekimmu-spirit.

One incantation speaks of the meat and drink of the evil spirit:

Thy food is the food of ghosts,
 Thy drink is the drink of ghosts.

In another "Prayer against the Evil Spirits" the Vampires are spoken of in the plainest terms. This incantation is as follows:

Spirits that minish heaven and earth,
 That minish the land,
 Spirits that minish the land, Of giant strength,
 Of giant strength and giant tread,
 Demons (like) raging bulls, great ghosts,
 Ghosts that break through all houses,
 Demons that have no shame,
 Seven are they!
 Knowing no care,
 They grind the land like corn
 Knowing no mercy.
 They rage against mankind:
 They spill their blood like rain,
 Devouring their flesh (and) sucking their veins.
 Where the images of the gods are, there they quake
 In the Temple of Nabu, who fertilises the shoots of wheat.
 They are demons full of violence
 Ceaselessly devouring blood.
 Invoke the ban against them,
 That they no more return to this neighbourhood.
 By heaven be ye exorcised! By Earth be ye exorcised!"[15]

These Seven Spirits re-appear both in Syriac and in Palestinian magic. In his exhaustive and authoritative work Semitic Magic (p. 52) Dr. Campbell Thompson says: "Their predilection for human blood, as described in the cuneiform incantation, is in keeping with all the traditions of the grisly mediaeval Vampires." An Ethiopic charm prescribes the following invocation: "Thus make perish, O [p. 225] Lord, all demons and evil spirits who eat flesh and drink blood: who crush the bones and seduce the children of men; drive them away, O Lord, by the power of these thy names and by the prayer of thy holy Disciples, from thy servant." In an even more curious Syriac exorcism the Seven Spirits are described in detail almost exactly as they were pictured by the earlier inhabitants of Mesopotamia. The charm is to protect the flocks and herds, and it may be noted that there has come down to us an Assyrian protective incantation which is almost exactly similar. The Syriac runes go thus: "For the fold of cattle. 'Seven accursed brothers accursed sons! destructive ones, sons of men of destruction! Why do you creep along on your knees and more upon your hands?' And they replied, 'We go on our hands, so that we may eat flesh, and we crawl along upon our hands, so that we may drink blood.' As soon as I saw it, I prevented them from devouring, and I cursed and bound them in the name of thy Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, saying: 'May you not proceed on your way, nor finish your journey, and may, God break your teeth, and cut the veins of your neck, and the sinews thereof, that you approach not the sheep nor the oxen of the person who carries (sc. these writs)! I bind you in the name of Gabriel and Michael, I bind you by that Angel who judged the woman that combed (the hair of) her head on the eve of Holy Sunday. May they vanish as smoke from before the wind for ever and ever, Amen'"

The twenty-second formula of the Cuneiform Inscription of Western Asia, which was published by Sir Henry Rawlinson and Mr. Edwin Morris in 1866 contains the following curse against a Vampire:

The phantom, child of heaven,
 Which the gods remember,
 The Innin (hobgoblin) prince
 Of the lords
 The . . .
 Which produces painful fever,
 The vampire which attacks man,
 The Uruku multifold
 Upon humanity,
 May they never seize him!

The earliest Vampire known is that depicted upon a prehistoric bowl, an engraving of which has been published in

[p. 226]

the Delegation en Perse[16] where a man copulates with a vampire whose head has been severed from the body. Here the threat of cutting off her head is supposed to frighten her away from the act represented and Dr. R. Campbell-Thompson suggests" that "quite probably the man may have drunk from this bowl as helping the magic (although this is a doubtful point)." A vampire is depicted among the Babylonian cylinder seals in the Revue d'Assyriologie, 1909,[61] concerning which the same great authority has given me the following note: "The idea is, I presume, to keep off the nocturnal visits of Lilith and her sisters. Just as the prehistoric or early people showed pictures of enemies with their heads cut off (in order that what they were there showing might by sympathetic magic actually happen), so will the man troubled by nightly emissions attributed to Lilith, depict on his amulet the terrors which are in store for these malignants."

The Hebrew Lilith is undoubtedly borrowed from the Babylonian demon Lilitu, a night spirit, although it is not probable that the Lilith has any connexion with the Hebrew Lailah, "night." It was perhaps inevitable that the Rabbis should assume some such derivation, and it must be allowed that the comparison seemed plausible enough, although it has been shown, on the evidence of the Assyrian word Lilu, that the old theory must no longer be maintained, and Lilith is almost certainly to be referred to lalu, "luxuriousness," and lulti, "lasciviousness, lechery." This night ghost is mentioned in Isaias xxxiv, 14, where the Vulgate has: "Et occurrent daemonia, onocentauris, et pilosus clamabit alter ad alterum: ibi cubauit lamia, et inuenit sibi requiem." Which Douay translates: "And demons and monsters shall meet, and the hairy ones shall cry out one to another, there hath the lamia lain down, and found rest for herself." The Authorised Version has: "The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest." Upon screech owl there is a marginal note: "Or, night monster." The Revised Version prefers: "And the wild beasts of the desert shall meet with the wolves, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; yea, the night-monster shall settle there, and shall find her a place of rest." There are marginal notes; satyr, "or, he-goat"; the

[p. 227]

night-monster, "Heb. Lilith." In classical Latin, lamia is defined by Lewis and Short as "a witch who was said to suck children's blood, a sorceress, enchantress." I doubt whether this is a very accurate definition, although possibly it will cover the meaning in Horace, Ars Poetica, 340:

Ne quodcumque uelit poscat sibi fabula credi,
 Neu pransae lamiae puerum uiuum extrahat aluo.

Which Francis translates:

             The probable maintain,
 Nor force us to believe the monstrous scene,
 Which shows a child, by a fell witch devour'd,
 Dragg'd from her entrails, and to life restor'd.

Apuleius, Metamorphoses, I, has: "Quo (odore spurcissimi humoris) me lamiae illae infecerunt." Here lamia is hardly the equivalent of anything more than "witch." So the meaning of Vampire had been to a large extent lost or submerged. This idea, however, seems to have remained in Aristophanes, when in the Wasps (1177) Philocreon boasts what tales he can tell:

pruton men us e Lami alous' eperdeto.

Liddell and Scott define Lamia as: "a fabulous monster said to feed on man's flesh, a bugbear to frighten children with," referring to this passage in Aristophanes, which does not seem a very satisfactory or scholarly explanation. Tertullian, Aduersus Ualentinianos, which de Labriolle dates at 208-211, uses the phrase lamiae turres as nursery tales, Contes de nourrice, contes bleus. Theil in his Grand Dictionnaire de la Langue Latine terms lamia by "lamie, sorciere, qui sucait, disait-on, le sang des enfants; magicienne." These lexicographers for some extraordinary reason do not appear to have remarked the use of the word in the Vulgate. Gervase of Tilbury in his Otia Imperialia has some account of lamias, so called, he states, because they lacerate children: "lamiae uel laniae, quia laniant infantes." In country places even yet many an old nurse dares not trust a child in a cradle without a candle or lamp in the room for fear of the night-hag.

Rabbinical literature is full of legends concerning Lilith. According to tradition she was the first wife of Adam and, the

[p. 228]

mother of devils, spirits, and lilin, which is the same word as the Assyrian Lilu. From Jewish lore she passed to mediaeval demonology, and Johann Weyer says that she was the princess who presided over the Succubi. It is true that the LXX translates in this passage of the prophet Isaias the Hebrew Lilith by Lamia, but it has been suggested that the nearest Latin equivalent might be strix, for although strix may be properly a screech owl, yet the Latins believed that these drained the blood of young children, and Ovid, Fasti, VI, 131-140 has:

Sunt auidae uolucres; non quae Phineia mensis
     Guttura fraudabant: sed genus inde trahunt.
 Grande caput: stantes oculi: rostra apta rapinae
     Canities pennis, unguibus hamus inest.
 Nocte uolant, puerosque petunt nutricis egentes
     Et uitiant cunis corpora rapta suis.
 Carpere dicuntur lactentia uiscera rostris;
     Et plenum poto sanguine guttur habent
 Est illis strigibus nomen: sed nominis huius
     Causa; quod horrenda stridere nocte solent.

But it is clear that the Strix was not always a bird, for in the Lombard Code we find the expression "Strix uel masca." Thiel has: "masca (mascha), sorciere, ML. De la le francais: masque." In fact masca has the same meaning as Larua which signifies a ghost, or as in the well-known line of Horace, a mask:

Nil illi larua et tragicis opus esse cothurnis.[18]

In the Breuiarium Romanum, pars aestiua, die 30 Augusti, ad Matutinum, in 11 Nocturno, lectio V, it is said of S. Rose of Lima, "laruas daemonum, frequenti certamine uictrix, impauide protriuit ac superauit."

Moreover, the Strix was a vampire, and it may not be superfluous again to quote the well-known Saxon Capitulary of Charlemagne, 781, Liber I, 6: "Siquis a diabolo deceptus crediderit secundum morem Paganorum, uirum aliquem aut feminam Strigem esse, et homines comedere, et propter hoc ipsum incenderit, uel carnem eius ad comedendum dederit, uel ipsam comederit, capitis sententia puniatur."

As has been remarked the earliest known representation of a vampire shows her in the act of copulation with a man and we have just observed that Weyer regards the Hebrew Lilith

[p. 229]

as queen of the Succubi, The connexion here is very plain, for Martin Delrio, 5, 7, in his Disquisitionum Magicarum Libri Sex, I, 178, (Louvain, 1599), definitely states: "Axioma I sit, solent Malefici et Lamiae cum daemonibus, illi quidem succubis, hae uero incubis, actum Uenerium exercere. . . . Axioma II potest etiam ex huiusmodi concubitu daemonis incubi proles nasci." Michael Psellus (Mixael o Psellos), the famous Byzantine scholar of the tenth century, in his treatise, De Operatione daemonum dialogus (graece et latine cum notis Gaulmini, Paris, 1615), says that a monk of Mesopotamia, named Marcus, informed him that demons here capable of sensual passions, "Quemadmodum et sperma nonnulli eorum emittunt et uermes quosdam spermate procreant. At incredibile est, inquam, excrementi quicquam daemonibus inesse, uasaue spermatica et uitalia. Uasa quidem eis, inquit ille, huiusmodi nulla insunt, superflui autem seu excrementi nescio quid emittunt hoc mihi asserenti credito." The learned authors of the Malleus Maleficarum discuss, "Whether Children can be Generated by Incubi and Succubi" (Part I, Question iii), and "By which Devils are the Functions of Incubus and Succubus Practised" (Part I, Question iv). Appeal is made to the authority of S. Augustine, who, De Trinitate, III, says "That devils do indeed collect human semen, by means of which they are able to produce bodily effects: but this cannot be done without some local movement, therefore demons can transfer the semen which they have collected and inject it into the bodies of others." Moreover, Sprenger and Kramer inquire: "Is it Catholic to affirm that the functions of Incubi and Succubi belong indifferently and equally to all unclean spirits?" They reply: "It seems that it is so; for to affirm the opposite would be to maintain that there is some good order among them." Now the vampire is certainly an unclean spirit, whether it be that the body is animated by some demon, or whether it be the man himself who is permitted to enter his corpse and energize it and accordingly it is Catholic to believe that a vampire can copulate with human beings. Nor are there lacking instances of this. We have the well-known history related by Phlegon of Tralles where Machates enjoys Philinnion, who has returned (albeit he knows it not) from her tomb; and in modern Greece it is quite commonly held that the vrykolakas will revisit

[p. 230]

his widow and know her, or he even seduces other women whilst their husbands are away, or what is more striking still he will betake himself to some town where he is not recognized, and he will even wed, children being born of such unions. Mr. Lawson (Modern Greek Folklore) informs us that in Thessaly he was actually told of a family in the neighbourhood of Domoko, who reckoned a vrykolakas among their ancestors of some two or three generations ago, and by virtue of such lineage they inherited a certain skill which enables them to deal most efficaciously with the vrykolakas who at intervals haunt the country-side, indeed so widely was their power esteemed that they had been on occasion summoned as specialists for consultation when quite remote districts were troubled in this manner.

Alardus Gazaeus in his Commentary on Cassian's Collationes, VIII, 21, (Migne, Patrologia Latina, xlix) plainly teaches: "Devils, although incorporeal and spiritual, can take to themselves the bodies of dead men, and in such bodies can copulate with women, as commonly with striges and witches, and by such intercourse can even beget children." The Strix we have just considered, and in the passage quoted from Gazaeus it would not, I think, be far amiss simply to translate striges as "vampires." If it be asked how an incubus or succubus, or a vampire, can fornicate with human beings we may refer to the famous treatise by the learned Ludovico Maria Sinistrari, the De Daemonialitate where that great Franciscan theologian has in detail discussed and admirably resolved these difficulties.

It has been said that "there is no trace of vampires in Jewish literature," but this would not appear to be strictly accurate for, Proverbs XXX, 15, we have: "Sanguisugae duae sunt filiae, dicentes: Affer, Affer." The LXX has bdelle for the equivalent of the Hebrew ### which the Vulgate renders sanguisuga. Douay translates: "The horseleach hath two daughters that say: Bring, bring." The Authorised Version renders: "The horse-leach hath two daughters, crying: Give, give." The Revised Version prefers: "The horse-leach hath two daughters, crying, Give, give." There are marginal notes, upon horseleach, "Or, vampire." Upon crying; "Or, called." This sanguisuga is probably a vampire or blood-sucking demon, and thus the passage is explained by [p. 231] Muhlau, De Prouerbiis Aguri et Lemuelis (42 sqq.), Leipzig, 1849; and Wellhausen, Rede arabische Heiderstums, p. 149; (2te Auflage), Berlin, 1897.

In ancient Egypt we can trace certain parallels to the Assyrian beliefs, for the ancient Egyptians held that every man had his ka, his double, which when he died lived in the tomb with the body and was there visited by the khu, the spiritual body or soul which at death departed from the body, and although it might visit the body, could only be brought back from its habitation in heaven by the ceremonial performance of certain mystic rites. Yet from one point of view the soul was sufficiently material to partake of the funeral offerings which were brought to the tomb for the refreshment of the ka. One of the chief objects of these sepulchral oblations was to maintain the double in the tomb so that it should not be compelled to wander abroad in search of food. But, as in Assyria, unless the ka were bountifully supplied with food it would issue forth from the tomb and be driven to eat any offal or drink any brackish water it might find. The ka occupied a special part of the tomb, "the house of the ka," and a priest called "the priest of the ka" was appointed specially to minister to it therein. The ka snuffed up the sweet smell of incense which was very agreeable to it when this was burned on certain days each year with the offerings of flowers, herbs, meat and drink in all of which it took great delight. The ka also viewed with pleasure the various scenes which were sculptured or richly painted on the walls of the tomb. In fact it was not merely capable, but desirous of material consolations. It would appear even that in later times the khu was identified with the ka.

In Arabic the word for horse-leach is ###, while ###, formed from the same root "to hang," means the kind of Jinn called Ghoul (###). The Ghoul appears as a female demon who feeds upon dead bodies and infests the cemeteries at night to dig open the grave for her horrid repasts. Some times she would seem to be a woman, half-human, half-fiend, for in story she is often represented as wedded to a husband who discovers her loathsome necrophagy. She can bear children, and is represented as luring travellers out of the way to lonely and remote ruins when she falls upon them suddenly and devours them, greedily sucking the warm blood

[p. 232]

from their veins. The Ghoul is familiar from The Thousand and One Nights as is the story of the Prince who having pursued a strange beast whilst hunting was carried to a great distance, and chanced to see by the wayside a lovely maiden who sat and wept. She told him that she was the daughter of an Indian king who had been lost in this desert spot by her caravan. The chivalrous youth takes her upon his horse, and a little later pleading a certain necessity she descends--latrines are particularly considered to be haunts of evil spirits and malignant entities, and Jean de Thevenot in his Travels into the Levant ("Newly done out of French, folio, London, 1687), says: "The Kerim Kiatib, merciful scribes wait upon him [the Turk] in all places, except when he does his needs, when they let him go alone, staying for him at the door till he comes out, and then they take him into possession again wherefore when the Turks go to the house of office they put the left foot foremost, to the end the Angel who registers their sins may leave them first; and when they come out they set the right foot before, that the Angel who writes down their good works may have them first under his protection."

The young man hears voices in the haunted latrine, the feigned Indian lady cries: "Children, to-day I have brought you a fat and comely juvenal." And several answer: "Bring him along, Mother, bring him along for our bellies cry for food." At these words he trembled exceedingly for he saw he had to do with a ghoul and when she returned he lifted up his voice in prayer: "O thou who art ever ready to hearken to the oppressed who calls upon Thee and Who dost unveil all deceit, grant me to triumph over mine enemy, and keep all evil far from me, for Thou canst all that Thou dost desire." When the ghoul heard these words she vanished from sight, and the prince is able to make his way back home. (The Fifth Night. Les Mille Nuits et Une Nuit. trs. Dr. J. C. Mardrus, Vol. I, 1899, pp. 57-59, "Histoire du Prince et de la Goule.")

In the story of Sidi Nouman a young man marries a wife named Amine, who to his surprise when they are set at dinner only eats a dish of rice grain by grain, taking up each single grain with a bodkin, and "instead of partaking of the other dishes she only carried to her mouth, in the most deliberate manner, small crumbs of bread, scarcely enough to satisfy

[p. 233]

a sparrow. The husband discovers that Amine steals out at nights and on one occasion he follows her. Sidi Nouman is relating these adventures to the Caliph Haroun Alraschid and he continues: "I saw her go into a burying place near our house; I then gained the end of a wall, which reached the burying place, and after having taken proper care not to be seen, I perceived Amine with a female Ghoul. Your Majesty know that Ghouls of either sex are demons, which wander about the fields. They commonly inhabit ruinous buildings, whence they issue suddenly and surprise passengers, whom they kill and devour. If they fail in meeting with travellers, they go by night into burying places, to dig up dead bodies, and feed upon them. I was both surprised and terrified, when I saw my wife with this Ghoul. They dug up together a dead body, which had been buried that very day, and the Ghoul several times cut off pieces of the flesh, which they both ate, as they sat upon the edge of the grave. They conversed together with great composure, during their savage and inhuman repast; but I was so far off that it was impossible for me to hear what they said, which, no doubt, was as extraordinary as their food, at the recollection of which I still shudder. When they had finished their horrid meal, they threw the remains of the carcase into the grave, which they filled again with the earth they had taken from it." (Arabian Nights Entertainments, translated by the Rev. Edward Forster. New Edition. London, 1850, p. 399.)

When they are next at dinner Sidi Nouman remonstrating with his wife asks if the dishes before them are not as palatable as the flesh of a dead man. In a fury she dashes a cup of cold water into his face and bids him assume the form of a dog. After various adventures as a mongrel cur, he is restored to his original shape by a young maiden skilled in white magic, and this lady also provides him with a liquid which when thrown upon Amine with the words: "Receive the punishment of thy wickedness" transforms this dark sorceress into a mare. This animal is promptly led away to the stable.

This tale is not dissimilar to a history which is related by the Dominican, Mathias do Giraldo, who was an exorcist of the Inquisition, in his Histoire curieuse et pittoresque des sorciers, devins, magiciens, astrologues, voyants, revenants

[p. 234]

ames en peine, vampires, spectres, esprits malins, sorts jetes exorcismes, etc., depuis l'Antiquite jusqu'a nos jours. (Ed. Fornari Paris, 1846.)

It may be taken as an example of many Oriental fictions which are significant since they show the popular belief in vampires. About the beginning of the fifteenth century there lived in a pleasant suburb of Bagdad an elderly merchant who by his diligence throughout the years amassed a very considerable fortune, and who had no heir to his wealth save a son whom he tenderly loved. Wishing to see the young man happily married, he decided that he would arrange a match with the daughter of another merchant, a friend of old standing, who like himself had prospered exceedingly in commerce. Unfortunately the lady was far from comely, and upon being shown her portrait the youth, Abdul-Hassan by name, asked for a certain delay that he might consider the proposed union.

One evening when, according to his wont, he was rambling alone in the light of the moon through the country near his father's house, he heard a voice of enchanting sweetness which rendered with great skill and tenderness certain love lyrics to the accompaniment of a lute. The youth, leaping a garden wall, found that the singer was a maiden of extraordinary beauty, who was seated in the balcony of a small but elegant house and who, unconscious of her audience, continued to fascinate him by her enchanting voice almost as much as by her dazzling charms. On the following morning, after his devotions, Abdul-Hassan proceeded to make inquiries concerning the lady. But so retired a life did she lead that it was not for some while he was able to ascertain that she was unmarried and the only daughter of a philosopher, whose learning was said to be of the most profound, although he could bestow scant dowry upon his child, a paragon instructed in every art and science. From this moment the marriage which had been suggested became impossible to the young man, and realizing that concealment would be useless he boldly approached his father, confessed his love and besought that Ito might be allowed to choose his own wife. As until that time he had in every way obeyed his doting parent and the father found it impossible to deny a first request in so important a particular. Accordingly he determined to put

[p. 235]

no obstacle in the way of his son's happiness, and paying a visit to the house of the philosopher he formally demanded for his son the hand of this sage's daughter. After a brief courtship the marriage was celebrated with much splendour, and several weeks passed in an extreme of happiness. Abdul-Hassan presently noted that his wife, Nadilla, would never partake of an evening meal, for which singularity she excused herself on account of the somewhat frugal and severe regimen she had always followed under her father's roof. One night, however, after but a few weeks had passed, Abdul-Hassan, awakening from a deep sleep found that he was alone in the bed. At first he took no heed, but he grew anxious as the hours wore away, and his bride did not return until shortly before dawn. Resolved to fathom the mystery he still feigned to be fast in slumber, but on the following night when he had pretended to close his eyes he carefully watched the actions of his wife. After a little while, no sooner did she deem herself unobserved than throwing over her a long dark cloak she silently slipped away. He rose, hastily dressed himself, and followed her at some little distance. To his surprise she soon left the main streets of the town and made her way to a remote cemetery which had a very ill repute as being darkly haunted. Tracking her very carefully he perceived that she entered a large vault, into which with the utmost caution he ventured to steal a glance. It was dimly lighted by three funerary lamps, and what was his horror to behold his young and beautiful wife seated with a party of hideous ghouls, about to partake of their loathsome feast. One of these monsters brought in a corpse which had been buried that day, and which was quickly torn to pieces by the company, who devoured the reeking gobbets with every evidence of satisfaction, recreating themselves meanwhile with mutual embraces and the drone of a mocking dirge. Fearing that he might be caught and even destroyed, as soon as possible the youth escaped back to his home, and when his wife returned he appeared deep in unbroken sleep until the morning. Throughout the whole of that day he gave no sign of what he had discovered, but in the evening as Nadilla was excusing herself from joining him at supper, according to her custom, he insisted that she should eat with him. None the less she steadfastly declined, and at last filled with anger and

[p. 236]

disgust he cried: "So then you prefer to keep your appetite for your supper with the ghouls." Nadilla turned pale, her eyes blazed, and she shook with fury, but she vouchsafed no reply and retired in silence. However, about midnight when she thought that her husband was fast asleep she exclaimed: "Now wretch receive the punishment for thy curiosity." At the same time she set her knee firmly on his chest, seized him by the throat, with her sharp nails tore open a vein and began greedily to suck his blood. Slipping from beneath her he sprung to his feet, and dealt her a blow with a sharp poniard wherewith he had been careful to arm himself, so that she sank down dying at the side of the bed. He called for help, the wound in his throat was dressed and on the following day the remains of this vampire were duly interred.

However, three nights afterwards, although the doors were locked, Nadilla appeared exactly at twelve o'clock in her husband's room and attacked him with superhuman strength and ferocity, tearing at his throat. His weapon proved useless now and the one chance of safety lay in speedy flight. On the following day they caused her tomb to be opened, and the body was discovered apparently asleep since it seemed to breathe, the eyes were open and glared horribly, the lips were blub and red, but the whole grave was swimming in newly-spilled blood. After this they repaired to the house of the old philosopher and he, when pressed revealed a most remarkable history. He said that his daughter, who, as be suspected, had devoted herself to the study of black magic, had been married some few years previously to an officer of high rank at the court of the Caliph. She forthwith, however, gave herself over to the most abominable debauchery and had been killed by her outraged husband, but coming to life again in the grave she returned to her father's house and dwelt there. Upon hearing this tale it was determined that the body must be exhumed and cremated. A great pyre of dry wood was built with frankincense, aloes, and costly spices, the corpse, writhing and foaming at the mouth, was placed thereon and reduced to ashes, which were collected and scattered in the Tigris to be borne away and dispersed amid the waves of the Persian Sea.

This is an extremely typical legend of an Oriental vampire, and we find the same details repeated again and again both

[p. 237]

in Eastern stories, and in those imitations which were so popular throughout Europe when once Antoine Galland had given France his adaptation of The Arabian Nights. Thus in Les Contes Orientaux of the Comte de Caylus, which are related to a King of Persia, afflicted with insomnia, in order to lull him to sleep, there is the story of a vampire who is only able to prolong this existence by devouring from time to time the heart of a comely young man. It would not be difficult to quote similar fictions but they are often derived at second, or even third hand, and accordingly are of little evidential value merely being devised for the entertainment of the reader.

Throughout the ancient Empire of China and from the earliest times the belief in vampires is very widely spread, and sinologists have collected many examples, some of which occur in myth and legend and some of which were related as facts, showing us that the Chinese Vampire lacks few, if any of the horrible traits he exhibits in Greek and Slavonic superstition.[19]

The Chinese Vampire, Ch'ing Shih, is regarded as a demon who by taking possession of a dead body preserves it from corruption owing to his power of preying upon other corpses or upon the living. The Chinese believe that a man has two souls: the Hun, or superior soul, which partakes of the quality of good spirits; and the P'o, or inferior soul which is generally malignant and may be classed among the Kuei, or evil spirits. It is thought that whilst any portion of a body, even if it be a small bone, remained whole and entire the lower soul can utilize this to become a vampire, and particularly should the sun or the moon be allowed to shine fully upon an unburied body the P'o will thence acquire strength to issue forth and obtain human blood to build up the vitality of the vampire. The belief,--which has some natural foundation,--that the sun can convey strength and vitality, is to be found, in one form or another, in very many lands.

Thus among the Chacu Indians of South America a newly married couple must sleep the first night on a mare's or bullock's skin with their heads towards the west, for the marriage was not fully ratified, nor would the wife conceive until the rays of the sun had touched their feet the following morn.[20] During the Impregnation-rite (Garbhadhana) which was a part of old [p. 238] Hindoo marriages, the bride was required to look towards the sun or to be exposed to its rays so that she might become fruitful, and bear her husband stout boys.[21] In parts of Siberia it was the custom for a young couple to be led forth with some ceremony and rejoicing on the morning after the nuptials to greet the sun and bask in. his rays. This is still observed in Iran and Central Asia where it is believed that the clear beams of the sun will impregnate the bride.[22]

There is an old myth amongst the Indians of Guacheta that the daughter of a certain chief having climbed a hill top when she was touched by the first rays of the sun conceived and gave birth to an emerald, which in a day or two became a child who grew to be a mighty hero, Garanchacha, the Son of the Sun.[23] In Samoan legend a damsel named Mangamangai finds herself pregnant through gazing at the Sun at dawn, and bears a male baby, the Child of the Sun.[24]

The Phrygians thought of the Moon as a Man,[25] and the same idea prevails or formerly prevailed among the Greenlanders who imagined that the Moon was a brisk youth and he "now and then comes down to give their wives a visit and caress them; for which reason no woman dare sleep lying upon her back without she first spits upon her fingers and rubs her belly with it. For the same reason the young maids are afraid to stare long at the moon, imagining they may get a child by the bargain."[26] It is said that in some parts of Brittany it was once supposed by the peasants that a girl who exposed herself naked in the moonlight might find herself pregnant by it and give birth to a monster.[27] In England the same belief existed, and the old term "moon-calf," partus lunaris, signified a false conception--mola carnea, or foetus imperfectly formed, being supposed to be occasioned by the influence of the moon.[28]

In appearance the Chinese monster is very like the European vampire, for he has red staring eyes, huge sharp talons or crooked nails, but he is also often represented as having his body covered with white or greenish white hair. In his standard work on The Religious System of China, Dr. de Groot suggests that this last characteristic may be due to the fungi which grow so profusely on the cotton grave-clothes used by the Chinese. In some cases, if he be particularly potent for ill, the Vampire is able to fly with speed through the air, which

[p. 239]

may be compared with the faculty ascribed to vampires by Serbian legend, that of penetrating a house or vanishing away in a swiftly floating mist or vapour.

A few anecdotes, which I owe to Mr. G. Willoughby-Meade's Chinese Ghouls and Goblins,[29] will show the close similarity of vampirish activities in China to those which are recorded in the tales of other lands. In the South-West of China a man added to his other villainies the study of black magic which enabled him to perpetrate the most abominable crimes. Having been caught in the very act of murder he was executed but within three days he had returned to earth and was terrorizing the whole neighbourhood. With infinite difficulty he was yet again made a prisoner, and this time he was drowned in a mighty river, which, it was hoped, would bear his body away on its foaming stream. Yet the third day had hardly come when it was reported that he was scouring the countryside and committing fresh deeds of violence and blood. Once more was he taken and put to death, only to re-appear and infest both hamlets and villages. At last when he had been seized and his head struck from his body, this was buried on the spot where he had fallen, whilst the severed head was conveyed to a great distance. Within forty-eight hours he was again seen, apparently as powerful and savage as ever, but it was noted that his neck was marked around by a thin streak of red. At last his mother, whom he had beaten, resorted to a mandarin of great honour and worship and gave him a mysterious vase, which was hermetically sealed. She explained that she had reason to believe that this through enchantment contained the superior soul of her son, whilst the inferior soul continued to animate and would persist in re-energizing his body, influencing him to commit these atrocities. "If you but break this little vase," said she, "you can dissipate both souls, and then you may execute him once and for all." The vessel, tied fast and painted with cabalistic signs, was forthwith shattered into a thousand pieces. The offender was caught with far less difficulty than had been supposed possible, he was put to death, and in a few days the body crumbled to dust, nor did he ever again re-visit the earth.

Although this story may be held strictly not to be a Vampire legend it is certainly closely analogous, and the following

[p. 240]

narrative contains details which we meet in a thousand traditions of Hungary and Moldavia. A tutor named Liu, who was resident in a family that lived at some distance from his native place, was granted a holiday in order that he might perform his devotions at the tomb of his ancestors. On the morning when he was to resume his duties his wife entered his chamber very early to call him so that he might set forth in good time on his journey, but to her horror when she approached the bed she saw stretched thereon a headless body, although there was no spot or stain of blood. Half mad with fear she at once gave the alarm, yet the circumstances were so surprising that the Magistrate gave orders for her arrest upon the suspicion of having murdered her husband, and in spite of the fact that she vehemently protested her innocence she was detained in custody until the fullest inquiries had been made. However, nothing immediately transpired to throw light upon the mystery, and it was not until two or three days later that a neighbour who was gathering firewood on a hillside hard by perceived a great coffin with the lid partly raised, that seemed to have been curiously placed near an old and neglected grave. His utmost apprehensions being aroused he called a number of persons together from the village before he dared investigate the cause of this unusual circumstance. They approached the coffin and quickly removed the cover. Within reposed a corpse which had the face of a living man, unspeakably brutish and horrible. Its angry red eyes glared fiercely upon them, long white teeth champed the full red lips into a foam of blood and spittle, and within its lean bony hands, armed with long nails like the claws of a vulture it held the missing head of the unfortunate Liu. Some at once ran to the authorities, who upon hearing the report hastened to the hill with an armed guard, reaching the place well before sunset. It was found impossible to detach the head without severing the arms of the corpse, and when this was done the crimson gore gushed out in a great flood swilling the coffin. The head of Liu was found to be desiccated, sucked dry, and bloodless. Command was forthwith given that the coffin and its contents should at once be burned to ashes on a mighty pyre, whilst the tutor's widow was immediately released from custody.

Another story, which for its macabre details might have

[p. 241]

come from the pages of Apuleius and indeed something reminds us of the adventures of Aristomenes in the hostelry at Hypata, is that of four travellers who, late one night, when very weary and almost fainting for want of food, knocked at the door of an inn at Ts'ai Tien, Shan Tung. There was no accommodation to be had, every room was full, the place was crowded from cock-loft to cellar. However, our travellers were so wayworn that they refused to budge, and they pressed Boniface to find them at least some nook or corner, they were not nice and they did not mind what or where. At last after being persuaded with many words and well-nigh as many coins he very reluctantly led them to a lonely house at a little distance where, so he curtly muttered, his daughter-in-law had recently died. The room was only lighted by the flicker of one poor lamp which was all he could allow them and behind a heavy curtain was laid the uncoffined body of the girl. Four pallets, not altogether uncomfortable, with blankets and a rug or two had been provided, and in a very few minutes three of the travellers were fast asleep. A strange sense of evil seemed to oppress the fourth, and in spite of his fatigue fear prevented him from shutting his eyes for some little while. Yet the leaden weight that lay heavy on his lids could not be resisted long and he had already fallen into a doze when he heard what seemed to be an ominous rustling sound behind the curtain as though somebody was stirring very softly. Cold with horror, he peered out from half-closed eyes and he distinctly saw a horrible stealthy hand thrust itself from behind the curtain which was noiselessly drawn aside. There stood the livid corpse gazing into the room with a baleful glare. It approached softly and stooping over the three sleepers seemed to breathe thence upon their faces. The man who was awake horror-struck buried his head under the quilt. He felt that the corpse was bending over him, but after a few moments as he lay in an agony of terror there was the same gentle rustle as before, and anon cautiously peeping he noticed that it had returned to its bier and was stretched out stark and still.

He crept from his place and not daring to whisper shook each one of his comrades, but could not make them move. He then reached for his clothes, but the gentle rustling sounded once more and he realized that he had been observed. [p. 242] In a moment he flung himself back on the bed and drew the coverlet tightly over his face. A few moments later, he felt that the awful creature was standing by his side. However, after a scrutiny it seemed to retire again, and at length half-mad with fright he put out his hand, grasped some clothes which he huddled on and rushed bare-foot from the house, the door of which he was able to bolt and bar just as the corpse leaped at him with demoniacal fury. As he ran at full speed under the light of a waning moon to put as great a distance between himself and the haunted house as possible, he chanced to glance back and shrieked aloud with fear to find that the corpse was not only hard at his heels but gaining upon him rapidly. In desperation he fled behind a large willow-tree which grew at the side of the road, and as the corpse rushed in one direction he darted rapidly in the other. Fire seemed to glint from its red eyes, and as it swooped upon him with hideous violence he fell senseless to the ground, so that missing its aim it clasped the tree in a rigid gripe. At daybreak they were found, and when the corpse was pulled away it was seen that its fingers had impaled and riddled the tree with the force of a sharp wimble. The traveller after many months recovered his health, but his companions were all found to be lying dead, poisoned by the fetid breath of the Vampire. It should be remarked that here we have a detail, repulsive enough but altogether in keeping, which we also find in Hungary, namely the carrion stink of a vampire's breath. This certainly seems to be one of the most horrible, as it is one of the most significant stories in the whole library of Chinese vampire legend.

It hardly seems necessary to give in detail the history of Lu, who whilst watching one night in his orchard saw a terrible spectre, a hideous hag clothed in red. (It may be remarked that among certain tribes, such as the Borana Gallas and the Masai, warriors who have slain a foe in fight are painted with vermilion,[30] but it is curious to find that in China this evil apparition should have worn red since this is the lucky Yang, or solar colour, and considered to be of efficacy against the darker powers.) A thief who entered Ws garden to rob the fruit was discovered mad with terror since in one of the alleys he had encountered a man without a head. That part of the ground whence these phantoms seemed to spring was

[p. 243]

dug up, and they soon came across a red coffin containing the body of a woman, together with a black coffin in which was the corpse of a man who had been decapitated. Both bodies wore as perfectly preserved as though they had been buried that very day. The coffins and bodies were burned to ashes, whereupon the hauntings ceased.

This story might be paralleled from ghost tales the whole wide world over, but the following seems more particularly to belong to the Vampire legends. In the year 1751, a courier called Chang Kuei was sent express from Peking with a most urgent government dispatch. Late one night after he had passed through Liang Hsiang a fierce storm arose, and the gusts of wind completely extinguished his lantern. Fortunately he perceived at some little distance a humble khan whither he made his way as it was absolutely impossible to proceed in the darkness. The door was opened by a young girl who ushered him in and led his horse to a little stable. That night she admitted him to her bed promising to set him well on his way at dawn, but he did not wake in fact until many hours after, when he was not only benumbed with cold but to his surprise found himself lying stretched upon a tomb in a dense thicket, while his horse was tied to a neighbouring tree. His dispatch was not delivered until twelve hours after the time when it was due, and accordingly, being questioned and asked what accident had delayed him, he related the whole circumstance. The magistrate ordered that inquiries should be made locally, and they discovered that a girl, named Chang, a common strumpet, had hanged herself in the wood some years before, and that several persons had been led aside to enjoy her favours, and so been detained in the same way as the imperial courier. It was presently ordered that her tomb should be opened, and when this had been done the body was found therein perfectly preserved, plump and of a rosy complexion, as though she were but in a soft slumber. It was burned under the direction of the authorities, and from that time the spot ceased to be so terribly haunted.

These particulars are in some respects not altogether unlike a legend which is related of a certain S. Hilary,[31] who was one of the earliest missionaries in the Alpine districts of North Italy. The story goes that after they had journeyed for many days into the heart of a most desolate country

[p. 244]

they came one eve of S. John[32] to a remote village of some size as it appeared where the people were holding a midsummer festival, but with strange pagan rites. Here at eventide they were greeted by a grave man saluting them most courteously and saying that he was the steward of the Lady Pelagia, who wished to give them entertainment in her palace. The missionaries, grateful of this kindness, were received with gracious welcome, and the mistress of the house, a patrician who was of the most surpassing beauty, led them to a banquet which had been made ready. Here Hilary sat beside her and she talked of many things, so that the good Bishop was moved with a great tenderness at her youth and her beauty. She thanked them in all humility for the honour they had done her villa, pressed them to sojourn long as her guests, and asked them many questions which the learned man was delighted to answer, whilst his companions sat as it were spell-bound by her charms. Presently, however, the conversation took a deeper turn and the lady poised shrewd problems in science and in theology, difficulties which S. Hilary was well-nigh hard put to it to solve neatly and in simple words. Yet she spake with such modesty and with such an air of seeking to know more of divine things that the holy Hilary was glad to expound these matters, albeit he thought the argument savoured somewhat of sophistry and wordy skill. At length she said in honeyed phrase, "I pray thee, good father, rede me this question aright: What is the distance between heaven and earth?" The Saint gazed in some wonder, when suddenly a voice, menacing and loud, was heard to thunder through the hall: "Who can tell us that more certainly than Lucifer who fell from heaven?" The Lady Pelagia arose and flung up her lovely white arms with an exceeding bitter cry, but the voice continued: "Breathe on her, Hilary, breathe upon her the breath of the Name of Christ!" And the Bishop, rising, fortified himself with the sign of redemption and breathed upon the beautiful woman in the name of the Lord. Instantly the light died from her eyes and the life left her limbs, and there was no longer the Lady Pelagia but a statue of marble which glistened exceeding white and fair. And Hilary knew it to be a statue of the goddess whom men worshipped in Greece as Aphrodite, but in Rome as Venus, who is also Pelagia, born of the sea, At

[p. 245]

that moment the statue fell prone in a thousand pieces, the lamps were extinguished, and they saw in the east the grey of dawn. As the sun rose they beheld they were in the midst of the ruins of an ancient Roman city, and their feet stood in the courts of a marble temple, broken and decayed, o'ergrown with high grass and rankest weeds. This had been the fair hall where they feasted,[35] and all around were scattered the fragments of the statue of the Lady Pelagia. So they bent the knee in prayer and in thanksgiving that they had been delivered from the wiles of the Temptress, and anon they passed on their way lauding Christ in sweet hymns and melody of many canticles.

A Chinese story which is referred to the eighteenth century tells us of a Tartar family living at Peking, a house of the highest importance, whose son was betrothed to a lady of lineage equally aristocratic and equally ancient. Upon the wedding day, as is the Chinese custom, the bride was brought home in the ceremonial sedan-chair and this according to wont was carefully curtained and closed. It so happened that just as they were passing an old tomb there sprung up for a moment a sharp breeze which raised a cloud of thickest dust. When the cortege reached the bridegroom's house there stepped out of the sedan two brides identical in every detail both of feature and dress. It was impossible at that point to interrupt the nuptials, but later in the evening the most piercing screams were heard from the bridal chamber. When the door of the room had been quickly broken open the husband was stretched unconscious on the ground, while one of the brides lay with her eyes torn out and her face covered with blood. No trace of the second bride could be seen. But upon search being made with lanterns and torches a huge and hideous bird, mottled black and grey, armed with formidable claws and a beak like a vulture was discovered clinging to a beam of the roof. Before they could fetch weapons to attack it, the monstrous thing disappeared with exceeding swiftness through the door. When the husband recovered his senses he related that one of the brides bad suddenly struck him across the face with her heavily embroidered sleeve and that the jewels and passementerie stunned him for the moment. A second afterwards a huge bird swooped upon him and pecked out his eyes with its beak. So this horrible Vampire blinded

[p. 246]

the newly married pair. The circumstance of the dust-cloud is exactly similar to the mist wherein the Slavonic Vampire conveys himself, but the transformation of the Vampire into a bird is scarcely to be met with in European tradition. Crows, rooks, and ravens may sometimes vaguely held to be unlucky, but they are generally associated with weather-lore, although Justus Doolittle in his Social Life of the Chinese[34] says that the appearance of a crow at a wedding in China was always considered most ominous. In various parts of England, particularly in Essex, to see a crow flying alone, or if a crow flies towards you, it is considered a sign of bad luck. In Worcestershire they say that: "When a single crow flies over you, it is the sign of a funeral; two are a certain prognostication of a wedding."[35] The old saw is well-known with reference to crows:[36]

One's unlucky,
 Two's lucky,
 Three is health,
 Four is wealth,
 Five is sickness,
 Six is death.

The raven was often held to denote sickness and death and his croak sounded a knell. So in The Jew of Malta, Marlowe has:

Let the sad presaging raven that tells
 The sick man's passport in her hollow beak,
 And in the shadow of the silent night
 Doth shake contagion from her sable wings.[37]

On the other hand, rooks are far more lucky. In East Anglia, and indeed in many other parts of England, it bodes good fortune if rooks settle near a house,[38] for this bird always begins to build on a Sunday, and when rooks desert a rookery, it foretells the downfall of the family owning the property;[39] in some counties even they are said as a sign of grief to abandon their nests at the approach of death to the head of the family, and not to return to the ancestral domain until after the funeral at soonest. An actual instance was given of this occurrence as having happened in 1874, on the death of Sir John Walsham, at his seat, Knill Court, in Herefordshire.[40] In Cornwall rooks are believed to forsake an estate if on the death of the proprietor no heir can be found to succeed him. [p. 247] So it will be seen that a black bird need by no means invariably be of ill-omen. Propertius speaks of the crow as "innocent" (cornix immerita). In his denunciation of the bawd and witch Acanthis[41] he mentions that the eyes of the crow were often used to confect a magical charm.

Posset ut intentos astu caecare maritos,
     Cornicum immeritas eruit ungue genas,
 Consuluitque stryges nostro de sanguine, et in me
     Hippomanes foetae semina legit equae.

This passage is to be taken literally, although no doubt there is also an allusion to the proverb cornicum oculos configere "to delude or deceive the most wary," as we say "to catch a weasel asleep," which no doubt arose from its custom of attacking prey first in the eyes. Beroaldus and Passerat would explain the allusion of Propertius metaphorically, but this is only a secondary allusion.

There is related a curious story of a Chinese temple which was haunted by a Vampire. This fane was dedicated to three heroes of the third century A.D., who had been deified on account of their prowess during the civil wars of that most troubled period. It seems that the place was always kept locked except on the great solemnities of the spring and autumn sacrifices, and not even a priest would venture to sleep there. In the year 1741 a shepherd asked and obtained permission to spend his nights in the shelter of the temple. Many people told him that it was terribly haunted, but nobody seemed exactly to know in what manner. Accordingly taking his big leather whip and having provided himself with a lantern, after he had collected his flock at evening he entered and proceeded to settle for the night. However, when all was darkest and most still it seemed that something stirred near the three statues. On a sudden there rose up out of the ground near the pedestal a very tall man of hideous aspect, gaunt and lean, his body covered with matted green hair. His glowing eyes seemed to flash fire when he caught sight of the intruder, and darting forth a claw-like hand armed with the nails of a bird of prey he almost succeeded in seizing the shepherd, who leapt nimbly to one side and lashed out with his heavy whip. The spectre, however, grinned hideously showing rows of shark-like teeth and the heavy leather fell

[p. 248]

harmlessly upon him. Rushing to the door the shepherd was just in time to evade a second clutch. Hardly knowing what he did he clambered up a large tree in the courtyard, and looking down he saw that the horrible figure was standing in the doorway glowering with rage, but did not appear able to advance beyond the threshold. All night the poor wretch clung there, and as the day broke the spectre vanished into the recesses of the building. It was early when various persons came to inquire how the bold man had fared, and finding him half distraught with terror they soon learned what had happened during the night. The next proceeding was to examine the base of the statute, and when this had been cautiously done it was remarked that a curious black vapour rose from the ancient fissures in the stone. The local authorities investigated these circumstances, and gave instructions that the pedestal should be broken down to discover what was lurking beneath it. After digging a little depth they found the body of a tall man of most hideous appearance, fetid and desiccated, covered with a green pile, just as the shepherd had described. The magistrates immediately commanded that a pyre should be built. The corpse was set thereon, and torches applied at every corner. The Vampire writhed and whistled with a screeching sound; blood poured from it in streams, and the bones crackled sharply. Once the body had been consumed, the hauntings entirely ceased but it was long before the temple lost its sombre reputation.[42]

It will be seen that the Chinese beliefs are linked with the Babylonian ideas on the one hand, for as the Ekimmu was driven from the Underworld by hunger and thirst when no offerings were made at the tomb, and it came forth to wander on earth and attack those whom it might devour, so ghosts enduring the Buddhist purgatory of physical want are obviously imagined to seize living persons that they may refresh and energize themselves with human blood. Again, as in Western Europe to-day, so in China, the Vampire is most powerful for evil between sunset and sunrise. His dominion commences when the sun sinks to rest, and he is driven back to the lair of his grave with the first rays of the dawn. One prominent feature of the European Vampire, a circumstance which affords an additional reason why he is dreaded and shunned,

[p. 249]

perhaps even more than any other demon or phantom of the night is that he infects with his pollution his luckless victim who in his turn also becomes a vampire. In China this does not appear to be a feature of the Vampire manifestation. Something of the kind, however, may be traced among the Karens of Burma. For a Karen wizard will snare the wandering soul of a sleeper and by his art transfer it to the body of a dead man. The latter, accordingly, returns to life as the former expires. But the friends of the sleeper in their turn engage another sorcerer who will catch the soul of another sleeper, and it is he who dies as the first sleeper comes to life. Apparently this process may be continued almost indefinitely, and so it may be presumed that there takes place an indeterminate succession of death and resuscitations.

With regard to another Chinese Ghoul, Mr. Willoughby-Meade tells us: "the Preta, or suffering soul of a suicide seeking a substitute, is not quite a parallel to the true vampire.[43]

The Preta also appears in Southern India, but the Indian Vampire which may now be briefly considered, however interesting, will hardly be found to have those features in common with the Western Vampires as are so strikingly to be noticed in the Chinese variety. Indeed, it may be said that the Indian Vampire is practically a demon, and that only in a few minor details does he essentially approximate to the true European species. Mr. N. M. Penzer in a note upon The Ocean of Story says: "As far as the Ocean of Story is concerned, the 'Demons' which appear are Rakshasa, Pisacha, Vetala, Bhuta, Dasyus, Kumbhanda and Kushmanda. Of these that most resembling the European Vampire is probably the Rakshasa," of which a very horrible description is given.

"Now the Vetala, which is seen in all its glory in the present work (The Ocean of Story) is a curious individual. He is the Deccan Guardian, in which capacity he sits on a stone smeared with red paint, or is found in the prehistoric stone circles scattered over the hills. In fiction, however, he appears as a mischievous goblin, and that is how we find him in the Ocean. A study of his actions will show him to be quite above the ordinary run of such demons. He is always ready to play some rather grim practical joke on any unwary person who chances to wander near burning-ghats at night, for here are corpses lying about or hanging from stakes, and what

[p. 250]

more effective means could be formed to frighten the life out of humans than by tenanting a corpse!

"I would describe the Vetala as 'sporting,' in that he has an inate admiration for bravery and is perfectly ready to own himself beaten, and even to help and advise. In the Vetala tales . . . we shall see that as soon as the Vetala discovers the persistence and bravery of Trivikramasena, he at once warns him of the foul intents of the mendicant. We have also seen that even the Rakshasa can become quite tame, and act the part of a kind of Arabian jinn who appears on thought. Thus we see that the Vetala of Hindu fiction is by no means an exact counterpart of the blood-sucking vampire of Eastern Europe who never had a good intention or decent thought in his whole career."[44]

In a private letter to myself Mr. Penzer writes: "It is the Rakshasas who are the more prominent among malicious demons. Their name means 'the harmers' or 'destroyers' as their particular delight is to upset sacrifices, worry ascetics, animate dead bodies, etc. They date in India from Rig-Vedic days.

"In the Atharva Veda they are described as deformed, of blue, green, or yellow colour, with long slit eyes. Their nails are poisonous and are dangerous to the touch. They eat human and horse flesh, the former of which they procure by prowling round the burning-ghats at night. They possess great wealth, and bestow it on those they favour. Their chief is Ravana, the enemy of Rama. See Crooke, Folk-Lore of Northern India, Vol. I, p. 246 sqq.

"The Pisachas are very similar to the above, while the Vetalas are perhaps more like Vampires."

In the Preface to Vikram and the Vampire, "Tales of Hindu Devilry" (Adapted by Richard F. Burton), London, 1870, p. xiii, Sir Richard Burton says: "The Baital-Pachisi, or Twenty-five (tales of a) Baital--a vampire or evil spirit which animates dead bodies--is an old and thoroughly Hindu repertory. It is the rude beginning of that fictitious history which ripened to the Arabian Nights' Entertainments, and which, fostered by the genius of Boccaccio, produced the romance of the chivalrous days, and its last development, the novel--that prose-epic of modern Europe." Baital in Sanskrit is Vetala-pancha-Vinshati. "Baital" is the modern

[p. 251]

form of "Vetala." When the Raja encounters the Baital it was hanging "head downwards, from a branch a little above him. Its eyes which were wide open, were of a greenish-brown, and never twinkled; its hair also was brown and brown was its face--these several shades which, notwithstanding, approached one another in an unpleasant way, as in an over-dried cocoa-nut. Its body was thin and ribbed like a skeleton or a bamboo framework, and as it held on to a bough, like a flying-fox, by the toe-tips, its drawn muscles stood out as if they were ropes of coir. Blood it appeared to have none, or there would have been a decided determination of that curious juice to the head; and as the Raja handled its skin, it felt icy cold and clammy as might a snake. The only sign of life was the whisking of a ragged little tail much resembling a goat's. Judging from these signs the brave king at once determined the creature to be a Baital--a Vampire."

A belief in Vampires is very firmly established among the Malays of the Peninsula, and there are a number of magic rites which must be performed to protect both women and children." Probably the spirit most resembling a European Vampire is the Penanggalan, which is supposed to resemble a trunkless human head with the sac of the stomach attached thereto, and which flies about seeking an opportunity of sucking the blood of infants. There are, however, other spectres which are dangerous to children. There is the Bajang, which generally takes the form of a polecat,[46] and disturbs the household by mewing like a huge eat. The Langsuir is seen as an owl with hideous claws which perches and hoots in a most melancholy way upon the roof, Her daughter, a still-born child, is the Pontianak or Madi-anak, who is also a night-owl. The Polong is a kind of goblin, and the Pelesit corresponds most closely to the familiar of the English witches.

The Bajang is generally said to be a male demon and the Langsuir is considered as the female species. Both of these spirits are supposed to be a kind of demon-vampire, and are often handed down in certain families as heirlooms, in exactly the same way as in English trials we find that the familiar descended from mother to daughter. Thus at Chelmsford "at an examination and confession of certaine Wytches,"[47] 26 July, 1566,[47] Elizabeth Francis confessed to various

[p. 252]

"vilanies," amongst the rest that "she learned this arte of witchcraft at the age of xii yeres of hyr grandmother whose nam mother Eue of Hatfyelde Peuerell, disseased. Itm when shee taughte it her, she counseiled her in the lykenesse of a whyte spotted Catte." In 1582, during the celebrated St. Osyth prosecutions Ales Hunt confessed that she entertained two familiars, and "saith, that her sister (named Margerie Sammon) hath also two spirites like Toads, the one called Tom, and the other Roddyn: And saith further, her sayde Syster and shee had the sayd spyrites of their Mother, Mother Barnes." That a familiar should have been handed down in this manner seems to have been a well-known custom among the Lapps, for in his notes upon the De Prodigiis of Julius Obsequens[48] J. Scheffer[49] quoting Tornaeus says: "the Laplanders bequeath their Demons as part of their inheritence, which is the reason that one family excells another in this magical art."

With regard to the Bajang, Sir Frank Swettenham further gives the following account: "Some one in the village falls ill of a complaint the symptoms of which are unusual; there may be convulsions, unconsciousness, or delirium, possibly for some days together or with intervals between the attacks. The relatives will call in a native doctor, and at her (she is usually an ancient female) suggestion, or without it, an impression will arise that the patient is the victim of a bajang. Such an impression quickly develops into certainty, and any trifle will suggest the owner of the evil spirit. One method of verifying this suspicion is to wait till the patient is in a state of delirium, and then to question him or her as to who is the author of the trouble. This should be done by some independent person of authority, who is supposed to be able to ascertain the truth.

"A further and convincing proof is then to call in a 'Pawang' skilled in dealing with wizards (in Malay countries they are usually men), and if he knows his business his power is such that he will place the sorcerer in one room, and, while he in another scrapes an iron vessel with a razor, the culprit's hair will fall off as though the razor had been applied to his head instead of to the vessel! That is supposing that he is the culprit; if not, of course he will pass through the ordeal without damage.

[p. 253]

I have been assured that the shaving process is so efficacious that, as the vessel represents the head of the person standing his trial, wherever it is scraped the wizard's hair will fall off in a corresponding spot. It might be supposed that under these circumstances the accused is reasonably safe, but this test of guilt is not always employed. What more commonly happens is that when several cases of unexplained sickness have occurred in a village, with possibly one or two deaths, the people of the place lodge a formal complaint against the supposed author of these ills, and desire that he be punished.

"Before the advent of British influence it was the practice to kill the wizard or witch whose guilt had been established to Malay satisfaction, and such executions were carried out not many years ago.

"I remember a case in Perak less than ten years ago, when the people of an up-river village accused a man of keeping a bajang, and the present Sultan, who was then the principal Malay judge in the State, told them he would severely punish the bajang if they would produce it. They went away hardly satisfied, and shortly after made a united representation to the effect that if the person suspected were allowed to remain in their midst they would kill him. Before anything could be done they put him, his family, and effects on a raft and started them down the river. On their arrival at Kuala Kangsar the man was given an isolated hut to live in, but not long afterwards he disappeared."[50]

The same authority tells us: "Langsuior, the female familiar, differs hardly at all from the bajang, except that she is a little more baneful, and when under the control of a man he sometimes becomes the victim of her attractions, and she will even bear him elfin children." The original Langsuir, legend says, was a woman of the most superb beauty, who died from the shock of hearing that her child was still-born, and had taken the shape of the Pontianak. When this terrible news was reported to her, she "clapped her hands," and without further warning "flew whinnying away to a tree, upon which she perched." She always wears a robe of exquisite green. Her tapering nails are of extraordinary length, which is considered among the Malays a mark of distinction and beauty, and which may be compared with the

[p. 254]

talons of the European Vampire. She has long jet black tresses which flow down even as far as her ankles, but these serve to conceal the hole in the back of her neck through which she sucks the blood of children. Yet her vampirish qualities can be destroyed if the right means are adopted, and in order to effect this she must be caught, and her nails and flowing hair cut quite short, the tresses being stuffed into the hole of her neck, in which case she will become quiet and domesticated, just like an ordinary woman, and she will be content to lead a normal life for many years together. Story relates that the Langsuir returned to civilization until she was allowed to dance at a village festival, when for some reason her savage nature re-asserted itself and with wild screams she flew off into the depths of the dark forests from whence she had come. Dr. Skeat says that a Malay peasant once told him how exceedingly fond of fish these women vampires are, and how not infrequently they may be seen "sitting in crowds on the fishing-stakes at the river mouth awaiting an opportunity to steal the fish." This seems completely to explain the following rune by the recital of which a Langsuir may be laid:

O ye mosquito-fry at the river's mouth
 When yet a great way off, ye are sharp of eye,
 When near, ye are hard of heart.
 When the rock in the ground opens of itself
 Then (and then only) be emboldened the hearts of my foes and opponents!
 When the corpse in the ground opens of itself
 Then (and then only) be emboldened the hearts of my foes and opponents!
 May your heart be softened when you behold me,
 By grace of this power that I use, called Silam Bayu.

The "mosquito-fry at the river's mouth" is no doubt an allusion to the Langsuir who were swarming round the fishing-stakes, endeavouring to devour the fish.

Sir William Maxwell in the Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Singapore (1878-1899), No. VII, p. 28, thus describes the Langsuir: "If a woman dies in childbirth, either before delivery or after the birth of a child, and before the forty days of uncleanness have expired, she is popularly supposed to become a langsuyar, a flying demon of the nature of the 'white lady' or 'banshee.' To prevent

[p. 255]

this a quantity of glass beads are put in the mouth of the corpse, a hen's egg is put under each arm-pit, and needles are placed in the palms of the hands. It is believed that if this is done the dead woman cannot become a langsuyar, as she cannot open her mouth to shriek (ngilai) or wave her arms as wings, or open and Aut her hands to assist her flight."

The Penanggalan is a sort of monstrous Vampire who delights in killing young children. One legend says that long ago in order to perform a religious penance (dudok bertapa) a woman was seated in one of the large wooden vats which are used by the Malays for holding the vinegar which proceeds from draining off the sap of the thatch-palm (menyadap nipah). Quite unexpectedly a man came along, and finding her seated there, asked: "What are you doing here?" She replied very shortly: "What business is that of yours?" But being very much startled, she leaped up and in the excitement of the moment kicked her own chin with such force that the skin split all round her neck and her head with the sac of the stomach hanging to it actually became separated from the body, and flew off to perch upon the nearest tree. Ever since that time she has existed as a malign and dangerous spirit, brooding over the house, screeching (mengilai) whenever a child is born, or trying to force her way up through the floor in order to drain its blood.

Among the Karens of Burma we meet with the Kephn, a demon which under the form of a wizard's head and a stomach attached devours human souls.

Mr. Hugh Clifford in his study In Court and Kampong, London, 1897, speaks of "The Penangal, that horrible wraith of a woman who has died in child-birth, and who comes to torment small children in the guise of a fearful face and bust, with many feet of bloody, trailing entrails in her wake."

The following description which is almost entirely parallel to that of the most deadly European Vampires is quoted by Dr. Skeat in his Malay Magic, London, 1900, p. 328, n.1.:

"He" (Mr. M.) said, "Very well then, tell me about the penanggalan only, I should like to hear it and write it down in English so that Europeans may know how foolish those persons are who believe in such things." I then drew a picture representing a woman's bead and neck only, with the intestines hanging down. Mr. M, caused this to be engraved on wood

[p. 256]

by a Chinese, and inserted it with the story belonging to it in a publication called the Anglo-Chinese Gleaner. And I said, "Sir, listen to the account of the penanggalan. It was originally a woman. She used the magic arts of a devil in whom she believed, and she devoted herself to his service night and day until the period of her agreement with her teacher had expired and she was able to fly. Her head and neck were then loosened from the body, the intestines being attached to them, and hanging down in strings. The body remained where it was. Wherever the person whom it wished to injure happened to live, thither flew the head and bowels to suck his blood, and the person whose blood was sucked was sure to die. If the blood and water which dripped from the intestines touched any person, serious illness followed and his body broke out in open sores. The penanggalan likes to suck the blood of women in child-birth. For this reason it is customary at all houses where a birth occurs to hang up jeruju [a kind of thistle] leaves at the doors and windows, or to place thorns wherever there is any blood, lest the penanggalan should come and suck it, for the penanggalan has, it seems, a dread of thorns in which her intestines may happen to get caught. It is said that a penanggalan once came to a man's house in the middle of the night to suck his blood, and her intestines were caught in some thorns near the hedge, and she had to remain there until daylight, when the people saw and killed her.

"The person who has the power of becoming a penanggalan always keeps at her house a quantity of vinegar in a jar or vessel of some kind. The use of this is to soak the intestines in, for when they issue forth from the body they immediately swell up and cannot be put back, but after being soaked in vinegar they shrink to their former size and enter the body again. There are many people who have seen the penanggalan flying along with its entrails dangling down and shining at night like fire-flies.

"Such is the story of the penanggalan as I have heard it from my forefathers but I do not believe it in the least. God forbid that I should." (Hikayat Abdullah, p. 143.)

It may be remembered that the Greeks thought that branches of buckthorn (rhamnus) fastened to doors and windows kept out witches, as Discorides tells us, De Materia

[p. 257]

Medica, I, 119. At the time of woman's delivery also they smeared pitch upon the houses to keep out the demons (eis apelasin tun daimonun) who are wont to attack mothers at this period, which the patriarch, Photius, notes in his Lexicon (ninth century) when he discusses the word rhamnos. The Serbians to-day paint crosses with tar on the doors of houses and barns to guard them from vampires. On Walpurgis Night the Bohemian peasant never neglects to strew the grunsel of his cow-sheds and stables with hawthorn, branches of gooseberry bushes, and the briars of wild rose-trees so that the witches or vampires will got entangled amid the thorns and can force their way no further. The tar of the Serbian will glue them fast in like manner. It was formerly believed among the Scotch Highlanders, and the custom may yet linger that tar daubed on a door kept away the witches. The horse shoe, at any rate, is still commonly to be seen so affixed, not as in England for good luck, but with the very definite object of protecting the house against warlocks and witches. Alexander Burnes, Travels in Bokhara, 1834, I, p. 202, says: "Passing a gate of the city of Peshawur I observed it studded with horse-shoes, which are as superstitious emblems in this country as in remote Scotland." The bawds of Amsterdam believed that a horse-shoe, which had either been found or stolen, placed on the chimney hearth would bring many clients to their stew and keep away witches, say the author of Le Putanisme d'Amsterdam, 1687. "The horse-shoe," writes William Henderson in his Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders, London, 1866, "is said to owe its virtue chiefly to its shape. Any other object presenting two points or forks, even the spreading out of the two forefingers, is said to possess similar occult power, though not in so high a degree as the rowan wish-rod. In Spain and Italy forked pieces of coral are in high repute as witch-scarers. A crescent formed of two boars' tusks is frequently appended to the necks of mules as a charm," In many countries mountain ash (or rowan) is held to be most efficacious against witches and vampires. If an Irish housewife ties a sprig of rowan on the handle of the churn-dash when she is churning no witch can steal her butter. In a local ballad made on the case of Mary Butters, the Carnmoney witch, when in August, 1807, Alexander [p. 258] Montgomery's cow was enchanted so no butter could be made from her milk the following lines occur:

It happened for a month or two
     Aye when they churn'd they got nae butter.
 Rown-tree tied in the cow's tail,
     And vervain glean'd about the ditches;
 These freets and charms did not prevail,
     They could not banish the auld witches.

Gay in his Fables, XXIII, "The Old Woman and her Cats" mentions the horse-shoe as a protection against witches:

Straws laid across, my pace retard;
 The horse-shoe's nail'd (each threshold's guard);
 The stunted broom the wenches hide,
 For fear that I should up and ride.
 They stick with pins my bleeding seat,
 And bid me show my secret teat.

In Polynesia we pretty generally find the tu, who under some aspects is a kind of vampire-demon and Dr. R. H. Codrington in his The Melanesians: Studies in their Anthropology and Folk Lore, says, "There is a belief in the Banks Islands in the existence of a power like that of Vampires. A man or a woman would obtain this power out of a morbid desire for communion with some ghost, and in order to gain it would steal and eat a morsel. The ghost then of the dead man would join in a close friendship with the person who had eaten, and would gratify him by afflicting any one against whom his ghostly power might be directed. The man so afflicted would feel that something was influencing his life, and would come to dread some particular person among his neighbours, who was, therefore, suspected of being a talamaur. This latter when seized and tried in the smoke of strong-smelling leaves would call out the name of the dead man whose ghost was his familiar, often the names of more than one, and lastly the name of the man who was afflicted. The same name talamaur was given to one whose soul was supposed to leave the grave and absorb the lingering vitality of a freshly dead person. There was a woman, some years ago, of whom the story is told that she made no secret of doing this, and that once on the death of a neighbour she gave notice that she would go in the night and eat the vitality. The friends of the deceased therefore kept watch in the house

[p. 259]

where the corpse lay, and at dead of night heard a scratching at the door, followed by a rustling noise close by the body. One of them threw a stone and seemed to hit the unknown thing; and in the morning the talamaur was found with a bruise on her arm, which she confessed was caused by a stone thrown at her whilst she was eating the vitality. Such a woman would feel a morbid delight in the dread which she inspired, and would also be secretly rewarded by some whose covert spite she gratified."

In his Ashanti Proverbs, "Translated from the Original (The Primitive Ethics of a Savage People)," p. 48, Mr. R. Sutherland Rattray speaks of the Asasabonsam, "a monster of human shape, which living far in the depths of the forest, is only occasionally met by hunters. It sits on tree tops, and its legs dangle down to the ground and have hooks for feet which pick up any one who comes within reach. It has iron teeth. There are female, male, and little sasabonsam." Mr. Rattray also describes the obayifo, which word is derived from bayi, "sorcery." This is "a kind of human vampire whose chief delight is to suck the blood of children, whereby the latter pine and die. Men and women possessed of this power and credited with volitant powers, being able to quit their bodies and travel great distances in the night. Besides sucking the blood of their victims, they are supposed to be able to extract the sap and juices of crops. Cases of coco blight are ascribed to the work of the obayifo. These witches are supposed to be very common, and a man never knows but that his friend or even his wife may be one. When prowling at night they are supposed to emit a phosphorescent light. An obayifo in every day life is supposed to be known by having sharp, shifty eyes, that are never at rest, also by showing an undue interest in food, and always talking about it, especially meat, and hanging about when cooking is going on, all of which habits are therefore purposely avoided."

A striking similarity to the beliefs of the Malay Peninsula is to be traced among the horrible superstitions of ancient Mexico. The Mexican religion presents an extremely complex system with a crowded pantheon and displays a corresponsive ceremonial of the most elaborate nature and exacting service. There existed a certain kind of monachism, and the sacerdotal caste is particularly distinguished by being

[p. 260]

deeply learned in myth and symbolism reduced to the most unyielding dogma, thus involving practices, sometimes pleasing and poetical, sometimes abhorent in their excess of savagery and barbarism, but which one and all were-not merely so much upheld as rigorously enforced by the state authorities of a great empire, which determined an essential unity of religious conception throughout its furthermost borders. There were of course, beneficent deities such as the Sun god, Tonatiuh, who was also called Xipilli "the Turquoise," whose festival Clavigero tells us[51] "which was celebrated every fifty-two years, was by far the most splendid and most solemn, not only among the Mexicans, but likewise among all the nations of that Empire, or who were neighbouring to it . . . every place resounded with the voice of gladness and mutual congratulations on account of the new century which heaven had granted him. The illuminations made during the first nights were extremely magnificent; their ornaments of dress, entertainments, dances, and public games were superiorly solemn." But even here we find that human sacrifice was offered. There were also goddesses such as Xochiquetzal, "Flower Feather" who is considered by Diego Munoz Camargo as corresponding to Venus, and whom he thus describes: "She dwells above the nine heavens in a very pleasant and delectable place, accompanied and guarded by many people and waited on by other women of the rank of goddesses, where are many delights of fountains, brooks, flower-gardens, and without her wanting for anything."[52] There was also Macuilxochitl, "Five Flower," the god of pleasure, whose festival, one of the movable feasts, was the Xochilhuitl, the Feast of Flowers, concerning which Sahagun says that: "the great folk made a feast, dancing and singing in honour of this sign, decorating themselves with their feathers and all their grandeur for the areyto [sacred dance]. At this feast the king bestowed honours upon warriors, musicians and courtiers."[53] There exists an elegant little song of this debonair god who is the Lord of Music and Games, which commences thus:

Out of the place of flowers I come,
 Priest of the Sunset, Lord of the Twilight.

Quails were offered to him at midday, but even this solemnity was not without some sombre incident, for it was

[p. 261]

the occasion when all the nobles in Mexico who lived near the frontiers of an enemy brought the slaves whom they had captured to the capital for sacrifice.

When we find that some circumstance of cruelty even intrudes upon the worship of the kindliest and most joyous gods it may well be supposed that the demonology of Mexico is grim in the extreme, nor can we be at all astonished that the first explorers and the earlier Spanish authors again and again expressed their horror of the terrible imagination and primitive fears which peopled the gloom of a Mexican midnight with the abominable shapes of foulest devils and vengeful dead. Probably the most horrible, as he is possibly the most powerful, of the Mexican gods was Tezcatlipoca of whom Bernal Diaz says: "And this Tezcatepuca was the god of hell and had charge of the souls of the Mexicans, and his body was girt with figures like little devils with snakes' tails."[54] This hideous figure, it is very significant to remark, particularly favoured cross-roads, where the Ciuateteo, who are vampire-witches, held their sabbat. Tezcatlipoca was also known as Yaotzin, "The Enemy" and in a thousand horrid phantom shapes he haunted the woods during the dark hours. He bore in his hand a magical instrument. From him proceeded those eerie and mysterious sounds which are heard at night and which fill with strange forebodings not only luckless travellers but even those who shudder when sheltered in their homes. He would often utter the howl of the jaguar, and the ill-omened cry, "yeccan, yeccan" the screech of the uactli bird, a species of hawk, whose note sounded a swift death to him who heard it. Another of his guises was the Youaltepuztli, or "ax of the night." When all was most silent and most still there might be heard near some remote temple a sound as if an ax were being laid to the roots of the trees. Should anyone dare to investigate the cause of the noise he was suddenly caught by Tezcatlipoca who appeared as a decomposing headless corpse in whose mouldering breast were set "two little doors meeting in the centre," and it was the swift opening and shutting of these which produced the sound of a man hewing down the trees. If some brave hero could plunge his hand into the aperture and clutch the black heart he might demand what ransom he would ere he let the demon go. But he must be one to whom fear was unknown

[p. 262]

for most persons who caught sight of this hideous phantom perished in an extremity of terror.

The true Mexican Vampires were the Ciuateteo, whom we have mentioned above, women who had died in their first labour,[55] and over whose revels this devil-deity presided. They were also known as the Ciuapipiltin, or princesses, in order to placate them by some honourable designation, as in the same way Ciuateteo signifies "Right honourable mother." Of these Sahagun says: "The Ciuapipiltin, the noble women, were those who had died in childbed. They were supposed to wander through the air, descending when they wished to the earth to afflict children with paralysis and other maladies. They haunted cross-roads to practise their maleficent deeds, and they had temples built at these places where bread offerings were made to them, also the thunder stones which fall from the sky. Their faces were white, and their arms and hands were coloured with a, white powder ticitl (chalk)." These haunting women celebrated their own sabbat, and it is curious to remark that it was thought of as being a meeting of the dead rather than, as in Europe, an infernal company of the living. The representations of the Ciuateteo in the ancient paintings are extremely hideous and repulsive. They often wear the dress and are distinguished by the characteristics of the goddess, Tlazolteotl, whose priests were the Cuecuesteca, and who was the goddess of all sorcery, lust, and evil. The learned friar who interpreted the Codex Telleriano-Renensis certainly speaks of the Ciuateteo as witches, who flew through the air upon their broom-sticks and met at cross-roads, a rendezvous presided over by their mistress Tlazolteotl. It may be remarked that the broom-stick is her especial symbol, and that she is often associated with the snake and the screech-owl. Under one aspect, also, she is regarded as a moon-goddess, and may, indeed, be fairly closely paralleled with the Greek Hecate. These animals, which were considered unlucky also often accompanied the Ciuateteo, who, moreover, carried a witch's broom, and upon whose garments crossbones were painted. They were essentially malignant, and sought to wreak their vengeance upon all whom they might meet during the dark hours. In the native huts the doors were carefully barred and every crack or cranny carefully filled up to prevent

[p. 263]

these vampire-witches from obtaining entrance. Occasionally, however, they would attack human dwellings, and did they obtain ingress the children of the household would pine and dwindle away owing to the blight that these loathsome creatures cast upon them. Accordingly in their shrines where four cross-roads met men heaped up enticing and substantial food offerings, in order that these malignant dead might so satisfy their hunger that they would not seek to make an onset upon the living. One explanation why the shrine should be at cross-roads was in order that the Ciuateteo might be confused and not knowing which way to take to the nearest human habitation, be surprised by dawn before she could set out to seize her prey. We find this exact reason is given in Greece and in other countries for burying the body of a suicide, who will almost certainly become a vampire, at four cross-roads.

With regard to Mexican Vampire-witches, who it appears partook in almost equal quantities the nature of both these evil things, Sahagun records: "It was said that they vented their wrath on people and bewitched them. When anyone is possessed by, the demons, with a wry mouth and disturbed eyes, with clenched, hands and inturned feet, wringing his hands and foaming at the mouth, they say that he has linked himself to a demon; the Ciuateteo, housed by the cross-ways, has taken his form."

But this was not the only vampire known to the mythology of Mexico. The Lord of Mictlampa (the Region of the Dead) certainly has vampirish attributes. He is often depicted as a complete skeleton (Codex Borgia, sheet 14), and sometimes he has a bunch or broom of malinalli grass, which was associated with witchcraft. In another representation he appears with a skeleton head but a black body, and at the side is seen a skull swallowing a man who falls into its bony jaws. In the Codex Magliabecchiano[56] he is depicted as a blue-grey form with enormous talons upon his hands that are markedly reminiscent of the claws of a Vampire, He sits in the portico of a dark temple and before him are his worshippers, a number of men and women, who feast upon human flesh, tearing heads, legs, and arms which they snatch from several earthen vessels. His wife was Mictecaciuatl, "Lady of the Place of the Dead," and she is often represented as wearing for ornaments the paper

[p. 264]

flags, which were generally put upon corpses prepared for cremation. She is sometimes seen to be thrusting a mummy into the earth, and there is a reference to her as the "earth-monster."

It would, perhaps, be hardly too much to say that in ancient Mexico all magicians were regarded as Vampires, a tradition which long survived even after the conversion of the country so that one of the regular questions which the Spanish priests used to put to those of whose faith they were suspicious was: "Art thou a sorcerer? Dost thou suck the blood of others?" That such interrogations were not superfluous is shown by the terrible occurrence at the end of the sixteenth century when Cosijopii, formerly King of Tehuantepec, was discovered amid a throng of his ancient courtiers and a concourse of people taking part in an idolatrous ceremony of peculiar horror. Even in the seventeenth century the priests of the Province of Oaxaca learned that numbers of Indians congregated secretly at night to worship their idols. It is true that the famous letter of Bishop Zumarraga to the Chapter of Tolosa, written in 1531 says that: "quingenta deorum templa sunt destructa et plusquam uicesies mille figurae daemonum, quas adorabant, fractae et combustae." But Fray Mendieta mentions certain idols of paper[57] which seemed to have been for a while preserved, and possibly new figures were clandestinely sculptured in the traditional manner to supply the place of those which had been so properly and so religiously destroyed. Such ceremonials were, of course, clear witchcraft, and the Mexican sorcerer or naualli seems to have been credited with taking the shape of a wer-coyote, the prairie wolf, as well as to have practised vampirism. So here too in Mexico we find a close connexion between the wer-animal and the Vampire. Sahagun notes: "The naualli or magician is he who frightens men and sucks the blood of children during the night." It appears that these sorcerers lived in separate huts built of wood very brightly painted, and that those who wished to bargain with them were wont to resort to these accursed houses under the cover of dark. Not superfluously then does the Vade mecum of a missionary who was engaged in the work of evangelizing the native Mexicans include such questions as: "Art thou a diviner?" "Dost thou suck the blood of others, or dost thou wander about at night, calling upon the demons to help thee?"

[p. 265]

Of all the many and dark superstitions that prevail in the West Indies none is more deeply rooted than the belief in the existence of vampires, and as this tradition was brought from Guinea and the Congo and maintained for more than two centuries by the hundreds of thousands of African slaves who were so constantly being imported from this native continent it may not impertinently be considered here. In Grenada, particularly, the vampire is known as a "Loogaroo," a corruption of loupgarou, and the attributes generally assigned to the loogaroo as well as the current stories told of these ghastly beings not infrequently recall the pages of De Lanere, clearly showing that the demonology of the French colonists of the seventeenth century was soon welded with negro witchcraft and voodoo. The West Indian natives, and above all the black, Quashee as he is called, hold that loogaroos are human beings, especially old women, who have made a pact with the devil, by which the fiend bestows upon them certain magic powers on condition that every night they provide him with a quantity of rich warm blood. And so every night the loogaroos make their way to the occult silk-cotton-tree (bombax ceiba, often known as the Devil's tree or Jumbies[58] tree), and there, having divested themselves of their skins, which are carefully folded up and concealed, in the form of a ball of sulphurous fire they speed abroad upon their horrid businesses. Even to-day visitors to Grenada have been called out of the house late at night by the servants to see the loogaroos, and their attention is directed to any solitary light which happens to flash through the darkness, perhaps the distant lantern of some watchman who is guarding a cocoa piece. Until dawn the loogaroos are at work, and any Quashee who feels tired and languid upon awaking will swear that the vampire has sucked his blood. Doors and shutters are no barrier to the monster who can slip through the tiniest chink, but if only rice and sand are scattered before a cabin the loogarroo must perforce stay until he has numbered every grain, and so morning will assuredly surprise him ere the tale is told.

Mr. H. J. Bell recounts the following anecdote which is sufficiently striking as reproducing in actual belief of to-day more than one of the old witch traditions. A native gardener pointed out to Mr. Bell a hideous beldame walking along the highway. This hag, who wore a bandage over one eye, was

[p. 266]

reputed to be a loogaroo of the most infamous and evil kind. It happened that one day upon awakening the gardener had felt extraordinary weak and supine. To his horror he remarked a slight stain of blood on his clothes, and he at once realized he had been the victim of a vampire. The following night he refrained from sleep, preserving a silent vigil. A little after twelve-o'clock there came a faint scratching in the thatch of the roof. As this grew louder the man guessing that the loogaroo was about to enter thrust through the spot with his cutlass. A stifled screech fell to hideous moans, and rushing out of the hut he heard the sound die away in the distance whilst a blue marish light vanished into the house where this ancient sibyl dwelt. The next day she was found lying in bed, half blind from an injury to one of her eyes. This she vowed had been caused during the night owing to a fall over the sharp stump of a tree whilst she was chasing some strayed chickens. Nobody believed her, and the gardener was praised for having so deservedly punished the vampire for her foul sorceries.

It is said that the human skin of a loogaroo has been found hidden in the bushes under a silk-cotton-tree. In this case it must be seized fast and pounded in a mortar with pepper and salt. So the vampire will be unable to assume a human shape and will perish miserably.

Now and again negroes have been discovered bold enough to play the loogaroo in order to cover up their nightly depredations. Two confederates will plan the robbing of a cocoa piece, and whilst one fellow will climb the tree to strip off the pods his friend will pass softly up and down in the vicinity waving a lantern fashioned from an empty dry calabash cut to imitate grotesque and gargoyled features, and lighted by a candle set in a socket which has been cleverly inserted.

The tradition, however, has its more serious sides and obscene, if not bloody, rites are practised in secret places where the white man will hardly venture. On one occasion a witch was seen at midnight dancing naked round a fire, and as she leaped to the drone of foul incantations she ever and anon cast strange substances into the flame which blazed up into a myriad colourings.

The loogaroo is particularly obnoxious to dogs, and any person at whom apparently without cause dogs will bark

[p. 267]

furiously or even endeavour to attack is incontinently accounted infect with the vampire taint.

It is supposed that the loogaroo will frequently molest animals of all kinds, and indeed in Trinidad and especially on the Spanish Main the horses suffer greatly from the attacks of large vampire bats. It is necessary that all the windows and ventilation holes of the stables and cattle pens should be firmly secured by wire netting to prevent the entrance of the bats, which are able greatly to harm any animal in whose flesh they manage to fasten their teeth.

It may seem that the superstition of the Quashee, although grosser and more ignorant, lacks some of the crueller and more abominable traits of the tradition in other countries. This is merely owing to the fact that it has largely been driven under ground by energetic and repressive measures. Pere Labat in his Nouveaux voyages aux Isles d' Amerique (1712) gives the story of a vampirish black sorceress who used to threaten to eat the hearts of those who offended her, and almost invariably they soon after began to waste away in great agony. When their bodies were opened it was seen that the heart and liver were drained dry as parchment. He further says: "Nearly all the negroes who leave their country, having attained the age of manhood, are sorcerers, or, at all events, are much tainted with magic, witchcraft and poison." Even half a century ago an important ordinance was passed in all the West Indian colonies imposing heavy penalties on any person found guilty of dealing in Obeah. Writing as lately as 1893, Mr. H. J. Bell says of Hayti, one of the most beautiful of the West Indies, an island possessing an area almost equal to that of France: "Dreadful accounts reach us of thousands of negroes having gone back to a perfectly savage life in the woods, going about stark naked, and having replaced the Christian religion by Voodooism and fetish worship. Cases of cannibalism have even been reported, and nowhere in the West Indies has Obeah a more tenacious hold on high and low than in Hayti."

By a comparison of the beliefs in these many lands, in ancient Assyria, in old Mexico, in China, India and Melanesia, although details differ, but yet not to any marked degree, it will be seen that the superstition and the tradition of the Vampire prevail to an extraordinary extent, and it is hard to believe that a phenomenon which has had so complete a hold over nations

[p. 268]

both old and young, in all parts of the world, at all times of history, has not some underlying and terrible truth however rare this may be in its more remarkable manifestations.

  

NOTES TO CHAPTER IV

[1. R. Campbell Thompson. The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, London, 1903, vol. I, p. xxviii, n.

2. Leonard W. King. Babylonian Religion, p. 75.

3. Op. cit., p. xxv.

4. King, Babylonian Religion, p. 176; Gilgamish Epic, Tablet xii.

5. Campbell Thompson, op. cit., p. xxx.

6. The Night-fiend idlu lili is the male counterpart of the Night-wraith, ardat lili. Idlu is the word used for a grown man of full strength.

7. Ea was the great god whose emanation always remained in water, and accordingly who was invoked with lustrations and aspersions of lymph.

8. Campbell Thompson, op. cit., pp. 37-49.

9. Northcote W. Thomas, Anthropological Report on the Ibo-speaking Peoples of Nigeria, London, 1913, I, 57 sqq.

10. Le Sieur de la Borde, "Relation de l'Origine, Moeurs, Coustumes, Religion, Guerres et Voyages des Caraibes sauvages des Isles Antilles de l'Amerique," Recueil de divers Voyages faits en Afrique et en l'Amerique, qui n'ont point este encore publiez. Paris, 1684.

11. E. Young, The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe, Westminster, 1898. 

12. Y. Scheffer, Lapponia, Frankfort, 1673, p. 313.

13. Ignaz V. Zingeric, Sitten, Brauche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes, 2nd edition. Innsbruck, 1871.

14. "On a Far-off Island," Blackwood's Magazine, February, 1886; p. 238.

15. Campbell Thompson, op. cit., I, pp. 69-71.

16. Among the illustrations of prehistoric utensils.

17. In a private letter to myself, 24th March, 1928.

18. Satirae, I, v, 64.

19. For much relating to Chinese Vampires I am indebted to Mr. G. Willoughby-Meade's Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, Constable, London. Published March, 1928.

20. Thomas J. Hutchinson, "On the Choco and other Indians of South America," Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London, N.S. iii (1865), p. 327.

21. Monica Williams, Religious Thought and Life in India, London, 1883, p. 354.

22. H. Vambery, Das Turkenvolk, Leipsic, 1885, p. 112.

23. H. Ternaux-Compans, Essai sur l'ancien Cundinamara, Paris, (s.d.), p. 18.

24. George Turner, LL.D., Samoa, a Hundred Years ago and long before, London, 1884, p. 200.

25. W. Drexler apud W. H. Roscher, Ausfuhrliches Lexikon der griechischen und romischen Mythologie, s.u. "Men."

26. Hans Egede, A Description of Greenland, London, 1818, p. 209.

27. Revue des Traditions Populaires, xv (1900), p. 471.

28. Cf. The Tempest, II, 2, where Caliban is alluded to as a "moon-calf."

Stepheno: "How cam'st thou to be the siege of this moon-calf? "

Trinculo: "I hid me under the dead moon-calf's gaberdine for fear of the storm." In Dryden and Davenant's The Tempest, or the Enchanted Island, 4to, 1670, II, Trincalo calls Caliban "perverse Moon-calf."

The same phrase is reproduced in Shadwell's operatic The Tempest or, The Enchanted Island, 4to, 1674.

29. Constable's, London, 1928.

[p. 269]

30. Ph. Paulitschke, Ethnographic Nordost-Afrikas: die materielle Cultur des Danakil, Galla, und Somal, Berlin, 1893.

A. C. Hollis, The Masai, Oxford, 1905.

31. Apparently not S. Hilary of Arles, nor S. Hilary of Poictiers.

32. The custom of gathering various herbs, especially S. John's Wort, hawkseed, and mugwort on S. John's eve, 23 June, as a protection against magical spells was almost universal throughout Europe as it was believed that then warlocks and witches were especially active. An immense library of folk-lore is concerned with this day. R. Kuhnau, Schlesische Sagen, Berlin, 1910-1913, iii, p. 39, n.1394, says: "On S. John's Night (between the 23rd and 24th of June) the witches busily bestir themselves to force their way into the houses of men and the stalls of cattle."

33. The deception was wrought by glamour. Algernon Blackwood has made excellent use of such a magical delusion in his occult studies, Dr. John Silence, 1908, Case iv, "Secret Worship."

34. Two vols. New York, 1862. Vol. II, p. 327.

35 J. Noake, Worcestershire Notes and Queries, London, 12 mo, 1856, p. 169.

36. I quote the version given by J. O. Halliwell, but there are many variants.

37. Act II. The soliloquy of Barabas as he is prowling outside the convent toward midnight. One may compare Shakespeare's "The nightly owl or fatal raven," Titus Andronicus, II, iii. 97. Also in Othello, IV, i, 21:

Oh! it comes o'er my memory
 As doth the raven o'er the infected house, Boding to all.

And Lady Macbeth's (Macbeth, I, v, 35):

The raven himself is hoarse
 That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
 Under my battlements.

Tickell, Colin and Lucy, has:

Three times, all in the dead of night,
 A bell was heard to ring,
 And at her window, shrieking thrice,
 The raven flapp'd his wing;
 Full well the love-lorn maiden knew,
 The solemn-boding sound. . . .

Much of interest might be written on this subject of which it has been possible for me en passant barely to touch the fringe.

38. Robert Forby, Vocabulary of East Anglia, 2 vols., London, 8vo, 1830.

39. William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders, London, 8vo, 1866. Harrison Ainsworth's fine romance, Rookwood, first published in April, 1834, may be noted in connexion with this tradition.

40. The Animal World, vi, p. 29.

41. V, v.

42. G. Willoughby-Meade, Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, pp. 234-35.

43. Op. cit., p. 236.

44. The Ocean of Story, pp. 139-140. Note II, Chapter LXXIII.

45. W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, London, 1900, pp. 320-331.

46. In 1644, Elizabeth Clarke, a notorious witch, confessed to Matthew Hopkins that amongst other familiars she entertained our "Newes, like a Polcat."

47. The examination and confession of certaine Wytches at Chelmsforde in the Countie of Essex before the Quenes Maiesties Judges the XXVI daye of July anno 1566.

48. Nothing is known of this writer who probably compiled his book in the fourth century. The De Prodigiis or Prodigiorum Libellus contains a record of the phenomena classed by the Romans under the general heading of Prodigia or Ostenta. The series extends in chronological order from the consulship of Scipio and Laelius, B.C. 190, to the consulship of Fabius and Aelius, B.C. 11. The materials are derived from an abridgement of Livy, whose very phrases are continually employed.

[p. 270]

49. Amsterdam, 1679.

50. W. W. Skeat, op. cit., p. 234.

51. Francesco Saverio Clavigero, Storia Antico del Mexico, Cesona, 1780. English translation by Charles Cullen, 2 vols., London, 1787.

52. Diego Munoz Camargo, Historia de Tlascala, Book I, c. xix. Edited by A. Chavero, Mexico, 1892.

53. Bernardino de Sahagun, Historia Universal de Nueva-Espana. Mexico, 1829; London, 1830, in vol. vi of Lord Kingsborough's Antiquities of Mexico. French translation by Jourdanet and Simeon, Paris, 1880.

54. Bernal Diaz del Castillo. Historia Verdadera de la Conquida de Nueva-Espana. Translated by A. p. Maudslay as The True History of the Conquest of Mexico. Hakluyt Society, London, 1908.

55. In Ireland hagiographical lore mention is made of a special burying-place for women who die in childbirth. Lives of the Cambro-British Saints, Ed. Rev. W. J. Rees, 1853, p. 63.

56. Reproduced by the Duc de Loubat, Rome, 1904. And also reproduced by Zelia Nuttall as The Book of the Life of the Ancient Mexicans, Berkeley, California, 1903. This codex is accompanied by a contemporary gloss in Spanish.

57. G. de Mendieta. Historia Ecclesiastica Indiana. Icazbalceta, Mexico, 1870.

58. The West Indian "Jumbies" or "Duppies" are ghostly visitants, malignant and terrific spectres. Many of the old houses in the West Indies have the reputation of being haunted in a most unpleasant way.]

     
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 271]

  

CHAPTER V

  

THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE

A CONSIDERATION of the Vampire theme in literature must of necessity be somewhat eclectic, if not even arbitrary in the selection of works which it reviews and with which it sets out to deal. Any exhaustive inquiry is well-nigh impossible, and this not so much, perhaps, on account of the wealth of the material, although indeed there is a far vaster field than might generally be supposed, as owing to the very vague definition and indeterminate interpretation one is able to give to vampirism from a purely literary point of view. It is the craft of an artist in the telling of ghost-stories to see that his colours should not be too vivid and too clear, and no mean skill is required to suggest without explanation, to mass the shadows without derangement, to be occult yet not to be obscure. Accordingly it would be a matter of extreme difficulty to differentiate the malignant and death-dealing spectre or it may be even corpse who returns to wreak his foul revenge from the Vampire,--using this latter word in its widest sense, as one must employ it when speaking of literature, a caution which here given as regards this Chapter will serve once for all. In such a story, for example, as Dr. M. R. James' Count Magnus[1] is the horrible revenant a ghost or a vampire? The writer has left the point ambiguous. It is of the very essence of his happy invention that he should do so, and the deftly veiled incertitude adds to the loathly terror of the thing. It will be readily remembered that the story relates how a traveller in Sweden about the middle of the last century whilst staying near an ancient manor house in Vestergothland obtains permission to examine the family papers and among these he comes upon the traces of a certain Count Magnus de la Gardie who in the year 1600 had built the house or herrgard. Even after the lapse of two and a half centuries dark traditions are still lingering concerning this

[p. 272]

mysterious nobleman, whose body lies in a richly ornate copper sarcophagus that stands the principal feature of a domed mausoleum at the eastern end of the church. Reluctantly the landlord tells a story which happened in the time of his grandfather ninety-two years before. Two men determined to go at night and have a free hunt in the woods upon the estate. They are warned: "No, do not go; we are sure you will meet with persons walking who should not be walking. They should be resting, not walking." The two men laughed and cried: "The Count is dead; we do not care for him." But in the night the villagers "hear someone scream, just as if the most inside part of his soul was twisted out of him." Then they hear a hideous laugh, "it was not one of those two men that laughed, and, indeed, they have all of them said that it was not any man at all." In the morning they go out with the priest, and they find one of the men dead, killed in so terrible a fashion that they buried him on the spot. "He was once a beautiful man, but now his face was not there, because the flesh of it was sucked away off the bones." The other man is standing with his back against a tree, "pushing with his hands-pushing something away from him which was not there."

There was some vague gossip that the Count had been "on the Black Pilgrimage, and had brought something or someone back with him." During his investigation of the papers the English traveller, Mr. Wraxall, found a Liber nigrae peregrinationis, or at least a few lines of such a document indicating that the Count had once journeyed to the city of Chorazin and there adored the prince of the air. In careless mood as he is passing near the mausoleum, Mr. Wraxall exclaims: "Ah, Count Magnus, there you are. I should dearly like to see you." He is indiscreet enough to cry out thus flippantly on two further occasions, and at last he is thoroughly alarmed by hearing the sound of metal hinges creaking and he knows that the sarcophagus is slowly opening wide. In a state of frenzied fear he sets out for England the next day, yet turn and double as he will he is everywhere haunted by two hideous figures, a man in a long black cloak and a broad-leafed hat and something in a dark cloak and hood. Upon landing at Harwich he makes his way across country to a neighbouring village, when on looking out of the

[p. 273]

carriage window he sees at a cross-road the two horrible creatures. He finds a lodging, but within the next forty-eight hours his pursuers fall upon him. He is discovered dead, and in the district it is still remembered how "the jury that viewed the body fainted, seven of 'em did, and none of 'em wouldn't speak to what they see, and the verdict was visitation of God; and how the people as kep' the 'ouse moved out that same week and went away from that part."

This story may, I think, certainly be considered as Vampire lore, and although it must, of course, be perfectly familiar to all who delight in tales of the supernatural I have related it at some little length here, partly because it is told so excellently well, and partly because it so admirably fulfils and exemplifies the qualities that this kind of literature should possess. It is brief and succinct, although there are many details, but every touch tells. No ghost story should be of any length. The horror and the awe evaporate with prolixity. The ghost is malevolent and odious. In fiction a helpful apparition is a notable weakness, and the whole narrative becomes flabby to a degree. The authentic note of horror is struck in the eerie suggestion which, as we have noticed, is of intent left ill-defined. Nothing could be more crude than an explanation, and it is this banality that often ruins a story which otherwise might be of the very first order.

To review the traces of vampire legends which appear in sagas, and which are in truth but few and unimportant, seems to be outside our province here, and even more foreign to our purpose would be the present examination of the vampire legend in folk-lore since this has already been dealt with in the course of the preceding chapters, and to regard such traditions merely as literature would be not only to look at them from a wrong perspective but to misrepresent their quality and essentially to pervert their purpose.

Since some point must be chosen at which to consider vampirism in literature we may most fairly recall to mind the many academic and philosophical treatises upon the Vampire which were rehearsed and discussed in German Universities during the earlier part of the eighteenth century, and these startling themes soon began to attract the attention of poets

[p. 274]

and literary men. Thus among the poems of Heinrich August Ossenfelder[2] we have a short piece entitled Der Vampir, which is as follows:

Mein liebes Magdchen glaubet
 Bestandig steif und feste,
 An die gegebnen Lehren
 Der immer frommen Mutter
 Als Volker an der Theyse
 An todtliche Vampiere
 Heyduckisch feste glauben,
 Nun warte nur Christianchen,
 Du willst mich gar nich lieben;
 Ich will mich an dir rachen,
 Und heute in Tockayer
 Zu einem Vampir trinken.
 Und wenn du sanfte schlummerst,
 Von deinen schonen Wangen
 Den frischen Purpur saugen.
 Alsdenn wirst du erschrecken,
 Wenn ich dich werde kussen
 Und als ein Vampir kussen:
 Wann du dann recht erzitterst
 Und matt in meine Arme,
 Gleich einer Todten sinkest
 Alsdenn will ich dich fragen,
 Sind meine Lehren besser,
 Als deiner guten Mutter?

The poet Wieland[3] has a passing reference to the Vampire

Der Jungling aus den Wolken
 Herab gefallen, stumm und bleich,
 Als hatt' ein Vampyr ihm die Adern ausgemolken,
 Steht ganz vernichtet von dem Streich.[4]

It would be an exaggeration to say that the Vampire entered German literature with Goethe's famous ballad Die Braut von Korinth, but it would be difficult to over-estimate the influence and the popularity of this piece, the subject of which is directly derived from Phlegon of Tralles. The young Athenian who visits his father's old friend to whose daughter he has been betrothed receives at midnight the Vampire body of the girl whom death has prevented from becoming his bride, and who declares:

Aus dem Grabe werd' ich ausgetrieben,
 Noch zu suchen das vermifste Gut,
 Noch den schon verlornen Mann zu lieben [p. 275]
 Und zu saugen seines Herzens Blut.
 Ist's um den geschehn,
 Muss nach andern gehn,
 Und das junge Volk erliegt der Wut.[6]

Even more famous are the charnel horrors of Burger's Lenore which was first printed in 1773 in the Gottinger Musenalmanach and which notwithstanding the legions of hostile comments and parodies whereof Brandl gives an ample list[6] has remained a household word.

In spite of the immense enthusiasm at that date in contemporary England for German romantic literature it is remarkable that no translation of Lenore was published here until 1796, when William Taylor of Norwich printed in the Monthly Review of March his rendering which in some respects must be called an adaptation. He had, however, by his own account written the translation as early as 1790,[7] and there can be no doubt that very shortly after its completion it was declaimed, applauded and much discussed in Norwich literary circles. We know that Mrs. Barbauld who visited Edinburgh "about the summer of 1793 or 1794"[8] read aloud Taylor's version to a number of enthusiastic admirers. This event was described to Sir Walter Scott by Miss Cranstoun, afterwards Countess Purgstall,[9] although Scott himself mentions that his curiosity "was first attracted to this truly romantic story by a gentleman, who, having heard Lenore once read in manuscript, could only recollect the general outline, and part of a couplet, which, from the singularity of its structure, and frequent recurrence,[10] had remained impressed on his memory."[11] This gentleman Was Mr. Cranstoun, the brother of Countess Purgstall, and so her statement is no doubt accurate as Scott might well have received his account both from the brother as well as from the sister. It was in the course of 1794, or at any rate early in the following year that Scott made his own rendering of the ballad. The account of Taylor's version, Ellenore, which "electrified" the assembled company at Dugald Stewart's house when read by the famous Anna Letitia Barbauld had given him the strongest desire to see the original. Just about this time, however, it was a difficult matter to procure books from the continent, and it was not until after some delay that a copy of Burger's works was conveyed to him from Hamburg. He

[p. 276]

immediately devoured the German ballad and was so impressed that he forthwith set about Englishing it. "I well recollect" he writes, "that I began my task after supper, and finished it about daybreak next morning."[12] Scott's friends privately printed a few copies of the poem as a surprise for the author," and as it went from hand to hand it met with the most flattering reception. In 1796, besides the public issue of the translations from Burger by Taylor and by Scott, no less than three other versions appeared, from the several pens of W. R. Spencer, H. J. Pye and J. T. Stanley. The translation by the last named author was given to the public in an edition de luxe at five shillings, as well as in the ordinary edition of half a crown.[14] In 1797, a pasquil followed, Miss Kitty: a Parody on Lenora, a Ballad, "Translated from the German, by several Hands," whilst in the following year, Mrs. Taylor turned the popular poem into Italian as a "Novella Morale."[15] Probably the most faithful, if not the most spirited translation, was that by the Rev. J. Beresford which was published in 1800.

It was in 1797 that Coleridge wrote the first part of Christabel, and German critics have somewhat superfluously endeavoured to emphasize herein the influence of Lenore, since upon examination it would hardly seem that such is present even in the smallest degree. For example, if the narrative of Geraldine be carefully read[16] it must be evident that the following judgment of Professor Brandl is without foundation. This critic writes: "Ihre Vorgeschichte (of Geraldine) schopfte er grossentheils aus Burgers 'Lenore' in Taylors Uebersetzung: die Dame ist, wenigstens ihrer Erzahlung nach, auf einem windschnellen Ross entfuhrt und halbtodt vor Furcht hier abgesetzt worden; statt des schwarzen Leichenzuges, der Lenoren auf ihrem Ritt durch die Mondnacht aufstiess, will sie 'den Schatten der Nacht' gekreuzt haben; noch zittert das verdorrte Blatt neben ihr wie aus Herzenangst."[17]

As we might expect, the young Shelley was enchanted by Lenore, and Medwin relates how the poet long treasured cc a copy of the whole poem, which he made with his own hand."[18] Dowden tells the story how one Christmas Eve Shelley dramatically related the Burger ballad with appropriate intonation and gesture "working up the horror to

[p. 277]

such a height of fearful interest "that the company fully expected to see Wilhelm stalk into the parlour." In his study of Shelley, Charles Middleton has remarked: "It is hinted, somewhat plausibly, that the Leonora of Burgher first awakened his poetic faculty. A tale of such beauty and terror might well have kindled his lively imagination, but his earliest pieces, written about this time, and consisting only of a few ballads, are deficient in elegance and originality, and give no evidence whatever of the genius which soon after declared itself."[20] To suggest, as Zeiger would have it,[21] that Lenore influenced the poem which in the romance St. Irvyne[22] Megalina inscribes on the wall of her prison, and which commences:

Ghosts of the dead! have I not heard your yelling
 Rise on the night-rolling breast of the blast, . . .

is the merest ineptitude, since these verses are taken almost word for word from "Lachin y Gair" in Byron's Hours of Idleness, and that had been published some four years previously.[23]

As I have elsewhere shown in some detail, Shelley's two juvenile romances owe not only their inspiration but a great deal of their phrasing and noctivagations to Charlotte Dacre's Zofloya: or The Moor, which appeared in 1806, and which, as the poet himself declares "quite enraptured" him.[24] It is a very remarkable circumstance that in spite of the extremely plain hint which might profitably have been taken from such poems as Die Braut von Korinth and Lenore the novelists of the Gothic school, soaked though they were in German literature, searching the earth and the depths of the earth for thrills and sensation of every kind, do not seem to have utilized the tradition of the Vampire. It is a puzzle indeed if we ask how it was that such writers as Monk Lewis, "Apollo's sexton," who would fain "make Parnassus a churchyard";[25] and Charles Robert Maturin who, as he himself confessed, loved bells rung by viewless hands, daggers encrusted with long shed blood, treacherous doors behind still more treacherous tapestry, mad nuns, apparitions,[26] et hoc genus omne; the two lords of macabre romance, should neither of them have sent some hideous vampire ghost ravening through their sepulchral pages. In the Gothic romance

[p. 278]

we have horror heaped on horror's head; mouldering abbeys, haunted castles, banditti, illuminati, sorcerers, conspirators, murderous monks and phantom friars, apparitions without number until the despairing reviewers cried aloud: "Surely the misses themselves must be tired of so many stories of ghosts and murders." We have such titles as the famous Horrid Mysteries; The Midnight Groan; The Abbot of Montserrat, or, The Pool of Blood; The Demon of Venice; The Convent Spectre; The Hag of the Mountains;[27] and a hundred such lurid nomenclatures, but until we come to Polidori's novel which will be considered later, nowhere, so far as I am aware, do we meet with the Vampire in the realm of Gothic fancy. So vast, however, is this fascinating library and so difficult to procure are these novels of a century and a quarter ago that I hesitate sweepingly to assert that this theme was entirely unexploited. There may be some romance which I have not had the good fortune to find where a hideous vampire swoops down upon his victims, but if such be the case I am at least prepared to say that the Vampire was not generally known to Gothic lore, and had his presence made itself felt in the sombre chapters of one votary of this school I think he would have re-appeared on many occasions, for the writers were as accustomed to convey from one another with an easy assurance, as they were wont deftly to plunder the foreign mines. Inevitably one of the band, T. J. Horseley Carties, Francis Lathom, William Herbert, Edward Montague, Mrs. Roche, Eliza Parsons, Miss M. Hamilton, Mrs. Helme, Mrs. Meeke, Isabella Kelley, and many another beside insatiably agog for horrid phantasmagoria would have utilized the Vampire in some funereal episode.

One might even have supposed that the notes to Southey's Thalaba the Destroyer,[28] must have put them on the track, and surely stanzas eight, nine and ten in Book VIII could not have passed unnoticed:

A night of darkness and of storms!
     Into the Chamber of the Tomb
         Thalaba led the Old Man,
         To roof him from the rain.
         A night of storms! the wind
     Swept through the moonless sky,
 And moan'd among the pillar'd sepulchres; [p. 279]
     And in the pauses if its sweep
         They heard the heavy rain
     Beat on the monument above.
         In silence on Oneiza's grave
 Her father and her husband sate.
 The Cryer from the Minaret
 Proclaim'd the midnight hour.
 "Now, now!" cried Thalaba;
 And o'er the chamber of the tomb
     There spread a lurid gleam,
 Like the reflection of a sulphur fire
         And in that hideous light
     Oneiza stood before them. It was She . . .
     Her very lineaments. . . . and such as death
 Had changed them, livid cheeks and lips of blue;
         But in her eye there dwelt
         Brightness more terrible
     Than all the loathsomeness of death.
     "Still art thou living, wretch? "
 In hollow tones she cried to Thalaba;
     "And must I nightly leave my grave
     To tell thee, still in vain,
     God hath abandoned thee?

"This is not she!" the Old Man exclaim'd;
         "A Fiend; a manifest Fiend!"
     And to the youth he held his lance;
         "Strike and deliver thyself!"
     "Strike HER!" cried Thalaba,
     And palsied of all power,
 Gazed fixedly upon the dreadful form.
 "Yea, strike her!" cried a voice, whose tones
 Flow'd with such a sudden healing through his soul,
         As when the desert shower
         From death deliver'd him;
 But obedient to that well-known voice,
         His eye was seeking it,
         When Moath, firm of heart,
 Perform 'd the bidding: through the vampire corpse
         He thrust his lance; it fell,
         And howling with the wound,
         Its fiendish tenant fled.
     A sapphire light fell on them,
 And garmented with glory, in their sight
     Oneiza's spirit stood.

It is important to remark that in his notes[29] upon this passage Southey cites at considerable length various cases of vampirism, particularly from the Lettres Juives, the Vampires

[p. 280]

of Gradisch, also the history of Arnold Paul, and the very ample account given by Tournefort. He further says: "The Turks have an opinion that men that are buried have a sort of life in their graves. If any man makes affidavit before a judge, that he heard a noise in a man's grave, he [i.e., the body] is, by order, dug up and chopped all too pieces. The merchants (at Constantinople) once airing on horseback, had, as usual, for protection, a Janisary with them. Passing by the burying place of the Jews, it happened that an old Jew sat by a sepulchre. The Janisary rode up to him, and rated him for stinking the world a second time, and commanded him to get into his grave again--Roger North's Life of Sir Dudley North."[30]

It might perhaps not unfairly be argued that the two notorious romances of the Marquis de Sade Justine, on les Malheurs de la Vertu and Juliette depict scenes of vampirism, and if we are to take the word in any extended sense this is certainly the case. In the first place it must be remembered that as it passed through various editions-it was first issued in 1791, 2 vols., 8vo,--until it appeared in its final and complete form in 1797 as La Nouvelle Justine, on les Malheurs de la Vertu, suivie de l'Histoire de Juliette, sa soeur, 10 vols., 18mo (of which Justine occupies four and Juliette six) Justine was added to and augmented until the last version is practically double the length of the first, and the book has been entirely re-written. In Justine we have the episodes in the house of Monsieur Rodin, and more particularly the orgies of the Comte de Gernade who takes a lustful pleasure in watching the blood flow from the veins of his victims, as also the cruelties of the monster Roland all of which. may well be esteemed vampirism. Many similar scenes are described with great prolixity in Juliette, and this romance is distinguished by such horrible figures as the Muscovite giant Minski, whose favourite meat is human flesh, and in whose castle the table and chairs are made of bleaching bones, and Cordelli, the necrophilist of Ancona.

In The New Monthly Magazine,[31] 1 April, 1819, was published The Vampyre: a Tale by Lord Byron, which although it may seem to us--steeped in Le Fanu and M. R. James--a little old-fashioned, at the time created an immense sensation and had the most extraordinary influence, being even

[p. 281]

more admired and imitated on the Continent than in England. It was almost immediately known that actually the story did not come from the pen of Lord Byron, but had been written by Dr. John William Polidori, physician-companion to the poet. Byron had, as a matter of fact, been writing a work of the same title in imitation of Mrs. Shelley's Frankenstein, but he denied the authorship of this piece in the famous letter facsimilied in Galignani's edition of his works. A first printed, The Vampyre forms a part of extracts from "A letter from Geneva, with Anecdotes of Lord Byron." Here is to be read that "among other things which the lady, from whom I procured these anecdotes, related to me, she mentioned the outline of a ghost story by Lord Byron. It appears that one evening Lord Byron, Mr. p. B. Shelley, the two ladies and the gentleman (the daughters of Godwin and Dr. Polidori) before alluded to after having perused a German work, which was entitled Phantasmagoriana[32] began relating ghost stories; when his lordship having recited the beginning of Christabel, then unpublished, the whole took so strong a hold of Mr. Shelley's mind, that he suddenly started up and ran out of the room. The physician and Lord Byron followed, and discovered him leaning against a mantlepiece with cold drops of perspiration trickling down his face. After having given him something to refresh him, upon enquiring into the cause of his alarm, they found that his wild imagination having pictured to him the bosom of one of the ladies with eyes (which was reported of a lady in the neighbourhood where he lived) he was obliged to leave the room in order to destroy the impression. It was afterwards proposed in the course of conversation, that each of the company present should write a tale depending upon some supernatural agency, which was undertaken by Lord Byron, the physician, and Miss M. Godwin. My friend, the lady above referred to, had in her possession the outline of each of these stories, I obtained them as a great favour, and herewith forward them to you, as I was assured you would feel as much curiosity as myself, to peruse the ebauches of so great a genius, and those immediately under his influence." Upon this the Editor has the following note: "We have in our possession the Tale of Dr. ------ as well as the outline of that of Miss Godwin. The latter has already appeared under the title of

[p. 282]

'Frankenstein, or the modern Prometheus'; the former, however, upon consulting this author, we may, probably, hereafter give to our readers."

The Vampyre is introduced by several paragraphs which deal with the tradition. This preamble commences: "The superstition upon which this tale is founded is very general in the East. Among the Arabians it appears to be common; it did not, however, extend itself to the Greeks until after the establishment of Christianity; and it has only assumed its present form since the division of the Latin and Greek churches; at which time, the idea becoming prevalent, that a Latin body could not corrupt if buried in their territory, it gradually increased, and formed the subject of many wonderful stories, still extant, of the dead rising from their graves, and feeding upon the blood of the young and beautiful. In the West it spread, with some slight variation, all over Hungary, Poland, Austria, and Lorraine, where the belief existed, that vampyres nightly imbibed a certain portion of the blood of their victims, who became emaciated, lost their strength, and speedily died of consumptions; whilst these human bloodsuckers fattened--and their veins became distended to such a state of repletion as to cause the blood to flow from all the passages of their bodies, and even from the very pores of their skins."

The Editor then recounts the famous instance of Arnold Paul, and continues: "We have related this monstrous rodomontade, because it seems better adapted to illustrate the subject of the present observations than any other instance we could adduce. In many parts of Greece it is considered as a sort of punishment after death, for some heinous crime committed whilst in existence, that the deceased is doomed to vampyrise, but be compelled to confine his visitations solely to those beings he loved most while on earth-those to whom he was bound by ties of kindred and affection. This supposition is, we imagine, alluded to in the following fearfully sublime and prophetic curse from the 'Giaour.'[32]

But first on earth, as Vampyre sent,
 Thy corse shall from its tomb be rent;
 Then ghastly haunt thy native place,
 And suck the blood of all thy race;
 There from thy daughter, sister, wife, [p. 283]
 At midnight drain the stream of life;
 Yet loathe the banquet, which perforce
 Must feed thy livid living corse,
 Thy victims, ere they yet expire,
 Shall know the demon for their sire;
 As cursing thee, thou cursing them,
 Thy flowers are withered on the stem.
 But one that for thy crime must fall,
 The youngest, best beloved of all,
 Shall bless thee with a father's name--
 That word shall wrap thy heart in flame!
 Yet thou must end thy task and mark
 Her check's last tinge--her eye's last spark,
 And the last glassy glance must view
 Which freezes o'er its lifeless blue;
 Then with unhallowed hand shall tear
 The tresses of her yellow hair,
 Of which, in life a lock when shorn
 Affection's fondest pledge was worn--
 But now is borne away by thee
 Memorial o thine agony!
 Yet with thine own best blood shall drip
 Thy gnashing tooth, and haggard lip;
 Then stalking to thy sullen grave
 Go--and with Ghouls and Afrits rave,
 Till these in horror shrink away
 From spectre more accursed than they."

After an allusion to Southey's Thalaba, Tournefort's Travels, and Dom Calmet's classical work, the editor concludes: "We could add many curious and interesting notices on this singularly horrible superstition, and we may, perhaps, resume our observations upon it at some future opportunity; for the present, we feel that we have very far exceeded the limits of a note, necessarily devoted to the explanation of the strange production to which we now invite the attention of our readers; and we shall therefore conclude by merely remarking, that though the term Vampyre is the one in most general acceptation, there are several other synonimous with it, which are made use of in various parts of the world, namely, Vroucolocha, Vardoulacha, Goul, Broucoloka, &c."

The story tells how at the height of a London season there appeared at the various parties of the leaders of the ton a nobleman, more remarkable for his singularities, than his rank. He gazed upon the mirth around him, as if he could not participate therein. Apparently, the light laughter of the

[p. 284]

fair only attracted his attention that he might by a look quell it, and throw fear into those breasts where thoughtlessness reigned. Those who felt this sensation of awe, could not explain whence it arose; some attributed it to the dead grey eye, which fixing upon the object's face, did not seem to penetrate, and at one glance to pierce through to the inward working of the heart; but fell upon the cheek with a leaden ray that weighed upon the skin it could not pass." This original is invited to every house, and in the course of the winter he meets "a young gentleman of the name of Aubrey" he was an orphan left with an only sister in the possession of great wealth, by parents who died while he was yet in childhood." Aubrey is greatly fascinated by Lord Ruthven, for this is the name of the mysterious nobleman, and intending to travel upon the Continent he mentions this intention to my Lord, and is "surprised to receive from him a proposal to join him. Flattered by such a mark of esteem from him who, apparently, had nothing in common with other men, he gladly accepted it, and in a few days they had passed the circling waters."

As they travelled from town to town, Aubrey notices the peculiar conduct of his companion who bestows largess upon the most worthless characters, broken gamblers and the like, but refuses a doit to the deserving and virtuous poor. However the recipients of this charity "inevitably found that there was a curse upon it, for they all were either led to the scaffold or sunk to the lowest and the most abject misery." Eventually the travellers arrive at Rome, and here Aubrey receives letters from his guardians who require him immediately to leave his companion as since their departure from London the most terrible scandals, adulteries and seductions, have come to light. At Rome Aubrey is able to foil Lord Ruthven's plans, frustrating an intrigue designed to ruin a heedless young girl, and then he "directed his steps towards Greece, and, crossing the Peninsula, soon found himself at Athens." Here he lodges in the house of a Greek, whose daughter Ianthe is a paragon of the most exquisite beauty. As he sketches the ruins of the city she is wont to entertain him with Greek legend and tradition, and "often, as she told him the tale of the living vampyre, who had passed years amidst his friends, and dearest ties, forced every year, by feeding upon the life of a

[p. 285]

lovely female to prolong his existence for the ensuing months, his blood would run cold, whilst he attempted to laugh her out of such idle and horrible fantasies; but Ianthe cited to him the names of old men, who had at last detected one living among themselves, after several of their relatives and children had been found marked with the stamp of the fiend's appetite; and when she found him so incredulous, she begged of him to believe her, for it had been remarked, that those who had dared to question their existence, always had some proof given, which obliged them, with grief and heart-breaking to confess it was true. She detailed to him the traditional appearance of these monsters, and his horror was increased, by hearing a pretty accurate description of Lord Ruthven; he, however, still persisted in persuading her, that there could be no truth in her fears, though at the same time he wondered at the many coincidences which had all tended to excite a belief in the supernatural power of Lord Ruthven."

Before long it becomes evident that Aubrey is in love with Ianthe, "and while he ridicules the idea of a young man of English habits, marrying an uneducated Greek girl, still he found himself more and more attached to the almost fairy form before him." He endeavours to occupy his time with antiquarian excursions which lead him farther and farther afield, and at length he determines to proceed to a point beyond any he has as yet visited. When Ianthe's parents hear the name of the place he proposes to visit they most earnestly implore him on no account to return when once dusk has fallen, "as he must necessarily pass through a wood, where no Greek would ever remain after the day had closed, upon any consideration. They described it as the resort of the vampyres in their nocturnal orgies, and denounced the most heavy evils as impending upon him who dared to cross their path. Aubrey made light of their representations, and tried to laugh them out of the idea; but when he saw them shudder at his daring thus to mock a superior, the very name of which apparently made their blood freeze, he was silent."

Having given his promise to Ianthe that he will be back well before evening he sets out very early. The exploration, however, takes longer than he has supposed, and when he turns his horse homeward the darkness is already hurrying on urged by a terrific storm. The steed, alarmed at the battle

[p. 286]

of the elements dashes off at breakneck pace and only halts trembling and tired before a distant hovel in the heart of a solitary wood. "As he approached, the thunder, for a moment silent, allowed him to hear the dreadful shrieks of a woman mingling with the stiffled exultant mockery of a laugh, continued in one almost unbroken sound." With a terrific effort Aubrey burst open the door and rushing into the darkness "found himself in contact with someone, whom he immediately seized, when a voice cried "again baffled," to which a loud laugh succeeded, and he felt himself grappled by one whose strength seemed superhuman determined to sell his life as dearly as he could, he struggled but it was in vain; he was lifted from his feet and hurled with enormous force against the ground; his enemy threw himself upon him, and kneeling upon his breast, had placed his hand upon his throat, when the glare of many torches penetrating through the hole that gave light in the day, disturbed him--he instantly rose and, leaving his prey, rushed through the door, and in a moment the crashing of the branches, as he broke through the wood was not longer heard." Several peasants now hastened into the hut bearing flambeaus which illuminate the scene, and to the horror of all there is discovered hard by, the lifeless body of Ianthe. A curious dagger lies near, but her death was not the result of a blow from this weapon. "There was no colour upon her cheek, not even upon her lip; yet there was a stillness about her face that seemed almost as attaching as the life that once dwelt there:--upon her neck and breast was blood, and upon her throat were the marks of teeth having opened the vein:--to this the men pointed, crying, simultaneously struck with horror, 'a Vampyre, a Vampyre!'" It appears that Ianthe had followed the traveller to watch over his safety. Aubrey is carried back to the city in a raging fever, and the parents of the unfortunate girl die brokenhearted owing to so terrible a loss.

Whilst Aubrey lies ill Lord Ruthven arrives in Athens and establishing himself in the same house nurses the invalid with such care that past differences are forgotten, since Aubrey not only becomes reconciled to his presence but even seeks his company. Together they travel into the wildest interior of Greece, and here in some mountain pass they are attacked by brigands, from whose guns Lord Ruthven receives a shot

[p. 287]

in the shoulder. His strength strangely decreasing, a couple of days later it is plain to all that he is at the point of death. He now exacts a terrific oath that his companion shall conceal all that is known of him and that the news of his death shall not be allowed to reach England. "Swear!" cried the dying man, "Swear by all your soul reveres, by all your nature fears, swear that for a year and a day you will not impart your knowledge of my crimes or death to any living being in any way, whatever may happen, or whatever you may see." Aubrey binds himself most solemnly by the prescribed oath, and in a paroxysm of hideous laughter Ruthven expires.

According to a promise which has been obtained from the robbers by a heavy bribe the body was conveyed to the pinnacle of a neighbouring mount, that it should be exposed to the first cold ray of the moon which rose after his death. Aubrey insists that it shall be interred in the ordinary way, but when he is conducted to the place it is found that the body has disappeared, and in spite of the protestations of the band he is convinced that they have buried the corpse for the sake of the clothes. One circumstance, however, gives Aubrey much food for thought. Among the effects of the deceased he discovered a sheath of most curious pattern and make which exactly fits the dagger that had been found in the deserted hut upon the occasion of Ianthe's death.

Returning to England, as he retraces his journey through Rome to his horror Aubrey discovers that in spite of the precautions he had so carefully taken, Lord Ruthven succeeded only too well in his bad designs and now there is bitter sorrow and distress where once reigned peace and happiness. The lady had not been heard of since the departure of his lordship, and Aubrey instinctively divines that she has "fallen a victim to the destroyer of Ianthe."

Upon his arrival in London the traveller is greeted by his sister, whose presentation into society had been delayed until her brother's return from the Continent, when he might be her protector. "It was now, therefore, resolved that the next drawing room, which was fast approaching, should be the epoch of her entry into the busy scene." Upon this gay occasion the crowd was excessive, and as Aubrey heedless and distracted is watching the gay throng a voice which he recognizes only too well, whispers in this ear: "Remember

[p. 288]

your oath." Turning he sees Lord Ruthven standing near him. A few nights later at the assembly of a near relation among the crowd of admirers by whom his sister is surrounded--the most prominent of the throng--he again perceives the mysterious and horrible figure. Hurrying forward he seizes his sister's arm and requests her immediately to accompany him home. However, before they have had time to retire again does the voice whisper close to him: "Remember your oath!"

Aubrey now becomes almost distracted. He sees no remedy against a monster who has already once mocked at death. Even if he were to declare all that he knew it is probable that he would hardly be believed. Whenever he attends a social gathering his looks as he scans the company become so suspicious and strange that he soon acquires a reputation for great eccentricity. As the months go on his loathing and his fears drive him well-nigh to madness, so that eventually a physician is engaged to reside in the house and take charge of him. He is a little consoled by the thought that when the year and the day have passed he will at least be able to unburden his mind and be at any rate freed from his terrible oath. It so happens that he overhears a conversation between the doctor and one of his guardians who enlarges upon the melancholy circumstance of her brother being in so critical a state when Miss Aubrey is to be married on the following day. He instantly demands the name of the bridegroom and is told the Earl of Marsden. He requests to see his sister and in an hour or two she visits him. As they are conversing she opens a locket and shows him a miniature of the man who has won her affections. To his horror he perceives that it is a portrait of Lord Ruthven and falling into convulsions of rage he tramples it under foot. In twenty-four hours the period of his oath will have expired, and he implores them to delay the wedding at least for that time. Since there seems no good reason for doing this the request is disregarded, upon which Aubrey falls into so sad a state of utter depression succeeded by an outburst of fury that the physician concludes him to be not far removed from lunacy and doubles the restraint. During the night the busy preparations for the nuptial are ceaselessly continued. It appears that upon the pretext of being her brother's dearest friend and travelling

[p. 289]

companion Lord Ruthven had visited the house to inquire after Aubrey during his supposed derangement, and from the character of a visitor gradually insinuated himself into that of an accepted suitor. When the bridal party has assembled Aubrey, neglected by the servants, contrives to make his way into the public apartments which are decorated for the nuptials. Ere he can utter a cry, he is, however, at once perceived by Lord Ruthven who with more than human strength thrusts him, speechless with rage, from the room, at the same time whispering in his ear: "Remember your oath, and know, if not my bride to-day, your sister is dishonoured. Women are frail!" The attendants at once secure the unhappy man, but he can no longer support his distress. In his agonies a blood vessel breaks and he is incontinently conveyed to bed. This sad accident is kept from his sister; the marriage was solemnized, and the bride and bridegroom left London.

"Aubrey's weakness increased; the effusion of blood produced symptoms of the near approach of death. He desired his sister's guardians might be called, and when the midnight hour had struck, he related composedly what the reader has perused--he died immediately after.

"The guardians hastened to protect Miss Aubrey; but when they arrived it was too late. Lord Ruthven had disappeared, and Aubrey's sister had glutted the thirst of a Vampyre!"

It were not easy to overestimate the astounding sensation which was caused by this story, and the narrative is certainly not without considerable merit, for in places the eerie atmosphere is well conveyed, Nor is it difficult to understand the extraordinary influence of the tale, since it introduced a tradition which had been long forgotten and which promised infinite possibilities in the way of that sensation and melodramatic calentures which the period craved. The first separate edition of The Vampyre appeared in 1819, and was published by Sherwood. The first issue of this, which is now very rare, contains a certain amount of preliminary matter concerning the Shelleys, Byron and Godwin. This was omitted in later issues, and accordingly one often finds that copies of The Vampyre are described as First Edition, which is strictly quite correct, although they are the Second Issue,

[p. 290]

and naturally of far less value in a bibliographer's eyes. A large number of reprints increased with amazing rapidity and in the same year the novel was translated into French by Henri Faber, Le Vampire, nouvelle traduite de l'anglais de Lord Byron, Paris, 1819. In February, 1820, there followed under the aegis of Charles Nodier a very obvious imitation, or rather continuation by Cyprien Berard, Lord Ruthwen ou les Vampires. "Roman de C. B. Publie par l'auteur de Jean Sbogar et de Therese Aubert.[34] Paris, 1820." In 1825, a new translation of Polidori's story was given by Eusebe de Salles. Nor was Germany behind hand, for The Vampyre was first translated in 1819: Der Vampyr. Eine Erzahlung aus dem Englischen des Lord Byron. Nebst einer Schilderung seines Aufenthaltes in Mytilene. Leipzig, 1819. In the following year there appeared at Frankfort a version by J. V. Adrian of Byron's poems and prose, wherein was included Der Blutsuger. In a collection of Byron's work the first volume of which was published at Zwickau in 1821, The Vampyre again found a place in volume V (1821), translated by Christian Karl Meifsner as Der Vampyr. The tale has also been included in various other continental collections and translations of Byron's work even until a recent date.

Yet it was well-known all the while that Polidori was the author of the story, but as Byron's was by far the greater name, so this sensational novella must be attributed to the cavaliero whose romantic adventures and the scandal of whose amours were thrilling the whole of Europe. Writing in the same Year as the great poet's death Amedee Pichot of the University of Marseilles in his Essai sur le genie et le caractere de Lord Byron[35] declared that this spurious issue "a autant contribue a faire connaitre le nom de lord Byron en France, que ses poemes les plus estimes." Publishers insisted upon Le Vampire, "nouvelle," being included among Byron's works, and it is said that Ladvocat was furious when it was represented to him that since it was openly acknowledged that Polidori had written The Vampire, the translation should properly be no longer given among the poet's work nor put forth under his name.

As might have been expected it was not long before the Vampire appeared upon the stage, and the first play of this kind would seem to be the famous melodrama by Charles

[p. 291]

Nodier (with Achille Jouffroy and Carmouche) which with music by Alexandre Piccini and scenery by Ciceri, was produced in Paris on 13th June, 1820, at the Theatre de la Porte-Saint-Martin, whose directors were the popular M. M. Croznier and Merle. The role of Lord Rutwen was taken by M. Philippe; the celebrated Madame Dorval was Malvina;[36] and the new play had an extraordinary success.

It was immediately published as Le Vampire, melodrame en trois actes avec un prologue, Par M. M. . . .; Musique, de M. Alexandre Piccini; Decors de M. Ciceri. This might be purchased at 1 fr. 25cs. "au magasin general de pieces de Theatre, Chez J.-N. Barba, Libraire, Palais Royal, derriere le Theatre Francais, No. 51. "The characters in the Prologue are Ituriel, ange de la Lune, Mlle. Descotte; Oscar, genie des Mariages, M. Moessard; and Un Vampire, M. Philippe. The scene opens in "une grotte basaltique," the Caledonian caves of Staffa. Oscar and Ituriel discourse of Vampires, and the latter asks: "Serait-il vrai que d'horribles fantomes viennent quelquefois, sous l'apparence des droits de l'hymen, egorger une vierge timide, et s'abreuver de son sang?" This is indeed the case, and it is significant that on the morrow Malvina (Miss Aubray) is to wed "le comte de Marsden." A vision of the sleeping Malvina appears when "Un spectre vetu d'un linceuil s'echappe de la plus apparente de ces tombes" and rushes upon her. He is swiftly repulsed by Oscar, the good genius and the curtain falls. The characters in the play are: Lord Rutwen, M. Philippe; Sir Aubray, M. Perrin ou Theringy; Malvina, Mad. Dorval; Brigitte, Mad. St. Amand; Edgar, M. Edmon; Scop, M. Pierson; Petterson, M. Dugy; Lovette, Mlle. J. Vertpre; Oscar, M. Moessard; with attendances of Domestiques and Villageois. The drama to a certain extent adroitly follows the lines of the Polidori novel, but with notable changes, which are well contrived and introduced. Lord Rutwen and Aubray have been fellow travellers, but the latter has no suspicion of Rutwen's real nature. In fact he holds him in the dearest affection since once he was saved from death by his friend who, whilst shielding him from a brigand's attack, fell by a chance shot. When Lord Rutwen arrives to claim Malvina's hand it is with delight Aubray hails his preserver on whom he supposed killed by the bandit's gun. It is cleverly explained how

[p. 292]

the wound did not after all prove fatal, whereupon "Rutwen, mes desirs sont remplis" cries Aubray, "nous allons etre freres" (Ils s'embrassent). Lovette a farmer's daughter of the Marsden estate is to wed Edgar, and Rutwen graciously presents himself at the marriage feast. As Lord of the Manor he is received with every respect and homage, but he immediately proceeds to attempt Lovette's virtue. Oscar "un viellard dont la tete venerable inspire le respect. Sa demarche a quelque chose d'imposant et de mysterieux," has already warned the maiden, and she coldly avoids such ardent importunities. Whilst Rutwen is actually pursuing the coy lass who shuns his embrace, Edgar in a fury fires a pistol at the seducer and he falls crying, "Je meurs." Aubray hastening to the spot is barely in time to receive him in his arms, and with dying lips Rutwen adjures him to swear the following oath. "Promets-moi que Malvina ne saura point ce qui m'est arrive; que tu ne feras rien pour venger ma mort avant que la premiere heure de la nuit n'ait sonne. Jure-moi le secret sur ce coeur expirant." Aubray much moved cries, "Je to le jure," and as Rutwen expires they lay the body gently on the ground. "A`ce moment on voit la lune planer entierement sur le corps de Rutwen, et eclairer les glacons de la montagne. La toile tombe."

Act III. "represente un grand vestibule gothique, la porte de la chapelle se voit au fond." Oscar solemnly utters words of warning to Brigitte, who is already full of fears which are not unnoticed by Malvina. When Aubray meets his sister she speaks joyfully of her marriage but as he is about to tell her of the fatal happening suddenly Rutwen appears and seizing his arm "lui dit d'une voix sombre: 'Songe a ton serment'!" Aubray now realizes that there is some horrid secret and displays violent emotion crying out in broken tones: "Eloigne-toi fantome! . . ma soeur . . . derobe-toi, aux poursuites de ce monstre . . . il te dira qu'il est ton epoux . . . refuse ton serment . . . cet hymen est un crime" At length he is carried off by the servants who fear that he has lost his senses, an idea Rutwen encourages. In spite of this disorder the bridegroom now hotly presses on the nuptials; the great doors are opened "et laisse voir la chapelle eclairee," Rutwen and Malvina approach the altar. With a wild cry Aubray rushes in to intercept the ceremony,

[p. 293]

upon which the monster drawing his dagger is about to plunge it deep into Malvina's heart when one o'clock strikes,--his power is gone." Il laisse tomber son poignard et cherche & s'enfuir, des ombres sortent de la terre et l'entrainent avec elles; l'Ange exterminateur parait dans un nuage, la foudre eclate et les Ombres s'engloutissent avec Rutwen. Pluie de feu. TABLEAU GENERAL."

The dialogue of this melodrama is spirited, the situations striking and well managed, and even in reading the play, one can clearly visualize that upon the stage it must have been extraordinarily effective, especially when set off with all the attractions of the scene painter's glowing perspectives, the magic craft of the subtle machinist, and the richest adornment of romantic costume.[37] Even before he had introduced the Vampire on to the boards Nodier had prophesied that this macabre monster would win a veritable triumph, and his prediction was amply fulfilled. "Le Vampire epouvantera, de son horrible amour, les songes de toutes les femmes, et bientot sans doute, ce monstre encore exhume pretera son masque immobile, sa voix sepulcrale, son oeil d'un gris mort, . . . tout cet attirail de melodrame a la Melpomene des boulevards; et quel succes alors ne lui est pas reserve!"[38] On 1st July, 1819, writing in the Drapeau Blanc he was far more serious and far more emphatic: "La fable du vampire est peut-etre la plus universelle de nos superstitions. . . Elle a partout l'autorite de la tradition: elle ne manque ni de celle de la theologie ni do celle de la, medicine. La philosophie meme en a parle."

All Paris flocked to see Le Vampire, and nightly the Porte-Saint-Martin was packed to the doors. Philippe and Madame Dorval were applauded to the echo by enthusiastic audiences who recalled them again and again after the final tableau. Even the book of the play had an immense circulation and every morning Barba's counter was freshly stocked with huge piles of the duodecimo, which rapidly diminished during the day.

Not a few critics, however, adopted a very uncompromising attitude, and were unsparing in their condemnation of so popular a melodrama. In Les Lettres Normandes, 1820, (tome XI, p. 93) Le Vampire was thus noticed: "Le melodrame du Vampire dans lequel on voit paraitre un monstre

[p. 294]

qui suce le sang des petites filles et qui offre des Tableaux qu'une honnete femme ne pout voir sans rougir, est l'ouvrage de MM. Ch. Nodier, redacteur du Drapeau Blanc; Achille Jouffroy, redacteur de La Gazette et auteur des Festes de l'anarchie; et Carmouche autre redacteur du Drapeau Blanc." This censure is, however, wholly inspired by political feeling which thus inveighed against the royalist Nodier, and which not unmingled with green jealousy we also find prominent in the Conservateur litteraire of April, 1820 (Tome II, p. 245) where we had: "Pour balancer le succes du Vampire melodrame degoutant et si monstreux que les auteurs MM. Ch. Nodier et Carmouche m'ont pas ose se faire connaitre, le theatre de la Porte-Saint-Martin se prepare a representer la traduction litterale, en prose, de la Marie Stuart de Schiller."

Yet another critic is even more trenchant and severe: "Le Vampire Ruthwen veut violer ou sucer dans les coulisses une jeune fiancee qui fuit devant lui sur le theatre: cette situation est-elle morale? . . . Toute la piece represente indirectement Dieu comme un etre faible ou odieux qui abandonne le monde aux genies de l'enfer."[39]

Yet all these attacks served but to enhance the attraction, and it is remarkable for how many years this continued undiminished. In 1823 a revival of Le Vampire with Philippe and Madame Dorval again thronged the Porte-Saint-Martin to excess. Alexandre Dumas, who was present at this production has recorded how vast was his delight, how ineffable his thrills during the sombre scenes of this sepulchral melodrame. How the theatre applauded the lean livid mask of the Vampire, how it shuddered at his stealthy steps! There are, perhaps, to be found throughout the whole of the many works of Alexandre, Dumas few pages more entertaining than those chapters in his Memoires which relate with rarest humour and not a few flashes of brilliant wit his adventures at a performance of Le Vampire at the Porte-Saint-Martin in 1823. It would be difficult to find a livelier, and yet at the same time entirely serious and even critical, account of a theatrical performance. Unfortunately it is too long to give in full. In the edition of Mes Memoires, Troisieme Serie, Michel Levy, Paris, 1863, it occupies no less than five chapters, LXXIII-LXXVII, and these are none of the shortest, (pp. 136-193). One is tempted to quote some delicious passages, but the

[p. 295]

account might lose thereby; it must be read as a delightful whole. Yet there is one extract which May certainly be made without impertinence, the story of the Vampire which was related to Dumas by his neighbour "le monsieur poli qui lisait un Elzevir." They have discussed the tradition at some length, and incidentally the good bibliophile refers his young acquaintance to the work of Dom Calmet, from whom he gives ample citations. He further remarks that he has resided in Illyria for three years, and he very sharply animadverts upon certain details on Nodier's melodrama which are foreign to the vampire tradition. "You speak of vampires as though they really existed," remarks Dumas. "Of course they exist," said his neighbour dryly. "Have you ever seen one then?" "Most certainly I have." "That was whilst you were in Illyria?" "Yes."

"Et vous y avez vu des vampires?"

"Vous savez que c'est la, terre claissique des vampires, l'Illyrie, comme la Hongrie, la Servie, la Pologne.

"Non, je no sais pas . . . je ne sais rien. Ou etaient ces vampires que vous avez vus?

"A Spalatro. Je logeais chez un bonhomme de soixante-deux ans. Il mourut. Trois jours apres avoir ete enterre, il apparut la nuit a son fils et lui demanda a manger; son fils le servit selon des desirs; il mangea et disparut. Le lendemain, le fils me raconta ce qui lui etait arrive, me disant que bien certainement son pere ne reviendrait pas pour une fois, et m'invitant a me mettre, la nuit suivante, a une fenetre pour le voir entrer et sortir. J'etais curieux de voir un vampire. Je me mis a la fenetre; mais, cette nuit-la, il ne vint pas. Le fils me dit, alors, do ne pas me decourager, qu'il viendrait probablement la nuit suivante.--La nuit suivante, je me remis donc a ma fenetre, et, en effet, vers minuit, je reconnus parfaitement le vieillard. Il venait du cote de cimetiere; il marchait d'un bon pas; mais son pas ne faisait aucun bruit. Arrive a la porte, il frappa,; je comptai trois coups; les coups resonnerent secs sur le chene, comme si l'on eut frappe avec un os, et non avec un doigt. Le fils, vint ouvrir la porte, et le vieillard entra. . . .

"J'ecoutais ce recit avec la plus grande attention, et je commencais a preferer les entr'actes au melodrame.

"Ma curiosite etait trop vivement excitee, reprit men voisin,

[p. 296]

pour que je quittasse ma fenetre; j'y demeurai donc. Une demi-heure apres, le vieillard sortit; il retournait d'ou il etait venu, c'est-a-dire du cote du cimetiere. A l'angle d'une muraille, il disparut. Presque au meme instant, ma porte s'ouvrit. Je me retournai vivement, c'etait son fils. It etait fort pale. 'Et bien, lui dis-je, votre pere est venu?--Oui . . . L'avez-vous vu entrer? Entrer et sortir. . . Qu'a-t-il fait aujourd'hui? Il m'a demande a boire et a manger, comme l'autre jour. Et il a bu et mange? Il a bu et mange . . . Mais ce n'est pas le tout. . . voici ce qui m'inquiete. . . Il m'a dit . . . Ah! il vous a parle pour autre chose que pour vous demander a, boire et a manger? . . . Oui, il m'a dit: 'Voici deux fois que je viens manger chez toi. C'est a ton tour maintenant de venir manger chez moi.' Diable! . . . Je l'attends apres demain a la meme heure. Diable! Diable! Eh! oui, justement, voila ce qui me tracasse.' Le surlendemain, on le trouva mort dans son lit! Ce meme jour, deux ou trois autres, personnes du meme village qui avaient vu aussi le vieillard, et qui lui avaient parle, tomberent malades et moururent a leur tour. Il fut donc reconnu que le vieillard etait vampire. On s'informa aupres de moi; je racontai ce que favais vu et entendu. La justice se transporta au cimetiere. On ouvrit les tombeaux de tous ceux qui etaient morts depuis six semaines; tous ces, cadavres etaient en decomposition. Mais, quand on en vint au tombeau de Kisilova,--c'etait le nom du vieillard,--on le trouva les yeux ouverts, la bouche vermeille, respirant a pleins poumons, et cependant immobile, comme mort. On lui enfonca un pieu dans le coeur; il jeta un grand cri, et rendit le sang par le bouche; puis on le mit sur un bucher, on le reduisit en cendre, et l'on jeta la cendre au vent. . . . Quelque temps apres, je quittai le pays de sorte que je ne pus savoir si son fils etait devenu vampire comme lui.

"Pourquoi serait-il devenu vampire comme lui? demandai-je.

"Ah! parce que c'est l'habitude, que les personnes qui meurent du vampirisme deviennent vampires.

"En verite, vous dites cela comme si c'etait un fait avere.

"Mais c'est qu'aussi c'est un fait avere, connu, enregistre!"

It will readily be remembered that in Monte-Cristo when

[p. 297]

during the performance of Parisina at the Teatro Argentino, Rome, the Count and Haidee enter their box, the Countess G------ directing her opera-glass in that direction asks Franz d'Epinay who they may be remarking that as for herself, "All I can say is that the gentleman whose history I am unable to furnish seems to me as though he had just been dug up; be looks more like a corpse permitted by some friendly gravedigger to quit his tomb for a while, and revisit this earth of ours, than anything human. How ghastly pale he is!" "Oh, he is always as colourless as you now see him," said Franz. "Then you know him?" almost screamed the countess. "Oh! pray do, for Heaven's sake, tell us all about--is he a vampire or a resuscitated corpse, or what?" A few moments later when the lady has carefully studied the loge of their mysterious vis-a-vis, Franz demands: "Well, what do you think of our mysterious neighbour?" "Why, that he is no other than Lord Ruthven himself in a living frame," was the reply. This fresh allusion to Byron drew a smile to Franz's countenance; although he could not but allow that if anything was likely to induce belief in the existence of vampires, it would be the presence of such a man as the mysterious personage before him . . . . . Is it possible," whispered Franz, "that you entertain any fear?" "I'll tell you," answered the countess. "Byron had the most perfect belief in the existence of vampires, and even assured me he had seen some. The description he gave me perfectly corresponds with the features and character of the man before us. Oh! it is the exact personification of what I have been led to expect. The coal-black hair, large bright, glittering eyes, in which a wild, unearthly fire seems burning,-the same ghastly paleness!"[40]

Nearly thirty years after Dumas in collaboration with Maquet utilized the theme of Le Vampire for his own drama of the same name which was given at the Ambigu-Comique, 20th December, 1851, and which may conveniently be considered here.

Le Vampire is described as a "Drame Fantastique en Cinq Actes, en Dix Tableaux" and there are very many characters in this remarkable play. The principal parts were taken as follows: Lord Ruthwen, M. Arnault; Gilbert de Tiffauges, M. Goujet; Juan Rozo, a Spanish inn-keeper, M. Coquet;

[p. 298]

Botaro, his son-in-law, M. Curcy; Lazare, M. Laurent; Lahennee, M. Thierry; Jarwick, M. Lavergne; the Ghoul, Mme. Lucie Mabire; Helene de Tiffauges, Mile. Jane Essler; Juana, Mile. Marie Clarisse; Antonia, Mlle. Daroux; Petra, Rozo's daughter, Mile. Heloise; and the mystic fairy Melusine, Mlle. Isabelle Constant. Lazare is a capital character, but the intrusion from Oriental legend of the ghoul cannot be considered happy. On the other hand the appearance of Melusine, whose legend was collected about the end of the fourteenth century by Jean d'Arras, is certainly effective and entirely in keeping with the history, since according to Paracelsus she was an occult power, and in folk lore she is often represented as protecting ancient houses--in Belgium she is the guardian of the old family de Gavre,--whilst one of her four sons became King of Brittany.

It is hardly necessary to do more than give the very briefest outline of the story as Dumas tells it. The play opens with a crowded scene of merrymakers in the patio of Juan Rozo's inn. They are celebrating the nuptials of his daughter with young Botaro, and every room is occupied by his friends. and acquaintance in festive mood. Juana, who is staying at the hostlery seeks for a guide to the castle of Tormenar, which lies at some little distance, for there she is to meet Don Luis de Figuerroa, whom she will wed upon the following day. She has secretly left the convent of Annunciades, where she was a boarder, since her father has other designs for her hand, and accordingly it is necessary that she should meet her betrothed in some lonely spot. But nobody, not even the good-natured Lazare, the servant of the inn, will conduct her to the haunted castle, "un chateau qui est en ruine, un chateau qui ne loge que des reptiles, et qui n'heberge que des fantomes." However, a numerous company, amongst whom is Gilbert de Tiffauges, arrives at the inn, and these travellers on being told that they cannot be accommodated in spite of the fact that night is falling, incontinently resolve to take up their quarters in Tormenar, so in spite of the warnings about ghosts and goblins, having once well stocked themselves with wine and food they merrily set forth, Gilbert taking charge of Juana who has confided to him her story. However, a mysterious figure, a lady, apparently of rank, who has been staying at the inn watches them as they take

[p. 299]

their departure and mutters to herself as she fixes her gaze upon Juana: "Il te faut deux heures pour aller retrouver ton beau fiance. . . . Je l'aurai joint dans trois minutes!" She is in fact the ghoul, a female vampire, and with the speed of lightning she has gone to destroy the unfortunate Don Luis.

In the second Act we see the huge Gothic hall of the old castle. A door opens and from an inner chamber the ghoul rushes out exclaiming: "Il etait jeune! Il etait beau! . . . Me voila, redevenue jeune et belle!" The voice of Gilbert is now heard, and with the cry, "A l'an prochain, Gilbert." she disappears from sight. It will be remarked that in his treatment of the vampire tradition Dumas has adopted the legend that the vampire must year by year rejuvenate his waning forces by absorbing the life of another and sucking from another's veins fresh blood, a detail which although it may recommend itself to, and legitimately be used by, the dramatist and the writer of romances is actually inexact and but rarely to be met with, and only then in folk-lore not of the first value. The travellers, no small party, spread their provisions upon the huge tables in the old hall and laughing at the stories of ghosts and apparitions are soon in convivial mood. The conversation, however, eventually turns on the supernatural and Gilbert tells of his old home in Brittany, where one room in the castle is hung with the tapestry of the Fairy Melusine, representing this lady and all her attendants. The story goes that if any of the family sleeps in that room she will descend from the tapestry and reveal his fortune, warning him of danger should such threaten. Another companion who has sojourned in Epirus speaks of the vampires, the women who will attack men and leave them dead and sapless; the men who will attack women to drink their blood. Just as the words are uttered Lord Ruthwen enters and announces himself as a belated traveller, who, finding no room at Rozo's inn down in the village has made his way thither,-he has even taken Lazare into his service. Presently the company disperse to their several rooms to make themselves as comfortable as may be for the night in such difficult circumstances. To his horror Gilbert discovers in the chamber he is to occupy the body of a young man, strangely pale, with a slight wound in the throat. By a letter he finds near upon the body it is plain that this can be none other

[p. 300]

than the unfortunate Don Luis. At the same moment a piercing cry is heard, and Juana ghostly pale and dying totters from her room. Gilbert rushes to her assistance just in time to see Lord Ruthwen dart out after her as she falls dead at his feet. In a moment he has drawn his sword and strikes Ruthwen to the heart, before he recognizes who it may be. In faltering accents Ruthwen explains that hearing a cry he has gone to the assistance of the lady, and with his last breath he implores Gilbert, who is well-nigh distracted at the unhappy accident, to bear his body to the hillside, where it may be bathed in the earliest rays of the new moon. This Gilbert promises, and in the final tableau we see the body of Lord Ruthwen laid upon the mountain. The moon slowly issues from the clouds, and as its silver light falls upon the corpse it seems as though the eyes opened and the mouth smiled. A moment more and the Vampire leaps to his feet re-vitalized and with fresh energy for some new demoniac enterprise.

In Act III. we find ourselves in Brittany, about a year later, at the chateau de Tiffauges where Helene awaits her brother's return. After an affectionate greeting he confides to her the secret of his love for Antonia a lady of Spalatro in Dalmatia, and she in her turn informs him that she is about to give her hand to the Baron de Marsden. This latter proves to be none other than Lord Ruthwen, who informs Gilbert that he was sore wounded indeed at Tormenar, but that certain kindly shepherds finding him on the mountain side nursed him back to life. Moreover, he explains his change of name by informing them that his elder brother having recently died, he has succeeded to the title and estates. Visiting Tiffauges in the hope of meeting Gilbert once more, he has fallen a victim to the charms of Helene. The explanation is cleverly contrived, but at the same time Gilbert is hardly convinced; he feels that there is some mysterious and terrible secret lurking in the background. A happy idea strikes him. He will sleep that night in the tapestry chamber of the lady Melusine. The scene that follows must have been extraordinarily effective upon the stage. Gilbert is slumbering, and from their places in the tapestry step forth Melusine and her court to warn the scion of her house that danger is near. From the framed canvas and the panels descend with stately stride

[p. 301]

the old barons to tell their descendant of the horror that encompasses him, Melusine reveals the secret.

"Prions, pour qu' a Gilbert Dieu tout-puissant inspire Un genereux effort.
 Ruthwen est un demon, Ruthwen est un vampire; Son amour, c'est la mort!"

(One cannot but recall the famous scene in Gilbert and Sullivan's Ruddigore with its subtle admixture of beauty, fantasy and humour.)

In Act IV of Le Vampire we are shown the accomplishment of Ruthwen's designs against Helene. Gilbert's frenzied warnings and denunciations are heard with alarm but with unbelief. They whisper that he is a lunatic, and when Ruthwen relates a cunning story of a mischance in Spain which temporarily unsettled Gilbert's reason, a story that seems borne out in every detail by the unhappy brother's horror and despair, the attendants for his own safety seek to restrain their young master. Ruthwen triumphs. But now the ghoul appears and bids him take heed how he seeks Gilbert's life for that is hers, and she will not likely relinquish her prey. Ruthwen defies her and the two vampires part in horrid enmity. Lazare cautions Helene that her brother's story is no figment, but it is too late, the vampire seizes his victim and as midnight strikes, he destroys his hapless bride and quaffs his fill from her veins. Too late Gilbert succeeds in forcing an entrance. There is a terrific struggle, and Ruthwen is hurled from the window into the depths of a tremendous valley.

In the last act we find that in order to escape the pursuit of Ruthwen, who has extricated himself unhurt but filled with designs of even more malignant vengeance, Gilbert has transported Antonia to Circassia. Here, however, we meet the ghoul who, disguising herself under the name of Ziska, obtained admittance to the castle in the quality of an attendant upon Antonia. She informs Gilbert that she alone can save his betrothed from the vampire, and at that moment the ghastly face of Ruthwen is actually seen peering through the window. She demands that he shall relinquish Antonia's hand, and accept her love though it be to death. He refuses to betray Antonia, and at length by a supreme act of renunciation she divulges the secret whereby the Vampire may be annihilated, although this revelation must put an end to her own

[p. 302]

existence. Ziska explains how Gilbert's sword is to be blessed by a priest with a certain occult formula and if the weapon thus consecrated be driven through the Vampire's heart it will once and for all rid the world of this infernal pest. Yet as she speaks she seems to vanish in flames and they hear her last sad sigh; "Adieu pour ce monde! Adieu pour l'autre! Adieu pour l'eternite"!

The final scene is a deserted cemetery. "Tombes, cypres. Fond sombre et fantastique; neige sur la terre; lune rouge au ciel." The Vampire lies half in and half out of his grave, grinning hideously. Gilbert is standing near. "Pour la derniere fois, adore Dieu!" he adjures. "Non," yells the monster. "Alors, desespere et meurs"! cries Gilbert and plunges the hallowed sword into the monster's heart. The Vampire falls back into the grave, howling fearfully, and a heavy stone closing him in fast seals him there in the womb of the earth for ever and ever. "Au nom du Seigneur, Ruthwen, je to scelle dans cette tombe pour l'eternite", et Gilbert trace sur la pierre une croix que devient lumineuse. A great aureola fills the sky and. multitudes of rejoicing angels are seen. Among them are Helene and Juana, smiling in happiest benison, whilst there rises from the earth the body of Ziska, radiant and beautiful, to join the glorious throng among whose immortal ranks she is enrolled by the merits of her great act of renunciation and unselfish love.

This drama of Dumas is infinitely more elaborate than the play of Nodier, but I am not altogether certain whether it is in some respects so good a work. The first two acts attain a high level; the scene in the tapestry chamber would be most picturesque upon the stage; there are several other telling situations and effective speeches, but as a whole it is too prolix, and we feel that the episode of Antonia in particular is an anti-climax. Nor, as I have remarked before, although material use is made of the character, can one consider the figure of the ghoul entirely in keeping with the rest. Had the level of the opening scenes been maintained we should possess an excellent piece of work. But without concentration and compression that was hardly possible, and here we have the secret of Nodier's success. Although he has an occasional crudity, it may be, which Dumas might not have tolerated, so swift is his action, as is essential to

[p. 303]

melodrama, so cleverly does he engage the interest of his audience, that we have no time to criticize a roughness here and there, but are rather intent to follow the next turn of the tale.

Immediately upon the furore created by Nodier's Le Vampire at the Porte-Saint-Martin in 1819 vampire plays of every kind from the most luridly sensational to the most farcically ridiculous pressed on to the boards. A contemporary critic cries: "There is not a theatre in Paris without its Vampire! At the Porte-Saint-Martin we have le Vampire; at the Vaudeville le Vampire again; at the Varietes les trois Vampires ou le clair de la lune."

Jean Larat[41] further mentions a play by Paul Feval, Le fils Vampire. The version by John Wilson Ross of The Loves of Paris, a romance, published by G. Vickers, 3, Catherine Street, Strand, 1846, is said to be "Translated from the French of Paul Feval, author of 'The Vampire,' 'The Loves of the Palais-Royal,' 'The Receipt at Midnight,' 'Stella,' 'The Son of the Devil,' etc., etc.", but it does not appear whether "The Vampire" mentioned here is a play or a romance. Probably it is the latter but no such translation is known.

Le Vampire which was produced at the Vaudeville, 15 June, 1820,[42] is a comedic-vaudeville in one act by Scribe and Melesville. The scene is laid Hungary, "une salle d'un chateau gothique," and the characters are as follows: Le Comte de Valberg, feld-marechal, M. Guillemin; Adolphe de Valberg, son neveu, M. Isambert; le Baron do Lourdorff, M. Fontenay; Saussmann, concierge du chateau, M. Hippolyte; Charles, valet du comte, M. Fichet; un Notaire, M. Justin; Hermance de Mansfred, Madame Riviere; Nancy, sa soeur, Madame Lucie; Peters, filleul de Saussmann, Madame Minette; with attendance of domestics and wedding guests. This elegant little piece opens with nuptials of Hermance de Mansfred at the castle of the Baron de Lourdorff, to whom she is betrothed. It appears that she has something trifled with the affections of Adolphe de Valberg, now supposed dead. Her sister, Nancy, acknowledges that she loved Adolphe, but kept silence owing to his courtship of Hermance. Adolphe's uncle, the Count de Valberg, who knows nothing of the two ladies, fearing his nephew is unworthily entangled has had him held in military detention at Temesvar, whence

[p. 304]

however he has disappeared. The intrigue of the seventeen scenes, although clearly unravelled in the play, is a little complicated, and it must suffice to relate by an accident Adolphe appears at the castle. Upon being asked his name he answers: "Lord Ruthwen. An Englishman," whereupon he is immediately taken to be a Vampire and the servants are thrown into a state of panic. Eventually he is reconciled to his uncle who recognizes him as the brave young hero by whom his life was saved on a recent battlefield; Nancy's fidelity is rewarded with the hand of the man she loves, and who now realizes that Hermance's heart was never his; so that the curtain falls upon a double wedding.

Several Pretty lyrics are interwoven with the dialogue and Nancy's first song, to the air "De sommeiller, encor ma chere from Fanchon la vielleuse, is as follows:

Oui, ces paysans respectables
 Nous rapellent le bon vieux temps:
 Chez eux on croit encore au diable,
 Aux vampires, au revenants;
 On croit a toutes les magies,
 Aux amours, aux soins assidus,
 Aux grands sorciers, aux grands genies . . .
 Bref a tout ce qu'on ne voit plus!

Les Trois Vampires, ou le clair de, la lune[43] which was being played at the Varietes is a thoroughly amusing farce in one act by Brazier, Gabriel, and Armand. It shows the adventures of a bon bourgeois, M. Gobetout, who has so distracted his brain by reading stories of Vampires and ghosts that when one night he sees in his garden three shadowy figures he is well nigh beside himself with terror as he supposes they can be no other than three vampires infesting his house. A little later he catches sight of his two daughters and their abigail who appear actually to be eating with the mysterious strangers. "Les vampires qui soupent avec mes filles!" he groans in accents of despair. However it proves that the supper is very material, cold chicken and a glass of good wine, whilst the rendezvous is of an amorous nature, since the visitors are two young sparks and their valet. So the play ends with a triple marriage. One remark of the worthy M. Gobetout was, it is said, nightly greeted with a hurricane of applause. He was wont to murmur in pensive accents: "Les vampires

[p. 305]

il nous viennent d'Angleterre . . . C'est encore une gentilesse de ces Messieurs . . . ils nous font de jolis cadeaux!"

Another farce, Encore un Vampire, which when produced in 1820 at Paris, met with considerable success, was published as by Emile B. L., and yet another vampire burlesque was contributed by A. Rousseau. Les Etrennes d'un Vampire at a minor theatre was billed as from a manuscript "trouve au cimitiere de Pere-Lachaise."

More amusing is the work of Desaugiers who in August, 1820, gave Cadet Buteux, vampire, avec relation veridique du prologue et des trois actes de cet epouvantable melodrame ecrit sous la dictee de ce passeux du Gros Caillou, par son secretaire, Desaugiers. When published by Rosa, 1820, this libretto bore the motto: "Vivent les morts!"

Yet another burlesque published by Martinet, 1820, is Le Vampire, melodrame en trois actes, paroles de Pierre de la Fosse de la rue des Morts.[44] A few verses from this vaudeville may be interesting to quote, particularly as showing the long continued popularity of Nodier's melodrama.

Lisant pour un sou d'politique
 Plac' Royale, sur un banc,
 J'tombe, le tour est diabolique,
 A' point nomme, sur l'Drapeau blanc.

J'prends un billet, non pas pour le parterre,
 Ces places sont reservees aux amis,
 Sans l'secours de l'abbe Saint-Pierre,
 Avec treiz sous' j'monte au paradis.

Au dernier bane, paix, qu'chacun s'taise
 A' bas la gueule on crie du premier rang,
 L'rideau s'leve et quoique tres mal a l'aise,
 Le croirez-vous, j'vois le Pere Lachaise,
 Du dernier bane.

The Vampire is described as "d'echappe de corbillard," One sees everywhere

Des fantoms, des revenans,
 Mettant la tete a la fenetre,
 Afin d'regarder les passans.

There was even a Polichinel Vampire which when performed at the Circus Maurice in 1822 attracted all who had a mind

[p. 306]

for a hearty laugh, and a contemporary visitor[45] to Paris merrily wrote that "Polichinel is the very jolliest fellow in the world."[46]

A comic operetta in one act, Le Vampire by Martin Joseph Mengals which was produced at Ghent, 1 March, 1826, deserves no more than passing mention.

James Robinson Planche speedily adapted Nodier's Le Vampire as The Vampire, or, The Bride of the Isles, and his version with music by Joseph Binns Hart[47] was brought out at the English Opera House, 9th August, 1820, with T. P. Cooke[48] as Ruthven, Earl of Marsden, the Vampire. Owing to his fine acting in the part, and perhaps a little to the scenic effects--the scene is laid in the Caverns of Staffa--the play was given nightly to packed houses. It is interesting to remark that for this piece the celebrated vampire trap was invented. Of this I quote the following simple description: "A vampire trap consists of two or more flaps, usually india-rubber, through which the sprite can disappear almost instantly, where he falls into a blanket fixed to the under surface of the stage. As with the star trap, this trap is secured against accidents by placing another piece or slide, fitting close beneath when not required, and removed when the prompter's bell gives the signal to make ready."

The following account of the production of The Vampire is given by Planche in his Recollections and Reflections, Chapter III.[49] Having just spoken of an Easter piece with which he had furnished Drury Lane, Abudah, or, The Talisman of Oromanes,[50] founded upon one of the Tales of the Genii[51] and which although it had a run of nine nights Planche calls a very poor piece, "miserably put on the stage," he continues to speak of a subsequent success, and tells us: "A more fortunate melodrama of mine, "The Vampire, or The Bride of the Isles," was produced at the Lyceum, or English Opera House, as it was then called, 9th August, 1820. Mr. Samuel James Arnold, the proprietor and manager, had placed in my hands, for adaptation, a French melodrama, entitled "Le Vampire," the scene of which was laid, with the usual recklessness of French dramatists, in Scotland, where the superstition never existed. I vainly endeavoured to induce Mr. Arnold to let me change it to some place in the East of Europe. He had set his heart on Scotch music and dresses--

[p. 307]

the latter, by the way, were in stock--laughed at my scruples, assured me that the public would neither know nor care--and in those days they certainly did not--and therefore there was nothing left for me but to do my best with it. The result was most satisfactory to the management. The situations were novel and effective; the music lively and popular; the cast strong, comprising T. P. Cooke, who made a great hit in the principal character, Harley, Bartley, Pearman, Mrs. Chatterley and Miss Love. The trap now so well known as "the Vampire trap" was invented for this piece, and the final disappearance of the Vampire caused quite a sensation. The melodrama had a long run, was often revived, and is to this day a stock piece in the country. I had an opportunity many years afterwards, however, to treat the same subject in a manner much more satisfactory to myself, and, as it happened, in the same theatre, under the same management; but of that anon."

The full cast of The Vampire, or, The Bride of the Isles was originally as follows: "In the Introductory Vision"; Unda, Spirit of the Flood, Miss Love; Ariel, Spirit of the Air, Miss Worgman; The Vampire, Mr. T. P. Cooke; Lady Margaret, Mrs. Chatterly. "In the Drama ": Ruthven, Earl of Marsden, the Vampire, Mr. T. P. Cooke; Ronald, Baron of the Isles, Mr. Bartley; Robert, an English Attendant on the Baron, Mr. Pearman; M'Swill, the Baron's Henchman, Mr. Harley; Andrew, Steward to Ruthven, Mr. Minton; Father Francis, Mr. Shaw; Lady Margaret, Daughter of Ronald, Mrs. Chatterly; Effie, Daughter of Andrew, Miss Carew; Bridget Lord Ronald's Housekeeper, Mrs. Grove. With regard to the costumes of which Planche speaks it is interesting to remark that the principal characters Ruthven and Lady Margaret are described as follows: Ruthven, Silver breast plate, studded with steel buttons; plaid kilt; philibeg; flesh arms and leggings; sandals; Scotch hat and feathers; sword and dagger. Lady Margaret, white satin dress, trimmed with plaid and silver; plaid silk sash; Scotch hat and feather. This is in the true transpontine tradition of Ossianic attire. The play is timed to take one hour and thirty minutes in representation-and Planche has done his work of adaptation very well, although I doubt whether his few slight departures from the original are improvements. Nevertheless he has

[p. 308]

given the dialogue a native turn and an ease which were at this period too often lacking in similar versions from the French.

In 1825, T. P. Cooke visited Paris and appeared as Le Monstre at the Porte-Saint-Martin in Planche's melodrama which proved a remarkable success, running for no less than eighty nights.

The Vampire or The Bride of the Isles has its place among the repertory of Hodgson's "Juvenile Drama," and this in itself is an indication of no small popularity.

In The Second Maiden's Tragedy,[52] a Globe play of 1611, licensed for the stage by Sir George Buc on 31st October of that year, a macabre drama now generally attributed to Tourneur,[53] there are some remarkable scenes which culminate in something very like necrophilia, and a perverse ill-omened melancholy pervades the whole action. In Act IV the Tyrant, a usurper, ordering soldiers to attend him with "Lanthornes and a pickax" makes his way at midnight to the Cathedral, crying:

Death nor the marble prison my love sleeps in
 Shall keep her body lockt up from mine arms.
 I must not be so cozened.

A little later: "Enter the Tirant agen at a farder dore, which opened, bringes hym to the Toombe wher the Lady lies buried; The Toombe here discouered ritchly set forthe." He adjures the sepulchre:

The house of silence and the Calms of rest
 After tempestuous life, I claim of thee
 A mistress one of the most beauteous sleepers
 That ever lay so cold.

The vault is forced, whilst the lover soliloquizes:

O the moon rises; what reflection
 Is thrown about the sanctified building,
 E'en in a twinkling, how the monuments glisten
 As if Death's palaces were all massy silver
 And scorned the name of marble. Art thou cold?
 I have no faith in't, yet I believe none.
 Madam; 'tis I, sweet lady, pry'thee speak
 'Tis thy love calls on thee; thy king, thy servant.
 No! not a word, all prisoners to pale silence
 I'll prove a kiss.

[p. 309]

First Soldier:

Here's chill venery!
 'Twould make a pandar's heels ache. I'll be sworn
 All my teeth chatter in my head to see't.

Tyrant:

By th' mass, thou'rt cold indeed. Beshrew thee for't,
 Unkind to thine own blood? Hard hearted lady,
 What injury hast thou offered to the youth
 And pleasure of thy days: refuse the Court
 And steal to this hard lodging, was that wisdom
 .      .      .      .      Since thy life has left me
 I'll clasp the body for the spirit that dwelt in't,
 And love the house still for the mistress' sake.
 Thou art mine now spite of destruction
 And Govianus; and I will possess thee.
 I once read of a Herod whose affection.
 Pursued a virgin's love as I did thine,
 Who for the hate she owed him killed herself
 (As thou too rashly didst), without all pity;
 Yet he preserved her body dead in honey,
 And kept her long after her funeral:
 But I'll unlock the treasure house of art
 With keys of gold and bestow all on thee
 Here slaves receive her humbly from our arms,
 .      .      .      .      So reverently
 Bear her before us gently to our palace.
 Place you the stone again where we first found it.

After a while the scene is in the palace: "They bringe the Body in a Chaire drest up in black veluet which setts out the pailenes of the handes and face, And a faire Chayne of pearle crosse her brest and the Crucyfex aboue it; He standes silent awhile letting the Musique play, beeknyng the soldiers that bringe her in to make obeisaunce to her, and he hym self makes a lowe honour to the body and kisses the hande. A song within in Voyces.

Song:

O what is Beauty that's so much adored
 A flattring glass that cozens her beholders.
 The Night of Death makes it look pale and horrid
 The Daynty preseru'd flesh how soone it molders
     To loue it lyuinge it bewitchett manye
     But after life is seldom heard of any."

Tyrant:

How pleasing art thou to us even in death
 I love thee yet, above all women living
 And shall do seven years hence. [p. 310]
 I can see nothing to be mended in thee
 But the too constant paleness of thy cheek.
 I'd give the kingdom, but to purchase there
 The breadth of a red Rose, in natural colour,
 And think it the best bargain that ever king made yet,
 But Fate's my hinderer,
 And I must only rest content with Art,
 And that I'll have in spite on't.

Accordingly an artist in painting and perfumery is summoned to adorn the face of the corpse and give it a fresh lively red colour. However this merchant of cosmetics is none other than Govianus, the rightful heir, disguised, and he fucuses the dead cheeks and lips with a peter which is confected with a strong poison, so that when the Tyrant lustfully kisses the cold flesh, he is blasted with the venom and falls in the agonies of death. The incident is extremely powerful, if extremely horrible. As the Tyrant expires Govianus taunts him thus

O thou sacrilegious villain,
 Thou thief of rest, robber of monuments,
 Cannot the body after funeral
 Sleep in the grave for thee? Must it be raised?
 Only to please the wickedness of thine eye?
 Does all things end with death and not thy lust?
 Hast thou devised a new way to damnation,
 More dreadful than the soul of any sin
 Did ever pass yet between earth and hell?

A very large number of plays are founded upon what may be termed the "Romeo and Juliet" motive, the awakening, or the restoration to life in some sort, of a loved one supposed dead, arousing from a trance, it may be, or a coma, a theme admitting almost innumerable variants. In the Italian, French and German theatres alone--nor does this rough list pretend to be exhaustive--we have Sforza d' Oddi's Imorti vivi (1576); Pagnini's Imorti vivi (1600); Rota's La morta viva (1674); Douville's Les morts vivans (1654); Quinault's Le fantome amoureux (1659); Boursault's Le Mort vivant (1662); Sedaine's Der Tote ein Freyer (1778); Kurlander's Der tote Neffe; Friedrich Rambach's Der Scheintote; Leopold Huber's Der Scheintote; Theodore Friedrich's Die Scheintoten; F. L. W. Meyer's Der Verstorbene; G. Lebrun's Die Verstorbenen; Tenelli's Der Verstorbene; Holbein's "romantisches Gemalde" Der Verstorbene; Paers' opera Die lebenden Toten; and a ballet

[p. 311]

(1803) Der lebendige Tote; cum multis aliis quae nunc perscribere longum est.

It may be convenient here briefly to review the progress of the Vampire in the theatre, at least in his most important appearances.

An Italian opera, I vampiri, the work of the much applauded Neapolitian composer Silvestro di Palma, which was performed at the Teatro San Carlo[54] in 1800 did not of course take anything from the novel by Polidori which indeed, it preceded by nearly twenty years. but was rather inspired by the famous treatise of Guiseppe Davanzati: Dissertazione sopra i Vampiri di Gioseppe Davanzati Patrizio Fiorentino e Tranese, Cavaliere Gerosolimitano, Arcivescovo di Trani, e Patriarca d'Alessandria. (Seconda edizione.) Nalopi. M.D.CC.LXXXIX. Presso Filippo Raimondi. Con licenzi de' Superiori.

On 28th March, 1828,[65] at Leipzig, was produced an opera, "Grosse romantische Oper," Der Vampyr, founded on the original French melodrama, the scene being changed from Scotland to Hungary. The libretto is by Wilhelm August Wohlbruck and the music by his yet more famous brother-in-law Heinrich August Marschner. Der Vampyr was an enormous success. A free adaptation of this being made by J. R. Planche, and produced at the Lyceum, 25th August, 1829, it ran for sixty nights. In his Recollections and Reflections which have before been quoted, Planche commences Chapter X by some account of this. "In the summer of 1829 I had the opportunity of treating the subject of 'The Vampire' in accordance with my own ideas of propriety. The French melodrama had been converted into an opera for the German stage, and the music composed by Marschner.

"Mr. Hawes, who had obtained a score of it, having induced Mr. Arnold to produce it at the Lyceum, I was engaged to write the libretto, and consequently laid the scene of action in Hungary, where the superstition exists to this day, substituted for a Scotch chieftain a Wallachian Boyard, and in many other respects improved upon my earlier version. The opera was extremely well sung, and the costumes novel as well as correct, thanks to the kindness of Dr. Walsh, the traveller,[66] who gave me some valuable information respecting the national dresses of the Magyars and the Wallachians.

[p. 312]

"I am surprised that Marschner's most dramatic and melodious works, 'Der Vampyr,' 'Die Judin,' &c., have not been introduced to our more advanced musical audiences at one or other of our great operatic establishments.

"The production of 'Der Vampyr' was followed by that of 'The Brigand' at Drury Lane."

Polidori's tale formed the basis of a romantic opera in three acts, the libretto of which was from the pen of C. M. Heigel, and the music by p. von Lindpaintner. This was seen at Stuttgart on 2 Ist September, 1828, and it proved a remarkable success. It was announced as being from "Byron's famous tale," although at this date such an attribution can hardly have deceived any.

On 25th May, 1857, there was produced in Berlin a "Komischen Zauber-Ballet Morgano" by Paul Taglioni with music by J. Hertzel. The scene is laid in Hungary during the seventeenth century, and in the sixth tableau Elsa dances an infernal lavolta with the vampires in their haunted castle, but she is rescued by her lover, Retzka, who slays the vampire Morgano with a consecrated poniard. In 1861 at Milan appeared a ballet by Rotta, Il vampiro, with music by Paolo Giorza. Guten Abend Herr Fischer! oder, Der Vampyr is a light vaudeville in one act by G. Belly and G. Loffler, with music by W. Telle, which had some success in its day. Ein Vampyr by Ulrich Franks (Ulla Wolf) given at Vienna in 1877 is a farce taken from Scribe.

In England Dion Boucicault's[57] The Vampire, in three acts was produced at the Princess's Theatre, London, 19th June, 1852, when the author made his first appearance before a metropolitan audience. Of this drama the following criticism, if criticism it may be called, was given by Henry Morley in his "Journal of a London Playgoer." It must be remembered that Morley continually shows himself extremely prejudiced and his censure must not be taken any more seriously than we regard the ill-word of many critics to-day, for example, the shrill petulant piping and the childish miffs of St. John Ervine in the sullens. Under 19th June Morley writes: "If there be any truth in the old adage, that 'when things are at the worst they must mend,' the bettering of Spectral Melodrama is not distant; for it has reached the extreme point of inanity in the new piece which was produced on

[p. 313]

Monday at the Princess's Theatre, under the attractive title of The Vampire.

"Its plot is chiefly copied from a piece which some years ago turned the Lyceum into a Chamber of Horrors; but it has been spun out into three parts, facetiously described as 'Three Dramas': the little period of a century has been interposed between each part; and, in order that the outrage on the possible shall be complete, the third part is projected forward into the year that will be 1860! By this ingenious arrangement, the resuscitation of the original Vampire has been enabled to supply the lovers of the revolting at the Princess's with three acts of murder--that is, two consumated, and one attempted; but, as the delicate process of vampirical killing is exactly after the same pattern in each case, the horror is quite worn out before the career of the creature terminates. Nothing but tedious trash remains.

"To 'an honest ghost' one has no objection; but an animated corpse which goes about in Christian attire, and although never known to eat, or drink, or shake hands, is allowed to sit at good men's feasts; which renews its odious life every hundred years by sucking a young lady's blood, after fascinating her by motions which resemble mesmerism burlesqued; and which, notwithstanding its well-purchased longevity, is capable of being killed during its term in order that it may be revived by moonbeams--such a ghost as this passes all bounds of toleration.

"The monster of absurdity was personated by its reviver Mr. Boucicault, with due paleness of visage, stealthiness of pace, and solemnity of tone; the scenery, especially a moonlit ridge amidst the heights of Snowdon, was beautiful, and the costumes were prettily diversified; but the dreary repetition of fantastical horror almost exhausted even the patience which a benefit enjoins. Unfortunately, the mischief of such a piece, produced at a respectable theatre, does not end with the weariness of the spectators, who come to shudder and remain to yawn; for it is not only 'beside the purpose of playing,' but directly contravenes it; and though it may be too dull to pervert the tastes of those who witness its vapid extravagances, it has power to bring discredit on the most genial of arts."

It may be pointed out that this account, probably through ignorance, possibly of intent, is deliberately inaccurate. [p. 314] Although confessedly a poorer play than Planche's The Vampire Dion Boucicault's drama is not derived from the earlier piece, but both are taken from the same source, Polidori's romance. Seeing that Henry Morley was Emeritus Professor of English Literature in University College, London, it were reasonable to suppose that he should have been acquainted with Polidori's novella. Or perhaps I rather ought to say that therefor it was not to be expected he should have known of this famous work.

Boucicault afterwards revived The Vampire as The Phantom, and this was given in London with good applause. The American cast of the characters of The Phantom, "As Produced at Wallack's Theatre, New York City," is as follows: In Act I (1645), The Phantom, Dion Boucicault; Lord Albert Clavering, Mr. J. B. Howe; Sir Hugh Neville of Graystock, Mr. Ralton; Sir Guy Musgrave, Mr. Etynge; Ralph Gwynne, Mr. Levere; Davy, Mr. T. B. Johnstone; Lucy Peveryl, Miss Agnes Robertson; Ellen, Miss Alleyne; Maud, Miss Ada Clare; Janet, Mrs. H. P. Grattan. In Act II (1750), Alan Raby, Dion Boucicault; Colonel Raby, Mr. Ralton; Edgar, his nephew, Mr. J. B. Howe; Dr. Rees, Mr. Burnett; Curate, Mr. Paul; Corporal Stump, Mr. Peters; Ada Raby, Miss Agnes Robertson; Jenny, Mrs. L. H. Allen.

Subsequently, I presume when The Phantom was given in London, some modifications were made which seem to me most decidedly to be improvements. The first act was placed in the latter part of the reign of Charles II, and two hundred years were supposed to elapse between the first and the second acts. This necessitated trifling changes in the dialogue at certain points; and naturally a complete alteration of costume to a modern style for Act II. In fact the script of the play which is printed in Dicks' Standard Plays, No. 697, (c. 1887) under "Costume" gives the following direction": "The costumes in the First Act are of the period of the latter part of the reign of Charles the Second. In the Second Art the respective characters are dressed in the provincial costume of Wales at the middle of the present century, The following description of Alan Raby's costume for each act will show the necessity of a complete change in the style of dress which this drama requires.

Alan Raby.--First Act: A Puritan's suit of black serge, bound with black velvet---cloak and breeches to match-black

[p. 315]

belt and buckle-black gauntlets---shirt collar thrown back so as to show the throat bare-black stockings-black velvet shoes with strap across the instep--black sugar-loaf hat and broad riband and steel buckle--phosphoric livid countenance--slightly bald head--long black lank hair combed behind the ears--bushy black eyebrows and heavy black moustache. 2nd dress: Black dress coat and overcoat of the same colour--black trousers--black waistcoat--black kid gloves, white wristbands over them--white cravat and black German hat--all modern, and such as would be worn by a gentleman at the present time." In the theatre such a contrast would have proved very effective.

I notice that Boucicault has in certain scenes borrowed his situations pretty freely from Le Vampire of Dumas, and occasionally he has even conveyed actual dialogue from the French play.

At the commencement of The Phantom we are shown a room in a Welsh inn, and it appears that Davy and Janet the hostess have just been married. A sudden storm sends Lucy Peveryl thither for shelter, and she confides to Janet that she is on her way to meet at sundown her cousin Roland Peveryl, who is a fugitive and proscribed. On this account he dare not openly seek her hand, but the lovers are secretly betrothed. He has promised to meet her, in order to bid her farewell for a time, in the most unfrequented spot, the ruins of Raby Castle. No sooner does Janet hear that name than she cries out with horror, and speaks of a fearful story connected with the place. They are interrupted by the arrival of Lord Clavering with a party of guests, amongst whom are friends of Lucy. She frankly informs them of her rendezvous, and they decide to accompany her, more especially as the inn has not sufficient accommodation for the travellers, who resolve to take provisions and wine and spend the night in the deserted chambers of the old castle. Davy endeavours to prevent them, nor are his efforts altogether selfish. He tells them: "No one ever sought a night's shelter in the ruins of Raby Castle, that ever lived to see the morning. . . . Within the ruins of Raby dwells some terrible thing--man or fiend! . . . No traveller that knows the road will ever venture near that spot after nightfall; but strange wayfarers, benighted in the storm have wandered to this place of shelter, and the next morning they are found--dead--each with a wound in his throat in the right side, from which they

[p. 316]

have evidently bled to death;--but no blood is spilt around, the face is white and fixed, as if it had died of horror." "And he, my betrothed," cries Lucy, "Roland is there." Nevertheless the company laugh at these old stories and determine to make their way to the old castle. This they actually find in far better state than they have been led to expect, and their servants who have insisted upon Davy showing them the way soon get a very fair supper from the provisions they have purchased at his inn. Roland Peveryl is not to be found, but whilst they are eating a stranger enters, a Puritan, and announces himself as Gervase Rookwood, a traveller who has lost his way in the mountains. Davy, however, almost collapses with terror. He recollects that many years before the castle belonged to Sir Owen Raby, a noble cavalier, while Alan Raby, his younger brother had joined the forces of Cromwell. Taking advantage of this difference the traitor one midnight with a band of Puritan soldiers surprises the castle, and butchers the sleeping garrison, killing his brother with his own hand. About a year later, however, the tables are turned, the Royalists recapture the place, Alan Raby is seized, and in their rage they hurl the fratricide from a window which hung shudderingly over a fearful precipice. Curiously enough no trace of the body could ever be recovered. But Davy recognizes that Gervase Rookwood is none other than Alan Raby. Here we have the old belief that a man guilty of some, monstrous crime, in this case rebellion against the King and the murder of a brother, is compelled to return as a vampire. When the company disperse to their various apartments for the night Lord Clavering is horrified to discover in his room the dead body of young Roland Peveryl, "a wound deep in his throat, but bloodless." At the same moment a piercing scream is heard and Lucy Peveryl rushing from her chamber with her hands wildly clasping her neck falls dead in Lord Clavering's arms. Seeing as he thinks a shadowy form that steals from her room he draws a pistol and fires. When the company hurry in with lights they discover Alan Raby has been shot. In faltering accents the dying man explains that hearing a cry for help he hastened to the lady's assistance. He will only forgive Lord Clavering on one condition. "When I have breathed my last, let my body be conveyed amongst the peaks of Snowdon, and there exposed to the first rays of the rising

[p. 317]

moon which touch the earth." This is done, and the first act concludes with a tableau of the peaks of Snowdon, whilst from behind the clouds there sails high in the heaven a silver sickle that strikes the corpse with her argent shaft of mystic light. The vampire wakes, and leaps to his feet crying in exultant tones: "Fountain of my life: once more thy rays restore me. Death! I defy thee!"

It cannot escape notice that in this act there are many parallels with Le Vampire of Dumas. Raby Castle is the Castle of Tormenar; Lucy Peveryl is Juana; Roland Peveryl, Don Luis de Figuerroa; Lord Clavering, Gilbert de Tiffauges; and Davy the gracioso Lazare.

Two centuries have flown. Raby Castle is now inhabited in possession of Colonel Raby, whose daughter is betrothed to her cousin Edgar. It has been falsely reported that this latter fell in battle, but the scene opens with his return. When the sad news first arrived Ada Raby was stricken almost to death, and, as they believed, actually died; but she was recalled to life by a mysterious stranger, since which hour she seems to, have fallen completely under his influence and in some extraordinary way only to respond to his power. This is none other than Gervase Rookwood, who now appears and informs Colonel Raby that he and none other is the lawful lord of Raby Castle. The Colonel's claim lies in the fact that when years before the last of the old Raby family, Sir Alan Raby died, or rather was killed, and no will could be found, the estate reverted to a distant branch of the Rabys, now represented by the Colonel. However, a document is produced in the handwriting of Alan Raby, his will, wherein he bequeaths the estate to Gervase Rookwood and the Rookwood successors. It seemed as though such a title cannot be resisted, but Doctor Rees, a scholar of occultism, is filled with the gravest suspicions of the stranger. In a "Dictionary of Necromancy, a rare work by Dr. Dee," he has read of vampires, and he divines the demoniac nature of the pretended Rookwood. In a trancelike state Ada Raby has rejected Edgar and is to be given to the stranger, when Dr. Rees examining the documents discovers that the will of Sir Alan Raby, which must be some two hundred years old, although the hand is doubtless that of Raby as the archives prove, is written upon paper which has a watermark of 1850, "scarcely five years old." The vampire who

[p. 318]

endeavours to assassinate Edgar, is killed by a charmed bullet. Whilst his limbs relax in death the hypnotic spell vanishes from Ada's mind and she is united to her lover. But to their horror they notice that as the moonlight touches the body of Alan Raby where he has fallen, his members begin to twitch anew with life. Dr. Rees seizes the vampire and hurls the body into the darkest chasm of the mountain side, where no beam nor ray can ever penetrate or find the smallest chink of entrance.

The Phantom is, of course, somewhat old-fashioned and a little stilted, as was the mode, in its diction. No doubt some of the situations could be revised and far more neatly turned, yet on the whole I conceive that it should prove of its kind excellent fare in the theatre, and some scenes, at least, in capable hands were not without emotional appeal, I had almost said a certain impressiveness. Far worse dramas have (not undeservedly) earned their meed of approbation and applause.

On 15th August, 1872, was advertised: "Royal Strand Theatre. Production of a Bit of Moonshine in Three Rays, entitled 'The Vampire,' written by R. Reece." There was indeed a bounteous bill of fare. At seven was given a farce, The Married Bachelor; at 7.30 Byron's Not Such a Fool as He Looks; "At Half Past Nine the new and original Burlesque, a little Bit of Moonshine in Three Rays, called The Vampire, written by R. Reece. The new Music by John Fitzgerald, the New Scenery Painted by H. P. Hall; Dresses by May, Mrs. Richardson and Assistants; Machinery by Wood; Properties by Ball. The Piece produced under the direction of Mrs. Swanborough, Mr. J. Wallace, and Mr. Reece." The house, says the Era, 18th August, 1872, was crowded for this "satirical burlesque." His play, the author wrote, was founded upon "a German legend, Lord Byron's story, and a Boucicaultian drama." The Vampire, according to Reece, is a plagiarist who lives on other people's brains. The title role was acted by Edward Terry who kept the audience in roars of laughter. "Mr. Terry's make-up as the Vampire was something extraordinary, and he worked with unflagging energy to add 'go' to the novelty." During a picnic in the ruins of Raby Castle the Vampire endeavours to steal the note books of Ada Raby (Miss Emily Pitt) and Lady Audley Moonstone (Mrs. Raymond) two lady novelists, so that he may utilize their efforts for his weekly instalment of the "penny dreadful" and other fiction.

[p. 319]

He is attacked by the two lovers of the ladies, Lord Albert Clavering (Miss Bella Goodall) and Edgar (Miss Topsy Venn), and a good deal of broadest farce follows. "The author was cordially greeted upon his appearance before the curtain, and the latest Strand burlesque may be noted as an undoubted success." The Illustrated London News, 24th August, 1872, although very justly doubting the propriety of the subject as a theme for travesty highly praised Edward. Terry "as the Hibernian plagiarist with the broadest of brogues and the most ghastly of faces." As Allan Raby he haunts the ruins of Raby Castle, Raby Hall, and the Peak of Snowdon, seeking to filch the notebooks of tourists, "from which he may gather materials for a three-volume novel which he has been engaged by a publisher to compose."

On Monday, 27th September, 1909, at the Paragon Theatre was produced The Vampire, a "two-scene sketch," adapted by Mr. Jose G. Levy from the French of Mme. C. le Vylars and Pierre Souvestre. "It is a capitally written little piece conceived. in the grand Guignol vein;" The Stage, 30th September, 1909. The first scene is Harry le Strang's smoking-room. Harry has been infatuated with a demi-mondaine named Sonia, who shot herself in a fit of remorse. The despairing lover is in communication with a Hindoo spiritualist Seratsih, who has evoked the spirit of the dead woman, now become a vampire and preying upon Harry's vitality and reason. An old friend, Jack Harlinger, in order as he thinks to save the situation persuades his own fiancee, Olga Kay, to personate the ghost of Sonia. The result is swift tragedy, for the maddened Harry le Strang shoots her dead destroying the vampire, whilst he himself falls at the revolver of Jack Harlingen Harry le Strang was played by Charles Hanbury; Jack Harlinger, Lauderdale Maitland; Seratsih, Clinton Barrett; and Olga Kay, Janet Alexander. The piece was very well received.

The Vampire, a Tragedy in Five Acts, by St. John Dorset (the Rev. Hugo John Belfour), Second Edition, 1821,[60] does not appear to have been acted. It was dedicated to W. G. Macready, Esq., whose kindness the author acknowledges in most grateful terms. The story is Oriental, the same being laid in Alexandria, and it is a "moral" vampire that is shown by the poet. In his "advertisement" he quotes a passage

[p. 320]

from the Examiner, when noticing Planche's melodrama wrote: "There are Vampires who waste the heart and happiness of those they are connected with, Vampires of avarice, Vampires of spleen, Vampires of debauchery, Vampires in all the shapes of selfishness and domestic tyranny." This is his theme, and although his pages have considerable merit I do not conceive that his scenes would have been entirely successful on the stage, since they are poetical and reflective rather than dramatic,

In Germany sensational fiction was long largely influenced by Polidori, and we have such romances as Zschokke's Der tote Gast, Spindler's Der Vampyr und seine Braut, Theodor Hildebrand's Der Vampyr, oder die Totenbraut. Edwin Bauer's roman a clef the clever Der Baron Vampyr," which was published at Leipzig in 1846, hardly concerns as here, whilst Ewald August Konig's sensational Ein moderner Vampyr,[62] which appeared in 1883, or Franz Hirsch's Moderne Vampyr,[63] 1873, productions which only use in their titles the word "Vampire" to attract,--one might say, to ensnare attention, are in this connexion no more deserving of consideration than mere chap-books and pedlar's penny-ware such as Morelli's Der Vampyr, and Dr. Seltzam's pornographic Die Vampyre der Residenz.

Undoubtedly the vampire tradition has never been treated with such consummate skill as by Theophile Gautier in his exquisite prose poem La Morte Amoureuse, which first appeared in the Chronique de Paris on 23rd and 26th June, 1836, when the young author was not quite twenty-five. Although the theme is not original yet perhaps nowhere beside has it been so ingeniously moulded with such delicacy of style, with such rich and vivid colouring, with such emotion and such repression. The darker shadows of the tradition are suggested rather than portrayed, yet none can deny that there is an atmosphere of sombre mystery, even a touch of morbid horror which with complete artistry the writer allows us to suspect rather than to comprehend. The very vagueness of the relation adds to the illusion. We hardly know whether Romuald is the young country priest occupied in prayer and good works, or whether he is the Renaissance seignior living a life of passion and hot extravagance. As he himself cries: "Sometimes I thought I was a priest who dreamed every night that be was a nobleman, sometimes that I was a nobleman who dreamed that he was a

[p. 321]

priest. I could no longer distinguish dreams from real life; I did not know where reality began and illusion ended. The dissolute, supercilious young lord jeered at the priest, and the priest abhorred the dissipations of the young lord." But were he humble priest, or were he profligate patrician, one emotion remained eternally the same, his love for Clarimonde. At length the Abbe Serapion dissolves the glamour. Sternly he bids young Romuald accompany him to the deserted cemetery where Clarimonde lies buried; he exhumes the body, and as he sprinkles it with holy water it crumbles into dust. Then also has the lord Romuald gone for ever. There only remains the poor priest of God broken and alone, who grows old in an obscure parish in the depths of a wood, and who well-nigh half a century after scarcely dares to stir the ashes of that memory.

There are in English not a few stories which deal with the vampire tradition, and many of these are well imagined and cleverly contrived; the morbid horror of the thing has often been conveyed with considerable power, but yet it will, I think, be universally allowed that no author has written pages comparable to this story of Gautier. It is hardly to be disputed that the best of the English vampire stories is Sheridan Le Fanu's Carmilla, which the authorities upon the bibliography of this author[64] have not traced further back than its appearance in the collection entitled In A Glass Darkly, 1872,[65] Carmilla which is a story of some length, containing sixteen chapters, is exceedingly well told and it certainly exhibits that note of haunting dread which is peculiar to Le Fanu's work. The castle in Styria and the family who inhabit it are excellently done, nor will the arrival of Carmilla and the mysterious coach wherein sat "a hideous black woman, with a sort of coloured turban on her head, who was gazing all the time from the carriage window, nodding and grinning derisively towards the ladies, with gleaming eyes and large white eyeballs, and her teeth set as if in fury," easily be forgotten.

It must suffice to mention very briefly but a few short stories in English where the vampire element is present. E. F. Benson has evoked real horror in his The Boom in the Tower and the horrible creature tangled in her rotting shroud all foul with mould and damp who returns from her accursed grave is loathly to the last degree.

[p. 322]

The Flowering of the Strange Orchid, by H. G. Wells, introduces a botanical vampire. An orchid collector is found dead in a jungle in the Andaman Islands, with a strange bulb lying near him. This is brought to England and carefully tended by a botanist until it comes to flower. But when at last the blossoms burst open great tendrils suddenly reach out to grasp the man sucking his blood with hideous gusts. The unfortunate wretch has to be violently torn away from the plant which drips with blood scare e in time to save his life.

This idea closely resembles Fred M. White's story, The Purple Terror, which appeared in the Strand Magazine, September, 1899, Vol. xviii, No. 105. Here Lieutenant Will Scarlett, an American officer and a number of his men have to make their way across a certain tract of Cuban Territory. Spending the night in a country posada they are attracted by a pretty dancing girl who is wearing twined round her shoulders a garland of purple orchids larger than any known variety. The blossoms which a blood-red centre exhale a strange exotic perfume. Scarlett is fired with the enthusiasm of giving a new orchid to the horticultural world, and on the following morning a native, named Tito, undertakes to guide him to the spot. He learns that the natives call them "the devil's poppies" and that the flowers grow in the high trees where their blossoms cling to long green tendrils. As night falls the little company arrives at a plateau ringed by tall trees whose branches are crowned with great wreaths of the purple flower nestling amid coils of long green ropery. To their alarm they note that the ground is covered with bleaching bones, the skeletons of men, animals, and birds alike. Yet perforce they must camp there rather than risk the miasma of the lower valley. Scarlett keeps watch. In the darkness there is a rustling sound and suddenly a long green tendril furnished at the end with a sucker armed with sharp spines like teeth descends and snatches one of the men from the ground. As it is about to withdraw Scarlett with inconceivable swiftness slashes it through with his knife. But the man's clothing has even in that moment been cut through by the razor spines and his body is marked by a number of punctures where his blood is oozing in great drops. Immediately half-a-dozen and more lithe living cords with fanged mouths fall groping for their prey. The men are hurriedly awakened and with

[p. 323]

difficulty they extricate themselves by sending their whingers, ripping and tearing in every direction. It appears that the vampire poppies at night send down these tendrils to gather moisture. Anything which the fearful suckers can catch they drain dry, be it man or beast or bird. Lieutenant Scarlett and his men have been deliberately led into this trap by Tito, who is madly jealous of their compliments to Zara, the dancing-girl. They hold him prisoner and threaten him with condign punishment at headquarters.

Algernon Blackwood brings together two types of vampires in his story The Transfer. One is a human being, the psychic sponge, who absorbs and seems to live upon the vitality of others. He is thus described by the governess: "I watched his hard, bleak face; I noticed how thin he was, and the curious oily brightness of his steady eyes. And everything he said or did announced what I may dare to call the suction of his presence." There is also a yet more horrible monster, if one may term it so, the Forbidden Corner, an arid barren spot in the midst of the rose garden, naked and bald amid luxuriant growth. A child who knows its evil secret says: "It's bad. It's hungry. It's dying because it can't get the food it wants. But I know what would make it feel right." When the human vampire ventures near this spot it exerts its secret strength and draws him to itself. He falls into the middle of the patch and it drinks his energy. He lives on, but he seems to be nothing more than a physical husk or shell without vitality. As for the Forbidden Corner "it lay untouched, full of great, luscious, driving weeds and creepers, very strong, full fed and bursting thick with life."

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in his little story, The Parasite, has depicted a human vampire or psychic sponge in the person of Miss Penelosa, who is described as being a small frail creature, "with a pale peaky face, an insignificant presence and retiring manner." Nevertheless she is able to obsess Professor Gilroy who says: "She has a parasite soul, yes, she is a parasite; a monster parasite. She creeps into my form as the hermit crab creeps into the whelk's shell." To his horror he realizes that under her influence his will becomes weaker and weaker and he is bound to seek her presence. He resists for a while, but the force becomes so overmastering that he is compelled to yield, loathing himself as he does so. When he visits her,

[p. 324]

with a terrific effort he breaks the spell and denounces her unhallowed fascination in burning words. However, his victory is short indeed. She persecutes him most bitterly, and when he unburdens his troubles to his college professor the only result is a prescription of chloral and bromide, which promptly goes into the gutter. With devilish craft the vampire destroys his reputation as a scholar, and brings about ill-natured gossip and comment. She is able to confuse his brain during his lectures, so that he talks unintelligible nonsense and his classes become the laughing-stock of the university, until at length the authorities are obliged to suspend him from his position. Almost in despair he cries: "And the most dreadful part of it all is my loneliness. Here I sit in a commonplace English bow-window looking out upon a common-place English street, with its garish buses and its lounging policemen, and behind me there hangs a shadow which is out of all keeping with the age and place. In the home of knowledge I am weighed down and tortured by a power of which science knows nothing. No magistrate would listen to me. No paper would discuss my case. No doctor would believe my symptoms. My own most intimate friends would only look upon it as a sign of brain derangement. I am out of all touch with my kind."

The unfortunate victim is driven even deeper still by this unhallowed influence, which causes him to rob a bank, violently assault a friend, and finally to come within an ace of mutilating the features of his betrothed. At length the persecution ceases with the sudden death of the vampire, Miss Penelosa.

The True Story of a Vampire is a pathetic little story, very exquisitely told, in Studies of Death, by Stanislaus Eric, Count Stenbock, who wrote some verses of extraordinary charm in Love, Sleep, and Dreams; Myrtle, Rue, and Cypress; The Shadow of Death; and who at least once in The Other Side told a macabre legend with most powerful and haunting effect. A mysterious Count Vardaleh visits the remote styrian castle of old Baron Wronski, and before long attains an occult influence over the boy heir, Gabriel. The lad wastes away, and Count Vardaleh is heard to murmur: "My darling, I fain would spare thee; but thy life is my life, and I must live, I who would rather die. Will God not have any mercy on me? Oh, oh! life; oh, the torture of life! . . . O Gabriel, my beloved! My life, yes, life--oh, my life? I am sure this is

[p. 325]

but a little I demand of thee. Surely the superabundance of life can spare a little to one who is already dead." As the boy lies wan and ill, the Count enters the room and presses a long feverish kiss upon his lips. Vardaleh rushes forth, and can never be traced again. Gabriel has expired in the agony of that embrace.

In a novel, The Vampire, by Reginald Hodder, a woman who is the leader of an occult society is forced to exercise her powers as a vampire to prevent the ebbing of her vitality. Here her ravages are psychic rather than physical, albeit in fact the two so closely commingled that they are not to be separated. A curious feature in the tale is that this woman is represented as putting forth her energies through the medium of a metallic talisman, and various struggles to gain possession of the object form the theme of the story. It falls into the hands of persons who would employ it for evil purposes, when it constitutes a very formidable menace, but at the last after a number of extraordinary happenings it is happily recovered.

The traditional, but yet more horrible vampire is presented to us by F. Marion Crawford in For the Blood Is the Life. Here a young man, who has been loved by a girl whose affection he was unable to return, is after her death vampirised by her, and when his friends suspect the truth they determine to rescue him. They find him upon her grave, a thin stream of blood trickling from his throat. "And the flickering light of the lantern played upon another face that looked up from the feast,--upon two deep, dead eyes that saw in spite of death--upon parted lips redder than life itself--upon gleaming teeth on which glistened a rosy drop." The situation is effectively dealt with according to the good old tradition. A hawthorn stake is driven through the heart of the vampire who emits a quantity of blood and with a despairing shriek dies the last death.

Almost equally vivid in its details must be accounted the tale, Four Wooden Stakes, by Victor Roman. The ghastly events in the lonely old house with its little grey crypt, some ten miles from the small town of Charing, a place of not more than fifteen hundred souls, are most vividly described. There lived the Holroyds, the grandfather, the father, and three brothers. Whilst in South America the grandfather "was

[p. 326]

attacked while asleep by one of those huge bats. Next morning he was so weak be couldn't walk. That awful thing had sucked his life blood away. He arrived here, but was sickly until his death, a few weeks later." So says Remson Holroyd, who is left the sole survivor of the family, and who has summoned his old college friend to help him solve the secret of the hideous doom which is taking toll one by one. The grandfather was not buried in the usual way; but, as his will directed, his remains were interred in the vault built near the house. Remson Holroyd continues: "Then my dad began failing and just pined away until he died. What puzzled the doctors was the fact that right up until the end he consumed enough food to sustain three men, yet he was so weak he lacked the strength to drag his legs over the floor. He was buried, or rather interred with grand-dad. The same symptoms were in evidence in the cases of George and Fred. They are both lying in the vault. And now, Jack, I'm going, too, for of late my appetite has increased to alarming proportions, yet I am as weak as a kitten." The next morning the visitor finds himself so weak that he is hardly able to rise and he feels a slight pain in the neck. "I rushed to examine it in the mirror. Two tiny dots rimmed with blood--my blood--and on my neck! No longer did I chuckle at Remson's fears, for it, the thing, had attacked me--as I slept." The host himself is in a state of utter exhaustion. That night watch is kept by the friend, and as from his concealment he is gazing into Remson's room he notices "a faint reddish glow outside one of the windows. It apparently emanated from nowhere. Hundreds of little specks danced and whirled in the spot of light, and as I watched them fascinated, they seemed to take oil the form of a human face. The features were masculine, as was also the arrangement of the hair. Then the mysterious glow disappeared." After a few moments there appears a vague form of which the watcher is able to distinguish the head, and to his horror he sees that the features are the same as those of a portrait of the grandfather which is hanging in the picture gallery of the house. "But oh, the difference in expression! The lips were drawn back in a snarl, disclosing two sets of pearly white teeth, the canines over developed and remarkably sharp. The eyes, an emerald green in colour, stared in a look of consuming hate." The horror is revealed. The house is infested by a vampire. In the morning

[p. 327]

the two friends visit the vault. "As if by mutual understanding, we both turned toward the coffin on our left. It belonged to the grandfather. We unplaced the lid, and there lay the old Holroyd. He appeared to be sleeping; his face was full of colour, and he had none of the stiffness of death. The hair was matted, the moustache untrimmed, and on the beard were matted stains of a dull brownish hue. But it was his eyes that attracted me. They were greenish, and they glowed with an expression of fiendish malevolence such as I had never seen before. The look of baffled rage on the face might well have adorned the features of the devil in hell." They drive a stake through the living corpse, which shrieks and writhes, whilst the gushing blood drenches coffins and floor spurting out in great jets over the very walls. The head is severed from the body, and as the final stroke of the knife cut the connexion a scream issued from the mouth; and the whole corpse fell away into dust, leaving nothing but a wooden stake lying in a bed of bones." The remaining three bodies are treated in the same way, and thus the thrall of the curse is lifted from the old house, ten miles from the little town of Charing.

Although the genius of Charles Baudelaire, when his art required it, shrank from no extremity of physical horror, yet in his exquisite poem Le Vampire he has rather portrayed the darkness and desolation of the soul:

Toi qui, comme un coup de couteau,
 Dans mon coeur plaintif est entree;
 Toi qui, forte comme un troupeau
 De demons, vins, folle et paree.

De mon esprit humilie
 Faire ton lit et ton domaine
 --Infame a qui je suis lie
 Comme le forcat a la chaine,

Comme au jeu le joueur tetu,
 Comme a la bouteille l'ivrogne,
 Comme aux vermines la charogne,
 --Maudite, maudite sois-tu!

J'ai prie le glaive rapide
 De conquerir ma liberte
 Et j'ai dit au poison perfide
 De secourir ma lachete.

[p. 328]

Helas! le poison et le glaive
 M'ont pris en dedain et m'ont dit
 Tu n'es pas digne qu'on t'enleve
 A ton esclavage maudit.

Imbecile!--de son empire
 Si nos efforts te delivraient,
 Tes baisers ressusciteraient
 Le cadavre de ton vampire!

In England there is a poem--truly of a very different kind--which appears in the life of the famous scientist, James Clerk Maxwell, by Lewis Campbell and William Garnett, verses written by Maxwell in 1845 when he was fourteen Years of age. The verses should not perhaps, because of the youth of the author, be criticized too sharply, and although they show Wardour Street fustian and gimcrack, since the piece is of no great length it may pardonably be quoted here. It is not entirely without a certain feeling after the right atmosphere, and much will be forgiven on account of the precocity. It is grandiosely entitled The Vampyre: Compylt into Meeter by James Clerk Maxwell."

Thair is a knichte rydis through the wood,
     And a douchty knichte is hee.
 And sure bee is on a message sent,
     He rydis sae hastilie.
 He passit the aik, and hee passit the birk,
     And bee passit monie a tre,
 Bot plesant to him was the saugh sae slim,
     For beneath it hee did see
 The boniest ladye that ever hee saw,
     Scho was sae schyn and fair.
 And thair scho sat, beneath the saugh,
     Kaiming hir gowden hair.
 And then the knichte--"Oh ladye brichte,
     What chance has broucht you here?
 But sae the word, and ye schall gang
     Back to your kindred dear,"
 Then up and spok the ladye fair--
     "I have nae friends or kin,
 Bot in a little boat I live,
     Amidst the waves' loud din."
 Then answered thus the douchty knichte"
     I'll follow you through all,
 For gin ye bee in a littel boat,
     The world to it seemis small." [p. 329]
 They goed through the wood, and through the wood,
     To the end of the wood they came:
 And when they came to the end of the wood
     They saw the salt sea faem.
 And when they saw the wee, wee boat,
     That daunced on the top of the wave,
 And first got in the ladye fair,
     And then the knichte sae brave.
 They got into the wee, wee boat
     And rowed wi' a' their micht
 When the knichte sae brave, he turnit about,
     And lookit at the ladye bricht
 He lookit at her bonnie cheik,
     And bee lookit at hir twa bricht eyne,
 Bot hir rosie cheik growe ghaistly pale,
     And schoe seymit as scho deid had been.
 The fause, fause knichte growe pale with frichte.
     And his hair rose up on end,
 For gane-by days cam to his mynde,
     And his former love he kenned.
 Then spake the ladye--"Thou, fause knichte,
     Hast done to me much ill,
 For didst forsake me long ago,
     Bot I am constant still:
 For though I ligg in the woods sae cald,
     At rest I canna bee
 Until I sucks the gude lyfe blude
     Of the man that gart me dee."
 Hee saw hir lipps were wet wi' blude,
     And hee saw hir lufolesse eyne,
 And loud bee cry'd, "get frae my syde,
     Thou vampyr corps encleane!"
 But no, bee is in hir magic boat,
     And on the wyde, wyde sea;
 And the vampyr suckis his gude lyfe blude,
     Sho suckis him till hee dee.
 So now beware, whoe'er you are,
     That walkis in this lone wood:
 Beware of that deceitfull spright,
     The ghaist that suckis the blude.

The Vampire Bride, a ballad by the Hon. Henry Liddell, has considerable merit, It may be found in The Wizard of the North, The Vampire Bride, and other Poems, Blackwood, Edinburgh, and Cadell, London, 1833. These stanzas are founded upon the old tale of the knight who having placed a ring--some say his wedding-ring--around the finger of the statue of Venus whilst he is a quoiting, when he would reclaim it

[p. 330]

finds that the finger is crooked so that the jewel may not be withdrawn, whilst that night a phantom claims him as her spouse. With difficulty is he freed from the thrall of the succubus.

In 1845 there was published at the Columbian Press Weston-super-mare, a little book entitled The Last of the Vampires, by Smyth Upton. The chief, some critics might say the only, merit of this tale is its excessive rarity. The narrative is somewhat curiously divided into Epochs, the first of which takes place in 1769, the second in 1777, the third and last in 1780. Chapter I opens in an English village named Frampton, but in Chapter II "we find ourselves upon the borders of Bohemia" in the Castle Von Oberfels. Four chapters of no great length and somewhat disconnected in their sequence comprise the First Epoch. A little later we meet with the mysterious Lord de Montfort, and apparently he has just committed a murder, since he is one of the two men who stand in a dreary outhouse adjoining Montfort Abbey. "Red blood, yet warm, stains their murderous hands, and is seen also in pools upon the floor; the same marks are observable, also, on their clothes." "The scene is a fearful one; it is one of those of which the mere recital makes the blood run cold," and the writer wisely does not attempt the task. In the penultimate chapter of this extraordinary production we are introduced to "a certain young German, the Baron Von Oberfels," who weds Mary Learmont, the elder daughter of "Sir James Learmont, who being a Baronet, was, moreover, a Knight of the Bath and M.P." Unfortunately the Baron "was one of that horrible class, the Vampires! He had sold his soul to the evil one, for the enjoyment of perpetual youth; being bound, besides, to what are understood to be the penalties of that wretched and accursed race. Every tenth year a female was sacrificed to his infernal master. Mary Learmont was to be the next victim; may she escape the threatened doom." But apparently, so far as I can gather, she is not so lucky for we are vaguely told "The Baron and his bride departed on his wedding tour. Her father and mother never hear of her more." A page or two later there is "a midnight wedding" at the Castle Von Oberfels. Of the bride we are told nothing save that she had a "fair presence." "The Baron Von Oberfels was there, once more arrayed in the

[p. 331]

garments of a bridegroom." The ceremony proceeds. The grand organ peals; the heavenly voices of white-robed choristers added greatly to the beauty of the scene. "But hark! another noise is heard; sulphureous smoke half fills the sacred building; the floor opens for an instant; and mocking shrieks are audible as the spirit of the Last of the Vampires descended into perdition."

I am bound to acknowledge that after a somewhat careful reading of this curious and most disjointed little piece of seventy-six pages the only impression with which I am met is that Mr. Smyth Upton knew nothing whatsoever of what the word vampire connotes. The idea of the victims who are sacrificed for the sake of eternal youth is, of course fairly common and was very effectively utilized by G. W. M. Reynolds in his romance The Necromancer, which ran in Reynolds's Miscellany from Saturday, 27th December, 1851, to Saturday, 31st July, 1852.[66] Incidentally it maybe remarked as a somewhat curious fact that this prolific novelist never availed himself of the vampire tradition in his melodramatic chapters.

The Vampyre. "By the Wife of a Medical Man," 1858, is a, violent teetotal tract, of twenty-seven short chapters presented in the guise of fiction. The villain of the piece is "The Vampyre Inn," and the dipsomaniac hero--if it be allowable to use the term in such a context--is given to ravings such as these: "They fly--they bite--they suck my blood--I die. That hideous 'Vampyre!' Its eyes pierce me thro'--they are red--they are bloodshot. Tear it from my pillow. I dare not lie down. It bites--I die! Give me brandy--brandy--more brandy."

A Vampire of Souls, by H. M. P., published in 1904, is a book of little value. The hero, George Ventnor, when aged twenty, is killed in a railway accident, and the narrative consists of his after experiences which are singularly material and crude. There is, perhaps, a good touch here and there, but the thing certainly does not deserve to be rescued from oblivion.

It will have been noticed that beyond the titles these two last works have really little or nothing to do with vampires at all, but we may now consider a romance which may at least be ranked as a very serious rival to--in my opinion it is far ghostlier than--its famous successor Dracula. Varney the Vampire, or, The Feast of Blood, is undoubtedly the best novel

[p. 332]

of Thomas Preskett Prest, a prolific writer of the fourth and fifth decades of the nineteenth century. It is true that his productions published by the well-known Edward Lloyd, of 231, Shoreditch,[67] may be classed as simple "shockers," but none the less he has considerable power in this kind, and he had at any rate the craft of telling his story with skill and address. There is a certain quality in his work, which appeared during the years from 1839 to the earlier fifties, that is entirely lacking in the productions of his fellows. To him have been ascribed, doubtless with some exaggeration, well nigh two hundred titles, but the following list comprises, I believe, his principal romances: Ela, the Outcast, or, the Gipsy of Rosemary Dell; Angelina, or, the Mystery of S. Mark's Abbey, "a Tale of Other Days "; The Death Grasp, or, A Father's Curse; Ernnestine De Lacy, or, The Robbers' Foundling; Gallant Tom, or, The Perils of a Sailor Ashore and Afloat, "an original nautical romance of deep and pathetic interest "; Sweeney Todd, the Demon Barber of Fleet Street (the most famous of Prest's novels); Newgate (which has some capital episodes); Emily Fitzormond; Mary Clifford; The Maniac Father, or, The Victim of Seduction; Gertrude of the Rock; Rosalie, or, The Vagrant's Daughter; The Miller's Maid; Jane Brightwell; Blanche, or, The Mystery of the Doomed House; The Blighted Heart, or, The Priory Ruins; Sawney Bean, the Man-eater of Midlothian; The Skeleton Clutch, or, The Goblet of Gore; The Black Monk, or, The Secret of the Grey Turret[68]; The Miller and His Men, or, The Secret Robbers of Bohemia. To Prest also has been attributed, but I conceive without foundation, Susan Hoply, an audacious piracy upon the famous novel by Mrs. Crowe, Susan Hopley.

Varney the Vampire, or, The Feast of Blood, was first published in 1847. It contains no less than CCXX chapters and runs to 868 pages. The many incidents succeed each other with such breathless rapidity that it were well-nigh impossible to attempt any conspectus of the whole romance. The very length would make this analysis a work of extreme difficulty, and incidentally we may note the amazing copiousness of Prest which must ever remain a matter for wonderment. Such a romance, for example, as Newgate runs to no less than on, hundred and forty-nine chapters comprising 772 pages. The Maniac Father has fifty-four chapters, each of considerable

[p. 333]

length, which total 604 pages, and I have not selected these on account of their exceptional volume.

Varney the Vampire was among the most popular of Prest's productions, and on account of its "unprecedented success" it was reprinted in 1853 in penny parts. To-day the book is unprocurable and considerable sums have been for many years in vain offered to secure a copy. Indeed, it may be noted that all Prest's work is excessively scarce.

It is hardly an exaggeration to affirm that of recent years there have been few books which have been more popular than Brain Stoker's Dracula, A tale, and certainly there is no sensational romance which in modern days has achieved so universal a reputation. Since it was first published in 1897, that is to say one and twenty years ago, it has run into a great number of editions, and the name has veritably become a household word. It will prove interesting to inquire into the immediate causes which have brought this book such wide and enduring fame. It has already been remarked that it is well-nigh impossible for a story which deals with the supernatural or the horrible to be sustained to any great length. Elements which at first are almost unendurable, will lose their effect if they are continued, for the reader's mind insensibly becomes inured to fresh emotions of awe and horror, and Dracula is by no means briefly told. In the ordinary reprints (Tenth Edition, 1913) it extends to more than four hundred pages, nor does it escape the penalty of its prolixity. The first part, "Jonathan Harker's Journal," which consists of four chapters is most admirably done, and could the whole story have been sustained at so high a level we should have had a complete masterpiece. But that were scarcely possible. The description of the journey through Transylvania is interesting to a degree, and even has passages which attain to something like charm. "All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of water, and running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear." Very effective is the arrival of the English traveller at the "vast ruined castle, from, whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose

[p. 334]

broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky." Very adroitly are the various incidents managed in their quick succession, those mysterious happenings which at last convince the matter-of-fact commonplace young solicitor of Exeter that he is a helpless prisoner in the power of a relentless and fearful being. The continual contrasts between business conversations, the most ordinary events of the dull listless days, and all the while the mantling of dark shadows in the background and the onrushing of some monstrous doom are in these opening chapters most excellently managed.

So tense a strain could not be preserved, and consequently when we are abruptly transported to Whitby and the rather tedious courtships of Lucy Westenra, who is a lay figure at best, we feel that a good deal of the interest has already begun to evaporate. I would hasten to add that before long it is again picked up, but it is never sustained in the same degree; and good sound sensational fare as we have set before us, fare which I have myself more than once thoroughly enjoyed, yet it is difficult not to feel that one's palate, has been a little spoiled by the nonpareil of an antipast. This is not to say that the various complications are not sufficiently thrilling, but because of their very bounty now and again they most palpably fail of effect, and it can hardly escape notice that the author begins to avail himself of those more extravagant details of vampirism which frankly have no place outside the stories told round a winter's hearth, It would have been better had he confined himself to those particulars which are known and accepted, which indeed have been officially certified and definitely proved. But to have limited himself thus would have meant the shortening of his narrative, and here we return to the point which was made above.

If we review Dracula from a purely literary point of approach it must be acknowledged that there is much careless writing and many pages could have been compressed and something revised with considerable profit. It is hardly possible to feel any great interest in the characters, they are labels rather than individuals. As I have said, there are passages of graphic beauty, passages of graphic horror, but these again almost entirely occur within the first sixty pages. There are some capital incidents, for example the method by which Lord [p. 335] Godalming and his friend obtain admittance to No. 347 Piccadilly. Nor does this by any means stand alone.

However, when we have--quite fairly, I hope--thus criticized Dracula, the fact remains that it is a book of unwonted interest and fascination. Accordingly we are bound to acknowledge that the reason for the immense popularity of this romance, the reason why, in spite of obvious faults it is read and re-read--lies in the choice of subject and for this the author deserves all praise.

It might not have seemed that Dracula would have been a very promising subject for the stage, but nevertheless it was dramatized by Hamilton Deans and produced at the Wimbledon Theatre on 9th March, 1925. This version was performed in London at the Little Theatre, 14th February, 1927. On the preceding Thursday the Daily Mirror published a photograph of the late Mr. Brain Stoker accompanied by the following paragraphs. "Herewith, one of the very few photographs of the late Brain Stoker, who, besides being Sir Henry Irving's manager for years, was an industrious novelist. As I have already said, a dramatic version of his most famous book, 'Dracula,' is to be done at the Little on Monday, and the scene of the Grand Guignol plays is appropriate, for the new piece, I hear, is so full of gruesome thrills that, in the provinces women having been carried fainting from the auditorium. Truly we take our pleasures sadly.

"The dramatic adaptation is by Hamilton Deans, whose grandfather, Colonel Deans, and the Rev. Abraham Stoker, Bram's father, lived on adjoining estates in County Dublin. Young Bram and Hamilton Deane's mother, then a young girl, were great friends. Stoker had the book 'Dracula' in his mind, and the young people used to discuss its possibilities. Strange that it should be young Hamilton Deane who has dramatized the book and brought the play to London."

At the Little Theatre the cast of Dracula was as follows: Count Dracula, Raymond Huntley; Abraham van Helsing, Hamilton Deane; Dr. Seward, Stuart Lomath; Jonathan Harker, Bernard Guest; Quincey P. Morris, Frieda Hearn; Lord Godalming, Peter Jackson; R. M. Renfield, Bernard Jukes; The Warden, Jack Howarth; The Parlourmaid, Hilda Macleod; The Housemaid, Betty Murgatroyd; Mina Harker, Dora Mary Patrick.

[p. 336]

By no stretch could it be called a good play, whilst the presentation, at the best, can hardly be described as more than reasonably adequate. In one or two instances the effects, upon which so much depends and which obviously demanded the most scrupulous care, were so clumsily contrived as to excite an involuntary smile. "It was only a step from the devilish to the ridiculous on Monday night," said the Era, 16th February, 1927. Very remarkable was a lady, dressed in the uniform of a hospital nurse who sat in the vestibule of the theatre, and it was bruited that her services were required by members of the audience who were overcome owing to the horrors of the drama. I can only say that I find this canard impossible to believe, quodcumque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi. As an advertisement, and it can surely have been nothing else, the attendance of a nurse was in deplorable taste. I am informed that after the first few weeks a kind of epilogue was spoken when all the characters were assembled upon the stage, and it was explained that the audience must not be distressed at what they had seen, that it was comically intended for their entertainment. So gross a lapse of good manners, not to speak of the artistic indecorum, is hardly credible.[69]

Confessedly the play was extremely weak, and yet such is the fascination of this subject that it had an exceptional success, and triumphantly made its way from theatre to theatre. On 25th July, 1927, Dracula was transferred to the Duke of York's; on the 29th August, following to the Prince of Wales, on 10th October to the Garrick; and all the while it was given to thronging houses. It has also toured, and at the present moment is still touring the provincial theatres with the most marked success, the drama being given with more spirit and vigour than originally was the case at the Little, and Wilfrid Fletcher in particular playing the lunatic Renfield with a real touch of wistful pathos and uncanny horror. This is is  extremely instructive, and it is curious that the vogue of the "vampire play" in London should be repeated almost exactly after the interval of a century. On 5th November, 1927, a new version of Dracula by Charles Morrel was presented at the Court Theatre, Warrington.

In America the dramatization of Dracula was produced at the Shubert, New Haven, 19th September, 1927. This was given at the Fulton, New York, upon the following 5th October.

[p. 337]

Jonathan Harker was acted by Terence Neil; Abraham Van Helsing by Edward Van Sloan; Renfield by Bernard Jukes; and Count Dracula by Bela Lugoni .

As I have before remarked, the striking fact that an indifferent play should prove so successful can, I think, only be attributed to the fascination of the theme. Consciously or unconsciously it is realized that the vampire tradition contains far more truth than the ordinary individual cares to appreciate and acknowledge. "La fable du vampire est peut-etre, la plus universelle de nos superstitions. . . . Elle a partout l'autorite de la tradition: elle ne manque ni de cello de la philosophic ni de celle de la medicine. La theologie meme en a parle."

  

NOTES TO CHAPTER V

[1. Ghost Stories of an Antiquary (Second Impression), London, 1905 pp. 149-179.

2. Der Naturforscher. Achtundvierzigstes Stuck, Leipzig, Sonnabend, den 25 des Mays, 1748.

3. Werke, Goschen, 1857, XI., 260.

4. Cf. also Schach Lolo: Werke, Hempel, XII, 39..

Nicht Menschen mehr, Vampyre nur erblickt,
 Die an ihm saugen und an ihm liegen.

5. The following but poorly expresses the original:

From my grave to wander I am forc'd,
 Still to seek The Good's long-sever'd link,
 Still to love the bridegroom I have lost,
 And the life-blood of his heart to drink;
 When his race is run,
 I must hasten on,
 And the young must 'neath my vengance sink.

6. In Schmidt, Charakteristiken, Berlin, 1886, pp. 246-247.

7. In his Historic Survey of German Poetry, London, 1830, in a note upon his translation Ellenore (p. 51) Taylor says: "No German poem has been so repeatedly translated into English as Ellenore: Eight different versions are lying on my table, and I have read others. It becomes not me to appreciate them; suffice it to observe that this was the earliest of them all, having been communicated to my friends in the year 1790, and mentioned in the preface to Dr. Aikin's poems which appeared in 1791. It was first printed in the second number of the Monthly Magazine for 1796. The German title is Lenore, which is the vernacular form of Eleonora, a name here represented by Ellenore." Taylor compares Lenore with "an obscure English ballad called the Suffolk miracle," and he reprints (p. 52) this ample poem in full; The Suffolk Miracle: Or a relation of a young man, who, a month after his death, appeared to his sweetheart, and carried her on horseback behind him for forty miles in two hours and was never seen after but in his grave.

8. Lockhart, Memoirs, vol. I, p. 204.

9. Captain Basil Hall's Schloss Hainfeld: or, a Winter in Lower Styria. Edinburgh, 1836, p. 332.

[p. 338]

10. The whole stanza is repeated thrice, xxxix; xlviii; and liv, with extraordinary effect:

Tramp, tramp, across the land they speede;
 Splash, splash, across the sea;
 Hurrah! the dead can ride apace
 Dost feare to ride with mee?

In a note Taylor says: "By shifting the scene to England, and making William, a soldier of Richard Lionheart, it became necessary that the ghost of Ellenore, whom Death, in the form of her lover, conveys to William's grave, should cross the sea. Hence the splash! splash! of the xxxix and other stanzas, of which there is no trace in the original; of the tramp! tramp! there is. I could not prevail upon myself to efface these words, which have been gotten by heart, and which are quoted even in Don Juan." The Don Juan reference is Canto X, lxxi:

On with the horses! Off to Canterbury!
 Tramp, tramp o'er pebble, and splash: splash! through puddle.

11. Introduction to The Chase and William and Helen, Edinburgh, 1807, p. iv.

12. Scott, Imitations, p. 39.

13. So Captain Basil Hall, Schloss Hainfeld, p. 332.

14. The publisher was Miller.

15. Eleonora. Novella Morale scritta sulla traccia d'un Poemetto Inglese tradotto dal Tedesco. Trattenimento Italico di Mra. Taylor, In Londra, 1798.

16. Christabel, I, 79-103.

17. Coleridge, p. 224.

18. Medwin, Life of Shelley, Vol. I, p. 62.

19. Dowden, Life of Shelley, Vol. II, p. 123.

20. Charles Middleton, Shelley and His Writings, 1858, vol. I, p. 47.

21. Beitrage, p. 61.

22. St. Irvyne; or, The Rosicrucian, "By a Gentleman of the University of Oxford," was published by J. J. Stockdale, 1811.

23. Newark, 1807.

24. See my Introduction to Zofloya, or The Moor, Fortune Press, 1928.

25. Byron, English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, 259-276.

26. British Review, 1818, vol. XI. p. 37.

27. Horrid Mysteries, of which there is a reprint in two volumes with Introduction by myself, 1927, was first published in 1796 as "From the German of the Marquis of Grosse by P. Will." The Midnight Groan, or The Spectre of the Chapel, 1808, is anonymous. The Abbot of Montserrat, 2 vols., 1826, is by William Child Green. The Demon of Venice (a redaction of Zofloya), 1810: The Convent Spectre, 1808, and The Hag of the Mountains (1798) were all published without the authors' names.

28. Thalaba was commenced on 12th July, 1799, and finished at Cintra in July, 1800. It was published in the following year.

29. I have used "The Poetical Works of Robert Southey Collected by Himself," ten volumes, 1837-38. Thalaba occupies vol. IV.

30. Vol. IV, p. 305 of this edition of Southey.

31. Vol. XI, no. 63.

32. Dr. Stefan Hock has not traced the German original. The French version is known to me: Fantasmagoriana, ou Recueil d'Histoires d'apparitions de spectres, revenans, fantomes, etc. Traduit de l'allemand par un Amateur [Eyries]. Paris, F. F. Schoell, 2 vols, 12 mo, 1812. I also have in my collection Tales of Terror, or More Ghosts; Forming a Complete Phantasmagoria, 1802. This bears as a motto upon the title page

Twelve o'Clock's the Time of Night
     That the Graves, all gaping wide,
 Quick send forth the airy Sprite
     In the Church-way Path to glide.

The book is embellished with a frontispiece representing a most entirely typical white-robed spectre.

[p. 339]

33. Byron signs the dedication of The Giaour to Samuel Rogers, May, 1813, In 1815 it had reached a fourteenth edition.

34. Jean Sbogar and Therese Aubert are two well-known works by Nodier.

35. Paris, 1824.

36. Philippe, who was a universal favourite, died 16th October, 1824. "Sa mort fit presque autant de bruit que sa vie," says Dumas, who gives a vivid picture of the unhappy scandals and delays which, owing to the ill-advised conduct of certain Jansenistic fanatics, profaned the funeral on the 18th October, following. The famous actor was interred at Pere-Lachaise, the obsequies being attended by more than three thousand people. Amelie Delaunay when quite young married an actor of medium attainments Allan-Dorval. She was soon left a widow, and after a hard struggle obtained recognition of her genius. Dumas who admired her immensely speaks of her as "l'Eve qui devait donner le jour a tout un monde dramatique."

37. "Quant a Philippe, qui l'ecraisait, a cette epoque, de la dignite de son pas et de la majeste de son geste, c'etait la representation du melodrame par sang Pixerecourt et Caignez. . . Nut ne portait comme Philippe la botte jaune, la tunique chamois bordee de noir, la toque it plume et l'epee a poignee en croix." Dumas, Mes Memoires, Troisieme Serie, lxxvii.

38. I quote from the article as reprinted in the Melanges, I, 417.

39. Histoire des Vampires et des spectres Malfaisans, Paris, 1820.

40. Le Comte de Monte-Cristo, Chapter xxxv. I quote from the English translation issued by Collins' Clear Type Press, vol. I, pp. 466-68.

41. La Tradition et l'Exotisme dans l'oeuvre de Charles Nodier, (1780-1844). 1923, p. 124.

42. Oeuvres completes de Eugene Scribe, Paris, Dentu, 1876. 2me Serie, VI, pp. 41-94.

43. Folie vaudeville en un acte. Paris, Barba, 1820.

44. Paris, Martinet, 1820.

45. Borne, Schilderungen aus Paris (1822 and 1823).

46. "Polichinel ist die beste Seele von der Welt."

47. 1794-1844.

48. Thomas Potter Cooke was born. April, 1786, and died April, 1864. His historic debut seems to have been made at the Royalty in January, 1804, but his first marked success was in the role of Lord Ruthven, which won him great applause. The best known character of this famous actor was William in Douglas Jerrold's Black-ey'd Susan, or, All in the Downs, produced at the Surrey Theatre, 8th June, 1829, when it ran for nearly a year. It was frequently revived and never failed of an enthusiastic reception.

49. 2 vols., London, 1871.

50. This was first produced on 13th April, 1819, as an after-piece to Jane Shore in which Mrs. W. West had appeared for the first time in the title-role. In Abudah, H. Kemble acted Abudah; Bengough, the genius Barhaddan; Harley, Fadlahdallah; Miss Cooke, Selima; and Mrs. Bland, Zemroude. Genest says that the little fairy tale was given thirteen times.

51. The Tales of the Genii: or, The Delightful Lessons of Horam the Son of Asmar. Translated from the Persian by Sir Charles Morell. This book was written by a young clergyman, the Rev. James Ridley, son of Dr. Gloster Ridley, Chaplain to the East India Company. "Horam" and "Sir Charles Morell" are mere fictions. James Ridley died in 1765 immediately after the completion of the first edition of his Tales, which proving very popular have been often reprinted.

52. The play is preserved in MS. Lansdowne 807, British Museum, a volume said to contain the few remains of John Warburton's collection which escaped the kitchen fire at the hands of his cook. Sir George Buc in his note written at the end of the piece refers to "this second Maidens tragedy" apparently in allusion to the famous drama by Beaumont and Fletcher, and although not very apposite the name has continued. A scholarly and welt-edited reprint of The Second Maiden's Tragedy has long been a desideratum. The issue which was prepared for the Malone Society in 1910 by Mr. W. W. Greg is eminently unreadable, nor has the petty recension of the text any real value

[p. 340]

being the mere tricks in hand of an arid and sterile pedantry. Such spade work might be used by a scholar as the basis for his edition.

53. On the last page, folio 56b, the authorship has been assigned to Thomas Goff. This name, however, was erased and that of George Chapman substituted. This again was deleted and the words "By Will Shakspear" inscribed. It is probable that the earliest attribution was made some fifty years or more before the two later, which may belong to the eighteenth century.

54. Founded by Charles III in 1738 and built by Angelo Carasale.

55. Some authorities say 29th March.

56. Rev. Robert Walsh, LL.D., author of "A Residence in Constantinople," and other similar works. (Planche.)

57. Dion Boucicault (or Bourcicault), playwright and actor, was born at Dublin, 20th December, 1822, and after a most distinguished career, died 18th September, 1890.

58. Journal of a London Playgoer from 1851 to 1866, London, 1891, pp. 45-64.

59. It may be remarked that the drawing which illustrates the last scene of the play in the Dicks' Edition is inconsistent, as it shows the characters in costumes of circa 1750.

60. The first edition was of the same year. In 1822 this author published a second tragedy, Montezuma. Hugo John Belfour was born in 1802, he was ordained in 1826, and died young in the following year.

61. Ein Kulturbild aus der Gegenwart.

62. Sozialer Roman. Als Manuskript Gedruckt. Oberhausen und Leipzig, 1883.

63. Novelle aus der Gegenwart. In Das neue Blatt. "Ein illustriertes Familien-Journal," IV (1873), p. 209-408.

64. Mr. S. M. Ellis, who contributed a bibliography of Le Fanu to the Irish Book Lover in 1916. Dr. M. R. James in his Epilogue to the reprint Madam Crowl's Ghost and Other Tales of Mystery, London, 1923.

65. Three volumes, Bentley; also in one volume. A modern re-issue in two parts by Newnes. Also reprinted in one volume, Eveleigh Nash and and  Grayson, London, 1923.

66. Vol. VII, p. 181; vol. IX, p. 212.

67. And afterwards of 12, Salisbury Square, Fleet Street.

68. Occasionally attributed to G. W. M. Reynolds, who, however, more than once denied the authorship.

69. This Epilogue was generally delivered in the provinces and so banal an anti-climax completely ruined the play.

    
The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, by Montague Summers, [1928], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 341]

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abhandlung des Dasenns der Gespenster Nebst einem Anhange vom Vampyrismus. Augsburg, 1768

Actenmassige und umstandliche Relation von denen Vampyren. Leipzig, 1732

ALLACCI, Leone (LEO ALLATIUS). De Graecorum hodie quorundam opinationibus, Cologne, 1645

ANDREE, Richard. Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche. 2 vols., Stuttgart, 1878-89

ARNASON, J. Icelandic Legends. translated by G. Powell and E. Magnusson, London, 1864-66

BARTELS, M. and PLOSS, H. H. Das Weib. Berlin, 1913

BASIN, Bernardus. De artibus magicis. 1482; also Paris, 1506

BASTIAN, Adolf. Der Mensch in der Geschichte, II Band: Psychologie und Mythologie. Leipzig, 1860

BELL, H. J. Obeah. Witchcraft in the West Indies. London, 1893.

BEUCHAT, H. Manuel d' archeologie americaine (Amerique Pre-historique; Civilisations disparues). Paris, 1912

BEAUMONT, John. An Historical, Physiological, and Theological Treatise of Spirits, Apparitions, Witchcrafts, and other Magical Practices. London, 1705

BENT, J. T. The Cyclades. London, 1885

BERNONI, Giuseppe Don. Leggende popolari Veneziane. Venezia, Antonelli, 1814

BOUREULLE, De. "La demonologie de Dom Calmet"--in the Bulletin de la Societe Philomatique Vosgienne, 1887. Saint-Die. Impr. Humbert.

BREENE, R. S. An Irish Vampire--in The Occult Review, October, 1925, pp. 242-5

BROWNE, W. A. F. "Necrophilism"--in Journal of Mental Science, January, 1875, pp. 551-560

CALMET, Augustin Dom (O.S.B.) Traite sur les Apparitons des Esprits, et sur les Vampires, ou les Revenans de Hongrie, de Moravie, etc. Nouvelle edition, revue, corrigee, & augmentee par l'Auteur. 2 vols. Paris, 1751. (The first edition is Paris, 1746; and there was an edition Einsiedeln, Dane la princiere abbaie par Jean Everhard Kalin, 2 vols., 1749)

CASTREN, M. A. Vorlesungen uber die finnische Mythologie: deutsch von A. Schiefner. St. Petersburg, 1853

CEYNOWA, Flor. De terrae Pucensis incolarum superstitione in re medica. Berlin, 1851

Christliche Betrachtungen uber die wunderbarliche Begebenheit mit den Blutsaugenden Todten in Servien. Leipzig, 1732

CODRINGTON, R. H. (D.D.). The Melanesians: studies in their Anthropology and Folk Lore. Oxford. Clarendon Press, 1891

COLLIN DE PLANCY, J. A. S. Dictionnaire Infernal. Editio princeps. 2 vols. Paris, 1818. (1 have used the sixth, and last, edition, 1 vol., 4to, 1863. The six editions differ widely from one another. This famous work is valuable, but uncritical and even erroneous)

--- Histoire des Vampires. Paris, 1820
 (This work, which has been erroneously attributed to Dr Polidori, is now considered almost certainly to be by Collin de Plancy)

CROWE, Catherine. Light and Darkness. 3 vols. London, 1850.

CUISIN, J.P.R. Les ombres sanglantes, galerie funebre de prodiges, evenemnents merveilleux, apparitions nocturnes, songes epouvantables, delits mysterieux,

[p. 342]

phenomenes terribles, vengeances atroces, et combinaisons du crime, forfaits historiques, cadavres mobiles, tetes de la terreur. 2 vols. 12mo. Paris, 1820

--- Spectriana, on recueil d'histories et d'aventures surprenantes, merveilleuses et remarquables, de spectres, revenans, esprits, fantomes, diables, ce demons. Manuscrit trouve dans les catacombes. Paris, Lecrivain, 1817

--- Curieuse Relation von denen sich in Servien erzeigend habenden Blutsaugern. Leipzig, 1732

CURTIN, J. Tales of the Fairies and of the Ghost World. London, 1895

DAVANZATI, Gioseppe. Dissertazione sopra i Vampiri di Gioseppe Davanzati, Patrizio Fiorentino, e Tranese, Cavaliere Gerosolimitano, Arcivescovo di Trani e Patriarca d'Alessandria. Seconda edizione. Napoli. M.DCC.LXXXIX. Presso Filippo Raimondi. Con licenza de' Superiori. 8vo. pp. xxx, 230

DAVIES, T. Witton. Magic, Divination, and Demonology among the Hebrews and their Neighbours. London and Leipzig, s.d. (1898)

DAWKINS, R. M. Modern Greek in Asia Minor; with a chapter on folk-tales by W. R. Halliday. London, 1916

DE GUAITA, Stanislas. Essais de sciences maudites. I. Paris, Carre 1886; Carre, 1890; Chamuel, 1895; II, Paris Chamuel, 1891; III, Paris, Chamuel, 1897.

DEMELIUS, Christoph Friedrichs. Philosophischer Versuch, ob nicht die merkwurdige Begebenheit der Blutsauger oder Vampyren aus den principiis naturae hergeleitet werden konne. Vienna, 1732

DITETERICH, Albrech. Nekyia. Leipzig, 1893

--- Dissertatio physica de cadaueribus sanguisugis, sub praesidio Jon. Christ. Stockii. Jena, 1732

DOZON, A. Contes albanais. Paris, 1881

EAVES, A. Osborne. Modern Vampirism. Talisman Publishing Company, Harrogate, England. 1904

ENNEMOSER, Joseph. The History of Magic: translated from the German by William Howitt. 2 vols. London, Bohn, 1854

ERAH, J. Onurb. Key to Vampyrology, Witchcrafte & Daemonologie for Guidance of ye Slayers. The Watchers' Society, Cambridge, 1751.

FAURIEL. Chansons populaires de la Grece Moderne. Paris, 1824-5

FRITCH, John Christian. Eines Weimarischen muthmassliche Gedancken von den Vampyren oder Blutsaugenden Todten, Leipzig, 1732

GARMANNUS, Christ. Frider. De Miraculis mortuorum. Lipsiae, 1670

GILES, H. A. Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, London, 1909

GIRALDO (O.P.) le R. P. Mathias de. Histoire curieuse et pittoresque des sorciers devins, magiciens, astrologues, voyants, revenants, ames en peine, vampires, spectres, esprits, malins, sorts jetes, excorcismes, etc., depuis l'antiquite jusqu'a nos jours. Revue et augmentie par Fornari. Paris, Renault, 8vo, 1846. There were other editions, 1849 and 1854, of this popular work. Fra Giraldo is described as "dominicain, ancien exorciste de l' Inquisition," but his actual existence is something more than suspect. Fornari writes himself "Professeur de Philosophie hermetique a Milan," and this is ornamental.

Globus: Illustrierte Zeitschrift fur Lander-und Volkerkunde

GORRES, Johann Joseph. Die Christliche Mystik. 4 vols. 1836-42. French translation: La Mystique Divine, Naturelle, et Diabolique . . . 5 vols. Paris, 1861

GRANT, James. The Mysteries of all Nations: Rise and Progress of Superstition. Leith, Edinburgh, and London. n.d. 2nd ed. (Preface signed, January, 1880)

GROOT, J. J. M. De. The Religious System of China. Leyden, 1892-1910

--- The Religion of the Chinese. New York, 1910

GRUNDTVIG, N. F. S. Danske Koempeviser. No. 90. Copenhagen, 1847

HAHN, J. G. von. Albanesische Studien. Jena, 1854

--- Griechische und Albaneeische Marchen. Leipzig, 1864

HANUSH, S. Slavische mythologie.

HARE, Augustus. Story of my Life, 6 vols. 1896-1900

HARENBERG, John Christian. Vernunfftige und christliche Gedanken uber die Vampyrs oder Blutsaugenden Todten. Wolfenbuttel, 1732

[p. 343]

HAUTTECOEUR, Henry. Le Folklore de l'Ile de Kythnos. Bruxelles, 1898

HAUXTHAUSEN, Baron August von. Transcaucasia: Sketches of the Nations and Races between the Black Sea and the Caspian. London, 1854

HEINECCIUS, J. M. De absolutione, mortuorum excommunicatorum, seu tympanicorum in ecclesia Graeca. Helmstad, 1709

HELLWALD, F. von. Die Welt der Slaven. Berlin, 1890

HELM, K. Altgermanische Religioneschichte. Heidelberg, 1913

HERTZ, Wilhelm. Der Werwolf. Stuttgart, 1862

HOCK S. Die Vampyrsagen und ihre Verwertung in der deutschen Litteratur. Berlin, 1900

HORST, Georg Conrad. Zauber-bibliothek; oder von Zauberei, Theurgie, und Mantik, Zauberern, Hexen, und Hexenprocessen, Damonen, Gesperstern, und Geistererschein ungen. 6 vols., Mainz, 1821

--- Histoire prodigieuse d'un gentilhomme auquel le Diable s'est apparu et avec lequel il a converse sous le corps d'une, femme morte, aduenue a Paris le premier de janvier mil six cens treize. Paris, 8vo, 1613. Reprinted by Lenglett-Dufresny, Recueil de dissertations. Tome I, Part 2 (pp. 69-71).

HOSE, C. and MEDOUGALL, W. The Pagan Tribes of Borneo. London, 1912

HOVORKA, O. von, and KRONFIELD, A. Vergleichende Volksmedizin. 2 vols. Berlin, 1009-9

HUDSON, Thomson Jay. The Law of Psychic Phenomena. Putnam, 1905. (c. xxi: "Suspended Animation")

HUNT, R. Popular Romances of the West of England. London, 1865

Ion Greanga. Edited by Tudor Pamfile (Roumanian periodical of peasant art and literature)

IVES, George. A History of Penal Methods. London, 1914

JOYCE, Thomas Athol. Mexican Archaeology: an introduction to the Archaeology of the Mexican and Mayan Civilizations of pre-Spanish America. London, 1914

KARL, O. F. (Karl Otto). Danziger Sagen gesammelt von O. F. Karl. Danzig, 1843

KEANE, A. H. Man, Past and Present. London, 1920

KORNMANN. De miraculis mortuorum. 1610

KRAUSS, F. S. "Vampyre im sudslavischen Volksglauben"--in Globus, lxi (1892)

LAISTNER, Ludwig. Das Rathsel der Sphynx: Grundzuge einer Mythengeschichte. Berlin, 1889

LANCELIER, Charles. Historie mystique de Shatan. Daragon, Paris, 1905. (3me partie: Le Vampire)

LAWSON, John Cuthbert. Modern Greek Folk Lore and Ancient Greek Religion. Cambridge, 1910

LEAKE, W. M. Travels in Northern Greece, 4 vols. London, 1835

LEE, Frederick George. The Vampyre. In Reynold's Miscellany. Vol. I, No. 28. (New Series.) Saturday, 20th January, 1849 (pp. 444-445)

LIEBRECHT, F. Zur Volkskunde. Heilbronn, 1879

LUCAS, Paul. Voyage da Sieur Paul Lucas au Levant. 2 vols. A La Haye. 1705

Lycanthropist (The). In Reynolds' Miscellany, Vol. V, No. 125. (New Series.) Saturday, 30th November, 1850 (pp. 293-295)

MACCULLOCH, J. X. "Vampire"--article in Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, edited by James Hastings. Vol. XII., pp. 589-591. Edinburgh, 1921

MACHAL, J. Slavic Mythology, Boston, 1918

MALLEUS MALEFICARUM--v. Sprenger and Kramer

MANNHARDT, W. Uber Vampyrismus--in Zeitschrift fur deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde. Vol. iv, pp. 259-82. Gottingen, 1858

MAP, Walter. De Nugis Curialium. Edited by M. R. James. (Anecdota Oxoniensia: Mediaeval and Modern Series, Part XIV) Oxford, 1914

--- De Nugis Curalium (Courtiers' Trifles). Englished by Frederick Tupper and Marbury Bladen Ogle. London, 1924

MAYO, Herbert. On the Truths contained in Popular Superstitions. Second Edition. London, 1951. (These papers were first published in Blackwoods' Edinburgh Magazine, 1847-8)

[p. 344]

MIGNE, M. L'abbe. Enyclopedie Theologique, Tome Quarante--Nuvieme: Dictionnaire des Sciences Occultes. Paris, 1860. Vampires, 783-798. See also: Paul, Arnold, 263; Plogojouits, Pierre, 323-324; Polyinte, 325-326. And in Tome Quarante-Huitcime, Harppe, 803; Katha hanes, 918-919

MORE, Henry. An Antidote against Atheism; or An Appeal to the Natural Faculties of the Mind of Man, whether there be not a God. 1653. Second Edition with Appendix, 1655

MORETON, Andrew. The Secrets of the Invisible World Disclosed; or, an Universal History of Apparitions Sacred and Prophane. The third edition, London, 1738

MURGOCI, Agnes. "The Vampire in Roumania".--in Folk-Lore, vol. xxxvii, No. 4, 31 December, 1926: pp. 320-49

NEWTON. Travels and Discoveries in the Levant. 2 vols., London, 1866

NINO, de A. Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi. G. Barbera, Florence, 1891

NODIER, Charles. Infernaliana. Paris, Sansom et Nadau, 12mo, 1882

--- Occult Review (The)

--- Ocean of Story (The)--v. Somadeva

OTESCU, I. Credintele Taranului Roman despre Cer si Stele. (Roumanian Academy pamphlet)

Ottonis Graben zum Stein unverlornes Licht und Recht derer Todten unter den Lebendigen. Wittenberg, 1732

P[ABAN], Madame Gabrielle de. Histoire des Fantomes et des Demons qui se sent montres parmi les hommes, ou choix d'anecdotes et de contes, de faits merveilleux, de traits bizarres, d'aventures extraordinaires sur les revenans, les fantomes, les lutins, les demons, les spectres, les vampires et les apparitions diverses, etc. Paris, 12mo, 1819. (Querard tells us that Collin de Plancy who was a cousin of the writer, collaborated in this work)

--- Demoniana, ou Nouveau choix d'anecdotes surprenantes, de nouvelles prodigieuses, d'aventures bizarres, sur les revenans, les spectres, les fantomes; les demons, les loups garous, les visions, etc.; ouvrage propre a rassurer les imaginations timorees contre les frayeurs superstitieuses. Paris, 18mo, 1820. (Graesse mistakenly attributes this work to Collin de Plancy: Bibliotheca Magica, p. 88)

PASHLEY, ROBERT. Travels in Crete. 2 vols. Cambridge and London, 1837.

PETRONIUS. Satirae, tertium edidit Franciscus Buecheler. Berolini, 1895

PHILOSTRATUS. The Life of Apollonius of Tyana, translated by F. C. Conybeare, 2 vols. (Loeb Classical Library), London, 1926

PHLEGON TRALLIANUS--apud Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, ed. Carolus Mullerus, vol. III, pp. 602-24, Paris, Didot, 1849

PLUMMER, Charles. Uitae Sanctorum Hiberniae. 2 vols. Oxford, 1900

POHLIUS, M. John Christopher. Dissertatio de hominibus post mortem sanguisugis. Leipzig, 1742

POLITES, N. P. Paradoseis tou ellenikou laou. Athens, 2 vols., 1904

PUTONEUS. Besondere Nachrichten von denen Vampyrs. Leipzig, 1732

RALSTON, W. R. S. Russian Folk Tales. London, 1873

RANFT, Michael. De Masticatione Mortuorum in Tumulis Liber. Leipzig, 1728

--- Tractat von dem Kauen und Schamtzen der Todten in Grabern. Leipzig, 1734

RATTRAY, R. Sutherland. Ashanti Proverbs: translated from the original. (The Primitive Ethics of a Savage People.) Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1916

Realite de la magie et des Apparitions, ou Contre-poison du Dictionnaire Infernal. Paris, 1819

Revue d'Assyriologie, 1909, 61

RICAUT, Paul. The Present State of the Greek and Armenian Churches, Anno Christi, 1678. London, 1679

RICHARD, S. J., Francois. Relation de ce qui s'est passe de plus remarquable a Sant-Erini Isle de l'Archipel, depuis l'etablissement des Peres de la compagnie de Jesus en icelle. Paris, MDCLVII.

[p. 345]

ROBERT, Cyprien. Les Slaves de Turquie, 2 vols. Paris, 1844

RODD, Sir Rennell. The Customs and Lore of Modern Greece. London, 1892

ROHR, M. Philip. De Masticatione Mortuorum (Dissertatio Historico-Philosophica). Leipzig, 1679

ROUGHEAD, William. Burke and Hare (Notable British Trials). Glasgow, Hodge, 1919

RZAZEYNSCI, S. J. Gabriel. Historia naturalis curiosa regni Poloniae. Sandomiriae, 1721

ST. CLAIR, S. G. B. and BROPHY, Charles A. Twelve Years' Study of the Eastern Question in Bulgaria: being a revised Edition of A Residence in Bulgaria (1869). London, 1877

SCHMIDT, Bernhard. Griechische Marchen, Sagen, und Volkslieder. Leipzig, 1877

SCHOTT, Arthur and Albert. Walachische Mahrchen. Stuttgart and Tubingen 1845

Schreiben eines-guten Freundes an einen anderen guten Freund, die Vampyren betreffend. Frankfort, 1732

SIMON, jun., Friedrich Alexander. Der Vampirismus im neunzehnten Jahrhundert. Hamburg, 1831. (A medical pamphlet dealing with the abuse of excessive letting of blood by physicians)

SIMON, Paul Max. Crimes et delits dans la folie. 1886

SIMROCK, C.J. Handbuch der deutschen Mythologien. Bonn, 1874

SINISTRARI, O. F. M., Ludovico Maria. Demoniality. Translated from the Latin by the Rev. Montague Summers with an Introduction and Notes. The Fortune Press, London, 1927

SKEAT, W. W. Malay Magic, being an Introduction to the Folklore and Popular Religion of the Malay Peninsula. London. 1900

SOMADERA. The Ocean of Story, translated by C. H. Tawney; edited with Introduction by N. M. Penzer, 10 vols. London, Sawyer, 1924

SOMMIERES, M. Le Colonel L. C. Vialla de. Voyage Historique et Politique au Montenegro. 2 vols., Paris, 1820

SPENCE, Lewis. An Encyclopedia of Occultism. London, Routledge, 1920

--- The Gods of Mexico. London, Unwin, 1923

--- The Myths of Mexico and Peru. London, Harrap, 1913

SPRENGER (O.P.), James and KRAMER (Institor), Heinrich. Malleus Maleficarum: translated from the Latin by the Rev. Montague Summers, with an Introduction and Notes. John Rodker, London, 1928

STEPHEN, H. J. Commentaries on the Laws of England. London, 1868

STOCK, John Christian. Dissertatio de Cadaueribus Sarguisugis. Jena, 1732

STOLL, Otto. Suggestion und Hypnotismus in der Volkerpsychologie. Leipzig, 1894

STRACK, Hermann, L. The Jew and Human Sacrifice. Translated from the 8th Edition by Henry Blanchamp. First published in England, May, 1909

SWETTENHAM, Frank A. Malay Sketches. London, 1895

TEBB, W. and VOLLUM, M.D. (Colonel). Premature Burial and How It May Be Prevented. 2nd edition by W. R. Hadwen, M.D., London, 1905

TERTULLIAN. De Anima--apud Migne, Patres Latini, II, 687-798

THOMPSON, R. Campbell. The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia. 2 vols. London, 1903-1904

--- Semitic Magic: its Origins and Development. London, 1908

THURSTON (S. J.), H. Broucolaccas: A Study in Mediaeval Ghost Lore. In The Month. November, 1897. Vol. XC. (pp. 502-520)

TOURNEFORT, M. Pitton de. Relation d'un Voyage du Levant, 2 vols. Paris, 1717

TOZER, Rev. Henry Fanshawe. Researches in the High lands of Turkey . . . with Notes on the Ballads, Tales, and Classical Superstitions of the Modem Greeks. 2 vols., London, 1869

Travels of Three English Gentlemen from Venice to Hamburgh being the grand Tour of Germany in the Year (1734). Harleian Miscellany, vol. IV sqq., 1745

Uisus et repertus uber die so genannten Vampyren. Nuremberg, 1732

VALVASOR, Iohannes Weichardus. Gloria Carniolae Explicata. 4to. 1689

[p. 346]

VILLEMARQUE, T. Hersart de la. Barzaz-Breiz: Chants populaires de la Bretagne, 4th edition, 2 vols. Paris, 1846

VOIGTS, Gottlieb Heinrich. Kurtzes Bedencken von den Relationen wegen der Vampyren. Leipzig, 1732

WACHSMUTH, C. Das alte Griechenland im neuem. Bonn, 1864

WILLELMI PARUI DE NEWBURGH. Historia Rerum, Anglicarum: recensuit Hans Claude Hamilton. 2 vols. Londini, 1856

WILLOUGHBY-MEADE, G. Chinese Ghouls and Goblins. London, 1928

WINSTEDT, R. O. Shaman, Saiva, and Sufi: a Study of Malay Magic. London, 1928

WRIGHT, Dudley. Vampires and Vampirism. 1914. Second Edition, enlarged, 1924

WRIGHT, Thomas. Essays on Subjects connected with the Literature, Popular Superstitions, and History of England in the Middle Ages. 2 vols. London, 1846

W.S.G.E. Curieuse and sehr wunderbarliche Relation von denen sich neuer Dinge in Servien erzeigenden Blutsaugern oder Vampyrs, arts authentischen Nachrichten mitgetheilet und mit historischen and philosophischen Reflexionen begleitet. Leipzig, 1732

ZEILER, Martin. Trauergeschicten. 3 vols., 1625

ZOPFT, John Heinrich. Dissertatio de Uampiris Seruiensibus. Halle, 1733

  

POETRY; FICTION; DRAMA

ARNOLD, Theodor Ferdinand Kajetan. Der Vampir. Schneeburg, 1801

BENSON, E. F. The Face, and No Bird Sings. Both in Spook Stories, 1928 The Room in the Tower--in The Room in the Tower and other Stories, 1912 Mrs. Amworth--in Visible and Invisible, 1923

BERARD, Cyprien. Lord Ruthven on les Vampires. Roman de G. B. Publie par l'auteur de Jean Sbogar et de Therese Aubut. Paris, 1820. (February, 1820. Second Edition with Notes on Vampirism, July, 1820)

BLACKWOOD, Algernon. The Transfer--in Pan's Garden, 1912.

--- The Strange Adventures of a Private Secretary in New York--in The Empty House, 1906

--- Blutsauger (Die) Roman. Quedlinburg und Leipzig, 1821

BOUCICAULT, Dion. The Phantom: a Drama in Two Acts. New York. Samuel French, 1856. No. CLXV Frerich's Standard Drama. Also Dick's Standard Plays, No. 697

BRADDON, Miss [Mary Elizabeth]. Good Lady Ducayne--in The Strand Magazine. February, 1896, vol. X1, pp. 185-199

BRAZIER, GABRIEL, et ARMAND. Les Trois Vampires, ou le clair de la lure. Folie vaudeville en un acte. Paris, Barba, 1820 (Produced at the Varietes)

BURTON, Sir Richard. Vikram and the Vampire or Tales of Hindu Devilry (Adapted by Richard F. Burton, F.R.G.S. etc.). London, 1870 [1869]

BYRON, Lord. The Giaour. "A Fragment of a Turkish Tale." London Murray, 1813. "A New Edition, with Some Additions," (71 lines at the beginning of the poem, the amended dedication and the advertisement). London, Murray, 1813

Cadet Buteux Vampire; ou Relation veridique du prologue et des trois actes de cet epouvantable melodrama ecrite sous la dictee di ce passeux du Gros-Caillou par son secretaire Desaugeirs. Paris, 1820 (A parody on Nodier)

COSMAR and KRAUSE. Der Vampyr: Trauerspiel in 5 Abteilungen; nach einen Spindlerschen Erzahlung bearbeitet. Berlin, 1828

CRAWFORD, F. Marion. For the Blood is the Life--in Uncanny Tales, 1911

DAHN, F. Der Vampyr. (Werke, vol. XVII, 1898, p. 233)

Der Vampyr, oder die blutige Hochzeit mit der schonin Kroatin: eine sonderbare Gerchichte von bohmischen Wissenpater. Erfurt. 1812

Der Vampyr, oder die todten Brant: Romantisches Schauspiel in drei Acten. Brunswick, 1822

[p. 347]

DORSET, St. John [Rev. Hugo John Belfour]. The Vampire: a Tragedy in Five Acts. First [Second] Edition. London, MDCCCXXI. C. and J. Ollier.

DOYLE, Sir A. Conan. The Parasite. 1891

DUMAS (Pere), Alexandre. Le Vampire: Drama fantastique en 5 actes et, 10 tableaux par Alexandre Dumas et Auguste Maquet, represente le 20 decembre, 1851 Sur le theatre de l'Amtigu-Comique, Theatre Complet de Alexandre Dumas. Onzieme Serie. Paris, Michel Levy, 1865

DUNN, Gertrude. The Mark of the Bat. London, 1928

ELLMENREICH, Friederike. Der Vampyr. Mainz, 1827 (A translation from Scribe)

FABER, H. Le Vampire, nouvelle traduite de l'anglais de Lord Byron. Paris 1819

FAIRFIELD, Henry W. A. Only by Mortal Hands (as told to Harold Standish Corbin). "Ghost Stories," vol. III, No. 4. October, 1927. Construction Publishing Company. Washington and South Aves.

FEVAL, Paul H. C. La Ville Vampire. Paris, Dentu, 1875. (This is ingenuously stated to be a romance by Mrs. Radcliffe, who recounted it to the writer's aunt from whom he heard the tale)

FOSSE, Pierre de Ia. Le Vampire; Melodrama en 3 actes. Paroles de M. Pierre de la Fosse de la rue des Morts. (Pseudonym). 1820

GAUTIER, Theophile. La Morte Amoreuse. Originally appeared in the Chronique: de Paris, 23rd and 26th June, 1836

--- The Beautiful Vampire. London, 1927. (A translation of La Morte Amoreuse, by Paul Hookham. There is also a translation by G. Burnham Ives as The Dead Leman, Putnam, New York and London, 1903. Other English versions have been published)

GOETHE, Johann Wolfgang von. Die Braut von Corinth

HAUSHOFER, Max. Die Verbannten. Leipzig, 1890

HEIGEL C. M. Der Vampyr: Romantische Oper in drei Aufzugen. Nach Byrons Dichtung von C. M. Heigel; Musik von p. V. Lindpaintner, 1829 (Produced at Stuttgart, 21 September, 1828)

HEROLD, A. Ferdinand. Les Contes du Vampire. Paris, Mercure de France, 1891. Second edition, 1902. (Indian tales)

HERON, E. and H. The Story of Baelbrow in Ghost Stories, London, Pearson, 1916. (Reprinted from Pearson's Magazine, April, 1898)

HILDEBRANDS, Theodor. Der Vampyr oder die Totenbraut: ein Roman nach neugriechischen Volkssagen. Leipzig, 1828

H.M.P. A Vampire of Souls. 1904 (A semi-apocalyptic novel)

HODDER, Reginald. The Vampire. London, 1913

HUGO, Victor. Han d'Islande. 4 vols., Paris, Persan, 1823

JAMES, M. R. Count Magnus in Ghost Stories of an Antiquary. London. Arnold, 1905. An Episode of Cathedral History--in A thin Ghost and Others. London, Arnold, 1919.

KEATS, John. Lamia. Published July, 1820

KERATY, M. de. Le Dernier du Beaumanoir. (1850?). [Founded on the following incident: Peu d'annees avant le revolution de 1789 un pretre fut convaincu d'avoir assouri sa passion brutale sur le cadavre encore chaud d'une femme aupres de laquelle il avait ete place pour reciter des prieres)

KING, Frank. The Ghoul. London, 1928 (This is a mystery novel. The Ghoul is a nickname given to a master-criminal)

LE FANU, Sheridan. Carmilla--In a Glass Darkly. 3 vols., London, Bentley, 1872. Also in one volume, 1872. Reprinted in two parts by Newnes. Reprinted Eveleigh Nash, 1923

LIDDELL, Hon. Henry. "The Vampire Bride"--in The Wizard of the North: The Vampire Bride, and other Poems. Blackwood, Edinburgh; and Cadell, London, MDCCCXXXIII

MENGALS, Martin Joseph. Le Vampire: Comic Opera in one Act. 1826. (Produced 1st March, 1826)

MERIMEE, Prosper. La Guzla, ou, Choix de Poesies Illyriques, 1827

NERUDA, Jan. The Vampire, pp. 847-849 of Great Short Stories of the World. London, New Impression. November, 1927

[p. 348]

NODIER, Charles. Le Vampire (A melodrama in a Prologue and three Acts. Music by Alexandre Piccini. Produced at the Porte-Saint-Martin, Paris, 13th June, 1820). Paris, 1820

PALMA, Silvestro di. I Vampiri. (1800)

PLANCHE, James Robinson. The Vampire. or the Bride of the Isles. Produced at the English Opera House, 9th August, 1820. 8vo. 1820. Also Dicks' Standard Plays, No. 875

POLIDORI. The Vampyre. Originally published in the New Monthly Magazine, April, 1819. First separate edition, London, Sherwood, 1819

PREST, Thomas Preskett. Varney the Vampire, or The Feast of Blood. 1847. Reprinted in Penny Numbers, 1853

PRZYBYSZEWSKI. De profundis. Leipzig and Berlin, 1895

RACHILDE. La Tour d'Amour. Paris, 1891 (Necrophilia)

ROMAN, Victor. "Four Wooden Stakes"--in Not at Night, London, 1925

ROTTA. Il Vampiro: Ballet with music by Paolo Giorza. Milan. 1861 (Produced at Milan in 1861)

SCHUBIN, Ossip. Vollmondzauber. Stuttgart, 1899

SCOTT, G. A. Dawson. The Vampire: a Book of Cornish and other Stories. London, 1925. (The only Vampire in this book seems to be a metaphor)

SCRIBE, Eugene. Le Vampire: Comedie-Vaudeville en un acte de Scribe et Melesville. Theatre du Vaudeville. 15 June, 1820. Oeuvres completes de Eugene Scribe. Comedies. Vaudevilles. 2me Serie, VI. (Paris, Dentu, 1876)

Second Maiden's Tragedy (The). Licensed 31st October, 1611. MS. Lansdowne 807. British Museum. (This drama has been several times printed. It was first given to the press in Baldwin's The Old English Drama, Vol. I, 1825. Among the later reprints is that of the Malone Society, 1909, Edited by W. W. Greg. A scholarly recension of this play is a desideratum)

SELTZAM, Dr. Die Vampyre der Residenz: Wahre Skandalgeschichten und sensationelle Enthullungen von Dr. Seltzam (pseudonym?). 2 Parts. Berlin, 1900. (A pornographic piece of no value)

SOUTHEY, Robert. Thalaba the Destroyer. 1801 (Finished July, 1800)

SPINDLER. Der Vampyr und seine Braut: Nachtstuck aus der neuesten zeit--in Zwillinge. Zwei Erzahlungen, nebst einem Anhange von Original briefen. Hanover, 1826

STENBOCK, Eric Stanislaus, Count. The True Story of a Vampire. In Studies of Death. London, Nutt, 1894.

STOKER, Bram. Dracula. A tale. pp. ix, 390. London, Constable, 1897. Tenth edition, Rider, 1913

--- Dracula's Guest and other Weird Stories. London, Routledge, 1914

STUCKEN, Edouard. Die Vampyrkatze--in Balladen, Berlin, 1899

TAGLIONI, Paul. Morgano: Comedie-ballet in four acts and seven tableaux; with music by J. Hatch. 1857. (Produced at Berlin, 25th May, 1857)

TOLSTOI, Alexei. Oupir (a short story)

TURGENIEV, I. S. Apparitions. tr. by p. Merimee. In Nouvelles Muscovites. 21 ed. Paris, 1868

UPTON, Smyth. The Last of the Vampires. Columbian Press, Weston-Super-Mare, 1845

VACANO, E. Schwarze Melancholie (A Short Story). 1865

Vampyre (The). By the Wife of a Medical Man. 1858. (A frantic teetotal tract, presented as fiction)

VAUDERE, J. de la. Le mystere de Karme. Paris, 1901

WACHENHUSEIN, Hans and May Karl. In den Schluchten des Balkan. Stuttgart and Leipzig. n.d.

WAKEFIELD, H. R. The Seventeenth Hole at Duncaster--in They Return at Evening, 1928

WELLS, H. G. The Flowering of the Strange Orchid--in The Stolen Bacillus, 1895

WOHLBRUK, Wilhelm August. Der Vampyr: an opera. Music by Marschner. 1828. (Produced 28th March, 1828)

X.L. Aut Diabolus aur Nihil: "The Kiss of Judas." London, Methuen, 1894

    


===== BOOK: vow.txt =====


     
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i1]

HERMES MERCURIUS TRISMEGISTUS

Click to enlarge

VIRGIN OF THE WORLD 1885

[p. i3] [p. i2]

  

THE HERMETIC WORKS

  

THE

  

VIRGIN OF THE WORLD

  

of

  

Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus

Isis egu eimi panta gegonos kai on kai esomenon kai to emon peplon oydeis tun thnetun apekalypsen

  

Now FIRST RENDERED INTO ENGLISH

  

With Essay Introductions and Notes

  

BY

  

DR. ANNA KINGSFORD

  

AND

  

EDWARD MAITLAND

  

AUTHORS OF

  

"THE PERFECT WAY"

  

London: G. Redway

  

[1885]

Scanned, proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, June 2005, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

THE

Titles of every Book of

Hermes Trismegistus.

VOL. II.

          Book.

        

       FOLIO.

     
       

       Introductory   Essays and Preface

       <page i>.--xxx.

     
      1.

       The Virgin of   the World

       <page 1>

     
      2.

       Asclepios on   Initiation

       <page 45>

     
      3.

       Definitions of   Asclepios

       <page 10>1

     
      4.

       The Fragments

       <page 119>

     
    

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

NOTE.

In presenting the "Virgin of the World"--which with my "Hargrave Jennings" Edition of the "Divine Pymander," now so much in repute and demand, are the text books of Hermetic thought--it is no act of supererogation to gratefully acknowledge my appreciation of the valued services of all associated with me in the privileged task of once again reviving those priceless writings of that "Master Initiate," "Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus;" (to be shortly supplemented by the Third Volume, or "Golden Treatise concerning the Physical Secret of the Philosopher's Stone, in seven sections," esteemed one of the best and oldest pieces of Alchemical Philosophy extant; comprising, in epitome, the whole Art, and secret method of its confection, with corroborative annotations from Fludd, Behmem, Vaughan, &c.

Bath; May, 1885.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i]

  

The Hermetic Books.

THE Sacred Books of Hermes, says Mrs. Child in her admirable compendium, [*1] containing the laws, science, and theology of Egypt, were declared by the priests to have been composed during the reign of the Gods, preceding that of their first king, Menes. Allusions on very ancient monuments prove their great antiquity. There were four of them, and the sub-divisions of the whole make forty-two volumes. These numbers correspond exactly to those of the Vedas, which the Puranas say were carried into Egypt by the Yadavas at the first emigration to that country from Hindostan. The subjects treated of in them were likewise similar; but how far the Books of Hermes were copied from the Vedas remains doubtful. They were deposited in the inmost holy recesses of the temples, and none but the higher order of priests were allowed to read them. They were carried reverently in all great religious processions. The chief priests carried ten volumes relating to the emanations of the Gods, the formation of the world, the divine annunciation of laws and rules for the priesthood. The prophets carried four, treating of astronomy and astrology. The leader of the sacred musicians carried two, containing hymns to the Gods, and maxims to guide the conduct of the king, which the chanter was required to know by heart. Such were the reputed antiquity and sanctity of these Egyptian hymns that Plato says they were ascribed to Isis, and believed to be ten thousand years old. Servitors of the temple carried ten volumes more, containing forms of prayer and rules for offerings, festivals, and processions. The other volumes treated of philosophy and the sciences, including anatomy and medicine.

[These

[p. ii]

[paragraph continues] These books were very famous, and later were much sought after for alchemical purposes, especially for that of making gold. The Roman Emperor Severus collected all writings on the Mysteries and buried them in the tomb of Alexander the Great; and Diocletian destroyed all their books on alchemy lest Egypt should become too rich to remain tributary to Rome. The once-renowned Books of Hermes have been lost these fifteen hundred years.

Thus much concerning the Hermetic Books generally.

The Fragments comprised in this reprint have been the subject of much learned research. In the early centuries of Christianity--Dr. Louis Menard tells us [*1]--they enjoyed a high repute as of undoubted genuineness, the Fathers invoking their testimony on behalf of the Christian mysteries, while Lactantius--the "Christian Cicero"--said of them, "Hermes, I know not how, has discovered well-nigh the whole truth." He was regarded as an inspired revealer, and the writings which bore his name passed for genuine monuments of that ancient Egyptian theology in which Moses had been instructed. And this opinion was accepted by Massilius Ficinus, Patricius, and other learned men of the Renaissance, who regarded them as the source of the Orphic initiations and of the philosophy of Pythagoras and Plato. Doubts, however, arose. They were ascribed, variously, on the strength of internal evidence, to a Jew, a Christian, and a Gnostic. And the conclusion come to by recent critics and accepted by Dr. Menard, is that their place is among the latest productions of Greek philosophy, but that amid the Alexandrian ideas, on which they are based, there are some traces of the religious doctrine of ancient Egypt. It was, he says, from the conjunction of the religious doctrines of Egypt, with the philosophic doctrines of Greece, that the Egyptian philosophy sprang which has left no other memorial than the books of Hermes, in which are to be recognised, under an abstract form, the ideas and tendencies which had before been presented under a mythological form.

[Another

[p. iii]

Another comparison is that which he institutes between some of the Hermetic writings and the Jewish and Christian Scriptures, especially the Book of Genesis and the fourth Gospel, and the works of Philo and the Shepherd of Hernias. [*1] "The advent of Christianity presents at first sight the appearance of a radical revolution in the manners and beliefs of the Western World. But history knows nothing of sudden changes and unanticipated transformations. To comprehend the passage from one religion to another, one should not contrast their two extreme terms--the Homeric mythology and the Nicene symbology. It is necessary to study their intermediate remains--the multiple products of an epoch of transition, when the primitive Hellenism, under philosophical discussion, changed more and more by admixture with the religions of the East, which were then confused by advancing upon Europe. Christianity represents the latest terms of this incursion of Oriental conceptions into the West. It did not fall like a thunderbolt into the midst of an old world surprised and aghast. It had its period of incubation; and while it sought a definitive form for its doctrines, the problems, the solution of which it sought, equally preoccupied the minds of Greece, Asia, and Egypt. The ideas were already in the air, which became combined in every kind of proportion.

"The multiplicity of the sects springing up in our days can give but a slight notion of that astonishing intellectual chemistry which had established its chief laboratory at Alexandria. Humanity had put up to competition vast moral and philosophical issues--the origin of evil, the destiny of souls, their fall and their redemption; the prize offered was the dictatorship of consciences. The Christian solution prevailed."

Our critic proceeds to distinguish in the books of Hermes Trismegistus between that which, in his view, belonged respectively to Egypt and to Judea. "When we meet in these books," he remarks, "Platonist or Pythagorean ideas, we must ask whether the author had recovered them from the ancient sources whence Pythagoras or Plato had drawn them before him; or whether they represent an element purely Greek. There is, then, room to discuss the influence, real or supposed, of the East on the Hellenic philosophy. One is generally too liable, on the

[strength

[p. iv]

strength of the belief of the Greeks themselves, to exaggerate this influence, and especially to set back the date of it. It is only after the foundation of Alexandria that a permanent and consistent connection was established between the thought of Greece and that of other peoples; and in these exchanges Greece had much more to give than to receive. The Orientals--at least, such of them as came into contact with the Greeks--appeared never to have had a philosophy properly so called. Psychic analysis, research for the foundations of knowledge and of moral laws, and their application to social life, were things absolutely unknown to the East before the invasion of Alexander. The expression respecting his countrymen which Plato ascribes to the Egyptian priest, 'You Greeks are but children; and there are no old men among you,' might be referred to the East and to Egypt itself. The scientific spirit is as alien to those peoples as the political instinct. They can endure, through long ages, but they can never reach their manhood. They are elderly youths, always in leading strings, and as incapable of searching for truth as of accomplishing justice.

"Initiated into philosophy by Greece, the East could but give in return that which it had,--the exaltation of religious sentiment; Greece accepted the exchange. Weary of the scepticism produced by the strife of her schools, she cast herself, by a reaction, into mystic fervours, precursors of a renewal of faith. The books of Hermes Trismegistus are a bond of union between the dogmas of the past and those of a future, and it is by this bond that they attach themselves to questions actual and living. If they belong still to paganism, it is to paganism in its last hours, always full of disdain for the new faith, and declining to abdicate in her favour, because it guards the depository of the old civilisation which will become extinct with it, already tired of a hopeless struggle, resigned to its destiny, and returning to sleep for evermore in its first cradle, the old Egypt, the land of the dead."

Dr. Menard thus concludes:--"The Hermetic books are the last monuments of paganism. They belong at once to the Greek philosophy and the Egyptian religion, and in their mystic exaltation they impinge already upon the Middle Age. Between a world which is ending and a world which is commencing, they resemble those animals who by their undecided nature serve as a

[link

[p. v]

link between different orders of organisations. These mixed creations are always inferior to each of the groups which they connect together. Not to be compared either with the religion of Homer or Christianity, the Books of Hermes enable us to comprehend the method of the world's passage from one to the other. In them the beliefs which were being born, and, the beliefs which were dying, met and clasped hands."

In contrast to, and also, as we hold, in correction of, the view thus expressed concerning the relative philosophies of Greece and the East, we adduce the following passages from Mr. Plumptre's "History of Pantheism":-- [*1]

"From our earliest childhood we have generally been taught to regard the Hebrews as those to whom we owe all our knowledge of theology and religion; and in a great measure even our knowledge of God Himself. We have been taught to regard the Greeks as those from whom we have gained all our acquaintance with the arts and sciences, philosophy, and, to a certain extent, all that is comprised within the word wisdom. And in like manner it is upon the Romans we have been told to look as upon those from whom we have gained all our notions of discipline and law. As regards our relations to the Hebrews and Romans, the definition is fairly accurate. Not so with the Greeks. There is, indeed, a certain superficial accuracy about the statement. We do, of course, owe a good deal of our knowledge and learning to the Greeks. But where the definition is erroneous is in this: it leads us to imply from it that the Greeks were the first people who cultivated the love of learning for its own sake; that they gained their knowledge from no other nations, but were the authors of it themselves. It might almost lead us to imply that they were the first people who had ever attained any degree of civilisation.

"The slightest acquaintance with Egyptian or Hindoo history is sufficient to make us detect such an obvious fallacy, and lead us readily to discredit the assertion. The civilisation of Egypt goes so far back in the world's history that it is almost impossible to say when it began. It is almost generally acknowledged now that Moses gained the greater portion of his knowledge from his

[connection

[p. vi]

connection with the Egyptians; and in that case even our first ideas of religion may be traced to an Egyptian source."

Mr. Plumptre goes on to spew that while the Hindoos and Egyptians had long been in possession of religio-philosophical systems of the highest intellectual order, the Greeks were sunk in ignorance and superstition of the most irrational kind, until the occurrence of an event which revolutionised, or, rather, which gave the first impulse to Greek thought, so that in a short time after it Greece sprang from a state of childish ignorance into one in which she became, both commercially and philosophically, the leading power of the world. This momentous event was the opening of the Egyptian ports by Psammetichus, B.C. 670. Previous to that time, the Egyptians had been shut out from all intercourse with Europe and the Mediterranean by an exclusion more rigorous than that which until lately was practised in China and Japan; and Egypt was to the Greeks but a land of mystery and fable, as witness the allusions to it in Homer and Hesiod. But with the system of isolation overthrown which had prevailed for so many thousands of years, the influence of the event upon the progress of Europe was such as to be incapable of exaggeration. First Greece, then the rest of the world, owed their civilisation to it. It destroyed the belief in the old mythologies, and gave birth to Greek philosophy.

There is one respect in which this statement requires modification. The Greek mythologies may indeed have been but irrational fables as popularly received and without the key to their interpretation. But in reality they were symbols denoting, while concealing, profound occult truths. And while their presence in Greece at so early a period shews that colleges of the Sacred Mysteries flourished there long before the rise of Greek philosophy, the identity of the doctrines they symbolised with those of Egypt and the East shews that there had been religious intercourse between these countries long before there was any political, commercial, or philosophical intercourse. Foreign missionary enterprise by no means originated with Christianity. The Sacred Mysteries were continually migrating and planting themselves in new ground in advance of secular civilisation. The migration of Abraham and the flights of Bacchus and of Moses were doubtless all of them events of this character.

[Mr.

[p. vii]

Mr. Plumtre's conclusion that whatever there was of coincidence between Greek and Egyptian philosophic thought was due to the recognition and adoption of the latter by the Greeks, is one which it seems to us impossible to escape. And we regard M. Menard's inferences to the contrary as due to his failure to combine with his classical knowledge a knowledge of Hermetic and Kabbalistic methods and traditions. Comprising as do these the world's spiritual history, it is impossible apart from them to form any sound judgment on the matters in question. Those who, enamoured of conventional methods, are unable to recognise any organon of knowledge except the superficial faculties, or any plane of knowledge transcending the range of those faculties, are necessarily intolerant of the idea that there has been in the world from the earliest times a system of esoteric and positive doctrine concerning the most hidden mysteries of Existence, of such a character, and so obtained as to fulfil all the conditions requisite to constitute a divine revelation. Nevertheless, this is the conclusion to which we have found ourselves compelled by sheer force of evidence, at once exoteric and esoteric. It is in Hindostan and Egypt that we find its earliest traces; and if, as assuredly is the case, there are coincidences between the ancient doctrines of those lands, and those of Greece, Judaea, and Christendom, it is because the same truth has passed from people to people, everywhere finding recognition, and undergoing re-formulation according to the genius of the time and place of its sojourn. And this, we may add, is a process which must inevitably continue until man has become either so far degenerate as to lose all care for and perception of truth; or so far regenerate as to attain to the full perception of it, and fix it for evermore as his most precious possession.

But be this as it may, we have seen that even the most destructive criticism is forced to make these three important admissions

(1) That the doctrine contained in the Hermetic books is in part, at least, a survival from the times of ancient Egypt, and therein really Hermetic.

(2) That there is a coincidence between the doctrine which has thus survived and that of Christianity. And,

[ (3) That

[p. viii]

(3) That this coincidence has been recognised and welcomed by the Church, to the admission that Christianity, so far from being something wholly new and unprecedented at the time of its inception, represents a development from, or re-formulation of; doctrine long pre-existent.

E. M.

 

Footnotes

^i:1 "The Progress of Religious Ideas."

^ii:1 Hermes Trismegistus. Traduction complete; precedee d'une etude sur l'origine des livres Hermetiques. Par Dr. Louis Menard, 2nd Ed., Paris, 1867.

This translation has been used, but not entirely followed, in the present work, as also have some of the notes, those which are not initialled being Dr. Menard's.

^iii:1 A title identical with that of the Pymander, or Shepherd, of Hermes.

^v:1 Vol. I, B. II.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

The Hermetic System

  

AND THE

  

Significance of its Present Revival.

TO the philosophical student of humanity the most significant and important feature of the present remarkable epoch is, unquestionably, the revival of Occult Science and Mystical, or Esoteric, Philosophy. The significance is due no less to the character of the period of its occurrence, than to that of the subject itself. For the moment chosen has been one wherein the human mind, as represented by the recognised intellect of the age, had become, to all appearance, irrevocably set in the opposite direction--that of materialism. Happily, however, for humanity, such appearance has proved deceptive, as had already been foreseen would be the case by those "watchers for the day," who, recognising the unity of nature, and vitalised on the higher planes of the consciousness, are able to forecast the processes of the mental world by those of the physical. That it is always when the sun is at its lowest point that the day and the year are reborn, is no less true in the world spiritual than in the world material. And while the prevalence of materialism meant the extinction of man's spiritual consciousness, the revival of occult and mystical science means the restoration of that consciousness. History, too, had its lessons of encouragement for them, by shewing that the passing away of old forms of faith is wont to be the prognostic

[and

[p. x]

and condition of new and higher manifestations. Hence they had confidence that the Spirit of Humanity, being, as they well knew, real and divine, would, in its own good time, make effectual protest against the extinction threatened; and are able to recognise in the present revival the form which that protest has taken.

The significance of this event is definitely enhanced by the facts, first, that it has brought the Hermetic philosophy into a prominence which it has not known for many centuries; and, secondly, that the revival of that philosophy has been at once the condition and the result of every great religious renaissance the world has seen. For the system designated the Hermetic Gnosis--the earliest formulation of which, for the western world, belongs to the pre-historic times of ancient Egypt--has constituted the core of all the religio-philosophical systems of both east and west, Buddhism and Christianity, among others, being alike intended as vehicles for and expressions of it, though the fact has been recognised by only the initiated few. The great school of scholastic mysticism which was the glory of the church of the Middle Ages, had, although unavowedly, the same basis. This school represented a strenuous and sustained endeavour to rescue religion from the exclusive domain of the historical and the ceremonial, and the control of a sacerdotalism, grossly materialistic and idolatrous, by restoring its proper intuitional and spiritual character. That the endeavour failed to secure a lasting success, and the church of the Middle Ages continued to sink deeper and deeper into superstition, with its usual accompaniment of religious persecution, was due to no fault of the system itself. This requires for its reception, that the spiritual consciousness of the many should have attained a development hitherto possessed only by the few. And the world was not then ripe for a doctrine which represents reason in its highest mode. History thus shows that the revival we are witnessing now, is but one of a series of revivals, all having the same object; and it may be confidently anticipated, that, under the altered conditions of society, the success attained will far surpass any yet achieved. For, gloomy as is the present outlook in every department of human activity, social, philosophical, moral, and religious alike, there never was a time when the conditions were so favour-able for a radical and widespread improvement; because there never was a time when new ideas and knowledges found such facilities for propagation, or when, through the intensity of their

[suffering

[p. xi]

suffering and discontent, mankind were in so high a state of receptivity. Hence the system has now a chance of recognition surpassing any hitherto enjoyed by it. Having always in the past found exclusive favour with the most luminous minds and noblest natures, it can hardly fail, with due formulation and presentation, to find acceptance with the mankind of the incoming era. Already are there indications not to be mistaken, that the still powerful aid of the church will not be wanting in this behalf, and this no less for its own preservation than for that of religious truth. The world has yet to discern the significance of the action of Pope Leo XIII., in the reinstatement of the writings of Aquinas as the basis of ecclesiastical education. But for the initiates of Hermes this is not doubtful, but affords sure ground for the loftiest hopes. And similarly with that extraordinary, if too often grotesque, phenomenon called modern spiritualism.

From these remarks on the circumstances under which the revival has occurred, of which this series of reprints is at once a product, a token, and an aid; we will proceed to give a slight general sketch of the nature of the doctrine which has played so important a part in the past, and bids fair to do as much, and even more, in the future.

It should be first stated, however, that the materials for our sketch are not restricted to the so-called Hermetic fragments themselves, which form the subject of these reprints. Not only are they, as fragments, incomplete; they are also interpolated and partially corrupt in text, though still replete with the purest and loftiest teaching. Much, too, of that which is genuine is mystical and allegorical, referring to a plane, and needing an interpretation, other than are apparent. Hence, it is necessary for such a task, to utilise the labours of those various exponents of the system who have either derived it from sources not now extant, or who, by following the same method, have discerned it for themselves, [*1] giving it, in some instances, fresh applications, not the less Hermetic because representing a further development of the

[doctrine.

[p. xii]

doctrine. No learning or industry, however, can compensate for the absence of that sympathetic insight which alone can detect the characteristic ring of the true Hermetic metal; and which, if hearty appreciation be any guarantee, will assuredly not be wholly wanting on this occasion. At best, however, it is but a slight outline that can be given here.

Starting from the axiom that from nothing nothing comes, and recognising Consciousness as the indispensable condition of existence, the Gnosis, with resistless logic, derives all things from pure and absolute Being, itself unmanifest and unconditioned, but in the infinity of its plenitude and energy, possessing and exercising the potentiality of manifestation and conditionment, and being, rather than having, life, substance, and mind, comprised in one Divine Selfhood, of which the universe is the manifestation.

Regarding all things as modes of consciousness, the Gnosis necessarily regards consciousness as subsisting under many modes, and as being definable as the property whereby whatever is, affects, or is affected in, itself; or affects, or is affected by, another; which is really to say, as constituting the things them-selves. There is, thus, a mechanical consciousness, a chemical consciousness, a magnetic, a mental, a psychic, consciousness, and so on up to the divine, or absolute, consciousness. And whereas all proceed from this last, so all return to this last, in that every entity possesses the potentiality of it. Herein lies the secret of evolution, which is no other than the expression of the tendency of things to revert, by ascension, to their original condition--a tendency, and therefore an expression, which could have no being were the lowest, or material mode of consciousness to be the original and normal mode.

By thus making matter itself a mode of consciousness, and therein of spirit--spirit being absolute consciousness--the Gnosis escapes at once the difficulties which stand in the way of the conception of an original Dualism, consisting of principles inherently antagonistic; and also those which arise out of the kindred conception of non-consciousness as having a positive existence. All being modes of the One, no inherent antagonism, or essential difference, is possible; but that which is regarded as unconsciousness is but a lower mode of consciousness--consciousness reduced, so to speak, to a minimum, but still consciousness so long as it is. Total unconsciousness is thus not-being; and

[bears

[p. xiii]

bears to consciousness the relation of darkness to light, the latter alone of the two being, however reduced, positive entity, and darkness being non-entity.

However various the manifestations of the universal consciousness, or being, whether as regards its different planes, or its different modes on the same plane, they all are according to one and the same law, which, by its uniformity, demonstrates the unity of the informing spirit, or mind, which subsists eternally and independently of any manifestation. For, as said in the "Divine Pymander" (B.V.):--

"He needeth not to be manifested; for He subsisteth eternally.

"But in that He is One, He is not made nor generated; but is unapparent and unmanifest.

"But by making all things appear, He appeareth in all and by all; but especially is He manifested to or in those wherein He willeth."

And again:--

"The Essence of all is One."

From the oneness of original Being comes, as a corollary, the law of correspondence between all planes, or spheres, of existence, in virtue of which the macrocosm is as the microcosm, the universal as the individual, the world as man, and man as God. "An earthly man," says "The Key," "is a mortal God, and the heavenly God is immortal man." The same book, however, is careful to explain that by man is meant only those men who are possessed of the higher intelligence, or spiritual consciousness, and that to lack this is to be not yet man, but only the potentiality of man. It avoids also the error of anthropomorphism by defining Divinity to be, itself, neither life, nor mind, nor substance; but the cause of these.

Ignorance of God is pronounced to be the greatest evil, but God is not to be discerned in phenomena, or with the outer eye. The quest must be made within oneself. In order to know, man must first be. This is to say, he must have developed in himself the consciousness of all the planes, or spheres, of his fourfold nature, and become thereby wholly man. It is to his inmost and divine part, the spirit, that the mystery of existence appertains, since that is Pure Being, of which existence is the manifestation. And, as man can recognise

[without

[p. xiv]

without him, that only which he has within him, it is essential to his perception of spiritual things that he be himself spiritual. "The natural man," says the apostle Paul, following at once the Hermetists and the Kabbalists, who are at one in both doctrine and method, and differ only in form, "receiveth not the things of the Spirit, neither can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned," that is, by the spiritual part in man. In such degree as man developer this consciousness he becomes an organon of knowledge, capable of obtaining certitude of truth, even the highest; and from being "agnostic" and incapable of knowledge, he becomes "Gnostic," or has the Gnosis, which consists in the knowledge of himself and of God, and of the substantial identity of the two.

From this it is obvious that what is demonstrated by the agnosticism of the present age, is simply the immaturity of its professors. This is to say, the philosophy of the day represents the conclusions of men, who, how developed soever intellectually, are still rudimentary in respect of the spiritual consciousness, and fall short, therefore, of their spiritual and true manhood--the manhood which belongs to the highest plane. Being to such extent not human but subhuman, and ignorant of the meaning and potentialities of man, they confound form with substance, and mistake the exterior and phenomenal part of man for man himself, and imagine accordingly that to gratify this part is necessarily to benefit the man, no matter how subversive of the real humanity the practices to which they have recourse. Out of this condition of spiritual darkness the Gnosis lifts man, and, giving him the supreme desideratum--which it is the object of all divine revelation to supply--a definition of himself, demonstrates to him, with scientific certainty, the supremacy of the moral law, and the impossibility either of getting good by doing evil, or of escaping the penalty of the latter. The attempt to get good by evil doing only puts him back, making his fate worse. The doctrine of Karma is no less Hermetic than Hindu, the equivalent term in the former being Adraste, a goddess to whom is committed the administration of justice. In the Greek pantheon she appears as Nemesis and Hecate. They all represent that inexorable law of cause and effect in things moral, in virtue of which man's nature and conditions in the future are the result of the tendencies voluntarily encouraged by him in the past and present.

[The

[p. xv]

The Hermetic method to the attainment of perfection, on whatever plane--physical, intellectual, moral, or spiritual--is purity. Not merely having, but being, consciousness, man is man, and is percipient, according to the measure in which he is pure; perfect purity implying full perception, even to the seeing of God, as the gospels have it. In the same proportion he has also power. The fully initiated Hermetist is a magian, or man of power, and can work what to the world seem miracles, and those on all planes--physical, intellectual, moral, and spiritual--by force of his own will. But his only secret of over is purity, as his only motive is love. For the power with which he operates is spirit, and spirit is keen and mighty in proportion as it is pure. Absolutely pure spirit is God. Hence the miracles of the magian, as distinguished from the magician, are really worked by God--the God in and of the man.

A word on the organon of Hermetic knowledge. This is emphatically the mode of the mind termed the intuition. Following this in its centripetal course, man comes into such relations with his own essential and permanent self--the soul--as to be able to receive from her the knowledges she has acquired of divine things in the long ages of her past. But this implies no disparagement to the mind's other and centrifugal mode, the intellect. This also must be developed and trained to the utmost, as the complement, supplement, and indispensable mate of the intuition--the man to its woman. Perfecting and combining these two, and only thus, man knows all things and perpetuates himself. For he knows God, and to know God is to have, and to be, God, and "the gift of God is eternal life."

A foremost Hermetic doctrine is that of the soul's multiple re-births into a physical body. Only when the process of regeneration--an Hermetic term--is sufficiently advanced to enable the spiritual entity, which constitutes the true individual, to dispense with further association with the body, is lie finally freed from the necessity of a return into materiality. The doctrine of correspondence here finds one of its most striking illustrations, but one which nevertheless was wholly missed by the chief modern restorer and exponent of that doctrine, Emmanuel Swedenborg. This is the correspondence in virtue of which, just as the body uses up and sheds many times its external covering of integument, plumage, shell, or hair, to say

[nothing

[p. xvi]

nothing of its artificial clothing, so the soul wears out and sheds many bodies. The law of gravitation, moreover, pervades all planes, the spiritual as well as the physical; and it is according to his spiritual density that the plane of the individual is determined, and his condition depends. The tendency which brings a soul once into the body must be exhausted before the soul is able to dispense with the body. The death of the body is no indication that the tendency has been overcome, so that the soul will not be again attracted to earth. But it is only the soul that thus returns; not the magnetic or "astral" body which constitutes the external personality.

Such is the rationale of the orthodox doctrine of transmigration, according alike to the Hermetic, the Kabbalistic, and the Hindu systems. It permeates, occultly, the whole of the Bible, and is implied in the teaching of Jesus to Nicodemus, the whole of which, as is also the entire Christian presentation, is, in its interior sense, Hermetic. Not that the new birth insisted on by Jesus is other than purely spiritual; but it involves a multiplicity of physical re-births as necessary to afford the requisite space and experiences for the accomplishment of the spiritual process declared to be essential to salvation. Seeing that regeneration must--as admitted by Swedenborg--have its commencement while in the body, and must also be carried on to a certain advanced stage before the individual can dispense with the body, and also that it denotes a degree of spiritual maturity far beyond the possibility of attainment in a single, or an early, incarnation; it is obvious that without a multiplicity of re-births to render regeneration possible, the gospel message would be one, not of salvation, but of perdition, to the race at large. What is theologically termed the "forgiveness of sins" is dependent upon the accomplishment in the individual of the process of regeneration, of which man, as Hermetically expressed, has the seed, or potentiality, in himself, and in the development of which he must co-operate. Doing this, he becomes "a new creature," in that he is re-born, not of corruptible matter, but of "water and the spirit," namely, his own soul and spirit purified and become divine. Thus re-constituted on the interior and higher plane of the spirit, he is said to be born of the "Virgin Mary" and the Holy Ghost."

While purely mystical and spiritual, as opposed to historical and ceremonial, the Hermetic system is distinguished from other

[schools

[p. xvii]

schools of mysticism by its freedom from their gloomy and churlish manner of regarding nature, and their contempt and loathing for the body and its functions as inherently impure and vile; [*1] and so far from repudiating the relations of the sexes, it exalts them as symbolising the loftiest divine mysteries, and enjoins their exercise as a duty, the fulfilment of which, in some at least of his incarnations, is essential to the full perfectionment and initiation of the individual. It is thus pervaded by an appreciation of beauty and joyousness of tone which at once assimilates it to the Greek, and distinguishes it from the Oriental, conception of existence, and so redeems mysticism from the reproach--too often deserved--of pessimism. The Hermetist, like the prophet who found God in the sea's depths and the while's belly, recognises divinity in every region and department of nature. And seeing in "ignorance of God the greatest of all evils," [*2] he seeks to perfect himself, not simply in order the sooner to escape from existence as a thing inherently evil, but to make himself an instrument of perception capable of "seeing God" in every region of existence in which he may turn his gaze. The pessimism ascribed to some Hermetic utterances, especially in the "Divine Pymander," is but apparent, not real, and implies only the comparative imperfection of existence as contrasted with pure and divine being.

It is to this end that the renunciation of flesh as food is insisted on, as in the "Asclepios." Belonging neither by his physical nor his moral constitution to the order of the carnivora, man can be the best that he has it in him to be only when his system is cleansed and built up anew of the pure materials derived from the vegetable kingdom, and indicated by his structure as his natural diet. The organon of the beatific vision is the intuition. And not only is the system, when flesh-fed, repressive of this faculty, but the very failure of the individual to recoil from violence and slaughter as a means of sustenance or gratification, is an indication of his lack of this faculty.

In no respect does the Hermetic system shew its unapproachable superiority to the pseudo-mystical systems than in its equal recognition of the sexes. True it is that the story of the Fall

[is of

[p. xviii]

is of Hermetic origin; but it is no less true that this is an allegory, having a significance wholly removed from the literal, and in no way implying blame or inferiority, either to an individual or to a sex. Representing an eternal verity of divine import, this allegory has been made the justification for doctrines and practices in regard to women, which are altogether false, unjust, cruel, and monstrous, and such as could have proceeded only from elementary and sub-human sources.

In conclusion. All history shews that it is to the restoration of the Hermetic system in both doctrine and practice that the world must look for the final solution of the various problems concerning the nature and conduct of existence, which now--more than at any previous time--exercise the human mind. For it represents that to which all enquiry--if only it be free enquiry, unlimited by incapacity, and undistorted by prejudice--must ultimately lead; inasmuch as it represents the sure, because experimental, knowledges, concerning the nature of things which, in whatever age, the soul of man discloses whenever he has attained full intuition. Representing the triumph of free-thought--a thought, that is, which has dared to probe the consciousness in all directions, outwards and downwards to matter and phenomena, and inwards and upwards to spirit and reality; it represents also the triumph of religious faith, in that it sees in God the All and in All of Being; in Nature, the vehicle for the manifestation of God; and in the Soul--educated and perfected through the processes of Nature--the individualisation of God.

E. M.

 

Footnotes

^xi:1 For, as we have subsequently ascertained, "The Perfect Way" is not a singular instance of the recovery of the Hermetic system, by unwittingly following the same method to which it was originally due, namely, intuitional perception and recollection, and altogether independently of extraneous sources of information.

^xvii:1 The term "corrupt," which in the translation of the "Divine Pymander" is applied to things earthly, means simply perishable.

^xvii:2 The title of one of the books in the "Divine Pymander."

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xix]

  

An Introduction

  

TO THE

  

Virgin of the World.

THE mystic title of the celebrated Hermetic fragment with which this volume commences, "Kore Kosmou" that is, the "Kosmic Virgin," is in itself a revelation of the wonderful identity subsisting between the ancient wisdom-religion of the old world, and the creed of catholic Christendom. Kore is the name by which, in the Eleusinian Mysteries, Persephone the Daughter, or Maiden, was saluted; and it is also--perhaps only by coincidence--the Greek word for the pupil or apple of the eye. When, however, we find Isis, the Moon-goddess and Initiatrix, in her discourse with Horos, mystically identifying the eye with the soul, and comparing the tunics of the physical organ of vision with the envelopes of the soul; when, moreover, we reflect that precisely as the eye, by means of its pupil, is the enlightener and percipient of the body, so is the soul the illuminating and seeing principle of man, we can hardly regard this analogy of names as wholly unintentional and uninstructive. For Kore, or Persephone, the Maiden, is the personified soul, whose "apostasy," or "descent," from the heavenly sphere into earthly generation, is the theme of the following Hermetic parable. [*1] The Greek mysteries dealt

[only

[p. xx]

only with two subjects, the first being the drama of the "rape" and restoration of Persephone the second, that of the incarnation, martyrdom, and resuscitation of Dionysos-Zagreus. By Persephone was intended the Soul; and by Dionysos, the Spirit. Hermetic doctrine taught a fourfold nature both of the Kosmos and of Man; and of this fourfold nature two elements were deemed immortal and permanent, and two mortal and transient. The former were the spirit and the soul; the latter, the lower mind--or sense-body--and the physical organism. The spirit and soul, respectively male and female, remained throughout all the changes of metempsychosis the same, indissoluble and incorrupt, but the body and lower intellect were new in each rebirth, and therefore changeful and dissoluble. The spirit, or Dionysos, was regarded as of a specially divine genesis, being the Son of Zeus by the immaculate Maiden--Kore-Persephoneia, herself the daughter of Demeter, or the parent and super-mundane Intelligence, addressed in the Mysteries as the "Mother." [*1] But Kore, although thus of heavenly origin, participates more closely than her Son in an earthly and terrestrial nature. "Hence," says Proclos, "according to the theologians who delivered to us the most holy Mysteries, Persephone abides on high in those dwellings of the Mother which she prepared for her in inaccessible places, exempt from the sensible world. But she likewise dwells beneath with Pluto, administering terrestrial concerns, governing the recesses of the earth, and supplying life to the extremities of the Kosmos."

Wherefore, considered as the daughter of Zeus and Demeter, Kore is immaculate and celestial in character; considered as the captive and consort of Hades, she belongs to the lower world and to the region of lamentation and dissolution. And, indeed, the Soul possesses the dual nature thus ascribed to her, for she is in her interior and proper quality, incorrupt and inviolable--ever virgin--while in her apparent and relative quality, she is defiled and fallen. In Hermetic fable the constant emblem of the Soul is Water, or the Sea--Maria; and one salient reason for this comparison is that water, however seemingly contaminated, yet

[remains,

[p. xxi]

remains, in its essence, always pure. For the defilement of so-called foul water really consists in sediments held by it in solution, and thereby causing it to appear turbid, but this defilement cannot enter into its integral constitution. So that if the foulest or muddiest water be distilled, it will leave behind in the cucurbite all its earthy impurities, and present itself, without loss, clear and lucent in the recipient alembic. Not, therefore, without cause is the Soul designated "ever virgin," because in her essential self-hood she is absolutely immaculate and without taint of sin. And the whole history of the world, from end to end, is the history of the generation, lapse, sorrows, and final assumption of this Kosmic virgin. For the soul has two modes or conditions of being--centrifugal and centripetal. The first is the condition of her outgoing, her immergence in Matter, or her "fall," and the grief and subjection which she thereby brings upon herself. This phase is, in the Jewish Kabbala, represented by Eve. The second condition is that of her incoming, her emergence from Matter, her restitution, or glorification in "heaven." This phase is presented to us in the Christian evangel and Apocalypse under the name of Mary. Hence the Catholic saying that the "Ave" of Mary reverses the curse of Eva.

In perfect accord with Kabbalistic doctrine, the allegory of the "Kore Kosmou" thus clearly indicates the nature of the Soul's original apostacy; "she receded from the prescribed limits; not willing to remain in the same abode, she moved ceaselessly, and repose seemed death." [*1]

In this phrase we have the parallel to the scene represented in the Mysteries, where Persephone, wilfully straying from the mansions of heaven, falls under the power of the Hadean God. This, perhaps the most occult part of the whole allegory, is but lightly touched in the fragmentary discourse of Isis, and we cannot, therefore, do better than to reproduce here the eloquent exposition of Thomas Taylor on the subject.

"Here, then," he says, "we see the first cause of the Soul's descent, namely, the abandoning of a life wholly according to the

[higher

[p. xxii]

[paragraph continues] Higher Intellect, which is occultly signified by the separation of Proserpina from Ceres. Afterward, we are told that Jupiter instructs Venus to go to her abode, and betray Proserpina from her retirement, that Pluto may be enabled to carry her away; and to prevent any suspicion in the virgin's mind, he commands Diana and Pallas to go in company. The three Goddesses arriving, find Proserpina at work on a scarf for her mother; in which she had embroidered the primitive chaos and the formation of the world. Now, by Venus, in this part of the narration, we must understand desire, which, even in the celestial regions (for such is the residence of Proserpina till she is ravished by Pluto), begins silently and stealthily to creep into the recesses of the Soul. By Minerva we must conceive the rational power of the Soul, and by Diana, Nature. And, lastly, the web in which Proserpina had displayed all the fair variety of the material world, beautifully represents the commencement of the illusive operations through which the Soul becomes ensnared with the fascination of imaginative forms. After this, Proserpina, forgetful of the Mother's commands, is represented as venturing from her retreat through the treacherous persuasions of Venus. Then we behold her issuing on to the plain with Minerva and Diana, and attended by a beauteous train of nymphs, who are evident symbols of the world of generation, and are, therefore, the proper companions of the Soul about to fall into its fluctuating realms. Moreover, the design of Proserpina, in venturing from her retreat, is beautifully significant of her approaching descent; for she rambles from home for the purpose of gathering flowers, and this in a lawn replete with the most enchanting variety, and exhaling the most delicious odours. This is a manifest image of the Soul operating principally according to the natural and external life, and so becoming ensnared by the delusive attractions of sensible form. Immediately, Pluto, forcing his passage through the earth, seizes on Proserpina and carries her away with him. Well may the Soul, in such a situation, pathetically exclaim with Proserpina:

'O male dilecti flores, despectaque Matris
 Consilia; O Veneris deprensae serius artes!' [*1]

[paragraph continues] Pluto hurries Proserpina into the infernal regions: in other words, the Soul is sunk into the profound depth and darkness of a

[material

[p. xxiii]

material nature. A description of her marriage next succeeds, her union with the dark tenement of the body."

To this eloquent exposition of Taylor's, it is well to add the description given in Homer's Hymn to Ceres. Persephone herself speaks:

"We were plucking the pleasant flowers, the beautiful crocus, the iris, the hyacinth, and the narcissus, which, like the crocus, the wide earth produced. With joy I was plucking them, when the earth yawned beneath, and out leaped the strong King, the Many-Receiver, and went bearing me, deeply sorrowing, under the earth in his golden chariot, and I cried aloud."

Compare with this Hermetic allegory of the lapse of Persephone and the manner of it, the Kabbalistic story of the "fall" of Eve.

"And she saw that the tree was good to eat, and fair to the eyes, and delightful to behold; and she took of the fruit thereof and did eat. . . . And to the woman He said: I will multiply thy sorrows and thy conceptions: in sorrow shalt thou bring forth, and thou shalt be under thy husband's power, and he shall have dominion over thee."

In a note appended to Taylor's Dissertations, Dr. Wilder quotes from Cocker's Greek Philosophy the following excellent reflections:

"The allegory of the Chariot and Winged Steeds, in Plato's Phaedrus, represents the lower or inferior part of man's nature (Adam or the body) as dragging the Soul down to the earth, and subjecting it to the slavery of corporeal conditions. Out of these conditions arise numerous evils that disorder the mind and becloud the reason, for evil is inherent to the condition of finite and multiform existence into which we have fallen. The earthly life is a fall. The soul is now dwelling in the grave which we call the body We resemble those captives chained in a subterraneous cave,' so poetically described in the seventh book of 'The Republic'; their backs turned to the light, so that they see but the shadows of the objects which pass behind them, and 'to these shadows they attribute a perfect reality.' Their sojourn upon earth is thus a dark imprisonment in the body, a dreamy exile from their proper home."

Similarly we read, in the "Kore Kosmou," that the souls on

[learning

[p. xxiv]

learning that they were about to be imprisoned in material bodies, sighed and lamented, lilting to heaven glances of sorrow, and crying piteously, "O woe and heartrending grief to quit these vast splendors, this sacred sphere, and all the glories of the blessed republic of the Gods to be precipitated into these vile and miserable abodes! No longer shall we behold the divine and luminous heavens!"

Who, in reading this, is not reminded of the pathetic lament of Eve on quitting the fair "ambrosial bowers" of Paradise? [*1]

From the sad and woful state into which the Virgin thus falls, she is finally rescued and restored to the supernal abodes. But not until the coming of the Saviour, represented in the allegory before us under the name of Osiris--the Man Regenerate. This Redeemer, himself of divine origin, is in other allegories represented under other names, but the idea is always luminously defined, and the intention obvious. Osiris is the Iesous of our Christian doctrine, the supreme Initiate or "Captain of Salvation." He is represented, together with his Spouse, as in all things "instructed" and directed by HERMES, famed as the celestial conductor of souls from the "dark abodes;" the wise and ubiquitous God in whom the initiate recognises the Genius of the Understanding or Divine Reason--the nous of Platonic doctrine, and the mystic "Spirit of Christ." Therefore, as the understanding of holy things and the faculty of their interpretation are the gift of HERMES, the name of this God is given to all science and revelation of an occult and divine nature. A "Divine" is, in fact, one who knows the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; hence S. John the seer, or the "divine," is especially the "beloved" of Christ. HERMES was regarded as the Messenger or Angel of the Gods, descending alike to the depths of the Hadean world, to bring up souls from thence, and ascending up beyond all heavens that he might fill all things. For the Understanding must search alike the deeps and the heights; there can be nothing hidden from it, nor can it attain the fulness of supernal and secret knowledge unless it first explore the phenomenal and terrestrial. "For that he ascended, what is it but because he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?"

With the splendid joyousness and light-hearted humour which characterised the Greeks, mingling laughter and mirth even with the mysteries of Religion, and making their sacred allegories

[human.

[p. xxv]

human and musical as no others of any nation or time, HERMES, the Diviner and Revealer, was also playfully styled a Thief, and the patron of thieves. But thereby was secretly indicated the power and skill of the Understanding in making everything intellectually its own. Wherefore, in charging HERMES with filching the girdle of Venus, the tongs of Vulcan, and the thunder of Jove, as well as with stealing and driving off the cattle of Apollo, it was signified that all good and noble gifts, even the attributes of the high Gods themselves, are accessible to the Understanding, and that nothing is withheld from man's intelligence, if only man have the skill to seek aright.

As the immediate companion of the sun, HERMES is the opener of the gates of the highest heaven, the revealer of spiritual light and life, the Mediator between the inner and outer spheres of existence, and the Initiator into those sacred mysteries, the knowledge of which is life eternal.

The panoply with which Greek art invests HERMES, is symbolical of the functions of the Understanding. He has four implements--the rod, the wings, the sword, and the cap, denoting respectively the science of the magian, the courage of the adventurer, the will of the hero, and the discretion of the adept. The initiates of HERMES acknowledge no authority but the Understanding; they call no man king or master upon earth; they are true Free-Thinkers and Republicans. "For where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." [*1] Hence Lactantius, in his "Divine Institutions," says:--"Hermes affirms that those who know God are safe from the attacks of the demon, and that they, are not even subjected to Fate." Now, the powers of Fate reside in the stars--that is, in the astral sphere, whether Kosmic or micro-Kosmic. And the astral power was, in Greek fable, typified by Argos, the hundred-eyed genius of the starry zone, Panoptes, the all-seeing giant, whom it was the glory of HERMES to have outwitted and slain. Of which allegory the meaning is, that they who have the Hermetic secret are not subject to Fate, but have passed beyond the thrall of metempsychosis, and have freed themselves from "ceaseless whirling on the wheel" of Destiny. To know God is to have overcome death, and the power of death. To know the origin and secret of delusion is to transcend delusion.

[The

[p. xxvi]

[paragraph continues] The spheres of delusion, dominated by the sevenfold astral Powers, lie between the Soul and God. Beyond these spheres are the celestial "Nine Abodes," wherein, say the Mysteries, Demeter vainly sought the lost Persephone. For from these abodes she had lapsed into a mundane and material state, and thereby had fallen under the power of the planetary rulers; that is, of Fate, personified by Hekate. On the tenth day, therefore, the divine Drama shows Demeter meeting the Goddess of Doom and Retribution, the terrible Hekate Triformis--personification of Karma--by whom the "Mother" is told of Persephone's abduction and detention in the Hadean world. And--we learn--Hekate becomes thereafter the constant attendant of Persephone. All this is, of course, pregnant with the deepest significance. Until the Soul falls into Matter, she has no Fate, or Karma. Fate is the appanage and result of Time and of Manifestation. In the sevenfold astral spheres the Moon is representative of Fate, and presents two aspects, the benign and the malignant. Under the benign aspect the Moon is Artemis, reflecting to the Soul the divine light of Phoebos; under the malignant aspect she is Hekate the Avenger, dark of countenance; and three beaded, being swift as a horse, sure as a dog, and as a lion implacable. She it is who, fleet, sagacious, and pitiless, hunts guilty souls from birth to birth, and outwits death itself with unerring justice. To the innocent and chaste soul, therefore, the lunar power is favorable. Artemis is the patron and protectress of virgins--that is, of souls undefiled with the traffic of Matter. In this aspect the Moon is the Initiatrix, Isis the Enlightener, because through a beneficent Karma, or fate, the soul receives interior illumination, and the dark recesses of her chamber are lit up by sacred reminiscences. Hence, in subsequent births, such a soul becomes prophetic and "divine." But to the corrupt and the evil-hearted the influence of the Moon is malignant, for to such she assumes the aspect of Hekate, smiting by night, and terrifying with ghostly omens of misfortune. These souls fear the lunar power, and in this instinctive dread may be discerned their secret recognition of the evil fate which they are preparing for themselves in existences to come. The Tree of Good and Evil, says the Kabbala, has its root in Malchuth--the Moon.

It has been sometime asserted that the doctrine of Karma is peculiar to Hindu theology. On the contrary, it is clearly exhibited alike in the Hebrew, Hellenic, and Christian Mysteries. The Greeks called it Fate; the Christians know it

[as

[p. xxvii]

as Original Sin. With which sin all mortal men come into the world, and on account of which all pass under condemnation. Only the "Mother of God" is exempt from it, the "virgin immaculate," through whose Seed the world shall be redeemed.

"As the lily among the thorns," sings the Church in the "Office of the Immaculate Conception," "so is the Beloved among the Daughters of Adam. Thou art all fair, O Beloved, and the original stain is not in thee: Thy name, O Mary, is as oil poured out; therefore, the virgins love thee exceedingly."

If, then, by Persephone or Kore, the "Virgin of the World," we are thus plainly taught to understand the Soul, we are no less plainly taught to see in Isis, the Initiatrix or Enlightener. Herself, equally with Kore, virgin and mother, the Egyptian Isis is, in her philosophical aspect, identical with the Ephesian Artemis, the Greek personification of the fructifying and all-nourishing power of Nature. She was regarded as the "inviolable and perpetual Maid of heaven;" her priests were eunuchs, and her image in the magnificent temple of Ephesus represented her with many breasts--polymastos. [*1] In works of art Artemis appears variously, as the huntress, accompanied by hounds, and carrying the implements of the chase; as the Goddess of the Moon, covered with a long veil reaching to her feet, and her head adorned with a crescent; or as the many-breasted Mother-Maid, holding a lighted torch in her hand. The Latins worshipped her under the name of Diana, and it is as Diana that the Ephesian Artemis is mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. Isis had all the attributes ascribed to the lunar divinity of the Greeks and Romans; and hence, like Artemis and Diana, she was identified with the occult principle of Nature--that is, Fate, which in its various aspects and relations was severally viewed as Fortune, Retribution, Doom, or Destiny; a principle represented, as we have already seen, by the Kabbalists, under the figure of Malchuth, or the Moon; and by the Hindu theosophists under the more abstract conception of Karma. The hounds of Artemis, or

[Diana,

[p. xxviii]

[paragraph continues] Diana, are the occult powers which hunt down and pursue the soul from birth to birth; the inevitable, implacable forces of Nature which, following evermore on the steps of every ego, compel it into the conditions successively engendered by its actions, as effect by cause. Hence Actaeon, presuming upon Fate, and oblivious of the sanctity and inviolability of this unchanging law of Karmic Destiny, is torn in pieces by his own dogs, to wit, his own deeds, which by the decree of the implacable Goddess, turn upon and rend him. So also, in accordance with this philosophical idea, those who were initiated into the mysteries of Isis, wore in the public processions masks representing the heads of dogs. So intimately was the abstract conception of the moon associated by the ancients with that of the secret influence and power of Destiny in Nature, that Proclos in his Commentary upon the Timaeus says of Diana:--"She presides over the whole of the generation into natural existence, leads forth into light all natural reasons, and extends a prolific power from on high even to the subterranean realms." These words completely describe the Egyptian Isis, and show us how the moon, occultly viewed as the Karmic power, was regarded as the cause of continued generation in natural conditions, pursuing souls even into the Hadean or purgatorial spheres and visiting upon them the fruition of their past. Hence, too, in the Orphic Hymn to Nature, that Goddess is identified with Fortune, and represented as standing with her feet upon a wheel which she continually turns,--"moving with rapid motion on an eternal wheel." [*1] And again, in another Orphic Hymn, Fortune herself is invoked as Diana. Proclos, in the Commentary to which reference has already been made, declares that "the moon is the cause of Nature to mortals, and the self-revealing image of the Fountain of Nature." "If," says Thomas Taylor, "the reader is desirous of knowing what we are to understand by the fountain of Nature of which the moon is the image, let him attend to the following information, derived from a long and deep study of the ancient theology, for from hence I have learned that there are many divine fountains contained in the essence of the Demiurgus of the world; and that among these there are three of a very distinguished rank, namely, the fountain of souls, or Juno (Hera), the fountain of virtues, or Minerva (Athena), and the fountain of nature, or Diana (Artemis). . . . And this information will enable us to explain the meaning

[ing of

[p. xxix]

of the following passages in Apuleius, the first of which is in the beginning of the eleventh book of his Metamorphoses, wherein the divinity of the moon is represented as addressing him in this sublime manner:--'Behold, Lucius, moved with thy supplications, I am present; I, who am Nature, the parent of things, mistress of all the elements, initial progeny of the ages, the highest of the divinities, queen of departed spirits, the first of the celestials, of Gods and Goddesses the sole likeness of all; who rule by my nod the luminous heights of the heavens, the salubrious breezes of the sea, and the woful silences of the infernal regions, and whose divinity, in itself but one, is venerated by all the earth, in many characters, various rites, and different appellations. . . Those who are enlightened by the emerging rays of the rising sun, the Aethiopians and Aryans, and likewise the Egyptians, powerful in ancient learning, who reverence my divinity with ceremonies perfectly appropriate, call me by my true appellation Queen Isis.' And again, in another place of the same book, he says of the moon:--'The supernal Gods reverence thee, and those in the realms beneath do homage to thy divinity. Thou dost make the world to revolve, and the sun to illumine, thou rulest the universe and treadest on Tartarus. To thee the stars respond, the deities rejoice, time returns by thee, the elements give thee service.' For all this easily follows if we consider it as spoken of the fountain-deity of Nature subsisting in the Demiurgus, and which is the exemplar of that nature which flourishes in the lunar orb and throughout the material world."

Thus enlightened as to the office and functions of Isis, we are at no loss to understand why she is selected by the writer of the following Hermetic fragment as the exponent of the origin, history, and destiny of the soul. For she is, in a peculiar sense, the arbiter of the soul's career in existence, her guardian and overseer. If Demeter, the Divine Intelligence, be the Mother of Kore, then Isis is her foster-mother, for no sooner does the soul fall into generation than Isis becomes her directress and the dispenser of her fate. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that by some mythologists Isis is identified with Demeter, and the sufferings of the former modified accordingly, to harmonise with the allegory of the sorrows of Demeter as set forth in the Eleusinian Mysteries. But the cause of this confusion is obvious to those who rightly understand the Hermetic method. Isis, whether as Artemis (Good Fortune), or as Hekate (Evil Fortune), is the controlling and illuminating influence of the soul while remaining

[within

[p. xxx]

within the jurisdiction of Nature and Time; Demeter, the Divine Intelligence, represents the heavenly fountain or super-mundane source, whence the soul originally draws her being, and as such, is concerned directly, not with her exile and wanderings in material conditions, but with her final recovery from generation and return to the celestial abodes. Consistently with this idea, Isis is represented sometimes as the spouse, sometimes as the mother of Osiris, the Saviour of men. For Osiris is the microcosmic sun, the counterpart in the human system of the macrocosmic Dionysos or Son of God. So that those authors who confound Isis with Demeter, equally and quite comprehensibly confound Osiris with Dionysos, and regard the former as the central figure of the Bacchic Mysteries. The Hermetic books admit three expressions of Deity: first, the supreme, abstract, and infinite God, eternally self-subsistent and unmanifest; secondly, the only-Begotten, the manifestation of Deity in the universe; thirdly, God in man, the Redeemer, or Osiris. On one of the walls of the Temple of the Sun at Philae, and on the gate of that at Medinet-Abou are inscribed these words:--"He has made all that is, and without Him nothing that is hath been made," words which, fourteen centuries or more afterwards, were applied by the writer of S. John's Gospel to the Word of God. The micro-cosmic Sun, or Osiris, was the image and correspondence of this macrocosmic Sun; the regenerating principle within the man, begotten by means of the soul's experience in Time and Generation. And hence the intimate association between this  principle by which the redemption of the individual was effected, and the divine power in Nature, personified by Isis, whose function it was to minister to that redemption by the ordination of events and conditions appropriate to the soul's development. Isis is thus the secret motive-power of Evolution; Osiris is the ultimate ideal Humanity towards the realisation of which that Evolution moves.

A.K.

Footnotes

^xix:1 Dr. Wilder, in his Introduction to the work of Mr. Thomas Taylor, the Platonist, entitled "Dissertation on the Eleusinian Mysteries," asserts that the name Kore is also Sanscrit, and that the Hindu goddess Parasu-pani, also called Goree, is identical with the Kore-Persephoneia of Hellenic worship.

^xx:1 The Spirit, under the name of Atman, is the chief topic of Hindu esoteric philosophy, the Upanishads being exclusively devoted to it. They ascribe to Atman the qualities of self-subsistence, unity, universality, immutability, and incorruptibility. It is independent of Karma, or acquired character and destiny, and the full knowledge of it redeems from Karma the personality informed of it. Atman is also the all-seeing; and, as the Mantras say, He who recognises the universe in his own Atman, and his own Atman in the universe, knows no hatred.

^xxi:1 I substitute the singular for the plural number, but this alters nothing in the sense.

^xxii:1

'O flowers fatally clear, and the mother's counsels despised!
 O cruel arts of crafty Venus!'

^xxiv:1 Milton's "Paradise Lost," Book XI.

^xxv:1 "Follow no man," said John Inglesant's adviser--"there is nothing in the world of any value but the Divine Light--follow it."

^xxvii:1 The many-breasted figure which forms the frontispiece of this volume, represents Isis under this aspect. The black face and hands are, of course, equivalent to the celebrated Veil, and indicate the inscrutable nature of the occult influence which directs Destiny; and which, to the uninitiate, even appears to be blind and fortuitous. The well-known "black virgin" has the same significance.

^xxviii:1 Aenau strofaliggi thoon rhuma dineuoysa.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD.

  

I.

*           *           *           *

HAVING thus spoken, Isis first pours out for Horos the sweet draught of immortality which souls receive from the Gods, and thus begins the most holy discourse. Heaven, crowned with stars, is placed above universal nature, O my son Horos, and nothing is wanting to it of that which constitutes the whole world. It is necessary, then, that all nature should be adorned and completed by that which is above her, for this Order could not proceed from below to above. The supremacy

[of

[p. 2]

of the greater mysteries over the lesser is imperative. Celestial order reigns over terrestrial order, as being absolutely determined, and inaccessible to the idea of death. Wherefore, the things below lament, being filled with fear before the marvellous beauty and eternal permanence of the heavenly world. For, indeed, a spectacle worthy of contemplation and desire were these magnificences of heaven, revelations of the God as yet unknown, and this sumptuous majesty of night illumined with a penetrating radiance, albeit less than that of the sun, and all these other mysteries which move above in harmonious cadence, ruling and maintaining the things below by secret influences. And so long as the Universal Architect refrained from putting an end to this incessant fear, to these anxious investigations, ignorance enveloped the universe. But when He judged good to reveal Himself to the world, He breathed into the Gods the enthusiasm of love, and poured into their mind the splendour which His bosom contained, that they might first be inspired with the will to seek, next with the desire to find, and lastly with the power to readjust.

Now, my wondrous child Horos, all this could not happen among mortals, for as yet they did not exist; but it took place in the universal Soul in sympathy with the mysteries of heaven. This was Hermes, the Kosmic Thought. He beheld the universe of things, and having seen, he understood, and having understood, he had the power to manifest and to reveal. That which he thought, he wrote; that which he wrote, he in great part concealed, wisely silent. and speaking by turns, so that while the world should last, these things might be sought. And thus, having enjoined upon the Gods, his brethren, that they should follow in his train, he ascended to the

[stars.

[p. 3]

stars. But he had for successor his son, and the heir of his knowledges, Tat, and a little later, Asclepios, son of Imouthe, by the counsels of Pan and Hephaistos, [*1] and all those for whom sovereign Providence reserved an exact knowledge of heavenly things.

Hermes then justified himself in the presence of those who surrounded him, in that he had not delivered the integral theory to his son, on account of his youth. But I, having arisen, beheld with mine eyes, which see the invisible secrets of the beginnings of things, [*2] and at length, but with certainty, I understood that the sacred symbols of the Kosmic elements were hidden near the secrets of Osiris. Hermes returned to heaven, having pronounced an invocatory speech.

It is not fitting, O my Son, that this recital be left incomplete; thou must be informed of the words of

[Hermes

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] Hermes when he laid down his books. "O sacred books," he said, "of the Immortals, ye in whose pages my hand has recorded the remedies by which incorruptibility is conferred, remain for ever beyond the reach of destruction and of decay, invisible and concealed from all who frequent these regions, until the day shall come in which the ancient heaven shall bring forth instruments worthy of you, whom the Creator shall call souls."

Having pronounced upon his books this invocation, he wrapped them in their coverings, returned into the sphere which belonged to him, and all remained hidden for a sufficient space.

And Nature, O my Son, was barren until the hour in which those who are ordained to survey the heavens, advancing towards God, the King of all things, deplored the general inertia, and affirmed the necessity of setting forth the universe. No other than Himself could accomplish this work.

"We pray Thee," said they, "to consider that which already is, and that which is necessary for the future."

At these words, the God smiled benignant, and commanded Nature to exist. And, issuing with His voice, the FEMININE came forth in her perfect beauty. The Gods with amaze beheld this marvel. And the great Ancestor, pouring out for Nature an elixir, commanded her to be fruitful; and forthwith, penetrating the universe with His glance, He cried, "Let heaven be the plenitude of all things, and of the air, and of the ether." God spake, and it was done. But Nature, communing with herself, understood that she might not transgress the commandment of the Father, and, uniting herself to Labour, she produced a most beautiful daughter, whom she called Invention, and to whom God accorded being.

And having differentiated created forms, He filled

[them

[p. 5]

them with mysteries, and gave the command of them to Invention.

Then, not willing that the upper world should be inactive, He saw fit to fill it with spirits, in order that no region should remain in immobility and inertia; and in the accomplishment of His work He used His sacred art. For, taking of Himself such essence as was necessary, and mingling with it an intellectual flame, He combined with these other materials by unknown ways. And having achieved by secret formulas the union of these principles, He endowed with motion the universal combination. Gradually, in the midst of the protoplasm, glittered a substance more subtle, purer, more limpid, than the elements from which it was generated. It was transparent, and the Artist alone perceived it. Soon, it attained its perfection, being neither melted by the fire, nor chilled by the breath, but possessing the stability of a special combination, and having its proper type and constitution. He bestowed on it a happy name, and, according to the similitude of its energies, He called it Self-Consciousness.

Of this product he formed myriads of Souls, employing the choicest part of the mixture for the end which He had in view, proceeding with order and measure, according to His knowledge and His reason. The souls were not necessarily different, but the choicest part, animated by the Divine motion, was not identical with the rest. The first layer was superior to the second, more perfect and pure; the second, inferior truly to the first, was superior to the third; and thus, until sixty degrees, was completed the total number. Only, God established this law, that all equally should be eternal, being of one essence, whose forms He alone determines. He traced the limits of their sojourn on the heights

[of

[p. 6]

of nature, so that they might turn the wheel according to the laws of Order and of wise discretion, for the joy of their Father.

Then, having summoned to these splendid regions of ether the souls of every grade, He said to them: "O souls, beautiful children of my breath and of my care, you whom I have produced with my hands, in order to consecrate you to my universe, hear my words as a law:--Quit not the place assigned to you by my will. The abode which awaits you is heaven, with its galaxy of stars and its thrones of virtue. If you attempt any transgression against my decree, I swear by my sacred breath, by that elixir of which I formed you, and by my creative hands, that I will speedily forge for you chains and cast you into punishment."

Having thus spoken, God, my Master, mingled together the rest of the congenial elements, earth and water, and pronouncing certain powerful and mystic words--albeit different from the first--He breathed into the liquid protoplasm motion and life, rendered it thicker and more plastic, and formed of it living beings of human shape. That which remained He gave to the loftiest souls inhabiting the region of the Gods in the neighbourhood of the stars, who are called the Sacred Genii. "Work," said He, "my children, offspring of my nature; take the residue of my task, and let each one of you make beings in his image. I will give you models."

Therewith He took the Zodiac and ordained the world in conformity with -vital movements, placing the animal signs after those of human form. And after having given forth the creative forces and generative breath for the whole range of beings yet to come, He

[withdrew,

[p. 7]

withdrew, promising to unite to every visible work an invisible breath and a reproductive principle, so that each being might engender its similar without necessity to create continually new entities. [*1]

And what did the souls do, O my Mother?

And Isis answered:--They took the mingled material, O my Son Horos, and began to reflect thereon, and to adore this combination, the work of the Father. Next, they sought to discover of what it was composed, which, indeed, it was not easy to find. Then, fearing

[that

[p. 8]

that this search might excite the anger of the Father, they set themselves to carry out His commands. Therefore, taking the upper portion of the protoplasm, that which was lightest, they created of it the race of birds. The compound having now become more compact and assuming a denser consistency, they formed of it the quadrupeds; while of the thickest part which needed a moist vehicle for its support, they made fishes. The remainder, being cold and heavy, was employed by the souls in the creation of reptiles.

Forthwith, O my Son, proud of their work, they were not afraid to transgress the Divine law, and, in spite of the prohibition, they receded from their appointed limits. Not willing to remain longer in the same abode, they moved ceaselessly, and repose seemed to them death. [*1]

But, O my Son--(thus Hermes informed me)--their conduct could not escape the eye of the Lord God of all things; He minded to punish them, and to prepare for them hard bonds. The Ruler and Master of the universe resolved then for the penance of the souls, to mould the human organism, and having called me to

[Him

[p. 9]

[paragraph continues] Him, said Hermes, He spoke in this wise:--"O soul of my soul, holy thought of my thought, how long shall earthly Nature remain sad? How long shall the creation already produced continue inactive and without praise? Bring hither before me all the Gods of heaven."

Thus God spake, quoth Hermes, and all obeyed His decree. "Look upon the earth," He said to them, "and upon all things beneath,"

Straightway they looked, and understood the will of the Lord. And when He spoke to them of the creation of Man, asking of each what he could bestow upon the race about to be born, the Sun first replied:--"I will illumine mankind." Then the Moon promised enlightenment in her turn, adding that already she had created Fear, Silence, Sleep, and Memory. Kronos announced that he had begotten Justice and Necessity. Zeus said, "In order to spare the future race perpetual wars, I have generated Fortune, Hope, and Peace." Ares declared himself already father of Conflict, impetuous Zeal, and Emulation, Aphrodite did not wait to be called upon: "As for me, O Master," she said, "I will bestow upon mankind Desire, with voluptuous Joy and Laughter, that the penalty, to which our sister Souls are destined may not weigh on them too hardly." These words of Aphrodite, O my Son, were welcomed gladly. "And I," said Hermes, "will endow human nature with Wisdom, Temperance, Persuasion, and Truth; nor will I cease to ally myself with Invention. I will ever protect the mortal life of such men as are born under my signs, seeing that to me the Creator and Father has attributed in the Zodiac, signs of Knowledge and Intelligence; above all, when the movement

[ment

[p. 10]

which draws thereto the stars is in harmony with the physical forces of each." [*1]

He Who is Master of the world rejoiced at hearing these things, and decreed the production of the human race. As for me--said Hermes--I sought what material ought to be employed in the work, and invoked the Lord. He commanded the Souls to give up the residue of the protoplastic substance, which having taken, I found it entirely dried up. Therefore, I used a great excess of water wherewith to renew the combination of the substance, in such wise that the product might be resolvable, yielding, and feeble, and that Force should not be added therein to Intelligence. When I had achieved my work it was beautiful, and I rejoiced in seeing it. And from below I called upon the Lord to behold what I had done. He saw it, and approved. Straightway He ordained that the Souls should be incorporated; and they were seized  horror on learning what should be their condemnation.

These words, said Isis, struck me. Hearken, my son Horos, for I teach thee a mystery. Our ancestor Kamephes had it also from Hermes, who inscribes the recital of all things; I, in turn, received it from the ancient Kamephes when he admitted me to the initiation of the black veil; [*2] and thou, likewise, O marvellous and illustrious child, receive it from me.

[The

[p. 11]

The Souls were about to be imprisoned in bodies, whereat some sighed and lamented, as when some wild and free animal suddenly enchained, in the first moment of subjection to hard servitude and of severance from the beloved habits of the wilderness, struggles and revolts, refusing to follow its conqueror, and if occasion presents itself, slaying him. Others, again, hissed like serpents, or gave vent to piercing cries and sorrowful words, glancing aimlessly from height to depth.

"Great Heaven," said one, "principle of our birth, ether, pure airs, hands, and sacred breath of the sovereign God, and you, shining Stars, eyes of the Gods, unwearying light of Sun and Moon, our early brethren, what grief, what rending is this! Must we quit these vast, effulgent spaces, this sacred sphere, all these splendors of the empyrean and of the happy republic of the Gods, to be precipitated into these vile and miserable abodes? What crime, O wretched ones, have we committed? How can we have merited, poor sinners that we are, the penalties which await us? Behold the sad future in store for us--to minister to the wants of a fluctuating and dissoluble body! No more may our eyes distinguish the souls divine! Hardly through these watery spheres shall we perceive, with sighs, our ancestral heaven; at intervals even we shall cease altogether to behold it. By this disastrous sentence direct vision is denied to us; we can see only by the aid of the outer light; these are but windows that we possess--not eyes. Nor will our pain be less when we hear in the air the fraternal breathing of the winds with which no longer can we mingle our own, since that will have for its dwelling, instead of the sublime and open world, the narrow prison of the breast! But Thou, Who drivest us forth, and causest us from so

[high

[p. 12]

high a seat to descend so low, assign a limit to our sufferings! O Master and Father, so quickly become indifferent to Thy handiwork, appoint a term to our penance, deign to bestow on us some last words, while yet we are able to behold the expanse of the luminous spheres!"

This prayer of the Souls was granted, my son Horos, for the Lord was present; and sitting upon the throne of Truth, thus He addressed them:--

"O Souls; you shall be governed by Desire and Necessity; after me, these shall be your masters and your guides. Souls, subjected to my sceptre which never fails, know that inasmuch as you remain stainless you shall inhabit the regions of the skies. If among you any be found to merit reproach, they shall inhabit abodes destined to them in mortal organisms. If your faults be light, you shall, delivered from the bond of the flesh, return to heaven. But if you become guilty of graver crime, if you turn away from the end for which you have been formed, then indeed you shall dwell neither in heaven nor in human bodies, but thenceforth you shall pass into those of animals without reason." [*1]

[p. 13]

Having thus spoken, O my son Horos, He breathed upon them and said, "It is not according to chance that I have ordained your destiny; if you act ill, it will be worse; it will be better if your actions are worthy of your birth. It is myself and not another who will be your witness and your judge. Understand that it is because of your past errors that you are to be punished and shut up in fleshly bodies. In different bodies, as I have already told you, your re-births will be different. Dissolution shall be a benefit, restoring your former happy condition. But if your conduct be unworthy of me, your prudence, becoming blinded and guiding you backwards, will cause you to take for good fortune that which is really a chastisement, and to dread a happier lot as though it were a cruel injury. The most just among you shall, in their future transformations, approximate to the

[divine

[p. 14]

divine, becoming among men, upright kings, true philosophers, leaders and legislators, true seers, collectors of salutary plants, cunning musicians, intelligent astronomers, wise augurs, instructed ministrants: all beautiful and good offices; as among birds are the eagles which pursue not nor devour those of their own kind, and do not permit weaker ones to be attacked in their presence, because justice is in the nature of the eagle; among quadrupeds, the lion, for he is a strong animal, untamed by slumber, in a mortal body performing immortal toils, and by nothing tired nor beguiled; among reptiles, the dragon, because he is powerful, living long, innocent, and a friend of men, allowing himself to be tamed, having no venom, and, leaving old age, approximating to the nature of the Gods; among fishes, the dolphin, for this creature, taking pity on those who fall into the sea, will carry them to land if they still live, and will abstain from devouring them if dead, although it is the most voracious of all aquatic animals."

Having spoken these words, God became an Incorruptible Intelligence (i.e., resumed the unmanifest).

After these things, my son Horos, there arose out of the earth an exceeding powerful Spirit, unencumbered with any corporeal envelope, strong in wisdom, but savage and fearful; although he could not be ignorant of the knowledge he sought, seeing the type of the human body to be beautiful and august of aspect, and perceiving that the souls were about to enter into their envelopes: 

"What are these," said he, "O Hermes, Secretary of the Gods?" "These are men," replied Hermes. "It is a rash work," said he, "to make man with such penetrating eyes, such a subtle tongue, such a delicate

[hearing

[p. 15]

hearing that can hear even those things which concern him not, such a fine scent, and in. his hands a sense of touch capable of appropriating everything. O generating Spirit, thinkest thou it is well that he should be free from care--this future investigator of the fine mysteries of Nature? Wilt thou leave him exempt from suffering--he whose thought will search out the limits of the earth? Mankind will dig up the roots of plants, they will study the properties of natural juices, they will observe the nature of stones, they will dissect not only animals but themselves, desiring to know how they have been formed. They will stretch forth their daring hands over the sea, and, cutting down the timber of the wild forest, they will pass from shore to shore seeking one another. They will pursue the inmost secrets of Nature even into the heights, and will study the motions of heaven. Nor is this enough; when nothing yet remains to be known than the furthest boundary of the earth, they will seek even there the last extremities of night. If they apprehend no obstacle, if they live exempt from trouble, beyond reach of any fear or of any anxiety, even heaven itself will not arrest their audacity; they will seek to extend their power over the elements. Teach them, then, desire and hope, in such wise that they may know likewise the dread of accident and of difficulty, and the painful sting of expectation deceived. Let the curiosity of their souls have for balance, desire and fear, care and vain hope. Let their souls be a prey to mutual love, to aspirations and varied longings, now satisfied, now deceived, so that even the sweetness of success may be an allurement to draw them towards misfortune. Let the weight of fevers oppress them, and break in them all desire."

Thou sufferest, Horos, in hearing this thy mother's

[recital?

[p. 16]

recital? Surprise and wonder seize thee in presence of the evils which now fall upon poor humanity? That which thou art about to hear is still more sad. The speech of Momos pleased Hermes; he deemed his advice good, and he followed it.

"O, Momos," said he, "the nature of the divine breath which enwraps all things shall not be ineffectual! The Master of the universe has charged me to be His agent and overseer. The Deity of the penetrating eye (Adrastia) [*1] will observe and direct all events; and for my part, I will design a mysterious instrument, a measure inflexible and inviolable, to which everything shall be subject from birth even to final destruction, and which shall be the bond of created entities. This instrument shall rule that which is on the earth, and all the rest."

It is thus--quoth Hermes--that I spoke to Momos; and forthwith the instrument operated. Straightway the souls were incorporated, and I was praised for my work.

Then the Lord summoned anew the assembly of the Gods. They gathered together, and He thus addressed them:

"Gods, who have received a sovereign and imperishable nature, and the sway of the vast eternity, ye whose office it is to maintain unceasingly the mutual harmony of things, how long shall we govern an empire unknown? How long shall creation re-main invisible to the sun and moon? Let each of

[us

[p. 17]

us undertake his part in the universe. By the exercise of our power let us put an end to the cohesion of inertia. Let chaos become a fable, incredible to posterity. Inaugurate your great labours; I will direct you."

He said, and immediately the Kosmic unity, until now obscure, was opened, and in the heights appeared the heavens with all their mysteries. The earth, hitherto unstable, grew more solid beneath the brightness of the sun, and stood forth adorned with enfolding riches. All things are beautiful in the eyes of God, even that which to mortals appears uncomely, because all is made according to the divine laws. And God rejoiced in beholding His works filled with movement; and with outstretched hands grasping the treasures of nature. "Take these," He said, "O sacred earth, take these, O venerable one, who art to be the mother of all things, and henceforth let nothing be lacking to thee!"

With these words, opening His divine hands, He poured His treasures into the universal font. But yet they were unknown, for the souls newly embodied and unable to support their opprobrium, sought to enter into rivalry with the celestial Gods, and, proud of their lofty origin, boasting an equal creation with these, revolted. Thus men became their instruments, opposed to one another, and fomenting civil wars. And thus, force oppressing weakness, the strong burnt and massacred the feeble, and quick and dead were thrust forth from the sacred places.

Then the elements resolved to complain before the Lord of the savage condition of mankind. For the evil being already very grievous, the elements hastened

[to

[p. 18]

to God the Creator, and pleaded in this wise--the fire being suffered to speak first:-- [*1]

"O Master," he said, "Maker of this new world, Thou whose name, mysterious among the Gods, has hitherto been revered among all men; how long, O Divinity, halt Thou decreed to leave human life without God? Reveal Thyself to the world which calls for Thee, correct its savage existence by the institution of peace. Grant unto life, law, grant unto night oracles; fill all things with happy auguries; let

[men

[p. 19]

men fear the judgment of the Gods, and no man shall sin any more. Let crimes receive their just punishment, and men will abstain from unrighteousness. They will fear to violate oaths, and madness will have an end. Teach them gratitude for benefits, so shall I devote my flame to pure offerings and libations, and the altars shall yield Thee exhalations of sweet savours. For now I am polluted, O Master, because the impious temerity of men forces me to consume flesh. They will not suffer me to remain in my nature; they pervert and corrupt my purity!"

The air spoke in its turn:--"I am defiled by the effluvium of corpses, O Master; I am becoming pestilent and unwholesome, and from on high I witness things which I ought not to behold."

Then the water took up the word, and spoke on this wise, O my illustrious son:--

"Father and wondrous Creator of all things, Divinity incarnate, Author of Nature who brings forth all through Thee, command the waters of the streams to be always pure, for now both rivers and seas are compelled to bathe the destroyer and to receive his victims!"

Then at the last the earth appeared, O my glorious son, and thus began:--

"O King, Chief of celestial choirs and Lord of their orbits, Master and Father of the elements which lend to all things increase and decrease, and into which all must return; behold how the impious and insensate tribe of man overspreads me, O venerable One, since by Thy commands I am the habitation of all beings, bearing them all and receiving into my bosom all that is slain; such is now my reproach. Thy terrestrial world in which all creatures are contained

[is bereft

[p. 20]

is bereft of God. And because they revere nothing, they transgress every law and overwhelm me with all manner of evil works. To my shame, O Lord, I admit into myself the product of the corruption of carcases. But I, who receive all things, would fain also receive God. Grant to earth this grace, and if Thou comest not Thyself--for indeed I cannot contain Thee--let me at least receive some holy efflux of Thee. Let the earth become the most glorious of all the elements; and since she alone gives all things to all, may she revere herself as the recipient of Thy favours."

Thus the elements discoursed, and forthwith God filled the universe with His divine voice. "Go," said He, "sacred offspring, worthy of your Father's greatness, seek not to change anything, nor refuse to my creatures your ministry. I will send you an efflux of myself, a pure Being who shall investigate all actions, who shall be the dreadful and incorruptible Judge of the living; and sovereign justice shall extend its reign even into the shades beneath the earth. Thus shall every man receive his merited deserts."

Thereupon the elements ceased from their complaints, and each of them resumed its functions and its sway.

And in what manner, O my mother, said Horos, did the earth afterwards obtain this efflux of God?

I will not recount this Nativity, said Isis; I dare not, O powerful Horos, declare the origin of thy race, lest men in the future should learn the generation of the Gods. I will say only that the Supreme God, Creator and Architect of the world, at length accorded to earth for a season, thy father Osiris and the great Goddess Isis, that they might bring the expected

[salvation.

[p. 21]

salvation. By them life attained its fulness; savage and bloody wars were ended; they consecrated temples to the Gods their ancestors, and instituted oblations. They gave to mortals law, nourishment, and raiment. "They shall read," Hermes said, "my mystic writings, and dividing them into two parts, they shall keep certain of them, and inscribe upon columns and obelisks those which may be useful to man." Institutors of the first tribunals, they established everywhere the reign of order and justice. With them began the faith of treaties, and the introduction into human life of the religious duty of oaths. They taught the rites of sepulture towards those who cease to live; they interrogated the horrors of death; they shewed that the spirit from without delights to return into the human body, and that if the way of entry be shut against it, it brings about a failure of life. Instructed by Hermes, they engraved upon hidden tables that the air is filled with genii. Instructed by Hermes in the secret laws of God, they alone were the teachers and legislators of mankind, initiating them in the arts, the sciences, and the benefits of civilised life. Instructed by Hermes concerning the sympathetic affinities which the Creator has established between heaven and earth, they instituted religious representations and sacred mysteries. And, considering the corruptible nature of all bodies, they ordained prophetic initiation, so that the prophet who lifts his hands to the Gods should be instructed in all things, and that thereby philosophy and magic might provide nourishment for the soul, and medicine might heal the sufferings of the flesh.

Having performed all these things, O my son, and seeing the world arrived at its fulness, Osiris and I were recalled by the inhabitants of heaven; but we

[could

[p. 22]

could not return thither without having first praised the Lord, so that the celestial Vision might fill the expanse, and that the way of a happy ascension might open before us, since God delights in hymns.

O my mother, said Horos, teach me this hymn, that I also may be instructed in it.

Hearken, my son, answered Isis.        .        .        .

 

Footnotes

^3:1 The text of this passage presents great difficulties and uncertainties. The words in Canter's edition, Asklepios o imouthes spanos kai efaistoy boylais, Canter reads Asclepios, Amnion, and Hephaistobulus. Patrizzi changes efaistoy boylais into efaistoboules and renders it Asclepios Imuthes, Spanos and Hephaestobulus. Others read panos in place of spanos, which is plausible enough, but at the same time they preserve efaistoboules, and then imouthes becomes a surname of Asclepios, who would thus be son of Pan and Hephaistoboule, an absolutely unknown goddess. But in another fragment we read, a little further on, Asklepios o imouthes and Asklepios o imouthes, and the word palin indicates that it refers to the same Asclepios, and not to two persons of the same name. It may be, then, that Imouthe was the name of his mother, as Fabricius supposes. Is it not likely that it is the Greek form of "Mouth"? The Egyptian Asclepios was represented bald, according to Synesios; the word spanos, which means bald, might then be retained. But in this case, in order that the phrase may have a meaning, it would be necessary to change boylais into boylaios, and translate:--Asclepios, the bald Imouthes, and counsellor of Hephaistos.

^3:2 This sentence is very obscure; the participles are in the masculine, as though the author had forgotten that a goddess was speaking. I believe the text of the passage must have been altered.

^7:1 This recital of the creation of the souls recalls the Timaeus of Plato. After all the Gods were born, the Artificer of the universe thus addressed them: "Gods of gods, of whom I am the Creator and Father, and who, formed by me, are by my will indissoluble, learn what I now say to you. . . . In order that mortal natures may exist, and that the universe may be indeed universal, turn yourselves according to your nature to the formation of animals, imitating the power which I employed in the generation of yourselves. . . . I myself will deliver the seeds and beginnings; and for the rest do you weave together the mortal and immortal nature, constructing and producing animals." He said, and into the same cup in which He had mingled and tempered the soul of the universe, He poured the residue, and mixed it in the same manner, but in less pure combinations of a second and third order. And having constituted the universe, He allotted souls to the stars in equal number, distributing each to each; and causing every one to mount his vehicle, He displayed to them the nature of the universe, and taught them the laws of Destiny.

[It may be added, also, that this legend, quaint and grotesque as it is in many of its details, is, likewise, in accord with the Kabbala, which recounts the pre-mundane history of the souls, their creation, their transgression, and their punishment, in much the same fashion. The creation of the visible world by the "working gods," or Titans, as agents for the Supreme God, is a thoroughly Hermetic idea, recognizable in all religious systems, and in accord with modern scientific research, which shews us everywhere the Divine Power operating secretly through natural forces.

A.K.]

^8:1 In reading this allegory, it must be borne in mind that the word "Soul" is used as a general term for all Egos or Intelligences, whether Genii or Men. Further, that in these Fragments, as in the Hebrew Scriptures, the same truths are repeated under different symbols in different passages. Hence the creation of Nature and of "differentiated forms" has already been otherwise depicted in a previous paragraph; and the whole process of the evolution of the Soul has been epitomized in the fable of the making of the protoplasm. The descent into generation occurs, actually, when the Titans first begin the manipulation of this protoplasm. The human body, although last in manifestation, is really the first in the Divine intention, and is the ultimate cause of all the series of objective forms. Hermetically speaking, there is nothing in the whole universe, save Man.

A.K.

^10:1 Heeren sees in these metaphors an allusion to the creation of Pandora in Hesiod. They recall also a passage in the Pymander, wherein the Rulers of the Seven Planets cause Man to participate in their nature; an idea developed likewise by Macrobius in his commentary on the Dream of Scipio.--Lib. L., chap. xii.

^10:2 Canter translates this by atramenturn, which would signify initiation by writing; but it is possible that the heads of the initiated persons were covered with a black veil, or perhaps the veil of Isis is here intended.

^12:1 It has been questioned whether Hermetic doctrine affirms the Hindu theory of transmigration, to wit--the possibility of the passage of the guilty Ego into lower forms than that of man. We must, I hold, admit the orthodoxy of the doctrine, which, when rightly understood, involves no paradox. In the Divine Pymander, it is clearly set forth that if a human soul continue evil "it shall neither taste of immortality nor be partaker of the good, but being drawn back it returneth into creeping things; and this is the condemnation of an evil soul." Yet, Trismegistus hastens immediately to explain and qualify this statement by adding that such a calamity cannot befall any truly human soul--that is, a soul possessing the divine Mind, however fallen from grace, for so long as the soul retains this living fire [p. 11] it is the soul of a man, and man "is not to be compared to any brute beast upon the earth, but to them that are above in heaven, that are called Gods." But there is a condition so low and lost that at length the divine flame is quenched, and the soul is left dark and Godless, a human soul no longer. "And such a soul, O Son," says Hermes, "hath no Mind; wherefore neither must such an one be called Man." Therefore, while it is true that "no other body is capable of a human soul, neither is it lawful for a man's soul to fall into the body of an unreasonable living thing," so also is it true that a soul, bereft of its Divine Particle which alone made it human, is human no longer, and, following the universal law of affinity, straightway gravitates to its proper level, sinking to its similars, and drawn to its analogues. Nevertheless, when its purgation is accomplished, such a soul may "come to itself and say, I will arise and go unto my Father."

There are some Rabbis indeed who have thought such an occult significance to lie hid in the parable of the prodigal; swine being accounted universally a figure of lust and sordid desire. The Hermetic doctrine, thus interpreted, is identical with that of the Kabbala on the same point, as we shall elsewhere have occasion to shew; and also with the teaching of Apollonius of Tyana.--(v. Perfect Way, III., 21, etc.)

A.K.

^16:1 This name appears to have been a marginal interpolation, inserted into the text by a copyist. It serves as a key to what follows, Adrastia (or Nemesis) being the personification of the necessary law (or inflexible instrument) of which Hermes is about to speak.

^18:1 In the Book of Enoch a similar legend appears--"The Giants turned themselves upon men to devour them, and began to do evil to birds and beasts of the field and reptiles and fish; and they devoured with one accord their flesh and drank their blood. When the earth lifted up her voice against the unjust, . . . . and because of the perdition of men, a cry arose that came even unto heaven. Therefore, Michael and Gabriel, and Souryan and Ouryan, looked forth from the height of heaven, and beheld the abundance of blood that was shed upon the earth, and all the iniquity that was accomplished, and they said one to another:--The voice of their cries ascends, the clamour of the earth is heard even at the gates of heaven, and before you, O holy ones of the skies, the souls of men complain, saying--Avenge us in the presence of the Lord. (VII. 14, 15; VIII. 8, 9; IX. 1, 2, 3.)

[See also the first book of Ovid's Metamorphoses, V., VI., VII. In all these accounts it appears that mankind is inspired to wickedness and impiety by the Giants, who are, in Hermetic teaching, explained to be the lower mundane forces, or "fallen Angels." They are, probably, the first created "souls" mentioned in an early passage of the allegory, and are elsewhere spoken of as Demons. Almost all the poets, whether Hebrew, Hellenic, Hindu, Persian, Norse, or Christian, celebrate the revolt of the Giants against heaven. It is needless to remind the reader that all these sacred fables have an esoteric and individual application, related to the Microcosm within man, as well as to the Macrocosm or world without. The text is manifestly imperfect.

A.K.]

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

PART II.

*           *           *           *

O MY illustrious son, if thou wilt know any-thing further, ask it of me. And Horos said, Revered Mother, I would fain know how royal souls are born. And Isis answered:--Herein, my son Horos, lies the distinctive character of royal souls. There are in the universe, four regions, governed by a fixed and immutable law: heaven, the ether, the air, and the most holy earth. Above, in heaven, dwell the Gods, ruled as are all the rest, by the Maker of the universe; in the ether are the stars, governed by the great fire, the sun; in the air are the souls of the genii, governed by the moon; upon earth are men and other animals governed by the soul who, for the time, is their king. For the Gods themselves engender those who shall be kings befitting the terrestrial race. Princes are the issue of kings, and he who is most kingly, is a greater

[king

[p. 24]

king than the rest. [*1] The sun, nearer to God than is the moon, is greater and stronger than she, and to him she is subject as much by rank as by power. The king is the last of the Gods and the first of men. So long as he sojourns upon earth, his divinity is concealed, but he possesses something which distinguishes him from other men and approximates him to God. The soul in him comes from a loftier region than that from which descend the souls of common men. Souls destined to reign upon the earth descend thither for two causes. There are those who in former lives have lived blameless, and who merit apotheosis; for such as these royalty is a preparation for the divine state. Again, there are holy souls who, for some slight infringement of the interior and divine law, receive in royalty a penance whereby the suffering and shame of incarnation are mitigated. The condition of these in taking a body resembles not that of others; they are as blessed as when they were free. [*2]

As to the various characters of these kings, the variety is not in the souls, for all are royal, but it is due to the nature of the angels and genii who assist them. For souls destined to such offices are not without ministers and escort. Heavenly justice, even while exiling them from the abodes of the Blessed, treats them as their nature befits. When, then, O my son Horos, the ministering angels and genii appointed are warlike, the soul in their charge takes that character,

[forgetting

[p. 25]

forgetting its own, or rather laying it aside until some future change of condition. If the guardian angels are of a gentle order, then the soul follows its path in peace; if they are friends of judgment, the soul loves to judge; if they are musicians, then the soul sings; if they love truth, the soul is that of a philosopher. Thus the souls necessarily follow the teaching of their guardians; falling into human bodies they forego their proper estate, and while exiled from it they approximate to those intelligences by whom they have been embodied.

Thine explanation is complete, my mother, said Horos, but thou hast not yet informed me in what manner noble souls are born.

There are upon earth, O my son, different offices. So also is it among souls; they occupy different stations, and that soul which issues from a more exalted sphere is nobler than the rest; even as he who is free among men, is nobler than the slave. Exalted and royal souls are necessarily the masters of men.

How are souls born male or female?

Souls, my son Horos, are all equal in nature, since they come from one region wherein the Creator has formed them. There are not among them either males or females; this distinction exists only between bodies, and not between incorporeal beings. But some are more energetic, some are gentler; and this belongs to the air in which all things are formed. For an airy body envelopes the soul; in it are the elements of earth, water, air, and fire. Among females this combination contains more of cold and of moisture than of dryness and heat, and the soul which is enfolded therein is watery and disposed to softness. The contrary happens among males; their envelope contains

[more

[p. 26]

more of dryness and of heat, less of cold and of moisture; hence in bodies so formed the souls manifest greater vivacity and energy.

And how, O my mother, are born the souls of the wise?

And Isis answered:--The organ of vision is enveloped in tunics. When these tunics are thick and dense, the sight is dull; when they are fine and subtle, the sight is penetrating. Even so is it with the soul; she likewise has her coverings, incorporeal as herself. These coverings are the interior airs; when they are subtle, clear, and transparent, then the soul is perspicuous; when, on the contrary, they are dense, thick, and turgid, then she cannot see far; and discerns only, as though in cloudy weather, that which lies immediately before her steps.

And Horos said:--For what reason, my mother, are the minds of men who are not of our holy country less open than the minds of those who belong to it? And Isis replied [*1]:--The earth is set in the midst of the universe like a man lying on his back and gazing into heaven, and the various regions of earth correspond to the different members of the man. The earth turns her gaze towards heaven as towards her father, following in her changes the changes of the skies. Her head lies to the south, her right shoulder to the east, her left is turned towards the Lybian wind, her feet are under the constellation of the Bear, the right beneath the tail, and the left beneath the head

[of the

[p. 27]

of the Bear; her loins are under the regions of heaven nearest to the Bear; the midst of her body is beneath the centre of heaven. Behold as a proof of these things, how they who dwell in the South have a beautiful countenance and plentiful hair, while the orientals have hands hardy in conflict and ready with the bow, for they are right-handed; the westerns are strong and fight with the left hand, attributing to the left side the functions which belong in others to the right; those who dwell beneath the Bear are distinguished by the attributes of their feet, and by the beauty of their legs; those who inhabit beyond the Bear in the climate of Italy and of Greece are remarkable for the beauty of their loins, and hence their tendency to prefer males. This part of the body also, being whiter than the rest, produces men of a whiter hue. The hallowed region of our ancestors is in the midst of the earth, and since the midst of the human body is the seat of the heart, and the heart of the soul, this is why, my son, the men of this land, beside the qualities which all men possess in common, have also a loftier intelligence and wisdom, because the heart of the earth brings them forth and nourishes them.

Moreover, my son, the south is the storehouse of the clouds; it is there they assemble, and thence, it is said, flows our river (Nile), when the cold becomes abundant. Now, where the clouds descend, the air grows thick and is filled with vapours which spread themselves as a veil not only over the sight, but over the intelligence. The east, my son Horos, is continually disturbed and glowing under the sunrise, as is the west under the sunset; there-fore, they who dwell in these regions can hardly preserve a clear perception. The north, by means of its icy temperature, thickens the mind even as it does the body.

[The

[p. 28]

[paragraph continues] The central land alone, clear and serene, is favoured as are those who inhabit her. She brings forth in a perpetual tranquillity, she adorns and completes her offspring, she contends alone against all others, she triumphs, and like a worthy ruler partakes with the vanquished the fruits of victory.

Explain to me further, my august Mother, what it is that causes in living men during long maladies, an alteration of discernment, of reason, even of the soul itself.

And Isis answered:--Among animals there are those who have affinity with fire, others with water, others with earth, others with air, others again with two or three elements, or with all the four. Or, inversely, some have an antipathy for fire, some for water, some for earth, some for air, or again for two, three or four elements. Thus, the locust and all kinds of insects flee from the fire; the eagle, the hawk, and other birds of flight fear the water; the fish dread the air and earth; the serpent abhors the open air, and like all crawling creatures loves the ground; all fishes delight in the deep, the birds in the air where they pass their lives; those who fly highest delight in the fire (of the sun) and sojourn in its vicinity. There are even certain creatures who disport themselves in the fire, such are the salamanders who have their abode in it. The elements enfold the body, and every soul inhabiting a body is weighed down and enchained by the four elements; wherefore, it is natural that the soul should have affinity with certain elements and aversion for others, for which reason she cannot enjoy perfect happiness. Nevertheless, as the soul is of divine origin, she struggles and meditates even beneath this bodily covering; but her thoughts are not what they would be if she were free from the body. And

[if the

[p. 29]

if the body be disturbed and troubled by sickness or by terror, the soul herself is tossed about like a man in the midst of tempestuous waves.

*           *           *           *

 

Footnotes

^24:1 This must not be understood in a vulgar sense of mere earthly monarchy, but of souls whose destiny it is to be chiefs and leaders among men, whether spiritually, intellectually, or politically.

A.K.

^24:2 This passage perhaps refers, though obscurely, to Avatars of souls who have already attained beatitude, though not apotheosis.

A.K.

^26:1 I believe the whole of the ensuing passage to be highly metaphorical, and to relate to the occult distinctions and divisions of the seven great races of mankind. It is not difficult to interpret the allusions.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

PART III.

*           *           *           *

THOU hast given me admirable instruction, O my most powerful Mother Isis, concerning the marvellous creation of Souls by God, and I am filled with wonder; but thou hast not yet shewn me whither souls depart when set free from bodies. Fain would I contemplate this mystery, and thank only thee for the initiation.

And Isis said:--Hearken, my son, for thy most necessary enquiry holds an important place, and may not be neglected. Hear my reply.

O great and marvellous scion of the illustrious Osiris, think not that souls on quitting the body mix themselves confusedly in the vague immensity and become dispersed in the universal and infinite spirit, without power to return into bodies, to preserve their identity, or to seek again their primeval abode. Water spilt from a vase returns no more to its place therein, it has no proper locality, it mingles itself with the mass of waters; but it is not thus with souls, O most wise Horos. I am

[initiated

[p. 31]

initiated into the mysteries of the immortal nature; I walk in the ways of the truth, and I will reveal all to thee without the least omission. And first I will tell thee that water, being a body without reason, composed of myriads of fluid particles, differs from the soul which is, my son, a personal entity, the royal work of the hands and of the mind of God, abiding herself in intelligence. That which proceeds from Unity, and not from multiplicity, cannot mingle with other things, and in order that the soul may be joined to the body, God subjects this harmonious union to Necessity.

Souls do not, then, return confusedly, nor by chance, into one and the same place, but each is despatched into the condition which belongs to her. And this is deter-mined by that which the soul experiences while yet she is in the tenement of the body, loaded with a burden contrary to her nature. Hear: therefore, this comparison, O beloved Horos; suppose that there should be shut up in the same prison, men, eagles, doves, swans, hawks, swallows, sparrows, flies, serpents, lions, leopards, wolves, dogs, hares, oxen, sheep, and certain amphibious animals, such as seals, hydras, turtles, crocodiles, and that at the same moment all the creatures should be liberated. All at once would escape; the men would seek cities and the public places, the eagles the ether, where nature teaches them to live, the doves the lower air, the hawks the higher expanse; the swallows would repair to places frequented by men, the sparrows to the orchards, the swans to districts where they could sing; the flies would haunt the proximity of the ground as high only as human exhalations extend, for the property of flies is to live on these and to flit over the surface of the earth; the lions and leopards would flee to the mountains, the wolves to the solitudes; the dogs would follow the track of man;

[the

[p. 32]

the hares would betake themselves to the woods, the oxen to the fields and meadows, the sheep to the pastures; the serpents would seek the caves of the earth; the seals and the turtles would rejoin their kind in the shallows and running waters, in order to enjoy, conformably to their nature, alike the proximity of the shore and of the deep. Each creature would return, conducted by its own interior discernment, into the abode befitting it. Even so every soul, whether human or inhabiting the earth under other conditions, knows whither she ought to go; unless, indeed, some son of Typhon should pretend that a bull may subsist in the waters or a turtle in the air. If, then, even when immersed in flesh and blood, souls do not infringe the law of order, although under penance,--for union with the body is a penance,--how much more shall they conform thereto when delivered from their bonds and set at liberty!

Now this most holy law, which extends even unto heaven, is on this wise, O illustrious child: behold the hierarchy of souls! The expanse between the empyrean and the moon is occupied by the Gods, the stars, and the powers of providence. Between the moon and ourselves, my son, is the abode of the souls. The unmeasured air, which we call the wind, has in itself an appointed way in which it moves to refresh the earth, as I shall by and by relate. But this movement of the air upon itself impedes not the way of the souls, nor does it hinder them from ascending and descending without obstacle; they flow across the air without mingling in it, or confounding themselves therewith, as water flows over oil. This expanse, my son, is divided into four provinces, and into sixty regions. The first province from the earth upwards comprehends four regions, and extends as far as certain summits or promontories, which

[it is

[p. 33]

it is unable to transcend. The second province comprises eight regions in which the motions of the winds arise. Be thou attentive, my son, for thou hearest the ineffable mysteries of the earth, the heavens, and of the sacred fluid which lies between. [*1] In the province of the winds fly the birds; above this there is no moving air nor any creature. But the air with all the beings it contains distributes itself into all boundaries within its reach, and into the four quarters of the earth, while the earth cannot lift itself into the mansions of the air. The third province comprehends sixteen regions filled with a pure and subtle element. The fourth contains thirty-two regions, in which the air, wholly subtle and diaphanous, allows itself to be penetrated by the element of fire. Such is the order which, without confusion, reigns from depth to height;--to wit, four general divisions, twelve intervals, sixty regions, and in these dwell the souls, each according to the nature thereof. They are indeed all of one substance, but they constitute a hierarchy; and the further any region is removed from the earth, the loftier is the dignity of the souls which dwell therein.

And now it remains to be explained to thee, O most glorious Horos, what souls they are who abide in each of these regions, and this I shall set forth, beginning by the most exalted.

The expanse which stretches between earth and heaven is divided into regions, my son Horos, according to measure and harmony. To these regions our ancestors have given various names; some call them

[zones

[p. 34]

zones, others firmaments, others spheres. Therein dwell the souls who are freed from bodies, and those who have not yet been incorporated. The stations which they occupy correspond with their dignity. In the upper region are the divine and royal souls; the baser souls--they who float over the surface of the earth--are in the lowest sphere, and in the middle regions are the souls of ordinary degree. Thus, my son, the souls destined to rule descend from the superior zones, and when they are delivered from the body, thither they return, or even higher still, unless indeed they have acted contrary to the dignity of their nature and to the laws of God. For, if they have transgressed, the Providence on high causes them to descend into the lower regions according to the measure of their faults; and in like manner also it conducts other souls, inferior in power and dignity, from the lower spheres into a more exalted abode. For on high dwell two ministers of the universal Providence; one is guardian of the souls, the other is their conductor, who sends them forth and ordains for them bodies. The first minister guards them, the second releases or binds them, according to the will of God.

In this wise the law of equity presides over the changes which take place above, even as upon earth also it moulds and constructs the vessels in which the souls are immured. This law is supplemented by two energies, Memory and Experience. Memory directs in Nature the preservation and maintenance of all the original types appointed in heaven; the function of Experience is to provide every soul descending into generation with a body appropriate thereto; so that passionate souls should have vigorous bodies; slothful souls sluggard bodies; active souls active bodies; gentle souls gentle bodies; powerful souls powerful bodies; cunning

[souls

[p. 35]

souls dexterous bodies;--briefly, that every soul should have a befitting nature. For it is not without just cause that winged creatures are clothed with feathers; that intelligent creatures are gifted with finer senses and superior to others; that beasts of the field are furnished with horns, with tusks, with claws, or other weapons; that reptiles are endowed with undulating and flexible bodies, and lest the moisture of their natures should render them feeble, are armed either with teeth or with pointed scales, so that they are, even less than others, in peril of death. As for fishes, these timid souls have allotted to them for a dwelling-place that element in which light is bereft of its double activity, for in the water, fire neither illuminates nor burns. Each fish, swimming by the help of his spiny fins, flies where he wills, and his weakness is protected by the obscurity of the deep. Thus are souls immured in bodies resembling themselves; in human shape, those souls who have received reason; in flying creatures, souls of a wild nature; in beasts, souls without reason, whose only law is force; in reptiles, deceitful souls, for they attack not their prey face to face, but by ambush; while fishes enshrine those timid souls who merit not the enjoyment of other elements.

In every order of animals there are individuals who transgress the laws of their being.

In what way, my Mother? said Horos.

And Isis answered: In this wise:--A man who acts against reason, a beast which eludes necessity, a reptile which forgets its cunning, a fish which loses its timidity, a bird which renounces freedom. Thou hast heard what was to be said concerning the hierarchy of souls, their descent, and the creation of bodies.

O my son, in every order of souls there are found a

[few

[p. 36]

few royal souls, and of divers characters: some fiery, some cold, some proud, some gentle, some crafty, some simple, some contemplative, some active. This diversity belongs to the regions from whence they descend into bodies. From the royal zone the royal souls go forth, but there are many royalties; the royalty of spirit, of the flesh, of art, of science, of the virtues.

And how, said Horos, dost thou name these royalties?

O my son, the king of souls who have hitherto existed is thy father Osiris; the king of bodies is the prince of each nation, he who governs. The king of wisdom is the Father of all things; the Initiator is the thrice great Hermes; over medicine presides Asclepios, the son of Hephaistos; force and power are under the sway of Osiris, and after him, under thine, my son. Philosophy depends on Arnebaskenis; poetry, yet again, on Asclepios, Imouthe's son. So that, if thou thinkest thereon, thou wilt perceive that there are indeed many royalties and many kings.

But the supreme royalty belongs to the highest region; lesser kingships correspond to the spheres which bring them forth. Those who issue from the fiery zone handle fire; those who come from the watery zone frequent liquid spheres; from the region of art and learning those are born who devote themselves to art and science; from the region of inactivity, those who live in ease and idleness. All that is done and said upon earth has its origin in the heights, from whence all essences are dispensed with measure and equilibrium; nor is there anything which does not emanate from above and return thither.

Explain to me this that thou sayest, O my Mother.

[And

[p. 37]

And Isis answered:--An evident token of these exchanges has been stamped on all creatures by most holy Nature. The breath which we indraw from the upper air we exhale and again inbreathe by means of the lungs within us which perform this work. And when the way destined to receive our breath is closed, then no longer do we remain on earth; we depart hence. Moreover, O my glorious son, there are other accidents by which the balance of our combination may be destroyed. [*1]

What is, then, this combination, O my Mother?

It is the union and admixture of the four elements, whence emanates a vapour which envelops the soul, penetrates into the body and communicates to both its own character. Thus are produced varieties among souls and bodies. If in the composition of a body, fire dominates, then the soul being already of an ardent nature, receives thereby an excess of heat which renders it the more energetic and furious, and the body the more vivacious and active. If the air dominates, the body and soul of the creature are thereby rendered unstable, errant and restless. The domination of the water causes the soul to be mild, affable, bland, sociable, and easily moulded, because water blends and mixes itself readily with all other things, dissolves them if it be abundant, moistens and penetrates them if it be less in quantity. A body softened by too much humidity offers but a weak resistance, a slight malady disintegrates it, and little by little dissolves its cohesion. Again, if the earthy element be dominant, the soul is obtuse, because the body lacks subtlety, nor can she force a way through the density of its organism. Therefore, the soul remains

[indrawn

[p. 38]

indrawn upon herself, borne down by the burden she supports, and the body is solid, inactive, and heavy, moving only with effort.

But if the elements be all in just equilibrium, then the whole nature is ardent in its actions, subtle in its motions, fluent in its sensations, and of a robust constitution. Of the predominance of air and fire birds are born, whose nature resembles that of the elements which generate them. Men are endowed with an abundance of fire united with but a little air, and of water and earth equal parts. This excess of fire becomes sagacity, seeing that intelligence is indeed a kind of flame, which consumes not, but which penetrates. The predominance of water and earth with a sufficient admixture of air and but little fire engenders beasts; those endued with more fire than the rest are the more courageous. Water and earth in equal quantities give birth to reptiles, which, being deprived of fire, have neither courage nor truthfulness, while the excess of water renders them cold, that of earth, sordid and heavy, and the lack of air makes all their movements difficult. Much water with but little earth produces fishes; the absence of fire and air in them causes their timidity, and disposes them to lie hidden, while the predominance of water and earth in their nature approximates them by natural affinity to earth dissolved in water. Moreover, by means of the proportional increase of the elements composing the body is the body itself increased, and its development ceases when the full measure is attained. And so long, my beloved son, as equilibrium is maintained in the primitive combination and in the vapours arising therefrom, that is, so long as the normal proportion of fire, air, earth, and water remains unchanged, the creature continues in

[health.

[p. 39]

health. But if the elements deviate from the proportion originally determined--(I speak not now of the growth of activities, nor of that resulting from a change of order, but of a rupture of equilibrium whether by addition or diminution of fire or of other elements)--then malady supervenes. And should air and fire, whose nature is one with that of the soul itself, prevail in the conflict, then, through the dominance of those elements, destroyers of the flesh, the creature abandons its proper state. For the earthy element is the pabulum of the body, and the water wherewith it is permeated contributes to consolidate it; but it is the aerial element which confers motion, and the fire engenders all energies. The vapours produced by the union and combination of these elements blending with the soul, as it were by fusion, bear her along with them, and clothe her in their own nature, whether good or evil. So long as she remains in this natural association the soul keeps the rank she has attained. But if a change should occur either in the combination itself or in any of its parts or subdivisions, the vapours, altering their condition, alter likewise the relations between soul and body; the fire and air, aspiring upward, draw with them the soul, their sister, while the watery and terrestrial elements, which tend earthwards like the body, weigh it down and overwhelm it.

*           *           *           *

 

[p. 40]

 

 

Footnotes

^33:1 This hint is enough to indicate that Isis speaks in metaphorical language. The entire description should be understood as equally applicable to the macrocosm and the microcosm, the consciousness of every constituent particle in man's system being accounted a soul.

A.K.

^37:1 Isis here speaks not as a Goddess, but as a mortal.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41] [p. 42]

  

A Treatise on Initiations;

  

or,

  

Asclepios.

[p. 43]

[p. 44] [p. 45]

  

A

  

TREATISE ON INITIATIONS;

  

OR,

  

ASCLEPIOS.

  

PART I.

Hermes:

IT is a God who hath brought thee to us, Asclepios, that thou mayst assist at a divine discourse, and one which will be the most truly religious of all we have as yet held, or with which we have been inspired from on high. In understanding it thou wilt be in possession of all blessings,--if so be indeed there are several, and if it be not more correct to say there is but one blessing which comprises all. For each one of them is bound to another; all

[are

[p. 46]

are derived from one and make but one, so that their mutual bonds make separation impossible. This is what thou wilt understand by paying attention to that which we are about to say. But first, Asclepios, go away for a little while and look for another hearer for our discourse.

[Asclepios proposes to call Ammon.]

There is no objection to Ammon's presence among us, says Trismegistos. I have not forgotten that I have addressed to him, as to a dear son, several writings on Nature and other subjects relating to exoteric teaching. But it is thy name, Asclepios, which I shall inscribe at the head of the present treatise. And call no other person than Ammon. For a discourse upon the holiest matters of religion would be profaned by a too numerous audience. It is an impiety to deliver to the knowledge of a great number, a treatise full of divine majesty. [*1]

[Ammon enters the sanctuary, and completes the holy quartet, [*2] filled with the presence of God. The invitation to devotional silence comes from the lips of Hermes, and in the presence of the attentive souls who

[hang

[p. 47]

hang upon his words, the divine Love thus begins:--] [*1]

Every human soul, Asclepios, is immortal; but this immortality is not uniform. It differs both in mode and in duration.

Asclepios:

It is because souls, Trismegistos, are not all of the same quality.

Hermes:

How quickly thou understandest the reason of things, Asclepios! I have not yet said that all is one and that one is all, since all things were in the Creator before the creation and we can call Him all since all things are His members. Wherefore, throughout all this discourse, bear in mind Him who is One and All, the Creator of all things.

Everything descends from heaven upon the earth, into the water, into the air: only fire is vivifying, because it tends upwards; that which tends downwards is subordinate to it. That which descends from above is generative; that which emanates and rises is nutritive. The earth, alone self-supported, is the receptacle of all things, and reconstructs the types which she receives. That Universal Being which contains all and which is all, puts into motion the soul and the world, all that nature comprises. In the manifold unity of universal life, the innumerable individualities distinguished by their variations, are, nevertheless, united in such a manner

[that

[p. 48]

that the whole is one, and that everything proceeds from unity.

Now this unity, which constitutes the world, is formed of four elements: fire, water, earth, and air:--one single world, one single soul, and one single God. Lend me now all the powers and all the penetration of thy thought; for the idea of Divinity, which cannot be conceived save by divine assistance, resembles a rapid stream precipitating itself onwards with impetuosity, and often, therefore, outstrips the attention of the listeners, and even of him who teaches.

Footnotes

^46:1 It is the indiscriminate disclosure of spiritual mysteries to those who, by reason of their exclusively fleshly condition, are incapable of appreciating and reverencing then, that is called by Jesus a casting of pearls before swine.

A.K.

^46:2 The fourth being Tatios, the son of Trismegistos. All such discourses required--for occult reasons--the presence of a minimum number of four. The four above represented the four great divisions of existence, and constituted an epitome of the Universe. "The form of the fourth is like the Son of God," Nabuchodonosor is made to exclaim in the Hermetic allegory in Daniel, representing the transmutation--instead of the expected destruction--of the earthly elements of Man under the fiery alchemic ordeal of suffering.

A.K.

^47:1 This identification of Hermes with Eros--the only instance Dr. Menard says he has found in literature--accords with the Hermetic axiom--" Love and Wisdom are One."

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART II.

HEAVEN--God manifest--regulates all bodies.

Their growth and their decline are determined by the sun and the moon. But He who directs heaven--the soul itself and all that exists in the world--is very God, the Creator.

From the heights where He reigns descend innumerable influences which spread themselves throughout the world, into all souls both general and particular, and into the nature of things.

The world has been prepared by God in order to receive all particular forms. Realising these forms by

[means

[p. 49]

means of Nature, He has updrawn the world to heaven through the four elements.

Everything is in accordance with the designs of God; but that which originates from on high has been separated into individualities in the following manner. The types of all things follow their (representative) individualities in such way that the type is a whole; the individual is a part of the type.

Thus the Gods constitute a type, the genii also. Similarly, men, birds, and all beings which the world contains, constitute types producing individuals resembling them.

There is yet another type, without sensation, but not without soul. It consists of those beings which sustain themselves by means of roots fixed in the earth. Individualities of this type are found everywhere.

Heaven is full of God. The types of which we have spoken have their habitation extending up to that of the beings whose individualities are immortal. For the individuality is a part of the type, as, for instance, man is a part of humanity; and each one follows the character of its type. Hence it comes that, while all types are imperishable, individuals are not all imperishable.

Divinity forms a type of which all the individualisations are as immortal as itself. Among other beings eternity belongs only to the type; the individual perishes, and is perpetuated only by reproduction. There are, then, some mortal individualities. Thus man is mortal, humanity is immortal.

Nevertheless, individuals of all the types mix with all the types. Some are primitive; others are produced

[by

[p. 50]

by these, by God, by genii, by men, and all resemble their respective types.

For bodies can be formed only by the divine will; individualities cannot be characterised without the aid of the genii; the education and training of animals cannot be conducted without man.

All those genii who have forsaken their own type, and become joined in individuality to an individuality of the divine type, are regarded as neighbours and associates of the Gods.

The genii who preserve the character of their type, and are properly called genii, love that which relates to mankind. The human type resembles, or even surpasses, theirs; for the individuality of the human is manifold and various, and results from the association mentioned above. It is the indispensable link between nearly all other individualities.

The man who has affinity with the Gods through the intelligence which he shares with them, and through piety, is the neighbour of God. He who has affinity with the genii approximates himself to them. They who are satisfied with human mediocrity remain a part of the human type. Other human individualities will be neighbours of the types or individualities with which they shall be in affinity.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

PART III.

MAN, then, Asclepios, is a great marvel; a creature worthy of respect and adoration. For amid this divine Nature he moves as if he himself were a God. He knows the order of the genii, and, aware that he is of the same origin, he despises the human side of his being in order to attach himself exclusively to the divine element.

How happily constituted and near to the Gods is humanity! In joining himself to the divine, man disdains that which he has in him of the earthly; he connects himself by a bond of love to all other beings, and thereby feels himself necessary to the universal order. He contemplates heaven; and in this happy middle sphere in which he is placed, he loves all that is below him, he is beloved of all that is above. He cultivates the earth; he borrows the speed of the elements; his piercing thought fathoms the deeps of the sea. Everything is clear for him. Heaven does not seem to him too high, for knowledge lifts him to it. The brightness of his mind is not obscured by the thick mists of the air; the earth's gravitation is no obstacle to his efforts; the profundity of deep seas does not disturb him; he includes everything and remains everywhere the same.

All animate beings have as it were roots passing downwards; inanimate beings, on the contrary, have a single root passing from below upwards, and supporting a whole forest of branches. Some creatures nourish

[themselves

[p. 52]

themselves upon two elements, others upon one only. There are two kinds of aliment for the two portions of the creature--one for the soul and another for the body. The soul of the world sustains itself by perpetual motion. Bodies develop themselves by means of water and of earth, the aliments of the inferior world. The spirit which fills everything, mingles with everything, and vivifies everything, adds consciousness to the intelligence, which, by a peculiar privilege, man borrows from the fifth element--the ether. In man, the consciousness is raised to the knowledge of the divine order.

Since I am led to speak of the consciousness, I will presently expound to you its function, which is great and holy as that of divinity itself. But let us first complete the exposition already begun. I was speaking of union with the Gods--a privilege which they accord only to humanity. A few men only have the happiness of rising to that perception of the Divine which subsists only in God and in the human intelligence.

Asclepios:

Are, then, not all men similarly conscient, Trismegistos?

Hermes:

All, Asclepios, have not the true intelligence. They are deceived when they suffer themselves to be drawn after the image of things, without seeking for the true reason of them. It is thus that evil is produced in man; and that the first of all creatures lowers himself almost to the level of the brutes.

[But

[p. 53]

But I will speak to you of the consciousness and all that belongs to it, when I come to my exposition of the mind. For man alone is a dual creature. One of the two parts of which he consists is single, and, as the Greeks say, essential; that is, formed after the divine likeness. The part which the Greeks call Kosmic--that is, belonging to the world--is quadruple, and constitutes the body, which, in man, serves as an envelope to the divine principle. This divine principle, and that which belongs to it, the perceptions of the pure intelligence, conceal themselves behind the rampart of the body. [*1]

Footnotes

^53:1 "The five elements of the Microcosm are here made to correspond with the five elements which the Greeks allotted to the Macrocosm; earth, water, air, fire, and ether. Trismegistos says that man obtains his intelligence from "the ether--the fifth element." Trismegistos includes in the body the physical particles, the exterior consciousness, the magnetic forces, and the sensible or mundane mind. In the fifth element he includes the immortal part--soul and spirit; since he speaks of the "divine principle and that which belongs to it--the perceptions of the pure intelligence." The soul, as we have already seen in the "Virgin of the world," is the percipient principle of man; the spirit is the divine light by means of which she sees. It is advisable, in this place, to point out, for the sake of a clear under-standing of what follows, that Hermetic doctrine regards man as having a twofold nature. For he is in one sense a child of the earth, developed by progressive evolution from below upwards; a true animal, and therefore bound by strict ties of kinship with the lower races, and of allegiance to Nature. In the other sense, man descends from above, and is of celestial origin; because when a certain point in his development from below is reached, the human soul focuses and fixes the Divine Spirit, which is peculiarly the attribute of man, and the possession of which constitutes his sovereignty over all other creatures. And until this vivification of the soul occurs, man is not truly Man in the Hermetic sense.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

PART IV.

Asclepios:

WHY then, O Trismegistos, was it necessary that man should be placed in the world, instead of where God is, to dwell with Him in supreme beatitude?

Hermes:

Thy question is natural, O Asclepios, and I pray God to assist me in replying to it, for everything depends upon His will, especially those great things which are at this moment the subject of our enquiry; listen, then, to me, Asclepios. The Lord and Author of all things, whom we call God, brought forth a second God, visible and sensible; I describe him thus, not because he himself has sensibility, for this is not the place to treat such a question, but because he is perceptible to the senses. Having then produced this unique Being who holds the first rank among creatures and the second after Himself, He found His offspring beautiful and filled with all manner of good, and He loved it as His own child. [*1] He willed, then, that another should be able to contemplate this Being so great and so perfect whom He had drawn forth from Himself, and to this end He created man, endowed with reason and intelligence.

[The

[p. 55]

The will of God is absolute accomplishment; to will and to do are for Him the work of the selfsame instant. And, knowing that the essential could not apprehend all things unless enveloped by the world, He gave to man a body for a dwelling-place. He willed that man should have two natures; He united them intimately and blended them in just proportion.

Thus, He formed man of spirit and of body; of an eternal nature and of a mortal nature, so that, a creature thus constituted, he might, by means of his double origin, admire and adore that which is celestial and eternal; cultivate and govern that which is upon the earth. I speak here of mortal things, not of the two elements subjected to man, to wit, earth and water, but of things coming from man, which are in him or depending on him, such as the culture of the soil, the pastures, the construction of buildings, of ports, navigation, commerce, and those reciprocal exchanges which are the strongest bond among men. Earth and water form a part of the world, and this terrestrial part is sustained by the arts and sciences, without which the world would be imperfect in the eyes of God. For that which God wills is necessary, and the effect accompanies His will; nor can it be believed that anything which has seemed good to Him can cease to seem good to Him, because from the beginning He knew what should be and what should please Him.

 

Footnotes

^54:1 This "second God" is the Visible Universe, which in most Hermetic writings is spoken of as the "Son of God"--"the word made flesh."

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

  

PART V.

BUT I perceive, O Asclepios, that thou art anxious to know in what manner Heaven and those who inhabit it can be the object of the aspiration and adoration of man; learn, then, O Asclepios, that to aspire after the God of heaven and all those who are therein is to render them frequent homage; for alone of all animated beings, divine and human, man is able to render it. The admiration, adoration, praise, and homage of man rejoice heaven and the celestial inhabitants; and the choir of the Muses has been sent among men by the supreme Divinity in order that the terrestrial world might not be without the sweet science of hymns; or rather that the human voice might celebrate Him who only is All, since He is the Father of all things, and that the tender harmonies of earth might ever unite themselves with the celestial choirs. Only a few men, rarely endowed with a pure intelligence, are entrusted with this holy function of beholding heaven clearly. Those in whom the confusion of their two natures holds the intelligence captive under the weight of the body, are appointed to have communion with the inferior elements. Man is not, then, debased because he has a mortal part; on the contrary, this mortality augments his aptitudes and his power; his double functions are possible to him only by his double nature; he is constituted in such a manner that he can embrace alike the terrestrial and the divine. I desire, O Asclepios, that thou mayest bring to this exposition all the attention and all the ardour of thy mind; for many are wanting in

[faith

[p. 57]

faith concerning these things. And now I am about to unfold true principles for the instruction of the holiest intelligences.

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART VI.

THE Master of Eternity is the first God, the world is the second, man is the third. God, Creator of the world and of all that it contains, governs all this universe and subjects it to the rule of man. And man makes of it the object of his special activity. So that the world and man become the appendage one of the other, and it is with reason that in Greek the world is called Kosmos. Man knows himself and knows the world; he should, therefore, distinguish that which is in accord with himself, that which is for his use and that which has a right to his worship. While addressing to God his praises and his acts of grace, he should venerate the world which is the image of God; remembering that he is himself the second image of God. For God has two similitudes: the world and man. The nature of man being complex, that part of him which is composed of soul, of consciousness, of mind, and of reason is divine, and from the superior elements seems able to mount to heaven; while his cosmic and mundane part, formed of fire, water, earth, and air, is

[mortal

[p. 58]

mortal and remains upon the earth; so that what is borrowed from the world may be restored to it.

It is thus that mankind is composed of a divine part and of a mortal part, to wit, the body. The law of this dual being, man, is religion, whose effect is goodness. Perfection is attained when the virtue of man preserves him from desire, and causes him to despise all that is foreign to himself. For terrestrial things, of which the body desires the possession, are foreign to all parts of the divine Thought. Such things may indeed be called possessions, for they are not born with us, they are acquired later. They are then foreign to man, and even the body itself is foreign to man, in such wise that man ought to disdain both the object of desire, and that whereby he is made accessible to desire.

It is the duty of man to direct his soul by reason, so that- the contemplation of the divine may lead him to take but small account of that mortal part which has been joined to him for the sake of the preservation of the lower world. In order that man should be complete in both his parts, observe that each of these possesses four binary subdivisions--to wit, the two hands and the two feet, which, with the other organs of the body, place him in relation with the inferior and terrestrial world. And, on the other hand, he possesses four faculties: sensibility, soul, memory, and foresight, which permit him to know and perceive divine things. He is able, therefore, to include in his investigations, differences, qualities, effects, and quantities. But if he be too much hindered by the weight of the body, he will be unable to penetrate into the true reason of things.

When man, thus formed and constituted, having

[received

[p. 59]

received for his function from the supreme God, the government of the world and the worship of Divinity, acquits himself well of this double duty, and obeys the holy Will, what should be his recompense? For, if the world is the work of God, he who by his care sustains and augments its beauty, is the auxiliary of the divine Will, employing his body and his daily labour in the service of the work produced by the hands of God. What should be his recompense, if not that which our ancestors have obtained? May it please divine goodness to accord this recompense also to us; all our aspirations and all our prayers tend towards its attainment; may we, delivered from the prison of the body, and from our mortal bonds, return, sanctified and pure, to the divine heritage of our nature!

Asclepios:

What thou sayest is just and true, O Trismegistos! Such indeed is the price of piety towards God, and of care bestowed on the maintenance of the world. But return to the heavens is denied to those who have lived impiously; upon them is imposed a penance which holy souls escape, to wit, migration into other bodies. The end of this discourse, O Trismegistos, brings us to the hope of an eternal future for the soul, as the result of her life in the world. But this future is for some difficult to believe; for others it is a fable; for others, again, perhaps a subject of derision. For it is a sweet thing to enjoy what one possesses in the corporeal life. Therein lies the evil, which, as one may say, turns the soul's head, attaches her to her mortal part, hinders her from knowing her divine part, and is envious of immortality. For I say unto thee, by a prophetic inspiration, no man after us will choose the simple way of philosophy, which lies

[wholly

[p. 60]

wholly in application to the study of divine things, and in holy religion. The majority of men obscure philosophy with diverse questions. How come they to encumber it with sciences which ought not to be comprehended in it, or after what manner do they mingle in it diverse questions?

Hermes:

O Asclepios, they mingle in it, by means of subtleties, a diversity of sciences which belong not to it--arithmetic, music, geometry. But pure, philosophy, whose proper object is holy religion, ought to occupy itself with other sciences only in so far as to admire the regular phases of the stars, their positions and their courses, determined by calculation; the dimensions of the earth, its qualities and quantities; the depth of the sea; the power of fire; and to know the effects of all these things, and Nature; to adore Art, the artist, and his divine intelligence. As for music, that is apprehended when one apprehends reason and the divine order of things. For this order by which everything is ranged singly in the unity of the whole, is indeed an admirable harmony and a divine melody.

Asclepios:

What then, after us, will men become?

Hermes:

Misled by the subtleties of the sophists, they will turn aside from the true, pure and holy philosophy. To adore God in the simplicity of thought and of the soul, to venerate His works, to bless His will, which alone is the fulness of good--this is the only philosophy which is not profaned by the idle curiosity of the mind. But enough on this matter.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

  

PART VII.

LET us begin to speak of Mind and of other similar things. In the beginning were God and Hyle--it is thus that the Greeks term the first matter or substance of the universe. The Spirit was with the universe, but not in the same manner as with God. The things which constitute the universe are not God, therefore before their birth they were not in existence, but they were already contained in that from which they were produced. For besides and without created things is not only that which is not yet born, but that also which has no generative fecundity, and which can bring forth nothing. Everything which has the power of generating contains in germ all that can be born of it, for it is easy to that which is brought forth to bear that which shall bring forth. But the eternal God cannot and never could be born; He is, He has been, He will be always. The nature of God is to be His own Principle. But matter, or the nature of the world, and mind, although appearing to be brought forth from the beginning, possess the power of birth and of procreation--fecundative energy. For the beginning is in the quality of Nature, who possesses in herself the potentiality of conception and of production. She is then, without any foreign intervention, the principle of creation. It is otherwise with that which possesses only the power of conception by means of mixing with a second nature. The matrix of the universe and of all that it contains appears not to have been itself born, holding however, within it, potentially, all Nature. I call that the matrix

[which

[p. 62]

which contains all things, for they could not have been without a vehicle to contain them. Everything which exists must exist in some place (or vehicle), neither qualities nor quantities, nor positions, nor effects could be distinguished in things having no place and being nowhere. Thus the world, although not having been born, has in it the principle of all birth; since it affords all things a fitting matrix for conception. It is, then, the sum-total of qualities and of matter susceptible of creation, although not yet created.

Matter, being fecund in all attributes, is able also to engender evil. I put aside, therefore, O Asclepios and Ammon, the question asked by many:--"Could not God hinder evil in the nature of things?" There is absolutely nothing to say to them; but for you I will pursue the discourse begun, and I will give the explanation. They affirm that God ought to have preserved the world from evil; now, evil is in the world as an integral part of it. The sovereign God indeed provided against it inasmuch as was reasonable and possible, when He bestowed upon humanity sentiment, knowledge, and intelligence. By these faculties solely, which place us above other animals, we may escape the snares of evil and vice. The man who is wise and protected by divine intelligence, knows how to preserve himself from such immediately he beholds them, and before he has been entrapped thereby. The foundation of knowledge is supreme goodness. Spirit governs and gives life to all that is in the world; it is an instrument employed by the will of the sovereign God. Thus we ought to comprehend, by intelligence alone, the supreme Intelligible called God. By Him is directed that secondary sensible God (the universe), who contains all spaces, all substances, the matter of all that engenders and produces,--in a word, all that is.

[As

[p. 63]

As for the spirit (or Mind), it moves and governs all individual beings in the world according to the nature which God has assigned to them. Matter--Hyle, or the Kosmos--is the receptacle, the motion, the replication of everything which God directs, dispensing to each of them that which is necessary to it, and filling them with spirit according to their qualities.

The form of the universe is that of a hollow sphere, having in itself the cause of its quality or of its figure, wholly invisible; if, choosing any given point of its surface, one should seek to behold its depths, one would be unable to see anything. It appears visible only by means of those special forms whose images appear graven upon it, it shows itself only in effigy; but in reality it is always invisible in itself. Therefore, the centre, the depths of this sphere--if indeed one may call it a place--is in Greek named Hades, the invisible, from eidein, to see, because the centre of a sphere, cannot be seen from without. Moreover, the types or formative appearances were called Ideas, because they are the forms of the Invisible. This interior of the sphere which the Greeks call Hades, because it is invisible, the Latins name Hell (Inferno), on account of its profound position. These are the primordial principles, the first sources, of all things. Everything is in them, or by them, or comes forth from them.

Asclepios:

These principles are, then, O Trismegistos, the universal substance of all individual appearances?

Hermes:

The world nourishes bodies, the spirit nourishes souls. Thought, the heavenly gift which is the happy privilege

[of

[p. 64]

of humanity, nourishes intelligence, but few men only have an intelligence capable of receiving such a benefit. Thought is a light which illuminates the intelligence, as the sun illuminates the world. And even more, for the light of the sun may be intercepted by the moon, or by the earth when night comes; but when thought has once penetrated into the human soul, it mingles intimately with her nature, and the intelligence can never again be obscured by any cloud. Therefore, with reason, it has been said that the souls of the Gods are intelligences. As for me, I say not this of all of them, but of the great supernal Gods.

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART VIII.

Asclepios:

WHAT, O Trismegistos, are the primordial principles of things?

Hermes:

I reveal to thee great and divine mysteries, and in beginning this initiation I implore the favour of heaven. There are many orders of the Gods; and in all there is an intelligible part. It is not to be supposed that they do not come within the range of our senses; on the contrary, we perceive them, better even than those which are called visible, as this discussion will inform thee.

[Thou

[p. 65]

[paragraph continues] Thou wilt apprehend this fact if thou lendest all thine attention to our discourse; for this order of ideas, so sublime, so divine, so elevated above the intelligence of man, demands an uninterrupted attention without which speech merely flits across the mind and flees away, or rather, returns to its source and is lost therein.

There are, then, Gods superior to all appearances; after them come the Gods whose principle is spiritual; these Gods being sensible, in conformity with their double origin, manifest all things by a sensible nature, each of them illuminating his works one by another. [*1] The supreme Being of heaven, or of all that is comprehended under this name, is Zeus, for it is by heaven that Zeus gives life to all things. The supreme Being of the sun is light, for it is by the disk of the sun that we receive the benefit of the light. The thirty-six horoscopes of the fixed stars have for supreme Being or prince, him whose name is Pantomorphos, or having all forms, because he gives divine forms to divers types. The seven planets, or wandering spheres, have for supreme Spirits Fortune and Destiny, who uphold the eternal stability of the laws of Nature throughout incessant transformation and perpetual agitation. The ether is the instrument or medium by which all is produced.

Thus, from the centre to the uttermost parts, everything moves, and relations are established according to natural analogies. That which is mortal approximates to that which is mortal, that which is sensible to that which is sensible. The supreme direction belongs to the supreme Master, in such wise that diversity is resolved into unity. For all things depend from unity or develope

[from

[p. 66]

from it, and because they appear distant from one another it is believed that they are many, whereas, in their collectivity they form but one, or rather two, Principles. These two Principles, whence all things proceed, and by which all exist, are the substance of which things are formed, and the Will of Him who differentiates them.

Asclepios:

What is the reason of this, O Trismegistos?

Hermes:

It is this, Asclepios. God is the Father, the universal Ruler--or whatever other name yet more holy and religious may be given to Him--and which, because of our intelligence, ought to be held sacred between us; but, in considering His divinity, we cannot define Him by any such name. For the voice is a sound resulting from the concussion of the air, and declaring the will of man, or the impression that his mind has received through the senses. This name, composed of a determined number of syllables, serving as a token between the voice and the ear, and, moreover, sensation, breath, air, all that is concerned with, and belonging to its expression--these convey this name of God, and I do not think that a name, however complex it may be, is able to designate the Principle of all majesty, the Father and Lord of all things. Nevertheless, it is necessary to give Him a name, or rather every name, since He is one and all; therefore we must say either that All is His name, or we must call Him by the names of all things. He, then, who is one and all, possessing the full and entire

[fecundity

[p. 67]

fecundity of both sexes, ever impregnated by His own Will, brings forth all that He has willed to beget. His Will is universal goodness, the selfsame goodness that exists in all things. Nature is born of His divinity, in such wise that all things should be as they are, and as they have been, and that Nature may suffice to generate of herself all that in the future is to be born. This, O Asclepios, is why and how all things are of two sexes.

Asclepios:

Sayest thou this also of God, O Trismegistos?

Hermes:

Not only of God, but of all beings, whether animated or inanimate. For it is impossible that anything which exists should be barren. Were we to suppress the fecundity of existing things, it would be impossible for them to remain what they are. For I say that this law of generation is contained in Nature, in intellect, in the universe, and preserves all that is brought forth. The two sexes are full of procreation, and their union, or rather their incomprehensible at-one-ment, may be known as Eros, or as Aphrodite, or by both names at once. If the mind can perceive any one truth more certainly and clearly than another, it is this duty of procreation, which God of universal Nature has imposed for ever upon all beings, and to which He has attached the supremest charity, joy, delight, longing, and divinest love. It would be needful to demonstrate the power and necessity of this law, if everyone were not able to recognise and perceive it by interior sentiment. Behold, indeed, how at the moment when from the brain the tide of life

[descends,

[p. 68])

descends, the two natures lose themselves each in each, and one eagerly seizes and hides within itself the seed of the other! At this moment, by means of this mutual enchainment, the feminine nature receives the virtue of the male, and the male reposes on the bosom of its mate. This mystery, so sweet and so necessary, is enacted in secret, lest the divinity of the two natures should be constrained to blush before the railleries of the ignorant, were the union of the sexes exposed to irreligious observation. For pious men are not numerous in the world; they are, even, rare, and one might easily count them. In the majority of men malice abides, for lack of prudence and of knowledge of things of the universe.

The understanding of divine religion, the basis of all things, leads to the contempt of all vices in the world, and supplies the remedy against them; but when ignorance asserts itself, then vices develope and inflict upon the soul an incurable hurt. Infected by vices, the soul is, as it were, swollen with poison, and can be healed only by knowledge and understanding. Let us then continue this teaching, even though but a small number should profit by it; and learn thou, O Asclepios, why to man only God has given a part of His intelligence and of His knowledge. Wherefore, hearken.

God the Father and the Ruler, after the Gods, [*1] formed men by the union in equal proportions of the corruptible part of the universe and of its divine part, and thus it happened that the imperfections of the universe remained mingled in the flesh. The need of nourishment which we have in common with all creatures, subjects us to desire and to all other vices of the soul. The Gods, constituted of the purest part of Nature, have no need of the aid of reasoning or of study; immortality

[tality

[p. 69]

and eternal youth are for them wisdom and know-ledge. Nevertheless, seeing the unity of Order, and that they might not be strangers to these things, God bestowed on them for their reason and their intelligence, the eternal law of Necessity.

Alone, among all creatures, whether to avoid or to overcome the evils of the flesh, man has the aid of reason and of intelligence, and the hope of immortality. Man, created good, and capable of immortal life, has been formed of two natures: one divine, the other mortal; and in thus forming him, the Divine Will rendered him superior to the Gods, who have an immortal nature only, as well as to all mortal beings. For this reason, man, united in close affinity with the Gods, pays them religious service, and the Gods, in their turn, watch with a tender affection over human affairs. But I speak here only of pious men; as for the wicked, I will say nothing concerning them, in order that I may not, by pausing to talk about them, sully the holiness of this discourse.

 

Footnotes

^65:1 Hermes here includes as Gods the sensible Forces of Nature, the elements and phenomena of the universe.

A.K.

^68:1 Hermes here intends the mundane deities.--A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART IX.

AND since we are brought to speak of the relationship and of the resemblance between men and Gods, behold, O Asclepios, the power and capacity of man! Even as the Ruler and Father, or to give Him the loftiest name--

[God

[p. 70]

[paragraph continues] God is the creator of the firmamental Gods, so is man the creator of the Gods who dwell in temples, pleased with human proximity, and not only themselves illumined, but illuminating. And this both profits man and strengthens the Gods. Dost thou marvel, Asclepios? Dost thou lack faith as do many?

Asclepios:

I am confounded, O Trismegistos; but yielding myself willingly to thy words, I judge man to be happy in that he has obtained such felicity.

Hermes:

Certes, he deserves admiration, being the greatest of all the Gods! For the race of the Gods is formed of the purest part of Nature, without admixture of other elements, and their visible signs are, as it were, only heads. [*1] But the Gods which mankind makes, possess two natures--one divine, which is the first and by far the purest, the other belonging to humanity, which is the matter of which these Gods are composed, so that they have not only heads, but entire bodies, with all their limbs. Thus mankind, remembering its nature and its origin, persists in this matter, in the imitation of Deity, for even as the Father and Lord has made the eternal Gods after the similitude of Himself, so also has humanity made its Gods in its own image.

[Asclepios:

[p. 71]

Asclepios:

Dost thou speak of the statues, Trismegistos?

Hermes:

Yes, of the statues, Asclepios. See how wanting thou art in faith! Of what else should I speak but of the statues, so full of life, of feeling, and of aspiration, which do so many wonderful things; the prophetic statues which predict the future by bestowing dreams and by all manner of other ways; which strike us with maladies, or heal our pains according to our deserts? Art thou not aware, O Asclepios, that Egypt is the image of heaven, or rather, that it is the projection below of the order of things above? If the truth must be told, this land is indeed the temple of the world. Nevertheless--since sages ought to foresee all things--there is one thing thou must know; a time will come when it will seem that the Egyptians have adored the Gods so piously in vain, and that all their holy invocations have been barren and unheeded. Divinity will quit the earth and return to heaven, forsaking Egypt, its ancient abode, and leaving the land widowed of religion and bereft of the presence of the Gods. Strangers will fill the earth, and not only will sacred things be neglected, but--more dreadful still--religion, piety, and the adoration of the Gods will be forbidden and punished by the laws. Then, this earth, hallowed by so many shrines and temples, will be filled with sepulchres and with the dead. O Egypt! Egypt! there will remain of thy religions only vague legends which posterity will refuse to believe; only

[words

[p. 72]

words graven upon stones will witness to thy devotion! The Scythian, the Indian, or some other neighbouring barbarian will possess Egypt! Divinity will return to heaven; humanity, thus abandoned, will wholly perish, and Egypt will be left deserted, forsaken of men and of Gods!

To thee I cry, O most sacred River, to thee I announce the coming doom! waves of blood, polluting thy divine waters, shall overflow thy banks; the number of the dead shall surpass that of the living; and if, indeed, a few inhabitants of the land remain, Egyptians by speech, they will in manners be aliens! Thou weepest, O Asclepios! But yet sadder things than these will come to pass. Egypt will fall into apostacy, the worst of all evils. Egypt, once the holy land beloved of the Gods and full of devotion for their worship, will become the instrument of perversion, the school of impiety, the type of all violence. Then, filled with disgust for everything, man will no longer feel either admiration or love for the world. He will turn away from this beautiful work, the most perfect alike in the present, the past, and the future. Nor will the languor and weariness of souls permit anything to remain save disdain of the whole universe, this immutable work of God, this glorious and perfect edifice, this manifold synthesis of forms and images, wherein the will of the Lord, lavish of marvels, has united all things in a harmonious and single whole, worthy for ever of veneration, of praise and love! Then darkness will be preferred to light, and death will be deemed better than life, nor will any man lift his eyes to heaven.

In those days the religious man will be thought mad; the impious man will be hailed as a sage; savage men

[will

[p. 73]

will be deemed valiant; the evil-hearted will be applauded as the best of men. The Soul, and all that belongs thereto--whether born mortal or able to attain eternal life--all those things which I have herein expounded to thee, will be but matters for ridicule, and will be esteemed foolishness. There will even be peril of death, believe me, for those who  faithful to religion and intelligence. New rights will be instituted, new laws, nor will there be left one holy word, one sacred belief, religious and worthy of heaven and of celestial things. O lamentable separation between the Gods and men! Then there will remain only evil demons who will mingle themselves with the miserable human race, their hand will be upon it impelling to all kinds of wicked enterprise; to war, to rapine, to falsehood, to everything contrary to the nature of the soul. The earth will no longer be in equilibrium, the sea will no longer be navigable, in the heavens the regular course of the stars will be troubled. Every holy voice will be condemned to silence; the fruits of the earth will become corrupt, and she will be no more fertile; the very air will sink into lugubrious torpor. Such will be the old age of the world; irreligion and disorder, lawlessness, and the confusion of good men.

When all these things shall be accomplished, O Asclepios, then the Lord and Father, the sovereign God who rules the wide world, beholding the evil ways and actions of men, will arrest these misfortunes by the exercise of His divine will and goodness. And, in order to put an end to error and to the general corruption, He will drown the world with a deluge or consume it by fire, or destroy it by wars and epidemics, and thereafter He will restore to it its primitive beauty; so that once more it shall appear worthy of admiration and worship, and

[again

[p. 74]

again a chorus of praise and of blessing shall celebrate Him Who has created and redeemed so beautiful a work. This re-birth of the world, this restoration of all good things, this holy and sacred re-habilitation of Nature will take place when the time shall come which is appointed by the divine and ever-eternal will of God, without beginning and always the same.

Asclepios:

Indeed, Trismegistos, the nature of God is Will reflected; that is, absolute goodness and wisdom.

Hermes:

O Asclepios, Will is the result of reflection, and to will is itself an act of willing. For He Who is the fulness of all things and Who possesses all that He will, wills nothing by caprice. But everything He wills is good, and He has all that He wills; all that is good He thinks and wills. Such is God, and the World is the image of His righteousness.

Asclepios:

Is the world then good, O Trismegistos?

Hermes:

Yes, the world is good, Asclepios, as I will inform thee. Even as God accords to all beings and to all orders in the world benefits of divers kinds, such as thought, soul, and life, so likewise the world itself divides and distributes good things among mortals, changing seasons, the fruits of the earth, birth, increase, maturity,

[and

[p. 75]

and other similar gifts. And thus God is above the summit of heaven, yet everywhere present and beholding all things. For beyond the heavens is a sphere without stars, transcending all corporeal things. Between heaven and earth he reigns who is the dispenser of life, and whom we call Zeus (Jupiter). Over the earth and the sea he reigns who nourishes all mortal creatures, the plants and fruit-bearing trees, and whose name is Zeus Sarapis (Jupiter Plutonius). And those to whom it shall be given to dominate the earth shall be sent forth and established at the extremity of Egypt, in a city built towards the west, whither, by sea and by land, shall flow all the race of mortals.

Asclepios:

But where are they now, Trismegistos?

Hermes:

They are established in a great city, upon the mountain of Lybia. Enough of this. [*1]

Footnotes

^70:1 Hermes speaks of the Stars, and of the Astral Powers, not of the Divine Intelligences. The whole of this discourse has a hidden and profound meaning, relating to the human organism, and to the elemental genii, which through man are individualised. A.K.

^75:1 By "Egypt" is denoted not only the country of that name, but the physical system generally of the world, and especially--as in the Hebrew Scriptures--the human body.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

PART X.

Hermes:

LET us speak now of that which is immortal and of that which is mortal. The multitude, ignorant of the reason of things, is troubled by the approach and the fear of death. Death occurs by the dissolution of the body, wearied with its toil. When the number which maintains unity is complete -for the binding-power of the body is a number--the body dies. And this happens when it can no longer support the burdens of life. Such, then, is death; the dissolution of the body, and the end of corporeal sensations. It is superfluous to trouble oneself about such a matter. But there remains another necessary law which human ignorance and unbelief despise.

Asclepios:

What law is this which is thus ignored or unregarded?

Hermes:

Hearken, O Asclepios. When the soul is separated from the body, she passes under the supreme power of Deity, to be judged according to her merits. If found pious and just she is allowed to dwell in the divine abodes, but if she appears defiled with vice she is precipitated from height to depth, and delivered over to the tempests and adverse hurricanes of the air, the fire, and the water. Ceaselessly tossed about between heaven and

[earth

[p. 77]

earth by the billows of the universe, she is driven from side to side in eternal penance, her immortal nature gives endless duration to the judgment pronounced against her. [*1] How greatly must we fear so dreadful a fate! They who now refuse to believe in such things will then be convinced against their will, not by words, but by beholding; not by menaces, but by the pains they will endure.

Asclepios:

The faults of men, O Trismegistos, are not then punished only by human laws?

Hermes:

O Asclepios, all that is terrestrial is mortal. Those who live according to the corporeal state, and who fall short during their life of the laws imposed on this condition, are subjected after death to chastisement so much the more severe as the faults committed by them have remained hidden; for the universal prescience of God will render the punishment proportional to the transgression. [*2]

[Asclepios:

[p. 78]

Asclepios:

Who are they who deserve the greatest penalties, O Trismegistos?

Hermes:

Those who, condemned by human laws, die a violent death, in such wise that they appear not to have paid the debt they owe to Nature, but to have received only the reward of their actions. [*1] The just man, on the contrary, finds in religion and in piety a great help, and God protects him against all evils. The Father and Lord of all things, Who alone is all, manifests Himself willingly to all; not that He shows any man His abode, nor His splendour, nor His greatness, but He enlightens man by intelligence alone, whereby the darkness of error is dissipated, and the glories of the truth revealed. By such means man is united to the Divine Intelligence; aspiring thither he is delivered from the mortal part of

[his

[p. 79]

his nature, and conceives the hope of everlasting life. Herein is the difference between the good and the wicked. He who is illumined by piety, religion, wisdom, the service and veneration of God, sees, as with open eyes, the true reason of things; and, through the confidence of this faith, surpasses other men even as the sun the other fires of heaven. For if the sun enlightens the rest of the stars, it is not so much by his greatness and power as by his divinity and sanctity. Thou must see in him, O Asclepios, a secondary God, who rules the rest of the world, and illumines all its inhabitants, animate and inanimate.

If the world is an animated being which is, which has been, and which will be always living, nothing in it is mortal. Each of its parts is alive, for in a single creature always living there is no room for death. Thus is God the plenitude of life and of eternity, for He necessarily lives eternally; the sun is lasting as the universe, and governs perpetually all living creatures, being the fount and distributor of all vitality. God is, then, the ever-lasting Ruler of all things which receive life, and of all that give it, the eternal dispenser of the being of the universe. Now, He has once for all bestowed life on all living creatures by an immutable law which I will expound to thee. The movement of the universe is the life of eternity; the sphere of this motion is the eternity of life. The universe will never cease from movement, nor will it ever become corrupt; the permanence of eternal life surrounds it and protects it as a rampart. It dispenses life to all that is in its bosom; it is the bond of all things ordained under the sun. The effect of its motion is double; it is vivified by the eternity which encompasses it, and, in its turn, it vivifies all that it

[contains,

[p. 80]

contains, diversifying everything according to certain fixed and determined numbers and seasons. All things are ordained in time by the action of the sun and the stars, according to a Divine law. Terrestrial periods are distinguished by the condition of the atmosphere, by the alternatives of heat and cold; celestial periods by the revolutions of the constellations, which return at fixed intervals of time to the same places in the heavens. The universe is the stage of time, the course and movement of which maintain Life. Order and time produce the renewal of all things in the world by recurring seasons.

 

Footnotes

^77:1 This passage resembles a fragment of Empedocles, cited by Plutarch:--"The etherial force pursues them towards the sea, the sea vomits them forth upon its shores, the earth in turn flings them upward to the untiring sun, and the sun again drives them back into the whirl-wind of space. Thus all the elements toss them from one to another, and all hold them in horror." [It is needless to add that the whole of this passage is allegorical, and that the penance referred to is that of Purgatory, or Kama Loka--the intermediate state of purification.]

A.K.

^77:2 This passage qualifies the previous statement in Sect. IX., concerning the duration of the purgatorial state, and shows that it is not [p. 78] to be regarded as eternal, but as proportional to the faults committed. Moreover, it supplies a reason for the Catholic custom of shriving the dying, seeing that unconfessed sin entails heavier penalty than sin confessed, and therefore no longer "hidden."

A.K.

^78:1 An obscure passage. Probably its meaning is that great sinners, cut off by violent means in the midst of their iniquity, have no time to work out their penance in life, and, being thus deprived of the opportunity of restitution and amendment, suffer the more acutely in purgatory. For since they cannot discharge their debt on earth, they are delivered to torment after death until the "uttermost farthing" is paid.

A.K.

[The opinions expressed in the above, or other scholarly annotations herein, must be disclaimed being in any way necessarily accepted as expressive of, or identical with my own.

Robt. H. Fryar, Bath.]

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART XI.

SINCE such is the state of the universe, there is nothing immutable, nothing stable, nothing unchanging in nature, either in the heavens or on the earth. God alone, and rightly alone, is wholly full and perfect in Himself, of Himself, and around Himself. He is His own firm stability, nor can He be moved by any impulsion, since all things are in Him, and He alone is all. Unless, indeed, we should dare to say, that His movement is in eternity, but this eternity itself is motionless, since all the motion of time revolves in eternity and takes its form therein. God, then, has ever been and is for ever immutable; with Him likewise is the immutable eternity, bearing within it, as

[the

[p. 81]

the image of God, the uncreated universe not yet manifest. Hence, the created universe constitutes the imitation of this eternal universe. Time, despite its perpetual movement, possesses, by means of its necessary revolutions on itself, the force and nature of stability. Thus, although eternity is fixed and immutable, nevertheless, since the motion of time unfolds itself in eternity, and this mobility is the very condition of time, it appears that eternity, immutable in itself, yet revolves by means of the time which is within it, and which contains all motion. Thence it results that the stability of eternity appears mobile, and the mobility of time, stable, by the fixed law of their course. And thus it might seem even that God moves in His own immutability. For there is in the immensity of the equilibrium an unchangeable movement; the law of His immensity is unchangeable.

That, therefore, which is not subject to sense--the Infinite, the Incomprehensible, the Immeasureable--can not be sustained, nor carried, nor sought out; neither can we know whence it comes, whither it goes, where it is, how it is, nor what it is. It is contained in its own supreme stability, and its stability in it; whether God be in eternity, or eternity in God, or both one and the other in the two. Eternity is undefinable by time; and time, which may be defined by number, by alternative, or by periodical revolutions, is eternal. Thus both appear equally infinite and eternal. Stability being the fixed point which serves as the basis of Movement, must, because of this stability, hold the principal place. God and Eternity are, therefore, the principle of all things; but the world, which is mutable, cannot be considered the principle. The mutability of the world takes precedence of its stability, by means of the law of eternal movement

[in

[p. 82]

in equilibrium. The whole consciousness of Divinity is then immutable, and moves only in equilibrium; it is holy, incorruptible, eternal; or to define it better, it is eternity, consisting in the very truth of the Supreme God, the plenitude of all feeling and knowledge, or indeed, so to speak, in God Himself. The consciousness of the natural universe includes all sensible things and species; the consciousness of humanity involves memory, by which man remembers his acts performed.

Now, the consciousness of Divinity descends even to the human creature. God has not seen fit to extend to all beings this supreme and divine consciousness, lest, were it common to all animals, the glory of it should be diminished. The intelligence of the human mind,--whatever may be its quality and quantity,--lies wholly in the memory, and it is by means of this tenacity of memory that man has become the lord of the earth. The intelligence of nature, the quality and consciousness of the universe, may be understood by means of the sensible things it contains. Eternity, in the next place, is understood as to its consciousness and its quality, according to the sensible world.

But the intelligence of the Divine Being, the consciousness of the Supreme God, is the only truth, and this truth cannot be discovered,--no, nor so much as its shadow,--in this world full of illusion, of changeful appearances, and of error, where things are known only in the dimension of time.

Thou seest, O Asclepios, what lofty matters we dare to treat! I thank Thee, O most high God, Who hast illumined me with the light of Thy Grace! As for you, O Tat, Asclepios, and Ammon, keep these Divine mysteries in the secret place of your hearts,

[and

[p. 83]

and conceal them in silence. Intellect differs from perception in this--that intellect, by means of study, is competent to understand and to know the nature of the universe.

The intellect of the universe penetrates to the consciousness of eternity, and of the super-mundane Gods. And as for us who are men, we perceive heavenly things as it were darkly through a mist, for thus only does the condition of our human sense

permit us to behold them. Feeble, indeed, is our strength to penetrate things so Divine; but, when at last we attain to them, we are indeed blessed by the joy of our inward consciousness.

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART XII.

CONCERNING the Void, to which so much importance is attached, my judgment is that it does not exist, that it never has existed, and that it never will exist. For all the various parts of the universe are filled, as the earth also is complete and full of bodies, differing in quality and in form, having their species and their magnitude, one larger, one smaller, one solid, one tenuous. The larger and more solid are easily perceived; the smaller and more tenuous are difficult to apprehend, or altogether invisible. We know only of their

[existence

[p. 84]

existence by the sensation of feeling, wherefore many persons deny such entities to be bodies, and regard them as simply spaces, but it is impossible there should be such spaces. For if indeed there should be anything outside the universe, which I do not believe, then it would be a space occupied by intelligible beings analogous to its Divinity, in such wise that the world, which we call the sensible world, would be filled with bodies and creatures appropriate to its nature and quality. We do not behold all the aspects of the world; some of these indeed are very vast, others very small, or else they appear small to us by reason of their remoteness, or the imperfection of our sight; their extreme tenuity may even cause us to be wholly ignorant of their existence. I speak of the genii, for I hold they dwell with us, and of the heroes who dwell above us, between the earth and the higher airs; wherein are neither clouds nor any tempest.

For in truth, O Asclepios, it cannot be said that there is anywhere a void, unless care be taken to define what is signified by void; as, for instance, void of fire, or water, or of some other such thing. And even if this or that space, small or great, be empty of these elements, nothing can be empty of the spirit and aerial fluid. The same thing may be said of place; this word alone cannot be understood, unless it is applied to something. By omitting the chief term, the sense intended is lost; thus, it is correct to say, "the place of water," "the place of fire," or of any other similar thing. For as it is impossible that there should be space void of everything, so also it is impossible there should be place by itself. If a place is supposed without its contents, then it is an empty place, and, in my judgment, such a place does not

[exist

[p. 85]

exist in the universe. But if nothing be void, then there can be no such thing as place in itself, unless it be qualified by length, breadth, and depth, even as human bodies have distinguishing signs.

If, then, these things be so, O Asclepios and you who are also present, know that the Intelligible World, that is to say, God, Who is perceived only by the eye of intelligence, is incorporeal, and that nothing corporeal can be mingled with His nature, nor anything that can be defined by quality, quantity, or numeration, for there is nothing of such a kind in Him. This world, which is called the sensible world, is the receptacle of all sensible appearances, qualities, and bodies, nor can this universe exist without God. For God is all, and all come forth from Him, and depend on His Will; He contains everything that is good, orderly, wise, perfect, perceptible for Him alone, and intelligible for Him alone. Apart from Him nothing has been, nothing is, nothing will be; for all proceed from Him, are in Him, and by Him; whether manifold qualities, vast quantities, magnitudes exceeding measurement, species of all forms. If thou understandest these things, Asclepios, render thanks to God; and, observing the universe, comprehend clearly that this sensible world, and all that it contains, is enfolded, as in a garment, by the supernal world. O Asclepios, beings of every kind, whether mortals, immortals, reasonable, animate, inanimate, to whatever class they may belong, bear the impress of that class, and although each of them has the general appearance of its kind, there are yet among them special differences. Even so, the human kind is uniform, and man may be defined by his type; nevertheless, under this general likeness, men present many dissimilarities. For the

[character

[p. 86]

character which proceeds from God is incorporeal, as is all that is comprehended in intelligence. Since the two principles which determine form are corporeal and incorporeal, it is impossible that they should generate a form wholly resembling something else, at whatever distance of time or of place. Forms, nevertheless, are as changeful as the moments in an hour's space, in the moveable circle wherein is that omniform God of whom we have spoken. Therefore the type persists, producing as many images of itself as the revolution of the world has instants of time. The world has changes in its revolution, but species (individuality) has neither period nor change. Thus the forms of every species are permanent, and yet various in the same species.

Asclepios:

And does the world also vary in its species, Trismegistos?

Hermes:

Why then, Asclepios, hast thou been asleep all the while we have been discoursing? What is the world, or of what is it composed, if not of all that is generated in it? Or dost thou speak of heaven, of the earth, and of the elements, for other beings continually change in appearance? But even so the heaven, now rainy, now dry, now hot, now cold, now clear, now covered with clouds, has many successive changes of aspect beneath its apparent uniformity. So also the earth constantly changes its aspect, for now it brings forth its fruits, now it hides them in its bosom, bearing

[products

[p. 87]

products of diverse quality and quantity; here is repose, there is movement, and every variety of trees, flowers, seeds, properties, odours, savours, forms. Fire, likewise, has its manifold and divine transformations, for the sun and the moon have all manner of aspects comparable to the multitude of images beheld in mirrors. And now we have discoursed enough of these things.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART XIII.

LET us return to man, and enquire concerning the divine gift of reason which entitles him to be called a reasonable creature. Among all the wonders we have noted in man, that which above all commands admiration is this:--that man has discovered the divinity of nature, and has made it efficient to his designs. [*1]

[Our

[p. 88]

Our ancestors, wandering astray in matters of faith concerning the Gods, and unable to lift their minds to the Divine knowledge and religion, discovered the art of making Gods; and, having discovered it, they invested their products with appropriate virtues drawn from the nature of the world. And, as they could not make souls, they evoked the spirits of genii and angels, and endowed with them the holy images and sacraments, thus enabling their idols to exercise powers

[for

[p. 89]

for good or ill. In such wise thine ancestor, O Asclepios, the inventor of medicine, has a temple on the Lybian mountain by the shores of the crocodile-frequented river, where also lies enshrined all of him which belonged to the earth--that is, his body. For the rest of him--his better part, or rather, indeed, himself--because the principle of consciousness and of life is the whole man--is restored to heaven. And now, by his divinity, he lends help to men in their sicknesses, who once instructed them in the art of healing. So also, Hermes, my own ancestor, whose name I bear, now enshrined in the country which is called after him, hears the prayers of those who come thither from all parts of the land to obtain of him assistance and health. Behold, again, what blessings Isis, the spouse of Osiris, confers upon men when she is favourable to them, and what ills she inflicts when she is angered! For these mundane and earthly Gods are accessible to wrath, being formed and composed by men out of Nature. Of, such sort in Egypt is the adoration paid to animals; and thus also do cities honour the souls of those men who, in their lifetime, gave them laws and whose names they preserve. And for this reason, O Asclepios, those deities which are adored in some places, receive in others no worship; whence arise many wars between the cities of Egypt.

Asclepios:

And of what kind, O Trismegistos, is the divinity of these Gods who inhabit the earth?

[Hermes:

[p. 90]

Hermes:

It consists in the divine virtue, which naturally subsists in herbs, rocks, and aromatic principles, wherefore these deities love frequent sacrifices, hymns, and praises, and sweet music resembling the celestial harmony, which heaven-like rite, attractive to their sacred nature, draws them and retains them in their shrines, so that they patiently endure their long sojourn among men. It is thus that men make Gods. Neither must thou suppose, O Asclepios, that the acts of these terrestrial deities are controlled by hazard. For while the supernal Gods abide in the heights of heaven, keeping each the order which belongs to him, these Gods of ours have also their special functions. Some predict by means of lots and divination the events of the future; others preside, in various ways, over things depending on their care, or come to our assistance as allies, as kinsmen, or as friends.

 

Footnotes

^87:1 This section continues and elucidates the argument of section IX. An acquaintance with occult doctrine regarding the Nature-spirits, or mundane Gods, will, I think, enable the reader to follow intelligently the observations of Hermes in regard to the sacred images. Precisely the same virtues as those attributed by the ancients to the idols of their various deities, are in our day attributed by Catholics to the idols of their saints. We hear of the "Virgin" of this or that town being propitious to a petition which the "Virgin" of some other place has refused to grant. Sacred images still heal the sick, avert pestilences, discover hidden springs, and confer blessings upon devotees. [p. 88] Hermes points out that the powers by which these things are accomplished belong to the divinity of Nature, individualised and differentiated by human intervention; and that mankind necessarily passes through the stage of nature-worship before becoming competent to realise the celestial order and the being of the heavenly Gods. For before the empyrean can be reached by the human intelligence, it must traverse the spheres intermediate between earth and heaven. Thus the images of the Gods are worshipped before the Gods themselves are known; nor are these images necessarily of wood or stone. All personalities are eidola (idols) reflecting the true essentials, and having, as it were, a portion of Divinity attached to them and resident in their forms, but none the less are they images, and however powerful and adorable they may appear to the multitude who know not divine religion, they are to the Hermetist but types and persona of essentials which are eternally independent of manifestation and unaffected by it. The signs of the truly Divine are three: transcendency of form, transcendency of time, transcendency of personality. Instead of form is Essence; instead of time, Eternity; instead of persons, Principles. Events become Processes, and phenomena, Noumena. So long as the conception of any divine idea remains associated with, or dependent on, any physical or historical circumstance, so long it is certain that the heavenly plane has not been reached. Symbols, when they are recognised as symbols, are no longer either deceptive or dangerous; they are merely veils of light rendering visible the "Divine Dark," towards which the true Hermetist aspires. Even the most refined, the subtlest and most metaphysical expression of the supreme Truth is still symbol and metaphor, for the Truth itself is unutterable, save by God to God. It is Essence, Silence, Darkness.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART XIV.

Asclepios:

O TRISMEGISTOS, what is the part taken in the order of things by Destiny or Fate? If the heavenly Gods rule the universe, and the mundane deities control special events, where is the part of Destiny?

[Hermes:

[p. 91]

Hermes:

O Asclepios, Destiny is the necessity which compels all things that happen, the chain which binds together all events. It is thus the cause of things, the supreme deity, or rather the second God created by God, that is the law of all things in heaven and earth established upon divine ordinances. Destiny and Necessity are bound together indissolubly: Destiny produces the beginning of all things, Necessity enforces the effect which ensues from these beginnings. And hence arises Order--that is, the sequence and disposition of things accomplished in Time; for nothing is performed without Order. And thus the world is perfected; for the world is founded on Order, and in Order the universe consists. Therefore these three, Destiny (which is Fate), Necessity, and Order, depend absolutely on the will of God Who governs the world by His divine law and reason. These three principles have no will in themselves; inflexible and inaccessible to favour as to anger, they are but the instruments of the eternal Reason, which is immutable, invariable, unalterable, indissoluble. First comes Destiny, containing, like newly-sown soil, the germs of future events. Necessity follows, urging them to their consummation. Lastly, Order maintains the fabric of things established by Destiny and Necessity. For all this is an ever-lasting sequence without beginning or end, sustained by its immutable law in the continuity of eternity. It rises and falls alternately, and as time rolls onward, that which had disappeared, again rises uppermost. For such is the condition of the circular movement; all things are interchained in such wise that neither

[beginning

[p. 92]

beginning nor end can be distinguished, and they appear to precede and follow each other unceasingly. But as for accident and chance, they pervade all mundane affairs.

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART XV.

AND now, inasmuch as it is given to man, and inasmuch as God has permitted, we have spoken concerning everything; it re-mains only, therefore, that we should bless and pray to God and return to our mortal cares, having satisfied our minds by treating of sacred things which are the food of the mind.

*           *           *           *

Therewith, coming forth from the Sanctuary, they addressed to God their oraisons, turning themselves to the south, because when the sun begins to decline, he who would praise the God should direct his gaze thither, as in like manner, at sunrise, he should look towards the orient. And even while they pronounced their invocations, Asclepios, in a low voice, spoke thus:

[O Tatius,

[p. 93]

O Tatius, let us ask our father that our prayers may be accompanied with odours of incense and perfumes.

Trismegistos heard, and was moved.

May the omen be favourable, O Asclepios, he said. It is almost a sacrilege to burn incense or any other perfume during prayer; He Who is all and Who contains all, desires nothing. Let us give Him praise and adoration only; the divinest odours are acts of grace which mortals render to God.

We give Thee thanks, O Lord Most High, for by Thy grace we have received the light of Thy knowledge; may Thy Name be adored and venerated, only Name by which Deity is praised according to the religion of our fathers! For Thou dost vouchsafe to accord to all of us the ancestral faith, piety, love, and the most worthy and gracious gifts, in that Thou bestowest upon us consciousness, reason, and intelligence. By consciousness we discern Thee, by reason we seek Thee, and intelligence endows us with the joy of understanding Thee. Saved by Thy divine power, let us be glad in beholding the manifestation of Thyself; let us be glad that, from the hour of our sojourn in the body, Thou dost deign to consecrate us to eternity. The only joy of Man is the knowledge of Thy majesty. We have known Thee, O magnificent Light, who art apprehended by Intelligence alone! We have known Thee, O true Way of Life, inexhaustible Source of all births! We have known Thee, O generative Plenitude of all Nature, Eternal Permanence! And in this our oraison, adoring the sanctity of Thy holiness, we ask of Thee only to grant that we may persevere in the love of Thy knowledge, in such wise that we may never

[separate

[p. 94]

separate ourselves from this manner of life. With which hope being filled, we go forth to take a pure repast without animal flesh. [*1]

[p. 95]

[p. 96]

 

 

Footnotes

^94:1 The words with which this Discourse on Initiation ends are full of significance. The key to the Hermetic Secret is found when the aspirant adopts the Edenic Life: the life of purity and charity which all mystics--Hebrew, Egyptian, Buddhist, Greek, Latin, Vedic, with one consent, ascribe to man in the golden age of his primeval perfection. The first outcome of the Fall, or Degeneracy, is the shedding of blood and eating of flesh. The license to kill is the sign-manual of "Paradise Lost." And the first step towards "Paradise Regained" is taken when man voluntarily returns to the manner of life indicated by his organism as that alone befitting him, and thus reunites himself to the harmony of Nature and the Will of God. No man who follows this path and faithfully keeps to it will fail to find at length the Gate of Paradise. Not necessarily in a single life-time, for the process of purification is a long one, and the past experiences of some men may be such as to shut them out for many lives from the attainment of the promised land. But, nevertheless, every step faithfully and firmly trodden, brings them nearer to the goal, every year of pure life increasingly strengthens the spirit, purges the mind, liberates the will, and augments their human royalty. On the other hand, it is idle to seek union with God in the Spirit, while the physical and magnetic organism remains insurgent against Nature. Harmony must be established between man and Nature before union can be accomplished between man and God. For Nature is the manifest God; and if man be not in perfect charity with that which is visible, how shall he love that which is invisible? Hermetic doctrine teaches the kinship and solidarity of all beings, redeemed and glorified in man. For man does not stand aloof and apart from other creatures, as though he were a fallen angel dropped from some supernal world upon the earth, but he is the child of earth, the product of evolution, the elder brother of all conscient things; their lord and king, but not their tyrant. It is his part to be to all creatures a Good Destiny; he is the keeper, the redeemer, the regenerator of the earth. If need be, he may call on his subjects to serve him as their king, but he may never, without forfeiting his kingship, maltreat and afflict them. All the children of God, in every land and age, have abstained from blood, in obedience

[to

[p. 95]

to an occult law which asserts itself in the breast of all regenerate men. The mundane Gods are not averse to blood, for by means of it they are invigorated and enabled to manifest. For the mundane Gods are the forces of the astral element in man, which element dominates in the unregenerate. Therefore, the unregenerate are under the power of the stars, and subject to illusion. Inasmuch as a man is clean from the defilement of blood, insomuch he is less liable to be beguiled by the deceptions of the astral serpent. Therefore, let all who seek the Hermetic secret, do their utmost to attain to the Hermetic life. If entire abstinence from all forms of animal food be impossible, let a lower degree be adopted, admitting the use of the least bloody meats only--milk, fish, eggs, and the flesh of birds. But in such a case, let the intention of the aspirant be continually united with that of Nature, willing with firm desire to lead, whenever possible, a yet more perfect life; so that in a future birth he may be enabled to attain to it.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97] [p. 98]

  

The Definitions of Asclepios.

[p. 99]

[p. 100] [p. 101]

  

THE

  

DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIOS.

  

PART I.

Asclepios to the King Ammon.

I ADDRESS to thee, O King, a comprehensive discourse, [*1] which is, as it were, the sum and epitome of all others. Far from being in accordance with the opinion of the vulgar, it is wholly adverse thereto. Even to

[thee,

[p. 102]

thee, it may seem inconsistent with certain of my discourses. My master, Hermes, who frequently conversed with me, either alone, or in the presence of Tatios, was wont to say that those who should read my writings would affirm their doctrine to be quite simple and clear, while indeed, on the contrary, it is truly occult and contains a hidden sense. And it has become yet more obscure since the Greeks undertook to translate it from our language into theirs. This has been a source of difficulty and perversion of sense. The character of the Egyptian language, and the energy of the words it uses, enforce the meaning on the mind. As much then as thou canst, O King, and indeed thou art all-powerful, prevent this discourse from being translated, lest these mysteries should reach the Greeks, and their manner of speech, adorned and elegant in expression, should, perchance, weaken the vigour and diminish the solemn gravity and force of these words. The Greeks, O King, have new forms of language for producing argument, and their philosophy is prodigal of speech. We, on the other hand, employ not words so much as the great language of facts.

I will begin this discourse by invoking God, the Master of the Universe, the Creator and the Father, Who contains all, Who is All in One, and One in All. For the plenitude of all things is Unity, and in Unity; nor is the one term inferior to the other, since the two are one. Bear in mind this thought, O King, during the whole of my exposition. Vain is it to seek to distinguish the All and the One by designating the multitude of things the All, and not their Plenitude. Such a distinction is impossible, for the All exists no longer if separated from Unity; and if Unity exists,

[it

[p. 103]

it is in the Totality; now it indeed exists and never ceases to be One, otherwise the Plenitude would be dissolved.

In the bosom of the earth there are impetuous springs of water and of fire; such are the three natures of fire, water, and earth, proceeding from a common origin. Whereby it may be thought that there is one general fountain of matter, bringing forth all abundantly and receiving existence from on high. It is thus that heaven and earth are governed by their creator, that is, by the sun, who causes essence to stream downwards, and matter to rise upwards, and who draws to himself the universe, giving all to everything, lavish of the benefits of his radiance. It is he who distributes beneficent energies not only in heaven and throughout the air, but upon earth also, and even in the depths of

the abyss. If there be an intelligible substance, it must be the very substance of the sun, whose light is the vehicle thereof. But what may be its constitution and primal fount, he only knows. That by induction we may understand that which is hidden from our sight, it would be necessary to be near him and analogous to his nature. But that which he permits us to behold is no conjecture; it is the splendid vision which illuminates the universal and supernal world.

In the midst of the universe is the sun established, like the bearer of the crowns; and even as a skilful driver, he directs and maintains the chariot of the world, holding it to its course. He keeps fast the reins of it, even life, soul, spirit, immortality, and birth. He drives it before him, or, rather, with him. And after this manner he forms all things, dispensing to immortals eternal permanence. The light, which from

[his

[p. 104]

his outer part streams towards heaven, nourishes the immortal spaces of the universe. The rest, encircling and illuminating the entirety of the waters, the earth, and the air, becomes the matrix wherein life germinates, wherein are initiated all births and metamorphoses, transforming creatures, as by a spiral motion, and causing them to pass from one portion of the world to another, from one species to another, and from one appearance to another; maintaining the equilibrium of their mutual metamorphoses, as in the creation of greater entities. For the permanence of bodies consists in transmutation. But immortal forms are indissoluble, and mortal bodies decompose; such is the difference between the immortal and the mortal.

This creation of life by the sun is as continuous as his light; nothing arrests or limits it. Around him, like an army of satellites, are innumerable choirs of Genii. These dwell in the neighbourhood of the Immortals, and thence watch over human things. They fulfil the will of the Gods by means of storms, tempests, transitions of fire, and earthquakes; likewise by famines and wars, for the punishment of impiety. For the greatest crime of men is impiety towards the Gods. The nature of the Gods is to do good, the duty of men is to be pious, the function of the Genii is to chastise. The Gods do not hold men responsible for faults committed through mistake or boldness, by that necessity which belongs to fate, or by ignorance; only iniquity falls under the weight of their justice.

It is the sun who preserves and nourishes all creatures; and even as the Ideal World which environs the sensible world fills this last with the plenitude and universal variety of forms, so also the sun enfolding

[all

[p. 105]

all in his light accomplishes everywhere the birth and development of creatures, and when they fall wearied in the race, gathers them again to his bosom. Under his orders is the choir of the Genii, or rather the choirs, for there are many and diverse, and their number corresponds to that of the stars. Every star has its genii, good and evil by nature, or rather by their operation, for operation is the essence of the genii. I n some there is both good and evil operation. All . these Genii preside over mundane affairs, they shake and overthrow the constitution of States and of individuals; they imprint their likeness on our souls, they are present in our nerves, our marrow, our veins, our arteries, and our very brain-substance, and in the recesses of our viscera. At the moment when each of us receives life and being, he is taken in charge by the genii who preside over births, and who are classed beneath the astral powers. Perpetually they change, not always identical, but revolving in circles. They permeate by the body two parts of the soul, that it may receive from each the impress of his own energy. But the reasonable part of the soul is not subject to the genii; it is designed for the reception of God, who enlightens it with a sunny ray. Those who are thus illumined are few in number, and from them the genii abstain; for neither genii nor gods have any power in the presence of a single ray of God. But all other men, both soul and body, are directed by genii, to whom they cleave, and whose operations they affect. But reason is not like desire, which deceives and misleads. The genii, then, have the control of mundane things, and our bodies

[serve

[p. 106]

serve them as instruments. Now, it is this control which Hermes calls Destiny. [*1]

The Intelligible World is attached to God, the Sensible World to the Intelligible World, and through these two worlds, the sun conducts the effluence of God, that is, the creative energy. Around him are the eight spheres which are bound to him--the sphere of the fixed stars, the six spheres of the planets, and that which surrounds the earth. To these spheres the genii are bound, and to the genii, men; and thus are all beings bound to God, who is the universal Father. The sun is the creator; the world is the crucible of creation. The Intelligible Essence rules heaven, heaven directs the gods, under these are classed the genii, who guide mankind. Such is the divine hierarchy, and such is the operation which God accomplishes by gods and genii for Himself. Everything is a part of God, thus God is all. In creating all, He perpetuates Himself without any intermission, for the energy of God has no past, and since God is without limits, His creation is without beginning or end. [*2]

[If

Footnotes

^101:1 This discourse, which usually concludes, not precedes, the "Fragments," is sometimes but erroneously attributed to Apuleius; see Hargrave Jennings' scholarly and exhaustive "Introductory Essay" to my Annotated Edition of "The Divine Pymander."

Robt. H. FRYAR, Bath.

^106:1 Asclepios, throughout this discourse, preaches pure Hermetic doctrine, which discourages all traffic with elementals, astrals, and other daemonic influences, whether beneficent or the reverse, and instructs man rather to seek the grace of the Holy Spirit, by aspiring evermore inwards and upwards, and abiding in the reasonable and divine part of his nature.

A.K.

^106:2 Compare with this declaration the opening passage of Section III. in the Book of Hermes to Tatios, and my note thereon. The Divine Olympos, or Mount of Energies, emits a continuous river of Generation, or "Becoming." And the equilibrium of Nature is continually maintained by a corresponding process of perpetual return from Matter to [p. 107] Essence; from Existence to Being. With the right hand ADONAI projects; with the left He indraws.

The leading idea in the above fragment is the parallelism between Man and the Universe. The whole Solar System of the Macrocosm, with its hierarchy of gods and elemental powers, is resumed in the human system of the Microcosm.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

PART II.

IF thou reflectest, O King, thou wilt perceive that there are incorporeal corporealites. Which are they? says the King. Corporealites which appear in mirrors; are they not incorporeal?

It is true, Tat, says the King; thou hast a marvellous fancy!

There are yet other incorporealities; for instance, abstract forms, what say you to them? Are they not in themselves incorporeal? yet they are manifest in animated and inanimated corporealities.

True again, Tat.

So then there is a reflexion of incorporealities upon corporealities, and of corporealities on incorporealities. In other words, the Sensible World and the Ideal World reflect each other. Adore, then, the sacred images, O King, for they also are reflective forms of the Sensible World.

Then the King rose and said, Methinks, prophet, it is time to look after our guests; to-morrow, we can continue this theological controversy. [*1]

[When

Footnotes

^107:1 As I read the above fragment, it is written in a spirit of mirth. Tat is quibbling with the King, as the manner of their talk plainly shows. Nevertheless, an undercurrent of occult meaning runs through the speech of the son of Trismegistos. When he names the sacred images, the allusion intended is to the cultus of the Mysteries.--A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 108]

  

PART III.

WHEN a musician, desiring to conduct a melody, is hindered in his design by the want of accord in the instruments employed, his efforts end in ridicule, and provoke the laughter of the auditors. In vain he expends the resources of his art, or accuses of falseness the instrument which reduces him to impotence.

The great musician of Nature, the God who presides over the harmony of song, and who controls the resonance of the instruments according to the rhythm of the melody, is unwearying, for weariness reaches not the gods. And if an artist conducts a concert of music, and the trumpeters blow according to their ability, the flute-players express the delicate modulations of the melody, and the lyre and violin accompany the song, who would think of accusing the inspiration of the composer, or withhold from him the esteem his work deserves, if some instrument should trouble the melody with discord and hinder the auditors from seizing its purity? Even so, not without impiety can we impeach Humanity, on account of the impotence of our own body. For know that God is an Artist of untiring Spirit, always Master of His science, always successful in His operations, and everywhere bestowing equal benefits. If Phidias, the creative artisan, should find the material on which it is necessary for him to work, refractory to his skill, let us not blame him who has laboured to the utmost of his power; neither let us accuse the musician of the faults of the instrument, but rather complain of the defective chord, which, by lowering or raising a note, has destroyed

[the

[p. 109]

the concord; and the worse this is, the more does he merit praise who succeeds in drawing from such a chord an accurate tone. Far from reproaching him, the auditors will be all the better pleased with him. It is thus, O most illustrious hearers, that our inward lyre must be attuned to the intention of the musician.

I can even imagine that a musician, deprived of the aid of his lyre, and being called upon to produce some great musical effect, might, by untried means, supply the place of the accustomed instrument, and arouse thereby the enthusiasm of his auditors. It is related of a cithara player, to whom Apollo was favourable, that, being once suddenly checked in his performance of a melody by the snapping of a string, the kindness of the God supplied the want and magnified the talent of the artist; for by providential help, a cicada interposed his song and executed the missing notes which the broken cord should have sounded. The musician, reassured, and no more troubled by the accident, obtained a triumph. I feel in myself, O most noble hearers, something similar; for, but now, being convinced of my incapacity and weakness, the power of the Supreme Being has supplied in my stead the melody wherewith to praise the king. For the design of this discourse is to declare the glory of royalties and their achievements. Forward, then! the musician wills it, and for this the lyre is tuned! May the grandeur and sweetness of the melody respond to the purpose of our song!

And since we have tuned our lyre to hymn the praise of kings, and to celebrate their renown, let us first praise the good God, the supreme King of the universe. After Him we will glorify those who reflect His image, and hold the sceptre of royalty. Kings

[themselves

[p. 110]

themselves are glad that the song should descend from above, degree after degree, that aspiration should draw nigh to Heaven whence victory comes to them. Let, then, the singer praise the mighty God of the universe, ever immortal, whose power is eternal as Himself, the first of Victors, from Whom all triumphs come, succeeding one another. Let us hasten to close our discourse, that we may offer praise to kings, even to those who are the guardians of peace and of general security; who hold from the Lord supreme their ancient power, and receive victory from His hand; those whose sceptres shine resplendent to herald the hardships of war, whose triumphs anticipate the conflict; and to whom it is given not only to reign, but to overcome; whose very advance to battle strikes the barbarian enemy with fear.

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART IV.

THIS discourse ends where it began, with the praise of the Supreme Being, and afterwards of the most holy kings by whom we obtain peace. So that having commenced by celebrating the Almighty greatness, it is to this greatness that we return in terminating our speech. Even as the sun nourishes all germs, and receives the promise of

[the

[p. 111]

the fruits which his rays, like divine hands, gather for the God; even as these shining hands collect likewise the sweet odours of plants, so also we, after having begun by the adoration of the Most High and the effluence of His Wisdom, after having gathered into our souls the fragrance of these heavenly flowers, must now collect the sweetness of this sacred harvest which He, with fruitful rains, will bless. But even if we had ten thousand mouths and ten thousand voices wherewith to glorify the God of all purity, the Father of Souls, we should yet be powerless to celebrate Him worthily; for new-born babes cannot, indeed, rightly extol their father, yet since they do their utmost, they obtain indulgence. Or rather, the glory of God is seen in this, that He is superior to all creatures; He is the Beginning, He is the End, the Midst, and the Continuance of their Praise; in Him they acknowledge their Parent, all-powerful and infinite.

It is the same also with our king. We, who are his children, love to extol him; and we ask indulgence of our father, even when, before we asked, it was granted to us. A father, far from turning away from his little ones, and from his new-born infants, because of their feebleness, rejoices to see himself recognised by them. The universal gnosis which communicates life to all, and enables us to bless God, is itself a gift of God. For God, being good, has in Himself the fulness of all perfection; being immortal, He contains in Himself immortal tranquillity, and His eternal power sends forth into this world a salutary benediction. In the hierarchy which He contains there are no differences nor variations; all the beings in Him are wise, the same providence is in all, the same intelligence governs

[them,

[p. 112]

them, the same sentiment impels them to mutual goodness, and the same love produces among them universal harmony.

Therefore, let us bless God and after Him the kings who from Him receive the sceptre. And having inaugurated the praises of the kings, let us also glorify piety towards the Supreme. May He instruct us how to bless Him, and may His aid assist us in this study. May our first and chief endeavour be to celebrate the fear of God and the praise of the Kings. For to them is due our gratitude for the fruitful peace which by their means we enjoy. It is the virtue of the King, and his name only which obtains peace; he is called King because he advances chief in royalty and power, and because he reigns by reason and peace. He is above all barbarian royalties, his very name is a symbol of peace. The name alone of the King suffices often to repel the foe. His images are as beacons of safety in the tempest. For the very image of our King procures victory, confers security, and renders us invulnerable.

[Patrizzi hesitates to ascribe the fragment entitled "Asclepios to King Ammon" to the disciple of Hermes, thinking it unworthy of one who had enjoyed the instructions of so great a man. Dr. Menard points out that despite the tirade against the Greeks and the Greek tongue in the first section of this fragment, it was undoubtedly originally written in that very language, as is proved by the reference made in the third section to basileus (the king), and the etymological derivation of the word from (bainein (to advance), and also by the allusions to Phidias, and to Eunomios, a musician of Locris, in the second section. The description of the sun as a charioteer, and the passing reference to "him who bears the crowns," are also both suggested by Greek usages. In Egypt the sun was always represented as carried on a barge or floating raft along the waters of the Nile. Dr. Menard inclines, therefore, to

[believe

[p. 113]

believe that the depreciatory remarks concerning the Greeks must have been introduced by a fraudulent hand, in order to mislead the reader in regard to the true origin of the fragment. Dr. Menard is, moreover, of opinion that the king, or kings spoken of in the fragment, are the imperial brothers Valens and Valentinian. I venture to differ from this view, and believe, rather, that the writer, whether indeed the true Asclepios or not, certainly uses the words "king," "kings," and "royalties" in an occult sense. For if he intended, as Dr. Menard supposes, a mere commonplace eulogium on a reigning monarch or monarchs--whether Ammon, or Valens and his brother--to what purpose should he set out by declaring his writings to be "truly occult and containing a hidden sense"? All that is said in the fragment concerning kingship is perfectly applicable to the mystic Osiris, the nature of whose royalty has been elsewhere explained. Osiris is the reflection and counterpart in Man, of the supreme Lord of the Universe, the ideal type of humanity; hence the soul, or essential ego, presenting itself for judgment in the spiritual world, is in the Egyptian Ritual of the Dead, described as "an Osiris." It is to this Osiris, or king within us, our higher Reason, the true Word of God, that we owe perpetual reverence, service, and faithful allegiance.

A.K.]

[p. 114]

 

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 115] [p. 116]

  

Fragments.

[p. 117] [p. 118]

[p. 119]

  

FRAGMENTS OF THE BOOK OF HERMES TO HIS SON TATIOS.

  

PART I.

Trismegistos.

IT is for the love of men and for the veneration of God, O my son, that I begin to write this. For there is no other true religion than to meditate on the universe and give thanks to the

[Creator;

[p. 120]

[paragraph continues] Creator; and these things I shall not cease to do.

Tatios.

O father, if nothing here below be real, how can one wisely employ one's life?

Trismegistos.

Be religious, my son; religion is lofty philosophy; without philosophy there is no lofty religion. He who instructs himself concerning the universe, its law, its principle, and its end, gives thanks for all things to the Creator as to a gracious father, a good protector, a faithful teacher. This is religion, and by means of it we know where truth is and what it is. Knowledge increases religion. For when once the soul, imprisoned within the body, has lifted herself to the perception of the real Good and of Truth, she cannot again fall back. The might of Love, and the oblivion of all evil things, forbid the soul who knows her Maker to separate herself from the Good. Herein, my son, is the aim of religion; if thou canst attain thereunto, thy life will be pure, thy death happy; thy soul will know whither she ought to direct her flight. Herein is the only way which leads to Truth, which, indeed, our ancestors trod, and by which they arrived at the attainment of the Good. This way is beautiful and even; nevertheless, it is difficult for the soul to walk therein so long as she is immured within the prison of the body. For, first, she must contend against herself, and having accomplished a division of herself,

[she

[p. 121]

she must submit to that part of herself which is first in dignity. For the one struggles against the two, that would fain rise, but these would drag it downwards. [*1] Nor is victory the same to both sides; for the one tends towards the Good, and the two towards Evil; the one would be free, the two cling to servitude. If the two be overcome, there remains a bulwark of defence for them and for their master; but if the one be the weaker, it is drawn away by the two, and punished in this life here below. It is this one, my son, which ought to be thy guide. See that thou anoint thyself with oil for the struggle, maintain the fight for life, and remain victorious.

And now, my son, I am about to sum up our principles; thou wilt understand my words by remembering that which thou hast learnt.

All beings are endowed with motion; non-being alone is motionless. All bodies transform themselves some only decompose. All creatures are not mortal nor are all immortal. That which is dissoluble is corruptible; that which is permanent is immutable; that which is immutable is eternal; that which is continually generated is continually corrupted, but that which is born but once is not corrupted and is not changed into any other thing. First God, then the Universe, and thirdly Man; the Universe for Man, and Man for God. The emotional part of the Soul is mortal; her rational part is immortal; all substance is immortal, all substance is subjected to change. All being is dual; no being is

[permanent.

[p. 122]

permanent. All things are not animated by soul, but all that is being is animated by soul. All that is passive is sentient; all that is sentient is transient. Everything that suffers and enjoys is a mortal creature; all that enjoys and suffers not is a being immortal. Not every body is subject to disease, but every body so subject is destructible. In God is Intelligence; in Man is Reason. Reason is in Intelligence, Intelligence is intransient. There is nothing real in the corporeal; nothing false in the incorporeal. Everything that is born changes, but not everything born corrupts. There is nothing perfect upon earth, nor anything evil in heaven. God is perfect; man is evil. The good comes by will; evil against will. The Gods chose the good as good. Time is divine; law is human. Evil is the pabulum of the world; Time is the destruction of man. All things in heaven are immutable; nothing is immutable on earth. In heaven, then, is no servitude; on earth there is no freedom. Nothing in heaven is unknown; on earth nothing is known. There is nothing in common between celestial things and things terrestrial. All is irreproachable in heaven; on earth nothing is without reproach. The immortal knows no mortality; nor does the mortal know immortality. That which is sown does not always come up; but that which comes up has always been sown. Corruptible bodies have two periods of existence: from conception to birth, and from birth to death; but the eternal entity has one period only from the moment of being. Dissoluble bodies increase and diminish. Dissoluble matter divides itself according to two contrary terms--destruction and birth; immortal substance divides itself either into itself or into its similars. The birth of man is a destruction; the destruction of man is an

[element

[p. 123]

element of birth. That which ends begins; that which begins ends. Among beings, some are in bodies, some in forms, some in energies. The body is in forms; form and energy are in bodies. The immortal receives nothing from the mortal; but the mortal receives from the immortal. The mortal enters not into an immortal form; but the immortal enters into a mortal body. Energies tend not upward, but downward. That which is on earth profits not that which is in heaven; but all that is in heaven profits that which is on earth. Heaven contains immortal entities; earth contains perishable bodies. Earth is irrational; heaven is reasonable. Celestial things are under the power of heaven; terrestrial things are upon earth. Heaven is the primordial element. Divine providence is order; necessity is the instrument with which providence works. Fortuity is the vehicle of disorder, the false image of energy, a delusive seeming. What is God but immutable Good, or man but continual evil?

In remembering these principles, thou wilt easily recollect the things I have explained to thee more at length, and which are therein resumed. But avoid speaking of them to the multitude; not that I desire to prohibit the multitude from knowing these things, but that I would not have thee exposed to the mockeries of the vulgar. Like attracts like; but between dissimilars there is no fellowship. These discourses ought to have but a small number of auditors, else before long they will have none at all. There is, moreover, a special peril attaching to them, for by means of them the wicked may be instigated to do worse. Keep thyself, therefore, from the crowd, which cannot understand the virtue of these discourses.

[Tatios.

[p. 124]

Tatios.

What meanest thou, my father?

Trismegistos.

Hearken, my son. The human race is drawn to-wards evil. Evil is its nature, and pleases it. If men should learn that the world is created, that all is done according to providence and necessity, and that by necessity and destiny all things are governed, they would readily begin to despise all things because they are created; to attribute vice to destiny, and to give the rein to all manner of iniquity. Therefore, abstain from the crowd, so that by means of ignorance the vulgar may be kept within bounds, even through fear of the unknown.

 

Footnotes

^121:1 With Plato, says Dr. Menard, Trismegistos here opposes Intelligence, the first part of the Soul, to the two other parts, Passion and Desire.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART II.

Tatios.

THOU hast well explained to me these things, my father, but instruct me yet again concerning this. Thou hast told me that know-ledge and art are activities of the reason; and now thou sayest that brute animals are so called because they have no reason. Whence it must necessarily follow that they have neither knowledge nor art.

[Trismegistos.

[p. 125]

Trismegistos.

It necessarily so follows, my son.

Tatios.

How then is it, father, that we behold certain animals making use of scientific and constructive knowledge; as, for instance, the ants who store up provisions for the winter, the birds who devise nests, the cattle who know their stables and return thither?

Trismegistos.

It is neither science nor art that directs them, my son, but nature. Science and art are acquired, but these creatures have acquired nothing. That which is naturally performed is the product of the universal activity; science and art belong only to those who have acquired them. Functions which are the common heritage are natural functions. Thus, all men can make use of their eyes, but not all are musicians, archers, hunters, and so forth. Some only among the many learn a science or an art, and exercise it. If in like manner certain ants only did what other ants do not, then thou mightest say with reason that they possess the science or the art of storing provisions. But all act in the same way under the impulsion of Nature and without deliberate intent; whence it is evident that neither science nor art directs them.

Activities, O Tatios, are incorporeal, and are exercised in the body and by the body. Insomuch as they are incorporeal, thou mayest indeed call them immortal;

[insomuch

[p. 126]

insomuch as they cannot be exercised but by means of a body, I say that they are always in a body. That of which the end and cause are determined by providence and necessity cannot remain inactive. That which is shall still be, therein is its body and its life. For which reason there will always be bodies; wherefore the creation of bodies is an eternal function. For terrestrial bodies are corruptible; nevertheless, bodies are necessary as abodes and as instruments for the energies. Now, the energies are immortal, and that which is immortal is always active. The creation of bodies is, then, a function, and an eternal function.

The energies or faculties of the soul are not all at once manifest; certain of them are manifest from the time of the birth of man, in the non-rational part of his soul; and as the reasonable part develops itself with age, the loftier faculties also lend their assistance. The faculties are attached to bodies. They descend from divine forms into mortal forms, and by them bodies are

created. Each of the faculties exercises a function either of the body or of the soul, but they subsist in the soul independently of the body. For the energies are eternal, but the soul is not always imprisoned in a mortal body. She can live without it, yet the faculties cannot manifest themselves unless in a body. This, my son, is an arcane discourse. The body cannot remain without the soul, but being can.

Tatios.

What meanest thou, my father?

Trismegistos.

Understand me, O Tatios. When the soul is separated

[rated

[p. 127]

from the body, the body indeed remains, but it is undermined by interior dissolution, and ends by disintegrating. Such an effect cannot be produced without an active cause; therefore, there remains some energy in the body after the withdrawal of the soul. Between an immortal entity and a mortal entity there is this difference: that the first is formed of simple substance, but not so the second. One is active, the other passive. All active being dominates, all passive being obeys; one is free, and governs; the other is in servitude, and subject to impulsion.

Now, the energies are not only in animate bodies, but in inanimate, such as wood, stone, and other like things. By means of the energies these things increase, fructify, ripen, decompose, dissolve, putrefy, disintegrate, and undergo all those changes of which inanimate bodies are susceptible. For energy is that which produces change, or becoming. And becoming is multiple, or rather universal. Never will anything capable of birth be wanting to the universe, because beings are continually brought forth by it and continually destroyed. All energy is then indestructible, no matter of what nature or in what body it is manifest. But among the energies, some are exerted in divine entities, some in mortal entities; some are universal, others special; some act upon species, others on individuals pertaining to these. Divine energies are exerted in eternal entities, and are perfect as these. Partial energies act by means of living beings; special energies in everything which exists. Whence it results, my son, that the whole universe is full of energies. For since energies necessarily manifest in bodies, there are many bodies in the universe. Nevertheless, the energies are more numerous

[than

[p. 128]

than the bodies, for often there exist one, two, three energies in a body, without counting those which are universally distributed. I call those universal energies which are inseparable from bodies and which manifest themselves by sensations and movements, and without which no body could exist. Far otherwise are those special energies which manifest themselves in human minds by art, science, and labour. The sensations accompany the energies, or rather are the consequence of these last.

Understand, O my son, the difference there is between the energies and the sensations. Energy comes from above; sensation is of the body, and from the body has its being. It is the seat of the energy, which manifests by means of it, and from which it obtains, as it were, a vehicle. For this reason I say that sensations are corporeal and mortal; their existence is bound up with that of the body, they are born therewith, and therewith they die. Immortal energies have not sensation, precisely because of the nature of their essence; for there can be no other sensation than that of some good or some evil which happens to a body or which departs therefrom, and immortal entities are not subject to these accidents.

Tatios.

Sensation, then, is experienced by all bodies?

Trismegistos.

Yes, my son, and in all bodies the energies act.

Tatios.

Even in inanimate bodies, my father?

[Trismegistos.

[p. 129]

Trismegistos.

Even in inanimate bodies. Sensations are of different kinds; those of reasonable beings are accompanied by reason; those of beings without reason are purely corporeal; those of inanimate beings are passive, and consist only in growth and decay. Starting from one principle and arriving at one end, passion and sensation are alike the product of the energies. In animate beings, there are two other energies which accompany the passions and the sensations--to wit, joy and sorrow. Without these, the animated being, and, above all, the reasonable being, would feel nothing; they may then be considered as modes of the affections in reasonable beings, or indeed in all living beings. They are activities manifested by the sensations, corporeal movements produced by the irrational parts of the soul. Joy and sorrow are alike evil; for joy--that is, the sensation accompanied by pleasure--draws after it great evils; sorrow, likewise, involves penalties and suffering, yet more severe. Both joy and sorrow, then, are evil.

Tatios.

Is sensation the same thing in the soul and in the body, my father?

Trismegistos.

What meanest thou, my child, by the sensation of the soul?

Tatios.

The soul is truly incorporeal. But sensation is as a body, my father, for it exists in a body.

 [Trismegistos.

[p. 130]

Trismegistos.

If we place it in the body, my son, we indeed assimilate it either to the soul or to the energies, which, although in the body, are incorporeal. But sensation is neither an energy nor a soul, nor anything distinct from the body; it is not, therefore, incorporeal. If it be not incorporeal, it must necessarily be corporeal, for there is nothing which is neither corporeal nor incorporeal.

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART III.

THE Lord, the Creator of immortal forms, O Tatios, after having accomplished His work, made nothing further, nor does He now make anything. Once consigned to themselves and united to one another, these eternal forms move without having need of anything; or if, indeed, they are necessary one to another, they have at least no need of any extraneous impulsion, since they are immortal. Such ought, indeed, to be the nature of the creations of the supreme God. But our (immediate) maker has a body; he has brought us forth, and unceasingly he brings forth, and will bring forth dissoluble and mortal bodies, for he ought not to imitate his own Creator, and, moreover, he cannot. For the first has evolved His

[creations

[p. 131]

creations from His own essence, primordial and incorporeal; the second has formed us of that which is corporeal and engendered. Whence it follows naturally, that heavenly forms born of incorporeal essence are imperishable, while our bodies, being constituted of corporeal matter, are consequently weak in themselves, and need extraneous assistance.

For how, indeed, could the combination which composes our bodies be sustained, if it were not continually fed and supported by elements of the same nature? The earth, the water, the fire, and the air flow into us and renew our covering. We are so weak that we cannot even endure a single day of movement. Thou knowest well, my son, that without the repose of the night our bodies would not resist the day's toil. For this reason our good creator, in his universal providence, has ensured the continual life of his creatures by devising sleep, the restorer of movement, and by assigning to repose an equal or even longer time (than to labour). Meditate, my son, on this virtue of sleep, opposed to that of the soul, and not less energetic. For if the function of the soul be movement, bodies cannot live without slumber, which loosens and unbinds the yoke of the organism, and by its restoring action dispenses to it the matter which it needs, giving water to the blood, earth to the bones, air to the nerves and vessels, fire to the eyes. And hence the great pleasure which the body finds in sleep.

[A great

[NOTE.--The opening passage of this fragmentary discourse will not lead the reader into error if he bears in mind the pantheistic character of all Hermetic teaching. The influx of the divine substance into the universe is perpetual, but the channels or forms through which [p. 132] it flows are immutable, unchangeable, and self-sustaining. The method of nature is determined from the beginning, and is incapable of variation or of intermittance. But the descent of soul into generation is a continual process, and will not cease until the creative period or "Day of Manifestation" closes. There has never been any suspension of the divine energies since the commencement of their primordial operation. The outflow of Being into Existence is unending, otherwise natural generation would cease, and evolution be arrested. The secondary creator mentioned in this fragment is the Demiourgos, the  of the material universe.

A.K.]

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

PART IV.

GREAT and divine power is established, O my son, in the midst of the universe, beholding all that is done by men upon earth. In the divine order all is governed by providential Necessity; among men the same function belongs to Justice. The first of these governments includes celestial things, for the Gods neither will, nor can, transgress; not being subject to error, which is the source of sin, they are sinless. The second, Justice, is charged to correct, upon earth, the evil which happens among men. The human race, being mortal, and formed of corruptible matter, is subject to fall away when the sight of divine things does not sustain it (in virtue). Herein Justice exerts its action. By means of the energies which he draws from Nature, man is subject to Destiny; by the errors of his life, to Justice.

[Here,

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 133]

  

PART V.

HERE, then, is that which can be said of the three tenses. They are not by themselves, and they are not bound together; again, they are bound together and are by themselves. Can the present be supposed without the existence of the past? One cannot exist without another, for the present is generated by the past, and from the present the future comes forth. If we wish to go to the root of the matter, we must reason thus:--The past tense is withdrawn into that which no longer is; the future is not so long as it has not become present; the present, in its turn, ceases to be itself the instant that it remains. Can that which does not endure for an instant and which has no fixed centre be called present when it cannot even be said to exist? Moreover, since the past is indistinguishable from the present, and the present from the future, they become one. There is among them identity, unity, continuity. Therefore time is continuous and divisible, even while it is one and identical.

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART VI.

O MY son, matter becomes; formerly it was, for matter is the vehicle of becoming. [*1] Becoming is the mode of activity of the uncreate and foreseeing God. Having been

[endowed

[p. 134]

endowed with the germ of becoming, matter is brought into birth, for the creative force fashions it according to the ideal forms. Matter not yet engendered, had no form; it becomes when it is put into operation.

 

Footnotes

^133:1 Dr. Menard observes that in Greek, the same word signifies [p. 134] to be born and to become. The idea here is that the material of the world is in its essence eternal, but that before creation or "becoming," it is in a passive and motionless condition. Thus it "was" before being "put into operation;" now, it "becomes," that is, it is mobile and progressive. Creation is thus the period of activity of God, who, according to Hermetic thought, has two modes--Activity, or existence, God evolved (Deus explicitus); and Passivity of Being--God involved (Deus implicitus). Both modes are perfect and complete, as are the waking and sleeping states of man. Fichte, the German philosopher, distinguished Being (Seyn) as One, which we know only through existence (Daseyn) as the Manifold. This view is thoroughly Hermetic. The "Ideal Forms," mentioned in the above fragment, are the archetypal or formative ideas of the Neo-Platonists; the eternal and subjective concepts of things subsisting in the Divine Mind prior to "creation" or "becoming."

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART VII.

TO speak of the Real with certainty, O Tatios, is an impossible thing to man, himself an imperfect creature, composed of imperfect parts, and constituted of an assemblage of foreign particles; nevertheless, as much as it is possible and permissible to me, I affirm that Reality is only in eternal beings, the forms of which also are real. Fire is but fire and no more; earth is nothing else than earth; air

[is

[p. 135]

is only air. Put our bodies are compounded of all these; we have in us fire, earth, water, and air, which yet are neither fire, nor earth, nor water, nor air, nor anything truly. If, then, from the beginning Reality is foreign to our constitution, how shall we behold Reality, or speak thereof, or even understand it, unless indeed by the Will of God? Mundane things, O Tatios, are not then themselves real, but the simulacra of Reality, and not all are even such; some are but illusion and error, O Tatios, fantastic appearances, mere phantoms. When such an appearance receives an influx from above, then, indeed, it becomes a similitude of the Real, but without this superior influence it remains an illusion. In the same way a portrait is a painted image of a body, but not the body it represents. It appears to have eyes, but sees nothing; ears, but hears nothing; and so on of the rest of it. It is an image which deceives the sight; it appears a reality, and is but a shadow. Those who behold not the False behold the True; if, then, we understand and see everything as it truly is, we see the Real; but if we see that which is not, we can neither understand nor know anything of the Real.

Tatios.

There is, then, my father, a Real even upon earth?

Trismegistos.

Reality is not upon the earth, my son, and it cannot be thereon, but it can be comprehended by a few men to whom God vouchsafes the divine vision. Nothing on earth is real, there are only appearances and opinions on

[earth;

[p. 136]

earth; yet all is real for intelligence and reason. Wherefore to think and to speak the truth this indeed may be called real.

Tatios.

What sayest thou? It is right to think and speak that which truly is, and yet nothing is true upon earth?

Trismegistos.

This certainly is true, that we know nothing of Truth. How should it be otherwise, my son? Truth is the supreme virtue, the sovereign Good which is not obscured by matter, nor circumscribed by the body; the naked Good, evident, unalterable, august, immutable. Now, the things which are here below thou seest, my son, are incompatible with the Good; they are perishable, changing, various, passing from form to form. That which is not even identical with itself, how can it be real? All that transforms itself is illusive, not only in itself, but by the appearances which it presents to us one after another.

Tatios.

Is not even man real, my father?

Trismegistos.

He is not real, my son, as man. The real consists solely in itself, and remains what it is. Man is composed of manifold elements, and does not continue identical

[with

[p. 137]

with himself. So long as he inhabits a body he passes from one age to another, and from one form to another. Often, after but a short interval of time, parents no longer are able to recognize their children, nor children their parents. That which changes in such wise as to be no longer recognizable as itself, can it be a real thing, Tatios? Should we not rather think this succession of diverse appearances an illusion? Look only on the eternal and the Good as the Real. Man is transient, therefore he is not real; he is but appearance, and appearance is the supreme illusion.

Tatios.

Then the celestial bodies themselves are not real, my father, since they also vary.

Trismegistos.

That which is subject to birth and to change is not real, but the works of the great Father may receive from Him a real substance. Nevertheless, there is in them a certain falsity, seeing that they too are variable, for nothing is real save that which is identical with itself.

Tatios.

What, then, may we call indeed real, my father?

Trismegistos.

The sun, the only one of all creatures that changes not, and which remains the same. For this reason is confided to him alone the ordinance of the universe; he

[is

[p. 138]

is the chief and the maker of everything; I venerate him and prostrate myself before his truth, and, after the first Unity, I recognize in him the creator.

Tatios.

And what, then, is the primordial Reality, O my father?

Trismegistos.

He Who is One and alone, O Tatios; He Who is not made of matter, nor in any body, Who has neither colour nor form, Who changes not, nor is transmuted, but who always Is.

*           *           *           *

That which is illusion is perishable, my son. The providence of the Real has limited and will limit by dissolution all mundane things, for dissolution is the condition of all births; all that is brought forth dissolves in order to be again brought forth. It is necessary that out of dissolution life should come into existence, and that life in its turn should decay, in order that the generation of creatures should never cease. Behold, then, in this perpetual birth, the Creator before all! Creatures born of dissolution are but shadows, they become at one time this, at another that; for they cannot be the same, and how is it possible for that which is not identical with itself, to be a real thing? Such must then, my son, be called appearances, and man must be regarded as an appearance of Humanity; as, also, a child is an appearance of childhood, a young man of adolescence, an adult of manhood, an old man of

[senility.

[p. 139]

senility. For how shall it be said that a man is a man, a child a child, a youth a youth, a grown man a grown man, an old man an old man, since by incessant transformations they deceive us both as to what they were, and what they have become? Behold, then, in all these things, my son, only the illusive appearances of a superior Reality; and since, indeed, this is the case, I define Illusion as the expression of the Real.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART VIII.

TO understand God is difficult; to speak of God, impossible. For the corporeal cannot express the incorporeal; the imperfect cannot comprehend the perfect. How is the eternal to be associated with the transient? The first abides for ever, the other is fleeting; the first is the Real, the other is a reflected shadow. As much as weakness differs from strength, or smallness from greatness, so much the mortal differs from the divine. The distance which divides them one from the other obscures the vision of the beautiful. Bodies are visible to sight, and that which the eye beholds the tongue is able to express. But that which has not any body, nor appearance, nor form, nor matter, cannot be apprehended by sense.

[I understand,

[p. 140]

I understand, O Tatios, I understand that which it is impossible to define--that is God.

[The above fragments are from the "Physical Eclogues" and "Florilegium" of Stobaeus.]

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 141]

 

  

FRAGMENTS of the WRITINGS

  

of

  

HERMES to AMMON.

  

PART I.

THAT which rules the universe is Providence; that which contains the universe and limits it is Necessity; Destiny impels and enfolds all things by the compulsory force which belongs thereto. It is Destiny which is the cause of birth and of the dissolution of Life. The universe, then, first receives Providence, the first ordained. Providence extends to the skies, about which the Gods revolve, in perpetual and untiring motion. There is Destiny because there is Necessity. Providence foresees, Destiny determines, the position of the stars. Such is the universal law.

[All

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 142]

  

PART II.

ALL things are produced by Nature and Destiny, nor is any place void of Providence. Providence is the Free Will of the Supreme God; whence two spontaneous forces, Necessity and Destiny. Destiny is subject to Providence and to Necessity; and to Destiny are subject the stars. Therefore, no man can escape from Destiny, nor arm himself against the action of the stars. For they are the instruments of Destiny; by their means the will of Destiny is accomplished throughout all Nature and in human existence. [*1]

[The

Footnotes

^142:1 I commend the above fragments to the careful consideration of Hermetists. Many persons find it difficult to reconcile belief in the "ruling of the stars" with belief in free will. At first sight it appears unjust and arbitrary that certain lines of life--even vicious ones--should be indicated by the "rulers of nativities" as the only lines in which the "native" will prosper; and they ask incredulously whether it can be rationally supposed that the "accident" of the day and hour of birth, is, by Divine Providence, permitted to direct and dominate the whole career of an intelligent and responsible being. But this objection is superficial, and the result of incomplete knowledge. For the difficulties of astrological science, if viewed in the light of Karmic Predestination or Fate, not only disappear, but give place to the unfoldment of a most lucid and admirable system of responsible causation. There is but one hypothesis capable of solving the enigma of Fate, and that hypothesis is a doctrine common to all the greater schools of thought--Vedic, Buddhist, Kabbalistic, Hermetic, Platonic,--the hypothesis, to wit, of multiple existences, or the doctrine of the Metempsychosis. Destiny, in the view of these philosophies, is not arbitrary, but acquired. Every man makes his own Fate; and nothing is truer than the saying that "Character is Destiny." For that which in one existence is Will, becomes in the next Fate. By the hands of men themselves, then, are their natal lines cast, whether in pleasant and virtuous, or in painful and [p. 143] vicious paths. For in what manner soever an ego conducts itself in one existence, by that conduct, by that order of thought and habit it builds for itself its destiny in a future existence. And the ego is enchained by these pre-natal influences, and by them irresistibly compelled into a new nativity at the time of such conjunction of planets and signs as oblige it into certain courses, or incline it strongly thereto. Hence "Destiny," or Karma, is said by Hermes to "determine the position of the stars." And if the course so defined be evil, and the ruling such as to favour chiefly vicious propensities, the afflicted ego, even though assuredly reaping the just effects of its own demerit, is not left without a remedy. For the ego may oppose its will to the stellar ruling, and heroically adopt a course opposed to the direction of the natal influences. Thereby, indeed, the ego may bring itself under a curse for such period as those influences have power, for, as Hermes tells us, "no man can escape from Destiny, nor preserve himself from the action of the stars;" but at the same time, the will thus exerted will reverse the planetary affinities acquired, and give a new "set" to the current of the Karmic predestination, so that the ruling signs of the next nativity will be favourable to virtue and to a loftier state. But the "stars" and "stellar influences" which are thus the "instruments of Destiny" are immediately microcosmic, and only mediately macrocosmic. (For the full exposition and interpretation of this important subject, the reader is referred to "Astrology Theologized," now about to be republished in the present series of Occult Reprints, by ROBT. H. FRYAR, Bath.)

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

PART III.

THE soul is, then, an incorporeal essence, and even when she is in a body, she does not wholly lose her manner of being. Her essence is that of perpetual movement, the spontaneous movement of thought; yet is she not moved in any thing else, nor towards any thing else, nor for any thing else. For she is a primordial force, and that which is primal needs not that which is secondary. The expression "in any thing" is applicable to place, to time, to

[nature;

[p. 144]

nature; "towards any thing" is applicable to a harmony, to a form, to a figure; "for any thing" is applicable to the body, because time, place, nature, and form are related to the body. All these terms are conjoined by reciprocal bonds. The body requires place, for it is not possible to conceive of a body unless also of a place occupied by it; a body changes its nature, such change is not possible unless in time, and by means of movement in nature; nor can the component parts of a body be united unless by harmony of form. Space exists on account of corporeity, it contains the changes thereof and suffers it not to be annihilated in these changes. The body passes from one condition to another, but in quitting its first condition it ceases not to be body, it takes only another condition. It was body, it remains body, its state alone varies; wherefore, that which changes in corporeity is quality and mode of being. Place, time, and natural movement, themselves bodiless, have each their special property. The property of space is to contain; the property of time is interval and number; the property of nature is movement; the property of harmony is affinity; the property of body is change; the property of soul is thought.

[The

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 145]

  

PART IV.

THE soul is then an incorporeal essence; if she had a body she would be unable to preserve herself, for every body has need of breath and of life which consists in order. Wherever there is birth there is fluxion. To "become" presupposes magnitude, that is augmentation; augmentation involves diminution, which, in turn, brings about destruction. That which receives the form of life participates in being by means of the soul. In order to produce existence, it is necessary to exist; existence I define to be a reasonable becoming and participation in intelligent life. Life constitutes the creature, intelligence renders it reasonable, the body makes it mortal. The soul is then incorporeal, and possesses an immutable force. Can an intelligent creature exist without a living essence? Can he be rational if an intelligent essence does not maintain in him rational life? If intelligence does not manifest itself in all creatures, it is on account of the constitution of the body in regard to harmony. If heat dominates in the constitution thereof, the creature is volatile and ardent; if cold dominates, it is heavy and slow. Nature distributes the elements of the body according to a law of harmony. This harmonic combination has three forms:--the hot, the cold, and the temperate. Conjunction is established according to stellar influence. The soul appropriates the body destined to her, and causes it to live by the operation of nature. Nature assimilates the harmony of bodies to the disposition of the stars, and the combination of their elements to the harmony of the stars; so that there may be reciprocal sympathy. For the purpose of stellar harmony is to engender sympathies in agreement with Destiny.

[The

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

PART V.

THE soul is then, O Ammon, an essence having its end in itself, receiving from the beginning the life prepared for her, and attracting to herself, as a material, a certain reason endowed with passion and desire. Passion is a matter; if it enters into accord with the intelligent part of the soul, it becomes courage, and does not yield to fear. Desire also is a matter; in association with the rational part of the soul, it becomes aspiration and yields not to voluptuousness. For reason enlightens the blindness of desire. When the faculties of the soul are thus co-ordinated under the supremacy of reason, they produce justice. The government of the faculties of the soul belongs to the Intellectual Principle which subsists in itself in its provident reason, having for authority its own reason. It governs all like a magistrate; its provident reason serves it as counsellor. The reason of this Principle is the cognizance of the reasons which furnish the image of rationality to the irrational; an image relatively obscure when compared with reason, but rational when compared to the irrational, as an echo compared to a voice, or the light of the moon compared to that of the sun. Passion and desire are ordained according to a certain reason; they mutually attract each other, and establish between them a circulatory current of thought. Every soul is immortal, and always in movement. For we have seen that movements proceed either from energies or from bodies. We have seen, also, that the soul, being incorporeal, proceeds not from any matter, but from an essence incorporeal

[poreal

[p. 147]

itself. Everything that is born is necessarily produced by some other thing. Two movements necessarily accompany everything the generation of which involves decay; that of the soul which moves it, and that of the body which augments, diminishes, and decomposes it, in decomposing itself. It is thus that I define the movement of perishable bodies. But the soul is perpetually in motion, without cessation she moves and produces movement. Thus every soul is immortal and always in motion, moved by her own activity. There are three species in souls: divine, human, and irrational. The divine soul abides in a divine form, it is therein that she has her energy; therein she moves and acts. When this soul separates herself from mortal creatures, she forsakes her irrational parts and enters into the divine form; and, as she is always in motion, she is borne along in the universal movement. The human soul has also something divine, but she is bound to irrational elements desire and passion; these elements are undying, because they are energies; but they are energies of mortal bodies, therefore they are removed from the divine part of the soul, which inhabits the divine form. When this divine part enters into a mortal body and meets therein these irrational elements, she becomes, by means of their presence, a human soul. The soul of animals is composed of passion and desire, therefore the animals are called brutes, because their soul is deprived of reason. The fourth species in soul, that possessed by inanimate creatures, is placed outside the bodies actuated. This soul moves in the divine form, and impels it passively. [*1]

[The

Footnotes

^147:1 The above fragment appears to me extremely obscure and unsatisfactory. I include it in the series of Hermetic writings because it is quoted as such by Stobaeus, but it certainly needs much interpretation and explanation, if it be indeed genuine.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

  

PART VI.

THE soul is, then, an eternal and intelligent essence; having for thought her own reason. She enters into association with the concept of harmony. Separated from the physical body, she endures in herself, she is independent in the Ideal world. She controls her reason, and confers on the entity emerging into life a movement analogous to her own thought, that is being; for the property of the soul is to assimilate other things to her own character. There are two kinds of vital movement: the one conform-able to the essence of the soul, the other to the nature of the body. The first is general, the second particular; the first is independent, the second is subject to necessity. For everything moved is subject to the necessary law of the mover. But the motor movement is united by affinity to the intelligent principle. It behoves the soul to be incorporeal, and to be essentially different from the physical body, for if she had a body she would have neither reason nor thought. All bodies are unintelligent, but in receiving the spirit they become animated and breathe. The breath belongs to the body, but reason contemplates the beauty of the essential. The sensible spirit discerns appearances. It is distributed into organic sensations; mental perception is a part of it, as also is the acoustic, olfactive, gustative, and tactile sense. This spirit, attracted by thought, discerns sensations, otherwise it creates only phantoms, for it belongs to the body, and receives all things. The reason of the essential is the judgment. To the reason belongs the cognizance of lofty things; but to the sensible spirit, opinion. This last receives its energy from the external world; but the former from within itself.

[The foregoing fragments are from the "Physical Eclogues" of Stobaeus.]

[There

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 149]

  

VARIOUS HERMETIC FRAGMENTS.

  

PART I.

THERE are, then, essential spirit, reason, intelligence, perception. Opinion and sensation tend towards perception, reason towards the essential spirit; thought advances independently. Thought is associated with perception. Conjoined, all these become a single form, which is that of the soul. Opinion and sensation tend also towards perfection, but they do not continue in the same condition, they exhibit excess, failure, or variation. Separated from perception, they deteriorate; approximating to and following it, they participate in the intellectual reason through the sciences. We have the power of choice; it depends on us to choose either the best or the worst by our will. The choice of evil approximates us to the corporeal nature, and subjects us

[to

[p. 150]

to Destiny. The intellectual spirit which is in us, being free, the intellectual reason is free also, always identical with itself, and independent of Destiny. Therefore, in following this higher and intelligent reason, ordained by the supreme God, the spirit is superior to the order of Nature over creatures; but the soul which attaches herself to these creatures participates in their destiny, though foreign to their nature. [*1]

Footnotes

^150:1 In the above fragment the power of the human will is clearly asserted as the only instrument by which Destiny may be controlled. By continued and ardent striving towards the purely spiritual and intelligent, the soul frees herself from the power of Destiny (Karma), and at length passes into beatitude. She transcends natural order, and enters into the divine. This is Saintship. Inversely, by attaching herself to sensible things, and by suffering herself to be borne away by passion and desire towards illusory existence, she becomes caught on the ever-rolling wheel of Destiny, and made subject to the order of Nature, which is that of Metamorphosis. Whereas her true duty and happiness are to aspire continually upwards, addressing herself by means of purified passion and desire towards the One, and away from the Manifold.

A.K.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART II.

THERE is, then, a state of Being superior to all beings, and to all that actually is. Being is that by which universal essentiality is common to all intelligible entities actually existing. . . Nature is sensible essentiality, including in itself all sensible objects. Midway are the intellectual and sensible gods. The concepts of intelligence are related to the intellectual gods, the concepts of opinion to the sensible gods, which are reflexions of the intelligences; as, for instance, the sun is the image of the

[creative

[p. 151]

creative and celestial God. For as God has created the universe, so the sun creates animals, produces plants, and governs fluid things.

[These fragments are from Stobaeus' Eclogues, "Physical and Moral."]

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART III.

WHEREFORE the incorporeal vision comes forth from the body to contemplate beauty, lifting itself up and adoring, not the form, nor the body, nor the appearance, but that which, behind all, is calm, tranquil, substantial, immutable; that which is all, alone and one, that which is by itself and in itself, similar to itself, and without variation.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART IV.

IF thou understandest this one and only Good, thou wilt find nothing impossible, for all virtue is therein. Think not that this Good is in anyone, nor that it is outside of anyone. It is without limit, being the limit of all. Nothing contains it, it contains all in itself. For what distinction is there between the corporeal and the incorporeal, the create and the uncreate; that which is subject to necessity and that which is free; between terrestrial things and things celestial, corruptible things and things eternal?

[nal?

[p. 152]

[paragraph continues] Is it not that these subsist freely, and that those are subject to the bondage of necessity? That which is below is imperfect and perishable.

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART V.

BENEATH nature and the ideal world is placed the pyramid. Its corner stone, placed on its summit, is the Creative Word of the universal Lord, which, after Him, is the first Power, uncreate, infinite, begotten of Him and antecedent to all His creations. He is the offspring of the Most Perfect, the fruitful and true Son. The nature of this intelligent Word is a generating and productive nature. Call it as thou wilt--generation, or nature, or character. But think this only, that he is perfect in the Perfect, and issued from the Perfect, that all his works are perfectly good, and that he is the source of creation and of life. Since such is his nature, he is well named.

.         .         .         .         .

But for the providence of the Lord of the universe Who causes me to reveal these words, you would not have so great a desire to seek out such matters. Now, therefore, hear the end of this discourse. This Spirit of whom I have so often spoken is necessary to all; for he maintains all, he gives life to all, he nourishes all. He outflows from the holy Source, and without ceasing comes to the aid of spirits and to all living creatures.

[The foregoing are from Cyril.]

["Thus

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 153]

  

PART VI.

"THUS the Ideal Light was before the Ideal Light, and the luminous Intelligence of Intelligence was always, and its unity was nothing else than the Spirit enveloping the universe. Out of Whom is neither God, nor Angels, nor any other essentials, for He is the Lord of all things and the power and the light; and all depends on Him and is in Him. His perfect Word, generative and creative, descending into generative Nature and into generating water, rendered the water fruitful."

Having thus spoken, he rose and said:--"I adjure thee, Heaven, holy work of the great God; I adjure thee, Voice of the Father, uttered in the beginning when the universal world was framed; I adjure thee by the Word, only Son of the Father Who upholds all things; be favorable, be favorable!"

[The above fragment is cited by Suidas.]

 

      
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART VII.

SEVEN Planets revolve in the ways of Olympos, and by them Eternity is measured:--The Moon which illumines the night, the gloomy Kronos, the gentle Sun, the Paphian Goddess, protectress of marriage, the valiant Ares, the fruitful Hermes, and Zeus the principle of birth and the fount of nature. These, likewise, have received the human race in heritage; and there are, within us, the Moon,

[Zeus,

[p. 154]

[paragraph continues] Zeus, Ares, Aphrodite, Kronos, Phoebus, Hermes. Moreover, we draw from the etherial fluid our tears, our laughter, our wrath, our speech, our generation, our sleep, our desire. Tears are of Kronos, generation of Zeus, speech of Hermes, valour of Ares, sleep of Artemis, desire of Kytheraea (Aphrodite), laughter of Apollo, for he it is who pours joy upon human thought and on the infinite world.

[This fragment, cited by Stobaeus, is in verse, and Heeren supposes it to be part of an Orphic hymn. It is thoroughly Hermetic, and its recognition of Man as the epitome and reflex of the universe is entirely in accord also with Kabbalistic teaching.--A.K.]

     
The Virgin of the World, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

PART VIII.

HERMES affirms that those who know God, are preserved from assaults of the evil one, and are not even subject to Destiny. The knowledge of God is religion.

[From Lactantius: "Divine Institutions."]

[Published under the auspices of the Hermetic Society.]

 

    


===== BOOK: vp.txt =====


    
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE

  

VISHNU PURANA,

  

A SYSTEM

  

OF

  

HINDU MYTHOLOGY AND TRADITION,

  

TRANSLATED

  

FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSCRIT,

  

AND

  

ILLUSTRATED BY NOTES

  

DERIVED CHIEFLY FROM OTHER PURANAS,

  

BY

  

H. H. WILSON, M. A. F.RS'.

  

MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, AND OF THE ASIATIC SOCIETIES OF BENGAL AND PARIS; OF THE IMPERIAL SOCIETY OF NATURALISTS, MOSCOW; OF THE ROYAL ACADEMIES OF BERLIN AND MUNICH; PHIL. DR. IN THE UNIVERSITY OF BRESLAU AND BODEN PROFESSOR OF SANSCRIT IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD;
 &c. &c. &c.

  

LONDON,

  

PUBLISHED BY JOHN MURRAY,

  

ALBEMARLE STREET.

  

[1840]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, February 2006, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to view
 TITLE PAGE
 (click icon to view)

OXFORD, PRINTED BY T. COMBE, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY.

Click to view
 VERSO
 (click icon to view)

TO

THE CHANCELLOR, MASTERS, AND SCHOLARS

OF

THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,

THIS WORK

IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY

H. H. WILSON,

IN TESTIMONY OF HIS VENERATION FOR

THE UNIVERSITY,

AND IN GRATEFUL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE DISTINCTION

CONFERRED UPON HIM

BY HIS ADMISSION AS A MEMBER,

AND HIS ELECTION

TO THE

BODEN PROFESSORSHIP OF THE SANSCRIT LANGUAGE.

  OXFORD,
 Feb. 10, 1840.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i]

Due to the length of the preface, it has been divided into several files, for which I have supplied section headings.--JBH

  

PREFACE.

Introduction

THE literature of the Hindus has now been cultivated for many years with singular diligence, and in many of its branches with eminent success. There are some departments, however, which are yet but partially and imperfectly investigated; and we are far from being in possession of that knowledge which the authentic writings of the Hindus alone can give us of their religion, mythology, and historical traditions.

From the materials to which we have hitherto had access, it seems probable that there have been three principal forms in which the religion of the Hindus has existed, at as many different periods. The duration of those periods, the circumstances of their succession, and the precise state of the national faith at each season, it is not possible to trace with any approach to accuracy. The premises have been too imperfectly determined to authorize other than conclusions of a general and somewhat vague description, and those remain to be hereafter confirmed or corrected by more extensive and satisfactory research.

The earliest form under which the Hindu religion appears is that taught in the Vedas. The style of the language, and the purport of the composition of those works, as far as we are acquainted with them, indicate a date long anterior to that of any other class of Sanscrit writings. It is yet, however, scarcely safe to advance an opinion of the precise belief or philosophy which they inculcate. To enable us to judge of their tendency, we have only a general sketch of their arrangement and contents, with a few extracts, by Mr. Colebrooke, in the Asiatic Researches [*1]; a few incidental observations by Mr. Ellis, in the same miscellany [*2]; and a translation of the first book of the Sanhita, or collection of the prayers of the Rig-veda, by Dr. Rosen [*3]; and some of the Upanishads,

[p. ii]

or speculative treatises, attached to, rather than part of, the Vedas, by Rammohun Roy [*4]. Of the religion taught in the Vedas, Mr. Colebrooke's opinion will probably be received as that which is best entitled to deference, as certainly no Sanscrit scholar has been equally conversant with the original works. "The real doctrine of the Indian scripture is the unity of the Deity, in whom the universe is comprehended; and the seeming polytheism which it exhibits, offers the elements and the stars and planets as gods. The three principal manifestations of the divinity, with other personified attributes and energies, and most of the other gods of Hindu mythology, are indeed mentioned, or at least indicated, in the Veda. But the worship of deified heroes is no part of the system; nor are the incarnations of deities suggested in any portion of the text which I have yet seen, though such are sometimes hinted at by the commentators [*5]." Some of these statements may perhaps require modification; for without a careful examination of all the prayers of the Vedas, it would be hazardous to assert that they contain no indication whatever of hero-worship; and certainly they do appear to allude occasionally to the Avataras, or incarnations, of Vishnu. Still, however, it is true that the prevailing character of the ritual of the Vedas is the worship of the personified elements; of Agni, or fire; Indra, the firmament; Vayu, the air; Varuna, the water; of Aditya, the sun; Soma, the moon; and other elementary and planetary personages. It is also true that the worship of the Vedas is for the most part domestic worship, consisting of prayers and oblations offered--in their own houses, not in temples--by individuals for individual good, and addressed to unreal presences, not to visible types. In a word, the religion of the Vedas was not idolatry.

It is not possible to conjecture when this more simple and primitive form of adoration was succeeded by the worship of images and types, representing Brahma, Vishnu, S'iva, and other imaginary beings, constituting a mythological pantheon of most ample extent; or when Rama

[p. iii]

and Krishna, who appear to have been originally real and historical characters, were elevated to the dignity of divinities. Image-worship is alluded to by Manu in several passages [*6], but with an intimation that those Brahmans who subsist by ministering in temples are an inferior and degraded class. The story of the Ramayana and Mahabharata turns wholly upon the doctrine of incarnations, all the chief dramatis personae of the poems being impersonations of gods and demigods and celestial spirits. The ritual appears to be that of the Vedas, and it may be doubted if any allusion to image-worship occurs; but the doctrine of propitiation by penance and praise prevails throughout, and Vishnu and S'iva are the especial objects of panegyric and invocation. In these two works, then, we trace unequivocal indications of a departure from the elemental worship of the Vedas, and the origin or elaboration of legends, which form the great body of the mythological religion of the Hindus. How far they only improved upon the cosmogony and chronology of their predecessors, or in what degree the traditions of families and dynasties may originate with them, are questions that can only be determined when the Vedas and the two works in question shall have been more thoroughly examined.

The different works known by the name of Puranas are evidently derived from the same religious system as the Ramayana and Mahabharata, or from the mytho-heroic stage of Hindu belief. They present, however, peculiarities which designate their belonging to a later period, and to an important modification in the progress of opinion. They repeat the theoretical cosmogony of the two great poems; they expand and systematize the chronological computations; and they give a more definite and connected representation of the mythological fictions, and the historical traditions. But besides these and other particulars, which may be derivable from an old, if not from a primitive era, they offer characteristic peculiarities of a more modern description, in the paramount importance which they assign to individual divinities, in the variety and purport of the rites and observances addressed to them, and in the invention of new legends illustrative of the power and graciousness of

[p. iv]

those deities, and of the efficacy of implicit devotion to them. S'iva and Vishnu, under one or other form, are almost the sole objects that claim the homage of the Hindus in the Puranas; departing from the domestic and elemental ritual of the Vedas, and exhibiting a sectarial fervour and exclusiveness not traceable in the Ramayana, and only to a qualified extent in the Mahabharata. They are no longer authorities for Hindu belief as a whole: they are special guides for separate and sometimes conflicting branches of it, compiled for the evident purpose of promoting the preferential, or in some cases the sole, worship of Vishnu or of S'iva [*7].

That the Puranas always bore the character here given of them, may admit of reasonable doubt; that it correctly applies to them as they now are met with, the following pages will irrefragably substantiate. It is possible, however, that there may have been an earlier class of Puranas, of which those we now have are but the partial and adulterated representatives. The identity of the legends in many of them, and still more the identity of the words--for in several of them long passages are literally the same--is a sufficient proof that in all such cases they must be copied either from some other similar work, or from a common and prior original. It is not unusual also for a fact to be stated upon the authority of an 'old stanza,' which is cited accordingly; shewing the existence of an earlier source of information: and in very many instances legends are alluded to, not told; evincing acquaintance with their prior narration somewhere else. The name itself, Purana, which implies 'old,' indicates the object of the compilation to be the preservation of ancient traditions, a purpose in the present condition of the Puranas very imperfectly fulfilled. Whatever weight may be attached to these considerations, there is no disputing evidence to the like effect afforded by other and unquestionable authority. The description given by Mr. Colebrooke [*8] of the contents of a Purana is taken from Sanscrit writers. The Lexicon of Amara Sinha gives as a synonyme of Purana, Pancha-lakshanam, 'that which has five characteristic topics:' and there is no difference of opinion amongst the

[p. v]

scholiasts as to what these are. They are, as Mr. Colebrooke mentions, 1. Primary creation, or cosmogony; 2. Secondary creation, or the destruction and renovation of worlds, including chronology; 3. Genealogy of gods and patriarchs; 4. Reigns of the Manus, or periods called Manwantaras; and 5. History, or such particulars as have been preserved of the princes of the solar and lunar races, and of their descendants to modern times [*9]. Such, at any rate, were the constituent and characteristic portions of a Purana in the days of Amara Sinha, fifty-six years before the Christian era; and if the Puranas had undergone no change since his time, such we should expect to find them still. Do they conform to this description? Not exactly in any one instance: to some of them it is utterly inapplicable; to others it only partially applies. There is not one to which it belongs so entirely as to the Vishnu Purana, and it is one of the circumstances which gives to this work a more authentic character than most of its fellows can pretend to. Yet even in this instance we have a book upon the institutes of society and obsequial rites interposed between the Manwantaras and the genealogies of princes, and a life of Krishna separating the latter from an account of the end of the world, besides the insertion of various legends of a manifestly popular and sectarial character. No doubt many of the Puranas, as they now are, correspond with the view which Col. Vans Kennedy takes of their purport. "I cannot discover in them," he remarks, "any other object than that of religious instruction." The description of the earth and of the planetary system, and the lists of royal races which occur in them, he asserts to be "evidently extraneous, and not essential circumstances, as they are entirely omitted in some Puranas, and very concisely illustrated in others; while, on the contrary, in all the Puranas some or other of the leading principles, rites, and observances of the Hindu religion are fully dwelt upon, and illustrated either by suitable legends

[p. vi]

or by prescribing the ceremonies to be practised, and the prayers and invocations to be employed, in the worship of different deities [*10]," Now, however accurate this description may be of the Puranas as they are, it is clear that it does not apply to what they were when they were synonymously designated as Pancha-lakshanas, or 'treatises on five topics;' not one of which five is ever specified by text or comment to be "religious instruction." In the knowledge of Amara Sinha the lists of princes were not extraneous and unessential, and their being now so considered by a writer so well acquainted with the contents of the Puranas as Col. Vans Kennedy is a decisive proof that since the days of the lexicographer they have undergone some material alteration, and that we have not at present the same works in all respects that were current under the denomination of Puranas in the century prior to Christianity.

The inference deduced from the discrepancy between the actual form and the older definition of a Purana, unfavourable to the antiquity of the extant works generally, is converted into certainty when we come to examine them in detail; for although they have no dates attached to them, yet circumstances are sometimes mentioned or alluded to, or references to authorities are made, or legends are narrated, or places are particularized, of which the comparatively recent date is indisputable, and which enforce a corresponding reduction of the antiquity of the work in which they are discovered. At the same time they may be acquitted of subservience to any but sectarial imposture. They were pious frauds for temporary purposes: they never emanated from any impossible combination of the Brahmans to fabricate for the antiquity of the entire Hindu system any claims which it cannot fully support. A very great portion of the contents of many, some portion of the contents of all, is genuine and old. The sectarial interpolation or embellishment is always sufficiently palpable to be set aside, without injury to the more authentic and primitive material; and the Puranas, although they belong especially to that stage of the Hindu religion in which faith in some one divinity was the prevailing principle, are also a valuable record of the form of Hindu belief

[p. vii]

which came next in order to that of the Vedas; which grafted hero-worship upon the simpler ritual of the latter; and which had been adopted, and was extensively, perhaps universally established in India at the time of the Greek invasion. The Hercules of the Greek writers was indubitably the Balarama of the Hindus; and their notices of Mathura on the Jumna, and of the kingdom of the Suraseni and the Pandaean country, evidence the prior currency of the traditions which constitute the argument of the Mahabharata, and which are constantly repeated in the Puranas, relating to the Pandava and Yadava races, to Krishna and his contemporary heroes, and to the dynasties of the solar and lunar kings.

The theogony and cosmogony of the Puranas may probably be traced to the Vedas. They are not, as far as is yet known, described in detail in those works, but they are frequently alluded to in a strain more or less mystical and obscure, which indicates acquaintance with their existence, and which seems to have supplied the Puranas with the groundwork of their systems. The scheme of primary or elementary creation they borrow from the Sankhya philosophy, which is probably one of the oldest forms of speculation on man and nature amongst the Hindus. Agreeably, however, to that part of the Pauranik character which there is reason to suspect of later origin, their inculcation of the worship of a favourite deity, they combine the interposition of a creator with the independent evolution of matter in a somewhat contradictory and unintelligible style. It is evident too that their accounts of secondary creation, or the developement of the existing forms of things, and the disposition of the universe, are derived from several and different sources; and it appears very likely that they are to be accused of some of the incongruities and absurdities by which the narrative is disfigured, in consequence of having attempted to assign reality and significancy to what was merely metaphor or mysticism. There is, however, amidst the unnecessary complexity of the description, a general agreement amongst them as to the origin of things, and their final distribution; and in many of the circumstances there is a striking concurrence with the ideas which seem to have pervaded the whole of the ancient world, and which we may therefore believe to be faithfully represented in the Puranas.

[p. viii]

The Pantheism of the Puranas is one of their invariable characteristics, although the particular divinity, who is all things, from whom all things proceed, and to whom all things return, be diversified according to their individual sectarial bias. They seem to have derived the notion from the Vedas: but in them the one universal Being is of a higher order than a personification of attributes or elements, and, however imperfectly conceived, or unworthily described, is God. In the Puranas the one only Supreme Being is supposed to be manifest in the person of S'iva or Vishnu, either in the way of illusion or in sport; and one or other of these divinities is therefore also the cause of all that is, is himself all that exists. The identity of God and nature is not a new notion; it was very general in the speculations of antiquity, but it assumed a new vigour in the early ages of Christianity, and was carried to an equal pitch of extravagance by the Platonic Christians as by the S'aiva or Vaishnava Hindus. It seems not impossible that there was some communication between them. We know that there was an active communication between India and the Red sea in the early ages of the Christian era, and that doctrines, as well as articles of merchandise, were brought to Alexandria from the former. Epiphanius [*11] and Eusebius [*12] accuse Scythianus of having imported from India, in the second century, books on magic, and heretical notions leading to Manichaeism; and it was at the same period that Ammonius instituted the sect of the new Platonists at Alexandria. The basis of his heresy was, that true philosophy derived its origin from the eastern nations: his doctrine of the identity of God and the universe is that of the Vedas and Puranas; and the practices he enjoined, as well as their object, were precisely those described in several of the Puranas under the name of Yoga. His disciples were taught "to extenuate by mortification and contemplation the bodily restraints upon the immortal spirit, so that in this life they might enjoy communion with the Supreme Being, and ascend after death to the universal Parent [*13]." That these are Hindu tenets the following pages [*14] will testify; and by the admission of their Alexandrian

[p. ix]

teacher, they originated in India. The importation was perhaps not wholly unrequited; the loan may not have been left unpaid. It is not impossible that the Hindu doctrines received fresh animation from their adoption by the successors of Ammonius, and especially by the mystics, who may have prompted, as well as employed, the expressions of the Puranas. Anquetil du Perron has given [*15], in the introduction to his translation of the 'Oupnekhat,' several hymns by Synesius, a bishop of the beginning of the fifth century, which may serve as parallels to many of the hymns and prayers addressed to Vishnu in the Vishnu Purana.

But the ascription to individual and personal deities of the attributes of the one universal and spiritual Supreme Being, is an indication of a later date than the Vedas certainly, and apparently also than the Ramayana, where Rama, although an incarnation of Vishnu, commonly appears in his human character alone. There is something of the kind in the Mahabharata in respect to Krishna, especially in the philosophical episode known as the Bhagavad Gita. In other places the divine nature of Krishna is less decidedly affirmed; in some it is disputed or denied; and in most of the situations in which he is exhibited in action, it is as a prince and warrior, not as a divinity. He exercises no superhuman faculties in the defence of himself or his friends, or in the defeat and destruction of his foes. The Mahabharata, however, is evidently a work of various periods, and requires to be read throughout carefully and critically before its weight as an authority can be accurately appreciated. As it is now in type [*16]--thanks to the public spirit of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and their secretary Mr. J. Prinsep--it will not be long before the Sanscrit scholars of the continent will accurately appreciate its value.

Footnotes

^i:1 Vol. VIII. p. 369.

^i:2 Vol. XIV. p. 37.

^i:3 Published by the Oriental Translation Fund Committee.

^ii:4 A translation of the principal Upanishads was published under the title of Oupnekhat, or Theologia Indica, by Anquetil du Perron: but it was made through the medium of the Persian, and is very [p. iii] incorrect and obscure. A translation of a very different character has been some time in course of preparation by M. Poley.

^ii:5 As. Res. vol. VIII. p. 473.

^iii:6 B. III. 152, 164. B. IV. 214.

^iv:7 Besides the three periods marked by the Vedas, Heroic Poems, and Puranas, a fourth may be dated from the influence exercised by the Tantras upon Hindu practice and belief; but we are yet too little acquainted with those works, or their origin, to speculate safely upon their consequences.

^iv:8 As. Res. vol. VII. p. 202.

^v:9 The following definition of a Purana is constantly quoted: it is found in the Vishnu, Matsya, Vayu, and other Puranas: 
Click to view A variation of reading in the beginning of the second line is noticed by Ramas'rama, the scholiast on Amara, 
Click to view 'Destruction of the earth and the rest, or final dissolution:' in which case the genealogies of heroes and princes are comprised in those of the patriarchs.

^vi:10 Researches into the Nature and Affinity of Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p.153, and note.

^viii:11 Adv. Manichaeos.

^viii:12 Hist. Evang.

^viii:13 Mosheim, vol. I. p.173.

^viii:14 See P. <page 649> et seq.

^ix:15 Theologia et Philosophia Indica, Dissert. p. xxvi.

^ix:16 Three volumes have been printed: the fourth and last is understood to be nearly completed.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Date of the Puranas

The Puranas are also works of evidently different ages, and have been compiled under different circumstances, the precise nature of which we can but imperfectly conjecture from internal evidence, and from what we know of the history of religious opinion in India. It is highly probable,

[p. x]

that of the present popular forms of the Hindu religion, none assumed their actual state earlier than the time of S'ankara Acharya, the great S'aiva reformer, who flourished, in all likelihood, in the eighth or ninth century. Of the Vaishnava teachers, Ramanuja dates in the twelfth century, Madhwacharya in the thirteenth, and Vallabha in the sixteenth [*17]; and the Puranas seem to have accompanied or followed their innovations, being obviously intended to advocate the doctrines they taught. This is to assign to some of them a very modern date, it is true; but I cannot think that a higher can with justice be ascribed to them. This, however, applies to some only out of the number, as I shall presently proceed to specify.

Another evidence of a comparatively modern date must be admitted in those chapters of the Puranas which, assuming a prophetic tone, foretell what dynasties of kings will reign in the Kali age. These chapters, it is true, are found but in four of the Puranas, but they are conclusive in bringing down the date of those four to a period considerably subsequent to Christianity. It is also to be remarked, that the Vayu, Vishnu, Bhagavata, and Matsya Puranas, in which these particulars are foretold, have in all other respects the character of as great antiquity as any works of their class [*18].

Footnotes

^x:17 As. Res. vols. XVI. and XVII. Account of Hindu Sects.

^x:18 On the history of the composition of the Puranas, as they now appear, I have hazarded some speculations in my Analysis of the Vayu Purana: Journ. Asiatic Society of Bengal, December 1832.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Form of the Puranas

The invariable form of the Puranas is that of a dialogue, in which some person relates its contents in reply to the inquiries of another. This dialogue is interwoven with others, which are repeated as having been held on other occasions between different individuals, in consequence of similar questions having been asked. The immediate narrator is commonly, though not constantly, Lomaharshana or Romaharshana, the disciple of Vyasa, who is supposed to communicate what was imparted to him by his preceptor, as he had heard it from some other sage. Vyasa, as will be seen in the body of the work [*19], is a generic title, meaning an 'arranger' or 'compiler.' It is in this age applied to Krishna Dwaipayana,

[p. xi]

the son of Paras'ara, who is said to have taught the Vedas and Puranas to various disciples, but who appears to have been the head of a college or school, under whom various learned men gave to the sacred literature of the Hindus the form in which it now presents itself. In this task the disciples, as they are termed, of Vyasa were rather his colleagues and coadjutors, for they were already conversant with what he is fabled to have taught them [*20]; and amongst them, Lomaharshana represents the class of persons who were especially charged with the record of political and temporal events. He is called Suta, as if it was a proper name; but it is more correctly a title; and Lomaharshana was 'a Suta,' that is, a bard or panegyrist, who was created, according to our text [*21], to celebrate the exploits of princes; and who, according to the Vayu and Padma Puranas, has a right by birth and profession to narrate the Puranas, in preference even to the Brahmans [*22]. It is not unlikely therefore that we are to understand, by his being represented as the disciple of Vyasa, the institution of some attempt, made under the direction of the latter, to collect from the heralds and annalists of his day the scattered traditions which they had imperfectly preserved; and hence the consequent appropriation of the Puranas, in a great measure, to the genealogies of regal dynasties, and descriptions of the universe. However this may be, the machinery has been but loosely adhered to, and many of the Patinas, like the Vishnu, are referred to a different narrator.

An account is given in the following work [*23] of a series of Pauranik compilations, of which in their present form no vestige appears. Lomaharshana is said to have had six disciples, three of whom composed as many fundamental Sanhitas, whilst he himself compiled a fourth. By a Sanhita is generally understood a 'collection' or 'compilation.' The Sanhitas of the Vedas are collections of hymns and prayers belonging to them, arranged according to the judgment of some individual sage, who is therefore looked upon as the originator and teacher of each. The Sanhitas of the Puranas, then, should be analogous compilations, attributed respectively to Mitrayu, S'ans'apayana, Akritavrana, and Romaharshana: no such Pauranik Sanhitas are now known, The

[p. xii]

substance of the four is said to be collected in the Vishnu Purana, which is also, in another place [*24], itself called a Sanhita: but such compilations have not, as far as inquiry has yet proceeded, been discovered. The specification may be accepted as an indication of the Puranas having existed in some other form, in which they are no longer met with; although it does not appear that the arrangement was incompatible with their existence as separate works, for the Vishnu Purana, which is our authority for the four Sanhitas, gives us also the usual enumeration of the several Puranas.

Footnotes

^x:19 <page 272>.

^xi:20 See P. <page 276>.

^xi:21 P. <page 102>.

^xi:22 Journ, Royal As. Soc. vol. V. p. 281.

^xi:23 P. <page 283>.

^xii:24 P. <page 5>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Classification of the Puranas

There is another classification of the Puranas alluded to in the Matsya Purana, and specified by the Padma Purana, but more fully. It is not undeserving of notice, as it expresses the opinion which native writers entertain of the scope of the Puranas, and of their recognising the subservience of these works to the dissemination of sectarian principles.. Thus it is said in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma, that the Puranas, as well as other works, are divided into three classes, according to the qualities which prevail in them. Thus the Vishnu, Naradiya, Bhagavata, Garuda, Padma, and Varaha Puranas, are Satwika, or pure, from the predominance in them of the Satwa quality, or that of goodness and purity. They are, in fact, Vaishnava Puranas. The Matsya, Kurma, Linga, S'iva, Skanda, and Agni Puranas, are Tamasa, or Puranas of darkness, from the prevalence of the quality of Tamas, 'ignorance,' 'gloom.' They are indisputably S'aiva Puranas. The third series, comprising the Brahmanda, Brahma-vaivartta, Markandeya, Bhavishya, Vamana, and Brahma Puranas, are designated as Rajasa, 'passionate,' from Rajas, the property of passion, which they are supposed to represent.. The Matsya does not specify which are the Puranas that come under these designations, but remarks that those in which the Mahatmya of Hari or Vishnu prevails are Satwika; those in which the legends of Agni or S'iva predominate are Tamasa; and those which dwell most on the stories of Brahma are Rajasa. I have elsewhere stated [*25], that I considered the Rajasa Puranas to lean to the Sakta division of the Hindus, the worshippers of S'akti, or the female principle; founding this opinion

[p. xiii]

on the character of the legends which some of them contain, such as the Durga Mahatmya, or celebrated legend on which the worship of Durga or Kali is especially founded, which is a principal episode of the Markandeya. The Brahma-vaivartta also devotes the greatest portion of its chapters to the celebration of Radha, the mistress of Krishna, and other female divinities. Col. Vans Kennedy, however, objects to the application of the term Sakta to this last division of the Puranas, the worship of S'akti being the especial object of a different class of works, the Tantras, and no such form of worship being particularly inculcated in the Brahma Purana [*26]. This last argument is of weight in regard to the particular instance specified, and the designation of S'akti may not be correctly applicable to the whole class, although it is to some of the series; for there is no incompatibility in the advocacy of a Tantrika modification of the Hindu religion by any Purana, and it has unquestionably been practised in works known as Upa-puranas. The proper appropriation of the third class of the Puranas, according to the Padma Purana, appears to be to the worship of Krishna, not in the character in which he is represented in the Vishnu and Bhagavata Puranas, in which the incidents of his boyhood are only a portion of his biography, and in which the human character largely participates, at least in his riper years, but as the infant Krishna, Govinda, Bala Gopala, the sojourner in Vrindavan, the companion of the cowherds and milkmaids, the lover of Radha, or as the juvenile master of the universe, Jagannatha. The term Rajasa, implying the animation of passion, and enjoyment of sensual delights, is applicable, not only to the character of the youthful divinity, but to those with whom his adoration in these forms seems to have originated, the Gosains of Gokul and Bengal, the followers and descendants of Vallabha and Chaitanya, the priests and proprietors of Jagannath and S'rinath-dwar, who lead a life of affluence and indulgence, and vindicate, both by precept and practice, the reasonableness of the Rajasa property, and the congruity of temporal enjoyment with the duties of religion [*27].

The Puranas are uniformly stated to be eighteen in number. It is said that there are also eighteen Upa-puranas, or minor Puranas; but

[p. xiv]

the names of only a few of these are specified in the least exceptionable authorities, and the greater number of the works is not procurable. With regard to the eighteen Puranas, there is a peculiarity in their specification, which is proof of an interference with the integrity of the text, in some of them at least; for each of them specifies the names of the whole eighteen. Now the list could not have been complete whilst the work that gives it was unfinished, and in one only therefore, the last of the series, have we a right to look for it. As however there are more last words than one, it is evident that the names must have been inserted in all except one after the whole were completed: which of the eighteen is the exception, and truly the last, there is no clue to discover, and the specification is probably an interpolation in most, if not in all.

The names that are specified are commonly the same, and are as follows: 1. Brahma, 2. Padma, 3. Vaishnava, 4. S'aiva, 5. Bhagavata, 6. Narada, 7. Markanda, 8. Agneya, 9. Bhavishya, 10. Brahma-vaivartta, 11. Lainga, 12. Varaha, 13. Skanda, 14. Vamana, 15. Kaurma, 16. Matsya, 17. Garuda, 18. Brahmanda [*28]. This is from the twelfth book of the Bhagavata, and is the same as occurs in the Vishnu [*29]. In other authorities there are a few variations. The list of the K.urma P. omits the Agni Purana, and substitutes the Vayu. The Agni leaves out the S'aiva, and inserts the Vayu. The Varaha omits the Garuda and Brahmanda, and inserts the Vayu and Narasinha: in this last it is singular. The Markandeya agrees with the Vishnu and Bhagavata in omitting the Vayu. The Matsya, like the Agni, leaves out the S'aiva.

Some of the Puranas, as the Agni, Matsya, Bhagavata, and Padma, also particularize the number of stanzas which each of the eighteen contains. In one or two instances they disagree, but in general they concur. The aggregate is stated at 400,000 slokas, or 1,600,000 lines. These are

[p. xv]

fabled to be but an abridgment, the whole amount being a krore, or ten millions of stanzas, or even a thousand millions. If all the fragmentary portions claiming in various parts of India to belong to the Puranas were admitted, their extent would much exceed the lesser, though it would not reach the larger enumeration. The former is, however, as I have elsewhere stated [*30], a quantity that an individual European scholar could scarcely expect to peruse with due care and attention, unless his whole time were devoted exclusively for many years to the task. Yet without some such labour being achieved, it was clear, from the crudity and inexactness of all that had been hitherto published on the subject, with one exception [*31], that sound views on the subject of Hindu mythology and tradition were not to be expected. Circumstances, which I have already explained in the paper in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society referred to above, enabled me to avail myself of competent assistance, by which I made a minute abstract of most of the Puranas. In course of time I hope to place a tolerably copious and connected analysis of the whole eighteen before Oriental scholars, and in the mean while offer a brief notice of their several contents.

In general the enumeration of the Puranas is a simple nomenclature, with the addition in some cases of the number of verses; but to these the Matsya Purana joins the mention of one or two circumstances peculiar to each, which, although scanty, are of value, as offering means of identifying the copies of the Puranas now found with those to which the Matsya refers, or of discovering a difference between the present and the past. I shall therefore prefix the passage descriptive of each Purana from the Matsya. It is necessary to remark, however, that in the comparison instituted between that description and the Purana as it exists, I necessarily refer to the copy or copies which I employed for the purpose of examination and analysis, and which were procured with some trouble and cost in Benares and Calcutta. In some instances my manuscripts

[p. xvi]

have been collated with others from different parts of India, and the result has shewn, that, with regard at least to the Brahma, Vishnu, Vayu, Matsya, Padma, Bhagavata, and Kurma Puranas, the same works, in all essential respects, are generally current under the same appellations. Whether this is invariably the case may be doubted, and farther inquiry may possibly shew that I have been obliged to content myself with mutilated or unauthentic works [*32]. It is with this reservation, therefore, that I must be understood to speak of the concurrence or disagreement of any Purana with the notice of it which the Matsya P. has preserved.

Footnotes

^xii:25 As. Res. vol. XVI. p. 10.

^xiii:26 Asiatic Journal, March 1837, p. 241.

^xiii:27 As. Res. vol. XVI. p. 85.

^xiv:28 The names are put attributively, the noun substantive, Purana, being understood. Thus Vaishnavam Puranam means the Purana of Vishnu; S'aivam Puranam, the P. of S'iva; Brahmam Puranam, the P. of Brahma. It is equally correct, and more common, to use the two substantives [p. xv] in apposition, as Vishnu Purana, S'iva Purana, &c. In the original Sanscrit the nouns are compounded, as Vishnu-puranam, &c.; but it has not been customary to combine them in their European shape.

^xiv:29 P. <page 284>.

^xv:30 Journ. Royal As. Soc. vol. V. p. 61.

^xv:31 I allude to the valuable work of Col. Vans Kennedy, on the Affinity between Ancient and Hindu Mythology. However much I may differ from that learned and industrious writer's conclusions, I must do him the justice to admit that he is the only author who has discussed the subject of the mythology of the Hindus on right principles, by drawing his materials from authentic sources.

^xvi:32 Upon examining the translations of different passages from the Puranas, given by Col. Vans Kennedy in the work mentioned in a former note, and comparing them with the text of the manuscripts I have consulted, I find such an agreement as to warrant the belief that there is no essential difference between the copies in his possession and in mine. The varieties which occur in the MSS. of the East India Company's Library will be noticed in the text.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

1. The Brahma Purana

1. Brahma Purana. "That, the whole of which was formerly repeated by Brahma to Marichi, is called the Brahma Purana, and contains ten thousand stanzas [*33]." In all the lists of the Puranas, the Brahma is placed at the head of the series, and is thence sometimes also entitled the Adi or 'first' Purana. It is also designated as the Saura, as it is in great part appropriated to the worship of Surya, 'the sun.' There are, however, works bearing these names which belong to the class of Upa-puranas, and which are not to be confounded with the Brahma. It is usually said, as above, to contain ten thousand slokas; but the number actually occurring is between seven and eight thousand. There is a supplementary or concluding section called the Brahmottara Purana, and which is different from a portion of the Skanda called the Brahmottara Khanda, which contains about three thousand stanzas more; but there is every reason to conclude that this is a distinct and unconnected work.

The immediate narrator of the Brahma Purana is Lomaharshana, who communicates it to the Rishis or sages assembled at Naimisharanya, as it was originally revealed by Brahma, not to Marichi, as the Matsya affirms, but to Daksha, another of the patriarchs: hence its denomination of the Brahma Purana.

[p. xvii]

The early chapters of this work give a description of the creation, an account of the Manwantaras, and the history of the solar and lunar dynasties to the time of Krishna, in a summary manner, and in words which are common to it and several other Puranas: a brief description of the universe succeeds; and then come a number of chapters relating to the holiness of Orissa, with its temples and sacred groves dedicated to the sun, to S'iva, and Jagannath, the latter especially. These chapters are characteristic of this Purana, and shew its main object to be the promotion of the worship of Krishna as Jagannath [*34]. To these particulars succeeds a life of Krishna, which is word for word the same as that of the Vishnu Purana; and the compilation terminates with a particular detail of the mode in which Yoga, or contemplative devotion, the object of which is still Vishnu, is to be performed. There is little in this which corresponds with the definition of a Pancha-lakshana Purana; and the mention of the temples of Orissa, the date of the original construction of which is recorded [*35], shews that it could not have been compiled earlier than the thirteenth or fourteenth century.

The Uttara Khanda of the Brahma P. bears still more entirely the character of a Mahatmya, or local legend, being intended to celebrate the sanctity of the Balaja river, conjectured to be the same as the Banas in Marwar. There is no clue to its date, but it is clearly modern, grafting personages and fictions of its own invention on a few hints from older authorities [*36].

Footnotes

^xvi:33 
Click to view

^xvii:34 Col. Vans Kennedy objects to this character of the Brahma P., and observes that it contains only two short descriptions of pagodas, the one of Konaditya, the other of Jagannath. In that case, his copy must differ considerably from those I have met with; for in them the description of Purushottama Kshetra, the holy land of Orissa, runs through forty chapters, or one-third of the work. The description, it is true, is interspersed, in the usual rambling strain of the Puranas, with a variety of legends, some ancient, some modern; but they are intended to illustrate some local circumstance, and are therefore not incompatible with the main design, the celebration of the glories of Purushottama Kshetra. The specification of the temple of Jagannath, however, is of itself sufficient, in my opinion, to determine the character and era of the compilation.

^xvii:35 See Account of Orissa proper, or Cuttack, by A. Stirling, Esq.: Asiatic Res. vol. XV. p. 305.

^xvii:36 See Analysis of the Brahma Purana: Journ. Royal As. Soc, vol. V. p. 65.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

2. The Padma Purana

[p. xviii]

2. Padma Purana. "That which contains an account of the period when the world was a golden lotus (padma), and of all the occurrences of that time, is therefore called the Padma by the wise: it contains fifty-five thousand stanzas [*37]." The second Purana in the usual lists is always the Padma, a very voluminous work, containing, according to its own statement, as well as that of other authorities, fifty-five thousand slokas; an amount not far from the truth. These are divided amongst five books, or Khandas; 1. the Srishti Khanda, or section on creation; 2. the Bhumi Khanda, description of the earth; 3. the Swarga Khanda, chapter on heaven; 4. Patala Khanda, chapter on the regions below the earth; and 5. the Uttara Khanda, last or supplementary chapter. There is also current a sixth division, the Kriya Yoga Sara, a treatise on the practice of devotion.

The denominations of these divisions of the Padma P. convey but an imperfect and partial notion of their contents. In the first, or section which treats of creation, the narrator is Ugras'ravas the Suta, the son of Lomaharshana, who is sent by his father to the Rishis at Naimisharanya to communicate to them the Purana, which, from its containing an account of the lotus (padma), in which Brahma appeared at creation, is termed the Padma or Padma Purana. The Suta repeats what was originally communicated by Brahma to Pulastya, and by him to Bhishma. The early chapters narrate the cosmogony, and the genealogy of the patriarchal families, much in the same style, and often in the same words, as the Vishnu; and short accounts of the Manwantaras and regal dynasties: but these, which are legitimate Pauranik matters, soon make way for new and unauthentic inventions, illustrative of the virtues of the lake of Pushkara, or Pokher in Ajmir, as a place of pilgrimage.

The Bhumi Khanda, or section of the earth, defers any description of the earth until near its close, filling up one hundred and twenty-seven chapters with legends of a very mixed description, some ancient and common to other Puranas, but the greater part peculiar to itself, illustrative of Tirthas either figuratively so termed--as a wife, a parent, or a

[p. xix]

[paragraph continues] Guru, considered as a sacred object--or places to which actual pilgrimage should be performed.

The Swarga Khanda describes in the first chapters the relative positions of the Lokas or spheres above the earth, placing above all Vaikuntha, the sphere of Vishnu; an addition which is not warranted by what appears to be the oldest cosmology [*38]. Miscellaneous notices of some of the most celebrated princes then succeed, conformably to the usual narratives; and these are followed by rules of conduct for the several castes, and at different stages of life. The rest of the book is occupied by legends of a diversified description, introduced without much method or contrivance; a few of which, as Daksha's sacrifice, are of ancient date, but of which the most are original and modern.

The Patala Khanda devotes a brief introduction to the description of Patala, the regions of the snake-gods; but the name of Rama having been mentioned, S'esha, who has succeeded Pulastya as spokesman, proceeds to narrate the history of Rama, his descent and his posterity; in which the compiler seems to have taken the poem of Kalidas'a, the Raghu Vans'a, for his chief authority. An originality of addition may be suspected, however, in the adventures of the horse destined by Rama for an As'wamedha, which form the subject of a great many chapters. When about to be sacrificed, the horse turns out to be a Brahman, condemned by an imprecation of Durvasas, a sage, to assume the equine nature, and who, by having been sanctified by connexion with Rama, is released from his metamorphosis, and dispatched as a spirit of light to heaven. This piece of Vaishnava fiction is followed by praises of the S'ri Bhagavata, an account of Krishna's juvenilities, and the merits of worshipping Vishnu. These accounts are communicated through a machinery borrowed from the Tantras: they are told by Sadas'iva to Parvati, the ordinary interlocutors of Tantrika compositions.

The Uttara Khanda is a most voluminous aggregation of very heterogeneous matters, but it is consistent in adopting a decidedly Vaishnava tone, and admitting no compromise with any other form of faith. The chief subjects are first discussed in a dialogue between king Dilipa and

[p. xx]

the Muni Vas'ishtha; such as the merits of bathing in the month of Magha, and the potency of the Mantra or prayer addressed to Lakshmi Narayana. But the nature of Bhakti, faith in Vishnu--the use of Vaishnava marks on the body--the legends of Vishnu's Avataras, and especially of Rama--and the construction of images of Vishnu--are too important to be left to mortal discretion: they are explained by S'iva to Parvati, and wound up by the adoration of Vishnu by those divinities. The dialogue then reverts to the king and the sage; and the latter states why Vishnu is the only one of the triad entitled to respect; S'iva being licentious, Brahma arrogant, and Vishnu alone pure. Vas'ishtha then repeats, after S'iva, the Mahatmya of the Bhagavad Gita; the merit of each book of which is illustrated by legends of the good consequences to individuals from perusing or hearing it. Other Vaishnava Mahatmyas occupy considerable portions of this Khanda, especially the Kartika Mahatmya, or holiness of the month Kartika, illustrated as usual by stories, a few of which are of an early origin, but the greater part modern, and peculiar to this Purana [*39].

The Kriya Yoga Sara is repeated by Suta to the Rishis, after Vyasa's communication of it to Jaimini, in answer to an inquiry how religious merit might be secured in the Kali age, in which men have become incapable of the penances and abstraction by which final liberation was formerly to be attained. The answer is, of course, that which is intimated in the last hook of the Vishnu Purana--personal devotion to Vishnu: thinking of him, repeating his names, wearing his marks, worshipping in his temples, are a full substitute for all other acts of moral or devotional or contemplative merit.

The different portions of the Padma Purana are in all probability as many different works, neither of which approaches to the original definition of a Purana. There may be some connexion between the three first portions, at least as to time; but there is no reason to consider them as of high antiquity. They specify the Jains both by name and practices.; they talk of Mlechchhas, 'barbarians,' flourishing in India; they commend

[p. xxi]

the use of the frontal and other Vaishnava marks; and they notice other subjects which, like these, are of no remote origin. The Patala Khanda dwells copiously upon the Bhagavata, and is consequently posterior to it. The Uttara Khanda is intolerantly Vaishnava, and is therefore unquestionably modern. It enjoins the veneration of the Salagram stone and Tulasi plant, the use of the Tapta-mudra, or stamping with a hot iron the name of Vishnu on the skin, and a variety of practices and observances undoubtedly no part of the original system. It speaks of the shrines of S'ri-rangam and Venkatadri in the Dekhin, temples that have no pretension to remote antiquity; and it names Haripur on the Tungabhadra, which is in all likelihood the city of Vijayanagar, founded in the middle of the fourteenth century. The Kriya Yoga Sara is equally a modern, and apparently a Bengali composition. No portion of the Padma Purana is probably older than the twelfth century, and the last parts may be as recent as the fifteenth or sixteenth [*40].

Footnotes

^xviii:37 
Click to view

^xix:38 See .

^xx:39 One of them, the story of Jalandhara is translated by Col. Vans Kennedy: Affinities of Ancient and Hindu Mythology, Appendix D.

^xxi:40 The grounds of these conclusions are more particularly detailed in my Analysis of the Padma P.: J. R. As. Soc. vol. V. p. 280.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

3. The Vishnu Purana

. Vishnu Purana. "That in which Paras'ara, beginning with the events of the Varaha Kalpa, expounds all duties, is called the Vaishnava; and the learned know its extent to be twenty-three thousand stanzas [*41]." The third Purana of the lists is that which has been selected for translation, the Vishnu. It is unnecessary therefore to offer any general summary of its contents, and it will be convenient to reserve any remarks upon its character and probable antiquity for a subsequent page. It may here be observed, however, that the actual number of verses contained in it falls far short of the enumeration of the Matsya, with which the Bhagavata concurs. Its actual contents are not seven thousand stanzas. All the copies, and in this instance they are not fewer than seven in number, procured both in the east and in the west of India, agree; and there is no appearance of any part being wanting. There is a beginning, a middle, and an end, in both text and comment; and the work as it stands is incontestably entire. How is the discrepancy to be explained?

Footnotes

^xxi:41 
Click to view

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxii]

4. The Vayaviya Purana

4. "The Purana in which Vayu has declared the laws of duty, in connexion with the Sweta Kalpa, and which comprises the Mahatmya of Rudra, is the Vayaviya Purana: it contains twenty-four thousand verses [*42]." The S'iva or S'aiva Purana is, as above remarked, omitted in some of the lists; and in general, when that is the case, it is replaced by the Vayu or Vayaviya. When the S'iva is specified, as in the Bhagavata, then the Vayu is omitted; intimating the possible identity of these two works. This indeed is confirmed by the Matsya, which describes the Vayaviya Purana as characterised by its account of the greatness of Rudra or Siva [*43]; and Balambhatta mentions that the Vayaviya is also called the S'aiva, though, according to some, the latter is the name of an Upa-purana. Col. Vans Kennedy observes, that in the west of India the S'aiva is commonly considered to be an Upa or 'minor' Purana [*44].

Another proof that the same work is intended by the authorities here followed, the Bhagavata and Matsya, under different appellations, is their concurrence in the extent of the work, each specifying its verses to be twenty-four thousand. A copy of the S'iva Purana, of which an index and analysis have been prepared, does not contain more than about seven thousand: it cannot therefore be the S'iva Purana of the Bhagavata; and we may safely consider that to be the same as the Vayaviya of the Matsya [*45].

The Vayu Purana is narrated by Suta to the Rishis at Naimisharanya, as it was formerly told at the same place to similar persons by Vayu; a repetition of circumstances not uncharacteristic of the inartificial style of this Purana. It is divided into four Padas, termed severally Prakriya, Upodghata, Anushanga, and Upasanhara; a classification peculiar to this work. These are preceded by an index, or heads of chapters, in the manner of the Mahabharata and Ramayana; another peculiarity.

The Prakriya portion contains but a few chapters, and treats chiefly

[p. xxiii]

of elemental creation, and the first evolutions of beings, to the same purport as the Vishnu, but in a more obscure and unmethodical style. The Upodghata then continues the subject of creation, and describes the various Kalpas or periods during which the world has existed; a greater number of which is specified by the S'aiva than by the Vaishnava Puranas. Thirty-three are here described, the last of which is the Sweta or 'white' Kalpa, from S'iva's being born in it of a white complexion. The genealogies of the patriarchs, the description of the universe, and the incidents of the first six Manwantaras, are all treated of in this part of the work; but they are intermixed with legends and praises of S'iva, as the sacrifice of Daksha, the Mahes'wara Mahatmya, the Nilakantha Stotra, and others. The genealogies, although in the main the same as those in the Vaishnava Puranas, present some variations. A long account of the Pitris or progenitors is also peculiar to this Purana; as are stories of some of the most celebrated Rishis, who were engaged in the distribution of the Vedas.

The third division commences with an account of the seven Rishis and their descendants, and describes the origin of the different classes of creatures from the daughters of Daksha, with a profuse copiousness of nomenclature, not found in any other Purana. With exception of the greater minuteness of detail, the particulars agree with those of the Vishnu P. A chapter then occurs on the worship of the Pitris; another on Tirthas, or places sacred to them; and several on the performance of Sraddhas, constituting the Sraddha Kalpa. After this, comes a full account of the solar and lunar dynasties, forming a parallel to that in the following pages, with this difference, that it is throughout in verse, whilst that of our text, as noticed in its place, is chiefly in prose. It is extended also by the insertion of detailed accounts of various incidents, briefly noticed in the Vishnu, though derived apparently from a common original. The section terminates with similar accounts of future kings, and the same chronological calculations, that are found in the Vishnu.

The last portion, the Upasanhara, describes briefly the future Manwantaras, the measures of space and time, the end of the world, the

[p. xxiv]

efficacy of Yoga, and the glories of S'iva-pura, or the dwelling of S'iva, with whom the Yogi is to be united. The manuscript concludes with a different history of the successive teachers of the Vayu Purana, tracing them from Brahma to Vayu, from Vayu to Vrihaspati, and from him, through various deities and sages, to Dwaipayana and S'uta.

The account given of this Purana in the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal was limited to something less than half the work, as I had not then been able to procure a larger portion. I have now a more complete one of my own, and there are several copies in the East India Company's library of the like extent. One, presented by His Highness the Guicowar, is dated Samvat 1540, or A. D. 1483, and is evidently as old as it professes to be. The examination I have made of the work confirms the view I formerly took of it; and from the internal evidence it affords, it may perhaps be regarded as one of the oldest and most authentic specimens extant of a primitive Purana.

It appears, however, that we have not yet a copy of the entire Vayu Purana. The extent of it, as mentioned above, should be twenty-four thousand verses. The Guicowar MS. has but twelve thousand, and is denominated the Purvarddha, or first portion. My copy is of the like extent. The index also spews that several subjects remain untold; as, subsequently to the description of the sphere of S'iva, and the periodical dissolution of the world, the work is said to contain an account of a succeeding creation, and of various events that occurred in it, as the birth of several celebrated Rishis, including that of Vyasa, and a description of his distribution of the Vedas; an account of the enmity between Vas'ishtha and Viswamitra; and a Naimisharanya Mahatmya. These topics are, however, of minor importance, and can scarcely carry the Purana to the whole extent of the verses which it is said to contain. If the number is accurate, the index must still omit a considerable portion of the subsequent contents.

Footnotes

^xxii:42 
Click to view

^xxii:43 Commentary on the Mitakshara, Vyavahara Kanda.

^xxii:44 As. Journ., March 1837, p. 242, note.

^xxii:45 Analysis of the Vayu Purana: Journ. As. Soc. of Bengal, December 1832.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

5. The Bhagavata Purana 

5. S'ri Bhagavata. "That in which ample details of duty are described, and which opens with (an extract from) the Gayatri; that in which the death of the Asura Vritra is told, and in which the mortals and immortals of the Saraswata Kalpa, with the events that then happened

[p. xxv]

to them in the world, are related; that, is celebrated as the Bhagavata, and consists of eighteen thousand verses [*46]." The Bhagavata is a work of great celebrity in India, and exercises a more direct and powerful influence upon the opinions and feelings of the people than perhaps any other of the Puranas. It is placed the fifth in all the lists; but the Padma Purana ranks it as the eighteenth, as the extracted substance of all the rest. According to the usual specification, it consists of eighteen thousand s'lokas, distributed amongst three hundred and thirty-two chapters, divided into twelve Skandhas or books. It is named Bhagavata from its being dedicated to the glorification of Bhagavat or Vishnu.

The Bhagavata is communicated to the Rishis at Naimisharanya by Suta, as usual; but he only repeats what was narrated by S'uka, the son of Vyasa, to Parikshit, the king of Hastinapura, the grandson of Arjuna. Having incurred the imprecation of a hermit, by which he was sentenced to die of the bite of a venomous snake, at the expiration of seven days; the king, in preparation for . this event, repairs to the banks of the Ganges; whither also come the gods and sages, to witness his death. Amongst the latter is S'uka; and it is in reply to Parikshit's question, what a man should do who is about to die, that he narrates the Bhagavata, as he had heard it from Vyasa; for nothing secures final happiness so certainly, as to die whilst the thoughts are wholly engrossed by Vishnu.

The course of the narration opens with a cosmogony, which, although in most respects similar to that of other Puranas, is more largely intermixed with allegory and mysticism, and derives its tone more from the Vedanta than the Sankhya philosophy. The doctrine of active creation by the Supreme, as one with Vasudeva, is more distinctly asserted, with a more decided enunciation of the effects being resolvable into Maya, or illusion. There are also doctrinal peculiarities, highly characteristic of this Purana; amongst which is the assertion that it was originally communicated by Brahma to Narada, that all men whatsoever, Hindus of every caste, and even Mlechchhas, outcastes or barbarians, might learn to have faith in Vasudeva.

[p. xxvi]

In the third book the interlocutors are changed to Maitreya and Vidura; the former of whom is the disciple in the Vishnu Purana, the latter was the half-brother of the Kuru princes. Maitreya, again, gives an account of the Srishti-lila, or sport of creation, in a strain partly common to the Puranas, partly peculiar; although he declares he learned it from his teacher Paras'ara, at the desire of Pulastya [*47]; referring thus to the fabulous origin of the Vishnu Purana, and furnishing evidence of its priority. Again, however, the authority is changed, and the narrative is said to have been that which was communicated by S'esha to the Nagas. The creation of Brahma is then described, and the divisions of time are explained. A very long and peculiar account is given of the Varaha incarnation of Vishnu, which is followed by the creation of the Prajapatis and Swayambhuva, whose daughter Devahuti is married to Karddama Rishi; an incident peculiar to this work, as is that which follows of the Avatara of Vishnu as Kapila the son of Karddama and Devahuti, the author of the Sankhya philosophy, which he expounds, after a Vaishnava fashion, to his mother, in the last nine chapters of this section.

The Manwantara of Swayambhuva, and the multiplication of the patriarchal families, are next described with some peculiarities of nomenclature, which are pointed out in the notes to the parallel passages of the Vishnu Purana. The traditions of Dhruva, Vena, Prithu, and other princes of this period, are the other subjects of the fourth Skandha, and are continued in the fifth to that of the Bharata who obtained emancipation. The details generally conform to those of the Vishnu Purana, and the same words are often employed, so that it would he difficult to determine which work had the best right to them, had not the Bhagavata itself indicated its obligations to the Vishnu. The remainder of the fifth book is occupied with the description of the universe, and the same conformity with the Vishnu continues.

This is only partially the case with the sixth book, which contains a variety of legends of a miscellaneous description, intended to illustrate the merit of worshipping Vishnu: some of them belong to the early

[p. xxvii]

stock, but some are apparently novel. The seventh book is mostly occupied with the legend of Prahlada. In the eighth we have an account of the remaining Manwantaras; in which, as happening in the course of them, a variety of ancient legends are repeated, as the battle between the king of the elephants and an alligator, the churning of the ocean, and the dwarf and fish Avataras. The ninth book narrates the dynasties of the Vaivaswata Manwantara, or the princes of the solar and lunar races to the time of Krishna [*48]. The particulars conform generally with those recorded in the Vishnu.

The tenth book is the characteristic part of this Purana, and the portion upon which its popularity is founded. It is appropriated entirely to the history of Krishna, which it narrates much in the same manner as the Vishnu, but in more detail; holding a middle place, however, between it and the extravagant prolixity with which the Hari Vans'a repeats the story. It is not necessary to particularize it farther. It has been translated into perhaps all the languages of India, and is a favourite work with all descriptions of people.

The eleventh book describes the destruction of the Yadavas, and death of Krishna. Previous to the latter event, Krishna instructs Uddhava in the performance of the Yoga; a subject consigned by the Vishnu to the concluding passages. The narrative is much the same, but something more summary than that of the Vishnu. The twelfth book continues the lines of the kings of the Kali age prophetically to a similar period as the Vishnu, and gives a like account of the deterioration of all things, and their final dissolution. Consistently with the subject of the Purana, the serpent Takshaka bites Parikshit, and he expires, and the work should terminate; or the close might be extended to the subsequent sacrifice of Janamejaya for the destruction of the whole serpent race. There is a rather awkwardly introduced description, however, of the arrangement of the Vedas and Puranas by Vyasa,

[p. xxviii]

and the legend of Markandeya's interview with the infant Krishna, during a period of worldly dissolution. We then come to the end of the Bhagavata, in a series of encomiastic commendations of its own sanctity, and efficacy to salvation.

Mr. Colebrooke observes of the Bhagavata Purana, "I am inclined to adopt an opinion supported by many learned Hindus, who consider the celebrated S'ri Bhagavata as the work of a grammarian (Vopadeva), supposed to have lived six hundred years ago [*49]." Col. Vans Kennedy considers this an incautious admission, because "it is unquestionable that the number of the Puranas has been always held to be eighteen; but in most of the Puranas the names of the eighteen are enumerated, amongst which the Bhagavata is invariably included; and consequently if it were composed only six hundred years ago, the others must be of an equally modern date [*50]." Some of them are no doubt more recent; but, as already remarked, no weight can be attached to the specification of the eighteen names, for they are always complete; each Purana enumerates all. Which is the last? which had the opportunity of naming its seventeen predecessors, and adding itself? The argument proves too much. There can be little doubt that the list has been inserted upon the authority of tradition, either by some improving transcriber, or by the compiler of a work more recent than the eighteen genuine Puranas. The objection is also rebutted by the assertion, that there was another Purana to which the name applies, and which is still to be met with, the Devi Bhagavata.

For, the authenticity of the Bhagavata is one of the few questions affecting their sacred literature which Hindu writers have ventured to discuss. The occasion is furnished by the text itself. In the fourth chapter of the first book it is said that Vyasa arranged the Vedas, and divided them into four; and that he then compiled the Itihasa and Puranas, as a fifth Veda. The Vedas he gave to Paila and the rest; the Itihasa and Puranas to Lomaharshana, the father of Suta [*51]. Then reflecting that these works may not be accessible to women, S'udras, and

[p. xxix]

mixed castes, he composed the Bharata, for the purpose of placing religious knowledge within their reach. Still he felt dissatisfied, and wandered in much perplexity along the banks of the Saraswati, where his hermitage was situated, when Narada paid him a visit. Having confided to him his secret and seemingly causeless dissatisfaction, Narada suggested that it arose from his not having sufficiently dwelt, in the works he had finished, upon the merit of worshipping Vasudeva. Vyasa at once admitted its truth, and found a remedy for his uneasiness in the composition of the Bhagavata, which he taught to S'uka his son [*52]. Here therefore is the most positive assertion that the Bhagavata was composed subsequently to the Puranas, and given to a different pupil, and was not therefore one of the eighteen of which Romaharshana the Seta was, according to all concurrent testimonies, the depositary. Still the Bhagavata is named amongst the eighteen Puranas by the inspired authorities; and how can these incongruities be reconciled?

The principal point in dispute seems to have been started by an expression of S'ridhara Swamin, a commentator on the Bhagavata, who somewhat incautiously made the remark that there was no reason to suspect that by the term Bhagavata any other work than the subject of his labours was intended. This was therefore an admission that some suspicions had been entertained of the correctness of the nomenclature, and that an opinion had been expressed that the term belonged, not to the S'ri Bhagavata, but to the Devi Bhagavata; to a S'aiva, not a Vaishnava, composition. With whom doubts prevailed prior to S'ridhara Swamin, or by whom they were urged, does not appear; for, as far as we are aware, no works, anterior to his date, in which they are advanced have been met with. Subsequently, various tracts have been written on the subject. There are three in the library of the East India Company; the Durjana Mukha Chapetika, 'A slap of the face for the vile,' by Ramas'rama; the Durjana Mukha Maha Chapetika, 'A great slap of the face for the wicked,' by Kas'inath Bhatta; and the Durjana Mukha Padma Paduka, 'A slipper' for the same part of the same persons, by a

[p. xxx]

nameless disputant. The first maintains the authenticity of the Bhagavata; the second asserts that the Devi Bhagavata is the genuine Purana; and the third replies to the arguments of the first. There is also a work by Purushottama, entitled 'Thirteen arguments for dispelling all doubts of the character of the Bhagavata' (Bhagavata swarupa vihsaya s'anka nirasa trayodasa); whilst Balambhatta, a commentator on the Mitakshara, indulging in a dissertation on the meaning of the word Purana, adduces reasons for questioning the inspired origin of this Purana.

The chief arguments in favour of the authenticity of this Purana are the absence of any reason why Vopadeva, to whom it is attributed, should not have put his own name to it; its being included in all lists of the Puranas, sometimes with circumstances that belong to no other Purana; and its being admitted to be a Purana, and cited as authority, or made the subject of comment, by writers of established reputation, of whom S'ankara Acharya is one, and he lived long before Vopadeva. The reply to the first argument is rather feeble, the controversialists being unwilling perhaps to admit the real object, the promotion of new doctrines. It is therefore said that Vyasa was an incarnation of Narayana, and the purpose was to propitiate his favour. The insertion of a Bhagavata amongst the eighteen Puranas is acknowledged; but this, it is said, can be the Devi Bhagavata alone, for the circumstances apply more correctly to it than to the Vaishnava Bhagavata. Thus a text is quoted by Kas'inath from a Purana--he does not state which--that says of the Bhagavata that it contains eighteen thousand verses, twelve books, and three hundred and thirty-two chapters. Kas'inath asserts that the chapters of the S'ri Bhagavata are three hundred and thirty-five, and that the numbers apply throughout only to the Devi Bhagavata. It is also said that the Bhagavata contains an account of the acquirement of holy knowledge by Hayagriva; the particulars of the Saraswata Kalpa; a dialogue between Ambarisha and S'uka; and that it commences with the Gayatri, or at least a citation of it. These all apply to the Devi Bhagavata alone, except the last; but it also is more true of the S'aiva than of the Vaishnava work, for the latter has only one word of the Gayatri, dhimahi, 'we meditate;' whilst the former to dhimahi adds, Ya nah prachodayat,

[p. xxxi]

[paragraph continues] 'who may enlighten us.' To the third argument it is in the first place objected, that the citation of the Bhagavata by modern writers is no test of its authenticity; and with regard to the more ancient commentary of S'ankara Acharya, it is asked, "Where is it?" Those who advocate the sanctity of the Bhagavata reply, "It was written in a difficult style, and became obsolete, and is lost." "A very unsatisfactory plea," retort their opponents, "for we still have the works of S'ankara, several of which are quite as difficult as any in the Sanscrit language." The existence of this comment, too, rests upon the authority of Madhwa or Madhava, who in a commentary of his own asserts that he has consulted eight others. Now amongst these is one by the monkey Hanuman; and although a Hindu disputant may believe in the reality of such a composition, yet we may receive its citation as a proof that Madhwa was not very scrupulous in the verification of his authorities.

There are other topics urged in this controversy on both sides, some of which are simple enough, some are ingenious: but the statement of the text is of itself sufficient to shew that according to the received opinion of all the authorities of the priority of the eighteen Puranas to the Bharata, it is impossible that the S'ri Bhagavata, which is subsequent to the Bharata, should be of the number; and the evidence of style, the superiority of which to that of the Puranas in general is admitted by the disputants, is also proof that it is the work of a different hand. Whether the Devi Bhagavata have a better title to be considered as an original composition of Vyasa, is equally questionable; but it cannot be doubted that the S'ri Bhagavata is the product of uninspired erudition. There does not seem to be any other ground than tradition for ascribing it to Vopadeva the grammarian; but there is no reason to call the tradition in question. Vopadeva flourished at the court of Hemadri, Raja of Devagiri, Deogur or Dowlutabad, and must consequently have lived prior to the conquest of that principality by the Mohammedans in the fourteenth century. The date of the twelfth century, commonly assigned to him, is probably correct, and is that of the Bhagavata Purana.

Footnotes

^xxv:46 
Click to view

^xxvi:47 See p. 5.

^xxvii:48 A translation of the ninth, by Capt. Fell, was published in Calcutta in different numbers of the Monthly and Quarterly Magazine, in 1823 and 1824. The second volume of Maurice's Ancient History of Hindustan contains a translation, by Mr. Halhed, of the tenth book, made through the medium of a Persian version.

^xxviii:49 As. Res. vol. VII. p.467.

^xxviii:50 Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p.155, note.

^xxviii:51 Book I. chap. iv. 20-22.

^xxix:52 Book I. 7,8.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

6. The Naradiya Purana

6. Narada or Naradiya Purana. "Where Narada has described the duties which were observed in the Vrihat Kalpa, that, is called the Naradiya,

[p. xxxii]

having twenty-five thousand stanzas [*53]." If the number of verses be here correctly stated, the Purana has not fallen into my hands. The copy I have analysed contains not many more than three thousand s'lokas. There is another work, which might be expected to be of greater extent, the Vrihat Naradiya, or great Narada Purana; but this, according to the concurrence of three copies in my possession, and of five others in the Company's library, contains but about three thousand five hundred verses. It may be doubted, therefore, if the Narada Purana of the Matsya exists [*54].

According to the Matsya, the Narada Purana is related by Narada, and gives an account of the Vrihat Kalpa. The Naradiya Purana is communicated by Narada to the Rishis at Naimisharanya, on the Gomati river. The Vrihannaradiya is related to the same persons, at the same place, by Suta, as it was told by Narada to Sanatkumara. Possibly the term Vrihat may have been suggested by the specification which is given in the Matsya; but there is no description in it of any particular Kalpa, or day of Brahma.

From a cursory examination of these Puranas, it is very evident that they have no conformity to the definition of a Purana, and that both are sectarial and modern compilations, intended to support the doctrine of Bhakti, or faith in Vishnu. With this view they have collected a variety of prayers addressed to one or other form of that divinity; a number of observances and holidays connected with his adoration; and different legends, some perhaps of an early, others of a more recent date, illustrative of the efficacy of devotion to Hari. Thus in the Narada we have the stories of Dhruva and Prahlada; the latter told in the words of the Vishnu: whilst the second portion of it is occupied with a legend of Mohini, the will-born daughter of a king called Rukmangada: beguiled by

[p. xxxiii]

whom, the king offers to perform for her whatever she may desire. She calls upon him either to violate the rule of fasting on the eleventh day of the fortnight, a day sacred to Vishnu, or to put his son to death; and he kills his son, as the lesser sin of the two. This shews the spirit of the work. Its date may also be inferred from its tenor, as such monstrous extravagancies in praise of Bhakti are certainly of modern origin. One limit it furnishes itself, for it refers to S'uka and Parikshit, the interlocutors of the Bhagavata, and it is consequently subsequent to the date of that Purana: it is probably considerably later, for it affords evidence that it was written after India was in the hands of the Mohammedans. In the concluding passage it is said, "Let not this Purana be repeated in the presence of the 'killers of cows' and contemners of the gods." It is possibly a compilation of the sixteenth or seventeenth century.

The Vrihannaradiya is a work of the same tenor and time. It contains little else than panegyrical prayers addressed to Vishnu, and injunctions to observe various rites, and keep holy certain seasons, in honour of him. The earlier legends introduced are the birth of Markandeya, the destruction of Sagara's sons, and the dwarf Avatara; but they are subservient to the design of the whole, and are rendered occasions for praising Narayana: others, illustrating the efficacy of certain Vaishnava observances, are puerile inventions, wholly foreign to the more ancient system of Pauranik fiction. There is no attempt at cosmogony, or patriarchal or regal genealogy. It is possible that these topics may be treated of in the missing stanzas; but it seems more likely that the Narada Purana of the lists has little in common with the works to which its name is applied in Bengal and Hindustan.

Footnotes

^xxxii:53 
Click to view

^xxxii:54 The description of Vishnu, translated by Col. Vans Kennedy (Affinity of Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p. 200) from the Naradiya Purana, occurs in my copy of the Vrihat Naradiya. There is no Narada Purana in the East India Company's library, though, as noticed in the text, several of the Vrihat Naradiya. There is a copy of the Rukmangada Charitra, said to be a part of the S'ri Narada Purana.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

7. The Markandeya Purana

7. Markanda or Markandeya Purana. "That Purana in which, commencing with the story of the birds that were acquainted with right and wrong, every thing is narrated fully by Markandeya, as it was explained by holy sages in reply to the question of the Muni, is called the Markandeya, containing nine thousand verses [*55]." This is so called from its

[p. xxxiv]

being in the first instance narrated by Markandeya Muni, and in the second place by certain fabulous birds; thus far agreeing with the account given of it in the Matsya. That, as well as other authorities, specify its containing nine thousand stanzas; but my copy closes with a verse affirming that the number of verses recited by the Muni was six thousand nine hundred; and a copy in the East India Company's library has a similar specification. The termination is, however, somewhat abrupt, and there is no reason why the subject with which it ends should not have been carried on farther. One copy in the Company's library, indeed, belonging to the Guicowar's collection, states at the close that it is the end of the first Khanda, or section. If the Purana was ever completed, the remaining portion of it appears to be lost.

Jaimini, the pupil of Vyasa, applies to Markandeya to be made acquainted with the nature of Vasudeva, and for an explanation of some of the incidents described in the Mahabharata; with the ambrosia of which divine poem, Vyasa he declares has watered the whole world: a reference which establishes the priority of the Bharata to the Markandeya Purana, however incompatible this may be with the tradition, that having finished the Puranas, Vyasa wrote the poem.

Markandeya excuses himself, saying he has a religious rite to perform; and he refers Jaimini to some very sapient birds, who reside in the Vindhya mountains; birds of a celestial origin, found, when just born, by the Muni S'amika, on the field of Kurukshetra, and brought up by him along with his scholars: in consequence of which, and by virtue of their heavenly descent, they became profoundly versed in the Vedas, and a knowledge of spiritual truth. This machinery is borrowed from the Mahabharata, with some embellishment. Jaimini accordingly has recourse to the birds, Pingaksha and his brethren, and puts to them the questions he had asked of the Muni. "Why was Vasudeva born as a mortal? How was it that Draupadi was the wife of the five Pandus? Why did Baladeva do penance for Brahmanicide? and why were the children of Draupadi destroyed, when they had Krishna and Arjuna to defend them?" The answers to these inquiries occupy a number of chapters, and form a sort of supplement to the Mahabharata; supplying,

[p. xxxv]

partly by invention, perhaps, and partly by reference to equally ancient authorities, the blanks left in some of its narrations.

Legends of Vritrasura's death, Baladeva's penance, Haris'chandra's elevation to heaven, and the quarrel between Vas'ishtha and Viswamitra, are followed by a discussion respecting birth, death, and sin; which leads to a more extended description of the different hells than is found in other Puranas. The account of creation which is contained in this work is repeated by the birds after Markandeya's account of it to Kroshtuki, and is confined to the origin of the Vedas and patriarchal families, amongst whom are new characters, as Duhsaha and his wife Marshti, and their descendants; allegorical personages, representing intolerable iniquity and its consequences. There is then a description of the world, with, as usual to this Purana, several singularities, some of which are noticed in the following pages. This being the state of the world in the Swayambhuva Manwantara, an account of the other Manwantaras succeeds, in which the births of the Manus, and a number of other particulars, are peculiar to this work. The present or Vaivaswata Manwantara is very briefly passed over; but the next, the first of the future Manwantaras, contains the long episodical narrative of the actions of the goddess Durga, which is the especial boast of this Purana, and is the text-book of the worshippers of Kali, Chandi, or Durga, in Bengal. It is the Chandi Patha, or Durga Mahatmya, in which the victories of the goddess over different evil beings, or Asuras, are detailed with considerable power and spirit. It is read daily in the temples of Durga, and furnishes the pomp and circumstance of the great festival of Bengal, the Durga puja, or public worship of that goddess [*56].

After the account of the Manwantaras is completed, there follows a series of legends, some new, some old, relating to the sun and his posterity; continued to Vaivaswata Manu and his sons, and their immediate descendants; terminating with Dama, the son of Narishyanta [*57]. Of most of the persons noticed, the work narrates particulars not found elsewhere.

[p. xxxvi]

This Purana has a character different from that of all the others. It has nothing of a sectarial spirit, little of a religious tone, rarely inserting prayers and invocations to any deity, and such as are inserted are brief and moderate. It deals little in precepts, ceremonial or moral. Its leading feature is narrative, and it presents an uninterrupted succession of legends, most of which, when ancient, are embellished with new circumstances; and when new, partake so far of the spirit of the old, that they are disinterested creations of the imagination, having no particular motive; being designed to recommend no special doctrine or observance. Whether they are derived from any other source, or whether they are original inventions, it is not possible to ascertain. They are most probably, for the greater part at least, original; and the whole has been narrated in the compiler's own manner, a manner superior to that of the Puranas in general, with exception of the Bhagavata.

It is not easy to conjecture a date for this Purana: it is subsequent to the Mahabharata, but how long subsequent is doubtful. It is unquestionably more ancient than such works as the Brahma, Padma, and Naradiya Puranas; and its freedom from sectarial bias is a reason for supposing it anterior to the Bhagavata. At the same time, its partial conformity to the definition of a Purana, and the tenor of the additions which it has made to received legends and traditions, indicate a not very remote age; and, in the absence of any guide to a more positive conclusion, it may conjecturally be placed in the ninth or tenth century.

Footnotes

^xxxiii:55 
Click to view

^xxxv:56 A translation into English by a Madras Pandit, Kavali Venkata Ramaswami, was published at Calcutta in 1823.

^xxxv:57 See Vishnu P., p. 253. n. 22.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

8. The Agni Purana

8. Agni Purana. "That Purana which describes the occurrences of the Is'ana Kalpa, and was related by Agni to Vas'ishtha, is called the Agneya: it consists of sixteen thousand stanzas [*58]." The Agni or Agneya Purana derives its name from its having being communicated originally by Agni, the deity of fire, to the Muni Vas'ishtha, for the purpose of instructing him in the twofold knowledge of Brahma [*59]. By him it was taught to Vyasa, who imparted it to Suta; and the latter is represented as repeating it to the Rising at Naimisharanya. Its contents are variously specified as sixteen thousand, fifteen thousand, or fourteen thousand

 

[p. xxxvii]

stanzas. The two copies which were employed by me contain about fifteen thousand s'lokas. There are two in the Company's library, which do not extend beyond twelve thousand verses; but they are in many other respects different from mine: one of them was written at Agra, in the reign of Akbar, in A. D. 1589.

The Agni Purana, in the form in which it has been obtained in Bengal and at Benares, presents a striking contrast to the Markandeya. It may be doubted if a single line of it is original. A very great proportion of it may be traced to other sources; and a more careful collation --if the task was worth the time it would require--would probably discover the remainder.

The early chapters of this Purana [*60] describe the Avataras; and in those of Rama and Krishna avowedly follow the Ramayana and Mahabharata. A considerable portion is then appropriated to instructions for the performance of religious ceremonies; many of winch belong to the Tantrika ritual, and are apparently transcribed from the principal authorities of that system. Some belong to mystical forms of S'aiva worship, little known in Hindustan, though perhaps still practised in the south. One of these is the Diksha, or initiation of a novice; by which, with numerous ceremonies and invocations, in which the mysterious monosyllables of the Tantras are constantly repeated, the disciple is transformed into a living personation of S'iva, and receives in that capacity the homage of his Guru. Interspersed with these, are chapters descriptive of the earth and of the universe, which are the same as those of the Vishnu Purana; and Mahatmyas or legends of holy places, particularly of Gaya. Chapters on the duties of kings, and on the art of war, then occur, which have the appearance of being extracted from some older work, as is undoubtedly the chapter on judicature, which follows them, and which is the same as the text of the Mitakshara. Subsequent to these, we have an account of the distribution and arrangement of the Vedas and Puranas, which is little else than an abridgment of the

[p. xxxviii]

[paragraph continues] Vishnu: and in a chapter on gifts we have a description of the Puranas, which is precisely the same, and in the same situation, as the similar subject in the Matsya Purana. The genealogical chapters are meagre lists, differing in a few respects from those commonly received, as hereafter noticed, but unaccompanied by any particulars, such as those recorded or invented in the Markandeya. The next subject is medicine, compiled avowedly, but injudiciously, from the Saus'ruta. A series of chapters on the mystic worship of S'iva and Devi follows; and the work winds up with treatises on rhetoric, prosody, and grammar, according to the Sutras of Pingala and Panini.

The cyclopaedical character of the Agni Purana, as it is now described, excludes it from any legitimate claims to be regarded as a Purana, and proves that its origin cannot be very remote. It is subsequent to the Itihasas; to the chief works on grammar, rhetoric, and medicine; and to the introduction of the Tantrika worship of Devi. When this latter took place is yet far from determined, but there is every probability that it dates long after the beginning of our era. The materials of the Agni, Purana are, however, no doubt of some antiquity. The medicine of Sus'ruta is considerably older than the ninth century; and the grammar of Panini probably precedes Christianity. The chapters on archery and arms, and on regal administration, are also distinguished by an entirely Hindu character, and must have been written long anterior to the Mohammedan invasion. So far the Agni Purana is valuable, as embodying and preserving relics of antiquity, although compiled at a more' recent date.

Col. Wilford [*61] has made great use of a list of kings derived from an appendix to the Agni Purana, which professes to be the sixty-third or last section. As he observes, it is seldom found annexed to the Purana. I have never met with it, and doubt its ever having formed any part of the original compilation. It would appear from Col. Wilford's remarks, that this list notices Mohammed as the institutor of an era; but his account of this is not very distinct. He mentions explicitly, however, that the list speaks of Salivahana and Vikramaditya; and this is quite

[p. xxxix]

sufficient to establish its character. The compilers of the Puranas were not such bunglers as to bring within their chronology so well known a personage as Vikramaditya. There are in all parts of India various compilations ascribed to the Puranas, which never formed any portion of their contents, and which, although offering sometimes useful local information, and valuable as preserving popular traditions, are not in justice to be confounded with the Puranas, so as to cause them to be charged with even more serious errors and anachronisms than those of which they are guilty.

The two copies of this work in the library of the East India Company appropriate the first half to a description of the ordinary and occasional observances of the Hindus, interspersed with a few legends: the latter half treats exclusively of the history of Mina.

Footnotes

^xxxvi:58 
Click to view

^xxxvi:59 See .

^xxxvii:60 Analysis of the Agni Purana: Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, March 1832. I have there stated incorrectly that the Agni is a Vaishnava Purana: it is one of the Tamasa or S'aiva class, as mentioned above.

^xxxviii:61 Essay on Vikramaditya and Salivahana: As. Res. vol. IX. p. 131.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

9. The Bhavishya Purana

9. Bhavishya Purana. "The Purana in which Brahma, having described the greatness of the sun, explained to Manu the existence of the world, and the characters of all created things, in the course of the Aghora Kalpa; that, is called the Bhavishya, the stories being for the most part the events of a future period. It contains fourteen thousand five hundred stanzas [*62]." This Purana, as the name implies, should be a book of prophecies, foretelling what will be (bhavishyati), as the Matsya Purana intimates. Whether such a work exists is doubtful. The copies, which appear to be entire, and of which there are three in the library of the East India Company, agreeing in their contents with two in my possession, contain about seven thousand stanzas. There is another work, entitled the Bhavishyottara, as if it was a continuation or supplement of the former, containing also about seven thousand verses; but the subjects of .both these works are but to a very imperfect degree analogous to those to which the Matsya alludes [*63].

The Bhavishya Purana, as I have it, is a work in a hundred and

[p. xl]

twenty-six short chapters, repeated by Sumantu to S'atanika, a king of the Pandu family. He notices, however, its having originated with Swayambhu or Brahma; and describes it as consisting of five parts; four dedicated, it should seem, to as many deities, as they are termed, Brahma, Vaishnava, S'aiva, and Twashtra; whilst the fifth is the Pratisarga, or repeated creation. Possibly the first part only may have come into my hands, although it does not so appear by the manuscript.

Whatever it may be, the work in question is not a Purana. The first portion, indeed, treats of creation; but it is little else than a transcript of the words of the first chapter of Manu. The rest is entirely a manual of religious rites and ceremonies. It explains the ten Sanskaras, or initiatory rites; the performance of the Sandhya; the reverence to be shewn to a Guru; the duties of the different Asramas and castes; and enjoins a number of Vratas, or observances of fasting and the like, appropriate to different lunar days. A few legends enliven the series of precepts. That of the sage Chyavana is told at considerable length, taken chiefly from the Mahabharata. The Naga Panchami, or fifth lunation, sacred to the serpent-gods, gives rise to a description of different sorts of snakes. After these, which occupy about one-third of the chapters, the remainder of them conform in subject to one of the topics referred to by the Matsya. They chiefly represent conversations between Krishna, his son S'amba, who had become a leper by the curse of Durvasas, Vas'ishtha, Narada, and Vyasa, upon the power and glory of the sun, and the manner in which he is to be worshipped. There is some curious matter in the last chapters, relating to the Magas, silent worshippers of the sun, from Sakadwipa, as if the compiler had adopted the Persian term Magh, and connected the fire-worshippers of Iran with those of India. This is a subject, however, that requires farther investigation.

The Bhavishyottara is, equally with the preceding, a sort of manual of religious offices, the greater portion being appropriated to Vratas, and the remainder to the forms and circumstances with which gifts are to be presented. Many of the ceremonies are obsolete, or are observed in a different manner, as the Rath-yatra, or car festival; and the Madanotsava, or festival of spring. The descriptions of these throw some light

[p. xli]

upon the public condition of the Hindu religion at a period probably prior to the Mohammedan conquest. The different ceremonies are illustrated by legends, which are sometimes ancient, as, for instance, the destruction of the god of love by S'iva, and his thence becoming Ananga, the disembodied lord of hearts. The work is supposed to be communicated by Krishna to Yudhishthira, at a great assemblage of holy persons at the coronation of the latter, after the conclusion of the great war.

Footnotes

^xxxix:62 
Click to view

^xxxix:63 Col. Vans Kennedy states that he had not been able to procure the Bhavishya P., nor even ever to obtain any account of its contents: Anc. and Hindu Mythology, p.153, note.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

10. The Brahma-vaivartta Purana

10. Brahma-vaivartta Purana. "That Purana which is related by Savarni to Narada, and contains the account of the greatness of Krishna, with the occurrences of the Rathantara Kalpa, where also the story of Brahma-varaha is repeatedly told, is called the Brahma-vaivartta, and contains eighteen thousand stanzas [*64]." The account here given of the Brahma-vaivartta Purana agrees with its present state as to its extent. The copies rather exceed than fall short of eighteen thousand stanzas. It also correctly represents its comprising a Mahatmya or legend of Krishna; but it is very doubtful, nevertheless, if the same work is intended.

The Brahma-vaivartta, as it now exists, is narrated, not by Savarni, but the Rishi Narayana to Narada, by whom it is communicated to Vyasa: he teaches it to Suta, and the latter repeats it to the Rishis at Naimisharanya. It is divided into four Khandas, or books; the Brahma, Prakriti, Ganes'a, and Krishna Janma Khandas; dedicated severally to describe the acts of Brahma, Devi, Ganes'a, and Krishna; the latter, however, throughout absorbing the interest and importance of the work. In none of these is there any account of the Varaha Avatara of Vishnu, which seems to be intended by the Matsya; nor any reference to a Rathantara Kalpa. It may also be observed, that, in describing the merit of presenting a copy of this Purana, the Matsya adds, "Whoever makes such gift, is honoured in the Brahma-loka;" a sphere which is of very inferior dignity to that to which a worshipper of Krishna is taught to aspire by this Purana. The character of the work is in truth so decidedly sectarial, and the sect to which it belongs so distinctly marked,

[p. xlii]

that of the worshippers of the juvenile Krishna and Radha, a form of belief of known modern origin, that it can scarcely have found a notice in a work to which, like the Matsya, a much more remote date seems to belong. Although therefore the Matsya may be received in proof of there having been a Brahma-vaivartta Purana at the date of its compilation, dedicated especially to the honour of Krishna, yet we cannot credit the possibility of its being the same we now possess.

Although some of the legends believed to be ancient are scattered through the different portions of this Purana, yet the great mass of it is taken up with tiresome descriptions of Vrindavan and Goloka, the dwellings of Krishna on earth and in heaven; with endless repetitions of prayers and invocations addressed to him; and with insipid descriptions of his person and sports, and the love of the Gopis and of Radha towards him. There are some particulars of the origin of the artificer castes, which is of value because it is cited as authority in matters affecting them, contained in the Brahma Khanda; and in the Prakrita and Ganes'a Khandas are legends of those divinities, not wholly, perhaps, modern inventions, but of which the source has not been traced. In the life of Krishna the incidents recorded are the same as those narrated in the Vishnu and the Bhagavata; but the stories, absurd as they are, are much compressed to make room for original matter, still more puerile and tiresome. The Brahma-vaivartta has not the slightest title to be regarded as a Purana [*65].

Footnotes

^xli:64 
Click to view

^xlii:65 Analysis of the Brahma-vaivartta Purana: Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, June 1832.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

11. The Linga Purana

11. Linga Purana. "Where Mahes'wara, present in the Agni Linga, explained (the objects of life) virtue, wealth, pleasure, and final liberation at the end of the Agni Kalpa, that Purana, consisting of eleven thousand stanzas, was called the Lainga by Brahma himself [*66]."

The Linga Purana conforms accurately enough to this description. The Kalpa is said to be the Is'ana, but this is the only difference. It consists of eleven thousand stanzas. It is said to have been originally composed by Brahma; and the primitive Linga is a pillar of radiance,

[p. xliii]

in which Mahes'wara is present. The work is therefore the same as that referred to by the Matsya.

A short account is given, in the beginning, of elemental and secondary creation, and of the patriarchal families; in which, however, S'iva takes the place of Vishnu, as the indescribable cause of all things. Brief accounts of S'iva's incarnations and proceedings in different Kalpas next occur, offering no interest except as characteristic of sectarial notions. The appearance of the great fiery Linga takes place, in the interval of a creation, to separate Vishnu and Brahma, who not only dispute the palm of supremacy, but fight for it; when the Linga suddenly springs up, and puts them both to shame; as, after travelling upwards and downwards for a thousand years in each direction, neither can approach to its termination. Upon the Linga the sacred monosyllable Om is visible, and the Vedas proceed from it, by which Brahms and Vishnu become enlightened, and acknowledge and eulogize the superior might and glory of S'iva.

A notice of the creation in the Padma Kalpa then follows, and this leads to praises of S'iva by Vishnu and Brahma. S'iva repeats the story of his incarnations, twenty-eight in number; intended as a counterpart, no doubt, to the twenty-four Avataras of Vishnu, as described in the Bhagavata; and both being amplifications of the original ten Avataras, and of much less merit as fictions. Another instance of rivalry occurs in the legend of Dadhichi, a Muni and worshipper of S'iva. In the Bhagavata there is a story of Ambarisha being defended against Durvasas by the discus of Vishnu, against which that S'aiva sage is helpless: here Vishnu hurls his discus at Dadhichi, but it falls blunted to the ground, and a conflict ensues, in which Vishnu and his partisans are all overthrown by the Muni.

A description of the universe, and of the regal dynasties of the Vaivaswata Manwantara to the time of Krishna, runs through a number of chapters, in substance, and very commonly in words, the same as in other Puranas. After which, the work resumes its proper character, narrating legends, and enjoining rites, and reciting prayers, intending to do honour to S'iva under various forms. Although, however, the Linga

[p. xliv]

holds a prominent place amongst them, the spirit of the worship is as little influenced by the character of the type as can well be imagined. There is nothing like the phallic orgies of antiquity: it is all mystical and spiritual. The Linga is twofold, external and internal. The ignorant, who need a visible sign, worship S'iva through a 'mark' or 'type'--which is the proper meaning of the word 'Linga'--of wood or stone; but the wise look upon this outward emblem as nothing, and contemplate in their minds the invisible, inscrutable type, which is S'iva himself. Whatever may have been the origin of this form of worship in India, the notions upon which it was founded, according to the impure fancies of European writers, are not to be traced in even the S'aiva Puranas.

Data for conjecturing the era of this work are defective, but it is more of a ritual than a Purana, and the Pauranik chapters which it has inserted, in order to keep up something of its character, have been evidently borrowed for the purpose. The incarnations of S'iva, and their 'pupils,' as specified in one place, and the importance attached to the practice of the Yoga, render it possible that under the former are intended those teachers of the S'aiva religion who belong to the Yoga school [*67], which seems to have flourished about the eighth or ninth centuries. It is not likely that the work is earlier, it may be considerably later. It has preserved apparently some S'aiva legends of an early date, but the greater part is ritual and mysticism of comparatively recent introduction.

Footnotes

^xlii:66 
Click to view

^xliv:67 See Asiatic Researches, vol. XVII. p. 287.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

12. The Varaha Purana

12. Varaha Purana. "That in which the glory of the great Varaha is predominant, as it was revealed to Earth by Vishnu, in connexion, wise Munis, with the Manava Kalpa, and which contains twenty-four thousand verses, is called the Varaha Purana [*68]."

It may be doubted if the Varaha Purana of the present day is here intended. It is narrated by Vishnu as Varaha, or in the boar incarnation, to the personified Earth. Its extent, however, is not half that specified, little exceeding ten thousand stanzas. It furnishes also itself

[p. xlv]

evidence of the prior currency of some other work, similarly denominated; as, in the description of Mathura contained in it, Sumantu, a Muni, is made to observe, "The divine Varaha in former times expounded a Purana, for the purpose of solving the perplexity of Earth."

Nor can the Varaha Purana be regarded as a Purana agreeably to the common definition, as it contains but a few scattered and brief allusions to the creation of the world, and the reign of kings: it has no detailed genealogies either of the patriarchal or regal families, and no account of the reigns of the Manus. Like the Linga Purana, it is a religious manual, almost wholly occupied with forms of prayer, and rules for devotional observances, addressed to Vishnu; interspersed with legendary illustrations, most of which are peculiar to itself, though some are taken from the common and ancient stock: many of them, rather incompatibly with the general scope of the compilation, relate to the history of S'iva and Durga [*69]. A considerable portion of the work is devoted to descriptions of various Tirthas, places of Vaishnava pilgrimage; and one of Mathura enters into a variety of particulars relating to the shrines of that city, constituting the Mathura Mahatmyam.

In the sectarianism of the Varaha Purana there is no leaning to the particular adoration of Krishna, nor are the Rath-yatra and Janmashtami included amongst the observances enjoined. There are other indications of its belonging to an earlier stage of Vaishnava worship, and it may perhaps be referred to the age of Ramanuja, the early part of the twelfth century.

Footnotes

^xliv:68 
Click to view

^xlv:69 One of these is translated by Col. Vans Kennedy, the origin of the three S'aktis, or goddesses, Saraswati, Lakshmi, and Parvati. Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p. 209. The Tri S'akti Mahatmya occurs, as he gives it, in my copy, and is so far an indication of the identity of the Varaha Purana in the different MSS.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

13. The Skanda Purana

13. Skanda Purana. "The Skanda Purana is that in which the six-faced deity (Skanda) has related the events of the Tatpurusha Kalpa, enlarged with many tales, and subservient to the duties taught by Mahes'wara. It is said to contain eighty-one thousand one hundred stanzas: so it is asserted amongst mankind  [*70]."

[p. xlvi]

It is uniformly agreed that the Skanda Purana in a collective form has no existence; and the fragments in the shape of Sanhitas, Khandas, and Mahatmyas, which are affirmed in various parts of India to be portions of the Purana, present a much more formidable mass of stanzas than even the immense number of which it is said to consist. The most celebrated of these portions in Hindustan is the Kas'i Khanda, a very minute description of the temples of S'iva in or adjacent to Benares, mixed with directions for worshipping Mahes'wara, and a great variety of legends explanatory of its merits, and of the holiness of Kas'i: many of them are puerile and uninteresting, but some are of a higher character. The story of Agastya records probably, in a legendary style, the propagation of Hinduism in the south of India: and in the history of Divodasa, king of Kas'i, we have an embellished tradition of the temporary depression of the worship of S'iva, even in its metropolis, before the ascendancy of the followers of Buddha [*71], There is every reason to believe the greater part of the contents of the Kas'i Khanda anterior to the first attack upon Benares by Mahmud of Ghizni. The Kas'i Khanda alone contains fifteen thousand stanzas.

Another considerable work ascribed in upper India to the Skanda Purana is the Utkala Khanda, giving an account of the holiness of Urissa, and the Kshetra of Purushottama or Jagannatha. The same vicinage is the site of temples, once of great magnificence and extent, dedicated to S'iva, as Bhuvanes'wara, which forms an excuse for attaching an account of a Vaishnava Tirtha to an eminently S'aiva Purana. There can be little doubt, however, that the Utkala Khanda is unwarrantably included amongst the progeny of the parent work. Besides these, there is a Brahmottara Khanda, a Reva Khanda, a S'iva Rahasya Khanda, a Himavat Khanda, and others. Of the Sanhitas, the chief are the Suta Sanhita, Sanatkumara Sanhita, Saura Sanhita, and Kapila Sanhita: there are several other works denominated Sanhitas. The

[p. xlvii]

[paragraph continues] Mahatmyas are more numerous still [*72]. According to the Suta Sanhita, as quoted by Col. Vans Kennedy [*73], the Skanda Purana contains six Sanhitas, five hundred Khandas, and five hundred thousand stanzas; more than is even attributed to all the Puranas. He thinks, judging from internal evidence, that all the Khandas and Sanhitas may be admitted to be genuine, though the Mahatmyas have rather a questionable appearance. Now one kind of internal evidence is the quantity; and as no more than eighty-one thousand one hundred stanzas have ever been claimed for it, all in excess above that amount must be questionable. But many of the Khandas, the Kas'i Khanda for instance, are quite as local as the Mahatmyas, being legendary stories relating to the erection and sanctity of certain temples or groups of temples, and to certain Lingas; the interested origin of which renders them very reasonably objects of suspicion. In the present state of our acquaintance with the reputed portions of the Skanda Purana, my own views of their authenticity are so opposed to those entertained by Col. Vans Kennedy, that instead of admitting all the Sanhitas and Khandas to be genuine, I doubt if any one of them was ever a part of the Skanda Purana.

Footnotes

^xlv:70 
Click to view

^xlvi:71 The legend is translated by Col. Vans Kennedy: Ancient and Hindu Mythology, Appendix B.

^xlvii:72 [p. xlvi] In a list of reputed portions of the Skanda Purana in the possession of my friend Mr. C. P. Brown, of the Civil service of Madras, the Sanhitas are seven, the Khandas twelve, besides parts denominated [p. xlvii] Gita, Kalpa, Stotra, &c. In the collection of Col. Mackenzie, amongst the Mahatmyas thirty-six are said to belong to the Skanda P.: vol. I. p. 6i. In the library at the India House are two Sanhitas, the Suta and Sanatkumara, fourteen Khandas, and twelve Mahatmyas.

^xlvii:73 Ancient and Hindu Mythol., p. 554, note.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

14. The Vamana Purana

14. Vamana Purana. "That in which the four-faced Brahma taught the three objects of existence, as subservient to the account of the greatness of Trivikrama, which treats also of the S'iva Kalpa, and which consists of ten thousand stanzas, is called the Vamana Purana [*74]."

The Vamana Purana contains an account of the dwarf incarnation of Vishnu; but it is related by Pulastya to Narada, and extends to but about seven thousand stanzas. Its contents can scarcely establish its claim to the character of a Purana [*75].

[p. xlviii]

There is little or no order in the subjects which this work recapitulates, and which arise out of replies made by Pulastya to questions put abruptly and unconnectedly by Narada. The greater part of them relate to the worship of the Linga; a rather strange topic for a Vaishnava Purana, but engrossing the principal part of the compilation. They are however subservient to the object of illustrating the sanctity of certain holy places; so that the Vamana Purana is little else than a succession of Mahatmyas. Thus in the opening almost of the work occurs the story of Daksha's sacrifice, the object of which is to send S'iva to Papamochana tirtha at Benares, where he is released from the sin of Brahmanicide. Next conies the story of the burning of Kamadeva, for the purpose of illustrating the holiness of a S'iva-linga at Kedares'wara in the Himalaya, and of Badarikas'rama. The larger part of the work consists of the Saro-mahatmya, or legendary exemplifications of the holiness of Sthanu tirtha; that is, of the sanctity of various Lingas and certain pools at Thanesar and Kurukhet, the country north-west from Delhi. There are some stories also relating to the holiness of the Godavari river; but the general site of the legends is in Hindustan. In the course of these accounts we have a long narrative of the marriage of S'iva with Uma, and the birth of Kartikeya. There are a few brief allusions to creation and the Manwantaras, but they are merely incidental; and all the five characteristics of a Purana are deficient. In noticing the Swarochisha Manwantara, towards the end of the book, the elevation of Bali as monarch of the Daityas, and his subjugation of the universe, the gods included, are described; and this leads to the narration that gives its title to the Purana, the birth of Krishna as a dwarf, for the purpose of humiliating Bali by fraud, as he was invincible by force. The story is told as usual, but the scene is laid at Kurukshetra.

A more minute examination of this work than that which has been given to it might perhaps discover some hint from which to conjecture its date. It is of a more tolerant character than the Puranas, and divides its homage between S'iva and Vishnu with tolerable impartiality. It is not connected, therefore, with any sectarial principles, and may have preceded their introduction. It has not, however, the air of any antiquity,

[p. xlix]

and its compilation may have amused the leisure of some Brahman of Benares three or four centuries ago.

Footnotes

^xlvii:74 
Click to view

^xlvii:75 From the extracts from the Vamana Pura translated by Col. Vans Kennedy, p. 293 et seq., it appears that his copy so far corresponds with mine, and the work is therefore probably the same: two copies in the Company's library also agree with mine.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

15. The Kurma Purana

15. Kurma Purana. "That in which Janarddana, in the form of a tortoise, in the regions under the earth, explained the objects of life--duty, wealth, pleasure, and liberation--in communication with Indradyumna and the Rishis in the proximity of S'akra, which refers to the Lakshmi Kalpa, and contains seventeen thousand stanzas, is the Kurma Purana [*76]."

In the first chapter of the Kurma Purana it gives an account of itself, which does not exactly agree with this description. Suta, who is repeating the narration, is made to say to the Rishis, "This most excellent Kaurma Purana is the fifteenth. Sanhitas are fourfold, from the variety of the collections. The Brahmi, Bhagavati, Sauri, and Vaishnavi, are well known as the four Sanhitas which confer virtue, wealth, pleasure, and liberation. This is the Brahmi Sanhita, conformable to the four Vedas; in which there are six thousand s'lokas, and by it the importance of the four objects of life, O great sages, holy knowledge and Parames'wara is known." There is an irreconcilable difference in this specification of the number of stanzas and that given above. It is not very clear what is meant by a Sanhita as here used. A Sanhita, as observed above (p. xi), is something different from a Purana. It may be an assemblage of prayers and legends, extracted professedly from a Purana, but is not usually applicable to the original. The four Sanhitas here specified refer rather to their religious character than to their connexion with any specific work, and in fact the same terms are applied to what are called Sanhitas of the Skanda. In this sense a Purana might be also a Sanhita; that is, it might be an assemblage of formulae and legends belonging to a division of the Hindu system; and the work in question, like the Vishnu Purana, does adopt both titles. It says, "This is the excellent Kaurma Purana, the fifteenth (of the series):" and again, "This is the Brahmi Sanhita." At any rate, no other work has been met with pretending to be the Kurma Purana.

[p. l]

With regard to the other particulars specified by the Matsya, traces of them are to be found. Although in two accounts of the traditional communication of the Purana no mention is made of Vishnu as one of the teachers, yet Suta repeats at the outset a dialogue between Vishnu, as the Kurma, and Indradyumna, at the time of the churning of the ocean; and much of the subsequent narrative is put into the mouth of the former.

The name, being that of an Avatara of Vishnu, might lead us to expect a Vaishnava work; but it is always and correctly classed with the S'aiva. Puranas, the greater portion of it inculcating the worship of S'iva and Durga. It is divided into two parts, of nearly equal length. In the first part, accounts of the creation, of the Avataras of Vishnu, of the solar and lunar dynasties of the kings to the time of Krishna, of the universe, and of the Manwantaras, are given, in general in a summary manner, but not unfrequently in the words employed in the Vishnu Purana. With these are blended hymns addressed to Mahes'wara by Brahma and others; the defeat of Andhakasura by Bhairava; the origin of four S'aktis, Mahes'wari, S'iva, S'ati, and Haimavati, from S'iva; and other S'aiva legends. One chapter gives a more distinct and connected account of the incarnations of S'iva in the present age than the Linga; and it wears still more the appearance of an attempt to identify the teachers of the Yoga school with personations of their preferential deity. Several chapters form a Kas'i Mahatmya, a legend of Benares. In the second part there are no legends. It is divided into two parts, the Is'wara Gita [*77] and Vyasa Gita. In the former the knowledge of god, that is, of S'iva, through contemplative devotion, is taught. In the latter the same object is enjoined through works, or observance of the ceremonies and precepts of the Vedas.

The date of the Kurma Purana cannot be very remote, for it is avowedly posterior to the establishment of the Tantrika, the Sakta, and the Jain sects. In the twelfth chapter it is said, "The Bhairava, Vama, Arhata, and Yamala S'astras are intended for delusion." There is no

[p. li]

reason to believe that the Bhairava and Yamala Tantras are very ancient works, or that the practices of the left-hand S'aktas, or the doctrines of Arhat or Jina were known in the early centuries of our era.

Footnotes

^xlix:76 
Click to view

^l:77 This is also translated by Col. Vans Kennedy (Anc. and Hindu Mythol., Appendix D. p. 444); and in this instance, as in other passages quoted by him from the Kurma, his MS. and mine agree.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

The Matsya Purana

16. Matsya Purana. "That in which, for the sake of promulgating the Vedas, Vishnu, in the beginning of a Kalpa, related to Manu the story of Narasinha and the events of seven Kalpas, that, O sages, know to be the Matsya Purana, containing twenty thousand stanzas [*78]."

We might, it is to be supposed, admit the description which the Matsya gives of itself to be correct, and yet as regards the number of verses there seems to be a mistatement. Three very good copies, one in my possession, one in the Company's library, and one in the Radcliffe library, concur in all respects, and in containing no more than between fourteen and fifteen thousand stanzas: in this case the Bhagavata is nearer the truth, when it assigns to it fourteen thousand. We may conclude, therefore, that the reading of the passage is in this respect erroneous. It is correctly said that the subjects of the Purana were communicated by Vishnu, in the form of a fish, to Manu.

The Purana, after the usual prologue of Suta and the Rishis, opens with the account of the Matsya or 'fish' Avatara of Vishnu, in which he preserves a king named Manu, with the seeds of all things, in an ark, from the waters of that inundation which in the season of a Pralaya overspreads the world. This story is told in the Mahabharata, with reference to the Matsya as its authority; from which it might be inferred that the Purana was prior to the poem. This of course is consistent with the tradition that the Puranas were first composed by Vyasa; but there can be no doubt that the greater part of the Mahabharata is much older than any extant Purana. The present instance is itself a proof; for the primitive simplicity with which the story of the fish Avatara is told in the Mahabharata is of a much more antique complexion than the mysticism and extravagance of the actual Matsya Purana. In the former, Manu collects the seeds of existing things in the ark, it is not said how: in the latter, he brings them all together by the power of Yoga.

[p. lii]

[paragraph continues] In the latter, the great serpents come to the king, to serve as cords wherewith to fasten the ark to the horn of the fish: in the former, a cable made of ropes is more intelligibly employed for the purpose.

Whilst the ark floats, fastened to the fish, Manu enters into conversation with him; and his questions, and the replies of Vishnu, form the main substance of the compilation. The first subject is the creation, which is that of Brahma and the patriarchs. Some of the details are the usual ones; others are peculiar, especially those relating to the Pitris, or progenitors. The regal dynasties are next described; and then follow chapters on the duties of the different orders. It is in relating those of the householder, in which the duty of making gifts to Brahmans is comprehended, that we have the specification of the extent and subjects of the Puranas. It is meritorious to have copies made of them, and to give these away on particular occasions. Thus it is said of the Matsya; "Whoever gives it away at either equinox, along with a golden fish and a milch cow, gives away the whole earth;" that is, he reaps a like reward in his next migration. Special duties of the householder--Vratas, or occasional acts of piety--are then described at considerable length, with legendary illustrations. The account of the universe is given in the usual strain. S'aiva legends ensue; as, the destruction of Tripurasura; the war of the gods with Taraka and the Daityas, and the consequent birth of Kartikeya, with the various circumstances of Uma's birth and marriage, the burning of Kamadeva, and other events involved in that narrative; the destruction of the Asuras Maya and Andhaka; the origin of the Matris, and the like; interspersed with the Vaishnava legends of the Avataras. Some Mahatmyas are also introduced; one of which, the Narmada Mahatmya, contains some interesting particulars. There are various chapters on law and morals; and one which furnishes directions for building houses, and making images. We then have an account of the kings of future periods; and the Purana concludes with a chapter on gifts.

The Matsya Purana, it will be seen even from this brief sketch of its contents, is a miscellaneous compilation, but including in its contents the elements of a genuine Purana. At the same time it is of too mixed a

[p. liii]

character to be considered as a genuine work of the Pauranik class; and upon examining it carefully, it may be suspected that it is indebted to various works, not only for its matter, but for its words. The genealogical and historical chapters are much the same as those of the Vishnu; and many chapters, as those on the Pitris and Sraddhas, are precisely the same as those of the Srishti Khanda of the Padma Purana. It has drawn largely also from the Mahabharata: amongst other instances, it is sufficient to quote the story of Savitri, the devoted wife of Satyavat, which is given in the Matsya in the same manner, but considerably abridged.

Although a S'aiva work, it is not exclusively so, and it has no such sectarial absurdities as the Kurma and Linga. It is a composition of considerable interest; but if it has extracted its materials from the Padma, which it also quotes on one occasion, the specification of the Upa-puranas, it is subsequent to that work, and therefore not very ancient.

Footnotes

^li:78 
Click to view

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

17. The Garuda Purana

17. Garuda Purana. "That which Vishnu recited in the Garuda Kalpa, relating chiefly to the birth of Garuda from Vinata, is here called the Garuda Purana; and in it there are read nineteen thousand verses [*79]."

The Garuda Purana which has been the subject of my examination corresponds in no respect with this description, and is probably a different work, though entitled the Garuda Purana. It is identical, however, with two copies in the Company's library. It consists of no more than about seven thousand stanzas; it is repeated by Brahma to Indra; and it contains no account of the birth of Garuda. There is a brief notice of the creation; but the greater part is occupied with the description of Vratas, or religious observances, of holidays, of sacred places dedicated to the sun, and with prayers from the Tantrika ritual, addressed to the sun, to S'iva, and to Vishnu. It contains also treatises on astrology, palmistry, and precious stones; and one, still more extensive, on medicine. The latter portion, called the Preta Kalpa, is taken up with directions for the performance of obsequial rites. There is nothing in

[p. liv]

all this to justify the application of the name. Whether a genuine Garuda Purana exists is doubtful. The description given in the Matsya is less particular than even the brief notices of the other Puranas, and might have easily been written without any knowledge of the book itself, being, with exception of the number of stanzas, confined to circumstances that the title alone indicates.

Footnotes

^liii:79 
Click to view

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

18. The Brahmanda Purana

18. Brahmanda Purana. "That which has declared, in twelve thousand two hundred verses, the magnificence of the egg of Brahma, and in which an account of the future Kalpas is contained, is called the Brahmanda Purana, and was revealed by Brahma [*80]."

The Brahmanda Purana is usually considered to be in much the same predicament as the Skanda, no longer procurable in a collective body, but represented by a variety of Khandas and Mahatmyas, professing to be derived from it. The facility with which any tract may be thus attached to the non-existent original, and the advantage that has been taken of its absence to compile a variety of unauthentic fragments, have given to the Brahmanda, Skanda, and Padma, according to Col. Wilford, the character of being the Puranas of thieves or impostors [*81]. This is not applicable to the Padma, which, as above shewn, occurs entire and the same in various parts of India. The imposition of which the other two are made the vehicles can deceive no one, as the purpose of the particular legend is always too obvious to leave any doubt of its origin.

Copies of what profess to be the entire Brahmanda Purana are sometimes, though rarely, procurable. I met with one in two portions, the former containing, one hundred and twenty-four chapters, the latter seventy-eight; and the whole containing about the number of stanzas assigned to the Purana. The first and largest portion, however, proved to be the same as the Vayu Purana, with a passage occasionally slightly varied, and at the end of each chapter the common phrase 'Iti Brahmanda Purane' substituted for 'Iti Vayu Purane.' I do not think there was any intended fraud in the substitution. The last section of the first part of the Vayu Purana is termed the Brahmanda section, giving an

[p. lv]

account of the dissolution of the universe; and a careless or ignorant transcriber might have taken this for the title of the whole. The checks to the identity of the work have been honestly preserved, both in the index and the frequent specification of Vayu as the teacher or narrator of it.

The second portion of this Brahmanda is not any part of the Vayu; it is probably current in the Dakhin as a Sanhita or Khanda. Agastya is represented as going to the city Kanchi (Conjeveram), where Vishnu, as Hayagriva, appears to him, and, in answer to his inquiries, imparts to him the means of salvation, the worship of Paras'akti. In illustration of the efficacy of this form of adoration, the main subject of the work is an account of the exploits of Lalita Devi, a form of Durga, and her destruction of the demon Bhandasura. Rules for her worship are also given, which are decidedly of a S'akta or Tantrika description; and this work cannot be admitted, therefore, to be part of a genuine Purana.

Footnotes

^liv:80 
Click to view

^liv:81 As. Res. vol. VIII. p. 252.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

The Upa-puranas

The Upa-puranas, in the few instances which are known, differ little in extent or subject from some of those to which the title of Purana is ascribed. The Matsya enumerates but four; but the Devi Bhagavata has a more complete list, and specifies eighteen. They are, 1. The Sanatkumara, 2. Narasinha, 3. Naradiya, 4. S'iva, 5. Durvasasa, g. Kapila, 7. Manava, 8. Aus'anas'a, 9. Varuna, 10. Kalika, 11. S'amba, 12. Nandi, 13. Saura, 14. Paras'ara, 15. Aditya, 16. Mahes'wara, 17. Bhagavata, 18. Vas'ishtha. The Matsya observes of the second, that it is named in the Padma Purana, and contains eighteen thousand verses. The Nandi it calls Nanda, and says that Kartikeya tells in it the story of Nanda. A rather different list is given in the Reva Khanda; or, 1. Sanatkumara, 2. Narasinha, 3. Nanda, 4. S'ivadharma, 5. Durvasasa, 6. Bhavishya, related by Narada or Naradiya, 7. Kapila, 8. Manava, 9. Aus'anas'a, 10. Brahmanda, 11. Varuna, 12. Kalika, 13. Mahes'wara, 14. S'amba, 15. Saura, 16. Paras'ara, 17. Bhagavata, 18. Kaurma. These authorities, however, are of questionable weight, having in view, no doubt, the pretensions of the Devi Bhagavata to be considered as the authentic Bhagavata.

Of these Upa-puranas few are to be procured. Those in my possession

[p. lvi]

are the S'iva, considered as distinct from the Vayu; the Kalika, and perhaps one of the Naradiyas, as noticed above. I have also three of the Skandhas of the Devi Bhagavata, which most undoubtedly is not the real Bhagavata, supposing that any Purana so named preceded the work of Vopadeva. There can be no doubt that in any authentic list the name of Bhagavata does not occur amongst the Upa-puranas: it has been put there to prove that there are two works so entitled, of which the Purana is the Devi Bhagavata, the Upa-purana the S'ri Bhagavata. The true reading should be Bhargava, the Purana of Bhrigu; and the Devi Bhagavata is not even an Upa-purana. It is very questionable if the entire work, which as far as it extends is eminently a Sakta composition, ever had existence.

The S'iva Upa-purana contains about six thousand stanzas, distributed into two parts. It is related by Sanatkumara to Vyasa and the Rishis at Naimisharanya, and its character may be judged of from the questions to which it is a reply. "Teach us," said the Rishis, "the rules of worshipping the Linga, and of the god of gods adored under that type; describe to us his various forms, the places sanctified by him, and the prayers with which he is to be addressed." In answer, Sanatkumara repeats the S'iva Purana, containing the birth of Vishnu and Brahma; the creation and divisions of the universe; the origin of all things from the Linga; the rules of worshipping it and S'iva; the sanctity of times, places, and things, dedicated to him; the delusion of Brahma and Vishnu by the Linga; the rewards of offering flowers and the like to a Linga; rules for various observances in honour of Mahadeva; the mode of practising the Yoga; the glory of Benares and other S'aiva Tirthas; and the perfection of the objects of life by union with Mahes'wara. These subjects are illustrated in the first part with very few legends; but the second is made up almost wholly of S'aiva stories, as the defeat of Tripurasura; the sacrifice of Daksha; the births of Kartikeya and Ganes'a the sons of S'iva, and Nandi and Bhringariti his attendants and others; together with descriptions of Benares and other places of pilgrimage, and rules for observing such festivals as the S'ivaratri. This work is a S'aiva manual, not a Purana.

[p. lvii]

The Kalika Purana contains about nine thousand stanzas in ninety-eight chapters, and is the only work of the series dedicated to recommend the worship of the bride of S'iva, in one or other of her manifold forms, as Girija, Devi, Bhadrakali, Kali, Mahamaya. It belongs therefore to the Sakta modification of Hindu belief, or the worship of the female powers of the deities. The influence of this worship spews itself in the very first pages of the work, which relate the incestuous passion of Brahma for his daughter Sandhya, in a strain that has nothing analogous to it in the Vayu, Linga, or S'iva Puranas.

The marriage of S'iva and Parvati is a subject early described, with the sacrifice of Daksha, and the death of Sati: and this work is authority for S'iva's carrying the dead body about the world, and the origin of the Pithasthanas, or places where the different members of it were scattered, and where Lingas were consequently erected. A legend follows of the births of Bhairava and Vetala, whose devotion to different forms of Devi furnishes occasion to describe in great detail the rites and formulae of which her worship consists, including the chapters on sanguinary sacrifices, translated in the Asiatic Researches. Another peculiarity in this work is afforded by very prolix descriptions of a number of rivers and mountains at Kamarupa-tirtha in Asam, and rendered holy ground by the celebrated temple of Durga in that country, as Kamaks'hi or Kamakhya. It is a singular, and yet uninvestigated circumstance, that Asam, or at least the north-east of Bengal, seems to have been in a great degree the source from which the Tantrika and S'akta corruptions of the religion of the Vedas and Puranas proceeded.

The specification of the Upa-puranas, whilst it names several of which the existence is problematical, omits other works, bearing the same designation, which are sometimes met with. Thus in the collection of Col. Mackenzie [*82] we have a portion of the Bhargava, and a Mudgala Purana, which is probably the same with the Ganes'a Upa-purana, cited by Col. Vans Kennedy [*83]. I have also a copy of the Ganes'a Purana, which seems to agree with that of which he speaks; the second portion being entitled the Krida Khanda, in which the pastimes of Ganes'a, including

[p. lviii]

a variety of legendary matters, are described. The main subject of the work is the greatness of Ganes'a, and prayers and formulae appropriate to him are abundantly detailed. It appears to be a work originating with the Ganapatya sect, or worshippers of Ganes'a. There is also a minor Purana called Adi, or 'first,' not included in the list. This is a work, however, of no great extent or importance, and is confined to a detail of the sports of the juvenile Krishna.

Footnotes

^lvii:82 Mackenzie Collection, 1. 50, 51.

^lvii:83 Anc. and Hindu Mythology, p. 251.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Synopsis of the Vishnu Purana

From the sketch thus offered of the subjects of the Puranas, and which, although admitting of correction, is believed to be in the main a candid and accurate summary, it will be evident that in their present condition they must be received with caution as authorities for the mythological religion of the Hindus at any remote period. They preserve, no doubt, many ancient notions and traditions; but these have been so much mixed up with foreign matter, intended to favour the popularity of particular forms of worship or articles of faith, that they cannot be unreservedly recognised as genuine representations of what we have reason to believe the Puranas originally were.

The safest sources for the ancient legends of the Hindus, after the Vedas, are no doubt the two great poems, the Ramayana and Mahabharata. The first offers only a few, but they are of a primitive character. The Mahabharata is more fertile in fiction, but it is more miscellaneous, and much that it contains is of equivocal authenticity, and uncertain date. Still it affords many materials that are genuine, and it is evidently the great fountain from which most, if not all, of the Puranas have drawn; as it intimates itself, when it declares that there is no legend current in the world which has not its origin in the Mahabharata [*84].

A work of some extent professing to be part of the Mahabharata may more accurately be ranked with the Pauranik compilations of least authenticity, and latest origin. The Hari Vans'a is chiefly occupied with the adventures of Krishna, but, as introductory to his era, it records particulars of the creation of the world, and of the patriarchal and regal

[p. lix]

dynasties. This is done with much carelessness and inaccuracy of compilation, as I have had occasion frequently to notice in the following pages. The work has been very industriously translated by M. Langlois.

A comparison of the subjects of the following pages with those of the other Puranas will sufficiently shew that of the whole series the Vishnu most closely conforms to the definition of a Pancha-lakshana Purana, or one which treats of five specified topics. It comprehends them all; and although it has infused a portion of extraneous and sectarial matter, it has done so with sobriety and with judgment, and has not suffered the fervour of its religious zeal to transport it into very wide deviations from the prescribed path. The legendary tales which it has inserted are few, and are conveniently arranged, so that they do not distract the attention of the compiler from objects of more permanent interest and importance.

Footnotes

^lviii:84 
Click to view 'Unconnected with this narrative, no story is known upon earth.' Vol. I. p. 11. l. 307.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Book One

The first book of the six, into which the work is divided, is occupied chiefly with the details of creation, primary (Sarga) and secondary (Pratisarga); the first explaining how the universe proceeds from Prakriti, or eternal crude matter; the second, in what manner the forms of things are developed from the elementary substances previously evolved, or how they reappear after their temporary destruction. Both these creations are periodical, but the termination of the first occurs only at the end of the life of Brahma, when not only all the gods and all other forms are annihilated, but the elements are again merged into primary substance, besides which one only spiritual being exists: the latter takes place at the end of every Kalpa, or day of Brahma, and affects only the forms of inferior creatures, and lower worlds, leaving the substance of the universe entire, and sages and gods unharmed. The explanation of these events involves a description of the periods of time upon which they depend. and which are accordingly detailed. Their character has been a source of very unnecessary perplexity to European writers, as they belong to a scheme of chronology wholly mythological, having no reference to any real or supposed history of the Hindus, but applicable, according to their system, to the infinite and eternal revolutions of the universe. In these notions, and in that of the coeternity of spirit and matter, the theogony and cosmogony of the Puranas, as they appear in the Vishnu Purana,

[p. lx]

belong to and illustrate systems of high antiquity, of which we have only fragmentary traces in the records of other nations.

The course of the elemental creation is in the Vishnu, as in other Puranas, taken from the Sankhya philosophy; but the agency that operates upon passive matter is confusedly exhibited, in consequence of a partial adoption of the illusory theory of the Vedanta philosophy, and the prevalence of the Pauranik doctrine of Pantheism. However incompatible with the independent existence of Pradhana or crude matter, and however incongruous with the separate condition of pure spirit or Purusha, it is declared repeatedly that Vishnu, as one with the supreme being, is not only spirit, but crude matter; and not only the latter, but all visible substance, and Time. He is Purusha, 'spirit;' Pradhana, crude matter; 'Vyakta, 'visible form;' and Kula, 'time.' This cannot but be regarded as a departure from the primitive dogmas of the Hindus, in which the distinctness of the Deity and his works was enunciated; in which upon his willing the world to be, it was; and in which his interposition in creation, held to be inconsistent with the quiescence of perfection, was explained away by the personification of attributes in action, which afterwards came to be considered as real divinities, Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva, charged severally for a given season with the creation, preservation, and temporary annihilation of material forms. These divinities are in the following pages, consistently with the tendency of a Vaishnava work, declared to be no other than Vishnu. In S'aiva Puranas they are in like manner identified with S'iva. The Puranas thus displaying and explaining the seeming incompatibility, of which there are traces in other ancient mythologies, between three distinct hypostases of one superior deity, and the identification of one or other of those hypostases with their common and separate original.

After the world has been fitted for the reception of living creatures, it is peopled by the will-engendered sons of Brahma, the Prajapatis or patriarchs, and their posterity. It would seem as if a primitive tradition of the descent of mankind from seven holy personages had at first prevailed, but that in the course of time it had been expanded into complicated, and not always consistent, amplification, How could these Rishis

[p. lxi]

or patriarchs have posterity? it was necessary to provide them with wives. In order to account for their existence, the Manu Swayambhuva and his wife Satarupa were added to the scheme, or Brahma becomes twofold, male and female, and daughters are then begotten, who are married to the Prajapatis. Upon this basis various legends of Brahma's double nature, some no doubt as old as the Vedas, have been constructed: but although they may have been derived in some degree from the authentic tradition of the origin of mankind from a single pair, yet the circumstances intended to give more interest and precision to the story are evidently of an allegorical or mystical description, and conduced, in apparently later times, to a coarseness of realization which was neither the letter nor spirit of the original legend. Swayambhuva, the son of the self-born or untreated, and his wife Satarupa, the hundred-formed or multiform, are themselves allegories; and their female descendants, who become the wives of the Rishis, are Faith, Devotion, Content, Intelligence, Tradition, and the like; whilst amongst their posterity we have the different phases of the moon, and the sacrificial fires. In another creation the chief source of creatures is the patriarch Daksha (ability), whose daughters, Virtues or Passions or Astronomical Phenomena, are the mothers of all existing things. These legends, perplexed as they appear to be, seem to admit of allowable solution, in the conjecture that the Prajapatis and Rishis were real personages, the authors of the Hindu system of social, moral, and religious obligations, and the first observers of the heavens, and teachers of astronomical science.

The regal personages of the Swayambhuva Manwantara are but few, but they are described in the outset as governing the earth in the dawn of society, and as introducing agriculture and civilisation. How much of their story rests upon a traditional remembrance of their actions, it would be useless to conjecture, although there is no extravagance in supposing that the legends relate to a period prior to the full establishment in India of the Brahmanical institutions. The legends of Dhruva and Prahlada, which are intermingled with these particulars, are in all probability ancient, but they are amplified, in a strain conformable to the Vaishnava purport of this Purana, by doctrines and prayers asserting the

[p. lxii]

identity of Vishnu with the supreme. It is clear that the stories do not originate with this Purana. In that of Prahlada particularly, as hereafter pointed out, circumstances essential to the completeness of the story are only alluded to, not recounted; shewing indisputably the writer's having availed himself of some prior authority for his narration.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Book Two

The second book opens with a continuation of the kings of the first Manwantara; amongst whom, Bharata is said to have given a name to India, called after him Bharata-varsha. This leads to a detail of the geographical system of the Puranas, with mount Meru, the seven circular continents, and their surrounding oceans, to the limits of the world; all of which are mythological fictions, in which there is little reason to imagine that any topographical truths are concealed. With regard to Bharata, or India, the case is different: the mountains and rivers which are named are readily verifiable, and the cities and nations that are particularized may also in many instances be proved to have had a real existence. The list is not a very long one in the Vishnu Purana, and is probably abridged from some more ample detail like that which the Mahabharata affords, and which, in the hope of supplying information' with respect to a subject yet imperfectly investigated, the ancient political condition of India, I have inserted and elucidated.

The description which this book also contains of the planetary and other spheres is equally mythological, although occasionally presenting practical details and notions in which there is an approach to accuracy. The concluding legend of Bharata--in his former life the king so named, but now a Brahman, who acquires true wisdom, and thereby attains liberation--is palpably an invention of the compiler, and is peculiar to this Purana.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

The Third Book

The arrangement of the Vedas and other writings considered sacred by the Hindus, being in fact the authorities of their religious rites and belief, which is described in the beginning of the third book, is of much importance to the history of Hindu literature, and of the Hindu religion. The sage Vyasa is here represented, not as the author, but the arranger or compiler of the Vedas, the Itihasas, and Puranas. His name denotes his character, meaning the 'arranger' or 'distributor;' and the recurrence of

[p. lxiii]

many Vyasas, many individuals who new modelled the Hindu scriptures, has nothing in it that is improbable, except the fabulous intervals by which their labours are separated. The rearranging, the refashioning, of old materials, is nothing more than the progress of time would be likely to render necessary. The last recognised compilation is that of Krishna Dwaipayana, assisted by Brahmans, who were already conversant with the subjects respectively assigned to them. They were the members of a college or school, supposed by the Hindus to have flourished in a period more remote, no doubt, than the truth, but not at all unlikely to have been instituted at some time prior to the accounts of India which we owe to Greek writers, and in which we see enough of the system to justify our inferring that it was then entire. That there have been other Vyasas and other schools since that date, that Brahmans unknown to fame have remodelled some of the Hindu scriptures, and especially the Puranas, cannot reasonably be contested, after dispassionately weighing the strong internal evidence which all of them afford of the intermixture of unauthorized and comparatively modern ingredients. But the same internal testimony furnishes proof equally decisive of the anterior existence of ancient materials; and it is therefore as idle as it is irrational to dispute the antiquity or authenticity of the greater portion of the contents of the Puranas, in the face of abundant positive and circumstantial evidence of the prevalence of the doctrines which they teach, the currency of the legends which they narrate, and the integrity of the institutions which they describe, at least three centuries before the Christian era. But the origin and developement of their doctrines, traditions, and institutions, were not the work of a day; and the testimony that establishes their existence three centuries before Christianity, carries it back to a much more remote antiquity, to an antiquity that is probably not surpassed by any of the prevailing fictions, institutions, or belief, of the ancient world.

The remainder of the third book describes the leading institutions of the Hindus, the duties of castes, the obligations of different stages of life, and the celebration of obsequial rites, in a short but primitive strain, and in harmony with the laws of Manu. It is a distinguishing feature of the

[p. lxiv]

Vishnu Purana, and it is characteristic of its being the work of an earlier period than most of the Puranas, that it enjoins no sectarial or other acts of supererogation; no Vratas, occasional self-imposed observances; no holidays, no birthdays of Krishna, no nights dedicated to Lakshmi; no sacrifices nor modes of worship other than those conformable to the ritual of the Vedas. It contains no Mahatmyas, or golden legends, even of the temples in which Vishnu is adored.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

The Fourth Book

The fourth book contains all that the Hindus have of their ancient history. It is a tolerably comprehensive list of dynasties and individuals; it is a barren record of events. It can scarcely be doubted, however, that much of it is a genuine chronicle of persons, if not of occurrences. That it is discredited by palpable absurdities in regard to the longevity of the princes of the earlier dynasties must be granted, and the particulars preserved of some of them are trivial and fabulous: still there is an inartificial simplicity and consistency in the succession of persons, and a possibility and probability in some of the transactions which give to these traditions the semblance of authenticity, and render it likely that they are not altogether without foundation. At any rate, in the absence of all other sources of information, the record, such as it is, deserves not to be altogether set aside. It is not essential to its credibility or its usefulness that any exact chronological adjustment of the different reigns should be attempted. Their distribution amongst the several Yugas, undertaken by Sir Wm. Jones or his Pandits, finds no countenance from the original texts, farther than an incidental notice of the age in which a particular monarch ruled, or the general fact that the dynasties prior to Krishna precede the time of the great war, and the beginning of the Kali age; both which events we are not obliged, with the Hindus, to place five thousand years ago. To that age the solar dynasty of princes offers ninety-three descents, the lunar but forty-five, though they both commence at the same time. Some names may have been added to the former list, some omitted in the latter; and it seems most likely, that, notwithstanding their synchronous beginning, the princes of the lunar race were subsequent to those of the solar dynasty. They avowedly branched off from the solar line; and the

[p. lxv]

legend of Sudyumna [*85], that explains the connexion, has every appearance of having been contrived for the purpose of referring it to a period more remote than the truth. Deducting however from the larger number of princes a considerable proportion, there is nothing to shock probability in supposing that the Hindu dynasties and their ramifications were spread through an interval of about twelve centuries anterior to the war of the Mahabharata, and, conjecturing that event to have happened about fourteen centuries before Christianity, thus carrying the commencement of the regal dynasties of India to about two thousand six hundred years before that date. This may or may not be too remote [*86]; but it is sufficient, in a subject where precision is impossible, to be satisfied with the general impression, that in the dynasties of kings detailed in the Puranas we have a record which, although it cannot fail to have suffered detriment from age, and may have been injured by careless or injudicious compilation, preserves an account, not wholly undeserving of confidence, of the establishment and succession of regular monarchies amongst the Hindus, from as early an era, and for as continuous a duration, as any in the credible annals of mankind.

The circumstances that are told of the first princes have evident relation to the colonization of India, and the gradual extension of the authority of new races over an uninhabited or uncivilized region. It is commonly admitted that the Brahmanical religion and civilization were brought into India from without [*87]. Certainly, there are tribes on the

[p. lxvi]

borders, and in the heart of the country, who are still not Hindus; and passages in the Ramayana and Mahabharata and Manu, and the uniform traditions of the people themselves, point to a period when Bengal, Orissa, and the whole of the Dekhin, were inhabited by degraded or outcaste, that is, by barbarous, tribes. The traditions of the Puranas confirm these views, but they lend no assistance to the determination of the question whence the Hindus came; whether from a central Asiatic nation, as Sir Wm. Jones supposed, or from the Caucasian mountains, the plains of Babylonia, or the borders of the Caspian, as conjectured by Klaproth, Vans Kennedy, and Schlegel. The affinities of the Sanscrit language prove a common origin of the now widely scattered nations amongst whose dialects they are traceable, and render it unquestionable that they must all have spread abroad from some centrical spot in that part of the globe first inhabited by mankind, according to the inspired record. Whether any indication of such an event be discoverable in the Vedas, remains to be determined; but it would have been obviously incompatible with the Pauranik system to have referred the origin of Indian princes and principalities to other than native sources. We need not therefore expect from them any information as to the foreign derivation of the Hindus.

We have, then, wholly insufficient means for arriving at any information concerning the ante-Indian period of Hindu history, beyond the general conclusion derivable from the actual presence of barbarous and apparently aboriginal tribes--from the admitted progressive extension of Hinduism into parts of India where it did not prevail when the code of Manu was compiled--from the general use of dialects in India, more or less copious, which are different from Sanscrit--and from the affinities of that language with forms of speech current in the western world--that a people who spoke Sanscrit, and followed the religion of the Vedas, came into India, in some very distant age, from lands west of the Indus. Whether the date and circumstances of their immigration will ever be ascertained is extremely doubtful, but it is not difficult to form a plausible outline of their early site and progressive colonization.

The earliest seat of the Hindus within the confines of Hindusthan was

[p. lxvii]

undoubtedly the eastern confines of the Panjab. The holy land of Manu and the Puranas lies between the Drishadwati and Saraswati rivers, the Caggar and Sursooty of our barbarous maps. Various adventures of the first princes and most famous sages occur in this vicinity; and the Asramas, or religious domiciles, of several of the latter are placed on the banks of the Saraswati. According to some authorities, it was the abode of Vyasa, the compiler of the Vedas and Puranas; and agreeably to another, when on one occasion the Vedas had fallen into disuse, and been forgotten, the Brahmans were again instructed in them by Saraswata, the son of Saraswati [*89]. One of the most distinguished of the tribes of the Brahmans is known as the Saraswata [*90]; and the same word is employed by Mr. Colebrooke to denote that modification of Sanscrit which is termed generally Prakrit, and which in this case he supposes to have been the language of "the Saraswata nation, which occupied the banks of the river Saraswati [*91]." The river itself receives its appellation from Saraswati, the goddess of learning, under whose auspices the sacred literature of the Hindus assumed shape and authority. These indications render it certain, that whatever seeds were imported from without, it was in the country adjacent to the Saraswati river that they were first planted, and cultivated and reared in Hindusthan.

The tract of land thus assigned for the first establishment of Hinduism in India is of very circumscribed extent, and could not have been the site of any numerous tribe or nation. The traditions that evidence the early settlement of the Hindus in this quarter, ascribe to the settlers more of a philosophical and religious, than of a secular character, and combine with the very narrow bounds of the holy land to render it possible that the earliest emigrants were the members, not of a political, so much as of a religious community; that they were a colony of priests, not in the restricted sense in which we use the term, but in that in which it still applies in India, to an Agrahara, a village or hamlet of Brahmans, who, although married, and having families, and engaging in tillage, in domestic duties, and in the conduct of secular interests affecting the

[p. lxviii]

community, are still supposed to devote their principal attention to sacred study and religious offices. A society of this description, with its artificers and servants, and perhaps with a body of martial followers, might have found a home in the Brahma-vartta of Manu, the land which thence was entitled 'the holy,' or more literally 'the Brahman, region;' and may have communicated to the rude, uncivilized, unlettered aborigines the rudiments of social organization, literature, and religion; partly, in all probability, brought along with them, and partly devised and fashioned by degrees for the growing necessities of new conditions of society. Those with whom this civilization commenced would have had ample inducements to prosecute their successful work, and in the course of time the improvement which germinated on the banks of the Saraswati was extended beyond the borders of the Jumna and the Ganges.

We have no satisfactory intimation of the stages by which the political organization of the people of Upper India traversed the space between the Saraswati and the more easterly region, where it seems to have taken a concentrated form, and whence it diverged in various directions, throughout Hindustan. The Manu of the present period, Vaivaswata, the son of the sun, is regarded as the founder of Ayodhya; and that city continued to be the capital of the most celebrated branch of his descendants, the posterity of Ikshwaku. The Vishnu Purana evidently intends to describe the radiation of conquest or colonization from this spot, in the accounts it gives of the dispersion of Vaivaswata's posterity: and although it is difficult to understand what could have led early settlers in India to such a site, it is not inconveniently situated as a commanding position, whence emigrations might proceed to the east, the west, and the south. This seems to have happened: a branch from the house of Ikshwaku spread into Tirhut, constituting the Maithila kings; and the posterity of another of Vaivaswata's sons reigned at Vaisali in southern Tirhut or Saran.

The most adventurous emigrations, however, took place through the lunar dynasty, which, as observed above, originates from the solar, making in fact but one race and source for the whole. Leaving out of consideration the legend of Sudyumna's double transformation, the first prince of Pratishthana, a city south from Ayodhya, was one of Vaivaswata's

[p. lxix]

children, equally with Ikshvaku. The sons of Pururavas, the second of this branch, extended, by themselves or their posterity, in every direction: to the east to Kas'i, Magadha, Benares, and Behar; southwards to the Vindhya hills, and across them to Vidarbha or Berar; westwards along the Narmada to Kus'asthali or Dwaraka in Guzerat; and in a north-westerly direction to Mathura and Hastinapura. These movements are very distinctly discoverable amidst the circumstances narrated in the fourth book of the Vishnu Purana, and are precisely such as might be expected from a radiation of colonies from Ayodhya. Intimations also occur of settlements in Banga, Kalinga, and the Dakhin; but they are brief and indistinct, and have the appearance of additions subsequent to the comprehension of those countries within the pale of Hinduism.

Besides these traces of migration and settlement, several curious circumstances, not likely to be unauthorized inventions, are hinted in these historical traditions. The distinction of castes was not fully developed prior to the colonization. Of the sons of Vaivaswata, some, as kings, were Kshatriyas; but one, founded a tribe of Brahmans, another became a Vais'ya, and a fourth a S'udra. It is also said of other princes, that they established the four castes amongst their subjects [*92]. There are also various notices of Brahmanical Gotras, or families, proceding from Kshatriya races [*93]: and there are several indications of severe struggles between the two ruling castes, not for temporal, but for spiritual dominion, the right to teach the Vedas. This seems to be the especial purport of the inveterate hostility that prevailed between the Brahman Vas'ishtha and the Kshatriya Viswamitra, who, as the Ramayana relates, compelled the gods to make him a Brahman also, and whose posterity became very celebrated as the Kaus'ika Brahmans. Other legends, again, such as Daksha's sacrifice, denote sectarial strife; and the legend of Paras'urama reveals a conflict even for temporal authority between the two ruling castes. More or less weight will be attached to these conjectures, according to the temperament of different inquirers; but, even whilst

[p. lxx]

fully aware of the facility with which plausible deductions may cheat the fancy, and little disposed to relax all curb upon the imagination, I find it difficult to regard these legends as wholly unsubstantial fictions, or devoid of all resemblance to the realities of the past.

After the date of the great war, the Vishnu Purana, in common with those Puranas which contain similar lists, specifies kings and dynasties with greater precision, and offers political and chronological particulars, to which on the score of probability there is nothing to object. In truth their general accuracy has been incontrovertibly established. Inscriptions on columns of stone, on rocks, on coins, decyphered only of late years, through the extraordinary ingenuity and perseverance of Mr. James Prinsep, have verified the names of races, and titles of princes--the Gupta and Andhra Rajas, mentioned in the Puranas--and have placed beyond dispute the identity of Chandragupta and Sandrocoptus: thus giving us a fixed point from which to compute the date of other persons and events. Thus the Vishnu Purana specifies the interval between Chandragupta and the great war to be eleven hundred years; and the occurrence of the latter little more than fourteen centuries B. C., as shewn in my observations on the passage [*94], remarkably concurs with inferences of the like date from different premises. The historical notices that then follow are considerably confused, but they probably afford an accurate picture of the political distractions of India at the time when they were written; and much of the perplexity arises from the corrupt state of the manuscripts, the obscure brevity of the record, and our total want of the means of collateral illustration.

Footnotes

^lxv:85 P. <page 349>.

^lxv:86 However incompatible with the ordinary computation of the period that is supposed to have elapsed between the flood and the birth of Christ, this falls sufficiently within the larger limits which are now assigned, upon the best authorities, to that period. As observed by Mr. Mil-man, in his note on the annotation of Gibbon (II. 301.) which refers to this subject; "Most of the more learned modern English protestants, as Dr. Hales, Mr. Faber, Dr. Russell, as well as the continental writers, adopt the larger chronology." To these may be added the opinion of Dr. Mill, who, for reasons which he has fully detailed, identifies the commencement of the Kali age of the Hindus, B. C. 3102, with the era of the deluge. Christa Sangita, Introd., supplementary note.

^lxv:87 Sir Wm. Jones on the Hindus (As. Res. vol. III.); Klaproth. Asia Polyglotta; Vans Kennedy on the Origin of Languages; A von Schlegel Origines des Hindous (Trans. R. Soc. of Literature).

^lxvii:89 See p. 285. note.

^lxvii:90 As. Res. vol. V. p. 55.

^lxvii:91 As. Res. vol. VII. p. 219.

^lxix:92 See p. <page 406>-409. <page 444>. &c.

^lxix:93 P. <page 448>. <page 459>. <page 454>. &c.

^lxx:94 P. <page 484> n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

The Fifth Book

The fifth book of the Vishnu Purana is exclusively occupied with the life of Krishna. This is one of the distinguishing characteristics of the Purana, and is one argument against its antiquity. It is possible, though not yet proved, that Krishna as an Avatara of Vishnu, is mentioned in an indisputably genuine text of the Vedas. He is conspicuously prominent in the Mahabharata, but very contradictorily described there. The part that he usually performs is that of a mere mortal, although the passages

[p. lxxi]

are numerous that attach divinity to his person. There are, however, no descriptions in the Mahabharata of his juvenile frolics, of his sports in Vrindavan, his pastimes with the cow-boys, or even his destruction of the Asuras sent to kill him. These stories have all a modern complexion: they do not harmonize with the tone of the ancient legends, which is generally grave, and sometimes majestic: they are the creations of a puerile taste, and grovelling imagination. These Chapters of the Vishnu Purana offer some difficulties as to their originality: they are the same as those on the same subject in the Brahma Purana: they are not very dissimilar to those of the Bhagavata. The latter has some incidents which the Vishnu has not, and may therefore be thought to have improved upon the prior narrative of the latter. On the other hand, abridgment is equally a proof of posteriority as amplification. The simpler style of the Vishnu Purana is however in favour of its priority; and the miscellaneous composition of the Brahma Purana renders it likely to have borrowed these chapters from the Vishnu. The life of Krishna in the Hari-vans'a and the Brahma-vaivartta are indisputably of later date.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

The Sixth Book

The last book contains an account of the dissolution of the world, in both its major and minor cataclysms; and in the particulars of the end of all things by fire and water, as well as in the principle of their perpetual renovation, presents a faithful exhibition of opinions that were general in the ancient world [*95]. The metaphysical annihilation of the universe, by the release of the spirit from bodily existence, offers, as already remarked, other analogies to doctrines and practices taught by Pythagoras and Plato, and by the Platonic Christians of later days.

Footnotes

^lxxi:95 Burnet has collected the opinions of the ancient world on this subject, tracing them, as he says, "to the earliest people, and the first appearances of wisdom, after the flood." The Hindu account explains what is imperfect or contradictory in ancient tradition, as handed down from other and less carefully perpetuated sources. Theory of the Earth, b. III. c. 3.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Date of the Vishnu Purana

The Vishnu Purana has kept very clear of particulars from which an approximation to its date may be conjectured. No place is described of which the sacredness has any known limit, nor any work cited of probable

[p. lxxii]

recent composition. The Vedas, the Puranas, other works forming the body of Sanscrit literature, are named; and so is the Mahabharata, to which therefore it is subsequent. Both Bauddhas and Jains are adverted to. It was therefore written before the former had disappeared; but they existed in some parts of India as late as the twelfth century at least; and it is probable that the Purana was compiled before that period. The Gupta kings reigned in the seventh century; the historical record of the Purana which mentions them was therefore later: and there seems little doubt that the same alludes to the first incursions of the Mohammedans, which took place in the eighth century; which brings it still lower. In describing the latter dynasties, some, if not all, of which were no doubt contemporary, they are described as reigning altogether one thousand seven hundred and ninety-six years. Why this duration should have been chosen does not appear, unless, in conjunction with the number of years which are said to have elapsed between the great war and the last of the Andhra dynasty, which preceded these different races, and which amounted to two thousand three hundred and fifty, the compiler was influenced by the actual date at which he wrote. The aggregate of the two periods would be the Kali year 4146, equivalent to A. D. 1045. There are some variety and indistinctness in the enumeration of the periods which compose this total, but the date which results from it is not unlikely to be an approximation to that of the Vishnu Purana.

It is the boast of inductive philosophy, that it draws its conclusions from the careful observation and accumulation of facts; and it is equally the business of all philosophical research to determine its facts before it ventures upon speculation. This procedure has not been observed in the investigation of the mythology and traditions of the Hindus. Impatience to generalize has availed itself greedily of whatever promised to afford materials for generalization; and the most erroneous views have been confidently advocated, because the guides to which their authors trusted were ignorant or insufficient. The information gleaned by Sir Wm. Jones was gathered in an early season of Sanscrit study, before the field was cultivated. The same may be said of the writings of 

[p. lxxiii]

[paragraph continues] Paulinus a St. Barolomaeo [*96], with the further disadvantage of his having been imperfectly acquainted with the Sanscrit language and literature, and his veiling his deficiencies under loftiness of pretension and a prodigal display of misapplied erudition. The documents to which Wilford [*97] trusted proved to be in great part fabrications, and where genuine, were mixed up with so much loose and unauthenticated matter, and so overwhelmed with extravagance of speculation, that his citations need to be carefully and skilfully sifted, before they can be serviceably employed. The descriptions of Ward [*98] are too deeply tinctured by his prejudices to be implicitly confided in; and they are also derived in a great measure from the oral or written communications of Bengali pandits, who are not in general very deeply read in the authorities of their mythology. The accounts of Polier [*99] were in like manner collected from questionable sources, and his Mythologie des Hindous presents a heterogeneous mixture of popular and Pauranik tales, of ancient traditions, and legends apparently invented for the occasion, which renders the publication worse than useless, except in the hands of those who can distinguish the pure metal from the alloy. Such are the authorities to which Maurice, Faber, and Creuzer have exclusively trusted in their description of the Hindu mythology, and it is no marvel that there should have been an utter confounding of good and bad in their selection of materials, and an inextricable mixture of truth and error in their conclusions. Their labours accordingly are far from entitled to that confidence which their learning and industry would else have secured; and a sound and comprehensive survey of the Hindu system is still wanting to the comparative analysis of the religious opinions of the ancient world, and to a satisfactory elucidation of an important chapter in the history of the human race. It is with the hope of supplying some of the necessary means for the accomplishment of these objects, that the following pages have been translated.

Footnotes

^lxxiii:96 Systema Brahmanicum, &c.

^lxxiii:97 Asiatic Researches.

^lxxiii:98 Account of the Hindus.

^lxxiii:99 Mythologie des Hindous, edited by Canoness Polier.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Conclusion

The translation of the Vishnu Purana has been made from a collation of various manuscripts in my possession. I had three when I commenced

[p. lxxiv]

the work, two in the Devanagari, and one in the Bengali character: a fourth, from the west of India, was given to me by Major Jervis, when some progress had been made: and in conducting the latter half of the translation through the press, I have compared it with three other copies in the library of the East India Company. All these copies closely agree; presenting no other differences than occasional varieties of reading, owing chiefly to the inattention or inaccuracy of the transcriber. Four of the copies were accompanied by a commentary, essentially the sane, although occasionally varying; and ascribed, in part at least, to two different scholiasts. The annotations on the first two books and the fifth are in two MSS. said to be the work of S'ridhara Yati, the disciple of Parananda, and who is therefore the same as S'ridhara Swami, the commentator on the Bhagavata. In the other three books these two MSS. concur with other two in naming the commentator Ratnagarbha Bhatta, who in those two is the author of the notes on the entire work. The introductory verses of his comment specify him to be the disciple of Vidya-vachaspati, the son of Hiranyagarbha, and grandson of Madhava, who composed his commentary by desire of Suryakara, son of Ratinath, Mis'ra, son of Chandrakara, hereditary ministers of some sovereign who is not particularized. In the illustrations which are attributed to these different writers there is so much conformity, that one or other is largely indebted to his predecessor. They both refer to earlier commentaries. S'ridhara cites the works of Chit-sukha-yoni and others, both more extensive and more concise; between which, his own, which he terms Atma- or Swa-prakasa, 'self-illuminator,' holds an intermediate character. Ratnagarbha entitles his, Vaishnavakuta chandrika, 'the moonlight of devotion to Vishnu.' The dates of these commentators are not ascertainable, as far as I am aware, from any of the particulars which they have specified.

In the notes which I have added to the translation, I have been desirous chiefly of comparing the statements of the text with those of other Puranas, and pointing out the circumstances in which they differ or agree; so as to render the present publication a sort of concordance to the whole, as it is not very probable that many of them will be

[p. lxxv]

published or translated. The Index that follows has been made sufficiently copious to answer the purposes of a mythological and historical dictionary, as far as the Puranas, or the greater number of them, furnish, materials.

In rendering the text into English, I have adhered to it as literally as was compatible with some regard to the usages of English composition. In general the original presents few difficulties. The style of the Puranas is very commonly humble and easy, and the narrative is plainly and unpretendingly told. In the addresses to the deities, in the expatiations upon the divine nature, in the descriptions of the universe, and in argumentative and metaphysical discussion, there occur passages in which the difficulty arising from the subject itself is enhanced by the brief and obscure manner in which it is treated. On such occasions I derived much aid from the commentary, but it is possible that I may have sometimes misapprehended and misrepresented the original; and it is also possible that I may have sometimes failed to express its purport with sufficient precision to have made it intelligible. I trust, however, that this will not often be the case, and that the translation of the Vishnu Purana will be of service and of interest to the few, who in these times of utilitarian selfishness, conflicting opinion, party virulence, and political agitation, can find a restingplace for their thoughts in the tranquil contemplation of those yet living pictures of the ancient world which are exhibited by the literature and mythology of the Hindus.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS.

  

BOOK I.

CHAP. I.--Invocation. Maitreya inquires of his teacher, Paras'ara, the origin and nature of the universe. Paras'ara performs a rite to destroy the demons: reproved by Vas'ishtha, he desists: Pulastya appears, and bestows upon him divine knowledge: he repeats the Vishnu Purana. Vishnu the origin, existence, and end of all things.--P. <page 1>.

CHAP. II.--Prayer of Paras'ara to Vishnu. Successive narration of the Vishnu Purana. Explanation of Vasudeva: his existence before creation: his first manifestations. Description of Pradhana, or the chief principle of things. Cosmogony. Of Prakrita, or material creation; of time; of the active cause. Development of effects; Mahat; Ahankara; Tanmatras; elements; objects of sense; senses; of the mundane egg. Vishnu the same as Brahma the creator; Vishnu the preserver; Rudra the destroyer.--P. <page 5>.

CHAP. III.--Measure of time. Moments or Kashthas, &c.; day and night, fortnight, month, year, divine year: Yugas, or ages: Mahayuga, or great age: day of Brahma: periods of the Manus: a Manwantara: night of Brahma, and destruction of the world: a year of Brahma: his life: a Kalpa: a Pararddha: the past, or Padma Kalpa: the present, or Varaha.--P. <page 21>.

CHAP. IV.--Narayana's appearance, in the beginning of the Kalpa, as the Varaha or boar: Prithivi (Earth) addresses him: he raises the world from beneath the waters: hymned by Sanandana and the Yogis. The earth floats on the ocean: divided into seven zones. The lower spheres of the universe restored. Creation renewed.--P. <page 27>.

CHAP. V.--Vishnu as Brahma creates the world. General characteristics of creation. Brahma meditates, and gives origin to immovable things, animals, gods, men. Specific creation of nine kinds; Mahat, Tanmatra, Aindriya, inanimate objects, animals, gods, men, Anugraha, and Kaumara. More particular account of creation. Origin of different orders of beings from Brahma's body under different conditions;

[p. lxxviii]

and of the Vedas from his mouths. All things created again as they existed in a former Kalpa.--P. <page 34>.

CHAP. VI.--Origin of the four castes: their primitive state. Progress of society. Different kinds of grain. Efficacy of sacrifice. Duties of men: regions. assigned them after death.--P. <page 44>.

CHAP. VII.--Creation continued. Production of the mind-born sons of Brahma; of the Prajapatis; of Sanandana and others; of Rudra and the eleven Rudras; of the Manu Swayambhuva, and his wife S'atarupa; of their children, The daughters of Daksha, and their marriage to Dharma and others. The progeny of Dharma and Adharma. The perpetual succession of worlds, and different modes of mundane dissolution.--P. <page 49>.

CHAP. VIII.--Origin of Rudra: his becoming eight Rudras: their wives and children. The posterity of Bhrigu. Account of S'ri in conjunction with Vishnu. (Sacrifice of Daksha.)--P. <page 58>.

CHAP. IX.--Legend of Lakshmi. Durvasas gives a garland to Indra: he treats it disrespectfully, and is cursed by the Muni. The power of the gods impaired: they are oppressed by the Danavas, and have recourse to Vishnu. The churning of the ocean. Praises of S'ri.--P. <page 70>.

CHAP. X.--The descendants of the daughters of Daksha married to the Rishis.--P. <page 82>.

CHAP. XI.--Legend of Dhruva, the son of Uttanapada: he is unkindly treated by his father's second wife: applies to his mother: her advice: he resolves to engage in religious exercises: sees the seven Rishis, who recommend him to propitiate Vishnu.--P.<page 86>.

CHAP. XII.--Dhruva commences a course of religious austerities. Unsuccessful attempts of Indra and his ministers to distract Dhruva's attention: they appeal to Vishnu, who allays their fears, and appears to Dhruva. Dhruva praises Vishnu, and is raised to the skies as the pole-star.--P. <page 90>.

CHAP. XIII.--Posterity of Dhruva. Legend of Vena: his impiety: he is put to death by the Rishis. Anarchy ensues. The production of Nishada and Prithu: the latter the first king. The origin of Suta and Magadha: they enumerate the duties of kings. Prithu compels Earth to acknowledge his authority: he levels it: introduces cultivation: erects cities. Earth called after bins Prithivi: typified as a cow.--P. <page 98>.

[p. lxxix]

CHAP. XIV.--Descendants of Prithu. Legend of the Prachetasas: they are desired by their father to multiply mankind, by worshipping Vishnu: they plunge into the sea, and meditate on and praise him: he appears, and grants their wishes.--P. <page 106>.

CHAP. XV.--The world overrun with trees: they are destroyed by the Prachetasas. Soma pacifies them, and gives them Marisha to wife: her story: the daughter of the nymph Pramlocha. Legend of Kandu. Marisha's former history. Daksha the son of the Prachetasas: his different characters: his sons: his daughters: their marriages and progeny: allusion to Prahlada, his descendant.--P. <page 110>.

CHAP. XVI.--Inquiries of Maitreya respecting the history of Prahlada.--P. <page 125>.

CHAP. XVII.--Legend of Prahlada. Hiranyakas'ipu the sovereign of the universe: the gods dispersed, or in servitude to him: Prahlada, his son, remains devoted to Vishnu: questioned by his father, he praises Vishnu: Hiranyakas'ipu orders him to be put to death, but in vain: his repeated deliverance: he teaches his companions to adore Vishnu.--P. <page 126>.

CHAP. XVIII.--Hiranyakas'ipu's reiterated attempts to destroy his son: their being always frustrated.--P. <page 134>.

CHAP. XIX.--Dialogue between Prahlada and his father: he is cast from the top of the palace unhurt: baffles the incantations of Samvara: he is thrown fettered into the sea: he praises Vishnu.--P. <page 137>.

CHAP. XX.--Vishnu appears to Prahlada. Hiranyakas'ipu relents, and is reconciled to his son: he is put to death by Vishnu as the Nrisinha. Prahlada becomes king of the Daityas: his posterity: fruit of hearing his story.--P. <page 143>

CHAP. XXI.--Families of the Daityas. Descendants of Kas'yapa by Danu. Children of Kas'yapa by his other wives. Birth of the Marutas, the sons of Diti.--P. <page 147>.

CHAP. XXII.--Dominion over different provinces of creation assigned to different beings. Universality of Vishnu. Four varieties of spiritual contemplation. Two conditions of spirit. The perceptible attributes of Vishnu types of his imperceptible properties. Vishnu every thing. Merit of hearing the first book of the Vishnu Purana.--P. <page 153>.

[p. lxxx]

  

BOOK II.

CHAP. I.--Descendants of Priyavrata, the eldest son of Swayambhuva Manu: his ten sons: three adopt a religious life; the others become kings of the seven Dwipas, or isles, of the earth. Agnidhra, king of Jambu-dwipa, divides it into nine portions, which he distributes amongst his sons. Nabhi, king of the south, succeeded by Rishabha; and he by Bharata: India named after him Bharata: his descendants reign during the Swayambhuva Manwantara.--P. <page 161>.

CHAP. II.--Description of the earth. The seven Dwipas and seven seas. Jambu-dwipa. Mount Meru: its extent and boundaries. Extent of Ilavrita. Groves, lakes, and branches of Meru. Cities of the gods. Rivers. The forms of Vishnu worshipped in different Varshas.--P. <page 166>.

CHAP. III.--Description of Bharata-varsha: extent: chief mountains: nine divisions: principal rivers and mountains of Bharata proper: principal nations: superiority over other Varshas, especially as the seat of religious acts. (Topographical lists).--P. <page 174>.

CHAP. IV.--Account of kings, divisions, mountains, rivers, and inhabitants of the other Dwipas, viz. Plaksha, S'almala, Kus'a, Krauncha, S'aka, and Pushkara: of the oceans separating them: of the tides: of the confines of the earth: the Lokaloka mountain. Extent of the whole.--P. <page 197>.

CHAP. V.--Of the seven regions of Patala, below the earth. Narada's praises of Patala. Account of the serpent S'esha. First teacher of astronomy and astrology.--P. <page 204>.

CHAP. VI.--Of the different hells, or divisions of Naraka, below Patala: the crimes punished in them respectively: efficacy of expiation: meditation on Vishnu the most effective expiation.--P. <page 207>.

CHAP. VII.--Extent and situation of the seven spheres, viz. earth, sky, planets, Mahar-loka, Jana-loka, Tapo-loka, and Satya-loka. Of the egg of Brahma, and its elementary envelopes. Of the influence of the energy of Vishnu.--P. <page 212>.

CHAP. VIII.--Description of the sun: his chariot; its two axles: his horses. The cities of the regents of the cardinal points. The sun's course: nature of his rays: his path along the ecliptic. Length of day and night. Divisions of time: equinoxes and solstices, months, years, the cyclical Yuga, or age of five years. Northern and southern declinations. Saints on the Lokaloka mountain. Celestial paths of the

[p. lxxxi]

[paragraph continues] Pitris, gods, Vishnu. Origin of Ganga, and separation, on the top of Meru, into four great rivers.--P. <page 217>.

CHAP. IX.--Planetary system, under the type of a S'is'umara, or porpoise. The earth nourished by the sun. Of rain whilst the sun shines. Of rain from clouds. Rain the support of vegetation, and thence of animal life. Narayana the support of all beings.--P. <page 230>.

CHAP. X.--Names of the twelve Adityas. Names of the Rishis, Gandharbas, Apsarasas, Yakshas, Uragas, and Rakshasas, who attend the chariot of the sun in each month of the year. Their respective functions.--P. <page 233>.

CHAP. XI.--The sun distinct from, and supreme over, the attendants on his car: identical with the three Vedas and with Vishnu: his functions.--P. <page 235>.

CHAP. XII.--Description of the moon: his chariot, horses, and course: fed by the sun: drained periodically of ambrosia by the progenitors and gods. The chariots and horses of the planets: kept in their orbits by aerial chains attached to Dhruva. Typical members of the planetary porpoise. Vasudeva alone real.--P. <page 238>.

CHAP. XIII.--Legend of Bharata. Bharata abdicates his throne, and becomes an ascetic: cherishes a fawn, and becomes so much attached to it as to neglect his devotions: he dies: his successive births: works in the fields, and is pressed as a palankin-bearer for the Raja of Sauvira: rebuked for his awkwardness: his reply: dialogue between him and the king.--P. <page 243>.

CHAP. XIV.--Dialogue continued. Bharata expounds the nature of existence, the end of life, and the identification of individual with universal spirit.--P. <page 251>.

CHAP. XV.--Bharata relates the story of Ribhu and Nidagha. The latter, the pupil of the former, becomes a prince, and is visited by his preceptor, who explains to him the principles of unity, and departs.--P. <page 254>.

CHAP. XVI.--Ribhu returns to his disciple, and perfects him in divine knowledge. The same recommended to the Raja by Bharata, who thereupon obtains final liberation. Consequences of hearing this legend.--P. <page 257>

[p. lxxxii]

  

BOOK III.

CHAP. I.--Account of the several Manus and Manwantaras. Swarochisha the second Manu: the divinities, the Indra, the seven Rishis of his period, and his sons. Similar details of Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata, Chakshusha, and Vaivaswata. The forms of Vishnu, as the preserver, in each Manwantara. The meaning of Vishnu.---P. <page 259>.

CHAP. II.--Of the seven future Manus and Manwantaras. Story of Sanjna and Chhaya, wives of the sun. Savarni, son of Chhaya, the eighth Manu. His successors, with the divinities, &c. of their respective periods. Appearance of Vishnu in each of the four Yugas.--P. <page 266>.

CHAP. III.--Division of the Veda into four portions, by a Vyasa, in every Dwapara age. List of the twenty-eight Vyasas of the present Manwantara. Meaning of the word Brahma.--P. <page 272>.

CHAP. IV.--Division of the Veda, in the last Dwapara age, by the Vyasa Krishna Dwaipayana. Paila made reader of the Rich; Vais'ampayana of the Yajush; Jaimini of the Saman; and Sumantu of the Atharvan. Suta appointed to teach the historical poems. Origin of the four parts of the Veda. Sanhitas of the Rig-veda.--P. <page 275>.

CHAP. V.--Divisions of the Yajur-veda. Story of Yajnawalkya: forced to give up what he has learned: picked up by others, forming the Taittiriya-yajush. Yajnawalkya worships the sun, who communicates to him the Vajasaneyi-yajush.--P. <page 279>.

CHAP. VI.--Divisions of the Sama-veda: of the Atharva-veda. Four Pauranik Sanhitas. Names of the eighteen Puranas. Branches of knowledge. Classes of Rishis.--P. <page 282>.

CHAP. VII.--By what means men are exempted from the authority of Yama, as narrated by Bhishma to Nakula. Dialogue between Yama and one of his attendants. Worshippers of Vishnu not subject to Yama. How they are to be known.--P. <page 286>.

CHAP. VIII.--How Vishnu is to be worshipped, as related by Aurva to Sagara. Duties of the four castes, severally and in common: also in time of distress.--P. <page 290>.

CHAP. IX.--Duties of the religious student, householder, hermit, and mendicant P. <page 294>.

[p. lxxxiii]

CHAP. X.--Ceremonies to be observed at the birth and naming of a child. Of marrying, or leading a religious life. Choice of a wife. Different modes of marrying--P. <page 297>.

CHAP. XI.--Of the Sadacharas, or perpetual obligations of a householder. Daily purifications, ablutions, libations, and oblations: hospitality: obsequial rites: ceremonies to be observed at meals, at morning and evening worship, and on going to rest--P. <page 300>.

CHAP. XII.--Miscellaneous obligations--purificatory, ceremonial, and moral.--P. <page 310>.

CHAP. XIII.--Of S'raddhas, or rites in honour of ancestors, to be performed on occasions of rejoicing. Obsequial ceremonies. Of the Ekoddishta or monthly S'raddha, and the Sapindana or annual one. By whom to be performed.--P. <page 314>.

CHAP. XIV.--Of occasional S'raddhas, or obsequial ceremonies: when most efficacious, and at what places.--P. <page 320>.

CHAP. XV.--What Brahmans are to be entertained at S'raddhas. Different prayers to be recited. Offerings of food to be presented to deceased ancestors.--P. <page 325>.

CHAP. XVI.--Things proper to be offered as food to deceased ancestors: prohibited things. Circumstances vitiating a S'raddha: how to be avoided. Song of the Pitris, or progenitors, heard by Ikshwaku.--P. <page 332>.

CHAP. XVII.--Of heretics, or those who reject the authority of the Vedas: their origin, as described by Vas'ishtha to Bhishma: the gods, defeated by the Daityas, praise Vishnu: an illusory being, or Buddha, produced from his body.--P. <page 334>.

CHAP. XVIII.--Buddha goes to the earth, and teaches the Daityas to contemn the Vedas: his sceptical doctrines: his prohibition of animal sacrifices. Meaning of the term Bauddha. Jainas and Bauddhas; their tenets. The Daityas lose their power, and are overcome by the gods. Meaning of the term Nagna. Consequences of neglect of duty. Story of S'atadhanu and his wife S'aivya. Communion with heretics to be shunned.--P. <page 340>.

[p. lxxxiv]

  

BOOK IV.

CHAP. I.--Dynasties of kings. Origin of the solar dynasty from Brahma. Sons of the Manu Vaivaswata. Transformations of Ila or Sudyumna. Descendants of the sons of Vaivaswat: those of Nedishta. Greatness of Marutta. Kings of Vais'ali. Descendants of S'aryati. Legend of Raivata: iris daughter Revati married to Balarama.--P. <page 347>.

CHAP. II.--Dispersion of Revata's descendants: those of Dhrishta: those of Nabhaga. Birth of Ikshwaku, the son of Vaivaswata: his sons. Line of Vikukshi. Legend of Kakutstha; of Dhundhumara; of Yuvanas'wa; of Mandhatri: his daughters married to Saubhari.--P. <page 358>.

CHAP. III.--Saubhari and his wives adopt an ascetic life. Descendants of Mandhatri. Legend of Narmada and Purukutsa. Legend of Tris'anku. Bahu driven from his kingdom by the Haihayas and Talajanghas. Birth of Sagara: he conquers the barbarians, imposes upon them distinguishing usages, and excludes them from offerings to fire, and the study of the Vedas.--P. <page 369>.

CHAP. IV.--The progeny of Sagara: their wickedness: he performs an As'wamedha: the horse stolen by Kapila: found by Sagara's sons, who are all destroyed by the sage: the horse recovered by Ans'umat: his descendants. Legend of Mitrasaha or Kalmashapada, the son of Sudasa. Legend of Khatwanga. Birth of Rama and the other sons of Das'aratha. Epitome of the history of Rama: his descendants, and those of his brothers. Line of Kus'a. Vrihadbala, the last, killed in the great war.--P. <page 377>.

CHAP. V.--Kings of Mithila. Legend of Nimi, the son of Ikshwaku. Birth of Janaka. Sacrifice of Siradhwaja. Origin of Sita. Descendants of Kus'adhwaja. Krita the last of the Maithila princes.--P. <page 388>.

CHAP. VI.--Kings of the lunar dynasty. Origin of Soma or the moon: he carries off Tara, the wife of Vrihaspati: war between the gods and Asuras in consequence: appeased by Brahma. Birth of Budha: married to Ila, daughter of Vaivaswata. Legend of his son Pururavas, and the nymph Urvas'i: the former institutes offerings with fire: ascends to the sphere of the Gandharbas,--P. <page 392>.

CHAP. VII.--Sons of Pururavas. Descendants of Amavasu. Indra born as Gadhi. Legend of Richika and Satyavati. Birth of Jamadagni and Vis'wamitra. Paras'urama

[p. lxxxv]

the son of the former. (Legend of Paras'urama.) Sunahs'ephas and others the sons of Vis'wamitra, forming the Kaus'ika race.--P. <page 398>.

CHAP. VIII.--Sons of Ayus. Line of Kshatravriddha, or kings of Kas'i. Former birth of Dhanwantari. Various names of Pratarddana. Greatness of Alarka.--P. <page 406>.

CHAP. IX.--Descendants of Raji, son of Ayus: Indra resigns his throne to him: claimed after his death by his sons, who apostatize from the religion of the Vedas, and are destroyed by Indra. Descendants of Pratikshatra, son of Kshatravriddha.--P. <page 411>.

CHAP. X.--The sons of Nahusha. The sons of Yayati: he is cursed by S'ukra: wishes his sons to exchange their vigour for his infirmities. Puru alone consents. Yayati restores him his youth: divides the earth amongst his sons, under the supremacy of Puru.--P. <page 413>.

CHAP. XI.--The Yadava race, or descendants of Yadu. Karttavirya obtains a boon from Dattatreya: takes Ravana prisoner: is killed by Paras'urama: his descendants.--P. <page 416>.

CHAP. XIII.--Descendants of Kroshtri. Jyamagha's connubial affection for his wife S'aivya: their descendants kings of Vidarbha and Chedi.--P. <page 420>.

CHAP. XIII.--Sons of Satwata. Bhoja princes of Mrittikavati. Surya the friend of Satrajit: appears to him in a bodily form: gives him the Syamantaka gem: its brilliance and marvellous properties. Satrajit gives it to Prasena, who is killed by a lion: the lion killed by the bear Jambavat. Krishna suspected of killing Prasena, goes to look for him in the forests: traces the bear to his cave: fights with him for the jewel: the contest prolonged: supposed by his companions to be slain: he overthrows Jambavat, and marries his daughter Jambavati: returns with her and the jewel to Dwaraka: restores the jewel to Satrajit, and marries his daughter Satyabhama. Satrajit murdered by S'atadhanwan: avenged by Krishna. Quarrel between Krishna and Balarama. Akrura possessed of the jewel: leaves Dwaraka. Public calamities. Meeting of the Yadavas. Story of Akrura's birth: he is invited to return: accused by Krishna of having the Syamantaka jewel: produces it in full assembly: it remains in his charge: Krishna acquitted of having purloined it.--P. <page 424>

CHAP. XIV.--Descendants of S'ini, of Anamitra, of S'waphalka and Chitraka, of Andhaka. The children of Devaka and Ugrasena. The descendants of Bhajamana.

[p. lxxxvi]

[paragraph continues] Children of S'ura: his son Vasudeva: his daughter Pritha married to Pandu: her children, Yudhishthira and his brothers; also Karna by Aditya. The sons of Pandu by Madri. Husbands and children of S'ura's other daughters. Previous births of S'is'upala.--P. <page 435>.

CHAP. XV.--Explanation of the reason why S'is'upala in his previous births as Hiranyakas'ipu and Ravana was not identified with Vishnu on being slain by him, and was so identified when killed as S'is'upala. The wives of Vasudeva: his children: Balarama and Krishna his sons by Devaki: born apparently of Rohini and Yasoda. The wives and children of Krishna. Multitude of the descendants of Yadu.--P. <page 438>.

CHAP. XVI.--Descendants of Turvasu.--P. <page 442>.

CHAP. XVII.--Descendants of Druhyu.--P. <page 443>.

CHAP. XVIII.--Descendants of Anu. Countries and towns named after some of them, as Anga, Banga, and others.--P. <page 444>.

CHAP. XIX.--Descendants of Puru. Birth of Bharata, the son of Dushyanta: his sons killed: adopts Bharadwaja or Vitatha. Hastin, founder of Hastinapur. Sons of Ajamidha, and the races derived from them, as Panchalas, &c. Kripa and Kripi found by S'antanu. Descendants of Riksha, the son of Ajamidha. Kurukshetra named from Kuru. Jarasandha and others, kings of Magadha.--P. <page 447>.

CHAP. XX.--Descendants of Kuru. Devapi abdicates the throne: assumed by Santanu: he is confirmed by the Brahmans: Bhishma his son by Ganga: his other sons. Birth of Dhritarashtra, Pandu, and Vidura. The hundred sons of Dhritarashtra. The five sons of Pandu: married to Draupadi: their posterity. Parikshit, the grandson of Arjuna, the reigning king.--P. <page 457>.

CHAP. XXI.--Future kings. Descendants of Parikshit, ending with Kshemaka.--P. <page 461>.

CHAP. XXII.--Future kings of the family of Ikshwaku, ending with Sumitra.--P. <page 463>.

CHAP. XXIII.--Future kings of Magadha, descendants of Vrihadratha.--P. <page 465>.

CHAP. XXIV.--Future kings of Magadha. Five princes of the line of Pradyota. Ten

[p. lxxxvii]

[paragraph continues] S'ais'unagas. Nine Nandas. Ten Mauryas. Ten S'ungas. Four Kanwas. Thirty Andhrabhrityas. Kings of various tribes and castes, and periods of their rule. Ascendancy of barbarians. Different races in different regions. Period of universal iniquity and decay. Coming of Vishnu as Kalki. Destruction of the wicked, and restoration of the practices of the Vedas. End of the Kali, and return of the Krita, age. Duration of the Kali. Verses chanted by Earth, and communicated by Asita to Jamaka. End of the fourth book.--P. <page 466>.

  

BOOK V.

CHAP. I.--The death of Kansa announced. Earth, oppressed by the Daityas, applies to the gods. They accompany her to Vishnu, who promises to give her relief. Kansa imprisons Vasudeva and Devaki. Vishnu's instructions to Yoganidra.--P. <page 491>.

CHAP. II.--The conception of Devaki: her appearance: she is praised by the gods.--P. <page 500>.

CHAP. III.--Birth of Krishna: conveyed by Vasudeva to Mathura, and exchanged with the new-born daughter of Yas'oda. Kansa attempts to destroy the latter, who becomes Yoganidra..--P. <page 502>.

CHAP. IV.--Kansa addresses his friends, announces their danger, and orders male children to be put to death.--P. <page 504>.

CHAP. V.--Nanda returns with the infants Krishna and Balarama to Gokula. Putana killed by the former. Prayers of Nanda and Yas'oda.--P. <page 506>.

CHAP. VI.--Krisna overturns a waggon: casts down two trees. The Gopas depart to Vrindavana. Sports of the boys. Description of the season of the rains.--P. <page 508>.

CHAP. VII. Krishna combats the serpent Kaliya: alarm of his parents and companions: he overcomes the serpent, and is propitiated by him: commands him to depart from the Yamuna river to the ocean.--P. <page 512>.

CHAP. VIII.--The demon Dhenuka destroyed by Rama.--P. <page 517>.

CHAP. IX.--Sports of the boys in the forest. Pralamba the Asura comes amongst them: is destroyed by Rama, at the command of Krishna.--P. <page 518>.

[p. lxxxviii]

CHAP. X.--Description of autumn. Krishna dissuades Nanda from worshipping Indra: recommends him and the Gopas to worship cattle and the mountains.--P. <page 522>.

CHAP. XI.--Indra, offended by the loss of his offerings, causes heavy rains to deluge Gokula. Krishna holds up the mountain Govarddhana to shelter the cowherds and their cattle.--P. <page 526>,

CHAP. XII.--Indra comes to Gokula: praises Krishna, and makes him prince over the cattle. Krishna promises to befriend Arjuna.--P. <page 528>.

CHAP. XIII.--Krishna praised by the cowherds: his sports with the Gopis: their imitation and love of him. The Rasa dance.--P. <page 531>.

CHAP. XIV,--Krishna kills the demon Arishta, in the form of a bull.--P. <page 536>.

CHAP. XV.--Kansa informed by Narada of the existence of Krishna and Balarama: he sends Kes'in to destroy them, and Akura to bring them to Mathura.--P. <page 537>.

CHAP. XVI.--Kes'in, in the form of a horse, slain by Krishna: he is praised by Narada.--P. <page 539>.

CHAP. XVII.--Akrura's meditation on Krishna: his arrival at Gokula: his delight at seeing Krishna and his brother.--P. <page 541>.

CHAP. XVIII.--Grief of the Gopis on the departure of Krishna and Balarama with Akrura: their leaving Gokula. Akrura bathes in the Yamuna; beholds the divine forms of the two youths, and praises Vishnu.--P. <page 544>.

CHAP. XIX.--Akrura conveys Krishna and Rama near to Mathura, and leaves them: they enter the town. Insolence of Kansa's washerman: Krishna kills him. Civility of a flower-seller: Krishna gives him his benediction.--P. <page 548>.

CHAP. XX.--Krishna and Balarama meet Kubja; she is made straight by the former: they proceed to the palace. Krishna breaks a bow intended for a trial of arms. Kansa's orders to his servants. Public games. Krishna and his brother enter the arena: the former wrestles with Chanura, the latter with Mushtika, the king's wrestlers; who are both killed. Krishna attacks and slays Kansa: he and Balarama do homage to Vasudeva and Devaki: the former praises Krishna.--P. <page 550>.

[p. lxxxix]

CHAP. XXI.--Krishna encourages his parents; places Ugrasena on the throne; becomes the pupil of Sandipani, whose son he recovers from the sea: he kills the marine demon Panchajana, and makes a horn of his shell.--P. <page 560>.

CHAP. XXII.--Jarasandha besieges Mathura; is defeated, but repeatedly renews the attack.--P. <page 563>.

CHAP. XXIII.--Birth of Kalayavana: he advances against Mathura. Krishna builds Dwaraka, and sends thither the Yadava tribe: he leads Kalayavana into the cave of Muchukunda: the latter awakes, consumes the Yavana king, and praises Krishna.--P. <page 565>.

CHAP. XXIV.--Muchukunda goes to perform penance. Krishna takes the army and treasures of Kalayavana, and repairs with them to Dwaraka. Balarama visits Vraja: inquiries of its inhabitants after Krishna.--P. <page 569>.

CHAP. XXV.--Balarama finds wine in the hollow of a tree; becomes inebriated; commands the Yamuna to come to him, and on her refusal drags her out of her course: Lakshmi gives him ornaments and a dress: he returns to Dwaraka, and marries Revati.--P. <page 571>.

CHAP. XXVI.--Krishna carries off Rukmini: the princes who come to rescue her repulsed by Balarama. Rukmin overthrown, but spared by Krishna, founds Bhojakata. Pradyumna born of Rukmini.--P. <page 573>.

CHAP. XXVII.--Pradyumna stolen by Sambara; thrown into the sea, and swallowed by a fish; found by Mayadevi: he kills Sambara, marries Mayadevi, and returns with her to Dwaraka. Joy of Rukmini and Krishna.--P. <page 575>

CHAP. XXVIII.--Wives of Krishna. Pradyumna has Aniruddha: nuptials of the latter. Balarama beat at dice, becomes incensed, and slays Rukmin and others.--P. <page 578>.

CHAP. XXIX.--Indra comes to Dwaraka, and reports to Krishna the tyranny of Naraka. Krishna goes to his city, and puts him to death. Earth gives the earrings of Aditi to Krishna, and praises him. He liberates the princesses made captive by Naraka, sends them to Dwaraka, and goes to Swarga with Satyabhama.--P. <page 581>.

CHAP. XXXI.--Krishna restores her earrings to Aditi, and is praised by her: he visits

[p. xc]

the gardens of Indra, and at the desire of Satyabhama carries off the Parijata tree. S'achi excites Indra to its rescue. Conflict between the gods and Krishna, who defeats them. Satyabhama derides them. They praise Krishna.--P. <page 584>.

CHAP. XXXI.--Krishna, with Indra's consent, takes the Parijata tree to Dwaraka; marries the princesses rescued from Naraka.--P. <page 589>.

CHAP. XXXII.--Children of Krishna. Usha, the daughter of Bana, sees Aniruddha in a dream, and becomes enamoured of him.--P. <page 591>.

CHAP. XXXIII.--Bana solicits S'iva for war: finds Aniruddha in the palace, and makes him prisoner. Krishna, Balarama, and Pradyumna come to his rescue. S'iva and Skanda aid Bana: the former is disabled; the latter put to flight. Bana encounters Krishna, who cuts off all his arms, and is about to put him to death. S'iva intercedes, and Krishna spares his life. Vishnu and S'iva are the same.--P. <page 593>.

CHAP. XXXIV.--Paundraka, a Vasudeva, assumes the insignia and style of Krishna, supported by the king of Kai. Krishna marches against, and destroys them. The son of the king sends a magical being against Krishna: destroyed by his discus, which also sets Benares on fire, and consumes it and its inhabitants.--P. <page 597>.

CHAP. XXXV.--S'amba carries off the daughter of Duryodhana, but is taken prisoner. Balarama comes to Hastinapur, and demands his liberation: it is refused: in his wrath he drags the city towards him, to throw it into the river. The Kuru chiefs give up S'amba and his wife.--P. <page 601>.

CHAP. XXXVI.--The Asura Dwivida, in the form of an ape, destroyed by Balarama.-- P. <page 604>.

CHAP. XXXVII.--Destruction of the Yadavas. S'amba and others deceive and ridicule the Rishis. The former bears an iron pestle: it is broken, and thrown into the sea. The Yadavas go to Prabhasa by desire of Krishna: they quarrel and fight, and all perish. The great serpent S'esha issues from the mouth of Rama. Krishna is shot by a hunter, and again becomes one with universal spirit.--P. <page 606>.

CHAP. XXXVIII.--Arjuna comes to Dwaraka, and burns the dead, and takes away the surviving inhabitants. Commencement of the Kali age. Shepherds and thieves attack Arjuna, and carry off the women and wealth. Arjuna regrets the loss of his prowess to Vyasa; who consoles him, and tells him the story of Ashtavakra's cursing

[p. xci]

the Apsarasas. Arjuna and his brothers place Parikshit on the throne, and go to the forests. End of the fifth book.--P. <page 613>.

  

BOOK VI.

CHAP. I.--Of the dissolution of the world: the four ages: the decline of all things, and deterioration of mankind, in the Kali age.--P. <page 621>.

CHAP. II.--Redeeming properties of the Kali age. Devotion to Vishnu sufficient to salvation in that age for all castes and persons.--P. <page 627>.

CHAP. III.--Three different kinds of dissolution. Duration of a Pararddha. The Clepsydra, or vessel for measuring time. The dissolution that occurs at the end of a day of Brahma.--P. <page 630>.

CHAP. IV.--Continuation of the account of the first kind of dissolution. Of the second kind, or elemental dissolution; of all being resolved into primary spirit.--P. <page 634>.

CHAP. V.--The third kind of dissolution, or final liberation from existence. Evils of worldly life. Sufferings in infancy, manhood, old age. Pains of hell. Imperfect felicity of heaven. Exemption from birth desirable by the wise. The nature of spirit or god. Meaning of the terms Bhagavat and Vasudeva.--P. <page 638>.

CHAP. VI.--Means of attaining liberation. Anecdotes of Khandikya and Kes'idhwaja. The former instructs the latter how to atone for permitting the death of a cow. Kes'idhwaja offers him a requital, and he desires to be instructed in spiritual knowledge.--P. <page 645>.

CHAP. VII.--Kes'idhwaja describes the nature of ignorance, and the benefits of the Yoga, or contemplative devotion. Of the novice and the adept in the performance of the Yoga. How it is performed. The first stage, proficiency in acts of restraint and moral duty: the second, particular mode of sitting: the third, Pranayama, modes of breathing: the fourth, Pratyahara, restraint of thought: the fifth, apprehension of spirit: the sixth, retention of the idea. Meditation on the individual and universal forms of Vishnu. Acquirement of knowledge. Final liberation,--P. <page 649>.

CHAP. VIII.--Conclusion of the dialogue between Paras'ara and Maitreya. Recapitulation of the contents of the Vishnu Purana: merit of hearing it: how handed down. Praises of Vishnu. Concluding prayer.--P. <page 660>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

  

CORRECTIONS.

P. 11, note 14, for the sense of the latter read the sense of the former

12, note 16, for there was neither the existent cause nor the nonexistent effect read the non-existent cause nor the existent effect

50, note, for son of Prachetas read son of the Prachetasas

98, note, for Puru read Prithu

176, note, refer to p. 421, n, 13, and add, 'In the Mahabharata, Adi P., the S'uktimati river is said to flow by the capital of Chedi'

213, for Vaibhrajas read Vairajas

226, note 21, for Avashthanas read Avasthanas

398, for his son was Suhotra, whose name was Jahnu read whose son was Jahnu

399, note 10, for Kus'anaba read Kus'amba

416, note 2, omit the second Aripu

457, for Jayasena Aravin read Jayasena, his son was Aravin

 

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

VISHNU PURANA.

  

BOOK I.

  

CHAP. I.

Invocation. Maitreya inquires of his teacher, Paras'ara, the origin and nature of the universe. Paras'ara performs a rite to destroy the demons: reproved by Vas'ishtha, he desists: Pulastya appears, and bestows upon him divine knowledge: he repeats the Vishnu Purana. Vishnu the origin, existence, and end of all things.

OM! GLORY TO VASUDEVA [*1].--Victory be to thee, Pundarikaksha;

[p. 2]

adoration be to thee, Viswabhavana; glory be to thee, Hrishikes'a, Mahapurusha, and Purvaja [*2].

May that Vishnu, who is the existent, imperishable, Brahma, who is Is'wara [*3], who is spirit [*4]; who with the three qualities [*5] is the cause of creation, preservation, and destruction; who is the parent of nature, intellect, and the other ingredients of the universe [*6]; be to us the bestower of understanding, wealth, and final emancipation.

[p. 3]

Having adored Vishnu [*7], the lord of all, and paid reverence to Brahma and the rest [*8]; having also saluted the spiritual preceptor [*9]; I will narrate a Purana equal in sanctity to the Vedas.

Maitreya [*10], having saluted him reverentially, thus addressed Paras'ara, the excellent sage, the grandson of Vas'ishtha, who was versed in traditional history, and the Puranas; who was acquainted with the Vedas, and the branches of science dependent upon them; and skilled in law and philosophy; and who had performed the morning rites of devotion.

Maitreya said, Master! I have been instructed by you in the whole of the Vedas, and in the institutes of law and of sacred science: through your favour, other men, even though they be my foes, cannot accuse me of having been remiss in the acquirement of knowledge. I am now desirous, oh thou who art profound in piety! to hear from thee, how this world was, and how in future it will be? what is its substance, oh Brahman, and whence proceeded animate and inanimate things? into what has it been resolved, and into what will its dissolution again occur? how were the elements manifested? whence proceeded the gods and other beings? what are the situation and extent of the oceans and the

[p. 4]

mountains, the earth, the sun, and the planets? what are the families of the gods and others, the Menus, the periods called Manwantaras, those termed Kalpas, and their subdivisions, and the four ages: the events that happen at the close of a Kalpa, and the terminations of the several ages [*11]: the histories, oh great Muni, of the gods, the sages, and kings; and how the Vedas were divided into branches (or schools), after they had been arranged by Vyasa: the duties of the Brahmans, and the other tribes, as well as of those who pass through the different orders of life? All these things I wish to hear from you, grandson of Vas'ishtha. Incline thy thoughts benevolently towards me, that I may, through thy favour, be informed of all I desire to know.

Paras'ara replied, Well inquired, pious Maitreya. You recall to my recollection that which was of old narrated by my father's father, Vas'ishtha. I had heard that my father had been devoured by a Rakshas employed by Viswamitra: violent anger seized me, and I commenced a sacrifice for the destruction of the Rakshasas: hundreds of them were reduced to ashes by the rite, when, as they were about to be entirely extirpated, my grandfather Vas'ishtha thus spake to me: Enough, my child; let thy wrath be appeased: the Rakshasas are not culpable: thy father's death was the work of destiny. Anger is the passion of fools; it becometh not a wise man. By whom, it may be asked, is any one killed? Every man reaps the consequences of his own acts. Anger, my son, is the destruction of all that man obtains by arduous exertions, of fame, and of devout austerities; and prevents the attainment of heaven or of emancipation. The chief sages always shun wrath: he not thou, my child, subject to its influence. Let no more of these unoffending spirits of darkness be consumed. Mercy is the might of the righteous [*12].

[p. 5]

Being thus admonished by my venerable grandsire, I immediately desisted from the rite, in obedience to his injunctions, and Vas'ishtha, the most excellent of sages, was content with me. Then arrived Pulastya, the son of Brahma [*13], who was received by my grandfather with the customary marks of respect. The illustrious brother of Pulaha said to me; Since, in the violence of animosity, you have listened to the words of your progenitor, and have exercised clemency, therefore you shall become learned in every science: since you have forborne, even though incensed, to destroy my posterity, I will bestow upon you another boon, and, you shall become the author of a summary of the Puranas [*14]; you shall know

[p. 6]

the true nature of the deities, as it really is; and, whether engaged in religious rites, or abstaining from their performance [*15], your understanding, through my favour, shall be perfect, and exempt from). doubts. Then my grandsire Vas'ishtha added; Whatever has been said to thee by Pulastya, shall assuredly come to pass.

Now truly all that was told me formerly by Vas'ishtha, and by the wise Palastya, has been brought to my recollection by your questions, and I will relate to you the whole, even all you have asked. Listen to the complete compendium of the Pur pas, according to its tenour. The world was produced from Vishnu: it exists in him: he is the cause of its continuance and cessation: he is the world [*16].

Footnotes

^1:1 An address of this kind, to one or other Hindu divinity, usually introduces Sanscrit compositions, especially those considered sacred. The first term of this mantra or brief prayer, Om or Omkara, is well known as a combination of letters invested by Hindu mysticism with peculiar sanctity. In the Vedas it is said to comprehend all the gods; and in the Puranas it is directed to be prefixed to all such formulae as that of the text. Thus in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana: 'The syllable Om, the mysterious name, or Brahma, is the leader of all prayers: let it therefore, O lovely-faced, (S'iva addresses Durga,) be employed in the beginning of all prayers:' According to the same authority, one of the mystical imports of the term is the collective enunciation of Vishnu expressed by A, of Sri his bride intimated by U, and of their joint worshipper designated by M. A whole chapter of the Vayu Purana is devoted to this term. A text of the Vedas is there cited: 'Om, the monosyllable Brahma;' the latter meaning either the Supreme Being or the Vedas collectively, of which this monosyllable is the type. It is also said to typify the three spheres of the world, the three holy fires, the three steps of Vishnu, &c.--Frequent meditation upon it, and repetition of it, ensure release from worldly existence. See also Manu, II. 76. Vasudeva, a name of Vishnu or Krishna, is, according to its grammatical etymology, a patronymic derivative implying son of Vasudeva. The Vaishnava Puranas, however, devise other explanations: see the next chapter, and again, b. VI. c. 5.

^2:2 In this stanza occurs a series of the appellations of Vishnu: 1. Pundarikaksha, having eyes like a lotus, or heart-pervading; or Pundarika is explained supreme glory, and Aksha imperishable: the first is the most usual etymon. 2. Viswabhavana, the creator of the universe, or the cause of the existence of all things. 3. Hrishikes'a, lord of the senses. 4. Maha purusha, great or supreme spirit; purusha meaning that which abides or is quiescent in body (puri sete), 5. Purvaja, produced or appearing before creation; the Orphic prutogonos. In the fifth book, c. 18, Vishnu is described by five appellations, which are considered analogous to these; or, 1. Bhutatma, one with created things, or Pundarikaksha; 2. Pradhanatma, one with crude nature, or Vis'wabhavana; 3. Indriyatma, one with the senses, or Hrishikes'a; 4. Paramatma, supreme spirit, or Mahapurusha; and Atma, soul; living soul, animating nature and existing before it, or Purvaja.

^2:3 Brahma, in the neuter form, is abstract supreme spirit; and Is'wara is the Deity in his active nature, he who is able to do or leave undone, or to do any thing in any other manner than that in which it is done.

^2:4 Puman which is the same with Purusha, incorporated spirit. By this and the two preceding terms also the commentator understands the text to signify that Vishnu is any form of spiritual being that is acknowledged by different philosophical systems, or that he is the Brahma of the Vedanta, the Is'wara of the Patanjala, and the Purusha of the Sankhya school.

^2:5 The three qualities, to which we shall have further occasion to advert, are, Satya, goodness or purity, knowledge, quiescence; Rajas, foulness, passion, activity; and Tamas, darkness, ignorance, inertia.

^2:6 Pradhanabuddhyadisu. This predicate of the Deity distinguishes most of the Puranas from several of the philosophical systems, which maintain, as did the earliest Grecian systems of cosmogony, the eternal and independent existence of the first principle of things, as nature, matter, or chaos. Accordingly, the commentator notices the objection. Pradhana being without beginning, it is said how can Vishnu be its parent? To which he replies, that this is not so, for in a period of worldly destruction (Pralaya), when the Creator desists from creating, nothing is generated by virtue of any other energy or parent. Or, if this be not satisfactory, then the text may be understood to imply that intellect (Buddhi) &c. are formed through the materiality of crude nature, or Pradhana.

^3:7 Vishnu is commonly derived in the Puranas from the root Vis, to enter, entering into, or pervading the universe, agreeably to the text of the Vedas, 'Having created that (world), he then afterwards enters into it;' being, as our comment observes, undistinguished by place, time, or property. According to the Matsya P. the name alludes to his entering into the mundane egg: according to the Padma P., to his entering into or combining with Prakriti, as Purusha or spirit. In the Moksha Dharma of the Mahabharata, s. 165, the word is derived from the root vi, signifying motion, pervasion, production, radiance; or, irregularly, from krama, to go with the particle vi, implying, variously, prefixed.

^3:8 Brahma and the rest is said to apply to the series of teachers through whom this Purana was transmitted from its first reputed author, Brahma, to its actual narrator, the sage Paras'ara. See also b. VI. c. 8.

^3:9 The Guru, or spiritual preceptor, is said to be Kapila or Saraswata; the latter is included in the series of teachers of the Purana. Paras'ara must be considered also as a disciple of Kapila, as a teacher of the Sankhya philosophy.

^3:10 Maitreya is the disciple of Paras'ara, who relates the Vishnu Purana to him; he is also one of the chief interlocutors in the Bhagavata, and is introduced in the Mahabharata (Vana Parva, s. 10.) as a great Rishi, or sage, who denounces Duryodhana's death. In the Bhagavata he is also termed Kausharavi, or the son of Kusharava.

^4:11 One copy reads Yuga dherma, the duties peculiar to the four ages, or their characteristic properties, instead of Yuganta.

^4:12 Sacrifice of Paras'ara. The story of Paras'ara's birth is narrated in detail in the Mahabharata (Adi Parva, s. 176). King Kalmashapada meeting with Sakti, the son of Vas'ishtha, in a narrow path in a thicket, desired him to stand out of his way. The sage refused: on which the Raja beat him with his whip, and Sakti cursed him to become a Rakshas, a man-devouring spirit. The Raja in this transformation killed and ate its author, or Sakti, together with all the other sons of Vas'ishtha. Sakti left his wife Adris'yanti pregnant, and she gave birth to Paras'ara, who was brought up by [p. 5] his grandfather. When he grew up, and was informed of his father's death, he instituted a sacrifice for the destruction of all the Rakshasas; but was dissuaded from its completion by Vas'ishtha and other sages or Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu. The Mahabharata adds, that when he desisted from the rite, he scattered the remaining sacrificial fire upon the northern face of the Himalaya mountain, where it still blazes forth at the phases of the moon, consuming Rakshasas, forests, and mountains. The legend alludes possibly to some transhimalayan volcano. The transformation of Kalmashapada is ascribed in other places to a different cause; but he is every where regarded as the devourer of Sakti or Saktri, as the name also occurs. The story is told in the Linga Purana (Purvarddha, s. 64) in the same manner, with the addition, conformably to the Saiva tendency of that work, that Paras'ara begins his sacrifice by propitiating Mahadeva. Vas'ishtha's dissuasion, and Pulastya's appearance, are given in the very words of our text; and the story concludes, 'thus through the favour of Pulastya and of the wise Vas'ishtha, Paras'ara composed the Vaishnava (Vishnu) Purana, containing ten thousand stanzas, and being the third of the Purana compilations' (Puranasanhita). The Bhagavata (b. III. s. 8) also alludes, though obscurely, to this legend. In recapitulating the succession of the narrators of part of the Bhagavata, Maitreya states that this first Purana was communicated to him by his Guru Paras'ara, as he had been desired by Pulastya: i. e. according to the commentator, agreeably to the boon given by Pulastya to Paras'ara, saying, You shall be a narrator of Puranas;. The Mahabharata makes no mention of the communication of this faculty to Paras'ara by Pulastya; and as the Bhagavata could not derive this particular from that source, it here most probably refers unavowedly, as the Linga does avowedly, to the Vishnu Purana.

^5:13 Pulastya, as will be presently seen, is one of the Rishis, who were the mind-born sons of Brahma. Pulaha, who is here also named, is another. Pulastya is considered as the ancestor of the Rakshasas, as he is the father of Visravas, the father of Ravana and his brethren. Uttara Ramayana. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, s. 272. Padma Pur. Linga Pur. s. 63.

^5:14 Purana sanhita kertta Bhavan bha [p. 6] vishyati. You shall be a maker of the Sanhita, or compendium of the Puranas, or of the Vishnu Purana, considered as a summary or compendium of Pauranic traditions. In either sense it is incompatible with the general attribution of all the Puranas to Vyasa.

^6:15 Whether performing the usual ceremonies of the Brahmans, or leading a life of devotion and penance, which supersedes the necessity of rites and sacrifices.

^6:16 These are, in fact, the brief replies to Maitreya's six questions (p. 3), or, How was the world created? By Vishnu. How will it be? At the periods of dissolution it will be in Vishnu. Whence proceeded animate and inanimate things? From Vishnu. Of what is the substance of the world? Vishnu. Into what has it been, and will it again he, resolved? Vishnu. He is therefore both the instrumental and material cause of the universe. 'The answer to the "whence" replies to the query as to the instrumental cause: "He is the world" replies to the inquiry as to the material cause.' 'And by this explanation of the agency of the materiality, &c. of Vishnu, as regards the universe, (it follows that) all will be produced from, and all will repose in him.' We have here precisely the to pan of the Orphic doctrines, and we might fancy that Brucker was translating a passage from a Purana when he describes them in these words: "Continuisse Jovem (lege Vishnum) sive summum ortum in se omnia, omnibus ortum ex se dedisse, omnia ex se genuisse, et ex sua produxisse essentia. Spiritum esse universi qui omnia regit vivificat estque; ex quibus necessario sequitur omnia in eum reditura." Hist. Philos. I. 388. Jamblichus and Proclus also testify that the Pythagorean doctrines of the origin of the material world from the Deity, and its identity with him, were much the same. Cudworth, l. c. p. 348.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

CHAP. II.

Prayer of Paras'ara to Vishnu. Successive narration of the Vishnu Purana. Explanation of Vasudeva: his existence before creation: his first manifestations. Description of Pradhana or the chief principle of things. Cosmogony. Of Prakrita, or material creation; of time; of the active cause. Developement of effects; Mahat; Ahankara; Tanmatras; elements; objects of sense; senses; of the mundane egg. Vishnu the same as Brahma the creator; Vishnu the preserver; Rudra the destroyer.

PARAS'ARA said, Glory to the unchangeable, holy, eternal, supreme Vishnu, of one universal nature, the mighty over all: to him who is Hiranygarbha, Hari, and S'ankara [*1], the creator, the preserver, and destroyer of

[p. 8]

the world: to Vasudeva, the liberator of his worshippers: to him, whose essence is both single and manifold; who is both subtile and corporeal, indiscrete and discrete: to Vishnu, the cause of final emancipation [*2], Glory to the supreme Vishnu, the cause of the creation, existence, and end of this world; who is the root of the world, and who consists of the world [*3].

Having glorified him who is the support of all things; who is the smallest of the small [*4]; who is in all created things; the unchanged, imperishable [*5] Purushottama [*6]; who is one with true wisdom, as truly known [*7]; eternal and incorrupt; and who is known through false appearances by the nature of visible objects [*8]: having bowed to Vishnu, the

[p. 9]

destroyer, and lord of creation and preservation; the ruler of the world; unborn, imperishable, undecaying: I will relate to you that which was originally imparted by the great father of all (Brahma), in answer to the questions of Daksha and other venerable sages, and repeated by them to Purukutsa, a king who reigned on the banks of the Narmada. It was next related by him to Saraswata, and by Saraswata to me [*9].

Who can describe him who is not to be apprehended by the senses: who is the best of all things; the supreme soul, self-existent: who is devoid of all the distinguishing characteristics of complexion, caste, or the like; and is exempt front birth, vicissitude, death, or decay: who is always, and alone: who exists every where, and in whom all things here exist; and who is thence named Vasudeva [*10]? He is Brahma [*11], supreme, lord, eternal, unborn, imperishable, undecaying; of one essence; ever pure as free from defects. He, that Brahma, was all things; comprehending in his own nature the indiscrete and discrete. He then existed in the forms of Purusha and of Kala. Purusha (spirit) is the first form, of the supreme; next proceeded two other forms, the discrete and indiscrete; and Kala (time) was the last. These four--Pradhana (primary or crude matter), Purusha (spirit), Vyakta (visible substance), and Kala (time)--the wise consider to be the pure and supreme condition of Vishnu [*12]. These four forms, in their due proportions, are the causes of

[p. 10]

the production of the phenomena of creation, preservation, and destruction. Vishnu being thus discrete and indiscrete substance, spirit, and time, sports like a playful boy, as you shall learn by listening to his frolics [*13].

That chief principle (Pradhana), which is the indiscrete cause, is called by the sages also Prakriti (nature): it is subtile, uniform, and comprehends what is and what is not (or both causes and effects); is durable, self-sustained, illimitable, undecaying, and stable; devoid of sound or touch, and possessing neither colour nor form; endowed with the three qualities (in equilibrium); the mother of the world; without beginning; and that into which all that is produced is resolved [*14]. By

[p. 11] 

that principle all things were invested in the period subsequent to the last dissolution of the universe, and prior to creation [*15]. For Brahmans learned in the Vedas, and teaching truly their doctrines, explain such

[p. 12]

passages as the following as intending the production of the chief principle (Pradhana). "There was neither day nor night, nor sky nor earth, nor darkness nor light, nor any other thing, save only One, unapprehensible by intellect, or That which is Brahma and Puman (spirit) and Pradhana (matter) [*16]." The two forms which are other than the essence of unmodified Vishnu, are Pradhana (matter) and Purusha (spirit); and his other form, by which those two are connected or separated, is called Kala (time) [*17]. When discrete substance is aggregated in crude nature, as in a foregone dissolution, that dissolution is termed elemental (Prakrita). The deity as Time is without beginning, and his end is not known; and from him the revolutions of creation, continuance, and dissolution unintermittingly succeed: for when, in the latter season, the equilibrium of the qualities (Pradhana) exists, and spirit (Puman) is detached from matter, then the form of Vishnu which is Time abides [*18]. Then the

[p. 13]

supreme Brahma, the supreme soul, the substance of the world, the lord of all creatures, the universal soul, the supreme ruler, Hari, of his own will having entered into matter and spirit, agitated the mutable and immutable principles, the season of creation being arrived, in the same manner as fragrance affects the mind from its proximity merely, and not from any immediate operation upon mind itself: so the Supreme influenced the elements of creation [*19]. Purushottama is both the agitator and

[p. 14]

the thing to be agitated; being present in the essence of matter, both when it is contracted and expanded [*20]. Vishnu, supreme over the supreme, is of the nature of discrete forms in the atomic productions, Brahma and the rest (gods, men, &c.)

Then from that equilibrium of the qualities (Pradhana), presided over by soul [*21], proceeds the unequal developement of those qualities (constituting the principle Mahat or Intellect) at the time of creation [*22]. The

[p. 15]

[paragraph continues] Chief principle then invests that Great principle, Intellect, and it becomes threefold, as affected by the quality of goodness, foulness, or darkness, and invested by the Chief principle (matter) as seed is by its skin. From the Great principle (Mahat) Intellect, threefold Egotism, (Ahankara) [*23],

[p. 16]

denominated Vaikarika, 'pure;' Taijasa, 'passionate;' and Bhutadi, 'rudimental,' [*24] is produced; the origin of the (subtile) elements, and of the organs of sense; invested, in consequence of its three qualities, by Intellect, as Intellect is by the Chief principle. Elementary Egotism then becoming productive, as the rudiment of sound, produced from it Ether, of which sound is the characteristic, investing it with its rudiment of sound. Ether becoming productive, engendered the rudiment of touch; whence originated strong wind, the property of which is touch; and Ether, with the rudiment of sound, enveloped the rudiment of touch. Then wind becoming productive, produced the rudiment of form (colour); whence light (or fire) proceeded, of which, form (colour) is the attribute; and the rudiment of touch enveloped the wind with the rudiment of colour. Light becoming productive, produced the rudiment of taste; whence proceed all juices in which flavour resides; and the rudiment of colour invested the juices with the rudiment of taste. The waters becoming productive, engendered the rudiment of smell; whence an aggregate (earth) originates, of which smell is the property [*25]. In each several

[p. 17]

element resides its peculiar rudiment; thence the property of tanmatrata, [*26] (type or rudiment) is ascribed to these elements. Rudimental elements are not endowed with qualities, and therefore they are neither soothing, nor terrific, nor stupifying [*27]. This is the elemental creation, proceeding from the principle of egotism affected by the property of darkness. The organs of sense are said to be the passionate products of the same principle, affected by foulness; and the ten divinities [*28] proceed from egotism affected by the principle of goodness; as does Mind, which

[p. 18]

is the eleventh. The organs of sense are ten: of the ten, five are the skin, eye, nose, tongue, and ear; the object of which, combined with Intellect, is the apprehension of sound and the rest: the organs of excretion and procreation, the hands, the feet, and the voice, form the other five; of which excretion, generation, manipulation, motion, and speaking, are the several acts.

Then, ether, air, light, water, and earth, severally united with the properties of sound and the rest, existed as distinguishable according to their qualities, as soothing, terrific, or stupifying; but possessing various energies, and being unconnected, they could not, without combination, create living beings, not having blended with each other. Having combined, therefore, with one another, they assumed, through their mutual association, the character of one mass of entire unity; and from the direction of spirit, with the acquiescence of the indiscrete Principle [*29], Intellect and the rest, to the gross elements inclusive, formed an egg [*30], which gradually expanded like a bubble of water. This vast egg, O sage, compounded of the elements, and resting on the waters, was the

[p. 19]

excellent natural abode of Vishnu in the form of Brahma; and there Vishnu, the lord of the universe, whose essence is inscrutable, assumed a perceptible form, and even he himself abided in it in the character of Brahma [*31]. Its womb, vast as the mountain Meru, was composed of the mountains; and the mighty oceans were the waters that filled its cavity. In that egg, O Brahman, were the continents and seas and mountains, the planets and divisions of the universe, the gods, the demons, and mankind. And this egg was externally invested by seven natural envelopes, or by water, air, fire, ether, and Ahankara the origin of the elements, each tenfold the extent of that which it invested; next came the principle of Intelligence; and, finally, the whole was surrounded by the indiscrete Principle: resembling thus the cocoa-nut, filled interiorly with pulp, and exteriorly covered by husk and rind.

Affecting then the quality of activity, Hari, the lord of all, himself becoming Brahma, engaged in the creation of the universe. Vishnu with the quality of goodness, and of immeasurable power, preserves created things through successive ages, until the close of the period termed a Kalpa; when the same mighty deity, Janarddana [*32], invested with the quality of darkness, assumes the awful form of Rudra, and swallows up the universe. Having thus devoured all things, and converted the world into one vast ocean, the Supreme reposes upon his mighty serpent couch amidst the deep: he awakes after a season, and again, as Brahma, becomes the author of creation.

Thus the one only god, Janarddana, takes the designation of Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva, accordingly as he creates, preserves, or destroys [*33].

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] Vishnu as creator, creates himself; as preserver, preserves himself; as destroyer, destroys himself at the end of all things. This world of earth, air, fire, water, ether, the senses, and the mind; all that is termed spirit [*34], that also is the lord of all elements, the universal form, and imperishable: hence he is the cause of creation, preservation, and destruction; and the subject of the vicissitudes inherent in elementary nature [*35]. He is the object and author of creation: he preserves, destroys, and is preserved. He, Vishnu, as Brahma, and as all other beings, is infinite form: he is the supreme, the giver of all good, the fountain of all happiness [*36].

Footnotes

^7:1 The three hypostases of Vishnu. Hiranyagarbha is a name of Brahma; he who was born from the golden egg. Hari is Vishnu, and S'ankara Siva. The Vishnu who is the subject of our text is the supreme being in all these three divinities or hypostases, in his different characters of creator, preserver and destroyer. Thus in the Markandeya: 'Accordingly, as the primal all-pervading spirit is distinguished by attributes in creation and the rest, so he obtains the denomination of Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva. In the capacity of Brahma he creates the worlds; in that of Rudra he destroys them; in that of Vishnu he is quiescent. These are the three Avasthas (ht. hypostases) of the self-born. Brahma is the quality of activity; Rudra that of darkness; Vishnu, the lord of the world, is goodness: so, therefore, the three gods are the three qualities. They are ever combined with, and dependent upon one another; and they are never for an instant separate; they never quit each other.' The notion is one common to all antiquity, although less philosophically conceived, or perhaps less distinctly expressed, in the passages which have come down to us. The treis arxikas ypostaseis of Plato are said by Cudworth (I. 111), upon the authority of Plotinus, to be an ancient doctrine, palaia doxa: and he also observes, "Orpheus, Pythagoras, and Plato have all of them asserted a trinity of divine hypostases; and as they unquestionably derived much of their doctrine from the Egyptians, it may reasonably be suspected that the Egyptians did the like before them." As however the Grecian accounts, and those of the Egyptians, are much more perplexed and unsatisfactory than those of the Hindus, it is most probable that we find amongst them the doctrine in its most original as well as most methodical and significant form.

^8:2 This address to Vishnu pursues the notion that he, as the supreme being, is one, whilst he is all: he is Avikara, not subject to change; Sadaikarupa, one invariable nature: he is the liberator (tara), or he who bears mortals across the ocean of existence: he is both single and manifold (ekanekarupa): and he is the indiscrete (avyakta) cause of the world, as well as the discrete (vyakta) effect; or the invisible cause, and visible creation.

^8:3 Jaganmaya, made up, or consisting substantially of the world. Maya is an affix denoting 'made' or 'consisting of,' as Kashtha maya, 'made of wood.' The world is therefore not regarded by the Pauranics as an emanation or an illusion, but as consubstantial with its first cause.

^8:4 Aniyansam aniyasam, 'the most atomic of the atomic;' alluding to the atomic theory of the Nyaya or logical school.

^8:5 Or Achyuta; a common name of Vishnu, from a, privative, and chyuta, fallen; according to our comment, 'he who does not perish with created things.' The Mahabharata interprets it in one place to mean, 'he who is not distinct from final emancipation;' and in another to signify, 'exempt from decay'. A commentator on the Kas'ikhanda of the Skanda Purana explains it, 'he who never declines (or varies) from his own proper nature.'

^8:6 This is another common title of Vishnu, implying supreme, best (Uttama), spirit (Purusha), or male, or sacrifice, or, according to the Mahabh. Moksha Dharma, whatever sense Purusha may bear.

^8:7 Paramarthatas, 'by or through the real object, or sense; through actual truth.'

^8:8 Bhranti ders'anatas, 'false appearances,' in opposition to actual truth. 'By the nature of visible objects': Artha is explained by dris'ya, 'visible;' swarupena 'by the nature of:' that is, visible objects are not what they seem to be, independent existences; they are essentially one with their original source: and knowledge of their true nature or relation to Vishnu, is knowledge of Vishnu himself. This is not the doctrine of Maya, or the influence of illusion, [p. 9] which alone, according to Vedanta idealism, constitutes belief in the existence of matter: a doctrine foreign to most of the Puranas, and first introduced amongst them apparently by the Bhagavata.

^9:9 A different and more detailed account of the transmission of the Vishnu Purana is given in the last book, c. 8.

^9:10 The ordinary derivation of Vasudeva has been noticed above (<page 1>): here it is derived from Vas, 'to dwell,' from Vishnu's abiding in all things, and all in him. The Mahabharata explains Vasu in the same manner, and Deva to signify radiant, shining: 'He causes all things to dwell in him, and he abides in all; whence he is named Vasu: being resplendent as the sun, he is called Deva: and he who is both these, is denominated Vasudeva.' See also b. VI. c. 5.

^9:11 The commentator argues that Vasudeva must be the Brahma, or supreme being, of the Vedas, because the same circumstances are predicated of both, as eternity, omnipresence, omnipotence, &c.; but he does not adduce any scriptural text with the name Vasudeva.

^9:12 Time is not usually enumerated in the Puranas as an element of the first cause, but the Padma P. and the Bhagavata [p. 10] agree with the Vishnu in including it. It appears to have been regarded at an earlier date as an independent cause: the commentator on the Moksha Dherma cites a passage from the Vedas, which he understands to allude to the different theories of the cause of creation. Time, inherent nature, consequence of acts, self-will, elementary atoms, matter, and spirit, asserted severally by the Astrologers, the Buddhists, the Mimansakas, the Jains, the Logicians, the Sankhyas, and the Vedantis. Kronos was also one of the first generated agents in creation, according to the Orphic theogony.

^10:13 The creation of the world is very commonly considered to be the Lila, sport or amusement, of the Supreme Being.

^10:14 The attributes of Pradhana, the chief (principle or element), here specified, conform generally to those ascribed to it by the Sankhya philosophy (Sankhya Karika, p. 16, &c.), although some of them are incompatible with its origin from a first cause. In the Sankhya this incongruity does not occur; for there Pradhana is independent, and coordinate with primary spirit. The Puranas give rise to the inconsistency by a lax use of both philosophical and pantheistical expressions. The most incongruous epithets in our text are however explained away in the comment. Thus nitya, 'eternal,' is said to mean 'uniform, not liable to increase or diminution:' Sadasadatmaka, 'comprehending what is and what is not,' means 'having the power of both cause and effect', as proceeding from Vishnu, and as giving origin to material things. Anadi, 'without beginning,' means 'without birth', not being engendered by any created thing, but proceeding immediately from the first cause. 'The mother,' or literally the womb of the world', means the passive agent in creation,' operated on or influenced by the active will of the Creator. The first part of the passage in the text is a favourite one with several of. the Puranas, but they modify it and apply it after their own fashion. In the Vishnu the original is ###, rendered as above. The Vayu, Brahmanda, and [p. 11] Kurmma Puranas have 'The indiscrete cause, which is uniform, and both cause and effect, and whom those who are acquainted with first principles call Pradhana and Prakriti--is the uncognizable Brahma, who was before all.' But the application of two synonymes of Prakriti to Brahma seems unnecessary at least. The Brahma P. corrects the reading apparently: the first line is as before; the second is, ###. The passage is placed absolutely; 'There was an indiscrete cause eternal, and cause and effect, which was both matter and spirit (Pradhana and Purusha), from which this world was made. Instead of 'such' or this,' some copies read 'from which Is'wara or god (the active deity or Brahma) made the world.' The Hari Vans'a has the same reading, except in the last term, which it makes ### that is, according to the commentator, the world, which is Is'wara, was made.' The same authority explains this indiscrete cause, avyakta karana, to denote Brahma, the creator an identification very unusual, if not inaccurate, and possibly founded on misapprehension of what is stated by the Bhavishya P.: 'That male or spirit which is endowed with that which is the indiscrete cause, &c. is known in the world as Brahma: he being in the egg, &c.' The passage is precisely the same in Manu, I, 11; except that we have 'visrishta' instead of 'vis'ishtha:' the latter is a questionable reading, and is probably wrong: the sense of the latter is, detached; and the whole means very consistently, 'embodied spirit detached from the indiscrete cause of the world is known as Brahma.' The Padma P. inserts the first line, ### &c., but has 'Which creates undoubtedly Mahat and the other qualities' assigning the first epithets, therefore, as the Vishnu does, to Prakriti only. The Linga also refers the expression to Prakriti alone, but makes it a secondary cause: 'An indiscrete cause, which those acquainted with first principles call Pradhana and Prakriti, proceeded from that Is'wara (S'iva).' This passage is one of very many instances in which expressions are common to several Puranas that seem to be borrowed from one another, or from some common source older than any of them, especially in this instance, as the same text occurs in Manu.

^11:15 The expression of the text is rather obscure; 'All was pervaded (or comprehended) by that chief principle before (recreation), after the (last) destruction.' The ellipses are filled up by the commentator. This, he adds, is to be regarded as the state of things at a Maha Pralaya, or total dissolution; leaving, therefore, crude matter, nature, or chaos, as a coexistent element with the Supreme. This, which is conformable to the philosophical doctrine, is not however that of the Puranas in general, nor [p. 12] that of our text, which states (b. VI. c. 4), that at a Prakrita, or elementary dissolution, Pradhana itself merges into the deity. Neither is it apparently the doctrine of the Vedas, although their language is somewhat equivocal.

^12:16 The metre here is one common to the Vedas, Trishtubh, but in other respects the language is not characteristic of those compositions. The purport of the passage is rendered somewhat doubtful by its close, and by the explanation of the commentator. The former is, 'One Pradhanika Brahma Spirit: THAT, was. The commentator explains Pradhanika, Pradhana eva, the same word as Pradhana; but it is a derivative word, which may be used attributively, implying 'having, or conjoined with, Pradhana.' The commentator, however, interprets it as the substantive; for he adds, 'There was Pradhana and Brahma and Spirit; this triad was at the period of dissolution.' He evidently, however, understands their conjoint existence as one only; for he continues, 'So, according to the Vedas, then there was neither the existent (invisible cause, or matter) nor the non-existent (visible effect, or creation),' meaning that there was only One Being, in whom matter and its modifications were all comprehended.

^12:17 Or it might be rendered, 'Those two other forms (which proceed) from his supreme nature;' that is, from the nature of Vishnu, when he is Nirupadhi, or without adventitious attributes: ### 'other' (###); the commentator states they are other or separate from Vishnu only through Maya, illusion,' but here implying false notion;' the elements of creation being in essence one with Vishnu, though in existence detached and different.

^12:18 Pradhana, when unmodified, is, according to the Sankhyas and Pauranics, nothing more than the three qualities in equilibrio, or goodness, foulness, and darkness neutralising each other; (Sankhya [p. 13] Karika, p. 52;) so in the Matsya P.: ###. This state is synonymous with the non-evolution of material products, or with dissolution; implying, however, separate existence, and detached from spirit This being the case, it is asked who. should sustain matter and spirit whilst separate, or renew their combination so as to renovate creation? It is answered, Time, which is when every thing else is not; and which, at the end of a certain interval, unites Matter, Pradhana, and Purusha, and produces creation. Conceptions of this kind are evidently comprised in the Orphic triad, or the ancient notion of the cooperation of three such principles in creation; as Phanes or Eros, which is the Hindu spirit or Purusha; Chaos, matter or Pradhana; and Chronos, or Kala, time.

^13:19 Pradhana is styled Vyaya 'that which may be expended;' or Parinamin, 'which may be modified:' and Purusha is called Avyaya, 'inconsumable; or aparina.min, 'immutable.' The expressions 'having entered into,' and 'agitated,' recall the mode in which divine intelligence, mens, nous, was conceived by the ancients to operate upon matter:

	Fren . . . frontisi kosmon apanta
	 . . . . kataissoysa thoesin:

or as in a more familiar passage;

	Spiritus intus alit totamque infusa per artus
	 Mens agitat molem et magno se corpore miscet:

or perhaps it more closely approximates to the Phoenician cosmogony, in which a spirit mixing with its own principles gives rise to creation. Brucker, I. 240. As presently explained, the mixture is not mechanical; it is an influence or effect exerted upon intermediate agents, which produce effects; as perfumes do not delight the mind by actual contact, but by the impression they make upon the sense of smelling, which communicates it to the mind. The entrance of the supreme Vishnu into spirit as well as matter is less intelligible than the view elsewhere taken of it, as the infusion of spirit, identified with the Supreme, into Prakriti or matter alone. Thus in the Padma Purana: 'He who is called the male (spirit) of Prakriti, is here named Achyuta; and that same divine Vishnu entered into Prakriti.' So the Vrihat Naradiya: 'The lord of the world, who is called Purusha, producing agitation in Prakriti.' From the notion of influence or agitation produced on matter through or with spirit, the abuse of personification led to actual or vicarious admixture. Thus the Bhagavata, identifying Maya with Prakriti, has, [p. 14] 'Through the operation of time, the Mighty One, who is present to the pure, implanted a seed in Maya endowed with qualities, as Purusha, which is one with himself.' B. III. s.5. And the Bhavishya: 'Some learned men say, that the Supreme Being, desirous to create beings, creates in the commencement of the Kalpa a body of soul (or an incorporeal substance); which soul created by him enters into Prakriti; and Prakriti being thereby agitated, creates many material elements.' But these may be regarded as notions of a later date. In the Mahabharata the first cause is declared to be 'Intellectual,' who creates by his mind or will: The first (Being) is called Manasa (intellectual), and is so celebrated by great sages: he is God, without beginning or end, indivisible, immortal, undecaying.' And again: 'The Intellectual created many kinds of creatures by his mind.'

^14:20 Contraction, Sankocha, is explained by Samya, sameness or equilibrium of the three qualities, or inert Pradhana: and Expansion, Vikas'a, is the destruction of this equipoise, by previous agitation and consequent developement of material products.

^14:21 The term here is Kshetrajna, 'embodied spirit,' or that which knows the kshetra or 'body;' implying the combination of spirit with form or matter, for the purpose of creating.

^14:22 The first product of Pradhana sensible to divine, though not to mere human organs, is, both according to the Sankhya and Pauranic doctrines, the principle called Mahat, literally 'the Great,' explained in other places, as in our text, 'the production of the manifestation of the qualities:' or, as in the Vayu, ###. We have in the same Purana, as well as in the Brahmanda and Linga, a number of synonymes for this term, as, ###. They are also explained, though not very distinctly, to the following purport: "Manas is that which considers the consequences of acts to all creatures, and provides for their happiness. Mahat, the Great principle, is so termed from being the first of the created principles, and from its extension being greater than that of the rest. Mati is that which discriminates and distinguishes objects preparatory to their fruition by Soul. Brahma implies that which effects the developement and augmentation of created things. Pur [p. 15] is that by which the concurrence of nature occupies and fills all bodies. Buddhi is that which communicates to soul the knowledge of good and evil. Khyati is the means of individual fruition, or the faculty of discriminating objects by appropriate designations, and the like. Is'wara is that which knows all things as if they were present. Prajna is that by which the properties of things are known. Chiti is that by which the consequences of acts and species of knowledge are selected for the use of soul. Smriti is the faculty of recognising all things, past, present, or to come. Samvit is that in which all things are found or known, and which is found or known in all things: and Vipura is that which is free from the effects of contrarieties, as of knowledge and ignorance, and the like. Mahat is also called Is'wara, from its exercising supremacy over all things; Bhava, from its elementary existence; Eka, or 'the one,' from its singleness; Purusha, from its abiding within the body; and from its being ungenerated it is called Swayambhu." Now in this nomenclature we have chiefly two sets of words; one, as Manas, Buddhi, Mati, signifying mind, intelligence, knowledge, wisdom, design; and the other, as Brahma, Is'wara, &c., denoting an active creator and ruler of the universe: as the Vayu adds, 'Mahat, impelled by the desire to create, causes various creation:' and the Mahabharata has, 'Mahat created Ahankara.' The Puranas generally employ the same expression, attributing to Mahat or Intelligence the 'act of creating. Mahat is therefore the divine mind in creative operation, the nous o diakosmun te kai pantun aitios of Anaxagoras; an ordering and disposing mind, which was the cause of all things: The word itself suggests some relationship to the Phoenician Mot, which, like Mahat, was the first product of the mixture of spirit and matter, and the first rudiment of creation: "Ex connexione autem ejus spiritus prodiit mot . . . hinc seminium omnis creaturae et omnium rerum creatio." Brucker, I. 240. Mot, it is true, . appears to be a purely material substance, whilst Mahat is an incorporeal substance; but they agree in their place in the cosmogony, and are something alike in name. How far also the Phoenician system has been accurately described, is matter of uncertainty. See Sankhya Karika, p. 83.

^15:23 The sense of Ahankara cannot be very well rendered by any European term. It means the principle of individual existence, that which appropriates perceptions, and on which depend the notions, I think, I feel, I am. It might be expressed by the proposition of Descartes reversed; "Sum, ergo cogito, sentio," &c. The equivalent employed by Mr. Colebrooke, egotism, has the advantage of an analogous etymology, Ahankara being derived from Aham, 'I;' as in the Hari Vans'a: 'He (Brahma), oh Bharata, said, I will create creatures.' See also S. Karika, p. 91.

^16:24 These three varieties of Ahankara are also described in the Sankhya Karika, p. 92. Vaikarika, that which is productive, or susceptible of production, is the same as the Satwika, or that which is combined with the property of goodness. Taijasa Ahankara is that which is endowed with Tejas, heat' or energy,' in  of its having the property of Rajas, 'passion' or 'activity;' and the third kind, Bhutadi, or 'elementary,' is the Tamasa, or has the property of darkness. From the first kind proceed the senses; from the last, the rudimental unconscious elements; both kinds, which are equally of themselves inert, being rendered productive by the cooperation of the second, the energetic or active modification of Ahankara, which is therefore said to be the origin of both the senses and the elements.

^16:25 The successive series of rudiments and elements, and their respectively engendering the rudiments and elements next in order, occur in most of the Puranas, in nearly the same words. The Vrihannaradiya P. observes, 'They (the elements) in successive order acquire the property of causality one to the other.' The order is also the same; or, ether (akas), wind or air (vayu), fire or light (tejas), water and earth; except in one passage of the Mahabharata (Moksha Dherma, C. 9), where it is ether, water, fire, air, earth. The order of Empedocles was ether, fire, earth, water, air. Cudworth, I. 97. The investment (avarana) of each element by its own rudiment, and of each rudiment by its preceding gross and rudimental elements, is also met with in most of the chief Puranas, as the Vayu, Padma, Linga, and Bhagavata; and traces [p. 17] of it are found amongst the ancient cosmogonists; for Anaximander supposed, that when the world was made, a certain sphere or flame of fire, separated from matter (the Infinite), encompassed the air, which invested the earth as the bark does a tree:' Kata ten genesin toude tou kosmoy apokritheinai, kai tina ek toutoy flogos spairan perifyeinai tui peri ten gein aeri, us tui dendrui floion. Euseb. Pr, I. 15. Some of the Puranas, as the Matsya, Vayu, Linga, Bhagavata, and Markandeya, add a description of a participation of properties amongst the elements, which is rather Vedanta than Sankhya. According to this notion, the elements add to their characteristic properties those of the elements which precede them. Akas has the single property of sound: air has those of touch and sound: fire has colour, touch, and sound: water has taste, colour, touch, and sound: and earth has smell and the rest, thus having five properties: or, as the Linga P. describes the series, ###.

^17:26 Tanmatra, 'rudiment' or 'type,' from Tad, 'that,' for Tasmin, 'in that' gross element, and matra, 'subtile or rudimental form'. The rudiments are also the characteristic properties of the elements: as the Bhagavata; 'The rudiment of it (ether) is also its quality, sound; as a common designation may denote both a person who sees an object, and the object which is to be seen: that is, according to the commentator, suppose a person behind a wall called aloud, "An elephant! an elephant!" the term would equally indicate that an elephant was visible, and that somebody saw it. Bhag. II. 5.

^17:27 The properties here alluded to are not those of goodness &c., but other properties assigned to perceptible objects by the Sankhya doctrines, or S'anti, 'placidity;' Ghorata, 'terror;' and Moha, 'dulness' or 'stupefaction.' S. Karika, V.38. p, 119.

^17:28 The Bhagavata, which gives a similar statement of the origin of the elements, senses, and divinities, specifies the last to be Dis' (space), air, the sun, Prachetas, the Aswins, fire, Indra, Upendra, Mitra, and Ka or Prajapati, presiding over the senses, according to the comment, or severally over the ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose, speech, hands, feet, and excretory and generative organs. Bhag. II. 5. 31.

^18:29 Avyaktanugrahena. The expression is something equivocal, as Avyakta may here apply either to the First Cause or to matter. In either case the notion is the same, and the aggregation of the elements is the effect of the presidence of spirit, without any active interference of the indiscrete principle. The Avyakta is passive in the evolution and combination of Mahat and the rest. Pradhana is, no doubt, intended, but its identification with the Supreme is also implied. The term Anugraha may also refer to a classification of the order of creation, which will be again adverted to.

^18:30 It is impossible not to refer this notion to the same origin as the widely diffused opinion of antiquity, of the first manifestation of the world in the form of an egg. "It seems to have been a favourite symbol, and very ancient, and we find it adopted among many nations." Bryant, III. 165. Traces of it occur amongst the Syrians, Persians, and Egyptians; and besides the Orphic egg amongst the Greeks, and that described by Aristophanes, Tekten prutiston ypenemion nux e melanopteros uon part of the ceremony in the Dionysiaca and other mysteries consisted of the consecration of an egg; by which, according to Porphyry, was signified the world: Ermeneuei de to uon ton kosmon. Whether this egg typified the ark, as Bryant and Faber suppose, is not material to the proof of the antiquity and wide diffusion of the belief that the world in the beginning existed in such a figure. A similar account of the first aggregation of the elements in the form of an egg is given in all the Puranas, with the usual epithet Haima or Hiranya, 'golden,' as it occurs in Manu, I. 9.

^19:31 Here is another analogy to the doctrines of antiquity relating to the mundane egg: and as the first visible male being, who, as we shall hereafter see, united in himself the nature of either sex, abode in the egg, and issued from it; so "this firstborn of the world, whom they represented under two shapes and characters, and who sprung from the mundane egg, was the person from whom the mortals and immortals were derived. He was the same as Dionusus, whom they styled, prutogonon difnei trigonon Bakxeion Anakta Agrion arreton krufion dikeruta dimofon:" or, with the omission of one epithet, , ###.

^19:32 Janarddana is derived from Jana, 'men,' and Arddana, 'worship;' 'the object of adoration to mankind.'

^19:33 This is the invariable doctrine of the Puranas, diversified only according to the [p. 20] individual divinity to whom they ascribe identity with Paramatma or Parames'wara. In our text this is Vishnu: in the S'aiva Puranas, as in the Linga, it is S'iva: in the Brahma-vaivartta it is Krishna. The identification of one of the hypostases with the common source of the triad was an incongruity not unknown to other theogonies; for Cneph, amongst the Egyptians, appears on the one hand to have been identified with the Supreme Being, the indivisible unity, whilst on the other he is confounded with both Emeph and Ptha, the second and third persons of the triad of hypostases. Cudworth, I. 4. 18.

^20:34 'The world that is termed spirit;' explained by the commentator, 'which indeed bears the appellation spirit;' conformably to the text of the Vedas, 'this universe is indeed spirit.' This is rather Vedanta than Sankhya, and appears to deny the existence of matter: and so it does as an independent existence; for the origin and end of infinite substance is the Deity or universal spirit: but it does not therefore imply the non-existence of the world as real substance.

^20:35 Vishnu is both Bhutes'a, 'lord of the elements,' or of created things, and Vis'warupa, 'universal substance:' he is therefore, as one with sensible things, subject to his own control.

^20:36 Varenya, 'most excellent;' being the same, according to the commentator, with supreme felicity.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

CHAP. III.

Measure of time. Moments or Kashthas, &c.; day and night; fortnight, month, year, divine year: Yugas, or ages: Mahayuga, or great age: day of Brahma: periods of the Manus: a Manwantara: night of Brahma, and destruction of the world: a year of Brahma: his life: a Kalpa: a Pararrdha: the past, or Padma Kalpa: the present, or Varaha.

MAITREYA.--How can creative agency be attributed to that Brahma, who is without qualities, illimitable, pure, and free from imperfection?

PARAS'ARA.--The essential properties of existent things are objects of observation, of which no foreknowledge is attainable; and creation, and hundreds of properties, belong to Brahma, as inseparable parts of his essence, as heat, oh chief of sages, is inherent in fire [*1]. Hear then how

[p. 22]

the deity Narayana, in the person of Brahma, the great parent of the world, created all existent things.

Brahma is said to be born: a familiar phrase, to signify his manifestation; and, as the peculiar measure of his presence, a hundred of his years is said to constitute his life: that period is also called Param, and the half of it, Pararddham [*2]. I have already declared to you, oh sinless Brahman, that Time is a form of Vishnu: hear now how it is applied to measure the duration of Brahma, and of all other sentient beings, as well as of those which are unconscious, as the mountains, oceans, and the like.

Oh best of sages, fifteen twinklings of the eye make a Kashtha; thirty Kashthas, one Kala; and thirty Kalas, one Muhurtta [*3]. Thirty Muhurttas

[p. 23]

constitute a day and night of mortals: thirty such days make a month, divided into two half-months: six months form an Ayana (the period of the sun's progress north or south of the ecliptic): and two Ayanas compose a year. The southern Ayana is a night, and the northern a day of the gods. Twelve thousand divine years, each composed of (three hundred and sixty) such days, constitute the period of the four Yugas, or ages. They are thus distributed: the Krita age has four thousand divine years; the Treta three thousand; the Dwapara two thousand; and the Kali age one thousand: so those acquainted with antiquity have declared. The period that precedes a Yuga is called a Sandhya, and it is of as many hundred years as there are thousands in the Yuga: and the period that follows a Yuga, termed the Sandhyansa, is of similar duration. The interval between the Sandhya and the Sandhyansa is the Yuga, denominated Krita, Treta, &c. The Krita, Treta, Dwapara, and Kali, constitute a great age, or aggregate of four ages: a thousand such aggregates are a day of Brahma, and fourteen Menus reign within that term. Hear the division of time which they measure [*4].

[p. 24]

Seven Rishis, certain (secondary) divinities, Indra, Manu, and the kings his sons, are created and perish at one period [*5]; and the interval, called a Manwantara, is equal to seventy-one times the number of years contained in the four Yugas, with some additional years: this is the duration of the Manu, the (attendant) divinities, and the rest, which is equal to 852.000 divine years, or to 306.720.000 years of mortals, independent of the additional period [*6]. Fourteen times this period constitutes

[p. 25]

a Brahma day, that is, a day of Brahma; the term (Brahma) being the derivative form. At the end of this day a dissolution of the universe occurs, when all the three worlds, earth, and the regions of space, are consumed with fire. The dwellers of Maharloka (the region inhabited by the saints who survive the world), distressed by the heat, repair then to Janaloka (the region of holy men after their decease). When the-three worlds are but one mighty ocean, Brahma, who is one with Narayana, satiate with the demolition of the universe, sleeps upon his serpent-bed--contemplated, the lotus born, by the ascetic inhabitants of the Janaloka--for a night of equal duration with his day; at the close of which he creates anew. Of such days and nights is a year of Brahma composed; and a hundred such years constitute his whole life [*7]. One Pararddha [*8], or half his existence, has expired, terminating with the Maha Kalpa [*9] called Padma. The Kalpa (or day of Brahma) termed Varaha is the first of the second period of Brahma's existence.

[p. 26]

this page consists entire of footnotes

Footnotes

^21:1 Agency depends upon the Raja guna, the quality of foulness or passion, which is an imperfection. Perfect being is void of all qualities, and is therefore inert:

	Omnis enim per se divom natura necesse est
	 Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur:

but if inert for ever, creation could not occur. The objection is rather evaded than answered. The ascribing to Brahma of innumerable and unappreciable properties is supported by the commentator with vague and scarcely applicable texts of the Vedas. 'In him there is neither instrument nor effect: his like, his superior, is nowhere seen.' 'That supreme soul is the subjugator of all, the ruler of all, the sovereign of all.' In various places of the Vedas also it is said that his power is supreme, and that wisdom, power, and action are his essential properties. The origin of creation is also imputed in the Vedas to the rise of will or desire in the Supreme: 'He wished I may become manifold, I may create creatures.' The Bhagavata expresses the same doctrine: 'The Supreme Being was before all things alone, the soul and lord of spiritual substance: in consequence of his own will he is secondarily defined, as if of various minds.' This will however, in the mysticism of the Bhagavata, is personified as Maya: 'She (that desire) was the energy of the Supreme, who was contemplating (the untreated world); and by her, whose name is Maya, the Lord made the universe.' This, which was at first a mere poetical personification of the divine will, came, in such works as the Bhagavata, to denote a female divinity, coequal and coeternal with the First Cause. It may be doubted if the Vedas authorize such a mystification, and no very decided vestige of it occurs in the Vishnu Purana.

^22:2 This term is also applied to a different and still more protracted period. See b. VI. C. 3.

^22:3 The last proportion is rather obscurely expressed: 'Thirty of them (Kalas) are the rule for the Muhurtta.' The commentator says it means that thirty Kalas make a Ghatika (or Ghari), and two Ghatikas a Muhurtta; but his explanation is gratuitous, and is at variance with more explicit passages elsewhere; as in the Matsya: 'A Muhurtta is thirty Kalas.' In these divisions of the twenty-four hours the Kurma, Markandeya, Matsya, Vayu, and Linga Puranas exactly agree with our authority. In Manu, I. 64, we have the same computation, with a difference in the first article, eighteen Nimeshas being one Kashtha. The Bhavishya P. follows Manu in that respect, and agrees in the rest with the Padma, which has,

          15 Nimeshas

       = 1   Kashtha

     
      30   Kashthas

       = 1 Kala

     
      30 Kalas

       = 1 Kshana

     
      12 Kshanas

       =1   Muhurtta

     
      30   Muhurttas

       = 1 day and   night.

     
   In the Mahabharata, Moksha Dherma, it is said that thirty Kalas and one-tenth, or, according to the commentator, thirty Kalas and three Kashthas, make a Muhurtta. A still greater variety, however, occurs in the Bhagavata and in the Brahma Vaivartta P. These have,

          2

       Paramanus   

       = 1 Anu

     
      3

       Anus 

       = 1 Trasarenu

     
      3

       Trasarenus 

       = 1 Truti

     
      100

       Trutis 

       = 1 Vedha

     
      3

       Vedhas 

       = 1 Lava

     
      3

       Lavas 

       = 1 Nimesha

     
      3

       Nimeshas 

       = 1 Kshana

     
      5

       Kshanas 

       = 1   Kashtha

     
      15

       Kashthas   

       = 1 Laghu

     
      15

       Laghus 

       = 1   Narika

     
      2

       Narikas   

       = 1   Muhurtta

     
      6 or 7

       Narikas   

       = 1 Yama, or   watch of the day or night.

     
   Allusions to this or either of the preceding computations, or to any other, have not been found in either of the other Puranas: [p. 23] yet the work of Gopala Bhatta, from which Mr. Colebrooke states he derived his information on the subject of Indian weights and measures (A. R. 5. 105), the Sankhya Parimana, cites the Varaha P. for a peculiar computation, and quotes another from the Bhavishya, different from that which occurs in the first chapter of that work, to which we have referred. The principle of the calculation adopted by the astronomical works is different: it is, 6 respirations (Prana) = 1 Vikala; 60 Vikalas = 1 Danda; 60 Dandas =1 sydereal day. The Nimesha, which is the base of one of the Pauranic modes, is a twinkle of the eye of a man at rest; whilst the Paramanu, which is the origin of the other, and apparently more modern system, considering the works in which it occurs, is the time taken by a Paramanu, or mote in the sunbeam, to pass through a crevice in a shutter. Some indications of this calculation being in common currency, occur in the Hindustani terms Renu (Trasarenu) and Lamhu (Laghu) in Indian horometry (A. R. 5. 81); whilst the more ordinary system seems derived from the astronomical works, being 60 Tilas = 1 Vipala; 60 Vipalas = 1 Pala; 60 Palas = 1 Danda or Ghari. Ibid.

^23:4 These calculations of time are found in most of the Puranas, with some additions occasionally, of no importance, as that of the year of the seven Rishis, 3030 mortal years, and the year of Dhruva, 9090 such years, in the Linga P. In all essential points the computations accord, and the scheme, extravagant as it may appear, seems to admit of easy explanation. We have, in the first place, a computation of the years of the gods in the four ages, or, [p. 24]

          Krita

       Yuga

       4000

        

        

     
       

       Sandhya

       400

        

        

     
       

       Sandhyansa

       400

        

        

     
       

        

        

       4800

        

     
      Treta

       Yuga

       3000

        

        

     
       

       Sandhya

       300

        

        

     
       

       Sandhyansa

       300

        

        

     
       

        

        

       3600

        

     
      Dwapara

       Yuga

       2000

        

        

     
       

       Sandhya

       200

        

        

     
       

       Sandhyansa

       200

        

        

     
       

        

        

       2400

        

     
      Kali

       Yuga

       1000

        

        

     
       

       Sandhya

       100

        

        

     
       

       Sandhyansa

       100

        

        

     
       

        

        

       1200

        

     
       

        

        

        

       12000.

     
   [paragraph continues] If these divine years are converted into years of mortals, by multiplying them by 360, a year of men being a day of the gods, we obtain the years of which the Yugas of mortals are respectively said to consist:

          4800 x 360

       = 1.728.000

     
      3600 x 360

       = 1.296.000

     
      2400 x 360

       = 864.000

     
      1200 x 360

       = 432.000

     
       

       4.320.000 a   Mahayuga.

     
   [paragraph continues] So that these periods resolve themselves into very simple elements: the notion of four ages in a deteriorating series expressed by descending arithmetical progression, as 4, 3, 2, 5; the conversion of units into thousands; and the mythological fiction, that these were divine years, each composed of 360 years of men. It does not seem necessary to refer the invention to any astronomical computations, or to any attempt to represent actual chronology.

^24:5 The details of these, as occurring in each Manwantara, are given in the third book, c. 1 and 2.

^24:6 'One and seventy enumerations of the four ages, with a surplus.' A similar reading occurs in several other Puranas, but none of them state of what the surplus or addition consists; but it is, in fact, the number of years required to reconcile two computations of the Kalpa. The most simple, and probably the original calculation of a Kalpa, is its being 1000 great ages, or ages of the gods: ### Bhavishya P. Then 4.320.000 years, or a divine age, x 1000 = 4320.000.000 years, or a day or night of Brahma,. But a day of Brahma is also seventy-one times a great age multiplied by fourteen: 4.320.000 x 71 x 14= 4.294.080.000, or less than the preceding by 25.920.000; and it is to make up for this deficiency that a certain number of years must be added to the computation by Manwantaras. According to the Surya Siddhanta, as cited by Mr. Davis (A. R. 2. 231), this addition consists of a Sandhi to each Manwantara, equal to the Satya age, or 5.728.000 years; and one similar Sandhi at the commencement of the Kalpa: thus [p. 25] 4.320.000 x 71 = 306.720.000 + 1.728.000 = 308.448.000 x 14 = 4318.272.000 + 1.728.000 = 4320.000.000. The Pauranics, however, omit the Sandhi of the Kalpa, and add the whole compensation to the Manwantaras. The amount of this in whole numbers is 1.851.428 in each Manwantara, or 4.320.000 x 71= 306.720.000 + 1.851.428 = 308.571.428 x 14 = 4319.999.992; leaving a very small inferiority to the result of the calculation of a Kalpa by a thousand great ages. To provide for this deficiency, indeed, very minute subdivisions are admitted into the calculation; and the commentator on our text says, that the additional years, if of gods, are 5142 years, 10 months, 8 days, 4 watches, 2 Muhurttas, 8 Kalas, 17 Kashthas, 2 Nimeshas, and 1/7th; if of mortals, 1.851.428 years, 6 months, 24 days, 12 Naris, 12 Kalas, 25 Kashthas, and 10 Nimeshas. It will be observed, that in the Kalpa we have the regular descending series 4, 3, 2, with cyphers multiplied ad libitum.

^25:7 The Brahma Vaivartta says 108 years, but this is unusual. Brahma's life is but a Nimesha of Krishna, according to that work; a Nimesha of S'iva, according to the Saiva Purana.

^25:8 In the last book the Pararddha occurs as a very different measure of time, but it is employed here in its ordinary acceptation.

^25:9 In theory the Kalpas are infinite; as the Bhavishya: 'Excellent sages, thousands of millions of Kalpas have passed, and as many are to come.' In the Linga Purana, and others of the Saiva division, above thirty Kalpas are named, and some account given of several, but they are evidently sectarial embellishments. The only Kalpas usually specified are those which follow in the text: the one which was the last, or the Padma, and the present [p. 26] or Varaha. The first is also commonly called the Brahma; but the Bhagavata distinguishes the Brahma, considering it to be the first of Brahma's life, whilst the Padma was the last of the first Pararddha. The terms Mana, or great Kalpa, applied to the Padma, is attached to it only in a general sense; or, according to the commentator, because it comprises, as a minor Kalpa, that in which Brahma was born from a lotus. Properly, a great Kalpa is not a day, but a life of Brahma; as in the Brahma Vaivartta: 'Chronologers compute a Kalpa by the life of Brahma. Minor Kalpas, as Samvartta and the rest, are numerous.' Minor Kalpas here denote every period of destruction, or those in which the Samvartta wind, or other destructive agents, operate. Several other computations of time are found in different Puranas, but it will be sufficient to notice one which occurs in the Hari Vans'a, as it is peculiar, and because it is not quite correctly given in M. Langlois' translation. It is the calculation of the Manava time, or time of a Menu.

          10

       divine years

       = a day and   night of a Menu.

     
      10

       Manava   days

       = his   fortnight.

     
      10

       Manava   fortn.

       = his month.

     
      12

       Manava   months

       = his season.

     
      6

       Manava   seasons

       = his year.

     
   Accordingly the commentator says 72000 divine years make up his year. The French translation has, "dix annees des dieux font un jour de Menu; dix jours des dieux font un pakcha de Menu," &c. The error lies in the expression "jours des dieux," and is evidently a mere inadvertence; for if ten years make a day, ten days can scarcely make a fortnight.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

CHAP. IV.

Narayana's appearance, in the beginning of the Kalpa, as the Varsha or boar: Prithivi (Earth) addresses him: he raises the world from beneath the waters: hymned by Sanandana and the Yogis. The earth floats on the ocean: divided into seven zones. The lower spheres of the universe restored. Creation renewed.

MAITREYA.--Tell me, mighty sage, how, in the commencement of the (present) Kalpa, Narayana, who is named Brahma, created all existent things [*1].

PARAS'ARA.--In what manner the divine Brahma, who is one with Narayana, created progeny, and is thence named the lord of progeny (Prajapati), the lord god, you shall hear.

At the close of the past (or Padma) Kalpa, the divine Brahma, endowed with the quality of goodness, awoke from his night of sleep, and beheld the universe void. He, the supreme Narayana, the incomprehensible, the sovereign of all creatures, invested with the form of Brahma, the god without beginning, the creator of all things; of whom, with respect to his name Narayana, the god who has the form of Brahma, the imperishable origin of the world, this verse is repeated, "The waters are called Nara, because they were the offspring of Nara (the supreme spirit); and as in them his first (Ayana) progress (in the character of Brahma) took place, he is thence named Narayana (he whose place of moving was the waters) [*2]." He, the lord, concluding that within the waters lay the

[p. 28]

earth, and being desirous to raise it up, created another form for that purpose; and as in preceding Kalpas he had assumed the shape of a fish or a tortoise, so in this he took the figure of a boar. Having adopted a form composed of the sacrifices of the Vedas [*3], for the preservation of the whole earth, the eternal, supreme, and universal soul, the great progenitor of created beings, eulogized by Sanaka and the other

[p. 29]

saints who dwell in the sphere of holy men (Janaloka); he, the supporter of spiritual and material being, plunged into the ocean. The goddess Earth, beholding him thus descending to the subterrene regions, bowed in devout adoration, and thus glorified the god:--

Prithivi (Earth).--Hail to thee, who art all creatures; to thee, the holder of the mace and shell: elevate me now from this place, as thou hast upraised me in days of old. From thee have I proceeded; of thee do I consist; as do the skies, and all other existing things. Hail to thee, spirit of the supreme spirit; to thee, soul of soul; to thee, who art discrete and indiscrete matter; who art one with the elements and with time. Thou art the creator of all things, their preserver, and their destroyer, in the forms, oh lord, of Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, at the seasons of creation, duration, and dissolution. When thou hast devoured all things, thou reposest on the ocean that sweeps over the world, meditated upon, oh Govinda, by the wise. No one knoweth thy true nature, and the gods adore thee only in the forms it bath pleased thee to assume. They who are desirous of final liberation, worship thee as the supreme Brahma; and who that adores not Vasudeva, shall obtain emancipation? Whatever may be apprehended by the mind, whatever may be perceived by the senses, whatever may he discerned by the intellect, all is but a form of thee. I am of thee, upheld by thee; thou art my creator, and to thee I fly for refuge: hence, in this universe, Madhavi (the bride of Madhava or Vishnu) is my designation. Triumph to the essence of all wisdom, to the unchangeable, the imperishable: triumph to the eternal; to the indiscrete, to the essence of discrete things: to him who is both cause and effect; who is the universe; the sinless lord of sacrifice [*4]; triumph. Thou art sacrifice; thou art the oblation; thou art the mystic Omkara; thou art the sacrificial fires; thou art the Vedas, and their dependent sciences; thou art, Hari, the object of all worship [*5]. The sun, the stars, the planets, the whole world; all that is formless, or that has form; all that is visible, or invisible; all, Purushottama, that I have said,

[p. 30]

or left unsaid; all this, Supreme, thou art. Hail to thee, again and again! hail! all hail!

PARAS'ARA.--The auspicious supporter of the world, being thus hymned by the earth, emitted a low murmuring sound, like the chanting of the Sama veda; and the mighty boar, whose eyes were like the lotus, and whose body, vast as the Nila mountain, was of the dark colour of the lotus leaves [*6], uplifted upon his ample tusks the earth from the lowest regions. As he reared up his head, the waters shed from his brow purified the great sages, Sanandana and others, residing in the sphere of the saints. Through the indentations made by his hoofs, the waters rushed into the lower worlds with a thundering noise. Before his breath, the pious denizens of Janaloka were scattered, and the Munis sought for shelter amongst the bristles upon the scriptural body of the boar, trembling

[p. 31]

as he rose up, supporting the earth, and dripping with moisture. Then the great sages, Sanandana and the rest, residing continually in the sphere of saints, were inspired with delight, and bowing lowly they praised the stern-eyed upholder of the earth.

The Yogis.--Triumph, lord of lords supreme; Kes'ava, sovereign of the earth, the wielder of the mace, the shell, the discus, and the sword: cause of production, destruction, and existence. THOU ART, oh god: there is no other supreme condition, but thou. Thou, lord, art the person of sacrifice: for thy feet are the Vedas; thy tusks are the stake to which the victim is bound; in thy teeth are the offerings; thy mouth is the altar; thy tongue is the fire; and the hairs of thy body are the sacrificial grass. Thine eyes, oh omnipotent, are day and night; thy head is the seat of all, the place of Brahma; thy mane is all the hymns of the Vedas; thy nostrils are all oblations: oh thou, whose snout is the ladle of oblation; whose deep voice is the chanting of the Sama veda; whose body is the hall of sacrifice; whose joints are the different ceremonies; and whose ears have the properties of both voluntary and obligatory rites [*7]: do thou, who art eternal, who art in size a mountain, be propitious. We acknowledge thee, who hast traversed the world, oh universal form, to be the beginning, the continuance, and the destruction of all things: thou art the supreme god. Have pity on us, oh lord of conscious and unconscious beings. The orb of the earth is seen seated on the tip of thy tusks, as if thou hadst been sporting amidst a lake where the lotus floats, and hadst borne away the leaves covered with soil. The space between heaven and earth is occupied by thy body, oh thou of unequalled glory, resplendent with the power of pervading the universe, oh lord, for the benefit of all. Thou art the aim of all: there is none other than thee, sovereign of the world: this is thy might, by which all things, fixed or movable, are pervaded. This form, which is now beheld, is thy form, as one essentially with wisdom. Those who have not practised devotion, conceive erroneously of the nature of the world. The ignorant,

[p. 32]

who do not perceive that this universe is of the nature of wisdom, and judge of it as an object of perception only, are lost in the ocean of spiritual ignorance. But they who know true wisdom, and whose minds are pure, behold this whole world as one with divine knowledge, as one with thee, oh god. Be favourable, oh universal spirit: raise up this earth, for the habitation of created beings. Inscrutable deity, whose eyes are like lotuses, give us felicity. Oh lord, thou art endowed with the quality of goodness: raise up, Govinda, this earth, for the general good. Grant us happiness, oh lotus-eyed. May this, thy activity in creation, be beneficial to the earth. Salutation to thee. Grant us happiness, oh lotus-eyed.

PARAS'ARA.--The supreme being thus eulogized, upholding the earth, raised it quickly, and placed it on the summit of the ocean, where it floats like a mighty vessel, and from its expansive surface does not sink beneath the waters. Then, having levelled the earth, the great eternal deity divided it into portions, by mountains: he who never wills in vain, created, by his irresistible power, those mountains again upon the earth which had been consumed at the destruction of the world. Having then divided the earth into seven great portions or continents, as it was before, he constructed in like manner the four (lower) spheres, earth, sky, heaven, and the sphere of the sages (Maharloka). Thus Hari, the four-faced god, invested with the quality of activity, and taking the form of Brahma, accomplished the creation: but he (Brahma) is only the instrumental cause of things to be created; the things that are capable of being created arise from nature as a common material cause: with exception of one instrumental cause alone, there is no need of any other cause, for (imperceptible) substance becomes perceptible substance according to the powers with which it is originally imbued [*8].

[p. 33]

This page consists solely of footnotes

Footnotes

^27:1 This creation is of the secondary order, or Pratiserga; water, and even the earth, being in existence, and consequently having been preceded by the creation of Mahat and the elements. It is also a different Pratiserga from that described by Manu, in which Swayambhu first creates the waters, then the egg: one of the simplest forms, and perhaps therefore one of the earliest in which the tradition occurs.

^27:2 This is the well known verse of Menu, I. 8, rendered by Sir Wm. Jones, "The waters are called Nara, because they were the production of Nara, or 'the spirit' of God; and since they were his first Ayana, or place of motion, he thence is named Narayana, or 'moving on the waters.'" Now although there can be little doubt that this tradition is in substance the same as that of Genesis, the language of the translation is perhaps more scriptural than [p. 28] is quite warranted. The waters, it is said in the text of Manu, were the progeny of Nara, which Kulluka Bhatta explains Paramatma, the supreme soul; that is, they were the first productions of God in creation. Ayana, instead of 'place of motion,' is explained by Asraya, place of abiding.' Narayana means, therefore, he whose place of abiding was the deep. The verse occurs in several of the Puranas, in general in nearly the same words, and almost always as a quotation, as in our text The Linga, Vayu, and Markandeya Puranas, citing the same, have a somewhat different reading; or, 'Apa (is the same as) Nara, or bodies (Tanava); such, we have heard (from the Vedas), is the meaning of Apa. He who sleeps in them, is thence called Narayana.' The ordinary sense of Tanu is either 'minute' or 'body,' nor does it occur amongst the synonymes of water in the Nirukta of the Vedas. It may perhaps be intended to say, that Nara or Apa has the meaning of 'bodily forms,' in which spirit is enshrined, and of which the waters, with Vishnu resting upon them, are a type; for there is much mysticism in the Puranas in which the passage thus occurs. Even in them, however, it is introduced in the usual manner, by describing the world as water alone, and Vishnu reposing upon the deep: ### Vayu P. The Bhagavata has evidently attempted to explain the ancient text: 'When the embodied god in the beginning divided the mundane egg, and issued forth, then, requiring an abiding-place, he created the waters: the pure created the pure. In them, his own created, he abode for a thousand years, and thence received the name of Narayana: the waters being the product of the embodied deity:' i. e. they were the product of Nara or Vishnu, as the first male or Virat, and were therefore termed Nara: and from there being his Ayana or Sthana, his 'abiding place,' comes his epithet of Narayana.

^28:3 The Varaha form was chosen, says the Vayu P., because it is an animal delighting to sport in water, but it is described in many Puranas, as it is in the Vishnu, as a type of the ritual of the Vedas, as we shall have further occasion to remark. The elevation of the earth from beneath the ocean in this form, was, therefore, probably at first an allegorical representation of the extrication of the world from a deluge of iniquity by the rites of religion. Geologists may perhaps suspect, in the original and unmystified tradition, an allusion to a geological fact, or the existence of lacustrine mammalia in the early periods of the earth.

^29:4 Yajnapati, 'the bestower of the beneficial results of sacrifices.'

^29:5 Yajnapurusha, 'the male or soul of sacrifice;' explained by Yajnamurtti, 'the form or personification of sacrifice;' or Yajnaradhya 'he who is to be propitiated by it.'

^30:6 Varaha Avatara. The description of the figure of the boar is much more particularly detailed in other Puranas. As in the Vayu: "The boar was ten Yojanas in breadth, a thousand Yojanas high; of the colour of a dark cloud; and his roar was like thunder; his bulk was vast as a mountain; his tusks were white, sharp, and fearful; fire flashed from his eyes like lightning, and he was radiant as the sun; his shoulders were round, flit, and large; he strode along like a powerful lion; his haunches were fat, his loins were slender, and his body was smooth and beautiful." The Matsya P. describes the Varaha in the same words, with one or two unimportant varieties. The Bhagavata indulges in that amplification which marks its more recent composition, and describes the Varaha as issuing from the nostrils of Brahma, at first of the size of the thumb, or an inch long, and presently increasing to the stature of an elephant. That work also subjoins a legend of the death of the demon Hiranyaksha, who in a preceding existence was one of Vishnu's doorkeepers, at his palace in Vaikuntha. Having refused admission to a party of Munis, they cursed him, and he was in consequence born as one of the sons of Diti. When the earth, oppressed by the weight of the mountains, sunk down into the waters, Vishnu was beheld in the subterrene regions, or Rasatala, by Hiranyaksha in the act of carrying it off. The demon claimed the earth, and defied Vishnu to combat; and a conflict took place, in which Hiranyaksha was slain. This legend has not been met with in any other Purana, and certainly does not occur in the chief of them, any more than in our text. In the Moksha Dherma of the Mahabharata, e.35, Vishnu destroys the demons in the form of the Varaha, but no particular individual is specified, nor does the elevation of the earth depend upon their discomfiture. The Kalika Upapurana has an absurd legend of a conflict between S'iva as a Sarabha, a fabulous animal, and Vishnu as the Varaha, in which the latter suffers himself and his offspring begotten upon earth to be slain.

^31:7 This, which is nothing more than the developement of the notion that the Varaha incarnation typifies the ritual of the Vedas, is repeated in most of the Puranas in the same or nearly the same words.

^32:8 This seems equivalent to the ancient notion of a plastic nature: "All parts of matter, by reason of a certain life in them, being supposed able to form themselves artificially and methodically to the greatest advantage of their present respective capabilities." This, which Cudworth (c. III.) calls hylozoism, is not incompatible with an active creator: "not that he should, aytoyrgein apanta, set his own hand to every work, which, as Aristotle says, would be, aprepes tui theui, unbecoming God; but, as in the case of Brahma and other subordinate agents, that they should occasion [p. 33] the various developments of crude nature to take place, by supplying that will, of which nature itself is incapable. Action being once instituted by an instrumental medium, or by the will of an intellectual agent, it is continued by powers or a vitality inherent in nature or the matter of creation itself. The efficiency of such subordinate causes was advocated by Plato, Aristotle, and others; and the opinion of Zeno, as stated by Laertius, might be taken for a translation of some such passage as that in our text: Esti de fusis exis ex ayteis kinoymene kata spermatikous logoys, apotelousa te kai synexoysa ta ex ayteis en uriosmenois xronois, kai toiauta drusa af' oiun apekrithe. 'Nature is a habit moved from itself, according to seminal principles; perfecting and containing those several things which in determinate times are produced from it, and acting agreeably to that from which it was secreted.' Intell. System, I. 328. 'So the commentator illustrates our text by observing that the cause of the budding of rice is in its own seed, and its developement is from itself; though its growth takes place only at a determinate season, in consequence of the instrumental agency of the rain.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

CHAP. V.

Vishnu as Brahma creates the world. General characteristics of creation. Brahma meditates, and gives origin to, immovable things, animals, gods, men. Specific creation of nine kinds; Mahat, Tanmatra, Aindriya, inanimate objects, animals, gods, men, Anugraha, and Kaumara. More particular account of creation. Origin of different orders of beings from Brahma's body under different conditions; and of the Vedas from his mouths. All things created again as they existed in a former Kalpa.

MAITREYA.--Now unfold to me, Brahman, how this deity created the gods, sages, progenitors, demons, men, animals, trees, and the rest, that abide on earth, in heaven, or in the waters: how Brahma at creation made the world with the qualities, the characteristics, and the forms of things [*1].

PARAS'ARA.--I will explain to you, Maitreya, listen attentively, how this deity, the lord of all, created the gods and other beings.

Whilst he (Brahma) formerly, in the beginning of the Kalpas, was. meditating on creation, there appeared a creation beginning with ignorance, and consisting of darkness. From that great being appeared fivefold Ignorance, consisting of obscurity, illusion, extreme illusion, gloom, utter darkness [*2]. The creation of the creator thus plunged in

[p. 35]

abstraction, was the fivefold (immovable) world, without intellect or reflection, void of perception or sensation, incapable of feeling, and destitute of motion [*3]. Since immovable things were first created, this is called the first creation. Brahma, beholding that it was defective, designed another; and whilst he thus meditated, the animal creation was manifested, to the products of which the term Tiryaksrotas is applied, from their nutriment following a winding course [*4]. These were called beasts, &c., and their characteristic was the quality of darkness, they being destitute of knowledge, uncontrolled in their conduct, and mistaking error for wisdom; being formed of egotism and self-esteem, labouring under the twenty-eight kinds of imperfection [*5], manifesting inward sensations, and associating with each other (according to their kinds).

[p. 36]

Beholding this creation also imperfect, Brahma again meditated, and a third creation appeared, abounding with the quality of goodness, termed Urddhasrotas [*6]. The beings thus produced in the Urddhasrotas creation were endowed with pleasure and enjoyment, unencumbered internally or externally, and luminous within and without. This, termed the creation of immortals, was the third performance of Brahma, who, although well pleased with it, still found it incompetent to fulfil his end. Continuing therefore his meditations, there sprang, in consequence of his infallible purpose, the creation termed Arvaksrotas, from indiscrete nature. The products of this are termed Arvaksrotasas [*7], from the downward current (of their nutriment). They abound with the light of knowledge, but the qualities of darkness and of foulness predominate. Hence they are afflicted by evil, and are repeatedly impelled to action. They have knowledge both externally and internally, and are the instruments (of accomplishing the object of creation, the liberation of soul). These creatures were mankind.

I have thus explained to you, excellent Muni, six [*8] creations. The first creation was that of Mahat or Intellect, which is also called the creation of Brahma [*9]. The second was that of the rudimental principles (Tanmatras), thence termed the elemental creation (Bhuta serga). The third was the modified form of egotism, termed the organic creation, or creation of the senses (Aindriyaka). These three were the Prakrita creations, the developements of indiscrete nature, preceded by the indiscrete

[p. 37]

principle [*10]. The fourth or fundamental creation (of perceptible things) was that of inanimate bodies. The fifth, the Tairyag yonya creation, was that of animals. The sixth was the Urddhasrotas creation, or that of the divinities. The creation of the Arvaksrotas beings was the seventh, and was that of man. There is an eighth creation, termed Anugraha, which possesses both the qualities of goodness and darkness [*11]. Of these creations, five are secondary, and three are primary [*12]. But there is a ninth,

[p. 38]

the Kaumara creation, which is both primary and secondary [*13]. These are the nine creations of the great progenitor of all, and, both as primary

[p. 39]

and secondary, are the radical causes of the world, proceeding from the sovereign creator. What else dost thou desire to hear?

MAITREYA. Thou hast briefly related to me, Muni, the creation of the gods and other beings: I am desirous, chief of sages, to hear from thee a more ample account of their creation.

PARAS'ARA.--Created beings, although they are destroyed (in their individual forms) at the periods of dissolution, yet, being affected by the good or evil acts of former existence, they are never exempted from their consequences; and when Brahma creates the world anew, they are the progeny of his will, in the fourfold condition of gods, men, animals, or inanimate things. Brahma then, being desirous of creating the four orders of beings, termed gods, demons, progenitors, and men, collected his mind into itself [*14]. Whilst thus concentrated, the quality of darkness

[p. 40]

pervaded his body; and thence the demons (the Asuras) were first born, issuing from his thigh. Brahma then abandoned that form which was, composed of the rudiment of darkness, and which, being deserted by him, became night. Continuing to create, but assuming a different. shape, he experienced pleasure; and thence from his mouth proceeded the gods, endowed with the quality of goodness. The form abandoned by him, became day, in which the good quality predominates; and hence by day the gods are most powerful, and by night the demons. He next adopted another person, in which the rudiment of goodness also prevailed; and thinking of himself, as the father of the world, the progenitors (the Pitris) were born from his side. The body, when he abandoned, it, became the Sandhya (or evening twilight), the interval between day and night. Brahma then assumed another person, pervaded by the quality of foulness; and from this, men, in whom foulness (or passion) predominates, were produced. Quickly abandoning that body, it became morning twilight, or the dawn. At the appearance of this light of day, men feel most vigour; while the progenitors are most powerful in the evening season. In this manner, Maitreya, Jyotsna (dawn), Ratri (night), Ahar (day), and Sandhya (evening), are the four bodies of Brahma invested by the three qualities [*15].

[p. 41]

Next from Brahma, in a form composed of the quality of foulness, was produced hunger, of whom anger was born: and the god put forth in darkness beings emaciate with hunger, of hideous aspects, and with long beards. Those beings hastened to the deity. Such of them as exclaimed, Oh preserve us! were thence called Rakshasas [*16]: others, who cried out, Let us eat, were denominated from that expression Yakshas [*17]. Beholding them so disgusting, the hairs of Brahma were shrivelled up, and first falling from his head, were again renewed upon it: from their falling they became serpents, called Sarpa from their creeping, and Ahi because they had deserted the head [*18]. The creator of the world, being incensed, then created fierce beings, who were denominated goblins, Bhutas, malignant fiends and eaters of flesh. The Gandharbas were next born, imbibing melody: drinking of the goddess of speech, they were born, and thence their appellation [*19].

The divine Brahma, influenced by their material energies, having created these beings, made others of his own will. Birds he formed from his vital vigour; sheep from his breast; goats from his mouth; kine from his belly and sides; and horses, elephants, Sarabhas, Gayals, deer, camels, mules, antelopes, and other animals, from his feet: whilst from the hairs of his body sprang herbs, roots, and fruits.

Brahma having created, in the commencement of the Kalpa, various plants, employed them in sacrifices, in the beginning of the Treta age. Animals were distinguished into two classes, domestic (village) and wild (forest): the first class contained the cow, the goat, the hog, the sheep, the horse, the ass, the mule: the latter, all beasts of prey, and many animals with cloven hoofs, the elephant, and the monkey. The fifth order were the birds; the sixth, aquatic animals; and the seventh, reptiles and insects [*20].

[p. 42]

From his eastern mouth Brahma then created the Gayatri metre, the Rig veda, the collection of hymns termed Trivrit, the Rathantara portion of the Sama veda, and the Agnishtoma sacrifice: from his southern mouth he created the Yajur veda, the Trishtubh metre, the collection of hymns called Panchadas'a, the Vrihat Sama, and the portion of the Sama veda termed Uktha: from his western mouth he created the Sama veda, the Jayati metre, the collection of hymns termed Saptadas'a, the portion of the Sama called Vairupa, and the Atiratra sacrifice: and from his northern mouth he created the Ekavinsa collection of hymns, the Atharva veda, the Aptoryama rite, the Anushtubh metre, and the Vairaja portion of the Sama veda [*21].

In this manner all creatures, great or small, proceeded from his limbs. The great progenitor of the world having formed the gods, demons, and Pitris, created, in the commencement of the Kalpa, the Yakshas, Pisachas (goblins), Gandharbas and the troops of Apsarasas the nymphs of heaven, Naras (centaurs, or beings with the limbs of horses and human

[p. 43]

bodies) and Kinnaras (beings with the heads of horses), Rakshasas, birds, beasts, deer, serpents, and all things permanent or transitory, movable or immovable. This did the divine Brahma, the first creator and lord of all: and these things being created, discharged the same functions as they had fulfilled in a previous creation, whether malignant or benign, gentle or cruel, good or evil, true or false; and accordingly as they are actuated by such propensities will be their conduct.

And the creator displayed infinite variety in the objects of sense, in the properties of living things, and in the forms of bodies: he determined in the beginning, by the authority of the Vedas, the names and forms and functions of all creatures, and of the gods; and the names and appropriate offices of the Rishis, as they also are read in the Vedas. In like manner as the products of the seasons designate in periodical revolution the return of the same season, so do the same circumstances indicate the recurrence of the same Yuga, or age; and thus, in the beginning of each Kalpa, does Brahma repeatedly create the world, possessing the power that is derived from the will to create, and assisted by the natural and essential faculty of the object to be created.

Footnotes

^34:1 The terms here employed are for qualities, Gunas; which, as we have already noticed, are those of goodness, foulness, and darkness. The characteristics, or Swabhavas, are the inherent properties of the qualities, by which they act, as, soothing, terrific, or stupifying: and the forms, Swarupas, are the distinctions of biped, quadruped, brute, bird, fish, and the like.

^34:2 Or Tamas, Moha, Mahamoha, Tamisra, Andhatamisra; they are the five kinds of obstruction, viparyyaya, of soul's liberation, according to the Sankhya: they are explained to be, 1. The belief of material substance being the same with spirit; 2. Notion of property or possession, and consequent attachment to objects, as children and the like, as being one's own; 3. Addiction to the enjoyments of sense; 4. Impatience or wrath; and 5. Fear of privation or death. They are called in the Patanjala philosophy, the five afflictions, Kles'a, but are similarly explained by Avidya, 'ignorance;' Asmita, 'selfishness,' literally 'I-am-ness;' Raga 'love;' Dwesha, 'hatred;' and Abhinives'a, 'dread of temporal suffering.' Sankhya Karika, p. 148-150. This creation by Brahma [p. 35] in the Varaha Kalpa begins in the same way, and in the same words, in most of the Puranas. The Bhagavata reverses the order of these five products, and gives them, Andhatamisra, Tamisra, Mahamoha, Moha, and Tamas; a variation obviously more immethodical than the usual reading of the text, and adopted, no doubt, merely for the sake of giving the passage an air of originality.

^35:3 This is not to be confounded with elementary creation, although the description would very well apply to that of crude nature, or Pradhana; but, as will be seen presently, we have here to do with final productions, or the forms in which the previously created elements and faculties are more or less perfectly aggregated. The first class of these forms is here said to be immovable things; that is, the mineral and vegetable kingdoms; for the solid earth, with its mountains and rivers and seas, was already prepared for their reception. The 'fivefold' immovable creation is indeed, according to the comment, restricted to vegetables, five orders of which are enumerated, or, 1. trees; 2. shrubs; 3. climbing plants; 4. creepers; and 5. grasses.

^35:4 Tiryak, 'crooked;' and Srotas, 'a canal.'

^35:5 Twenty-eight kinds of Badhas, which in the Sankhya system mean disabilities, as defects of the senses, blindness, deafness, &c.; and defects of intellect, discontent, ignorance, and the like. S. Karika, p. 148, 151. In place of Badha, however, the more usual reading, as in the Bhagavata, Varaha, and Markandeya Puranas, is Vidha, 'kind,' 'sort,' as ###, implying twenty-eight sorts of animals. These are thus specified in the Bhagavata, III. 10: Six kinds have single hoofs, nine have double or cloven hoofs, and thirteen have five claws or nails instead of hoofs. The first are the horse, the mule, the ass, the yak, the sarabha, and the gaura, or white deer. The second are the cow, the goat, the buffalo, the hog, the gayal, the black deer, the antelope, the camel, and the sheep. The last are the dog, shacal, wolf, tiger, cat, hare, porcupine, lion, monkey, elephant, tortoise, lizard, and alligator.

^36:6 Urddha, 'above,' and Srotas, as before; their nourishment being derived from the exterior, not from the interior of the body: according to the commentator; ### as a text of the Vedas has it; 'Through satiety derived from even beholding ambrosia.'

^36:7 Arvak, 'downwards,' and Srotas, 'canal.'

^36:8 This reckoning is not very easily reconciled with the creations described; for, as presently enumerated, the stages of creation are seven. The commentator, however, considers the Urddhasrotas creation, or that of the superhuman beings, to be the same with that of the Indriyas, or senses over which they preside; by which the number is reduced to six.

^36:9 This creation being the work of the supreme spirit, ### according to the commentator; or it might have been understood to mean, that Brahma was then created, being, as we have seen, identified with Mahat, 'active intelligence,' or the operating will of the Supreme. See <page 15>, note .

^37:10 The text is, ### which is, as rendered in the text, 'creation preceded by, or beginning with Buddhi, intelligence.' The rules of euphony would however admit of a mute negative being inserted, or 'preceded by ignorance;' that is, by the chief principle, crude nature or Pradhana, which is one with ignorance: but this seems to depend on notions of a later date, and more partial adoption, than those generally prevailing in our authority; and the first reading therefore has been preferred. It is also to be observed, that the first unintellectual creation was that of immovable objects (as in <page 35>), the original of which is, ### and all ambiguity of construction is avoided. The reading is also established by the text of the Linga Purana, which enumerates the different series of creation in the words of the Vishnu, except in this passage, which is there transposed, with a slight variation of the reading. Instead of ### it is ### 'The first creation was that of Mahat: Intellect being the first in manifestation.' The reading of the Vayu P. is still more tautological, but confirms that here preferred: See also n. [*12].

^37:11 The Anugraha creation, of which no notice has been found in the Mahabharata, seems to have been borrowed from the Sankhya philosophy. It is more particularly described in the Padma, Markandeya, Linga, and Matsya Puranas; as, 'The fifth is the Anugraha creation, which is subdivided into four kinds; by obstruction, disability, perfectness, and acquiescence.' This is the Pratyaya sarga, or intellectual creation, of the Sankhyas (S. Karika, v. 46. p.146); the creation of which we have a notion, or to which we give assent (Anugraha), in contradistinction to organic creation, or that existence of which we have sensible perception. In its specific subdivisions it is the notion of certain inseparable properties in the four different orders of beings: obstruction or stolidity in inanimate things; inability or imperfection in animals; perfectibility in man; and acquiescence or tranquil enjoyment in gods. So also the Vayu P.: ###

^37:12 Or Vaikrita, derived mediately from the first principle, through its Vikritis, 'productions' or 'developements;' and Prakrita, derived more immediately from the chief principle itself. Mahat and the two forms of Ahankara, or the rudimental elements and the senses, constitute the latter class; inanimate beings, &c. compose the former: or the latter are considered as the work of [p. 38] Brahma, whilst the three first are evolved from Pradhana. So the Vayu: 'The three creations beginning with Intelligence are elemental; but the six creations which proceed from the series of which Intellect is the first are the work of Brahma'.

^38:13 We must have recourse here also to other Puranas, for the elucidation of this term. The Kaumara creation is the creation of Rudra or Nilalohita, a form of S'iva, by Brahma, which is subsequently described in our text, and of certain other mind-born sons of Brahma, of whose birth the Vishnu P. gives no further account: they are elsewhere termed Sanatkumara, Sananda, Sanaka, and Sanatana, with sometimes a fifth, Ribhu, added. These, declining to create progeny, remained, as the name of the first implies, ever boys, kumaras; that is, ever pure and innocent; whence their creation is called the Kaumara. Thus the Vayu: ###. And the Linga has, 'Being ever as he was born, he is here called a youth; and hence his name is well known as Sanatkumara.' This authority makes Sanatkumara and Ribhu the two first born of all, whilst the text of the Hari Vans'a limits the primogeniture to Sanatkumara. In another place, however, it enumerates apparently six, or the above four with Sana and either. Ribhu or another Sanatana; for the passage is corrupt. The French translation ascribes a share in creation to Sanatkumara: 'Les sept Prajapatis, Roudra, Scanda, et Sanatkaumara, se mirent a produire les etres repandant partout l'inepuisable energie de dieu.' The original is, Sankshipya is not 'repandant,' but 'restraining;' and Tishthatah being in the dual number, relates of course to only two of the series. The correct rendering is, 'These seven (Prajapatis) created progeny, and so did Rudra; but Skanda and Sanatkumara, restraining their power, abstained (from creation).' So the commentator: ###. These sages, however, live as long as Brahma, and they are only created by him in the first Kalpa, although their generation is very commonly, but inconsistently, introduced in the Varaha or Padma Kalpas. This creation, says the text, is both primary (Prakrita) and secondary (Vaikrita). It is the latter, according to the commentator, as regards the origin of these saints from Brahma: it is the former as affects Rudra, who, though proceeding from Brahma, in a certain form was in essence equally an immediate production of the first principle. These notions, the birth of Rudra and the saints, seem to have been borrowed from the Saivas, and to have been awkwardly engrafted upon the Vaishnava system. Sanatkumara and his brethren are always described in the Saiva Puranas as Yogis: as the Kurma, after enumerating them, adds, 'These five, oh Brahmans, were Yogis, [p. 39] who acquired entire exemption from passion:' and the Hari Vans'a, although rather Vaishnava than Saiva, observes, that the Yogis celebrate these six, along with Kapila, in Yoga works. The idea seems to have been amplified also in the Saiva works; for the Linga P. describes the repeated birth of S'iva, or Vamadeva, as a Kumara, or boy, from Brahma, in each Kalpa, who again becomes four. Thus in the twenty-ninth Kalpa Swetalohita is the Kumara, and he becomes Sananda, Nandana, Viswananda, Upanandana; all of a white complexion: in the thirtieth the Kumara becomes Virajas, Vivahu, Visoka, Viswabhavana; all of a red colour: in the thirty-first he becomes four youths of a yellow colour: and in the thirty-second the four Kumaras were black. All these are, no doubt, comparatively recent additions to the original notion of the birth of Rudra and the Kumaras; itself obviously a sectarial innovation upon the primitive doctrine of the birth of the Prajapatis, or will-born sons of Brahma.

^39:14 These reiterated, and not always very congruous accounts of the creation are explained by the Puranas as referring to different Kalpas, or renovations of the world, and therefore involving no incompatibility. A better reason for their appearance is the probability that they have been borrowed from different original authorities. The account that follows is evidently modified by the Yogi Saivas, by its general mysticism, and by the expressions with which it begins: 'Collecting his mind into itself,' according to the comment, is the performance of the Yoga (Yuyuje). The term Ambhansi, lit. 'waters,' for the four orders of beings, gods, demons, men, and Pitris, is also a peculiar, and probably mystic term. The commentator says it occurs in the Vedas as a synonyme of gods. The Vayu Purana derives it from 'to shine,' [p. 40] because the different orders of beings shine or flourish severally by moonlight, night, day, and twilight: &c.

^40:15 This account is given in several other Puranas: in the Kurma with more simplicity; in the Padma, Linga, and Vayu with more detail. The Bhagavata, as usual, amplifies still more copiously, and mixes up much absurdity with the account. Thus the person of Sandhya, 'evening twilight,' is thus described: "She appeared with eyes rolling with passion, whilst her lotus-like feet sounded with tinkling ornaments: a muslin vest depended from her waist, secured by a golden zone: her breasts were protuberant, and close together; her nose was elegant; her tongue beautiful; her face was bright with smiles, and she modestly concealed it with the skirts of her robe; whilst the dark curls clustered round her brow." The Asuras address her, and win her to become their bride. To the four forms of our text, the same work adds, Tandri, 'sloth;' Jrimbhika, 'yawning;' Nidra, 'sleep;' Unmada, 'insanity;' Antarddhana, 'disappearance;' Pratibimba, 'reflexion;' which become the property of Pisachas, Kinnaras, Bhutas, Gandherbas, Vidyadharas, Sadhyas, Pitris, and Menus. The notions of night, day, twilight, and moonlight being derived from Brahma, seem to have originated with the Vedas. Thus the commentator on the Bhagavata [p. 41] observes, 'That which was his body, and was left, was darkness: this is the S'ruti.' All the authorities place night before day, and the Asuras or Titans before the gods, in the order of appearance; as did Hesiod and other ancient theogonists.

^41:16 From Raksha, 'to preserve'

^41:17 From Yaksha, 'to eat'

^41:18 From Srip, serpo, 'to creep,' and from Ha, 'to abandon.'

^41:19 Gam dhayantah, 'drinking speech.'

^41:20 This and the preceding enumeration [p. 42] of the origin of vegetables and animals occurs in several Puranas, precisely in the same words. The Linga adds a specification of the Aranya, or wild animals, which are said to be the buffalo, gayal, bear, monkey, sarabha, wolf, and lion.

^42:21 This specification of the parts of the Vedas that proceed from Brahma occurs, in the same words, in the Vayu, Linga, Kurma, Padma, and Markandeya Puranas. The Bhagavata offers some important varieties: "From his eastern and other mouths he created the Rich, Yajush, Sama, and Atharvan vedas; the S'astra, or 'the unuttered incantation;' Ijya, 'oblation;' Stuti and Stoma, 'prayers' and 'hymns;' and Prayas'chitta, 'expiation' or 'sacred philosophy' (Brahma): also the Vedas of medicine, arms, music, and mechanics; and the Itihasas and Puranas, which are a fifth Veda: also the portions of the Vedas called Sorasi, Uktha, Purishi, 'Agnishtut, Aptoryama, Atiratra, Vajapeya, Gosava; the four parts of virtue, purity, liberality, piety, and truth; the orders of life, and their institutes and different religious rites and professions; and the sciences of logic, ethics, and polity. The mystic words and monosyllable proceeded from his heart; the metre Ushnih from the hairs of his body; Gayatri from his skin; Trishtubh from his flesh; Anushtubh from his tendons; Jagati from his bones; Pankti from his marrow; Vrihati from his breath. The consonants were his life; the vowels his body; the sibilants his senses; the semivowels his vigour." This mysticism, although perhaps expanded and amplified by the Pauranics, appears to originate with the Vedas: as in the text, 'The metre was of the tendons.' The different portions of the Vedas specified in the text are yet, for the most part, uninvestigated.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

CHAP. VI.

Origin of the four castes: their primitive state. Progress of society. Different kinds of grain. Efficacy of sacrifice. Duties of men: regions assigned them after death.

MAITREYA.--Thou hast briefly noticed, illustrious sage, the creation termed Arvaksrotas, or that of mankind: now explain to me more fully how Brahma accomplished it; how he created the four different castes; what duties he assigned to the Brahmans and the rest [*1].

PARAS'ARA.--Formerly, oh best of Brahmans, when the truth-meditating Brahma was desirous of creating the world, there sprang from his mouth beings especially endowed with the quality of goodness; others from his breast, pervaded by the quality of foulness; others from his thighs, in whom foulness and darkness prevailed; and others from his feet, in whom the quality of darkness predominated. These were, in succession, beings of the several castes, Brahmans, Kshetriyas, Vaisyas, and S'udras, produced from the mouth, the breast, the thighs, and the feet of Brahma [*2]. These he created for the performance of sacrifices, the four castes being the fit instruments of their celebration. By sacrifices, oh thou who knowest the truth, the gods are nourished; and by the rain which they bestow, mankind are supported [*3]: and thus sacrifices, the source of happiness, are performed by pious men, attached to their duties, attentive to prescribed obligations, and walking in the paths of virtue. Men acquire (by them) heavenly fruition, or final felicity: they go, after death, to whatever sphere they aspire to, as the consequence of their human

[p. 45]

nature. The beings who were created by Brahma, of these four castes, were at first endowed with righteousness and perfect faith; they abode wherever they pleased, unchecked by any impediment; their hearts were free from guile; they were pure, made free from soil, by observance of sacred institutes. In their sanctified minds Hari dwelt; and they were filled with perfect wisdom, by which they contemplated the glory of Vishnu [*4]. After a while (after the Treta age had continued for some period), that portion of Hari which has been described as one with Kala (time) infused into created beings sin, as yet feeble though formidable, or passion and the like: the impediment of soul's liberation, the seed of iniquity, sprung from darkness and desire. The innate perfectness of human nature was then no more evolved: the eight kinds of perfection, Rasollasa and the rest, were impaired [*5]; and these being enfeebled, and sin gaining strength, mortals were afflicted with pain, arising from susceptibility to contrasts, as heat and cold, and the like. They therefore constructed places of refuge, protected by trees, by mountains, or by water; surrounded them by a ditch or a wall, and formed villages and cities; and in them erected appropriate dwellings, as defences against the sun and the cold [*6]. Having thus provided security against

[p. 46]

the weather, men next began to employ themselves in manual labour, as a means of livelihood, (and cultivated) the seventeen kinds of useful grain--rice, barley, wheat, millet, sesamum, panic, and various sorts of lentils, beans, and pease [*7]. These are the kinds cultivated for domestic

[p. 47]

use: but there are fourteen kinds which may be offered in sacrifice; they are, rice, barley, Masha, wheat, millet, and sesamum; Priyangu is the seventh, and kulattha, pulse, the eighth: the others are, Syamaka, a sort of panic; Nivara, uncultivated rice; Jarttila, wild sesamum; Gaveduka (coix); Markata, wild panic; and (a plant called) the seed or barley of the Bambu (Venu-yava). These, cultivated or wild, are the fourteen grains that were produced for purposes of offering in sacrifice; and sacrifice (the cause of rain) is their origin also: they again, with sacrifice, are the great cause of the perpetuation of the human race, as those understand who can discriminate cause and effect. Thence sacrifices were offered daily; the performance of which, oh best of Munis, is of essential service to mankind, and expiates the offences of those by whom they are observed. Those, however, in whose hearts the dross of sin derived from Time (Kala) was still more developed, assented not to sacrifices, but reviled both them and all that resulted from them, the gods, and the followers of the Vedas. Those abusers of the Vedas, of evil disposition and conduct, and seceders from the path of enjoined duties, were plunged in wickedness [*8].

The means of subsistence having been provided for the beings he had created, Brahma prescribed laws suited to their station and faculties, the duties of the several castes and orders [*9], and the regions of those of the different castes who were observant of their duties. The heaven of the Pitris is the region of devout Brahmans. The sphere of Indra, of

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] Kshetriyas who fly not from the field. The region of the winds is assigned to the Vaisyas who are diligent in their occupations and submissive. S'udras are elevated to the sphere of the Gandharbas. Those Brahmans who lead religious lives go to the world of the eighty-eight thousand saints: and that of the seven Rishis is the seat of pious anchorets and hermits. The world of ancestors is that of respectable householders: and the region of Brahma is the asylum of religious mendicants [*10]. The imperishable region of the Yogis is the highest seat of Vishnu, where they perpetually meditate upon the supreme being, with minds intent on him alone: the sphere where they reside, the gods themselves cannot behold. The sun, the moon, the planets, shall repeatedly be, and cease to be; but those who internally repeat the mystic adoration of the divinity, shall never know decay. For those who neglect their duties, who revile the Vedas, and obstruct religious rites, the places assigned after death are the terrific regions of darkness, of deep gloom, of fear, and of great terror; the fearful hell of sharp swords, the hell of scourges and of a waveless sea [*11].

Footnotes

^44:1 The creation of mankind here described is rather out of its place, as it precedes the birth of the Prajapatis, or their progenitors: but this want of method is common to the Puranas, and is evidence of their being compilations from various sources.

^44:2 This original of the four castes is given in Manu, and in most of the Puranas. We shall see, however, that the distinctions are subsequently ascribed to voluntary election, to accident, or to positive institutions.

^44:3 According to Manu, oblations ascend to and nourish the sun; whence the rain falls upon earth, and causes the growth of corn: burnt-offerings are therefore the final causes of the support of mankind.

^45:4 This description of a pure race of beings is not of general occurrence in the Puranas. It seems here to be abridged from a much more detailed account in the Brahmanda, Vayu, and Markandeya Puranas. In those works Brahma is said to create, in the beginning of the Kalpa, a thousand pairs of each of the four classes of mankind, who enjoy perfect happiness during the Krita age, and only gradually become subject to infirmities as the Treta or second age advances.

^45:5 These eight perfections, or Siddhis, are not the supernatural faculties obtained by the performance of the Yoga. They are described, the commentator says, in the Skanda and other works; and from them he extracts their description: 1. Rasollasa, the spontaneous or prompt evolution of the juices of the body, independently of nutriment from without: 2. Tripti, mental satisfaction, or freedom from sensual desire: 3. Samya, sameness of degree: 4. Tulyata, similarity of life, form, and feature: 5. Visoka, exemption alike from infirmity or grief: 6. Consummation of penance and meditation, by attainment of true knowledge: 7. The power of going every where at will: 8. The faculty of reposing at any time or in any place. These attributes are alluded to, though obscurely, in the Vayu, and are partly specified in the Markandeya Purana.

^45:6 In the other three Puranas, in which this legend has been found, the different kinds of inhabited places are specified and [p. 46] introduced by a series of land measures. Thus the Markandeya states, that 10 Paramanus = 1 Parasukshma; 10 Parasukshmas = 1 Trasarenu; 10 Trasarenus = 1 particle of dust, or Mahirajas; 10 Mahirajasas = 1 Balagra, 'hair's point;' 10 Balagras = 1 Likhya; 10 Likhyas= 1 Yuka; to Yukas = 1 heart of barley (Yavodara); 10 Yavodaras = 1 grain of barley of middle size; 10 barley grains = 1 finger, or inch; 6 fingers = a Pada, or foot (the breadth of it); 2 Padas = 1 Vitasti, or span; 2 spans = 1 Hasta, or cubit; 4 Hastas = a Dhanu, a Danda, or staff, or 2 Narikas; 2000 Dhanus = a Gavyuti; 4 Gavyutis = a Yojana. The measurement of the Brahmanda is less detailed. A span from the thumb to the first finger is a Prades'a; to the middle finger, a Nala; to the third finger, a Gokerna; and to the little finger, a Vitasti, which is equal to twelve Angulas, or fingers; understanding thereby, according to the Vayu, a joint of the finger; according to other authorities, it is the breadth of the thumb at the tip. (A. R. 5. 104.) The Vayu, giving similar measurements upon the authority of Manu, although such a statement does not occur in the Manu Sanhita, adds, that 21 fingers= 1 Ratni; 24 fingers = 1 Hasta, or cubit; 2 Ratnis = 1 Kishku; 4 Hastas = 1 Dhanu; 2000 Dhanus = l Gavyuti; and 8000 Dhanus = 1 Yojana. Durgas, or strong holds, are of four kinds; three of which are natural, from, their situation in mountains, amidst water, or in other inaccessible spots; the fourth is the artificial defences of a village (Grama), a hamlet (Khetaka), or a city (Pura or Nagara), which are severally half the size of the next in the series. The best kind of city is one which is about a mile long by half a mile broad, built in the form of a parallelogram, facing the northeast, and surrounded by a high wall and ditch. A hamlet should be a Yojana distant from a city: a village half a Yojana from a hamlet. The roads leading to the cardinal points from a city should be twenty Dhanus (above too feet) broad: a village road should be the same: a boundary road ten Dhanus: a royal or principal road or street should be ten Dhanus (above fifty feet) broad: a cross or branch road should be four Dhanus. Lanes and paths amongst the houses are two Dhanus in breadth: footpaths four cubits: the entrance of a house three cubits: the private entrances and paths about the mansion of still narrower dimensions. Such were the measurements adopted by the first builders of cities, according to the Puranas specified.

^46:7 These are enumerated in the text, as well as in the Vayu and Markandeya P., and are, Udara, a sort of grain with long stalks (perhaps a holcus); Kodrava (Paspalum kora); Chinaka, a sort of panic (P. miliaceum); Masha, kidney bean (Phaseolus radiatus); Mudga (Phaseolus mungo); Masura, lentil (Ervum hirsutum); Nishpava, a sort of pulse; Kulattha (Dolithos [p. 47] biflorus); Arhaki (Cytisus Cajan); Chanaka, chick pea (Cicer arietinum); and Sana (Crotolaria).

^47:8 This allusion to the sects hostile to the Vedas, Buddhists or Jains, does not occur in the parallel passages of the Vayu and Markandeya Puranas.

^47:9 The Vayu goes farther than this, and states that the castes were now first divided according to their occupations; having, indeed, previously stated that there was no such distinction in the Krita age: 'Brahma now appointed those who were robust and violent to be Kshetriyas, to protect the rest; those who were pure and pious he made Brahmans; those who were of less power, but industrious, and addicted to cultivate the ground, he made Vaisyas; whilst the feeble and poor of spirit were constituted S'udras: and he assigned them their several occupations, to prevent that interference with one another which had occurred as long as they recognised no duties peculiar to castes.

^48:10 These worlds, some of which will be more particularly described in a different section, are the seven Lokas or spheres above the earth: 1. Prajapatya or Pitri loka: 2. Indra loka or Swerga: 3. Marut loka or Diva loka, heaven: 4. Gandharba loka, the region of celestial spirits; also called Maharloka: 5. Janaloka, or the sphere of saints; some copies read eighteen thousand; others, as in the text, which is also the reading of the Padma Purana: 6. Tapaloka, the world of the seven sages: and 7. Brahma loka or Satya loka, the world of infinite wisdom and truth. The eighth, or high world of Vishnu, is a sectarial addition, which in the Bhagavata is called Vaikuntha, and in the Brahma Vaivartta, Goloka; both apparently, and most certainly the last, modern inventions.

^48:11 The divisions of Naraka, or hell, here named, are again more particularly enumerated, b. II. c. 6.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

CHAP. VII.

Creation continued. Production of the mind-born sons of Brahma; of the Prajapatis; of Sanandana and others; of Rudra and the eleven Rudras; of the Manu Swayambhuva, and his wife S'atarupa; of their children. The daughters of Daksha, and their marriage to Dharma and others. The progeny of Disarms and Adharma. The perpetual succession of worlds, and different modes of mundane dissolution.

PARAS'ARA.--From Brahma, continuing to meditate, were born mind-engendered progeny, with forms and faculties derived from his corporeal nature; embodied spirits, produced from the person of that all-wise deity. All these beings, front the gods to inanimate things, appeared as I have related to you [*1], being the abode of the three qualities: but as they did not multiply themselves, Brahma created other mind-born sons, like himself; namely, Bhrigu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Angiras, Marichi, Daksha, Atri, and Vas'ishtha: these are the nine Brahmas (or Brahma rishis) celebrated in the Puranas [*2]. Sanandana and the other sons of

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] Brahma were previously created by him, but they were without desire or passion, inspired with holy wisdom, estranged from the universe, and undesirous of progeny. This when Brahma perceived, he was filled with wrath capable of consuming the three worlds, the flame of which invested, like a garland, heaven, earth, and hell. Then from his forehead,

[p. 51]

darkened with angry frowns, sprang Rudra [*3], radiant as the noon-tide sun, fierce, and of vast bulk, and of a figure which was half male, half female. Separate yourself, Brahma said to him; and having so spoken, disappeared. Obedient to which command, Rudra became twofold, disjoining his male and female natures. His male being he again divided into eleven persons, of whom some were agreeable, some hideous, some fierce, some mild; and he multiplied his female nature manifold, of complexions black or white [*4].

Then Brahma [*5] created himself the Manu Swayambhuva, born of, and identical with, his original self, for the protection of created beings; and the female portion of himself he constituted S'atarupa, whom austerity

[p. 52]

purified from the sin (of forbidden nuptials), and whom the divine Manu Swayambhuva took to wife. From these two were born two sons, Priyavrata

[p. 53]

and Uttanapada [*6], and two daughters, named Prasuti and Akuti,

[p. 54]

graced with loveliness and exalted merit [*7]. Prasuti he gave to Daksha, after giving Akuti to the patriarch Ruchi [*8], who espoused her. Akuti bore to Ruchi twins, Yajna and Dakshina [*9], who afterwards became husband and wife, and had twelve sons, the deities called Yamas [*10], in the Manwantara of Swayambhuva.

The patriarch Daksha had by Prasuti twenty-four daughters [*11]: hear from me their names: Sraddha (faith), Lakshmi (prosperity), Dhriti (steadiness), Tushti (resignation), Pushti (thriving), Medha (intelligence), Kriya (action, devotion), Buddhi (intellect), Lajja (modesty), Vapu (body), Santi (expiation), Siddhi (perfection), Kirtti (fame): these thirteen daughters of Daksha, Dharma (righteousness) took to wife. The other eleven bright-eyed and younger daughters of the patriarch were, Khyati (celebrity), Sati (truth), Sambhuti (fitness), Smriti (memory), Priti (affection), Kshama (patience), Sannati (humility), Anasuya (charity), Urjja (energy), with Swaha (offering), and Swadha (oblation). These maidens were respectively wedded to the Munis, Bhrigu, Bhava, Marichi, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, and Vas'ishtha; to Fire (Vahni), and to the Pitris (progenitors) [*12].

[p. 55]

The progeny of Dharma by the daughters of Daksha were as follows: by Sraddha he had Kama (desire); by Lakshmi, Darpa (pride); by Dhriti, Niyama (precept); by Tushti, Santosha (content); by Pushti, Lobha (cupidity); by Medha, Sruta (sacred tradition); by Kriya, Danda, Naya, and Vinaya (correction, polity, and prudence); by Buddhi, Bodha (understanding); by Lajja, Vinaya (good behaviour); by Vapu, Vyavasaya (perseverance). Santi gave birth to Kshema (prosperity); Siddhi to Sukha (enjoyment); and Kirtti to Yasas (reputation [*13]). These were the sons of Dharma; one of whom, Kama, had Hersha (joy) by his wife Nandi (delight).

The wife of Adharma [*14] (vice) was Hinsa (violence), on whom he begot

[p. 56]

a son Anrita (falsehood), and a daughter Nikriti (immorality): they intermarried, and had two sons, Bhaya (fear) and Naraka (hell); and twins to them, two daughters, Maya (deceit) and Vedana (torture), who became their wives. The son of Bhaya and Maya was the destroyer of living creatures, or Mrityu (death); and Dukha (pain) was the offspring of Naraka and Vedana. The children of Mrityu were Vyadhi (disease), Jara (decay), Soka (sorrow), Trishna (greediness), and Krodha (wrath). These are all called the inflictors of misery, and are characterised as the progeny of Vice (Adharma). They are all without wives, without posterity, without the faculty to procreate; they are the terrific forms of Vishnu, and perpetually operate as causes of the destruction of this world. On the contrary, Daksha and the other Rishis, the elders of mankind, tend perpetually to influence its renovation: whilst the Manus and their sons, the heroes endowed with mighty power, and treading in the path of truth, as constantly contribute to its preservation.

MAITREYA.--Tell me, Brahman, what is the essential nature of these revolutions, perpetual preservation, perpetual creation, and perpetual destruction.

PARAS'ARA.--Madhusudana, whose essence is incomprehensible, in the forms of these (patriarchs and Manus), is the author of the uninterrupted vicissitudes of creation, preservation, and destruction. The dissolution of all things is of four kinds; Naimittika, 'occasional;' Prakritika, 'elemental;' Atyantika, 'absolute;' Nitya, 'perpetual [*15]: The first, also

[p. 57]

termed the Brahma dissolution, occurs when the sovereign of the world reclines in sleep. In the second, the mundane egg resolves into the primary element, from whence it was derived. Absolute non-existence of the world is the absorption of the sage, through knowledge, into supreme spirit. Perpetual destruction is the constant disappearance, day and night, of all that are born. The productions of Prakriti form the creation that is termed the elemental (Prakrita). That which ensues after a (minor) dissolution is called ephemeral creation: and the daily generation of living things is termed, by those who are versed in the Puranas, constant creation. In this manner the mighty Vishnu, whose essence is the elements, abides in all bodies, and brings about production, existence, and dissolution. The faculties of Vishnu to create, to preserve, and to destroy, operate successively, Maitreya, in all corporeal beings and at all seasons; and he who frees himself from the influence of these three faculties, which are essentially composed of the three qualities (goodness, foulness, and darkness), goes to the supreme sphere, from whence he never again returns.

Footnotes

^49:1 It is not clear which of the previous narratives is here referred to, but it seems most probable that the account in p. <page 35>, <page 36>. is intended.

^49:2 Considerable variety prevails in this list of Prajapatis, Brahmaputras, Brahmanas, or Brahmarshis; but the variations are of the nature of additions made to an apparently original enumeration of but seven, whose names generally recur. Thus in the Mahabharata, Moksha Dharma, we have in one place, Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vas'ishtha, 'the seven highminded sons of the self-born Brahma.' In another place of the same, however, we have Daksha substituted for Vas'ishtha: 'Brahma then created mind-begotten sons, of whom Daksha was the seventh, with Marichi,' &c. These seven sons of Brahma are also identified with the seven Rishis as in the Vayu; although, with palpable inconsistency, eight are immediately enumerated, or, Bhrigu, Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vas'ishtha. The Uttara Khanda of the Padma P. substitutes Kardama for Vas'ishtha. The Bhagavata includes Daksha, enumerating nine. The Matsya agrees with Manu in adding Narada to the list of our text. The Kurma P. adds Dharma and Sankalpa. The Linga, Brahmanda, and Vayu P. also add them, and extend the list to Adharma and Ruchi. The Hari Vans'a in one place inserts Gautama, and [p. 50] in another Manu. Altogether therefore we have seventeen, instead of seven. But the accounts given of the origin of several of these, shew that they were not originally included amongst the Manasa putras, or sons of Brahma's mind; for even Daksha, who finds a place in all the lists except one of those given in the Mahabharata, is uniformly said to have sprung from Brahma's thumb: and the same patriarch, as well as Dharma, is included in some accounts, as in the Bhagavata and Matsya P., amongst a different series of Brahma's progeny, or virtues and vices; or, Daksha (dexterity), Dharma (virtue), Kama (desire), Krodha (passion), Lobha (covetousness), Moha (infatuation), Mada (insanity), Pramoda (pleasure), Mrityu (death), and Angaja (lust). These are severally derived from different parts of Brahma's body: and the Bhagavata, adding Kardama (soil or sin) to this enumeration, makes him spring from Brahma's shadow. The simple statement, that the first Prajapatis sprang from the mind or will of Brahma, has not contented the depraved taste of the mystics, and in some of the Puranas, as the Bhagavata, Linga, and Vayu, they also are derived from the body of their progenitor; or, Bhrigu from his skin, Marichi from his mind, Atri from his eyes, Angiras from his mouth, Pulastya from his ear, Pulaha from his navel, Kratu from his hand, Vas'ishtha from his breath, Daksha from his thumb, and Narada from his hip. They do not exactly agree, however, in the places whence these beings proceed; as for instance, according to the Linga, Marichi springs from Brahma's eyes, not Atri, who there proceeds, instead of Pulastya, from his ears. The Vayu has also another account of their origin, and states them to have sprung from the fires of a sacrifice offered by Brahma; an allegorical mode of expressing their probable original, considering them to be in some degree real persons, from the Brahmanical ritual, of which they were the first institutors and observers. The Vayu P. also states, that besides the seven primitive Rishis, the Prajapatis are numerous, and specifies Kardama, Kas'yapa, S'esha, Vikranta, Susravas, Bahuputra, Kumara, Vivaswat, Suchisravas, Prachetasa (Daksha), Arishtanemi, Bahula. These and many others were Prajapatis. In the beginning of the Mahabharata (A. P.) we have again a different origin, and first Daksha, the son of Prachetas, it is said, had seven sons, after whom the twenty-one Prajapatis were born, or appeared. According to the commentator, the seven sons of Daksha were the allegorical persons Krodha, Tamas, Dama, Vikrita, Angiras, Kardama, and Aswa; and the twenty-one Prajapatis, the seven usually specified Marichi and the rest, and the fourteen Manus. This looks like a blending of the earlier and later notions.

^51:3 Besides this general notice of the origin of Rudra and his separate forms, we have in the next chapter an entirely different set of beings so denominated; and the eleven alluded to in the text are also more particularly enumerated in a subsequent chapter. The origin of Rudra, as one of the agents in creation, is described in most of the Puranas. The Mahabharata, indeed, refers his origin to Vishnu, representing him as the personification of his anger, whilst Brahma is that of his kindness. The Kurma P. makes him proceed from Brahma's mouth, whilst engaged in meditating on creation. The Varaha P. makes this appearance of Rudra the consequence of a promise made by S'iva to Brahma, that he would become his son. In the parallel passages in other Puranas the progeny of the Rudra created by Brahma is not confined to the eleven, but comprehends infinite numbers of beings in person and equipments like their parent; until Brahma, alarmed at their fierceness, numbers, and immortality, desires his son Rudra, or, as the Matsya calls him, Vamadeva, to form creatures of a different and mortal nature. Rudra refusing to do this, desists; whence his name Sthanu, from Stha, 'to stay.' Linga, Vayu P. &c.

^51:4 According to the Vayu, the female became first twofold, or one half white, and the other black; and each of these, again, becomes manifold, being the various energies, or S'aktis, of Mahadeva, as stated by the Kurma, after the words ### which are those of our text: ###. The Linga and Vayu specify many of their names. Those of the white complexion, or mild nature, include Lakshmi, Saraswati, Gauri, Uma, &c. Those of the dark hue, and fierce disposition, Durga, Kali, Chandi, Maharatri, and others.

^51:5 Brahma, after detaching from himself the property of anger, in the form of Rudra, converted himself into two persons, the first male, or the Manu Swayambhuva, and the first woman, or S'atarupa: so in the Vedas; 'So himself was indeed (his) son.' The commencement of production through sexual agency is here described with sufficient distinctness, but the subject has been rendered [p. 52] obscure by a more complicated succession of agents, and especially by the introduction of a person of a mythic or mystical character, Viraj. The notion is thus expressed in Manu: "Having divided his own substance, the mighty power Brahma became half male and half female; and from that female he produced Viraj. Know me to be that person whom the male Viraj produced by himself." I. 32, 33. We have therefore a series of Brahma, Viraj, and Manu, instead of Brahma and Manu only: also the generation of progeny by Brahma, begotten on Satarupa, instead of her being, as in our text, the wife of Manu. The idea seems to have originated with the Vedas, as Kulluka Bhatta quotes a text; 'Then (or thence) Virat was born.' The procreation of progeny by Brahma, however, is at variance with the whole system, which almost invariably refers his creation to the operation of his will: and the expression in Manu, 'he created Viraj in her,' does not necessarily imply sexual intercourse. Viraj also creates, not begets, Manu. And in neither instance does the name of S'atarupa occur. The commentator on Manu, however, understands the expression asrijat to imply the procreation of Viraj; and the same interpretation is given by the Matsya Purana, in which the incestuous passion of Brahma for S'atarupa, his daughter in one sense, his sister in another, is described; and by her he begets Viraj, who there is called, not the progenitor of Manu, but Manu himself. This therefore agrees with our text, as far as it makes Manu the son of Brahma, though not as to the nature of the connexion. The reading of the Agni and Padma P. is that of the Vishnu; and the Bhagavata agrees with it in one place, stating distinctly that the male half of Brahma, was Manu, the other half, S'atarupa: ### Bhagav. III. 12. 35: and although the production of Viraj is elsewhere described, it is neither as the son of Brahma, nor the father of Manu. The original and simple idea, therefore, appears to be, the identity of Manu with the male half of Brahma, and his being thence regarded as his son. The Kurma P. gives the same account as Manu, and in the same words. The Linga P. and Vayu P. describe the origin of Viraj and S'atarupa from Brahma; and they intimate the union of S'atarupa with Purusha or Viraj, the male portion of Brahma, in the first instance; and in the second, with Manu, who is termed Vairaja, or the son of Viraj. The Brahma P., the words of which are repeated in the Hari Vans'a, introduces a new element of perplexity in a new name, that of Apava. According to the commentator, this is a name of the Prajapati Vas'ishtha. As, however, he performs the office of Brahma, he should be regarded as that divinity: but this is not exactly the case, although it has been so rendered by the French translator. Apava becomes twofold, and in the capacity of his male half begets offspring by the female. Again, it is said Vishnu created [p. 53] Viraj, and Viraj created the male, which is Vairaja or Manu; who was thus the second interval (Antaram), or stage, in creation. That is, according to the commentator, the first stage was the creation of Apava, or Vas'ishtha, or Viraj, by Vishnu, through the agency of Hiranyagarbha or Brahma; and the next was that of the creation of Manu by Viraj. S'atarupa appears as first the bride of Apava, and then as the wife of Manu. This account therefore, although obscurely expressed, appears to be essentially the same with that of Manu; and we have Brahma, Viraj, Manu, instead of Brahma and Manu. It seems probable that this difference, and the part assigned to Viraj, has originated in some measure from confounding Brahma with the male half of his individuality, and considering as two beings that which was but one. If the Purusha or Viraj be distinct from Brahma, what becomes of Brahma? The entire whole and its two halves cannot coexist; although some of the Pauranics and the author of Manu seem to have imagined its possibility, by making Viraj the son of Brahma. The perplexity, however, is still more ascribable to the personification of that which was only an allegory. The division of Brahma into two halves designates, as is very evident from the passage in the Vedas given by Mr. Colebrooke, (As. R. VIII. 425,) the distinction of corporeal substance into two sexes; Viraj being all male animals, S'atarupa all female animals. So the commentator on the Hari Vans'a explains the former to denote the horse, the bull, &c.; and the latter, the mare, the cow, and the like. In the Bhagavata the term Viraj implies, Body, collectively, as the commentator observes; 'As the sun illuminates his own inner sphere, as well as the exterior regions, so soul, shining in body (Viraja), irradiates all without and within.' All therefore that the birth of Viraj was intended to express, was the creation of living body, of creatures of both sexes: and as in consequence man was produced, he might be said to be the son of Viraj, or bodily existence. Again, S'atarupa, the bride of Brahma, or of Viraj, or of Manu, is nothing more than beings of varied or manifold forms, from Sata, 'a hundred,' and 'form;' explained by the annotator on the Hari Vans'a by Anantarupa, 'of infinite,' and Vividharupa, 'of diversified shape;' being, as he states, the same as Maya, 'illusion,' or the power of multiform metamorphosis. The Matsya P. has a little allegory of its own, on the subject of Brahma's intercourse with S'atarupa; for it explains the former to mean the Vedas, and the latter the Savitri, or holy prayer, which is their chief text; and in their cohabitation there is therefore no evil.

^53:6 The Brahma P. has a different order, and makes Vira the son of the first pair, who has Uttanapada, &c. by Kamya. The commentator on the Hari Vans'a quotes the Vayu for a confirmation of this account; but the passage there is, 'S'atarupa bore to the male Vairaja (Manu) two Viras,' i. e. heroes or heroic sons, [p. 54] Uttanpada and Priyavrata. It looks as if the compiler of the Brahma P. had made some very unaccountable blunder, and invented upon it a new couple, Vira and Kamya: no such person as the former occurs in any other Purana, nor does Kamya, as his wife.

^54:7 The Bhagavata adds a third daughter, Devahuti; for the purpose apparently of introducing a long legend of the Rishi Kardama, to whom she is married, and of their son Kapila: a legend not met with any where else.

^54:8 Ruchi is reckoned amongst the Prajapatis by the Linga and Vayu Puranas.

^54:9 These descendants of Swayambhuva are all evidently allegorical: thus Yajna is 'sacrifice,' and Dakshina 'donation' to Brahmans.

^54:10 The Bhagavata (b. IV. c. 1) says the Tushitas, but they are the divinities of the second, not of the first Manwantara, as appears also in another part of the same, where the Yamas are likewise referred to the Swayambhuva Manwantara.

^54:11 These twenty-four daughters are of much less universal occurrence in the Puranas than the more extensive series of fifty or sixty, which is subsequently described, and which appears to be the more ancient legend.

^54:12 The twenty-four daughters of Daksha are similarly named and disposed of in most of the Puranas which notice them. The Bhagavata, having introduced a third daughter. of Swayambhuva, has a rather different enumeration, in order to assign some of them, the wives of the Prajapatis, to [p. 55] Kardama and Devahuti. Daksha had therefore, it is there said (b. IV. c. 1), sixteen daughters, thirteen of whom were married to Dharma, named Sraddha, Maitri (friendship), Daya (clemency), Santi Tushti, Pushti, Kriya, Unnati (elevation), Buddhi, Medha, Titiksha (patience), Hri (modesty), Murtti (form); and three, Sati, Swaha, and Swadha, married, as in our text. Some of the daughters of Devahuti repeat these appellations, but that is of slight consideration. They are, Kala (a moment), married to Marichi; Anasuya to Atri; Sraddha to Angiras; Havirbhu (oblation-born) to Pulastya; Gati (movement) to Pulaha; Kriya to Kratu; Khyati to Bhrigu; Arundhati to Vas'ishtha; and Santi to Atharvan. In all these instances the persons are manifestly allegorical, being personifications of intelligences and virtues and religious rites, and being therefore appropriately wedded to the probable authors of the Hindu code of religion and morals, or to the equally allegorical representation of that code, Dharma, moral and religious duty.

^55:13 The same remark applies here. The Puranas that give these details generally concur with our text, but the Bhagavata specifies the progeny of Dharma in a somewhat different manner; or, following the order observed in the list of Dharma's wives, their children are, Rita (truth), Prasada (favour), Abhaya (fearlessness), Sukha, Muda (pleasure), Smaya (wonder), Yoga (devotion), Darpa, Artha (meaning), Smriti (memory), Kshema, Prasraya (affection), and the two saints Nara and Narayana, the sons of Dharma by Murtti. We have occasional varieties of nomenclature in other authorities; as, instead of S'ruta, Sama; Kurma P.: instead of Dandanaya, Samaya; and instead of Bodha, Apramada; Linga P.: and Siddha in place of Sukha; Kurma P.

^55:14 The text rather abruptly introduces Adharma and his family. He is said by the commentator to be the son of Brahma, and the Linga P. enumerates him among the Prajapatis, as well as Dharma. According to the Bhagavata, he is the husband of Mrisha (falsehood), and the father of Dambha (hypocrisy) and Maya (deceit), who were adopted by Nirritti. The series [p. 56] of their descendants is also somewhat varied from our text; being in each descent, however, twins which intermarry, or Lobha (covetousness) and Nikriti, who produce Krodha (wrath) and Hinsa: their children are, Kali (wickedness) and Durukti (evil speech): their progeny are, Mrityu and Bhi (fear); whose offspring are, Niraya (hell) and Yatana (torment).

^56:15 The three first of these are more particularly described in the last book: the last, the Nitya, or constant, is differently described by Col. Vans Kennedy (Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p. 224, note). "In the 7th chapter," he observes, "of the Vishnu Purana four kinds of Pralaya are described. The Naimittika takes place when Brahma slumbers: the Prakritika when this universe returns to its original nature: Atyantika proceeds from divine knowledge: and Nitya is the extinction of life, like the extinction of a lamp, in sleep at night." For this last characteristic, however, our text furnishes no warrant; nor can it be explained to signify, that the Nitya Pralaya means no more [p. 57] than "a man's falling into a sound sleep at night." All the copies consulted on the present occasion concur in reading ### as rendered above. The commentator supplies the illustration, 'like the flame of a lamp;' but he also writes, 'That which is the destruction of all that are born, night and day, is the Nitya, or constant.' Again, in a verse presently following we have the Nitya Sarga, 'constant or perpetual creation,' as opposed to constant dissolution: 'That in which, oh excellent sages, beings are daily born, is termed constant creation, by those learned in the Puranas.' The commentator explains this, 'The constant flow or succession of the creation of ourselves and other creatures is the Nitya or constant creation: this is the meaning of the text.' It is obvious, therefore, that the alternation intended is that of life and death, not of waking and sleep.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

  

CHAP. VIII.

Origin of Rudra: his becoming eight Rudras: their wives and children. The posterity of Bhrigu. Account of S'ri in conjunction with Vishnu. Sacrifice of Daksha.

PARAS'ARA.--I have described to you, oh great Muni, the creation of Brahma, in which the quality of darkness prevailed. I will now explain to you the creation of Rudra [*1].

In the beginning of the Kalpa, as Brahma purposed to create a son, who should be like himself, a youth of a purple complexion [*2] appeared, crying with a low cry, and running about [*3]. Brahma, when he beheld him thus afflicted, said to him, "Why dost thou weep?" "Give me a name," replied the boy. "Rudra be thy name," rejoined the great father of all creatures: "be composed; desist from tears." But, thus addressed, the boy still wept seven times, and Brahma therefore gave to him seven other denominations; and to these eight persons regions and wives and posterity belong. The eight manifestations, then, are named Rudra, Bhava, S'arva, Is'ana, Pas'upati, Bhima, Ugra, and Mahadeva, which were given to them by their great progenitor. He also assigned to them their respective stations, the sun, water, earth, air, fire, ether, the ministrant Brahman, and the moon; for these are their several forms [*4]. The wives

[p. 59]

of the sun and the other manifestations, termed Rudra and the rest, were respectively, Suverchala, Usha, Vikesi, Siva, Swaha, Dis'a, Diksha, and Rohini. Now hear an account of their progeny, by whose successive generations this world has been peopled. Their sons, then, were severally, Sanais'chara (Saturn), S'ukra (Venus), the fiery-bodied Mars, Manojava (Hanuman), Skanda, Swarga, Santana, and Budha (Mercury).

It was the Rudra of this description that married Sati, who abandoned her corporeal existence in consequence of the displeasure of Daksha [*5]. She afterwards was the daughter of Himavan (the snowy mountains) by Mena; and in that character, as the only Uma, the mighty Bhava again married her [*6]. The divinities Dhata and Vidhata were born to Bhrigu by Khyati, as was a daughter, S'ri, the wife of Narayana, the god of gods [*7].

MAITREYA.--It is commonly said that the goddess S'ri was born from the sea of milk, when it was churned for ambrosia; how then can you say that she was the daughter of Bhrigu by Khyati.

PARAS'ARA.--S'ri, the bride of Vishnu, the mother of the world, is

[p. 60]

eternal, imperishable; in like manner as he is all-pervading, so also is she, oh best of Brahmans, omnipresent. Vishnu is meaning; she is speech. Hari is polity (Naya); she is prudence (Niti). Vishnu is understanding; she is intellect. He is righteousness; she is devotion. He is the creator; she is creation. S'ri is the earth; Hari the support of it. The deity is content; the eternal Lakshmi is resignation. He is desire; S'ri is wish. He is sacrifice; she is sacrificial donation (Dakshina). The goddess is the invocation which attends the oblation; Janarddana is the oblation. Lakshmi is the chamber where the females are present (at a religious ceremony); Madhusudana the apartment of the males of the family. Lakshmi is the altar; Hari the stake (to which the victim is bound). S'ri is the fuel; Hari the holy grass (Kus'a). He is the personified Sama veda; the goddess, lotus-throned, is the tone of its chanting. Lakshmi is the prayer of oblation (Swaha); Vasudeva, the lord of the world, is the sacrificial fire. Sauri (Vishnu) is S'ankara (S'iva); and S'ri is the bride of S'iva (Gauri). Kes'ava, oh Maitreya, is the sun; and his radiance is the lotus-seated goddess. Vishnu is the tribe of progenitors (Pitrigana); Padma. is their bride (Swadha), the eternal bestower of nutriment. S'ri is the heavens; Vishnu, who is one with all things, is wide extended space. The lord of S'ri is the moon; she is his unfading light. She is called the moving principle of the world; he, the wind which bloweth every where. Govinda is the ocean; Lakshmi its shore. Lakshmi is the consort of Indra (Indrani); Madhusudana is Devendra. The holder of the discus (Vishnu) is Yama (the regent of Tartarus); the lotus-throned goddess is his dusky spouse (Dhumorna). S'ri is wealth; S'ridhara (Vishnu) is himself the god of riches (Kuvera). Lakshmi, illustrious Brahman, is Gauri; and Kes'ava, is the deity of ocean (Varuna). S'ri is the host of heaven (Devasena); the deity of war, her lord, is Hari. The wielder of the mace is resistance; the power to oppose is S'ri. Lakshmi is the Kashtha and the Kala; Hari the Nimesha and the Muhurtta. Lakshmi is the light; and Hari, who is all, and lord of all, the lamp. She, the mother of the world, is the creeping vine; and Vishnu the tree round which she clings. She is the night; the god who is armed with the mace and discus is the day. He, the bestower of blessings, is the bridegroom; the lotus-throned goddess is the bride.

[p. 61]

[paragraph continues] The god is one with all male--the goddess one with all female, rivers. The lotus-eyed deity is the standard; the goddess seated on a lotus the banner. Lakshmi is cupidity; Narayana, the master of the world, is covetousness. Oh thou who knowest what righteousness is, Govinda is love; and Lakshmi, his gentle spouse, is pleasure. But why thus diffusely enumerate their presence: it is enough to say, in a word, that of gods, animals, and men, Hari is all that is called male; Lakshmi is all that is termed female: there is nothing else than they.

Footnotes

^58:1 The creation of Rudra has been already adverted to, and that seems to be the primitive form of the legend. We have here another account, grounded apparently upon S'aiva or Yogi mysticism.

^58:2 The appearance of Rudra as a Kumara, 'a boy,' is described as of repeated occurrence in the Linga and Vayu Puranas, as already noticed (<page 38>); and these Kumaras are of different complexions in different Kalpas. In the Vaishnava Puranas, however, we have only one original form, to which the name of Nilalohita, the blue and red or purple complexioned is assigned. In the Kurma this youth comes from Brahma's mouth: in the Vayu, from his forehead.

^58:3 This is the Pauranic etymology: ### or rud, 'to weep,' and dru, 'to run' The grammarians derive the name from rud, 'to weep,' with ra affix.

^58:4 The Vayu details the application of each name severally. These eight Rudras are therefore but one, under as many appellations, and in as many types. The Padma, Markandeya, Kurma, Linga, and Vayu agree with our text in the nomenclature of the Rudras, and their types, their wives, and progeny. The types are those which are enumerated in the Nandi, [p. 59] or opening benedictory verse, of Sakuntala; and the passage of the Vishnu P. was found by Mons. Chezy on the envelope of his copy. He has justly corrected Sir Wm. Jones's version of the term ### 'the sacrifice is performed with solemnity;' as the word means, 'Brahmane officiant,' 'the Brahman who is qualified by initiation (Diksha) to conduct the rite.' These are considered as the bodies, or visible forms, of those modifications of Rudra which are variously named, and which, being praised in them, severally abstain from harming them: ### Vayu P. The Bhagavata, III. 12, has a different scheme, as usual; but it confounds the notion of the eleven Rudras, to whom the text subsequently adverts, with that of the eight here specified. These eleven it terms Manyu, Manu, Mahinasa, Mahan, Siva, Ritadhwaja, Ugraretas, Bhava, Kala, Vamadeva, and Dhritavrata: their wives are, Dhi, Dhriti, Rasaloma, Niyut, Sarpi, Ila, Ambika, Iravati, Swadha, Diksha, Rudrani: and their places are, the heart, senses, breath, ether, air, fire, water, earth, sun, moon, and tapas, or ascetic devotion. The same allegory or mystification characterises both accounts.

^59:5 See the story of Daksha's sacrifice at the end of the chapter.

^59:6 The story of Uma's birth and marriage occurs in the S'iva P. and in the Kas'i Khanda of the Skanda P.: it is noticed briefly, and with some variation from the Puranas, in the Ramayana, first book: it is also given in detail in the Kumara Sambhava of Kalidasa.

^59:7 The family of Bhrigu is more particularly described in the tenth chapter: it is here mentioned merely to introduce the story of the birth of the goddess of prosperity, S'ri.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

  

SACRIFICE OF DAKSHA [*1].

(From the Vayu Purana.)

"There was formerly a peak of Meru, named Savitra, abounding with gems, radiant as the sun, and celebrated throughout the three worlds;

[p. 62]

of immense extent, and difficult of access, and an object of universal veneration. Upon that glorious eminence, rich with mineral treasures, as upon a splendid couch, the deity S'iva reclined, accompanied by the daughter of the sovereign of mountains, and attended by the mighty Adityas, the powerful Vasus, and by the heavenly physicians, the sons of Aswini; by Kuvera, surrounded by his train of Guhyakas, the lord of the Yakshas, who dwells on Kailasa. There also was the great Muni Usanas: there, were Rishis of the first order, with Sanatkumara at their head; divine Rishis, preceded by Angiras; Vis'wavasu, with his bands of heavenly choristers; the sages Narada and Parvata; and innumerable troops of celestial nymphs. The breeze blew upon the mountain, bland, pure, and fragrant; and the trees were decorated with flowers, that blossomed in every season. The Vidyadharas and Siddhas, affluent in devotion, waited upon Mahadeva, the lord of living creatures; and many other beings, of various forms, did him homage. Rakshasas of terrific semblance, and Pisachas of great strength, of different shapes and features, armed with various weapons, and blazing like fire, were delighted to be present, as the followers of the god. There stood the royal Nandi, high in the favour of his lord, armed with a fiery trident, shining with inherent lustre; and there the best of rivers, Ganga, the assemblage of all holy waters, stood adoring the mighty deity. Thus worshipped by all the most excellent of sages and of gods, abode the omnipotent and all-glorious Mahadeva.

"In former times, Daksha commenced a holy sacrifice on the side of Himavan, at the sacred spot Gangadwara, frequented by the Rishis. The gods, desirous of assisting at this solemn rite, came, with Indra at their head, to Mahadeva, and intimated their purpose; and having received his permission, departed in their splendid chariots to Gangadwara, as tradition reports [*2]. They found Daksha, the best of the devout,

[p. 63]

surrounded by the singers and nymphs of heaven, and by numerous sages, beneath the shade of clustering trees and climbing plants; and all of them, whether dwellers on earth, in air, or in the regions above the skies, approached the patriarch with outward gestures of respect. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, all entitled to partake of the oblations, together with Jishnu, were present. The four classes of Pitris, Ushmapas, Somapas, Ajyapas, and Dhumapas, or those who feed upon the flame, the acid juice, the butter, or the smoke of offerings, the Aswins and the progenitors, came along with Brahma. Creatures of every class, born from the womb, the egg, from vapour, or vegetation, came upon their invocation; as did all the gods, with their brides, who in their resplendent vehicles blazed like so many fires. Beholding them thus assembled, the sage Dadhicha was filled with indignation, and observed, 'The man who worships what ought not to be worshipped, or pays not reverence where veneration is due, is guilty, most assuredly, of heinous sin.' Then addressing Daksha, he said to him, 'Why do you not offer homage to the god who is the lord of life (Pas'ubhartri)?' Daksha spake; 'I have already many Rudras present, armed with tridents, wearing braided hair, and existing in eleven forms: I recognise no other Mahadeva.' Dadhicha spake; 'The invocation that is not addressed to Is'a, is, for all, but a solitary (and imperfect) summons. Inasmuch as I behold no other divinity who is superior to S'ankara, this sacrifice of Daksha will not be completed.' Daksha spake; I offer, in a golden cup, this entire oblation, which has been consecrated by many prayers, as an offering ever due to the unequalled Vishnu, the sovereign lord of all [*3].'

[p. 64]

"In the meanwhile, the virtuous daughter of the mountain king, observing the departure of the divinities, addressed her lord, the god of living beings, and said--Uma spake--'Whither, oh lord, have the gods, preceded by Indra, this day departed? Tell me truly, oh thou who knowest all truth, for a great doubt perplexes me.' Mahes'wara spake; Illustrious goddess, the excellent patriarch Daksha celebrates the sacrifice of a horse, and thither the gods repair.' Devi spake; Why then, most mighty god, dost thou also not proceed to this solemnity? by what hinderance is thy progress thither impeded?' Mahes'wara spake; 'This is the contrivance, mighty queen, of all the gods, that in all sacrifices no portion should be assigned to me. In consequence of an arrangement formerly devised, the gods allow me, of right, no participation of  offerings.' Devi spake; 'The lord god lives in all bodily forms, and his might is eminent through his superior faculties; he is unsurpassable, he is unapproachable, in splendour and glory and power. That such as he should be excluded from his share of oblations, fills me with deep sorrow, and a trembling, oh sinless, seizes upon my frame. Shall I now practise bounty, restraint, or penance, so that my lord, who is inconceivable, may obtain a share, a half or a third portion, of the sacrifice [*4]?'

[p. 65]

"Then the mighty and incomprehensible deity, being pleased, said to his bride, thus agitated; and speaking; 'Slender-waisted queen of the gods, thou knowest not the purport of what thou sayest; but I know it, oh thou with large eyes, for the holy declare all things by meditation. By thy perplexity this day are all the gods, with Mahendra and all the three worlds, utterly confounded. In my sacrifice, those who worship me, repeat my praises, and chant the Rathantara song of the Sama veda; my priests worship me in the sacrifice of true wisdom, where no officiating Brahman is needed; and in this they offer me my portion.' Devi spake; 'The lord is the root of all, and assuredly, in every assemblage of the female world, praises or hides himself at will.' Mahadeva spake; 'Queen of the gods, I praise not myself: approach, and behold whom I shall create for the purpose of claiming my share of the rite.'

"Having thus spoken to his beloved spouse, the mighty Mahes'wara created from his mouth a being like the fire of fate; a divine being, with a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet; wielding a thousand clubs, a thousand shafts; holding the shell, the discus, the mace, and bearing a blazing bow and battle-axe; fierce and terrific, shining with dreadful splendour, and decorated with the crescent moon; clothed in a tiger's skin, dripping with blood; having a capacious stomach, and a vast mouth, armed with formidable tusks: his ears were erect, his lips were pendulous, his tongue was lightning; his hand brandished the thunderbolt;

[p. 66]

flames streamed from his hair; a necklace of pearls wound round his neck; a garland of flame descended on his breast: radiant with lustre, he looked like the final fire that consumes the world. Four tremendous tusks projected from a mouth which extended from ear to ear: he was of vast bulk, vast strength, a mighty male and lord, the destroyer of the universe, and like a large fig-tree in circumference; shining like a hundred moons at once; fierce as the fire of love; having four heads, sharp white teeth, and of mighty fierceness, vigour, activity, and courage; glowing with the blaze of a thousand fiery suns at the end of the world; like a thousand undimmed moons: in bulk like Himadri, Kailasa, or Meru, or Mandara, with all its gleaming herbs; bright as the sun of destruction at the end of ages; of irresistible prowess, and beautiful aspect; irascible, with lowering eyes, and a countenance burning like fire; clothed in the hide of the elephant and lion, and girt round with snakes; wearing a turban on his head, a moon on his brow; sometimes savage, sometimes mild; having a chaplet of many flowers on his head, anointed with various unguents, and adorned with different ornaments and many sorts of jewels; wearing a garland of heavenly Karnikara flowers, and rolling his eyes with rage. Sometimes he danced; sometimes he laughed aloud; sometimes he stood wrapt in meditation; sometimes he trampled upon the earth; sometimes he sang; sometimes he wept repeatedly: and he was endowed with the faculties of wisdom, dispassion, power, penance, truth, endurance, fortitude, dominion, and self-knowledge.

"This being, then, knelt down upon the ground, and raising his hands respectfully to his head, said to Mahadeva, 'Sovereign of the gods, command what it is that I must do for thee.' To which Mahes'wara replied, Spoil the sacrifice of Daksha.' Then the mighty Virabhadra, having heard the pleasure of his lord, bowed down his head to the feet of Prajapati; and starting like a lion loosed from bonds, despoiled the sacrifice of Daksha, knowing that the had been created by the displeasure of Devi. She too in her wrath, as the fearful goddess Rudrakali, accompanied him, with all her train, to witness his deeds. Virabhadra the fierce, abiding in the region of ghosts, is the minister of the anger of

[p. 67]

[paragraph continues] Devi. And he then created, from the pores of his skin, powerful demigods, the mighty attendants upon Rudra, of equal valour and strength, who started by hundreds and thousands into existence. Then a loud and confused clamour filled all the expanse of ether, and inspired the denizens of heaven with dread. The mountains tottered, and earth shook; the winds roared, and the depths of the sea were disturbed; the fires lost their radiance, and the sun grew pale; the planets of the firmament shone not, neither did the stars give light; the Rishis ceased their hymns, and gods and demons were mute; and thick darkness eclipsed the chariots of the skies [*5].

"Then from the gloom emerged fearful and numerous forms, shouting the cry of battle; who instantly broke or overturned the sacrificial columns, trampled upon the altars, and danced amidst the oblations. Running wildly hither and thither, with the speed of wind, they tossed about the implements and vessels of sacrifice, which looked like stars precipitated from the heavens. The piles of food and beverage for the gods, which had been heaped up like mountains; the rivers of milk; the banks of curds and butter; the sands of honey and butter-milk and sugar; the mounds of condiments and spices of every flavour; the undulating knolls of flesh and other viands; the celestial liquors, pastes, and confections, which had been prepared; these the spirits of wrath devoured or defiled or scattered abroad. Then falling upon the host of the gods, these vast and resistless Rudras beat or terrified them, mocked and insulted the nymphs and goddesses, and quickly put an end to the rite, although defended by all the gods; being the ministers of Rudra's wrath, and similar to himself [*6]. Some then made a hideous clamour, whilst others fearfully shouted, when Yajna was decapitated. For the

[p. 68]

divine Yajna, the lord of sacrifice, then began to fly up to heaven, in the shape of a deer; and Virabhadra, of immeasurable spirit, apprehending his power, cut off his vast head, after he had mounted into the sky [*7]. Daksha the patriarch, his sacrifice being destroyed, overcome with terror, and utterly broken in spirit, fell then upon the ground, where his head was spurned by the feet of the cruel Virabhadra [*8]. The thirty scores of sacred divinities were all presently bound, with a band of fire, by their lion-like foe; and they all then addressed him, crying, 'Oh Rudra, have mercy upon thy servants: oh lord, dismiss thine anger.' Thus spake Brahma and the other gods, and the patriarch Daksha; and raising their hands, they said, 'Declare, mighty being, who thou art.' Virabhadra said, 'I am not a god, nor an Aditya; nor am I come hither for enjoyment, nor curious to behold the chiefs of the divinities: know that I am come to destroy the sacrifice of Daksha, and that I am called Virabhadra, the issue of the wrath of Rudra. Bhadrakali also, who has sprung from the anger of Devi, is sent here by the god of gods to destroy this rite. Take refuge, king of kings, with him who is the lord of Uma; for better is the anger of Rudra than the blessings of other gods.'

[p. 69]

"Having heard the words of Virabhadra, the righteous Daksha propitiated the mighty god, the holder of the trident, Mahes'wara. The hearth of sacrifice, deserted by the Brahmans, had been consumed; Yajna had been metamorphosed to an antelope; the fires of Rudra's wrath had been kindled; the attendants, wounded by the tridents of the servants of the god, were groaning with pain; the pieces of the uprooted sacrificial posts were scattered here and there; and the fragments of the meat-offerings were carried off by flights of hungry vultures, and herds of howling jackals. Suppressing his vital airs, and taking up a posture of meditation, the many-sighted victor of his foes, Daksha fixed his eyes every where upon his thoughts. Then the god of gods appeared from the altar, resplendent as a thousand suns, and smiled upon him, and said, 'Daksha, thy sacrifice has been destroyed through sacred knowledge: I am well pleased with thee:' and then he smiled again, and said, 'What shall I do for thee; declare, together with the preceptor of the gods.'

"Then Daksha, frightened, alarmed, and agitated, his eyes suffused with tears, raised his hands reverentially to his brow, and said, 'If, lord, thou art pleased; if I have found favour in thy sight; if I am to be the object of thy benevolence; if thou wilt confer upon me a boon, this is the blessing I solicit, that all these provisions for the solemn sacrifice, which have been collected with much trouble and during a long time, and which have now been eaten, drunk, devoured, burnt, broken, scattered abroad, may not have been prepared in vain.' 'So let it be,' replied Hara, the subduer of Indra. And thereupon Daksha knelt down upon the earth, and praised gratefully the author of righteousness, the three-eyed god Mahadeva, repeating the eight thousand names of the deity whose emblem is a bull."

Footnotes

^61:1 The sacrifice of Daksha is a legend of some interest, from its historical and archeological relations. It is obviously intended to intimate a struggle between the worshippers of S'iva and of Vishnu, in which at first the latter, but finally the former, acquired the ascendancy. It is also a favourite subject of Hindu sculpture, at least with the Hindus of the S'aiva division, and makes a conspicuous figure both at Elephanta and Ellora. A representation of the dispersion and mutilation of the gods and sages by Virabhadra, at the former, is published in the Archaeologia, VII. 326, where it is described as the Judgment of Solomon! a figure of Virabhadra is given by Niebuhr, vol. II. tab. 10: and the entire group in the Bombay Transactions, vol. I. p. 220. It is described, p. 229; but Mr. Erskine has not verified the subject, although it cannot admit of doubt. The groupe described, p. 224, probably represents the introductory details given in our text. Of the Ellora sculptures, a striking one occurs in what Sir C. Malet calls the Doomar Leyna cave, where is "Veer Budder, with eight hands. In one is suspended the slain Rajah Dutz." A. R. VI. 396. And there is also a representation of 'Ehr Budr,' in one of the colonades of Kailas; being, in fact, the same figure as that at Elephanta. Bombay Tr. III. 287. The legend of Daksha therefore was popular when those cavern temples were excavated. The story is told in much more detail in several other Puranas, and with some variations, which will be noticed: but the above has been selected as a specimen of the style of the Vayu Purana, and as being a narration which, from its , obscure, tautological, and uncircumstantial construction, is probably of an ancient date. The same legend, in the same words, is given in the Brahma P.

^62:2 Or this may he understood to imply, that the original story is in the Vedas; the term being, as usual in such a reference, ###. Gangadwara, the place where the Ganges descends to the plains--or Haridwar, as it is more usually termed--is usually specified as the scene of action, The Linga is more precise, calling it Kanakhala, which is the village still called Kankhal, near Haridwar (Megha Duta, [p. 63] p. 59). It rather inaccurately, however, describes this as upon Hansa peak, a point of the Himalaya.

^63:3 The Kurma P. gives also this discussion between Dadhicha and Daksha, and their dialogue contains some curious matter. Daksha, for instance, states that no portion of a sacrifice is ever allotted to S'iva, and no prayers are directed to be addressed to him, or to his bride. Dadhicha apparently evades the objection, and claims a share for Rudra, consisting of the triad of gods, as one with the sun, who is undoubtedly hymned by the several ministering priests of the Vedas. Daksha replies, that the twelve Adityas receive special oblations; that they are all the suns; and [p. 64] that he knows of no other. The Munis, who overhear the dispute, concur in his sentiments. These notions seem to have been exchanged for others in the days of the Padma P. and Bhagavata, as they place Daksha's neglect of S'iva to the latter's filthy practices, his going naked, smearing himself with ashes, carrying a skull, and behaving as if he were drunk or crazed: alluding, no doubt, to the practices of S'aiva mendicants, who seem to have abounded in the days of S'ankara Acharya, and since. There is no discussion in the Bhagavata, but Rudra is described as present at a former assembly, when his father-in-law censured him before the guests, and in consequence he departed in a rage. His follower Nandi curses the company, and Bhrigu retorts in language descriptive of the Vamacharis, or left hand worshippers of S'iva. "May all those," he says, "who adopt the worship of Bhava (S'iva), all those who follow the practices of his worshippers, become heretics, and oppugners of holy doctrines; may they neglect the observances of purification; may they be of infirm intellects, wearing clotted hair, and ornamenting themselves with ashes and bones; and may they enter the S'aiva initiation, in which spirituous liquor is the libation."

^64:4 This simple account of Sati's share in the transaction is considerably modified in [p. 64] other accounts. In the Kurma, the quarrel begins with Daksha the patriarch's being, as he thinks, treated by his son-in-law with less respect than is his due. Upon his daughter Sati's subsequently visiting him, he abuses her husband, and turns her out of his house. She in spite destroys herself. S'iva, hearing of this, comes to Daksha, and curses him to be born as a Kshetriya, the son of the Prachetasas, and to beget a son on his own daughter. It is in this subsequent birth that the sacrifice occurs. The Linga and Matsya allude to the dispute between Daksha and Sati, and to the latter's putting an end to herself by Yoga. The Padma, Bhagavata, and Skanda in the Kasi Khanda, relate the dispute between father and daughter in a like manner, and in more detail. The first refers the death of Sag, however, to a prior period; and that and the Bhagavata both ascribe it to Yoga. The Kasi Khanda, with an improvement indicative of a later age, makes Sati throw herself into the fire prepared for the solemnity.

^67:5 The description of Virabhadra and his followers is given in other Puranas in the same strain, but with less detail.

^67:6 Their exploits, and those of Virabhadra, are more particularly specified elsewhere, especially in the Linga, Kurma, and Bhagavata Puranas. Indra is knocked down and trampled on; Yama has his staff broken; Saraswati and the Matris have their noses cut off; Mitra or Bhaga has his eyes pulled out; Pusha has his teeth knocked down his throat; Chandra is pummelled; Vahni's hands are cut off; Bhrigu loses his beard; the Brahmans are pelted with stones; the Prajapatis are beaten; and the gods and demigods are run through with swords or stuck with arrows.

^68:7 This is also mentioned in the Linga and in the Hari Vans'a: and the latter thus accounts for the origin of the constellation Mrigasiras; Yajna, with the head of a deer, being elevated to the planetary region, by Brahma.

^68:8 As he prays to S'iva presently, it could not well be meant here that Daksha was decapitated, although that is the story in other places. The Linga and Bhagavata both state that Virabhadra cut off Daksha's head, and threw it into the fire. After the fray therefore, when S'iva restored the dead to life, and the mutilated to their limbs, Daksha's head was not forthcoming: it was therefore replaced by the head of a goat, or, according to the Kasi Khanda, that of a ram. No notice is taken in our text of the conflict elsewhere described between Virabhadra and Vishnu. In the Linga, the latter is beheaded, and his head is blown by the wind into the fire. The Kurma, though a S'aiva Purana, is less irreverent towards Vishnu, and after describing a contest in which both parties occasionally prevail, makes Brahma interpose, and separate the combatants. The Kasi Khanda of the Skanda P. describes Vishnu as defeated, and at the mercy of Virabhadra, who is prohibited by a voice from heaven from destroying his antagonist: whilst in the Hari Vans'a, Vishnu compels S'iva to fly, after taking him by the throat and nearly strangling him. The blackness of S'iva's neck arose from this throttling, and not, as elsewhere described, from his drinking the poison produced at the churning of the ocean.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

CHAP. IX.

Legend of Lakshmi. Durvasas gives a garland to Indra: he treats it disrespectfully, and is cursed by the Muni. The power of the gods impaired: they are oppressed by the Danavas, and have recourse to Vishnu. The churning of the ocean. Praises of S'ri.

PARAS'ARA.--But with respect to the question thou hast asked me, Maitreya, relating to the history of S'ri, hear from me the tale as it was told to me by Marichi.

Durvasas, a portion of S'ankara (S'iva) [*1], was wandering over the earth; when be beheld, in the hands of a nymph of air [*2], a garland of flowers culled from the trees of heaven, the fragrant odour of which spread throughout the forest, and enraptured all who dwelt beneath its shade. The sage, who was then possessed by religious phrensy [*3], when he beheld that garland, demanded it of the graceful and full-eyed nymph, who, bowing to him reverentially, immediately presented it to him. He, as one frantic, placed the chaplet upon his brow, and thus decorated resumed his path; when he beheld (Indra) the husband of S'achi, the ruler of the three worlds, approach, seated on his infuriated elephant Airavata, and attended by the gods. The phrensied sage, taking from his head the garland of flowers, amidst which the bees collected ambrosia, threw it to the king of the gods, who caught it, and suspended it on the brow of Airavata, where it shone like the river Jahnavi, glittering on the dark summit of the mountain Kailasa. The elephant, whose eyes were dim with inebriety, and attracted by the smell, took hold of the garland with his trunk, and cast it on the earth. That chief of sages, Durvasas, was

[p. 71]

highly incensed at this disrespectful treatment of his gift, and thus angrily addressed the sovereign of the immortals: "Inflated with the intoxication of power, Vasava, vile of spirit, thou art an idiot not to respect the garland I presented to thee, which was the dwelling of Fortune (S'ri). Thou hast not acknowledged it as a largess; thou hast not bowed thyself before me; thou hast not placed the wreath upon thy head, with thy countenance expanding with delight. Now, fool, for that thou hast not infinitely prized the garland that I gave thee, thy sovereignty over the three worlds shall be subverted. Thou confoundest me, S'akra, with other Brahmans, and hence I have suffered disrespect from thy arrogance: but in like manner as thou hast cast the garland I gave thee down on the ground, so shall thy dominion over the universe be whelmed in ruin. Thou hast offended one whose wrath is dreaded by all created things, king of the gods, even me, by thine excessive pride."

Descending hastily from his elephant, Mahendra endeavoured to appease the sinless Durvasas: but to the excuses and prostrations of the thousand-eyed, the Muni answered, "I am not of a compassionate heart, nor is forgiveness congenial to my nature. Other Munis may relent; but know me, S'akra, to be Durvasas. Thou hast in vain been rendered insolent by Gautama and others; for know me, Indra, to be Durvasas, whose nature is a stranger to remorse. Thou hast been flattered by Vas'ishtha and other tender-hearted saints, whose loud praises (lave made thee so arrogant, that thou hast insulted me. But who is there in the universe that can behold my countenance, dark with frowns, and surrounded by my blazing hair, and not tremble? What need of words? I will not forgive, whatever semblance of humility thou mayest assume."

Having thus spoken, the Brahman went his way; and the king of the gods, remounting his elephant, returned to his capital Amaravati. Thenceforward, Maitreya, the three worlds and S'akra lost their vigour, and all vegetable products, plants, and herbs were withered and died; sacrifices were no longer offered; devout exercises no longer practised; men were no more addicted to charity, or any moral or religious obligation;

[p. 72]

all beings became devoid of steadiness [*4]; all the faculties of sense were obstructed by cupidity; and men's desires were excited by frivolous objects. Where there is energy, there is prosperity; and upon prosperity energy depends. How can those abandoned by prosperity be possessed of energy; and without energy, where is excellence? Without excellence there can be no vigour nor heroism amongst men: he who has neither courage nor strength, will be spurned by all: and he who is universally treated with disgrace, must suffer abasement of his intellectual faculties.

The three regions being thus wholly divested of prosperity, and deprived of energy, the Danavas and sons of Diti, the enemies of the gods, who were incapable of steadiness, and agitated by ambition, put forth their strength against the gods. They engaged in war with the feeble and unfortunate divinities; and Indra and the rest, being overcome in fight, fled for refuge to Brahma, preceded by the god of flame (Hutas'ana). When the great father of the universe had heard all that had come to pass, he said to the deities, "Repair for protection to the god of high and low; the tamer of the demons; the causeless cause of creation, preservation, and destruction; the progenitor of the progenitors; the immortal, unconquerable Vishnu; the cause of matter and spirit, of his unengendered products; the remover of the grief of all who humble themselves before him: he will give you aid." Having thus spoken to the deities, Brahma proceeded along with them to the northern shore of the sea of milk; and with reverential words thus prayed to the supreme Hari:--

"We glorify him who is all things; the lord supreme over all; unborn, imperishable; the protector of the mighty ones of creation; the unperceived, indivisible Narayana; the smallest of the smallest, the largest of the largest, of the elements; in whom are all things, from whom are all things; who was before existence; the god who is all beings; who is the end of ultimate objects; who is beyond final spirit, and is one with supreme soul; who is contemplated as the cause of final liberation by

[p. 73]

sages anxious to be free; in whom are not the qualities of goodness, foulness, or darkness, that belong to undeveloped nature. May that purest of all pure spirits this day be propitious to us. May that Hari be propitious to us, whose inherent might is not an object of the progressive chain of moments or of days, that make up time. May he who is called the supreme god, who is not in need of assistance, Hari, the soul of all embodied substance, be favourable unto us. May that Hari, who is both cause and effect; who is the cause of cause, the effect of effect; he who is the effect of successive effect; who is the effect of the effect of the effect himself; the product of the effect of the effect of the effect, or elemental substance; to him I bow [*5]. The cause of the cause; the cause of the cause of the cause; the cause of them all; to him I bow. To him who is the enjoyer and thing to be enjoyed; the creator and thing to be created; who is the agent and the effect; to that supreme being I bow. The infinite nature of Vishnu is pure, intelligent, perpetual, unborn, undecayable, inexhaustible, inscrutable, immutable; it is neither gross nor subtile, nor capable of being defined: to that ever holy nature of Vishnu I bow. To him whose faculty to create the universe abides in but a part of but the ten-millionth part of him; to him who is one with the inexhaustible supreme spirit, I bow: and to the glorious nature of the supreme Vishnu, which nor gods, nor sages, nor I, nor S'ankara apprehend; that nature which the Yogis, after incessant effort, effacing both moral merit and demerit, behold to be contemplated in the mystical monosyllable Om: the supreme glory of Vishnu, who is the first of all; of whom, one only god, the triple energy is the same with Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva: oh lord of all, great soul of all, asylum of all, undecayable, have pity upon thy servants; oh Vishnu, be manifest unto us."

[p. 74]

Paras'ara continued.--The gods, having heard this prayer uttered by Brahma, bowed down, and cried, "Be favourable to us; be present to our sight: we bow down to that glorious nature which the mighty Brahma does not know; that which is thy nature, oh imperishable, in whom the universe abides." Then the gods having ended, Vrihaspati and the divine Rishis thus prayed: "We bow down to the being entitled to adoration; who is the first object of sacrifice; who was before the first of things; the creator of the creator of the world; the undefinable: oh lord of all that has been or is to be; imperishable type of sacrifice; have pity upon thy worshippers; appear to them, prostrate before thee. Here is Brahma; here is Trilochana (the three-eyed S'iva), with the Rudras; Pusha, (the sun), with the Adityas; and Fire, with all the mighty luminaries: here are the sons of Aswini (the two Aswini Kumaras), the Vasus and all the winds, the Sadhyas, the Vis'wadevas, and Indra the king of the gods: all of whom bow lowly before thee: all the tribes of the immortals, vanquished by the demon host, have fled to thee for succour."

Thus prayed to, the supreme deity, the mighty holder of the conch and discus, shewed himself to them: and beholding the lord of gods, bearing a shell, a discus, and a mace, the assemblage of primeval form, and radiant with embodied light, Pitamaha and the other deities, their eyes moistened with rapture, first paid him homage, and then thus addressed him: "Repeated salutation to thee, who art indefinable: thou art Brahma; thou art the wielder of the Pinaka bow (S'iva); thou art Indra; thou art fire, air, the god of waters, the sun, the king of death (Yama), the Vasus, the Maruts (the winds), the Sadhyas, and Vis'wadevas. This assembly of divinities, that now has come before thee, thou art; for, the creator of the world, thou art every where. Thou art the sacrifice, the prayer of oblation, the mystic syllable Om, the sovereign of all creatures: thou art all that is to be known, or to be unknown: oh universal soul, the whole world consists of thee. We, discomfited by the Daityas, have fled to thee, oh Vishnu, for refuge. Spirit of all, have compassion upon us; defend us with thy mighty power. There will be affliction, desire, trouble, and grief, until thy protection is obtained: but thou art the remover of all sins. Do thou then, oh pure of spirit, shew favour unto

[p. 75]

us, who have fled to thee: oh lord of all, protect us with thy great power, in union with the goddess who is thy strength [*6]." Hari, the creator of the universe, being thus prayed to by the prostrate divinities, smiled, and thus spake: "With renovated energy, oh gods, I will restore your strength. Do you act as I enjoin. Let all the gods, associated with the Asuras, cast all sorts of medicinal herbs into the sea of milk; and then taking the mountain Mandara for the churning-stick, the serpent Vasuki for the rope, churn the ocean together for ambrosia; depending upon my aid. To secure the assistance of the Daityas, you must be at peace with them, and engage to give them an equal portion of the fruit of your associated toil; promising them, that by drinking the Amrita that shall be produced from the agitated ocean, they shall become mighty and immortal. I will take care that the enemies of the gods shall not partake of the precious draught; that they shall share in the labour alone."

Being thus instructed by the god of gods, the divinities entered into alliance with the demons, and they jointly undertook the acquirement of the beverage of immortality. They collected various kinds of medicinal herbs, and cast them into the sea of milk, the waters of which were radiant as the thin and shining clouds of autumn. They then took the mountain Mandara for the staff; the serpent Vasuki for the cord; and commenced to churn the ocean for the Amrita. The assembled gods were stationed by Krishna at the tail of the serpent; the Daityas and Danavas at its head and neck. Scorched by the flames emitted from his inflated hood, the demons were shorn of their glory; whilst the clouds driven towards his tail by the breath of his mouth, refreshed the gods with revivifying showers. In the midst of the milky sea, Hari himself, in the form of a tortoise, served as a pivot for the mountain, as it was whirled around. The holder of the mace and discus was present in other forms amongst the gods and demons, and assisted to drag the monarch of the serpent race: and in another vast body he sat upon the summit of the mountain. With one portion of his energy, unseen by gods or demons, he sustained the serpent king; and with another, infused vigour into the gods.

[p. 76]

From the ocean, thus churned by the gods and Danavas, first uprose the cow Surabhi, the fountain of milk and curds, worshipped by the divinities, and beheld by them and their associates with minds disturbed, and eyes glistening with delight. Then, as the holy Siddhas in the sky wondered what this could be, appeared the goddess Varuni (the deity of wine), her eyes rolling with intoxication. Next, from the whirlpool of the deep, sprang the celestial Parijata tree, the delight of the nymphs of heaven, perfuming the world with its blossoms. The troop of Apsarasas, the nymphs of heaven, were then produced, of surprising loveliness, endowed with beauty and with taste. The cool-rayed moon next rose, and was seized by Mahadeva: and then poison was engendered from the sea, of which the snake gods (Nagas) took possession. Dhanwantari, robed in white, and bearing in his hand the cup of Amrita, next came forth: beholding which, the sons of Diti and of Danu, as well as the Munis, were filled with satisfaction and delight. Then, seated on a full-blown lotus, and holding a water-lily in her hand, the goddess S'ri, radiant with beauty, rose from the waves. The great sages, enraptured, hymned her with the song dedicated to her praise [*7]. Vis'wavasu and other heavenly quiristers sang, and Ghritachi and other celestial nymphs danced before her. Ganga and other holy streams attended for her ablutions; and the elephants of the skies, taking up their pure waters in vases of gold, poured them over the goddess, the queen of the universal world. The sea of milk in person presented her with a wreath of never-fading flowers; and the artist of the gods (Viswakerma) decorated her person with heavenly ornaments. Thus bathed, attired, and adorned, the goddess, in the view of the celestials, cast herself upon the breast of Hari; and there reclining, turned her eyes upon the deities, who were inspired with rapture by her gaze. Not so the Daityas, who, with Viprachitti at their head, were filled with indignation, as Vishnu turned away from them, and they were abandoned by the goddess of prosperity (Lakshmi.)

The powerful and indignant Daityas then forcibly seized the Amrita-cup, that was in the hand of Dhanwantari: but Vishnu, assuming a female form, fascinated and deluded them; and recovering the Amrita

[p. 77]

from them, delivered it to the gods. S'akra and the other deities quaffed the ambrosia. The incensed demons, grasping their weapons, fell upon them; but the gods, into whom the ambrosial draught had infused new vigour, defeated and put their host to flight, and they fled through the regions of space, and plunged into the subterraneous realms of Patala. The gods thereat greatly rejoiced, did homage to the holder of the discus and mace, and resumed their reign in heaven. The sun shone with renovated splendour, and again discharged his appointed task; and the celestial luminaries again circled, oh best of Munis, in their respective orbits. Fire once more blazed aloft, beautiful in splendour; and the minds of all beings were animated by devotion. The three worlds again were rendered happy by prosperity; and Indra, the chief of the gods, was restored to power [*8]. Seated upon his throne, and once more in

[p. 78]

heaven, exercising sovereignty over the gods, S'akra thus eulogized the goddess who bears a lotus in her hand:--

"I bow down to S'ri, the mother of all beings, seated on her lotus throne, with eyes like full-blown lotuses, reclining on the breast of Vishnu. Thou art Siddhi (superhuman power): thou art Swadha and Swaha: thou art ambrosia (Sudha), the purifier of the universe: thou art evening, night, and dawn: thou art power, faith, intellect: thou art the goddess of letters (Saraswati). Thou, beautiful goddess, art knowledge of devotion,

[p. 79]

great knowledge, mystic knowledge, and spiritual knowledge [*9]; which confers eternal liberation. Thou art the science of reasoning, the three Vedas, the arts and sciences [*10]: thou art moral and political science. The world is peopled by thee with pleasing or displeasing forms. Who else than thou, oh goddess, is seated on that person of the god of gods, the wielder of the mace, which is made up of sacrifice, and contemplated by holy ascetics? Abandoned by thee, the three worlds were on the brink of ruin; but they have been reanimated by thee. From thy propitious gaze, oh mighty goddess, men obtain wives, children, dwellings, friends, harvests, wealth. Health and strength, power, victory, happiness, are easy of attainment to those upon whom thou smilest. Thou art the mother of all beings, as the god of gods, Hari, is their father; and this world, whether animate or inanimate, is pervaded by thee and Vishnu. Oh thou who purifiest all things, forsake not our treasures, our granaries, our dwellings, our dependants, our persons, our wives: abandon not our children, our friends, our lineage, our jewels, oh thou who abidest on the bosom of the god of gods. They whom thou desertest are forsaken by truth, by purity, and goodness, by every amiable and excellent quality; whilst the base and worthless upon whom thou lookest favourably become immediately endowed with all excellent qualifications, with families, and with power. He on whom thy countenance is turned is honourable, amiable, prosperous, wise, and of exalted birth; a hero of irresistible prowess: but all his merits and his advantages are converted into worthlessness from whom, beloved of Vishnu, mother of the world, thou avertest thy face. The tongues of Brahma, are unequal to celebrate thy excellence. Be propitious to me, oh goddess, lotus-eyed, and never forsake me more."

Being thus praised, the gratified S'ri, abiding in all creatures, and

[p. 80]

heard by all beings, replied to the god of a hundred rites (S'atakratu); "I am pleased, monarch of the gods, by thine adoration. Demand from me what thou desirest: I have come to fulfil thy wishes." "If, goddess," replied Indra, "thou wilt grant my prayers; if I am worthy of thy bounty; be this my first request, that the three worlds may never again be deprived of thy presence. My second supplication, daughter of ocean, is, that thou wilt not forsake him who shall celebrate thy praises in the words I have addressed to thee." "I will not abandon," the goddess answered, "the three worlds again: this thy first boon is granted; for I am gratified by thy praises: and further, I will never turn my face away from that mortal who morning and evening shall repeat the hymn with which thou hast addressed me."

Paras'ara proceeded.--Thus, Maitreya, in former times the goddess S'ri conferred these boons upon the king of the gods, being pleased by his adorations; but her first birth was as the daughter of Bhrigu by Khyati: it was at a subsequent period that she was produced from the sea, at the churning of the ocean by the demons and the gods, to obtain ambrosia [*11]. For in like manner as the lord of the world, the god of gods, Janarddana, descends amongst mankind (in various shapes), so does his coadjutrix S'ri. Thus when Hari was born as a dwarf, the son of Aditi, Lakshmi appeared from a lotus (as Padma, or Kamala); when he was born as Rama, of the race of Bhrigu (or Paras'urama), she was Dharani; when he was Raghava (Ramachandra), she was Sita; and when he was Krishna, she became Rukmini. In the other descents of Vishnu, she is his associate. If he takes a celestial form, she appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a mortal too, transforming her own person agreeably to whatever character it pleases Vishnu to put on. Whosoever hears this

[p. 81]

account of the birth of Lakshmi, whosoever reads it, shall never lose the goddess Fortune from his dwelling for three generations; and misfortune, the fountain of strife, shall never enter into those houses in which the hymns to S'ri are repeated.

Thus, Brahman, have I narrated to thee, in answer to thy question, how Lakshmi, formerly the daughter of Bhrigu, sprang from the sea of milk; and misfortune shall never visit those amongst mankind who daily recite the praises of Lakshmi uttered by Indra, which are the origin and cause of all prosperity.

Footnotes

^70:1 Durvasas was the son of Atri by Anasuya, and was an incarnation of a portion of S'iva.

^70:2 Vidyadhari. These beings, male and female, are spirits of an inferior order, tenanting the middle regions of the atmosphere. According to the Vayu, the garland was given to the nymph by Devi.

^70:3 He observed the Vrata, or vow of insanity; equivalent to the ecstasies of some religious fanatics. In this state,' says the commentator, 'even saints are devils.'

^72:4 They became Nih-satwa; and Satwa is explained throughout by Dhairyya, 'steadiness,' 'fortitude.'

^73:5 The first effect of primary cause is nature, or Prakriti: the effect of the effect, or of Prakriti, is Mahat: effect in the third degree is Ahankara: in the fourth, or the effect of the effect (Ahankara) of the effect (Mahat) of the effect (Prakriti), is elementary substance, or Bhuta. Vishnu is each and all. So in the succeeding ascending scale, Brahma is the cause of mortal life; the cause of Brahma is the egg, or aggregate elementary matter: its cause is, therefore, elementary matter; the cause of which is subtile or rudimental matter, which originates from Ahankara, and so on. Vishnu is also each and all of these.

^75:6 With thy S'akti, or the goddess S'ri or Lakshmi.

^76:7 Or with the Sukta, or hymn of the Vedas, commencing, "Hiranya vernam," &c.

^77:8 The churning of the ocean does not occur in several of the Puranas, and is but cursorily alluded to in the S'iva, Linga, and Kurma Puranas. The Vayu and Padma have much the same narrative as that of our text; and so have the Agni and Bhagavata, except that they refer only briefly to the anger of Durvasas, without narrating the circumstances; indicating their being posterior, therefore, to the original tale. The part, however, assigned to Durvasas appears to be an embellishment added to the original, for no mention of him occurs in the Matsya P. nor even in the Hari Vans'a, neither does it occur in what may be considered the oldest extant versions of the story, those of the Ramayana and Mahabharata: both these ascribe the occurrence to the desire of the gods and Daityas to become immortal. The Matsya assigns a similar motive to the gods, instigated by observing that the Daityas slain by them in battle were restored to life by S'ukra with the Sanjivini, or herb of immortality, which he had discovered. The account in the Hari Vans'a is brief and obscure, and is explained by the commentator as an allegory, in which the churning of the ocean typifies ascetic penance, and the ambrosia is final liberation: but this is mere mystification. The legend of the Ramayana is translated, vol. I. p. 410. of the Serampore edition; and that of the Mahabharata by Sir C. Wilkins, in the notes to his translation of the Bhagavata Gita. See also the original text, Cal. ed. p. 40. It has been presented to general readers in a more attractive form by my friend H. M. Parker, in his Draught of Immortality, printed with other poems, Lond. 1827. The Matsya P. has many of the stanzas of the Mahabharata interspersed with others. There is some variety in the order and number of articles produced from the ocean. As I have observed elsewhere (Hindu Theatre, I. 59. Lond. ed.), the popular enumeration is fourteen; but the Ramayana specifies but nine; the Mahabharata, nine; the Bhagavata, ten; the Padma, nine; the Vayu, twelve; the [p. 78] Matsya, perhaps, gives the whole number. Those in which most agree, are, 1. the Halahala or Kalakuta poison, swallowed by S'iva: 2. Varuni or Sura, the goddess of wine, who being taken by the gods, and rejected by the Daityas, the former were termed Suras, and the latter Asuras: 3. the horse Uchchais's'ravas, taken by Indra: 4. Kaustubha, the jewel worn by Vishnu: 5. the moon: 6. Dhanwantari, with the Amrita in his Kamandalu, or vase; and these two articles are in the Vayu considered as distinct products: 7. the goddess Padma or S'ri: 8. the Apsarasas, or nymphs of heaven: 9. Surabhi, or the cow of plenty: 10. the Parijata tree, or tree of heaven: 11. Airavata, the elephant taken by Indra. The Matsya adds, 12. the umbrella taken by Varuna: 13. the earrings taken by Indra, and given to Aditi: and apparently another horse, the white horse of the sun: or the number may be completed by counting the Amrita separately from Dhanwantari. The number is made up in the popular lists by adding the bow and the conch of Vishnu; but there does not seem to be any good authority for this, and the addition is a sectarial one: so is that of the Tulas'i tree, a plant sacred to Krishna, which is one of the twelve specified by the Vayu P. The Uttara Khanda of the Padma P. has a peculiar enumeration, or, Poison; Jyeshtha or Alakshmi, the goddess of misfortune, the elder born to fortune; the goddess of wine; Nidra, or sloth; the Apsarasas; the elephant of Indra; Lakshmi; the moon; and the Tulas'i plant. The reference to Mohini, the female form assumed by Vishnu, is very brief in our text; and no notice is taken of the story told in the Mahabharata and some of the Puranas, of the Daitya Rahu's insinuating himself amongst the gods, and obtaining a portion of the Amrita: being beheaded for this by Vishnu, the head became immortal, in consequence of the Amrita having reached the throat, and was transferred as a constellation to the skies; and as the sun and moon detected his presence amongst the gods, Rahu pursues them with implacable hatred, and his efforts to seize them are the causes of eclipses; Rahu typifying the ascending and descending nodes. This seems to be the simplest and oldest form of the legend. The equal immortality of the body, under the name Ketu, and his being the cause of meteorical phenomena, seems to have been an after-thought. In the Padma and Bhagavata, Rahu and Ketu are the sons of Sinhika, the wife of the Danava Viprachitti.

^79:9 The four Vidyas, or branches of knowledge, are said to be, Yajna vidya, knowledge or performance of religious rites; Maha vidya, great knowledge, the worship of the female principle, or Tantrika worship; Guhya vidya, knowledge of mantras, mystical prayers, and incantations; and Atma vidya, knowledge of soul, true wisdom.

^79:10 Or Vartta, explained to mean the S'ilpa s'astra, mechanics, sculpture, and architecture; Ayur-veda, medicine, &c.

^80:11 The cause of this, however, is left unexplained. The Padma P. inserts a legend to account for the temporary separation of Lakshmi from Vishnu, which appears to be peculiar to that work. Bhrigu was lord of Lakshmipur, a city on the Narmada, given him by Brahma. His daughter Lakshmi instigated her husband to request its being conceded to her, which offending Bhrigu, he cursed Vishnu to be born upon earth ten times, to be separated from his wife, and to have no children. The legend is an insipid modern embellishment.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

CHAP. X.

The descendants of the daughters of Daksha married to the Rishis.

MAITREYA.--Thou hast narrated to me, great Muni, all that I asked of thee: now resume the account of the creation subsequently to Bhrigu.

PARAS'ARA.--Lakshmi, the bride of Vishnu, was the daughter of Bhrigu by Khyati. They had also two sons, Dhatri and Vidhatri, who married the two daughters of the illustrious Meru, Ayati and Niryati; and had by them each a son, named Prana and Mrikanda. The son of the latter was Markandeya, from whom Vedas'iras was born [*1]. The son of Prana was named Dyutimat, and his son was Rajavat; after whom, the race of Bhrigu became infinitely multiplied.

Sambhuti, the wife of Marichi, gave birth to Paurnamasa, whose sons were Virajas and Sarvaga. I shall hereafter notice his other descendants, when I give a more particular account of the race of Marichi [*2].

The wife of Angiras, Smriti, bore daughters named Sinivali, Kuhu,

[p. 83]

[paragraph continues] Raka, and Anumati (phases of the moon [*3]). Anasuya, the wife of Atri, was the mother of three sinless sons, Soma (the moon), Durvasas, and the ascetic Dattatreya [*4]. Pulastya had, by Priti, a son called in a former birth, or in the Swayambhuva Manwantara, Dattoli, who is now known as the sage Agastya [*5]. Kshama, the wife of the patriarch Pulaha, was the mother of three sons, Karmasa, Arvarivat, and Sahishnu [*6]. The wife of Kratu, Sannati, brought forth the sixty thousand Balakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger than a joint of the thumb, chaste, pious, resplendent as the rays of the sun [*7]. Vas'ishtha had seven sons by his wife Urjja, Rajas, Gatra, Urddhabahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapas, and S'ukra, the seven pure sages [*8]. The Agni named Abhimani, who is the eldest born of 

[p. 84]

[paragraph continues] Brahma, had, by Swaha, three sons of surpassing brilliancy, Pavaka, Pavamana, and S'uchi, who drinks up water: they had forty-five sons, who, with the original son of Brahma and his three descendants, constitute the forty-nine fires [*9]. The progenitors (Pitris), who, as I have mentioned, were created by Brahma, were the Agnishwattas and Varhishads; the former being devoid of, and the latter possessed of, fires [*10]. By them, Swadha had two daughters, Mena and Dharani, who were both acquainted with theological truth, and both addicted to religious meditation; both accomplished in perfect wisdom, and adorned with all estimable qualities [*11]. Thus has been explained the progeny of the

[p. 85]

daughters of Daksha [*12]. He who with faith recapitulates the account, shall never want offspring.

Footnotes

^82:1 The commentator interprets the text ### to refer to Prana: 'Vedas'iras was born the son of Prana.' So the Bhagavata has ###. The Linga, the Vayu, and Markandeya, however, confirm our reading of the text, making Vedas'iras the son of Markandeya. Prana, or, as read in the two former, Pandu, was married to Pundarika, and had by her Dyutimat, whose sons were Srijavana and Asruta or Asrutavrana. Mrikanda (also read Mrikandu) married Manaswini, and had Markandeya, whose son, by Murddhanya, was Vedas'iras: he married Pivari, and had many children, who constituted the family, or Brahmanical tribe, of Bhargavas, sons of Bhrigu. The most celebrated of these was Us'anas, the preceptor of the Daityas, who, according to the Bhagavata, was the son of Vedas'iras; but the Vayu makes him the son of Bhrigu by Paulomi, and born at a different period.

^82:2 Alluding especially to Kas'yapa, the son of Marichi, of whose posterity a full detail is subsequently given. The Bhagavata adds a daughter, Devakulya; and the Vayu and Linga, four daughters, Tushti, Pushti, Twisha, and Apachiti. The latter inserts the grandsons of Paurnamasa. Virajas, married to Gauri, has Sudhaman, a Lokapala, or ruler of the east quarter; and Parvasa (quasi Sarvaga) has, by Parvasi, Yajnavama and Kas'yata, who were both founders of Gotras, or families. The names of all these occur in different forms in different MSS.

^83:3 The Bhagavata adds, that in the Swarochisha Manwantara the sages Uttathya and Vrihaspati were also sons of Angiras; and the Vayu, &c. specify Agni and Kirttimat as the sons of the patriarch in the first Manwantara. Agni, married to Sadwati, has Parjanya, married to Marichi; and their son is Hiranyaroman, a Lokapala. Kirttimat has, by Dhenuka, two sons, Charishnu and Dhritimat.

^83:4 The Bhagavata gives an account of Atri's penance, by which the three gods, Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva, were propitiated, and became, in portions of themselves, severally his sons, Soma, Datta, and Durvasas. The Vayu has a totally different series, or five sons, Satyanetra, Havya, Apomurtti, Sani, and Soma; and one daughter, Sruti, who became the wife of Kardama.

^83:5 The text would seem to imply that he was called Agastya in a former Manwantara, but the commentator explains it as above. The Bhagavata calls the wife of Pulastya, Havirbhu, whose sons were the Muni Agastya, called in a former birth Dahragni or Jatharagni, and Visravas. The latter had by Ilavila, the deity of wealth, Kuvera; and by Kesini, the Rakshasas Ravana, Kumbhakarna, and Vibhishana. The Vayu specifies three sons of Pulastya, Dattoli, Vedabahu, and Vinita; and one daughter, Sadwati, married (see note 3) to Agni.

^83:6 The Bhagavata reads Karmas'reshtha, Variyas, and Sahishnu. The Vayu and Linga have Kardama and Ambarisha in place of the two first, and add Vanakapivat and a daughter, Pivari, married to Vedas'iras (see note [*1]). Kardama married S'ruti (note [*4]), and had by her Sankhapada, one of the Lokapalas, and a daughter, Kamya, married to Priyavrata (note , <page 53>). Vana-kapivat, also read Dhana-k. and Ghana-k., had a son, Sahishnu, married to Yasodhara, and they were the parents of Kamadeva.

^83:7 The different authorities agree in this place. The Vayu adds two daughters, Punya and Sumati, married to Yajnavama (see note [*2]).

^83:8 The Bhagavata has an entirely different set of names, or Chitraketu, Surochish, Virajas, Mitra, Ulwana, Vasubhridyana, and [p. 84] Dyumat. It also specifies Saktri and others, as the issue of a different marriage. The Vayu and Linga have the same sons as in our text, reading Putra and Hasta in place of Gatra: they add a daughter, Pundarika, married to Pandu (see note [*1]). The eldest son, according to the Vayu, espoused a daughter of Markandeya, and had by her the Lokapala of the west, Ketumat. The seven sons of Vas'ishtha are termed in the text the seven Rishis, appearing in that character in the third Manwantara.

^84:9 The eldest son of Brahma, according to the commentator, upon the authority of the Vedas. The Vayu P. enters into a very long detail of the names and places of the whole forty-nine fires. According to that, also, Pavaka is electric or Vaidynta fire; Pavamana is that produced by friction, or Nirmathya; and S'uchi is solar, Saura, fire. Pavamana was the parent of Kavyavahana, the fire of the Pitris; S'uchi of Havyavahana, the fire of the gods; and Pavamana of Saharaksha, the fire of the Asuras. The Bhagavata explains these different fires to be so many appellations of fire employed in the invocations with which different oblations to fire are offered in the ritual of the Vedas: ### explained by the commentator, ###.

^84:10 According to the commentator, this distinction is derived from the Vedas. The first class, or Agnishwattas, consists of those householders who, when alive, did not maintain their domestic fires, nor offer burnt-sacrifices: the second, of those who kept up the household flame, and presented oblations with fire. Manu calls these Agnidagdhas and the reverse, which Sir W. Jones renders, 'consumable by fire,' &c. Kulluka Bhatta gives no explanation of them. The Bhagavata adds other classes of Pitris; or, the Ajyapas, drinkers of ghee;' and Somapas, drinkers of the acid juice.' The commentator, explaining the meaning of the terms Sagnayas and Anagnyas, has, ### which might be understood to signify, that the Pitris who are 'without fire' are those to whom oblations are not offered; and those 'with fire' are they to whom oblations are presented.

^84:11 The Vayu carries this genealogy forward. Dharani was married to Meru, and [p. 85] had by him Mandara and three daughters, Niyati, Ayati, and Vela: the two first were married to Dhatri and Vidhatri (<page 81>). Vela was the wife of Samudra, by whom she had Samudri, married to Prachinavarhish, and the mother of the ten Prachetasas, the fathers of Daksha, as subsequently narrated. Mena was married to Himavat, and was the mother of Mainaka, and of Ganga, and of Parvati or Uma.

^85:12 No notice is here taken of Sati, married to Bhava, as is intimated in c. 8 (<page 59>), when describing the Rudras. Of these genealogies the fullest and apparently the oldest account is given in the Vayu P.: as far as that of our text extends, the two nearly agree, allowing for differences of appellation originating in inaccurate transcription, the names frequently varying in different copies of the same work, leaving it doubtful which reading should be preferred. The Bhagavata, as observed above (<page 54>. n. ), has created some further perplexity by substituting, as the wives of the patriarchs, the daughters of Kardama for those of Daksha. Of the general statement it may be observed, that although in some respects allegorical, as in the names of the wives of the Rishis (<page 54>); and in others astronomical, as in the denominations of the daughters of Anginas (<page 82>); yet it seems probable that it is not altogether fabulous, but that the persons in some instances had a real existence, the genealogies originating in imperfectly preserved traditions of the families of the first teachers of the Hindu religion, and of the descent of individuals who took an active share in its propagation.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

CHAP. XI.

Legend of Dhruva, the son of Uttanapada: he is unkindly treated by his father's second wife: applies to his mother: her advice: he resolves to engage in religious exercises: sees the seven Rishis, who recommend him to propitiate Vishnu.

PARAS'ARA continued.--I mentioned to you, that the Manu Swayambhuva had two heroic and pious sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Of these two, the latter had a son whom he dearly loved, Uttama, by his favourite wife Suruchi. By his queen, named Suniti, to whom he was less attached, he also had a son, called Dhruva [*1]. Observing his brother Uttama on the lap of his father, as he was seated upon his throne, Dhruva was desirous of ascending to the same place; but as Suruchi was present, the Raja did not gratify the desire of his son, respectfully wishing to be taken on his father's knee. Beholding the child of her rival thus anxious to be placed on his father's lap, and her own son already seated there, Suruchi thus addressed the boy: "Why, child, do you vainly indulge in such presumptuous hopes? You are born from a different mother, and are no son of mine, that you should aspire inconsiderately to a station fit for the excellent Uttama alone. It is true you are the son of the Raja, but I have not given you birth. This regal throne, the seat of the king of kings, is suited to my son only; why should you aspire to its occupation? why idly cherish such lofty ambition, as if you were my son? do you forget that you are but the offspring of Suniti."

The boy, having heard the speech of his step-mother, quitted his father, and repaired in a passion to the apartment of his own mother; who, beholding him vexed, took him upon her lap, and, gently smiling, asked him what was the cause of his anger, who had displeased him, and if any one, forgetting the respect due to his father, had behaved ill to

[p. 87]

him. Dhruva, in reply, repeated to her all that the arrogant Suruchi had said to him in the presence of the king. Deeply distressed by the narrative of the boy, the humble Suniti, her eyes dimmed with tears, sighed, and said, "Suruchi has rightly spoken; thine, child, is an unhappy fate: those who are born to fortune are not liable to the insults of their rivals. Yet be not afflicted, my child, for who shall efface what thou hast formerly done, or shall assign to thee what thou hast left undone. The regal throne, the umbrella of royalty, horses and elephants, are his whose virtues have deserved them: remember this, my son, and be consoled. That the king favours Suruchi is the reward of her merits in a former existence. The name of wife alone belongs to such as I, who have not equal merit. Her son is the progeny of accumulated piety, and is born as Uttama: mine has been born as Dhruva, of inferior moral worth. Therefore, my son, it is not proper for you to grieve; a wise man will be contented with that degree which appertains to him: but if you continue to feel hurt at the words of Suruchi, endeavour to augment that religious merit which bestows all good; be amiable, be pious, be friendly, be assiduous in benevolence to all living creatures; for prosperity descends upon modest worth as water flows towards low ground."

Dhruva answered; "Mother, the words that you have addressed to me for my consolation find no place in a heart that contumely has broken. I will exert myself to obtain such elevated rank, that it shall be revered by the whole world. Though I be not born of Suruchi, the beloved of the king, you shall behold my glory, who am your son. Let Uttama my brother, her child, possess the throne given to him by my father; I wish for no other honours than such as my own actions shall acquire, such as even my father has not enjoyed."

Having thus spoken, Dhruva went forth from his mother's dwelling: he quitted the city, and entered an adjoining thicket, where he beheld seven Munis sitting upon hides of the black antelope, which they had taken from off their persons, and spread over the holy kusa grass. Saluting them reverentially, and bowing humbly before then, the prince said, "Behold in me, venerable men, the son of Uttanapada, born of

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] Suniti. Dissatisfied with the world, I appear before you." The Rishis replied; "The son of a king, and but four or five years of age, there can be no reason, child, why you should be dissatisfied with life; you cannot be in want of any thing whilst the king your father reigns; we cannot imagine that you suffer the pain of separation from the object of your affections; nor do we observe in your person any sign of disease. What is the cause of your discontent? Tell us, if it is known to yourself."

Dhruva then repeated to the Rishis what Suruchi had spoken to him; and when they had heard his story, they said to one another, "How surprising is the vehemence of the Kshetriya nature, that resentment is cherished even by a child, and he cannot efface from his mind the harsh speeches of a step-mother. Son of a Kshetriya, tell us, if it be agreeable to thee, what thou hast proposed, through dissatisfaction with the world, to accomplish. If thou wishest our aid in what thou hast to do, declare it freely, for we perceive that thou art desirous to speak."

Dhruva said; "Excellent sages, I wish not for riches, neither do I want dominion: I aspire to such a station as no one before me has attained. Tell me what I must do to effect this object; how I may reach an elevation superior to all other dignities." The Rishis severally thus replied.--Marichi said; "The best of stations is not within the reach of men who fail to propitiate Govinda. Do thou, prince, worship the undecaying (Achyuta)." Atri said; "He with whom the first of spirits, Janarddana, is pleased, obtains imperishable dignity. I declare unto you the truth." Angiras said; "If you desire an exalted station, worship that Govinda in whom, immutable and undecaying, all that is, exists." Pulastya said; "He who adores the divine Hari, the supreme soul, supreme glory, who is the supreme Brahma, obtains what is difficult of attainment, eternal liberation." "When that Janarddana," observed Kratu, "who in sacrifices is the soul of sacrifice, and who in abstract contemplation is supreme spirit, is pleased, there is nothing man may not acquire." Pulaha said; "Indra, having worshipped" the lord of the world, obtained the dignity of king of the celestials. Do thou adore, pious youth, that Vishnu, the lord of sacrifice." "Any thing, child, that the mind covets," exclaimed Vas'ishtha, "may be obtained by propitiating

[p. 89]

[paragraph continues] Vishnu, even though it he the station that is the most excellent in the three worlds."

Dhruva replied to them; "You have told me, humbly bending before you, what deity is to be propitiated: now inform me what prayer is to he meditated by me, that will offer him gratification. May the great Rishis, looking upon me with favour, instruct me how I am to propitiate the god." The Rishis answered; "Prince, thou deservest to hear how the adoration of Vishnu has been performed by those who have been devoted to his service. The mind must first be made to forsake all external impressions, and a man must then fix it steadily on that being in whom the world is. By him whose thoughts are thus concentrated on one only object, and wholly filled by it; whose spirit is firmly under control; the prayer that we shall repeat to thee is to be inaudibly recited: 'Om! glory to Vasudeva, whose essence is divine wisdom; whose form is inscrutable, or is manifest as Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva [*2].' This prayer, which was formerly uttered by your grandsire, the Manu Swayambhuva, and propitiated by which, Vishnu conferred upon him the prosperity he desired, and which was unequalled in the three worlds, is to be recited by thee. Do thou constantly repeat this prayer, for the gratification of Govinda."

Footnotes

^86:1 The Matsya, Brahma, and Vayu Puranas speak of but one wife of Uttanapada, and call her Sunrita: they say also that she had four sons, Apaspati (or Vasu), Ayushmanta, Kirttimat, and Dhruva. The Bhagavata, Padma, and Naradiya have the same account as that of the text.

^89:2 The instructions of the Rishis amount to the performance of the Yoga. External impressions are first to be obviated by particular positions, modes of breathing, &c.: the mind must then be fixed on the object of meditation; this is Dharana: next comes the meditation, or Dhyana; and then the Japa, or inaudible repetition of a Mantra, or short prayer; as in the text. The subject of the Yoga is more fully detailed in a subsequent book.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 90]

  

CHAP. XII.

Dhruva commences a course of religious austerities. Unsuccessful attempts of Indra and his ministers to distract Dhruva's attention: they appeal to Vishnu, who allays their fears, and appears to Dhruva. Dhruva praises Vishnu, and is raised to the skies as the pole-star.

THE prince, having received these instructions, respectfully saluted the sages, and departed from the forest, fully confiding in the accomplishment of his purposes. He repaired to the holy place, on the banks of the Yamuna, called Madhu or Madhuvana, the grove of Madhu, after the demon of that name, who formerly abided there. S'atrughna (the younger brother of Rama) having slain the Rakshas Lavana, the son of Madhu, founded a city on the spot, which was named Mathura. At this holy shrine, the purifier from all sin, which enjoyed the presence of the sanctifying god of gods, Dhruva performed penance, as enjoined by Marichi and the sages: he contemplated Vishnu, the sovereign of all the gods, seated in himself. Whilst his mind was wholly absorbed in meditation, the mighty Hari, identical with all beings and with all natures, (took possession of his heart.) Vishnu being thus present in his mind, the earth, the supporter of elemental life, could not sustain the weight of the ascetic. As he stood upon his left foot, one hemisphere bent beneath him; and when he stood upon his right, the other half of the earth sank down. When he touched the earth with his toes, it shook with all its mountains, and the rivers and the  were troubled, and the gods partook of the universal agitation.

The celestials called Yamas, being excessively alarmed, then took counsel with Indra how they should interrupt the devout exercises of Dhruva; and the divine beings termed Kushmandas, in company with their king, commenced anxious efforts to distract his meditations. One, assuming the semblance of his mother Suniti, stood weeping before him, and calling in tender accents, "My son, my son, desist from destroying thy strength by this fearful penance. I have gained thee, my son, after

[p. 91]

much anxious hope: thou canst not have the cruelty to quit me, helpless, alone, and unprotected, on account of the unkindness of my rival. Thou art my only refuge; I have no hope but thou. What hast thou, a child but five years old, to do with rigorous penance? Desist from such fearful practices, that yield no beneficial fruit. First comes the season of youthful pastime; and when that is over, it is the time for study: then succeeds the period of worldly enjoyment; and lastly, that of austere devotion. This is thy season of pastime, my child. Hast thou engaged in these practices to put an end to thine existence? Thy chief duty is love for me: duties are according to time of life. Lose not thyself in bewildering error: desist from such unrighteous actions. If not, if thou wilt not desist from these austerities, I will terminate my life before thee."

But Dhruva, being wholly intent on seeing Vishnu, beheld not his mother weeping in his presence, and calling upon him; and the illusion, crying out, "Fly, fly, my child, the hideous spirits of ill are crowding into this dreadful forest with uplifted weapons," quickly disappeared. Then advanced frightful Rakshasas, wielding terrible arms, and with countenances emitting fiery flame; and nocturnal fiends thronged around the prince, uttering fearful noises, and whirling and tossing their threatening weapons. Hundreds of jackals, from whose mouths gushed flame [*1] as they devoured their prey, were howling aloud, to appal the boy, wholly engrossed by meditation. The goblins called out, "Kill him, kill him; cut him to pieces; eat him, eat him;" and monsters, with the faces of lions and camels and crocodiles, roared and yelled with horrible cries, to terrify the prince. But all these uncouth spectres, appalling cries, and threatening weapons, made no impression upon his senses, whose mind was completely intent on Govinda. The son of the monarch of the earth, engrossed by one only idea, beheld uninterruptedly Vishnu seated in his soul, and saw no other object.

All their delusive stratagems being thus foiled, the gods were more perplexed than ever. Alarmed at their discomfiture, and afflicted by

[p. 92]

the devotions of the boy, they assembled and repaired for succour to Hari, the origin of the world, who is without beginning or end; and thus addressed him: "God of gods, sovereign of the world, god supreme, and infinite spirit, distressed by the austerities of Dhruva, we have come to thee for protection. As the moon increases in his orb day by day, so this youth advances incessantly towards superhuman power by his devotions. Terrified by the ascetic practices of the son of Uttanapada, we have come to thee for succour. Do thou allay the fervour of his meditations. We know not to what station he aspires: to the throne of Indra, the regency of the solar or lunar sphere, or to the sovereignty of riches or of the deep. Have compassion on us, lord; remove this affliction from Our breasts; divert the son of Uttanapada from persevering in his penance." Vishnu replied to the gods; "The lad desireth neither the rank of Indra, nor the solar orb, nor the sovereignty of wealth or of the ocean: all that he solicits, I will grant. Return therefore, deities, to your mansions as ye list, and be no more alarmed: I will put an end to the penance of the boy, whose mind is immersed in deep contemplation."

The gods, being thus pacified by the supreme, saluted him respectfully and retired, and, preceded by Indra, returned to their habitations: but Hari, who is all things, assuming a shape with four arms, proceeded to Dhruva, being pleased with his identity of nature, and thus addressed him: "Son of Uttanapada, be prosperous. Contented with thy devotions, I, the giver of boons, am present. Demand what boon thou desirest. In that thou hast wholly disregarded external objects, and fixed thy thoughts on me, I am well pleased with thee. Ask, therefore, a suitable reward." The boy, hearing these words of the god of gods, opened his eyes, and beholding that Hari whom he had before seen in his meditations actually in his presence, bearing in his hands the shell, the discus, the mace, the bow, and scimetar, and crowned with a diadem, the bowed his head down to earth; the hair stood erect on his brow, and his heart was depressed with awe. He reflected how best he should offer thanks to the god of gods; what he could say in his adoration; what words were capable of expressing his praise: and being overwhelmed with perplexity, he had recourse for consolation to the deity. "If," he

[p. 93]

exclaimed, "the lord is contented with my devotions, let this be my reward, that I may know how to praise him as I wish. How can I, a child, pronounce his praises, whose abode is unknown to Brahma and to others learned in the Vedas? My heart is overflowing with devotion to thee: oh lord, grant me the faculty worthily to lay mine adorations at thy feet."

Whilst lowly bowing, with his hands uplifted to his forehead, Govinda, the lord of the world, touched the son of Uttanapada with the tip of his conch-shell, and immediately the royal youth, with a countenance sparkling with delight, praised respectfully the imperishable protector of living beings. "I venerate," exclaimed Dhruva, "him whose forms are earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect, the first element (Ahankara), primeval nature, and the pure, subtile, all-pervading soul, that surpasses nature. Salutation to that spirit that is void of qualities; that is supreme over all the elements and all the objects of sense, over intellect, over nature and spirit. I have taken refuge with that pure form of thine, oh supreme, which is one with Brahma, which is spirit, which transcends all the world. Salutation to that form which, pervading and supporting all, is designated Brahma, unchangeable, and contemplated by religious sages. Thou art the male with a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet, who traversest the universe, and passest ten inches beyond its contact [*2]. Whatever has been, or is to be, that, Purushottama, thou art. From thee sprang Virat, Swarat, Samrat, and Adhipurusha [*3]. The lower, and upper, and middle parts of the earth are not independent of thee: from thee is all this universe, all that has been, and that shall be: and all this world is in thee, assuming this universal form [*4]. From thee is sacrifice

[p. 94]

derived, and all oblations, and curds, and ghee, and animals of either class (domestic or wild). From thee the Rig-Veda, the Sama, the metres of the Vedas, and the Yajur-Veda are born. Horses, and cows having teeth in one jaw only [*5], proceed from thee; and from thee come goats, sheep, deer. Brahmans sprang from thy mouth; warriors from thy arms; Vaisyas from thy thighs; and S'udras from thy feet. From thine eyes come the sun; from thine ears, the wind; and from thy mind, the moon: the vital airs from thy central vein; and fire from thy mouth: the sky from thy navel; and heaven from thy head: the regions from thine ears; the earth from thy feet. All this world was derived from thee. As the wide-spreading Nyagrodha (Indian fig) tree is compressed in a small seed [*6], so, at the time of dissolution, the whole universe is comprehended in thee as its germ. As the Nyagrodha germinates from the seed, and becomes first a shoot, and then rises into loftiness, so the created world proceeds from thee, and expands into magnitude. As the bark and leaves of the Plantain tree are to be seen in its stem, so thou art the stem of the universe, and all things are visible in thee. The faculties of the intellect, that are the cause of pleasure and of pain, abide in thee as one with all existence; but the sources of pleasure and of pain, singly or blended, do not exist in thee, who art exempt from all qualities [*7]. Salutation to thee, the subtile rudiment, which, being single, becomes

[p. 95]

manifold, Salutation to thee, soul of existent things, identical with the great elements. Thou, imperishable, art beheld in spiritual knowledge as perceptible objects, as nature, as spirit, as the world, as Brahma, as Manu, by internal contemplation. But thou art in all, the element of all; thou art all, assuming every form; all is from thee, and thou art from thyself. I salute thee, universal soul: glory be to thee. Thou art one with all things: oh lord of all, thou art present in all things. What can I say unto thee? thou knowest all that is in the heart, oh soul of all, sovereign lord of all creatures, origin of all things. Thou, who art all beings, knowest the desires of all creatures. The desire that I cherished has been gratified, lord, by thee: my devotions have been crowned with success, in that I have seen thee."

Vishnu said to Dhruva; "The object of thy devotions has in truth been attained, in that thou hast seen me; for the sight of me, young prince, is never unproductive. Ask therefore of me what boon thou desirest; for men in whose sight I appear obtain all their wishes." To this, Dhruva answered; "Lord god of all creatures, who abidest in the hearts of all, how should the wish that I cherish be unknown to thee? I will confess unto thee the hope that my presumptuous heart has entertained; a hope that it would be difficult to gratify, but that nothing is difficult when thou, creator of the world, art pleased. Through thy favour, Indra reigns over the three worlds. The sister-queen of my mother has said to me, loudly and arrogantly, 'The royal throne is not for one who is not born of me;' and I now solicit of the support of the universe an exalted station, superior to all others, and one that shall endure for ever." Vishnu said to him; "The station that thou askest thou shalt obtain; for I was satisfied with thee of old in a prior existence. Thou wast formerly a Brahman, whose thoughts were ever devoted to me, ever dutiful to thy parents, and observant of thy duties. In course of time a prince became thy friend, who was in the period of youth, indulged in all sensual pleasures, .and was of handsome appearance and elegant form. Beholding, in consequence of associating with him, his affluence, you formed the desire that you might be subsequently born as the son of a king; and, according to your wish, you obtained a

[p. 96]

princely birth in the illustrious mansion of Uttanapada. But that which would have been thought a great boon by others, birth in the race of Swayambhuva, you have not so considered, and therefore have propitiated me. The man who worships me obtains speedy liberation from life. What is heaven to one whose mind is fixed on me? A station shall be assigned to thee, Dhruva, above the three worlds [*8]; one in which thou shalt sustain the stars and the planets; a station above those of the sun, the moon, Mars, the son of Soma (Mercury), Venus, the son of Surya (Saturn), and all the other constellations; above the regions of the seven Rishis, and the divinities who traverse the atmosphere [*9]. Some celestial beings endure for four ages; some for the reign of a Manu: to thee shall be granted the duration of a Kalpa. Thy mother Suniti, in the orb of a bright star, shall abide near thee for a similar term; and all those who, with minds attentive, shall glorify thee at dawn or at eventide, shall acquire exceeding religious merit.

Thus the sage Dhruva, having received a boon from Janarddana, the god of gods, and lord of the world, resides in an exalted station. Beholding his glory, Us'anas, the preceptor of the gods and demons, repeated these verses: "Wonderful is the efficacy of this penance, marvellous is its reward, that the seven Rishis should be preceded by Dhruva. This too is the pious Suniti, his parent, who is called Sunrita [*10]." Who can

[p. 97]

celebrate her greatness, who, having given birth to Dhruva, has become the asylum of the three worlds, enjoying to all future time an elevated station, a station eminent above all? He who shall worthily describe the ascent into the sky of Dhruva, for ever shall be freed from all sin, and enjoy the heaven of Indra. Whatever be his dignity, whether upon earth or in heaven, he shall never fall from it, but shall long enjoy life, possessed of every blessing [*11].

Footnotes

^91:1 A marginal note by a Bengali Pundit asserts it to be a fact, then when a jackal carries a piece of meat in his mouth, it shews in the dark as if it was on fire.

^93:2 The commentator understands this passage to imply merely that the supreme pervades both substance and space, being infinitely vast, and without limit. 'Having a thousand heads,' &c. denotes only infinite extension: and the 'ten inches beyond the contact of the universe' expresses merely non-restriction by its boundaries.

^93:3 Explained severally the Brahmanda, or material universe; Brahma, the creator; Manu, the ruler of the period; and supreme or presiding spirit.

^93:4 So the inscription upon the temple of Sais: Egu eimi pan to gegonos, kai on, kai esomenon. So the Orphic verse, cited by Eusebius, beginning 

	En de demas basileion en ui tade panta kukleitai, k.t.l.

'One regal body in which all things are [p. 94] comprehended (viz. Virat), fire, and water, and earth, and air, and night, and day, and Intelligence (viz. Mahat) the first generator, and divine love; for all these does Jupiter include in his expansive form.' It proceeds also, precisely in the Pauranic strain, to describe the members of this universal form: the heaven is his head, the stars his hair, the sun and moon his eyes, &c.

^94:5 A piece of natural history quite correct as applied to the front teeth, which in the genus ox occur in the lower jaw only.

^94:6 This is also conformable to the doctrine, that the rudiments of plants exist in their cotyledons.

^94:7 In life, or living beings, perception depends not, according to Hindu metaphysics, upon the external senses, but the impressions made upon them are communicated to the mental organ or sense, and by the mind to the understanding--Samvid in the text--by which they are distinguished as pleasurable, painful, or mixed. But pleasure depends upon the quality of goodness, pain on that of darkness, and their mixture on that of foulness, inherent in the understanding; properties belonging to Jives'wara, or god, as one with life, or to embodied spirit, but not as Parames'wara, or supreme spirit.

^96:8 The station or sphere is that of the north pole, or of the polar star. In the former case, the star is considered to be Suniti, the mother of Dhruva. The legend, although as it is related in our text it differs in its circumstances from the story told by Ovid of Callisto and her son Areas, whom Jove

	Imposuit caelo vicinaque sidera fecit,

suggests some suspicion of an original identity. In neither of the authorities have we, perhaps, the primitive fable. It is evident from the quotation that presently follows in the text, of a stanza by Nanas, that the Purana has not the oldest version of the legend; and Ovid's representation of it is after a fashion of his own: all that has been retained of the original is the conformity of the characters and of the main incident, the translation of a mother and her son to the heavens as constellations, in which the pole-star is the most conspicuous luminary.

^96:9 The Vaimanika devas, the deities who travel in Vimanas, 'heavenly cars,' or rather 'moving spheres.'

^96:10 The text says merely ###; the commentator says, 'perhaps formerly so called;' ###. We have already remarked that some Puranas so denominate her.

^97:11 The legend of Dhruva is narrated in the Bhagavata, Padma (Swerga Khanda), Agni, and Naradiya, much to the same purport, and partly in the same words, as our text. The Brahma and its double the Hari Vans'a, the Matsya, and Vayu merely allude to Dhruva's having been transferred by Brahma to the skies, in reward of his austerities. The story of his religious penance, and adoration of Vishnu, seems to be an embellishment interpolated by the Vaishnava Puranas, Dhruva being adopted as a saint by their sect. The allusion to Sunrita in our text concurs with the form of the story as it appears elsewhere, to indicate the priority of the more simple legend.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

CHAP. XIII.

Posterity of Dhruva. Legend of Vena: his impiety: he is put to death by the Rishis. Anarchy ensues. The production of Nishada and Prithu: the latter the first king. The origin of Suta and Magadha: they enumerate the duties of kings. Prithu compels Earth to acknowledge his authority: he levels it: introduces cultivation: erects cities. Earth called after him Prithivi: typified as a cow.

PARAS'ARA.--The sons of Dhruva, by his wife S'ambhu, were Bhavya and Slishti. , the wife of the latter, was the mother of five virtuous sons, Ripu, Ripunjaya, Vipra, Vrikala, and Vrikatejas. The son of Ripu, by Vrihati, was the illustrious Chakshusha, who begot the Manu Chakshusha on Pushkarini, of the family of Varuna, the daughter of the venerable patriarch Anaranya. The Manu had, by his wife Navala, the daughter of the patriarch Vairaja, ten noble sons, Uru, Pura, Satadyumna, Tapaswi, Satyavak, Kavi, Agnishtoma, Atiratra, Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu. The wife of Uru, Agneyi, bore six excellent sons, Anga, Sumanas, Swati, Kratu, Angiras, and S'iva. Anga had, by his wife Sunitha, only one son, named Vena, whose right arm was rubbed by the Rishis, for the purpose of producing from it progeny. From the arm of Vena, thus rubbed, sprang a celebrated monarch, named Prithu, by whom, in olden time, the earth was milked for the advantage of mankind [*1].

[p. 99]

MAITREYA.--Best of Munis, tell me why was the right hand of Vena rubbed by the holy sages, in consequence of which the heroic Prithu was produced.

PARAS'ARA.--Sunitha was originally the daughter of Mrityu, by whom she was given to Anga to wife. She bore him Vena, who inherited the evil propensities of his maternal grandfather. When he was inaugurated by the Rishis monarch of the earth, he caused. it to be every where proclaimed, that no worship should be performed, no oblations offered, no gifts bestowed upon the Brahmans. "I, the king," said he, "am the lord of sacrifice; for who but I am entitled to the oblations." The Rishis, respectfully approaching the sovereign, addressed him in melodious accents, and said, "Gracious prince, we salute you; hear what we have to represent. For the preservation of your kingdom and your life, and for the benefit of all your subjects, permit us to worship Hari, the lord of all sacrifice, the god of gods, with solemn and protracted rites [*2]; a portion of the fruit of which will revert to you [*3]. Vishnu, the god of oblations, being propitiated with sacrifice by us, will grant you, oh king, all your desires. Those princes have all their wishes gratified, in whose realms Hari, the lord of sacrifice, is adored with sacrificial rites." "Who," exclaimed Vena, "is superior to me? who besides me is entitled to worship? who is this Hari, whom you style the lord of sacrifice? Brahma, Janarddana. S'ambhu, Indra, Vayu, Ravi (the sun), Hutabhuk

[p. 100]

[paragraph continues] (fire), Varuna, Dhata, Pusha, (the sun), Bhumi (earth), the lord of night (the moon); all these, and whatever other gods there be who listen to our vows; all these are present in the person of a king: the essence of a sovereign is all that is divine. Conscious of this, I have issued my commands, and look that you obey them. You are not to sacrifice, not to offer oblations, not to give alms. As the first duty of women is obedience to their lords, so observance of my orders is incumbent, holy men, on you." "Give command, great king," replied the Rishis, "that piety may suffer no decrease. All this world is but a transmutation of oblations; and if devotion be suppressed, the world is at an end." But Vena was entreated in vain; and although this request was repeated by the sages, he refused to give the order they suggested. Then those pious Munis were filled with wrath, and cried out to each other, "Let this wicked wretch be slain. The impious man who has reviled the god of sacrifice who is without beginning or end, is not fit to reign over the earth." And they fell upon the king, and beat him with blades of holy grass, consecrated by prayer, and slew him, who had first been destroyed by his impiety towards god.

Afterwards the Munis beheld a great dust arise, and they said to the people who were nigh, "What is this?" and the people answered and said, "Now that the kingdom is without a king, the dishonest men have begun to seize the property of their neighbours. The great dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is raised by troops of clustering robbers, hastening to fall upon their prey." The sages, hearing this, consulted, and together rubbed the thigh of the king, who had left no offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh, thus rubbed, came forth a being of the complexion of a charred stake, with flattened features (like a negro), and of dwarfish stature. "What am I to do?" cried he eagerly to the Munis. "Sit down" (Nishida), said they; and thence his name was Nishada. His descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhya mountain, great Muni, are still called Nishadas, and are characterized by the exterior tokens of depravity [*4]. By this means the wickedness of Versa was expelled; those

[p. 101]

[paragraph continues] Nishadas being born of his sins, and carrying them away. The Brahmans then proceeded to rub the right arm of the king, from which friction was engendered the illustrious son of Vena, named Prithu, resplendent in person, as if the blazing deity of Fire bad been manifested.

There then fell from the sky the primitive bow (of Mahadeva) named Ajagava, and celestial arrows, and panoply from heaven. At the birth of Prithu all living creatures rejoiced; and Vena, delivered by his being born from the hell named Put, ascended to the realms above. The seas and rivers, bringing jewels from their depths, and water to perform the ablutions of his installation, appeared. The great parent of all, Brahma, with the gods and the descendants of Angiras (the fires), and with all things animate or inanimate, assembled and performed the ceremony of consecrating the son of Vena. Beholding in his right hand the (mark of the) discus of Vishnu, Brahma recognised a portion of that divinity in Prithu, and was much pleased; for the mark of Vishnu's discus is visible in the hand of one who is born to be a universal emperor [*5], one whose power is invincible even by the gods.

The mighty Prithu, the son of Veda, being thus invested with universal dominion by those who were skilled in the rite, soon removed the grievances of the people whom his father had oppressed, and from winning

[p. 102]

their affections he derived the title of Raja, or king [*6]. The waters became solid, when he traversed the ocean: the mountains opened him a path: his banner passed unbroken (through the forests): the earth needed not cultivation; and at a thought food was prepared: all kine were like the cow of plenty: honey was stored in every flower. At the sacrifice of the birth of Prithu, which was performed by Brahma, the intelligent Suta (herald or bard) was produced, in the juice of the moon-plant, on the very birth-day [*7]: at that great sacrifice also was produced the accomplished Magadha: and the holy sages said to these two persons, "Praise ye the king Prithu, the illustrious son of Vena; for this is your especial function, and here is a fit subject for your praise." But they respectfully replied to the Brahmans, "We know not the acts of the new-born king of the earth; his merits are not understood by us; his fame is not spread abroad: inform us upon what subject we may dilate in his praise." "Praise the king," said the Rishis, "for the acts this heroic monarch will perform; praise him for the virtues he will display."

The king, hearing these words, was much pleased, and reflected that persons acquire commendation by virtuous actions, and that consequently his virtuous conduct would be the theme of the eulogium which the bards were about to pronounce: whatever merits, then, they should panegyrize in their encomium, he determined that he would endeavour to acquire; and if they should point out what faults ought to be avoided, he would try to shun them. He therefore listened attentively, as the sweet-voiced encomiasts celebrated the future virtues of Prithu, the enlightened son of Vena.

"The king is a speaker of truth, bounteous, an observer of his promises; he is wise, benevolent, patient, valiant, and a terror to the wicked; he knows his duties; he acknowledges services; he is compassionate and

[p. 103]

kind-spoken; he respects the venerable; he performs sacrifices; he reverences the Brahmans; he cherishes the good; and in administering justice is indifferent to friend or foe."

The virtues thus celebrated by the Suta and the Magadha were cherished in the remembrance of the Raja, and practised by him when occasion arose. Protecting this earth, the monarch performed many great sacrificial ceremonies, accompanied by liberal donations. His subjects soon approached him, suffering from the famine by which they were afflicted, as all the edible plants had perished during the season of anarchy. In reply to his question of the cause of their coming, they told him, that in the interval in which the earth was without a king all vegetable products had been withheld, and that consequently the people had perished. "Thou," said they, "art the bestower of subsistence to us; thou art appointed, by the creator, the protector of the people: grant us vegetables, the support of the lives of thy subjects, who are perishing with hunger."

On hearing this, Prithu took up his divine bow Ajagava, and his celestial arrows, and in great wrath marched forth to assail the Earth. Earth, assuming the figure of a cow, fled hastily from him, and traversed, through fear of the king, the regions of Brahma and the heavenly spheres; but wherever went the supporter of living things, there she beheld Vainya with uplifted weapons: at last, trembling with terror, and anxious to escape his arrows, the Earth addressed Prithu, the hero of resistless prowess. "Know you not, king of men," said the Earth, "the sin of killing a female, that you thus perseveringly seek to slay me." The prince replied; "When the happiness of many is secured by. the destruction of one malignant being, the death of that being is an act of virtue." "But," said the Earth, "if, in order to promote the welfare of your subjects, you put an end to me, whence, best of monarchs, will thy people derive their support." "Disobedient to my rule," rejoined Prithu, "if I destroy thee, I will support my people by the efficacy of my own devotions." Then the Earth, overcome with apprehension, and trembling in every limb, respectfully saluted the king, and thus spake: "All undertakings are successful, if suitable means of effecting them are employed.

[p. 104]

[paragraph continues] I will impart to you means of success, which you can make use of if you please. All vegetable products are old, and destroyed by me; but at your command I will restore them, as developed from my milk. Do you therefore, for the benefit of mankind, most virtuous of princes, give me that calf, by which I may be able to secrete milk. Make also all places level, so that I may cause my milk, the seed of all vegetation, to flow every where around."

Prithu accordingly uprooted the mountains, by hundreds and thousands, for myriads of leagues, and they were thenceforth piled upon one another. Before his time there were no defined boundaries of villages or towns, upon the irregular surface of the earth; there was no cultivation, no pasture, no agriculture, no highway for merchants: all these things (or all civilization) originated in the reign of Prithu. Where the ground was made level, the king induced his subjects to take up their abode. Before his time, also, the fruits and roots which constituted the food of the people were procured with great difficulty, all vegetables having been destroyed; and he therefore, having made Swayambhuva Manu the calf [*8], milked the Earth, and received the milk into his own hand, for the benefit of mankind. Thence proceeded all kinds of corn and vegetables upon which people subsist now and perpetually. By granting life to the Earth, Prithu was as her father, and she thence derived the patronymic appellation Prithivi (the daughter of Prithu). Then the gods, the sages, the demons, the Rakshasas, the Gandharbhas, Yakshas, Pitris, serpents, mountains, and trees, took a milking vessel suited to their kind, and milked the earth of appropriate milk, and the milker and the calf were both peculiar to their own species [*9].

[p. 105]

This Earth, the mother, the nurse, the receptacle, and nourisher of all existent things, was produced from the sole of the foot of Vishnu. And thus was born the mighty Prithu, the heroic son of Vena, who was the lord of the earth, and who, from conciliating the affections of the people, was the first ruler to whom the title of Raja was ascribed. Whoever shall recite this story of the birth of Prithu, the son of Vena, shall never suffer any retribution for the evil he may have committed: and such is the virtue of the tale of Prithu's birth, that those who hear it repeated shall be relieved from affliction [*10].

Footnotes

^98:1 The descent of Puru from Dhruva is similarly traced in the Matsya Purana, but with some variety of nomenclature: thus the wife of Dhruva is named Dhanya; and the eldest son of the Manu, Taru. The Vayu introduces another generation, making the eldest son of Slishti, or as there termed Pushti, father of Udaradhi; and the latter the father of Ripu, the father of Chakshusha, the father of the Manu. The Bhagavata has an almost entirely different set of names, having converted the family of Dhruva into personifications of divisions of time and of day and night. The account there given is, Dhruva had, by his wife Bhrami (revolving), the daughter of S'is'umara (the sphere), Kalpa and Vatsara. The latter married Suvithi, and had six sons, Pushparna, Tigmaketu, Isha, Urjja, Vasu, Jaya. The first married Prabha and Dosha, and had by the former, Pratah (dawn), Madhyadina (noon), and Saya (evening); and by the latter, Pradosha, Nis'itha, and Vyushta, or the beginning, middle, and end of night. The last has, by Pushkarini, Chakshush, married [p. 99] to Akuti, and the father of Chakshusha Manu. He has twelve sons, Puru, Kritsna, Rita, Dyumna, Satyavat, Dhrita, Vrata, Agnishtoma, Atiratra, Pradyumna, Sivi, and Ulmuka. The last is the father of six sons, named as in our text, except the last, who is called Gaya. The eldest, Anga, is the father of Vena, the father of Prithu. These additions are evidently the creatures of the author's imagination. The Brahma Purana and Hari Vans'a have the same genealogy as the Vishnu, reading, as do the Matsya and Vayu, Pushkarini or Virani, the daughter of Virana, instead of Varuna. They, as well as copies of the text, present several other varieties of nomenclature. The Padma P. (Bhumi Khanda) says Anga was of the family of Atri, in allusion perhaps to the circumstance mentioned in the Brahma P. of Uttanapada's adoption by that Rishi.

^99:2 With the Dirghasatra, 'long sacrifice;' a ceremony lasting a thousand years.

^99:3 That is, the land will be fertile in proportion as the gods are propitiated, and the king will benefit accordingly, as a sixth part of the merit and of the produce will be his. So the commentator explains the word 'portion.'

^100:4 The Matsya says there were born outcast or barbarous races, Mlechchas, as black as collyrium. The Bhagavata describes an individual of dwarfish [p. 101] stature, with short arms and legs, of a complexion as black as a crow, with projecting chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and tawny hair; whose descendants were mountaineers and foresters: The Padma (Bhu. Kh.) has a similar description, adding to the dwarfish stature and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, and a protuberant belly. It also particularizes his posterity as Nishadas, Kiratas, Bhillas, Bahanakas, Bhramaras, Pulindas, and other barbarians, or Mlechchas, living in woods and on mountains. These passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the uncouth appearance of the Goands, Koles, Bhils, and other uncivilized tribes, scattered along the forests and mountains of central India, from Behar to Kandesh, and who are not improbably the predecessors of the present occupants of the cultivated portions of the country. They are always very black, ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have countenances of a very African character.

^101:5 A Chakra-vertti, or, according to the text, one in whom the Chakra, the discus of Vishnu, abides (varttate); such a figure being delineated by the lines of the hand. The grammatical etymology is, 'he who abides in, or rules over, an extensive territory called a Chakra.'

^102:6 From raga, 'passion' or 'affection;' but the more obvious etymology is raj, to shine' or 'be splendid.'

^102:7 The birth of Prithu is to be considered as the sacrifice, of which Brahma, the creator, was the performer; but in other places, as in the Padma, it is considered that an actual sacrificial rite was celebrated, at which the first encomiasts were produced. The Bhagavata does not account for their appearance.

^104:8 'Having willed or determined the Manu Swayambhuva to be the calf:' ###. So the Padma P.: ###. The Bhagavata has, 'Having made the Manu the calf.' By the calf,' or Manu in that character, is typified, the commentator observes, the promoter of the multiplication of progeny: ###.

^104:9 The Matsya, Brahma, Bhagavata, and Padma enter into a greater detail of this milking, specifying typically the calf, the milker, the milk, and the vessel. Thus, according to the Matsya, the Rishis milked the earth through Vrihaspati; their calf [p. 105] was Soma; the Vedas were the vessel; and the milk was devotion. When the gods milked the earth, the milker was Mitra (the sun); Indra was the calf; superhuman power was the produce. The gods had a gold, the Pitris a silver vessel: and for the latter, the milker was Antaka (death); Yama was the calf; the milk was Swadha, or oblation. The Naga, or snake-gods, had a gourd for their pail; their calf was Takshaka; Dhritarashtra (the serpent) was their milker; and their milk was poison. For the Asuras, Maya was the milk; Virochana, the son of Prahlada, was the calf; the milker was Dwimurddha; and the vessel was of iron. The Yakshas made Vaisravana their calf; their vessel was of unbaked earth; the milk was the power of disappearing. The Rakshasas and others employed Raupyanabha as the milker; their calf was Sumali; and their milk was blood. Chitraratha was the calf, Vasuruchi the milker, of the Gandharbas and nymphs, who milked fragrant odours into a cup of lotus leaves. On behalf of the mountains, Meru was the milker; Himavat the calf; the pail was of crystal; and the milk was of herbs and gems. The trees extracted sap in a vessel of the Palas'a, the Sal being the milker, and the Plaksha the calf. The descriptions that occur in the Bhagavata, Padma, and Brahma Puranas are occasionally slightly varied, but they are for the most part in the same words as that of the Matsya. These mystifications are all probably subsequent modifications of the original simple allegory, which typified the earth as a cow, who yielded to every class of beings the milk they desired, or the object of their wishes.

^105:10 Another reading is, 'It counteracts evil dreams.' The legend of Prithu is briefly given in the Mahabharata, Raja Dherma, and occurs in most of the Puranas, but in greatest detail in our text, in the Bhagavata, and especially in the Padma, Bhumi Khanda, s. 29, 30. All the versions, however, are essentially the same.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106]

  

CHAP. XIV.

Descendants of Prithu. Legend of the Prachetasas: they are desired by their father to multiply mankind, by worshipping Vishnu: they plunge into the sea, and meditate on and praise him: he appears, and grants their wishes.

PRITHU had two valiant sons, Antarddhi and Pali [*1]. The son of Antarddhana, by his wife Sikhandini, was Havirdhana, to whom Dhishana, a princess of the race of Agni, bore six sons, Prachinaverhis, S'ukra, Gaya, Krishna, Vraja, and Ajina [*2]. The first of these was a mighty prince and patriarch, by whom mankind was multiplied after the death of Havirdhana. He was called Prachinaverhis from his placing upon the earth the sacred grass, pointing to the east [*3]. At the termination of a

[p. 107]

rigid penance the married Savarna, the daughter of the ocean, who had been previously betrothed to him, and who had by the king ten sons, who were all styled Prachetasas, and were skilled in military science: they all observed the same duties, practised religious austerities, and remained immersed in the bed of the sea for ten thousand years.

MAITREYA.--You can inform me, great sage, why the magnanimous Prachetasas engaged in penance in the waters of the sea.

PARAS'ARA.--The sons of Prachinaverhis were originally informed by their father, who had been appointed as a patriarch, and whose mind was intent on multiplying mankind, that the had been respectfully enjoined by Brahma, the god of gods, to labour to this end, and that he had promised obedience: "now therefore," continued he, "do you, my sons, to oblige me, diligently promote the increase of the people, for the orders of the father of all creatures are entitled to respect." The sons of the king, having heard their father's words, replied, "So be it;" but they then inquired of him, as he could best explain it, by what means they might accomplish the augmentation of mankind. He said to them; "Whoever worships Vishnu, the bestower of good, attains undoubtedly the object of his desires: there is no other mode. What further can I tell you? Adore therefore Govinda, who is Hari, the lord of all beings, in order to effect the increase of the human race, if you wish to succeed.

[p. 108]

[paragraph continues] The eternal Purushottama is to be propitiated by him who wishes for virtue, wealth, enjoyment, or liberation. Adore him, the imperishable, by whom, when propitiated, the world was first created, and mankind will assuredly be multiplied."

Thus instructed by their father, the ten Prachetasas plunged into the depths of the ocean, and with minds wholly devoted to Narayana, the sovereign of the universe, who is beyond all worlds, were engrossed by religious austerity for ten thousand years: remaining there, they with fixed thoughts praised Hari, who, when propitiated, confers on those who praise him all that they desire.

MAITREYA.--The excellent praises that the Prachetasas addressed to Vishnu, whilst they stood in the deep, you, oh best of Munis, are qualified to repeat to me.

PARAS'ARA.--Hear, Maitreya, the hymn which the Prachetasas, as they stood in the waters of the sea, sang of old to Govinda, their nature being identified with him:--

"We bow to him whose glory is the perpetual theme of every speech; him first, him last; the supreme lord of the boundless world; who is primeval light; who is without his like; indivisible and infinite; the origin of all existent things, movable or stationary. To that supreme being who is one with time, whose first forms, though he be without form, are day and evening and night, be adoration. Glory to him, the life of all living things, who is the same with the moon, the receptacle of ambrosia, drunk daily by the gods and progenitors: to him who is one with the sun, the cause of heat and cold and rain, who dissipates the gloom, and illuminates the sky with his radiance: to him who is one with earth, all-pervading, and the asylum of smell and other objects of sense, supporting the whole world by its solidity. We adore that form of the deity Hari which is water, the womb of the world, the seed of all living beings. Glory to the mouth of the gods, the eater of the Havya; to the eater of the Kavya, the mouth of the progenitors; to Vishnu, who is identical with fire; to him who is one with air, the origin of ether, existing as the five vital airs in the body, causing constant vital action; to him who is identical with the atmosphere, pure, illimitable, shapeless,

[p. 109]

separating all creatures. Glory to Krishna, who is Brahma in the form of sensible objects, who is ever the direction of the faculties of sense. We offer salutation to that supreme Hari who is one with the senses, both subtle and substantial, the recipient of all impressions, the root of all knowledge: to the universal soul, who, as internal intellect, delivers the impressions received by the senses to soul: to him who has the properties of Prakriti; in whom, without end, rest all things; from whom all things proceed; and who is that into which all things resolve. We worship that Purushottoma, the god who is pure spirit, and who, without qualities, is ignorantly considered as endowed with qualities. We adore that supreme Brahma, the ultimate condition of Vishnu, unproductive, unborn, pure, void of qualities, and free from accidents; who is neither high nor low, neither bulky nor minute, has neither shape, nor colour, nor shadow, nor substance, nor affection, nor body; who is neither etherial nor susceptible of contact, smell, or taste; who has neither eyes, nor ears, nor motion, nor speech, nor breath, nor mind, nor name, nor race, nor enjoyment, nor splendour; who is without cause, without fear, without error, without fault, undecaying, immortal, free from passion, without sound, imperceptible, inactive, independent of place or time, detached from all investing properties; but (illusively) exercising irresistible might, and identified with all beings, dependent upon none. Glory to that nature of Vishnu which tongue can not tell, nor has eye beheld."

Thus glorifying Vishnu, and intent in meditation on him, the Prachetasas passed ten thousand years of austerity in the vast ocean; on which Hari, being pleased with them, appeared to them amidst the waters, of the complexion of the full-blown lotus leaf. Beholding him mounted on the king of birds, Garuda, the Prachetasas bowed down their heads in devout homage; when Vishnu said to them, "Receive the boon you have desired; for I, the giver of good, am content with you, and am present." The Prachetasas replied to him with reverence, and told him that the cause of their devotions was the command of their father to effect the multiplication of mankind. The god, having accordingly granted to them the object of their prayers, disappeared, and they came up from the water.

Footnotes

^106:1 The text of the Vayu and Brahma (or Hari Vans'a) read, like that of the Vishnu, ###. Mons. Langlois understands the two last words as a compound epithet; "Se jouirent dupouvoir de se rendre invisibles." The construction would admit of such a sense, but it seems more probable that they are intended for names. The lineage of Prithu is immediately continued through one of them, Antarddhana, which is the same as Antarddhi; as the commentator states with regard to that appellation, ###, and as the commentator on the Hari Vans'a remarks of the succeeding name, 'one of the brothers being called Antarddhana or Antarddhi,' leaves no other sense for Palin but that of a proper name. The Bhagavata gives Prithu five sons, Vijitaswa, Haryyaksha, Dhumrakesa, Vrika, and Dravina, and adds that the elder was also named Antarddhana, in consequence of having obtained from Indra the power of making himself invisible.

^106:2 The Bhagavata, as usual, modifies this genealogy; Antarddhana has by Sikhandini three sons, who were the three fires, Pavaka, Pavamana, and Suchi, condemned by a curse of Vas'ishtha to be born again: by another wife, Nabhaswati, he has Havirddhana, whose sons are the same as those of the text, only giving another name, Varhishad as well as Prachinaverhis, to the first. According to the Mahabharata (Moksha Dharma), which has been followed by the Padma P., Prachinavarhis was born in the family of Atri.

^106:3 The text is, ###. Kus'a or varhis is properly 'sacrificial grass' (Poa); and Prachinagra, literally, 'having its tips towards the east;' the direction in which it should be placed upon the ground, as a seat for the gods on occasion of offerings made to them. The name therefore intimates, either that the practice originated with him, or, as the commentator explains it, that he was exceedingly devout, offering sacrifices or invoking [p. 107] the gods every where. The Hari Vans'a adds a verse to that of our text, reading, ###, which Mons. Langlois has rendered, 'Quand il marchoit sur la terre les pointes de cousa etoient courbees vers l'Orient;' which he supposes to mean, 'Que ce prince avait tourne ses pensees et porte sa domination vers l'Orient:' a supposition that might have been obviated by a little further consideration of the verse of Manu to which he refers. "If he have sitten on culms of grass with their points towards the east," &c. The commentary explains the passage as above, referring ### to ### not to ### as, ###. 'He was called Prachinavarhis, because his sacred grass, pointing east, was going upon the very earth, or was spread over the whole earth.' The text of the Bhagavata also explains clearly what is meant: 'By whose sacred grass, pointing to the east, as he performed sacrifice after sacrifice, the whole earth, his sacrificial ground, was overspread.'

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

  

CHAP. XV.

The world overrun with trees: they are destroyed by the Prachetasas. Soma pacifies them, and gives them Marisha to wife: her story: the daughter of the nymph Pramlocha. Legend of Kandu. Marisha's former history. Daksha the son of the Prachetasas: his different characters: his sons: his daughters: their marriages and progeny: allusion to Prahlada, his descendant.

WHILST the Prachetasas were thus absorbed in their devotions, the trees spread and overshadowed the unprotected earth, and the people perished: the winds could not blow; the sky was shut out by the forests; and mankind was unable to labour for ten thousand years. When the sages, coming forth from the deep, beheld this, they were angry, and, being incensed, wind and flame issued from their mouths. The strong wind tore up the trees by their roots, and left them sear and dry, and the fierce fire consumed them, and the forests were cleared away. When Soma (the moon), the sovereign of the vegetable world, beheld all except a few of the trees destroyed, he went to the patriarchs, the Prachetasas, and said, "Restrain your indignation, princes, and listen to me. I will form an alliance between you and the trees. Prescient of futurity, I have nourished with my rays this precious maiden, the daughter of the woods. She is called Marisha, and is assuredly the offspring of the trees. She shall be your bride, and the multiplier of the race of Dhruva. From a portion of your lustre and a portion of mine, oh mighty sages, the patriarch Daksha shall be born of her, who, endowed with a part of me, and composed of your vigour, shall be as resplendent as fire, and shall multiply the human race.

"There was formerly (said Soma) a sage named Kandu, eminent in holy wisdom, who practised pious austerities on the lovely borders of the Gomati river. The king of the gods sent the nymph Pramlocha to disturb his penance, and the sweet-smiling damsel diverted the sage from his devotions. They lived together, in the valley of Mandara, for a hundred and fifty years; during which, the mind of the Muni was wholly given up to enjoyment. At the expiration of this period the

[p. 111]

nymph requested his permission to return to heaven; but the Muni, still fondly attached to her, prevailed upon her to remain for some time longer; and the graceful damsel continued to reside for another hundred years, and delight the great sage by her fascinations. Then again she preferred her suit to be allowed to return to the abodes of the gods; and again the Muni desired her to remain. At the expiration of more than a century the nymph once more said to him, with a smiling countenance, 'Brahman, I depart;' but the Muni, detaining the fine-eyed damsel, replied, 'Nay, stay yet a little; you will go hence for a long period.' Afraid of incurring an imprecation, the graceful nymph continued with the sage for nearly two hundred years more, repeatedly asking his permission to go to the region of the king of the gods, but as often desired by him to remain. Dreading to be cursed by him, and excelling in amiable manners, well knowing also the pain that is inflicted by separation from an object of affection, she did not quit the Muni, whose mind, wholly subdued by love, became every day more strongly attached to her.

"On one occasion the sage was going forth from their cottage in a great hurry. The nymph asked him where he was going. 'The day,' he replied, 'is drawing fast to a close: I must perform the Sandhya worship, or a duty will be neglected.' The nymph smiled mirthfully as she rejoined, 'Why do you talk, grave sir, of this day drawing to a close: your day is a day of many years, a day that must be a marvel to all: explain what this means.' The Muni said, 'Fair damsel, you came to the river-side at dawn; I beheld you then, and you then entered my hermitage. It is now the revolution of evening, and the day is gone. What is the meaning of this laughter? Tell me the truth.' Pramlocha. answered, 'You say rightly,' venerable Brahman, 'that I came hither at morning dawn, but several hundred years have passed since the time of my arrival. This is the truth.' The Muni, on hearing this, was seized with astonishment, and asked her how long he had enjoyed her society: to which the nymph replied, that they had lived together nine hundred and seven years, six months, and three days. The Muni asked her if she spoke the truth, or if she was in jest; for it appeared to him that

[p. 112]

they had spent but one day together: to which Pramlocha replied, that she should not dare at any time to tell him who lived in the path of piety an untruth, but particularly when she had been enjoined by him to inform him what had passed.

"When the Muni, princes, had heard these words, and knew that it was the truth, he began to reproach himself bitterly, exclaiming, 'Fie, fie upon me; my penance has been interrupted; the treasure of the learned and the pious has been stolen from me; my judgment has been blinded: this woman has been created by some one to beguile me: Brahma is beyond the reach of those agitated by the waves of infirmity [*1]. I had subdued my passions, and was about to attain divine knowledge. This was foreseen by him by whom this girl has been sent hither. Fie on the passion that has obstructed my devotions. All the austerities that would have led to acquisition of the wisdom of the Vedas have been rendered of no avail by passion that is the road to hell.' The pious sage, having thus reviled himself, turned to the nymph, who was sitting nigh, and said to her, 'Go, deceitful girl, whither thou wilt: thou hast performed the office assigned thee by the monarch of the gods, of disturbing my penance by thy fascinations. I will not reduce thee to ashes by the fire of my wrath. Seven paces together is sufficient for the friendship of the virtuous, but thou and I have dwelt together. And in truth what fault hast thou committed? why should I be wroth with thee? The sin is wholly mine, in that I could not subdue my passions: yet fie upon thee, who, to gain favour with Indra, hast disturbed my devotions; vile bundle of delusion.'

"Thus spoken to by the Muni, Pramlocha stood trembling, whilst big drops of perspiration started from every pore; till he angrily cried to her, 'Depart, begone.' She then, reproached by him, went forth from his dwelling, and, passing through the air, wiped the perspiration from her person with the leaves of the trees. The nymph went from tree to tree, and as with the dusky shoots that crowned their summits she dried her limbs, which were covered with moisture, the child she had conceived by

[p. 113]

the Rishi came forth from the pores of her skin in drops of perspiration. The trees received the living dews, and the winds collected them into one mass. "This," said Soma, "I matured by my rays, and gradually it increased in size, till the exhalation that had rested on the tree tops became the lovely girl named Marisha. The trees will give her to you, Prachetasas: let your indignation be appeased. She is the progeny of Kandu, the child of Pramlocha, the nursling of the trees, the daughter of the wind and of the moon. The holy Kandu, after the interruption of his pious exercises, went, excellent princes, to the region of Vishnu, termed Purushottama, where, Maitreya [*2], with his whole mind he devoted himself to the adoration of Hari; standing fixed, with uplifted arms, and repeating the prayers that comprehend the essence of divine truth [*3]."

The Prachetasas said, "We are desirous to hear the transcendental

[p. 114]

prayers, by inaudibly reciting which the pious Kandu propitiated Kes'ava." On which Soma repeated as follows: "'Vishnu is beyond the boundary of all things: he is the infinite: he is beyond that which is boundless: he is above all that is above: he exists as finite truth: he is the object of the Veda; the limit of elemental being; unappreciable by the senses; possessed of illimitable might: he is the cause of cause; the cause of the cause of cause; the cause of finite cause; and in effects, he, both as every object and agent, preserves the universe: he is Brahma the lord; Brahma all beings; Brahma the progenitor of all beings; the imperishable: he is the eternal, undecaying, unborn Brahma, incapable of increase or diminution: Purushottama is the everlasting, untreated, immutable Brahma. May the imperfections of my nature be annihilated through his favour.' Reciting this eulogium, the essence of divine truth, and propitiating Kes'ava, Kandu obtained final emancipation.

"Who Marisha was of old I will also relate to you, as the recital of her meritorious acts will be beneficial to you. She was the widow of a prince, and left childless at her husband's death: she therefore zealously worshipped Vishnu, who, being gratified by her adoration, appeared to her, and desired her to demand a boon; on which she revealed to him the wishes of her heart. 'I have been a widow, lord,' she exclaimed, 'even from my infancy, and my birth has been in vain: unfortunate have I been, and of little use, oh sovereign of the world. Now therefore I pray thee that in succeeding births I may have honourable husbands, and a son equal to a patriarch amongst men: may I be possessed of affluence and beauty: may I he pleasing in the sight of all: and may I be born out of the ordinary course. Grant these prayers, oh thou who art propitious to the devout.' Hrishikes'a, the god of gods, the supreme giver of all blessings, thus prayed to, raised her from her prostrate attitude, and said, 'In another life you shall have ten husbands of mighty prowess, and renowned for glorious acts; and you shall have a son magnanimous and valiant, distinguished by the rank of a patriarch, from whom the various races of men shall multiply, and by whose posterity the universe shall be filled. You, virtuous lady, shall be of marvellous birth, and you shall be endowed with grace and loveliness, delighting the

[p. 115]

hearts of men.' Thus having spoken, the deity disappeared, and the princess was accordingly afterwards born as Marisha, who is given to you for a wife [*4]."

Soma having concluded, the Prachetasas took Marisha, as he had enjoined them, righteously to wife, relinquishing their indignation against the trees: and upon her they begot the eminent patriarch Daksha, who had (in a former life) been born as the son of Brahma [*5]. This great sage, for the furtherance of creation, and the increase of mankind, created progeny. Obeying the command of Brahma, he made movable and immovable things, bipeds and quadrupeds; and subsequently, by his will, gave birth to females, ten of whom he bestowed on Dharma, thirteen on Kas'yapa, and twenty-seven, who regulate the course of time, on the moon [*6]. Of these, the gods, the Titans, the snake-gods, cattle, and birds, the singers and dancers of the courts of heaven, the spirits of evil, and other beings, were born. From that period forwards living creatures

[p. 116]

were engendered by sexual intercourse: before the time of Daksha they were variously propagated, by the will, by sight, by touch, and by the influence of religious austerities practised by devout sages and holy saints.

MAITREYA.--Daksha, as I have formerly heard, was born from the right thumb of Brahma: tell me, great Muni, how he was regenerate as the son of the Prachetasas. Considerable perplexity also arises in my mind, how he, who, as the son of Marisha, was the grandson of Soma, could be also his father-in-law.

PARAS'ARA.--Birth and death are constant in all creatures: Rishis and sages, possessing divine vision, are not perplexed by this. Daksha and the other eminent Munis are present in every age, and in the interval of destruction cease to be [*7]: of this the wise man entertains no doubt. Amongst them of old there was neither senior nor junior; rigorous penance and acquired power were the sole causes of any difference of degree amongst these more than human beings.

[p. 117]

MAITREYA.--Narrate to me, venerable Brahman, at length, the birth of the gods, Titans, Gandharbas, serpents, and goblins.

PARAS'ARA.--In what manner Daksha created living creatures, as commanded by Brahma, you shall hear. In the first place he willed into existence the deities, the Rishis, the quiristers of heaven, the Titans, and the snake-gods. Finding that his will-born progeny did not multiply themselves, he determined, in order to secure their increase, to establish sexual intercourse as the means of multiplication. For this purpose he espoused Asikni, the daughter of the patriarch Virana [*8], a damsel addicted to devout practices, the eminent supportress of the world. By her the great father of mankind begot five thousand mighty sons, through whom he expected the world should be peopled. Narada, the divine Rishi, observing them desirous to multiply posterity, approached them, and addressed them in a friendly tone: "Illustrious Haryaswas, it is evident that your intention is to beget posterity; but first consider this: why should you, who, like fools, know not the middle, the height, and depth of the world [*9], propagate offspring? When your intellect is no more obstructed by interval, height, or depth, then how, fools, shall ye not all behold the term of the universe?" Having heard the words of Narada, the sons of Daksha dispersed themselves through the regions, and to the present day have not returned; as rivers that lose themselves in the ocean come back no more.

The Haryaswas having disappeared, the patriarch Daksha begot by the daughter of Virana a thousand other sons. They, who were named Savalaswas, were desirous of engendering posterity, but were dissuaded by Narada in a similar manner. They said to one another, "What the Muni has observed is perfectly just. We must follow the path that our

[p. 118]

brothers have travelled, and when we have ascertained the extent of the universe, we will multiply our race." Accordingly they scattered themselves through the regions, and, like rivers flowing into the sea, they returned not again. Henceforth brother seeking for brother disappears, through ignorance of the products of the first principle of things. Daksha the patriarch, on finding that all these his sons had vanished, was incensed, and denounced an imprecation upon Narada [*10].

[p. 119]

Then, Maitreya, the wise patriarch, it is handed down to us, being anxious to people the world, created sixty daughters of the daughter of Virana [*11]; ten of whom he gave to Dharma, thirteen to Kas'yapa, and twenty-seven to Soma, four to Arishtanemi, two to Bahuputra, two to Angiras, and two to Kris'as'wa. I will tell you their names. Arundhati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Marutwati, Sankalpa, Muhurtta, Sadhya, and Vis'wa were the ten wives of Dharma [*12], and bore him the following

[p. 120]

progeny. The sons of Vis'wa were the Vis'wadevas [*13]; and the Sadhyas [*14], those of Sadhya. The Maruts, or winds, were the children of Marutwati; the Vasus, of Vasu. The Bhanus (or suns) of Bhanu; and the deities presiding over moments, of Muhurtta. Ghosha was the son of Lamba (an arc of the heavens); Nagavithi (the milky way), the daughter of Yami (night). The divisions of the earth were born of Arundhati; and Sankalpa (pious purpose), the soul of all, was the son of Sankalpa. The deities called Vasus, because, preceded by fire, they abound in splendour and might [*15], are severally named Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhava (fire), Anila (wind), Anala (fire), Pratyusha (day-break), and Prabhasa (light). The four sons of Apa were Vaitandya, S'rama (weariness), Sranta (fatigue), and Dhur (burthen). Kala (time), the cherisher of the world, was the son of Dhruva. The son of Soma was Varchas (light), who was the father of Varchaswi (radiance). Dhava had, by his wife Manohara (loveliness), Dravina, Hutahavyavaha, S'is'ira, Prana, and Ramana. The two sons of Anila (wind), by his wife S'iva, were Manojava (swift as thought) and Avijnatagati (untraceable motion). The son of Agni (fire), Kumara, was born in a clump of S'ara reeds: his sons were Sakha, Visakha, Naigameya, and Prishthaja. The offspring of the Krittikas was named Kartikeya. The son of Pratyusha was the Rishi named Devala, who had two philosophic and intelligent sons [*16]. The sister of Vachaspati, lovely and virtuous, Yogasiddha, who pervades the wholes world without

[p. 121]

being devoted to it, was the wife of Prabhasa, the eighth of the Vasus, and bore to him the patriarch Viswakarma, the author of a thousand arts, the mechanist of the gods, the fabricator of all ornaments, the chief of artists, the constructor of the self-moving chariots of the deities, and by whose skill men obtain subsistence. Ajaikapad, Ahirvradhna, and the wise Rudra Twashtri, were born; and the self-born son of Twashtri was also the celebrated Vis'warupa. There are eleven well-known Rudras, lords of the three worlds, or Hara, Bahurupa, Tryambaka, Aparajita, Vrishakapi, Sambhu, Kaparddi, Raivata, Mrigavyadha, Sarva, and Kapali [*17]; but there are a hundred appellations of the immeasurably mighty Rudras [*18].

[p. 122]

The daughters of Daksha who were married to Kas'yapa were Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arishta, Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavas'a, Ida, Khasa, Kadru, and Muni [*19]; whose progeny I will describe to you. There were twelve celebrated deities in a former Manwantara, called Tushitas [*20], who, upon the approach of the present period, or in the reign of the last Manu, Chakshusha, assembled, and said to one another, "Come, let us quickly enter into the womb of Aditi, that we may be born in the next Manwantara, for thereby we shall again enjoy the rank of gods:" and accordingly they were born the sons of Kas'yapa, the son of Marichi, by Aditi, the daughter of Daksha; thence named the twelve Adityas; whose appellations were respectively, Vishnu, S'akra, Aryaman, Dhuti, Twashtri, Pushan, Vivaswat, Savitri, Mitra, Varuna, Ans'a, and Bhaga [*21]. These, who in the Chakshusha Manwantara were the gods called Tushitas, were called the twelve Adityas in the Manwantara of Vaivas'wata.

The twenty-seven daughters of the patriarch who became the virtuous wives of the moon were all known as the nymphs of the lunar constellations,

[p. 123]

which were called by their names, and had children who were brilliant through their great splendour [*22]. The wives of Arishtanemi bore him sixteen children [*23]. The daughters of Bahuputra were the four lightnings [*24]. The excellent Pratyangirasa Richas were the children of Angiras [*25], descended from the holy sage: and the deified weapons of the gods [*26] were the progeny of Kris'as'wa.

These classes of thirty-three divinities [*27] are born again at the end of a thousand ages, according to their own pleasure; and their appearance and disappearance is here spoken of as birth and death: but, Maitreya, these divine personages exist age after age in the same manner as the sun sets and rises again.

It has been related to us, that Diti had two sons by Kas'yapa, named Hiranyakas'ipu and the invincible Hiranyaksha: she had also a daughter,

[p. 124]

[paragraph continues] Sinka, the wife of Viprachitti. Hiranyakas'ipu was the father of four mighty sons, Anuhlada, Hlada, the wise Prahlada, and the heroic Sanhlada, the augmentor of the Daitya race [*28]. Amongst these, the illustrious Prahlada, looking on all things with indifference, devoted his whole faith to Janarddana. The flames that were lighted by the king of the Daityas consumed not him, in whose heart Vasudeva was cherished; and all the earth trembled when, bound with bonds, he moved amidst the waters of the ocean. His firm body, fortified by a mind engrossed by Achyuta, was unwounded by the weapons hurled on him by order of the Daitya monarch; and the serpents sent to destroy him breathed their venomous flames upon him in vain. Overwhelmed with rocks, he yet remained unhurt; for he never forgot Vishnu, and the recollection of the deity was his armour of proof. Hurled from on high by the king of the Daityas, residing in Swerga, earth received him unharmed. The wind sent into his body to wither him up was itself annihilated by him, in whom Madhusudana was present. The fierce elephants of the spheres broke their tusks, and vailed their pride, against the firm breast which the lord of the Daityas had ordered them to assault. The ministrant priests of the monarch were baffled in all their rites for the destruction of one so steadily attached to Govinda: and the thousand delusions of the fraudulent Samvara, counteracted by the discus of Krishna, were practised without success. The deadly poison administered by his father's officers he partook of unhesitatingly, and without its working any visible change; for he looked upon the world with mind undisturbed, and, full of benignity, regarded all things with equal affection, and as identical with himself. He was righteous; an inexhaustible mine of purity and truth; and an unfailing model for all pious men.

Footnotes

^112:1 Or, 'immersed in the six Urmis'; explained hunger, thirst, sorrow, stupefaction, decay, and death.

^113:2 There is some confusion here in regard to the person addressed, but the context shews that the insertion of Maitreya's name is an inadvertence, and that the passage is a continuation of Soma's speech to the Prachetasas.

^113:3 The phrase is 'made up of the farther boundary of Brahma;' implying either 'comprehending the supreme, or Brahma, and transcendental wisdom, Para;' or, consisting of the farthest limits (Para) or truths of the Vedas or Brahma;' that is, being the essence of the Vedanta philosophy. The hymn that follows is in fact a mantra or mystical prayer, commencing with the reiteration of the word Para and Para; as, ###. Para means 'supreme, infinite; and Para, 'the farther bank or limit,' the point that is to be attained by crossing a river or sea, or figuratively the world or existence. Vishnu, then, is Para, that which nothing surpasses; and Para, the end or object of existence: he is Apara para, the farthest bound of that which is illimitable, or space and time: he is Param parebhyah, above or beyond the highest, being beyond or superior to all the elements: he is Paramartha rupi, or identical with final truth, or knowledge of soul: he is Brahma para, the object or essence of spiritual wisdom. Paraparabhuta is said to imply the farther limit (Para) of rudimental matter (Para). He is Para, or chief Paranam, of those objects which are beyond the senses: and he is Parapara, or the boundary of boundaries; that is, he is the comprehensive in-vesture of, and exterior to, those limits by which soul is confined; he is free from all incumbrance or impediment. The passage may be interpreted in different ways, according to the ingenuity with which the riddle is read.

^115:4 This part of the legend is peculiar to our text, and the whole story of Marisha's birth is nowhere else so fully detailed. The penance of the Prachetasas, and its consequences, are related in the Agni, Bhagavata, Matsya, Padma, Vayu, and Brahma Puranas, and allusion is briefly made to Marisha's birth. Her origin from Kandu and Pramlocha is narrated in a different place in the Brahma Purana, where the austerities of Kandu, and the necessity for their interruption, are described. The story, from that authority, was translated by the late Professor Chezy, and is published in the first number of the Journal Asiatique.

^115:5 The second birth of Daksha, and his share in the peopling of the earth, is narrated in most of the Puranas in a similar manner. It is perhaps the original legend, for Daksha seems to be an irregular adjunct to the Prajapatis, or mind-born sons of Brahma (see <page 49>. n. ); and the allegorical nature of his posterity in that character (<page 54>) intimates a more recent origin. Nor does that series of descendants apparently occur in the Mahabharata, although the existence of two Dakshas is especially remarked there (Moksha Dh.). In the Adi Parva, which seems to be the freest from subsequent improvements, the Daksha noticed is the son of the Prachetasas. The incompatibility of the two accounts is reconciled by referring the two Dakshas to different Manwantaras. The Daksha who proceeded from Brahma as a Prajapati being born in the first, or Swayambhuva, and the son of the Prachetasas in the Chakshusha Manwantara. The latter however, as descended from Uttanapada, should belong to the first period also. It is evident that great confusion has been made by the Puranas in Daksha's history.

^115:6 That is, they are the Nakshatras, or lunar asterisms.

^116:7 'They are removed', which the commentator explains by 'are absorbed, as if they were fast asleep;' but in every age or Yuga, according to the text--in every Manwantara, according to the comment--the Rishis reappear, the circumstances of their origin only being varied. Daksha therefore, as remarked in the preceding note, is the son of Brahma in one period, the son of the Prachetasas in another. So Soma, in the Swayambhuva Manwantara, was born as the son of Atri; in the Chakshusha, he was produced by churning the ocean. The words of our text occur in the Hari Vans'a, with an unimportant variation: 'Birth and obstruction are constant in all beings, but Rishis and those men who are wise are not perplexed by this;' that is, not, as rendered above, by the alternation of life and death; but, according to the commentator on the Hari Vans'a, by a very different matter, the prohibition of unlawful marriages. Utpatti, 'birth of progeny,' is the result of their will; Nirodha, 'obstruction,' is the law prohibiting the intermarriage of persons connected by the offering of the funeral cake; to which Rishis and sages are not subject, either from their matrimonial unions being merely platonic, or from the bad example set by Brahma, who, according to the Vedas, approached his own daughter; we have already had occasion to advert to (<page 51>. n. ). The explanation of the text, however, given by the commentator appears forced, and less natural than the interpretation preferred above.

^117:8 This is the usual account of Daksha's marriage, and is that of the Mahabharata, Adi P. (p. 113), and of the Brahma Purana, which the Hari Vans'a, in the first part, repeats. In another portion, the Pushkara Mahatmya, however, Daksha, it is said, converts half himself into a female, by whom he begets the daughters presently to be noticed: ###. This seems to be merely a new edition of an old story.

^117:9 The commentator explains it to mean the origin, duration, and termination of subtile rudimental body; but the Padma and Linga P. distinctly express it, 'the extent of the earth.'

^118:10 Narada's interference, and the fruitless generation of the first progeny of Daksha, is an old legend. The Mahabharata (Adi P. p. 113) notices only one set of sons, who, it is said, obtained Moksha, or liberation, through Nareda's teaching them the Sankhya philosophy. The Brahma, Matsya, Vayu, Linga, Padma, Agni, and Bhagavata Puranas tell the story much as in the text, and not unfrequently in the same words. In general they merely refer to the imprecation denounced upon Narada, as above. The Bhagavata specifies the imprecation to be perpetual peripateticism. Daksha says to him, 'There shall not be a resting-place for thee in all these regions.' The Kurma repeats the imprecation merely to the effect that Narada shall perish, and gives no legend. In the Brahma Vaivartta, Narada is cursed by Brahma, on a similar occasion, to become the chief of the Gandharbas, whence his musical propensities: but the Bhagavata, VI. 7, has the reverse of this legend, and makes him first a Gandharba, then a S'udra, then the son of Brahma. The Brahma P., and after it the Hari Vans'a and the Vayu P., have a different and not very intelligible story. Daksha, being about to pronounce an imprecation upon Narada, was appeased by Brahma and the Rishis, and it was agreed between them that Narada should be again born, as the son of Kas'yapa, by one of Daksha's daughters. This seems to be the gist of the legend, but it is very confusedly told. The version of the Brahma P., which is the same as that of Hari Vans'a, may be thus rendered: "The smooth-speaking Narada addressed the sons of Daksha for their destruction and his own; for the Muni Kas'yapa begot him as a son, who was the son of Brahma, on the daughter of Daksha, through fear of the latter's imprecation. He was formerly the son of Parameshthi (Brahma), and the excellent sage Kas'yapa next begot him, as if he were his father, on Asikni, the daughter of Virana. Whilst he was engaged in beguiling the sons of the patriarch, Daksha, of resistless power, determined on his destruction; but he was solicited by Brahma, in the presence of the great sages, and it was agreed between them that Narada, the son of Brahma, should be born of a daughter of Daksha. Consequently Daksha gave his daughter to Parameshthi, and by her was Narada born." Now several difficulties occur here. Asikni is the wife, not the daughter, of Daksha; but this may be a blunder of the compiler, for in the parallel passage of the Vayu no name occurs. In the next place, who is this daughter? for, as we shall see, the progeny of all Daksha's daughters are fully detailed, and in no [p. 119] authority consulted is Narada mentioned as the son of either of them, or as the son of Kas'yapa. Daksha, too, gives his daughter, not to Kas'yapa, but to Parameshthi, or Brahma. The commentator on the Hari Vans'a solves this by saying he gives her to Brahma for Kas'yapa. The same bargain is noticed in the Vayu, but Narada is also said there to be adopted by Kas'yapa. Again, however, it gives Daksha's imprecation in the same words as the Hari Vans'a; a passage, by the way, omitted in the Brahma: 'Narada, perish (in your present form), and take up your abode in the womb.' Whatever may be the original of this legend, it is evidently imperfectly given by the authorities here cited. The French translation of the passage in the Hari Vans'a can scarcely be admitted as correct: assuredly is not 'le Devarchi Dakcha, epoux d''Asikni, fille de Virana, fut l'aieul de cet illustri mouni ainsi regenere.' ### is more consistently said by the commentator to mean Kas'yapa. The Vayu P. in another part, a description of the different orders of Rishis, states that the Devarshis Parvata and Nareda were sons of Kas'yapa: In the account of Karttavirya, in the Brahma P. and Hari Vans'a, Narada is introduced as a Gandharba, the son of Varidasa; being the same, according to the commentator on the latter, as the Gandharba elsewhere called Upavarhana.

^119:11 The prior specification (p. 115) was fifty. The Mahabharata, Adi P. 113, and, again, Moksha Dharma, has the same number. The Bhagavata, Kurma, Padma, Linga, and Vayu P. state sixty. The former is perhaps the original, as the fullest and most consistent details relate to them and their posterity.

^119:12 This is the usual list of Dharma's wives. The Bhagavata substitutes Kakud for Arundhati. The Padma P., Matsya P., and Hari Vans'a contain two different account of Daksha's descendants: the first agrees with our text; the second, which is supposed to occur in the Padma Kalpa, is somewhat varied, particularly as to the wives of Dharma, who are said to be five. The nomenclature varies, or,

             Padma P.   

          Hari Vans'a.   

          Matsya.   

     
      Lakshmi

       Lakshmi

       Lakshmi

     
      Saraswati

       Kirtti

       Saraswati

     
      Ganga

       Sadhya

       Sadhya

     
      Vis'wes'a

       Vis'wa

       Vis'wes'a

     
      Savitri

       Marutwati

       Urjjaswati.

     
   There is evident inaccuracy in all the copies, and the names may in some instances be erroneous. From the succeeding enumeration of their descendants, it appears that Kama was the son of Lakshmi; the [p. 120] Sadhyas, of Sadhya; the Vis'wadevas, of Vis'wa; the Maruts, of Marutwati; and the Vasus, of Devi, who may be either the Saraswati or Savitri of the previous enumeration.

^120:13 The Vis'wadevas are a class of gods to whom sacrifices should be offered daily. Manu, III. 121. They are named in some of the Puranas, as the Vayu and Matsya: the former specifying ten; the latter, twelve.

^120:14 The Sadhyas, according to the Vayu, are the personified rites and prayers of the Vedas, born of the metres, and partakers of the sacrifices. The same work names twelve, which are all names of sacrifices and formulae, as Dars'a, Paurnamasa, Vrihadas'wa, Rathantara, &c. The Matsya P., Padma P., and Hari V. have a different set of seventeen appellations, apparently of arbitrary selection, as Bhava, Prabhava, Is'a, Aruni, &c.

^120:15 Or, according to the Padma P., because they are always present in light, or luminous irradiation.

^120:16 The Vayu supplies their names, Kshamavartta (patient) and Manaswin (wise).

^121:17 The passage is, ### Whose sons they are does not appear; the object being, according to the comment, to specify only the eleven divisions or modifications of the youngest Rudra, Twashta.' We have, however, an unusual variety of reading here in two copies of the comment: 'The eleven Rudras, in whom the family of Twashtri (a synonyme, it may be observed, sometimes of Viswakarma) is included, were born. The enumeration of the Rudras ends with Aparajita, of whom Tryambaka is the epithet.' Accordingly the three last names in all the other copies of the text are omitted in these two; their places being supplied by the three first, two of whom are always named in the lists of the Rudras. According to the Vayu and Brahma P. the Rudras are the children of Kas'yapa by Surabhi: the Bhagavata makes them the progeny of Bhuta and Sarupa: the Matsya, Padma, and Hari V., in the second series, the offspring of Surabhi by Brahma. The names in three of the Pauranic authorities run thus:

                Vayu.         

             Matsya.         

             Bhagavata.         

     
      Ajaikapad

       Ajaikapad

       Ajaikapad   

     
      Ahirvradhna

       Ahirvradhna

       Ahirvradhna

     
      Hara

       Hama

       Ugra

     
      Nirrita

       Nirritti

       Bhima

     
      Is'wara

       Pingala

       Vama

     
      Bhuvana

       Dahana

       Mahan

     
      Angaraka

       Aparajita

       Bahurupa

     
      Arddhaketu

       Mrigavyadha

       Vrishakapi

     
      Mrityu

       Senani

       Aja

     
      Sarpa

       Sajja

       Bhava

     
      Kapali

       Kapali

       Raivata.

     
   [paragraph continues] The Brahma or Hari V., the Padma, the Linga, &c. have other varieties; and the Lexicons have a different reading from all, as in that of Jatadhara they are Ajaikapad, Ahivradhna, Virupaksha, Sures'wara, Jayanta, Bahurupaka, Tryambaka, Aparajita, Vaivas'wata, S'avitra, and Hara. The variety seems to proceed from the writers applying to the Rudras, as they may legitimately do, different appellations of the common prototype, or synonymes of Rudra or S'iva, selected at will from his thousand and eight names, according to the Linga P.

^121:18 The posterity of Daksha's daughters [p. 122] by Dharma are clearly allegorical personifications chiefly of two classes, one consisting of astronomical phenomena, and the other of portions or subjects of the ritual of the Vedas.

^122:19 There is some, though not much, variation in these names in different Puranas. The Bhagavata has Sarama, Kashtha, and Timi, the parents severally of canine animals, beasts with uncloven hoofs, and fishes, in place of Vinata, Khasa, and Kadru; disposing of the first and last differently. The Vayu has Prava in place of Arishta, and Anayush or Danayush for Surasa. The Padma P., second series, substitutes Kala, Anayush, Sinhika, Pis'acha, Vach for Arishta, Surasa, Surabhi, Tamra, and Muni; and omits Ida and Khasa. In the Uttara Khanda of the same, Kas'yapa's wives are said to be but four, Aditi, Diti, Kadru, and Vinata.

^122:20 In the sixth reign, or that of Chakshusha Manu, according to the text; but in book III. ch. 1. the Tushitas are the gods of the second or Swarochisha Manwantara. The Vayu has a much more complete legend than any other Pura on this subject. In the beginning of the Kalpa twelve gods, named Jayas, were created by Brahma, as his deputies and assistants in the creation. They, lost in meditation, neglected his commands; on which he cursed them to be repeatedly born in each Manwantara till the seventh. They were accordingly, in the several successive Manwantaras, Ajitas, Tushitas, Satyas, Haris, Vaikunthas, Sadhyas, and Adityas. Our authority and some others, as the Brahma, have apparently intended to refer to this account, but have confused the order of the series.

^122:21 [p. 123] The Puranas that contain this genealogy agree tolerably well in these names. The Bhagavata adds many details regarding some of the Adityas and their descendants.

^123:22 The Nakshatra Yoginis, or chief stars of the lunar mansions, or asterisms in the moon's path.

^123:23 None of the authorities are more specific on the subject of Arishtanemis' progeny. In the Mahabharata this is said to be another name of Kas'yapa. The Bhagavata substitutes Tarksha for this personage, said by the commentator to be likewise another name of Kas'yapa. His wives are, Kadru, Vinata, Patangi, and Yamini, mothers of snakes, birds, grasshoppers, and locusts.

^123:24 Enumerated in astrological works as brown, red, yellow, and white; portending severally wind, heat, rain, famine.

^123:25 The Richas, or verses, thirty-five in number, addressed to presiding divinities, denominated Pratyangirasas. The Bhagavata calls the wives of Anginas, Swadha and Sati, and makes them the mothers of the Pitris and the Atharvan Veda severally.

^123:26 The S'astra devatas, 'gods of the divine weapons;' a hundred are enumerated in the Ramayana, and they are there termed the sons of Kris'as'wa by Jaya and Vijaya, daughters of the Prajapati; that is, of Daksha. The Bhagavata terms the two wives of Kris'as'wa, Archish (flame) and Dhishana; the former is the mother of Dhumaketu (comet); the latter, of four sages, Devala, Vedas'iras, Vayuna, and Manu. The allegorical origin of the weapons is undoubtedly the more ancient.

^123:27 This number is founded upon a text of the Vedas, which to the eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, and twelve Adityas, adds Prajapati, either Brahma or Daksha, and Vashatkara, 'deified oblation.' They have the epithet Chhandaja, as born in different Manwantaras, of their own will.

^124:28 The Puranas generally concur in this genealogy, reading sometimes Anuhrada, Hrada, &c. for Anuhlada and the rest. Although placed second in the order of Kas'yapa's descendants, the Daityas are in fact the elder branch. Thus the Mahabharata, Moksha Dherma, calls Diti the senior wife of Kas'yapa: and the Vayu terms Hiranyakas'ipu and Hiranyaksha the eldest of all the sons of that patriarch. "Titan and his enormous brood" were "heaven's first born."

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

  

CHAP. XVI.

Inquiries of Maitreya respecting the history of Prahlada.

MAITREYA.--Venerable Muni, you have described to me the races of human beings, and the eternal Vishnu, the cause of this world; but who was this mighty Prahlada, of whom you have last spoken; whom fire could not burn; who died not, when pierced by weapons; at whose presence in the waters earth trembled, shaken by his movements, even though in bonds; and who, overwhelmed with rocks, remained unhurt. I am desirous to hear an account of the unequalled might of that sage worshipper of Vishnu, to whose marvellous history you have alluded. Why was he assailed by the weapons of the sons of Diti? why was so righteous a person thrown into the sea? wherefore was he overwhelmed with rocks? why bitten by venomous snakes? why hurled from the mountain crest? why cast into the flames? why was he made a mark for the tusks of the elephants of the spheres? wherefore was the blast of death directed against him by the enemies of the gods? why did the priests of the Daityas practise ceremonies for his destruction? why were the thousand illusions of Samvara exercised upon him? and for what purpose was deadly poison administered to him by the servants of the king, but which was innocuous as food to his sagacious son? All this I am anxious to hear: the history of the magnanimous Prahlada; a legend of great marvels. Not that it is a wonder that he should have been uninjured by the Daityas; for who can injure the man that fixes his whole heart on Vishnu? but it is strange that such inveterate hatred should have been shewn, by his own kin, to one so virtuous, so unweariedly occupied in worshipping Vishnu. You can explain to me for what reason the sons of Diti offered violence to one so pious, so illustrious, so attached to Vishnu, so free from guile. Generous enemies wage no war with such as he was, full of sanctity and every excellence; how should his own father thus behave towards him? Tell me therefore, most illustrious Muni, the whole story in detail: I wish to hear the entire narrative of the sovereign of the Daitya race.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

CHAP. XVII.

Legend of Prahlada. Hiranyakas'ipu, the sovereign of the universe: the gods dispersed or in servitude to him: Prahlada, his son, remains devoted to Vishnu: questioned by his father, he praises Vishnu: Hiranyakas'ipu orders him to be put to death, but in vain: his repeated deliverance: he teaches his companions to adore Vishnu.?

PARAS'ARA.--Listen, Maitreya, to the story of the wise and magnanimous Prahlada, whose adventures are ever interesting and instructive. Hiranyakas'ipu, the son of Diti, had formerly brought the three worlds under his authority, confiding in a boon bestowed upon him by Brahma [*1]. He had usurped the sovereignty of Indra, and exercised of himself the functions of the sun, of air, of the lord of waters, of fire, and of the moon. He himself was the god of riches; he was the judge of the dead; and he appropriated to himself, without reserve, all that was offered in sacrifice to the gods. The deities therefore, flying from their seats in heaven, wandered, through fear of the Daitya, upon the earth, disguised in mortal shapes. Having conquered the three worlds, he was inflated with pride, and, eulogized by the Gandharbas, enjoyed whatever he desired. The Gandharbas, the Siddhas, and the snake-gods all attended upon the mighty Hiranyakas'ipu, as he sat at the banquet. The Siddhas delighted stood before him, some playing on musical instruments, some singing songs in his praise, and others shouting cries of victory; whilst the nymphs of heaven danced gracefully in the crystal palace, where the Asura with pleasure quaffed the inebriating cup.

The illustrious son of the Daitya king, Prahlada, being yet a boy, resided in the dwelling of his preceptor, where he read such writings as are studied in early years. On one occasion he came, accompanied by his teacher, to the court of his father, and bowed before his feet as he was drinking. Hiranyakas'ipu desired his prostrate son to rise, and said

[p. 127]

to him, "Repeat, boy, in substance, and agreeably, what during the period of your studies you have acquired." "Hear, sire," replied Prahlada, "what in obedience to your commands I will repeat, the substance of all I have learned: listen attentively to that which wholly occupies my thoughts. I have learned to adore him who is without beginning, middle, or end, increase or diminution; the imperishable lord of the world, the universal cause of causes." On hearing these words, the sovereign of the Daityas, his eyes red with wrath, and lip swollen with indignation, turned to the preceptor of his son, and said, "Vile Brahman, what is this preposterous commendation of my foe, that, in disrespect to me, you have taught this boy to utter?" "King of the Daityas," replied the Guru, "it is not worthy of you to give way to passion: that which your son has uttered, he has not been taught by me." "By whom then," said Hiranyakas'ipu to the lad, "by whom has this lesson, boy, been taught you? your teacher denies that it proceeds from him." "Vishnu, father," answered Prahlada, "is the instructor of the whole world: what else should any one teach or learn, save him the supreme spirit?" "Blockhead," exclaimed the king, "who is this Vishnu, whose name you thus reiterate so impertinently before me, who am the sovereign of the three worlds?" "The glory of Vishnu," replied Prahlada, "is to be meditated upon by the devout; it cannot be described: he is the supreme lord, who is all things, and from whom all things proceed." To this the king rejoined, "Are you desirous of death, fool, that you give the title of supreme lord to any one whilst I survive?" "Vishnu, who is Brahma," said Prahlada, "is the creator and protector, not of me alone, but of all human beings, and even, father, of you: he is the supreme lord of all. Why should you, sire, be offended?" Hiranyakas'ipu then exclaimed, "What evil spirit has entered into the breast of this silly boy, that thus, like one possessed, he utters such profanity?" "Not into my heart alone," said Prahlada, "has Vishnu entered, but he pervades all the regions of the universe, and by his omnipresence influences the conduct of all beings, mine, fattier, and thine [*2]." "Away with the wretch!" cried

[p. 128]

the king; "take him to his preceptor's mansion. By whom could he have been instigated to repeat the lying praises of my foe?"

According to the commands of his father, Prahlada was conducted by the Daityas back to the house of his Guru; where, assiduous in attendance on his preceptor, he constantly improved in wisdom. After a considerable time had elapsed, the sovereign of the Asuras sent for him again; and on his arrival in his presence, desired him to recite some poetical composition. Prahlada immediately began, "May he from whom matter and soul originate, from whom all that moves or is unconscious proceeds, he who is the cause of all this creation, Vishnu, be favourable unto us!" On hearing which, Hiranyakas'ipu exclaimed, "Kill the wretch! he is not fit to live, who is a traitor to his friends, a burning brand to his own race!" and his attendants, obedient to his orders, snatched up their weapons, and rushed in crowds upon Prahlada, to destroy him. The prince calmly looked upon them, and said, "Daityas, as truly as Vishnu is present in your weapons and in my body, so truly shall those weapons fail to harm me:" and accordingly, although struck heavily and repeatedly by hundreds of the Daityas, the prince felt not the least pain, and his strength was ever renewed. His father then endeavoured to persuade him to refrain from glorifying his enemy, and promised him immunity if the would not be so foolish as to persevere but Prahlada replied, that he felt no fear as long as his immortal guardian against all dangers was present in his mind, the recollection of whom was alone sufficient to dissipate all the perils consequent upon birth or human infirmities.

Hiranyakas'ipu, highly exasperated, commanded the serpents to fall upon his disobedient and insane son, and bite him to death with their envenomed fangs: and thereupon the great snakes Kuhaka, Takshaka, 

[p. 129]

and Andhaka, charged with fatal poison, bit the prince in every part of his body; but he, with thoughts immovably fixed on Krishna, felt no pain from their wounds, being immersed in rapturous recollections of that divinity. Then the snakes cried to the king, and said, "Our fangs are broken; our jewelled crests are burst; there is fever in our, hoods, and fear in our hearts; but the skin of the youth is still unscathed: have recourse, monarch of the Daityas, to some other expedient." "Ho, elephants of the skies!" exclaimed the demon; "unite your tusks, and destroy this deserter from his father, and conspirer with my foes. It is thus that often our progeny are our destruction, as fire consumes the wood from which it springs." The young prince was then assailed by the elephants of the skies, as vast as mountain peaks; cast down upon the earth, and trampled on, and gored by their tusks: but he continued to call to mind Govinda, and the tusks of the elephants were blunted against his breast. "Behold," he said to his father, "the tusks of the elephants, as hard as adamant, are blunted; but this is not by any strength of mine: calling upon Janarddana is my defence against such fearful affliction."

Then said the king to his attendants, "Dismiss the elephants, and let fire consume him; and do thou, deity of the winds, blow up the fire, that this wicked wretch may be consumed." And the Danavas piled a mighty heap of wood around the prince, and kindled a fire, to burn him, as their master had commanded. But Prahlada cried, "Father, this fire, though blown up by the winds, burneth me not; and all around I behold the face of the skies, cool and fragrant, with beds of lotus flowers."

Then the Brahmans who were the sons of Bhargava, illustrious priests, and reciters of the Sama-Veda, said to the king of the Daityas, "Sire, restrain your wrath against your own son. How should anger succeed in finding a place in heavenly mansions? As for this lad, we will be his instructors, and teach him obediently to labour for the destruction of your foes. Youth is the season, king, of many errors; and you should not therefore be relentlessly offended with a child. If he will not listen to us, and abandon the cause of Hari, we will adopt infallible measures to work his death." The king of the Daityas, thus solicited by the

[p. 130]

priests, commanded the prince to be liberated from the midst of the flames.

Again established in the dwelling of his preceptor, Prahlada gave lessons himself to the sons of the demons, in the intervals of his leisure. "Sons of the offspring of Diti," he was accustomed to say to them, "hear from me the supreme truth; nothing else is fit to be regarded; nothing, else here is an object to be coveted. Birth, infancy, and youth are the portion of all creatures; and then succeeds gradual and inevitable decay, terminating with all beings, children of the Daityas, in death: this is manifestly visible to all; to you as it is to me. That the dead are born again, and that it cannot be otherwise, the sacred texts are warrant: but production cannot be without a material cause; and as long as conception and parturition are the material causes of repeated birth, so long, be sure, is pain inseparable from every period of existence. The simpleton, in his inexperience, fancies that the alleviation of hunger, thirst, cold, and the like is pleasure; but of a truth it is pain; for suffering gives delight to those whose vision is darkened by delusion, as fatigue would be enjoyment to limbs that are incapable of motion [*3]. This vile body is a compound of phlegm and other humours. Where are its beauty, grace, fragrance, or other estimable qualities? The fool that is fond of a body composed of flesh, blood, matter, ordure, urine, membrane, marrow, and bones, will be enamoured of hell. The agreeableness of fire is caused by cold; of water, by thirst; of food, by hunger: by other circumstances their contraries are equally agreeable [*4]. The child of the Daitya who

[p. 131]

takes to himself a wife introduces only so much misery into his bosom; for as many as are the cherished affections of a living creature, so many are the thorns of anxiety implanted in his heart; and he who has large possessions in his house is haunted, wherever he goes, with the apprehension that they may be lost or burnt or stolen. Thus there is great pain in being born: for the dying man there are the tortures of the judge of the deceased, and of passing again into 'the womb. If you conclude that there is little enjoyment in the embryo state, you must then admit that the world is made up of pain. Verily I say unto you, that in this ocean of the world, this sea of many sorrows, Vishnu is your only hope. If ye say, you know nothing of this; 'we are children; embodied spirit in bodies is eternal; birth, youth, decay, are the properties of the body, not of the soul [*5].' But it is in this way that we deceive ourselves. I am yet a child; but it is my purpose to exert myself when I am a youth. I am yet a youth; but when I become old I will do what is needful for the good of my soul. I am now old, and all my duties are to be fulfilled. How shall I, now that my faculties fail me, do what was left undone when my strength was unimpaired?' In this manner do men, whilst their minds are distracted by sensual pleasures, ever propose, and never attain final beatitude: they die thirsting [*6]. Devoted in childhood to play, and in youth to pleasure, ignorant and impotent they find that old age is come upon them. Therefore even in childhood let the embodied soul acquire discriminative wisdom, and, independent

[p. 132]

of the conditions of infancy, youth, or age, strive incessantly to be freed. This, then, is what I declare unto you; and since you know that it is not untrue, do you, out of regard to me, call to your minds Vishnu, the liberator from all bondage. What difficulty is there in thinking upon him, who, when remembered, bestows prosperity; and by recalling whom to memory, day and night, all sin is cleansed away? Let all your thoughts and affections be fixed on him, who is present in all beings, and you shall laugh at every care. The whole world is suffering under a triple affliction [*7]. 'What wise man would feel hatred towards beings who are objects of compassion? If fortune be propitious to them, and I am unable to partake of the like enjoyments, yet wherefore should I cherish malignity towards those who are more prosperous than myself: I should rather sympathise with their happiness; for the suppression of malignant feelings is of itself a reward [*8]. If beings are hostile, and indulge in hatred, they are objects of pity to the wise, as encompassed by profound delusion. These are the reasons for repressing hate, which are adapted to the capacities of those who see the deity distinct from his creatures. Hear, briefly, what influences those who have approached the truth. This whole world is but a manifestation of Vishnu, who is identical with all things; and it is therefore to be regarded by the wise as not differing from, but as the same with themselves. Let us therefore lay aside the angry passions of our race, and so strive that we obtain that perfect, pure, and eternal happiness, which shall be beyond the power of the elements or their deities, of fire, of the sun, of the moon, of wind, of Indra, of the regent of the sea; which shall be unmolested by spirits of air or earth; by Yakshas, Daityas, or their chiefs; by the serpent-gods or monstrous demigods of Swerga; which shall be uninterrupted by men or beasts, or

[p. 133]

by the infirmities of human nature; by bodily sickness and disease [*9], or hatred, envy, malice, passion, or desire; which nothing shall molest, and which every one who fixes his whole heart on Kes'ava shall enjoy. Verily I say unto you, that you shall have no satisfaction in various revolutions through this treacherous world, but that you will obtain placidity for ever by propitiating Vishnu, whose adoration is perfect calm. What here is difficult of attainment, when he is pleased? Wealth, pleasure, virtue, are things of little moment. Precious is the fruit that you shall gather, be assured, from the exhaustless store of the tree of true wisdom."

Footnotes

^126:1 The boon, according to the Vayu Purana, was, that he should not be slain by any created being: the Kurma adds, except by Vishnu. The Bhagavata has a similar boon as the Vayu, and therefore, says the commentator, Vishnu assumed the form of the Nrisinha, as being that of neither a man nor an animal.

^127:2 The Puranas teach constantly incompatible doctrines. According to this passage, the Supreme Being is not the inert cause of creation only, but exercises the [p. 128] functions of an active Providence. The commentator quotes a text of the Veda in support of this view: 'Universal soul entering into men, governs their conduct.' Incongruities, however, are as frequent in the Vedas as in the Puranas; but apparently the most ancient parts of the Hindu ritual recognised an active ruler in the Creator of the universe; the notion of abstract deity originating with the schools of philosophy.

^130:3 This is the purport of the sentence apparently, and is that which the comment in part confirms. Literally it is, 'A blow is the pleasure of those whose eyes are darkened by ignorance, whose limbs, exceedingly benumbed, desire pleasure by exercise: The commentator divides the sentence, however, and reads it, 'As fatigue would be like pleasure to paralyzed limbs; and a blow is enjoyment to those who are blinded by delusion; that is, by love; for to them a slap, or even a kick, from a mistress would be a favour.' It is not improbably an allusion to some such venerable pastime as blindman's buff. This interpretation, however, leaves the construction of the first half of the sentence imperfect, unless the nominative and verb apply to both portions.

^130:4 They are so far from being sources of pleasure in themselves, that, under different [p. 131] contrasts, they become sources of pain. Heat is agreeable in cold weather: cold is agreeable in hot weather; heat would then be disagreeable. Drink is pleasant to a thirsty man: thirst is agreeable to one who has drunk too much; and more drink would be painful. So of food, and of other contrasts.

^131:5 'Divine knowledge is the province only of those who can separate soul from body; that is, who live independent of bodily infirmities and passions. We have not overcome corporeal vicissitudes, and have therefore no concern with such abstruse inquiries.' This is the commentator's explanation of the passage.

^131:6 Alluding, says the commentator, to the fable of a washerman, who, whilst washing his clothes in the Ganges, proposed daily to drink of its waters, but forgot his purpose in his occupation: or of a boy, who proposed the same as he pursued fish after fish, and never accomplished his intention, being engrossed by his sport: both died without drinking.

^132:7 The three kinds of affliction of the Sankhya philosophy: internal, as bodily or mental distress; external, as injuries from men, animals, &c.; and superhuman, or inflictions by gods or demons. See S. Karika, ver. 1.

^132:8 The construction of the text is elliptical and brief, but the sense is sufficiently clear. The order of the last pada is thus transposed by the commentator: 'Whence (from feeling pleasure) the abandonment of enmity is verily the consequence.'

^133:9 The original rather unpoetically specifies some of these, or fever, ophthalmia, dysentery, spleen, liver, &c. The whole of these defects are the individuals of the three species of pain alluded to before.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 134]

  

CHAP. XVIII.

Hiranyakas'ipu's reiterated attempts to destroy his son: their being always frustrated.

THE Danavas, observing the conduct of Prahlada, reported it to the king, lest they should incur his displeasure. He sent for his cooks, and said to them, "My vile and unprincipled son is now teaching others his impious doctrines: be quick, and put an end to him. Let deadly poison be mixed up with all his viands, without his knowledge. Hesitate not, but destroy the wretch without delay." Accordingly they did so, and administered poison to the virtuous Prahlada, as his father had commanded them. Prahlada, repeating the name of the imperishable, ate and digested the food in which the deadly poison had been infused, and suffered no harm from it, either in body or mind, for it had been rendered innocuous by the name of the eternal. Beholding the strong poison digested, those who had prepared the food were filled with dismay, and hastened to the king, and fell down before him, and said, "King of the Daityas, the fearful poison given by us to your son has been digested by him along with his food, as if it were innocent. Hiranyakas'ipu, on hearing this, exclaimed, "Hasten, hasten, ministrant priests of the Daitya race! instantly perform the rites that will effect his destruction!" Then the priests went to Prahlada, and, having repeated the hymns of the Sama-Veda, said to him, as he respectfully hearkened, "Thou hast been born, prince, in the family of Brahma, celebrated in the three worlds, the son of Hiranyakas'ipu, the king of the Daityas; why shouldest thou acknowledge dependance upon the gods? why upon the eternal? Thy father is the stay of all the worlds, as thou thyself in turn shalt be. Desist, then, from celebrating the praises of an enemy; and remember, that of all venerable preceptors, a father is most venerable." Prahlada replied to them, "Illustrious Brahmans, it is true that the family of Marichi is renowned in the three worlds; this cannot be denied: and I also admit, what is equally indisputable, that my father is mighty over the universe. There is no error, not the least, in what you have said, 'that a father is the most venerable of all holy teachers:' he is a venerable instructor, no doubt, and is ever to be devoutly reverenced. To all

[p. 135]

these things I have nothing to object; they find a ready assent in my mind: but when you say, 'Why should I depend upon the eternal?' who can give assent to this as right? the words are void of meaning." Having said thus much, he was silent a while, being restrained by respect to their sacred functions; but he was unable to repress his smiles, and again said, "What need is there of the eternal? excellent! What need of the eternal? admirable! most worthy of you who are my venerable preceptors! Hear what need there is of the eternal, if to hearken will not give you pain. The fourfold objects of men are said to be virtue, desire, wealth, final emancipation. Is he who is the source of all these of no avail? Virtue was derived from the eternal by Daksha, Marichi, and other patriarchs; wealth has been obtained front him by others; and by others, the enjoyment of their desires: whilst those who, through true. wisdom and holy contemplation, have come to know his essence, have been released from their bondage, and have attained freedom from existence for ever. The glorification of Hari, attainable by unity, is the root of all riches, dignity, renown, wisdom, progeny, righteousness, and liberation. Virtue, wealth, desire, and even final freedom, Brahmans, are fruits bestowed by him. How then can it be said, 'What need is there of the eternal?' But enough of this: what occasion is there to say more? You are my venerable preceptors, and, speak ye good or evil, it is not for my weak judgment to decide." The priests said to him, "We preserved you, boy, when you were about to be consumed by fire, confiding that you would no longer eulogize your father's foes: we knew not how unwise you were: but if you will not desist from this infatuation at our advice, we shall even proceed to perform the rites that will inevitably destroy you." To this menace, Prahlada answered, "What living creature slays, or is slain? what living creature preserves, or is preserved? Each is his own destroyer or preserver, as he follows evil or good [*1]."

[p. 136]

Thus spoken to by the youth, the priests of the Daitya sovereign were incensed, and instantly had recourse to magic incantations, by which a female form, enwreathed with fiery flame, was engendered: she was of fearful aspect, and the earth was parched beneath her tread, as she approached Prahlada, and smote him with a fiery trident on the breast. In vain! for the weapon fell, broken into a hundred pieces, upon the ground. Against the breast in which the imperishable Hari resides the thunderbolt would be shivered, much more should such a weapon be split in pieces. The magic being, then directed against the virtuous prince by the wicked priest, turned upon them, and, having quickly destroyed them, disappeared. But Prahlada, beholding them perish, hastily appealed to Krishna, the eternal, for succour, and said, "Oh Janarddana! who art every where, the creator and substance of the world, preserve these Brahmans from this magical and insupportable fire. As thou art Vishnu, present in all creatures, and the protector of the world, so let these priests be restored to life. If, whilst devoted to the omnipresent Vishnu, I think no sinful resentment against my foes, let these priests be restored to life. If those who have come to slay me, those by whom poison was given me, the fire that would have burned, the elephants that would have crushed, and snakes that would have stung me, have been regarded by me as friends; if I have been unshaken in soul, and am without fault in thy sight; then, I implore thee, let these, the priests of the Asuras, be now restored to life." Thus having prayed, the Brahmans immediately rose up, uninjured and rejoicing; and bowing respectfully to Prahlada, they blessed him, and said, "Excellent prince, may thy days be many; irresistible be thy prowess; and power and wealth and posterity be thine." Having thus spoken, they withdrew, and went and told the king of the Daityas all that had passed.

Footnotes

^135:1 This is not the doctrine of the impassibility of soul, taught in the Vedas: 'We do not recognise either the doctrine that supposes the slayer to slay, or the slain to be killed; this (spiritual existence) neither kills nor is killed.' The same is inculcated at great length, and with great beauty, in the Bhagavat Gita: 'Weapons wound it not; fire doth not [p. 136] consume it; water cannot drown it; nor doth it wither before the winds:' or, as rendered by Schlegel, 'Non ilium penetrant tela; non ilium comburit flamma; neque illum perfundunt aquae; nec ventus exsiccat.' P. 17. new edition. But in the passage of our text, all that the Hindus understand of Fate, is referred to. Death or immunity, prosperity or adversity, are in this life the inevitable consequences of conduct in a prior existence: no man can suffer a penalty which his vices in a preceding state of being have not incurred, nor can he avoid it if they have.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 137]

  

CHAP. XIX.

Dialogue between Prahlada and his father: he is cast from the top of the palace unhurt: baffles the incantations of Samvara: he is thrown fettered into the sea: he praises Vishnu.

WHEN Hiranyakas'ipu heard that the powerful incantations of his priests had been defeated, he sent for his son, and demanded of him the secret of his extraordinary might. "Prahlada," he said, "thou art possessed of marvellous powers; whence are they derived? are they the result of magic rites? or have they accompanied thee from birth?" Prahlada, thus interrogated, bowed down to his father's feet, and replied, "Whatever power I possess, father, is neither the result of magic rites, nor is it inseparable from my nature; it is no more than that which is possessed by all in whose hearts Achyuta abides. He who meditates not of wrong to others, but considers them as himself, is free from the effects of sin, inasmuch as the cause does not exist; but he who inflicts pain upon others, in act, thought, or speech, sows the seed of future birth, and the fruit that awaits him after birth is pain. I wish no evil to any, and do and speak no offence; for I behold Kes'ava in all beings, as in my own soul. Whence should corporeal or mental suffering or pain, inflicted by elements or the gods, affect me, whose heart is thoroughly purified by him? Love, then, for all creatures will be assiduously cherished by all those who are wise in the knowledge that Hari is all things."

When he had thus spoken, the Daitya monarch, his face darkened with fury, commanded his attendants to cast his son from the summit of the palace where he was sitting, and which was many Yojanas in height, down upon the tops of the mountains, where his body should be dashed to pieces against the rocks. Accordingly the Daityas hurled the boy down, and he fell cherishing Hari in his heart, and Earth, the nurse of all creatures, received him gently on her lap, thus entirely devoted to Kes'ava, the protector of the world.

Beholding him uninjured by the fall, and sound in every bone, Hiranyakas'ipu addressed himself to Samvara, the mightiest of enchanters,

[p. 138]

and said to him, "This perverse boy is not to be destroyed by us: do you, who art potent in the arts of delusion, contrive some device for his destruction." Samvara replied, "I will destroy him: you shall behold, king of the Daityas, the power of delusion, the thousand and the myriad artifices that it can employ." Then the ignorant Asura Samvara practised subtile wiles for the extermination of the firm-minded Prahlada: but he, with a tranquil heart, and void of malice towards Samvara, directed his thoughts uninterruptedly to the destroyer of Madhu; by whom the excellent discus, the flaming Sudarsana, was dispatched to defend the youth; and the thousand devices of the evil-destinied Samvara were every one foiled by this defender of the prince. The king of the Daityas then commanded the withering wind to breathe its blighting blast upon his son: and, thus commanded, the wind immediately penetrated into his frame, cold, cutting, drying, and insufferable. Knowing that the wind had entered into his body, the Daitya boy applied his whole heart to the mighty upholder of the earth; and Janarddana, seated in his heart, waxed wroth, and drank up the fearful wind, which had thus hastened to its own annihilation.

When the devices of Samvara were all frustrated, and the blighting wind had perished, the prudent prince repaired to the residence of his preceptor. His teacher instructed him daily in the science of polity, as essential to the administration of government, and invented by Us'anas for the benefit of kings; and when he thought that the modest prince was well grounded in the principles of the science, he told the king that Prahlada was thoroughly conversant with the rules of government as laid down by the descendant of Bhrigu. Hiranyakas'ipu therefore summoned the prince to his presence, and desired him to repeat what he had learned; how a king should conduct himself towards friends or foes; what measures he should adopt at the three periods (of advance, retrogression, or stagnation); how he should treat his councillors, his ministers, the officers of his government and of his household, his emissaries, his subjects, those of doubtful allegiance, and his foes; with whom should he contract alliance; with whom engage in war; what sort of fortress he should construct; how forest and mountain tribes should be reduced;

[p. 139]

how internal grievances should be rooted out: all this, and what else he had studied, the youth was commanded by his father to explain. To this, Prahlada having bowed affectionately and reverentially to the feet of the king, touched his forehead, and thus replied:--

"It is true that I have been instructed in all these matters by my venerable preceptor, and I have learnt them, but I cannot in all approve them. It is said that conciliation, gifts, punishment, and sowing dissension are the means of securing friends (or overcoming foes) [*1]; but I, father--be not angry--know neither friends nor foes; and where no object is to be accomplished, the means of effecting it are superfluous. It were idle to talk of friend or foe in Govinda, who is the supreme soul, lord of the world, consisting of the world, and who is identical with all beings. The divine Vishnu is in thee, father, in me, and in all every where else; and hence how can I speak of friend or foe, as distinct from myself? It is therefore waste of time to cultivate such tedious and unprofitable sciences, which are but false knowledge, and all our energies should be dedicated to the acquirement of true wisdom. The notion that ignorance is knowledge arises, father, from ignorance. Does not the child, king of the Asuras, imagine the fire-fly to be a spark of fire. That is active duty, which is not for our bondage; that is knowledge, which is for our liberation: all other duty is good only unto weariness; all other knowledge is only the cleverness of an artist. Knowing this, I look upon all such acquirement as profitless. That which is really profitable hear me, oh mighty monarch, thus prostrate before thee, proclaim. He who cares not for dominion, he who cares not for wealth, shall assuredly obtain both in a life to come. All men, illustrious prince, are toiling to be great; but the destinies of men, and not their own exertions, are the cause of greatness. Kingdoms are the gifts of fate, and are bestowed upon the stupid, the ignorant, the cowardly, and those to whom the science of government is unknown. Let him therefore who covets the goods of fortune be assiduous in the practice of virtue: let him who hopes for final liberation learn to look upon all things as equal and the

[p. 140]

same. Gods, men, animals, birds, reptiles, all are but forms of one eternal Vishnu, existing as it were detached from himself. By him who knows this, all the existing world, fixed or movable, is to be regarded as identical with himself, as proceeding alike from Vishnu, assuming a universal form. When this is known, the glorious god of all, who is without beginning or end, is pleased; and when he is pleased, there is an end of affliction."

On hearing this, Hiranyakas'ipu started up from his throne in a fury, and spurned his son on the breast with his foot. Burning with rage, he wrung his hands, and exclaimed, "Ho Viprachitti! ho Rahu! ho Bali [*2]! bind him with strong bands [*3], and cast him into the ocean, or all the regions, the Daityas and Danavas, will become converts to the doctrines of this silly wretch. Repeatedly prohibited by us, he still persists in the praise of our enemies. Death is the just retribution of the disobedient." The Daityas accordingly bound the prince with strong bands, as their lord had commanded, and threw him into the sea. As he floated on the waters, the ocean was convulsed throughout its whole extent, and rose in mighty undulations, threatening to submerge the earth. This when Hiranyakas'ipu observed, he commanded the Daityas to hurl rocks into the sea, and pile them closely on one another, burying beneath their incumbent mass him whom fire would not burn, nor weapons pierce, nor serpents bite; whom the pestilential gale could not blast, nor poison nor magic spirits nor incantations destroy; who fell from the loftiest heights unhurt; who foiled the elephants of the spheres: a son of depraved heart, whose life was a perpetual curse. "Here," he cried, "since he cannot die, here let him live for thousands of years at the bottom of the ocean, overwhelmed by mountains. Accordingly the Daityas and Danavas hurled upon Prahlada, whilst in the great ocean, ponderous rocks,

[p. 141]

and piled them over him for many thousand miles: but he, still with mind undisturbed, thus offered daily praise to Vishnu, lying at the bottom of the sea, under the mountain heap. "Glory to thee, god of the lotus eye: glory to thee, most excellent of spiritual things: glory to thee, soul of all worlds: glory to thee, wielder of the sharp discus: glory to the best of Brahmans; to the friend of Brahmans and of kine; to Krishna, the preserver of the world: to Govinda be glory. To him who, as Brahma, creates the universe; who in its existence is its preserver; be praise. To thee, who at the end of the Kalpa takest the form of Rudra; to thee, who art triform; be adoration. Thou, Achyuta, art the gods, Yakshas, demons, saints, serpents, choristers and dancers of heaven, goblins, evil spirits, men, animals, birds, insects, reptiles, plants, and stones, earth, water, fire, sky, wind, sound, touch, taste, colour, flavour, mind, intellect, soul, time, and the qualities of nature: thou art all these, and the chief object of them all. Thou art knowledge and ignorance, truth and falsehood, poison and ambrosia. Thou art the performance and discontinuance of acts [*4]: thou art the acts which the Vedas enjoin: thou art the enjoyer of the fruit of all acts, and the means by which they are accomplished. Thou, Vishnu, who art the soul of all, art the fruit of all acts of piety. Thy universal diffusion, indicating might and goodness, is in me, in others, in all creatures, in all worlds. Holy ascetics meditate on thee: pious priests sacrifice to thee. Thou alone, identical with the gods and the fathers of mankind, receivest burnt-offerings and oblations [*5]. The universe is thy intellectual form [*6]; whence proceeded thy subtile form, this world: thence art thou all subtile elements and elementary beings, and the subtile principle, that is called soul, within them. Hence the supreme soul of all objects, distinguished as subtile or gross, which is imperceptible, and which cannot be conceived, is even a form of thee. Glory be to thee, Purushottama; and

[p. 142]

glory to that imperishable form which, soul of all, is another manifestation [*7] of thy might, the asylum of all qualities, existing in all creatures. I salute her, the supreme goddess, who is beyond the senses; whom the mind, the tongue, cannot define; who is to be distinguished alone by the wisdom of the truly wise. Om! salutation to Vasudeva: to him who is the eternal lord; he from whom nothing is distinct; he who is distinct from all. Glory be to the great spirit again and again: to him who is without name or shape; who sole is to be known by adoration; whom, in the forms manifested in his descents upon earth, the dwellers in heaven adore; for they behold not his inscrutable nature. I glorify the supreme deity Vishnu, the universal witness, who seated internally, beholds the good and ill of all. Glory to that Vishnu from whom this world is not distinct. May he, ever to be meditated upon as the beginning of the universe, have compassion upon me: may he, the supporter of all, in whom every thing is warped and woven [*8], undecaying, imperishable, have compassion upon me. Glory, again and again, to that being to whom all returns, from whom all proceeds; who is all, and in whom all things are: to him whom I also am; for he is every where; and through whom all things are from me. I am all things: all things are in me, who am everlasting. I am undecayable, ever enduring, the receptacle of the spirit of the supreme. Brahma is my name; the supreme soul, that is before all things, that is after the end of all.

Footnotes

^139:1 These are the four Upayas, 'means of success,' specified in the Amera-kosha.

^140:2 Celebrated Daityas. Viprachitti is one of the chief Danavas, or sons of Danu, and appointed king over them by Brahma. Rahu was the son of Sinhika, more known as the dragon's head, or ascending node, being a chief agent in eclipses. Bali was sovereign of the three worlds in the time of the dwarf incarnation, and afterwards monarch of Patala.

^140:3 With Naga pas'as, 'snake-nooses;' tortuous and twining round the limbs like serpents.

^141:4 Acts of devotion--sacrifices, oblations, observance of rules of purification, almsgiving, and the like--opposed to ascetic and contemplative worship, which dispenses with the ritual.

^141:5 Havya and Kavya, oblations of ghee or oiled butter; the former presented to the gods, the latter to the Pitris.

^141:6 Mahat, the first product of nature, intellect.

^142:7 The preceding passage was addressed to the Purusha, or spiritual nature, of the supreme being: this is addressed to his material essence, his other energy, that is, to Pradhana,

^142:8 Or rather, woven as the warp and woof; ###--### meaning 'woven by the long threads,' and ### 'by the cross threads.'

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

CHAP. XX.

Vishnu appears to Prahlada. Hiranyakas'ipu relents, and is reconciled to his son: he is put to death by Vishnu as the Nrisinha. Prahlada becomes king of the Daityas: his posterity: fruit of hearing his story.

THUS meditating upon Vishnu, as identical with his own spirit, Prahlada became as one with him, and finally regarded himself as the divinity: he forgot entirely his own individuality, and was conscious of nothing else than his being the inexhaustible, eternal, supreme soul; and in consequence of the efficacy of this conviction of identity, the imperishable Vishnu, whose essence is wisdom, became present in his heart, which was wholly purified from sin. As soon as, through the force of his contemplation, Prahlada had become one with Vishnu, the bonds with which he was bound burst instantly asunder; the ocean was violently uplifted; and the monsters of the deep were alarmed; earth with all her forests and mountains trembled; and the prince, putting aside the rocks which the demons had piled Upon him, came forth from out the main. When he beheld the outer world again, and contemplated earth and heaven, he remembered who he was, and recognised himself to be Prahlada; and again he hymned Purushottama, who is without beginning or end; his mind being steadily and undeviatingly addressed to the object of his prayers, and his speech, thoughts, and acts being firmly under control. "Om! glory to the end of all: to thee, lord, who art subtile and substantial; mutable and immutable; perceptible and imperceptible; divisible and indivisible; indefinable and definable; the subject of attributes, and void of attributes; abiding in qualities, though they abide not in thee; morphous and amorphous; minute and vast; visible and invisible; hideousness and beauty; ignorance and wisdom; cause and effect; existence and non-existence; comprehending all that is good and evil; essence of perishable and imperishable elements; asylum of undeveloped rudiments. Oh thou who art both one and many, Vasudeva, first cause of all; glory be unto thee. Oh thou who art large and small, manifest and hidden; who art all beings, and art not

[p. 144]

all beings; and from whom, although distinct from universal cause, the universe proceeds: to thee, Purushottama, be all glory."

Whilst with mind intent on Vishnu, he thus pronounced his praises, the divinity, clad in yellow robes, suddenly appeared before him. Startled at the sight, with hesitating speech Prahlada pronounced repeated salutations to Vishnu, and said, "Oh thou who removest all worldly grief, Kes'ava, be propitious unto me; again sanctify me, Achyuta, by thy sight." The deity replied, "I am pleased with the faithful attachment thou hast shown to me: demand from me, Prahlada, whatever thou desirest." Prahlada replied, "In all the thousand births through which I may be doomed to pass, may my faith in thee, Achyuta, never know decay; may passion, as fixed as that which the worldly-minded feel for sensual pleasures, ever animate my heart, always devoted unto thee." Bhagavan answered, "Thou hast already devotion unto me, and ever shalt have it: now choose some boon, whatever is in thy wish." Prahlada then said, "I have been hated, for that I assiduously proclaimed thy praise: do thou, oh lord, pardon in my father this sin that he Bath committed. Weapons have been hurled against me; I have been thrown into the flames; I have been bitten by venomous snakes; and poison has been mixed with my food; I have been bound and cast into the sea; and heavy rocks have been heaped upon me: but all this, and whatever ill beside has been wrought against me; whatever wickedness has been done to me, because I put my faith in thee; all, through thy mercy, has been suffered by me unharmed: and do thou therefore free my father from this iniquity." To this application Vishnu replied, "All this shall be unto thee, through my favour: but I give thee another boon: demand it, son of the Asura." Prahlada answered and said, "All my desires, oh lord, have been fulfilled by the boon that thou hast granted, that my faith in thee shall never know decay. Wealth, virtue, love, are as nothing; for even liberation is in his reach whose faith is firm in thee, root of the universal world." Vishnu said, "Since thy heart is filled immovably with trust in me, thou shalt, through my blessing, attain freedom from existence." Thus saying, Vishnu vanished from his sight; and Prahlada repaired to his father, and bowed down before him. His father

[p. 145]

kissed him on the forehead [*1], and embraced him, and shed tears, and said, "Dost thou live, my son?" And the great Asura repented of his former cruelty, and treated him with kindness: and Prahlada, fulfilling his duties like any other youth, continued diligent in the service of his preceptor and his father. After his father had been put to death by Vishnu in the form of the man-lion [*2], Prahlada became the sovereign of the Daityas; and possessing the splendours of royalty consequent upon his piety, exercised extensive sway, and was blessed with a numerous progeny. At the expiration of an authority which was the reward of his meritorious acts, he was freed from the consequences of moral merit or demerit, and obtained, through meditation on the deity, final exemption from existence.

Such, Maitreya, was the Daitya Prahlada, the wise and faithful worshipper of Vishnu, of whom you wished to hear; and such was his miraculous power. Whoever listens to the history of Prahlada is immediately cleansed from his sins: the iniquities that he commits, by night or by day, shall be expiated by once hearing, or once reading, the history of Prahlada. The perusal of this history on the day of full moon, of new moon, or on the eighth or twelfth day of the lunation [*3],

[p. 146]

shall yield fruit equal to the donation of a cow [*4]. As Vishnu protected Prahlada in all the calamities to which he was exposed, so shall the deity protect him who listens constantly to the tale [*5].

Footnotes

^145:1 Literally, 'having smelt his forehead.' I have elsewhere had occasion to observe this practice: Hindu Theatre, II. 45.

^145:2 Here is another instance of that brief reference to popular and prior legends, which is frequent in this Purana. The man-lion Avatara is referred to in several of the Puranas, but I have met with the story in detail only in the Bhagavata. It is there said that Hiranyakas'ipu asks his son, why, if Vishnu is every where, he is not visible in a pillar in the hall, where they are assembled. He then rises, and strikes the column with his fist; on which Vishnu, in a form which is neither wholly a lion nor a man, issues from it, and a conflict ensues, which ends in Hiranyakas'ipu's being torn to pieces. Even this account, therefore, is not in all particulars the same as the popular version of the story.

^145:3 The days of full and new moon are sacred with all sects of Hindus: the eighth and twelfth days of the lunar half month were considered holy by the Vaishnavas, as appears from the text. The eighth maintains its character in a great degree from the eighth of Bhadra being the birthday of Krishna; but the eleventh, in more recent Vaishnava works, as the Brahma Vaivartta P., has taken the place of the twelfth, and is even more sacred than the eighth.

^146:4 Or any solemn gift; that of a cow is held particularly sacred; but it implies accompaniments of a more costly character, ornaments and gold.

^146:5 The legend of Prahlada is inserted in detail in the Bhagavata and Naradiya Puranas, and in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma: it is adverted to more briefly in the Vayu, Linga, Kurma, &c., in the Moksha Dharma of the Mahabharata, and in the Hari Vans'a.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 147]

  

CHAP. XXI.

Families of the Daityas. Descendants of Kas'yapa by Danu. Children of Kas'yapa by his other wives. Birth of the Marutas, the sons of Diti.

THE sons of Sanhrada, the son of Hiranyakas'ipu, were Ayushman, S'ivi, and Vashkala [*1]. Prahlada had a son named Virochana; whose son was Bali, who had a hundred sons, of whom Bana was the eldest [*2].

Hiranyaksha also had many sons, all of whom were Daityas of great prowess; Jharjhara, S'akuni, Bhutasantapana, Mahanabha, the mighty-armed and the valiant Taraka. These were the sons of Diti [*3].

The children of Kas'yapa by Danu were Dwimurddha, S'ankara, Ayomukha, S'ankus'iras, Kapila, Samvara, Ekachakra, and another mighty Taraka, Swarbhanu, Vrishaparvan, Puloman, and the powerful Viprachitti; these were the renowned Danavas, or sons of Danu [*4].

Swarbhanu had a daughter named Prabha [*5]; and S'armishtha [*6] was the daughter of Vrishaparvan, as were Upadanavi and Hayas'ira [*7].

[p. 148]

Vaiswanara [*8] had two daughters, Puloma and Kalika, who were both married to Kas'yapa, and bore him sixty thousand distinguished Danavas, called Paulomas and Kalakanjas [*9], who were powerful, ferocious, and cruel.

The sons of Viprachitti by Sinhika (the sister of Hiranyakas'ipu) were Vyans'a, S'alya the strong, Nabha the powerful, Vatapi, Namuchi, Ilwala, Khasrima, Anjaka, Naraka, and Kalanabha, the valiant Swarbhanu, and the mighty Vaktrayodhi [*10]. These were the most eminent Danavas [*11], through whom the race of Danu was multiplied by hundreds and thousands through succeeding generations.

In the family of the Daitya Prahlada, the Nivata Kavachas were born, whose spirits were purified by rigid austerity [*12].

Tamra (the wife of Kas'yapa) had six illustrious daughters, named S'uki, S'yeni, Bhasi, Sugrivi, S'uchi, and Gridhrika. S'uki gave birth to parrots, owls, and crows [*13]; S'yeni to hawks; Bhasi to kites; Gridhrika

[p. 149]

to vultures; S'uchi to water-fowl; Sugrivi to horses, camels, and asses. Such were the progeny of Tamra.

Vinata bore to Kas'yapa two celebrated sons, Garuda and Aruna: the former, also called Suparna, was the king of the feathered tribes, and the remorseless enemy of the serpent race [*14].

The children of Surasa were a thousand mighty many-headed serpents, traversing the sky [*15].

The progeny of Kadru were a thousand powerful many-headed serpents, of immeasurable might, subject to Garuda; the chief amongst whom were S'esha, Vasuki, Takshaka, S'ankha, S'weta, Mahapadma, Kambala, Aswatara, Elapatra, Naga, Karkkota, Dhananjaya, and many other fierce and venomous serpents [*16].

The family of Krodhavasa were all sharp-toothed monsters [*17], whether on the earth, amongst the birds, or in the waters, that were devourers of flesh.

[p. 150]

 [*18]Surabhi was the mother of cows and buffaloes [*19]: Ira, of trees and creeping plants and shrubs, and every kind of grass: Khasa, of the Rakshasas and Yakshas [*20]: Muni, of the Apsarasas [*21]: and Arishta, of the illustrious Gandharbas.

These were the children of Kas'yapa, whether movable or stationary, whose descendants multiplied infinitely through successive generations [*22]. This creation, oh Brahman, took place in the second or Swarochisha Manwantara. In the present or Vaivaswata Manwantara, Brahma being engaged at the great sacrifice instituted by Varuna, the creation of progeny, as it is called, occurred; for he begot, as his sons, the seven Rishis, who were formerly mind-engendered; and was himself the grand-sire of the Gandharbas, serpents, Danavas, and gods [*23].

[p. 151]

Diti, having lost her children, propitiated Kas'yapa; and the best of ascetics, being pleased with her, promised her a boon; on which she prayed for a son of irresistible prowess and valour, who should destroy Indra. The excellent Muni granted his wife the great gift she had solicited, but with one condition: "You shall bear a son," he said, "who shall slay Indra, if with thoughts wholly pious, and person entirely pure, you carefully carry the babe in your womb for a hundred years." Having thus said, Kas'yapa departed; and the dame conceived, and during gestation assiduously observed the rules of mental and personal purity. When the king of the immortals, learnt that Diti bore a son destined for his destruction, he came to her, and attended upon her with the utmost humility, watching for an opportunity to disappoint her intention. At last, in the last year of the century, the opportunity occurred. Diti

[p. 152]

retired one night to rest without performing the prescribed ablution of her feet, and fell asleep; on which the thunderer divided with his thunderbolt the embryo in her womb into seven portions. The child, thus mutilated, cried bitterly; and Indra repeatedly attempted to console and silence it, but in vain: on which the god, being incensed, again divided each of the seven portions into seven, and thus formed the swift-moving deities called Marutas (winds). They derived this appellation from the words with which Indra had addressed them (Ma rodih, 'Weep not'); and they became forty-nine subordinate divinities, the associates of the wielder of the thunderbolt [*24].

Footnotes

^147:1 The Padma P. makes these the sons of Prahlada. The Bhagavata says there were five sons, but does not give the names. It also inserts the sons of Hlada, making them the celebrated demons Ilwala and Vatapi. The Vayu refers to Hlada, other Daityas, famous in Pauranic legend, making his son, Nisunda; and his sons, Sunda and Upasunda; the former the father of Maricha and Taraka; the latter, of Muka.

^147:2 The Padma P. and Vayu name several of these, but they are not of any note: the latter gives the names of two daughters, who are more celebrated, Putana and S'akuni.

^147:3 The descendants of Hiranyaksha are said, in the Padma P., to have extended to seventy-seven crores, or seven hundred and seventy millions. Some copies, for Taraka, read Kalanabha.

^147:4 The Padma and Vayu P. furnish a much longer list of names, but those of most note are the same as in the text, with which also the Bhagavata for the most part agrees.

^147:5 The Bhagavata makes Prabha the wife of Namuchi: according to the Vayu, she is the mother of Nahusha.

^147:6 Married to Yayati, as will be related.

^147:7 The text might be understood to imply that the latter two were the daughters of Vaiswanara; and the Bhagavata has, "The four lovely daughters of Vaiswanara were Upadanavi, Hayas'iras, Puloma, and Kalaka." The Padma substitutes Vajra and Sundari for the two former names. The Vayu specifies only Puloma and Kalika as the daughters of Vaiswanara, as does our text. Upadanavi, according to the Bhagavata, is the wife of Hiranyaksha; and Hayas'iras, of Kratu.

^148:8 Though not specified by the text as one of the Danavas, he is included in the catalogue of the Vayu, and the commentator on the Bhagavata calls him a son of Danu.

^148:9 The word is also read Kulakas and Kalakeyas: the Mahabharata, I. 643, has Kalakanjas.

^148:10 The text omits the two most celebrated of the Sainhikeyas, or sons of Sinhika, Rahu (see <page 78>. note ) and Ketu, who are specified both in the Bhagavata and the Vayu; the former as the eldest son. Of the other sons it is said by the Vayu that they were all killed by Paras'urama.

^148:11 Two names of note, found in the Vayu, are omitted by the Vishnu; that of Puloman, the father of S'achi, the wife of Indra, and mother of Jayanta; and Maya, the father of Vajrakama and Mahodari.

^148:12 The Bhagavata says the Paulomas were killed by Arjuna, who therefore, the commentator observes, were the same as the Nivata Kavachas: but the Mahabharata describes the destruction of the Nivata Kavachas and of the Paulomas and Kalakeyas as the successive exploits of Arjuna. Vana P. 8. I. 633. The story is narrated in detail only in the Mahabharata, which is consequently prior to all the Puranas in which the allusion occurs. According to that work, the Nivata Kavachas were Danavas, to the number of thirty millions, residing in the depths of the sea; and the Paulomas and Kalakanjas were the children of two Daitya dames, Puloma and Kalaka, inhabiting Hiranyapura, the golden city, floating in the air.

^148:13 All the copies read ### which should be, 'S'uki bore parrots; and Uluki, the several sorts of owls? but Uluki is nowhere named as one of the daughters of Tamra; and the reading may be, 'Owls [p. 149] and birds opposed to owls, i. e. crows. The authorities generally concur with our text; but the Vayu has a somewhat different account; or, S'uki, married to Garuda, the mother of parrots: S'yeni, married to Aruna, mother of Sampati and Jatayu: Bhasi, the mother of jays, owls, crows, peacocks, pigeons, and fowls: Kraunchi, the parent of curlews, herons, cranes: and Dhritarashtri, the mother of geese, ducks, teal, and other water-fowl. The three last are also called the wives of Garuda.

^149:14 Most of the Puranas agree in this account; but the Bhagavata makes Vinata the wife of Tarksha, and in this place substitutes Sarama, the mother of wild animals. The Vayu adds the metres of the Vedas as the daughters of Vinata; and the Padma gives her one daughter Saudamini.

^149:15 The dragons of modern fable. Anayush or Danayush is substituted for Surasa in the Vayu, and in one of the accounts of the Padma. The Bhagavata says Rakshasas were her offspring. The Matsya has both Surasa and Anayush, making the former the parent of all quadrupeds, except cows; the latter, the mother of diseases.

^149:16 The Vayu names forty: the most noted amongst whom, in addition to those of the text, are Airavata, Dhritarashtra, Mahanila, Balahaka, Anjana, Pushpadanshtra, Durmukha, Kaliya, Pundarika, Kapila, Nahusha, and Mani.

^149:17 By Danshtrina some understand, serpents, some Rakshasas; but by the context carnivorous animals, birds, and fishes seem intended. The Vayu makes Krodhavas'a the mother of twelve daughters, Mrigi and others, from whom all wild animals, deer, elephants, monkeys, tigers, lions, dogs, also fishes, reptiles, and Bhutas and Pis'achas, or goblins, sprang.

^150:18 One copy only inserts a half stanza here; "Krodha was the mother of the Pis'achas;" which is an interpolation apparently from the Matsya or Hari Vans'a. The Padma P., second legend, makes Krodha the mother of the Bhutas; and Pis'acha, of the Pis'achas.

^150:19 The Bhagavata says, of animals with cloven hoofs. The Vayu has, of the eleven Rudras, of the bull of S'iva, and of two daughters, Rohini and Gandharbi; from the former of whom descended horned cattle; and from the latter, horses.

^150:20 According to the Vayu, Khasa had two sons, Yaksha and Rakshas, severally the progenitors of those beings.

^150:21 The Padma, second series, makes Vach the mother of both Apsarasas and Gandharbas: the Vayu has long lists of the names of both classes, as well as of Vidyadharas and Kinnaras. The Apsarasas are distinguished as of two kinds, Laukika, 'worldly,' of whom thirty-four are specified; and Daivika, or 'divine,' ten in number: the latter furnish the individuals most frequently engaged in the interruption of the penances of holy sages, such as Menaka, Sahajanya, Ghritachi, Pramlocha, Viswachi, and Purvachitti. Urvas'i is of a different order to both, being the daughter of Narayana. Rambha, Tilotama Misrakes'i, are included amongst the Laukika nymphs. There are also fourteen Ganas, or troops, of Apsarasas, bearing peculiar designations, as Ahutas, Sobhayantis, Vegavatis, &c.

^150:22 The Kurma, Matsya, Brahma, Linga, Agni, Padma, and Vayu Puranas agree generally with our text in the description of Kas'yapa's wives and progeny. The Vayu enters most into details, and contains very long catalogues of the names of the different characters descended from the sage. The Padma and Matsya and the Hari Vans'a repeat the story, but admit several variations, some of which have been adverted to in the preceding notes.

^150:23 We have a considerable variation here in the commentary, and it may be doubted if the allusion in the text is accurately explained by either of the versions. In one it is said that 'Brahma, the grandsire of [p. 151] the Gandharbas, &c., appointed the seven Rishis, who were born in a former Manwantara, to be his sons, or to be the intermediate agents in creation: he created no other beings himself, being engrossed by the sacrificial ceremony.' Instead of "putratwe," 'in the state of sons,' the reading is sometimes "pitratwe," 'in the character of fathers;' that is, to all other beings. Thus the gods and the rest, who in a former Manwantara originated from Kas'yapa, were created in the present period as the offspring of the seven Rishis. The other explanation agrees with the preceding in ascribing the birth of all creatures to the intermediate agency of the seven Rishis, but calls them the actual sons of Brahma, begotten at the sacrifice of Vanilla, in the sacrificial fire. The authority for the story is not given, beyond its being in other Puranas, it has the air of a modern mystification. The latter member of the passage is separated altogether from the foregoing, and carried on to what follows: thus; "In the war of the Gandharbas, serpents, gods, and demons, Diti having lost her children," &c.; the word 'virodha' being understood, it is said, This is defended by the authority of the Hari Vans'a, where the passage occurs word for word, except in the last half stanza, which, instead of ### occurs ###. The parallel passages are thus rendered by M. Langlois: 'Le Mouni Swarotchicha avoit cesse de regner quand cette creation eut lieu: c'etait sous l'empire du Menou Vevaswata le sacrifice de Varouna avait commence. La premiere creation fut celle de Brahma, quand il jugea qu'il etait temps de proceder a son sacrifice, et que, souverain aieul du monde, il forma lui-meme dans sa pensee et enfanta les sept Brahmarchis.'

^152:24 This legend occurs in all those Puranas in which the account of Kas'yapa's family is related.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 153]

  

CHAP. XXII.

Dominion over different provinces of creation assigned to different beings. Universality of Vishnu. Four varieties of spiritual contemplation. Two conditions of spirit. The perceptible attributes of Vishnu types of his imperceptible properties. Vishnu every thing. Merit of hearing the first book of the Vishnu Purana.

WHEN Prithu was installed in the government of the earth, the great father of the spheres established sovereignties in other parts of the creation. Soma was appointed monarch of the stars and planets, of Brahmans and of plants, of sacrifices and of penance. Vaisravana was made king over kings; and Varuna, over the waters. Vishnu was the chief of the Adityas; Pavaka, of the Vasus; Daksha, of the patriarchs; Vasava, of the winds. To Prahlada was assigned dominion over the Daityas and Danavas; and Yama, the king of justice, was appointed the monarch of the Manes (Pitris). Airavata was made the king of elephants; Garuda, of birds; Indra, of the gods. Uchchais'ravas was the chief of horses; Vrishabha, of kine. S'esha became the snake-king; the lion, the monarch of the beasts; and the sovereign of the trees was the holy fig-tree [*1]. Having thus fixed the limits of each authority, the great progenitor Brahma stationed rulers for the protection of the different quarters of the world: he made Sudhanwan, the son of the patriarch Viraja, the regent of the east; Sankhapada, the son of the patriarch Kardama, of the south; the immortal Ketumat, the son of Rajas, regent of the west; and Hiranyaroman, the son of the patriarch Parjanya, regent of the north [*2]. By these the whole earth, with its seven continents and its

[p. 154]

cities, is to the present day vigilantly protected, according to their several limits.

All these monarchs, and whatever others may be invested with authority by the mighty Vishnu, as instruments for the preservation of the world; all the kings who have been, and all who shall be; are all, most worthy Brahman, but portions of the universal Vishnu. The rulers of the gods, the rulers of the Daityas, the rulers of the Danavas, and the rulers of all malignant spirits; the chief amongst beasts, amongst birds, amongst men, amongst serpents; the best of trees, of mountains, of planets; either those that now are, or that shall hereafter be, the most exalted of their kind; are but portions of the universal Vishnu. The power of protecting created things, the preservation of the world, resides with no other than Hari, the lord of all. He is the creator, who creates the world; he, the eternal, preserves it in its existence; and he, the destroyer, destroys it; invested severally with the attributes of foulness, goodness, and gloom. By a fourfold manifestation does Janarddana operate in creation, preservation, and destruction. In one portion, as Brahma, the invisible assumes a visible form; in another portion he, as Marichi and the rest, is the progenitor of all creatures; his third portion is time; his fourth is all beings: and thus he becomes quadruple in creation, invested with the quality of passion. In the preservation of the world he is, in one portion, Vishnu; in another portion he is Manu and the other patriarchs; he is time in a third; and all beings in a fourth portion: and thus, endowed with the property of goodness, Purushottama preserves the world. When he assumes the property of darkness, at the end of all things, the unborn deity becomes in one portion Rudra; in another, the destroying fire; in a third, time; and in a fourth, all beings: and thus, in a quadruple form, he is the destroyer of the world. This, Brahman, is the fourfold condition of the deity at all seasons.

Brahma, Daksha, time, and all creatures are the four energies of Hari, which are the causes of creation. Vishnu, Manu and the rest, time, and all creatures are the four energies of Vishnu, which are the causes of duration. Rudra, the destroying fire, time, and all creatures

[p. 155]

are the four energies of Janarddana that are exerted for universal dissolution. In the beginning and the duration of the world, until the period of its end, creation is the work of Brahma, the patriarchs, and living animals. Brahma creates in the beginning; then the patriarchs beget progeny; and then animals incessantly multiply their kinds: but Brahma is not the active agent in creation, independent of time; neither are the patriarchs, nor living animals. So, in the periods of creation and of dissolution, the four portions of the god of gods are equally essential. Whatever, oh Brahman, is engendered by any living being, the body of Hari is cooperative in the birth of that being; so whatever destroys any existing thing, movable or stationary, at any time, is the destroying form of Janarddana as Rudra. Thus Janarddana is the creator, the preserver, and the destroyer of the whole world--being threefold--in the several seasons of creation, preservation, and destruction, according to his assumption of the three qualities: but his highest glory [*3] is detached from all qualities; for the fourfold essence of the supreme spirit is composed of true wisdom, pervades all things, is only to be appreciated by itself, and admits of no similitude.

MAITREYA.--But, Muni, describe to me fully the four varieties of the condition of Brahma, and what is the supreme condition [*4].

PARAS'ARA.--That, Maitreya, which is the cause of a thing is called the means of effecting it; and that which it is the desire of the soul to accomplish is the thing to be effected. The operations of the Yogi who is desirous of liberation, as suppression of breath and the like, are his means: the end is the supreme Brahma, whence he returns to the world no more. Essentially connected with, and dependant upon, the means employed for emancipation by the Yogi, is discriminative knowledge; and this is the first variety of the condition of Brahma [*5]. The second

[p. 156]

sort is the knowledge that is to be acquired by the Yogi whose end is escape from suffering, or eternal felicity. The third kind is the ascertainment of the identity of the end and the means, the rejection of the notion of duality. The last kind is the removal of whatever differences may have been conceived by the three first varieties of knowledge, and the consequent contemplation of the true essence of soul. The supreme condition of Vishnu, who is one with wisdom, is the knowledge of truth; which requires no exercise; which is not to be taught; which is internally diffused; which is unequalled; the object of which is self-illumination; which is simply existent, and is not to be defined; which is tranquil, fearless, pure; which is not the theme of reasoning; which stands in need of no support [*6]. Those Yogis who, by the annihilation of ignorance, are resolved into this fourfold Brahma, lose the seminal property, and can no longer germinate in the ploughed field of worldly existence. This is the supreme condition, that is called Vishnu, perfect,

[p. 157]

perpetual, universal, undecaying, entire, and uniform: and the Yogi who attains this supreme spirit (Brahma) returns not to life again; for there he is freed from the distinction of virtue and vice, from suffering, and from soil.

There are two states of this Brahma; one with, and one without shape; one perishable, and one imperishable; which are inherent in all beings. The imperishable is the supreme being; the perishable is all the world. The blaze of fire burning on one spot diffuses light and heat around; so the world is nothing more than the manifested energy of the supreme Brahma: and inasmuch, Maitreya, as the light and heat are stronger or feebler as we are near to the fire, or far off from it, so the energy of the supreme is more or less intense in the beings that are less or more remote from him. Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva are the most powerful energies of god; next to them are the inferior deities, then the attendant spirits, then men, then animals, birds, insects, vegetables; each becoming more and more feeble as they are farther from their primitive source. In this way, illustrious Brahman, this whole world, although in essence imperishable and eternal, appears and disappears, as if it was subject to birth and death.

The supreme condition of Brahma, which is meditated by the Yogis in the commencement of their abstraction, as invested with form, is Vishnu, composed of all the divine energies, and the essence of Brahma, with whom the mystic union that is sought, and which is accompanied by suitable elements, is effected [*7] by the devotee whose whole mind is addressed to that object. This Hari, who is the most immediate of all the energies of Brahma, is his embodied shape, composed entirely of his essence; and in him therefore is the whole world interwoven; and from him, and in him, is the universe; and he, the supreme lord of all, comprising all that is perishable and imperishable, bears upon him all material and spiritual existence, identified in nature with his ornaments and weapons.

[p. 158]

MAITREYA.--Tell me in what manner Vishnu bears the whole world, abiding in his nature, characterised by ornaments and weapons.

PARAS'ARA.--Having offered salutation to the mighty and indescribable Vishnu, I repeat to you what was formerly related to me by Vas'ishtha. The glorious Hari wears the pure soul of the world, undefiled, and void of qualities, as the Kaustubha gem. The chief principle of things (Pradhana) is seated on the eternal, as the Srivatsa mark. Intellect abides in Madhava, in the form of his mace. The lord (Is'wara) supports egotism (Ahankara) in its twofold division, into elements and organs of sense, in the emblems of his conch-shell and his bow. In his hand Vishnu holds, in the form of his discus, the mind, whose thoughts (like the weapon) fly swifter than the winds. The necklace of the deity Vaijayanti, composed of five precious gems [*8], is the aggregate of the five elemental rudiments. Janarddana bears, in his numerous shafts, the faculties both of action and of perception. The bright sword of Achyuta is holy wisdom, concealed at some seasons in the scabbard of ignorance. In this manner soul, nature, intellect, egotism, the elements, the senses, mind, ignorance, and wisdom, are all assembled in the person of Hrishikes'a. Hari, in a delusive form, embodies the shapeless elements of the world, as his weapons and his ornaments, for the salvation of mankind [*9]. Pundarikaksha, the lord of all, assumes nature, with all its products, soul and all the world. All that is wisdom, all that is ignorance, all that is, all that is not, all that is everlasting, is centred in the destroyer of Madhu, the lord of all creatures. The supreme, eternal Hari is time, with its divisions of seconds, minutes, days, months, seasons, and years: he is the seven worlds, the earth, the sky, heaven, the world of patriarchs,

[p. 159]

of sages, of saints, of truth: whose form is all worlds; first-born before all the first-born; the supporter of all beings, himself self-sustained: who exists in manifold forms, as gods, men, and animals; and is thence the sovereign lord of all, eternal: whose shape is all visible things; who is without shape or form: who is celebrated in the Vedanta as the Rich, Yajush, Sama, and Atharva Vedas, inspired history, and sacred science. The Vedas, and their divisions; the institutes of Manu and other lawgivers; traditional scriptures, and religious manuals [*10]; poems, and all that is said or sung; are the body of the mighty Vishnu, assuming the form of sound. All kinds of substances, with or without shape, here or elsewhere, are the body of Vishnu. I am Hari. All that I behold is Janarddana; cause and effect are from none other than him. The man who knows these truths shall never again experience the afflictions of worldly existence.

Thus, Brahman, has the first portion of this Purana been duly revealed to you: listening to which, expiates all offences. The man who hears this Purana obtains the fruit of bathing in the Pushkara lake [*11] for twelve years, in the month of Kartik. The gods bestow upon him who hears this work the dignity of a divine sage, of a patriarch, or of a spirit of heaven.

Footnotes

^153:1 These are similarly enumerated in the Vayu, Brahma, Padma, Bhagavata, &c., with some additions; as, Agni, king of the Pitris; Vayu, of the Gandharbas; Sulapani (S'iva), of the Bhutas; Kuvera, of riches, and of the Yakshas; Vasuki, of the Nagas; Takshaka, of serpents; Chitraratha, of the Gandharbas; Kamadeva, of the Apsarasas; Viprachitti, of the Danavas; Rahu, of meteors; Parjanya, of clouds; Samvatsara, of times and seasons; Samudra, of rivers; Himavat, of mountains, &c.

^153:2 We have already had occasion to notice the descent of these Lokapalas, as specified in the Vayu P.; and it is evident, although the Vishnu does not supply a connected series of generations, yet that both accounts are derived from a common source.

^155:3 Vibhuti, superhuman or divine power or dignity.

^155:4 The question, according to the commentator, implies a doubt how the supreme being, who is without qualities, can be subject to specific variety, or to existence in divided and different conditions.

^155:5 Of Brahmabhuta; of him who, or that which, becomes identified with the supreme spirit, which is the same respectively with absolute wisdom, Jnana, and discriminative wisdom, Vijnana; leading to felicity, or the condition of Brahma, expressed by the words, [p. 156] Sat chit anandam, 'entire tranquillity of mind,' or 'internal enjoyment:' the same also with the combination of wisdom and tranquillity, which the devotee believes to exist in Adwaita, 'non- duality,' or unity of god and himself: and finally, the same with the aggregate of these three processes, or the conviction that spirit is one, universal, and the same.

^156:6 The epithets of Jnyana, 'wisdom,' here employed, are taken from the Yoga philosophy. 'Requires no exercise,' Nirvyapara, is explained, 'without the practice of abstract contemplation,' &c. . 'Not to be taught,' Anakhyeyam; 'not capable of being enjoined.' 'Internally diffused,' Vyaptimatram, means 'mental identification of individual with universal spirit' . The phrase translated 'the object of which is self-illumination,' is explained ###. 'Simply existent' is said to mean, 'being unmodified by the accidents of happiness,' &c.; consequently it is not to be defined . So the Yoga Pradipa explains Samadhi, or contemplation, to be the entire occupation of the thoughts by the idea of Brahma, without any effort of the mind. It is the entire abandonment of the faculties to one all-engrossing notion. 'Tranquil,' Pras'antam, is, 'being void of passion,' &c. 'Fearless; not dreading agitation or perplexity by ideas of duality. 'Pure;' undisturbed by external objects. 'Not the theme of reasoning'; that is, 'not to be ascertained by logical deduction.' 'Stands in no need of support'; not resting or depending upon perceptible objects.

^157:7 The great Yoga is produced. This great Yoga, or union, is to have its relation or dependance, which is Vishnu; and its seed, or mystical ejaculations; and to be accompanied with Mantras and silent repetitions, or Japa.

^158:8 Or of pearl, ruby, emerald, sapphire, and diamond.

^158:9 We have in the text a representation of one mode of Dhyana, or contemplation, in which the conception of a thing is attempted to be rendered more definite by thinking upon its types; or in which, at least, the thoughts are more readily concentrated by being addressed to a sensible emblem, instead of an abstract truth. Thus the Yogi here says to himself, "I meditate upon the jewel on Vishnu's brow, as the soul of the world; upon the gem on his breast, as the first principle of things;" and so on: and thus through a perceptible substance proceeds to an imperceptible idea.

^159:10 Akhyanani is said to denote the Puranas, and Anuvada the Kalpa, Sara, and similar works, containing directions for supplementary rites.

^159:11 The celebrated lake Pokher in Ajmer.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 160] [p. 161]

  

VISHNU PURANA.

  

BOOK II.

  

CHAP. I.

Descendants of Priyavrata, the eldest son of Swayambhuva Manu: his ten sons: three adopt a religious life; the others become kings of the seven Dwipas, or isles, of the earth. Agnidhra, king of Jambu-dwipa, divides it into nine portions, which he distributes amongst his sons. Nabhi, king of the south, succeeded by Rishabha; and he by Bharata: India named after him Bharata: his descendants reign during the Swayambhuva Manwantara.

MAITREYA.--You have related to me, venerable preceptor, most fully, all that I was curious to hear respecting the creation of the world; but there is a part of the subject which I am desirous again to have described. You stated that Priyavrata and Uttanapada were the sons of Swayambhuva Manu, and you repeated the story of Dhruva, the son of Uttanapada: you made no mention of the descendants of Priyavrata, and it is an account of his family that I beg you will kindly communicate to me.

PARAS'ARA.--Priyavrata married Kamya, the daughter of the patriarch Kardama [*1], and had by her two daughters, Samrat and Kukshi, and ten

[p. 162]

sons, wise, valiant, modest, and dutiful, named Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Vapushmat, Dyutimat, Medha, Medhatithi, Bhavya, Savala, Putra, and the tenth was Jyotishmat [*2], illustrious by nature as by name. These were the sons of Priyavrata, famous for strength and prowess. Of these, three, or Medha, Putra, and Agnibahu, adopted a religious life: remembering the occurrences of a prior existence, they did not covet dominion, but diligently practised the rites of devotion in due season, wholly disinterested, and looking for no reward.

Priyavrata having divided the earth into seven continents, gave them respectively to his other seven sons [*3]. To Agnidhra he gave Jambu-dwipa; to Medhatithi he gave Plaksha-dwipa: he installed Vapushmat in the sovereignty over the Dwipa of Salmali; and made Jyotishmat king of Kus'a-dwipa: he appointed Dyutimat to rule over Krauncha-dwipa; Bhavya to reign over Saka-dwipa; and Savala he nominated the monarch of the Dwipa of Pushkara.

Agnidhra, the king of Jambu-dwipa, had nine sons, equal in splendour to the patriarchs: they were named Nabhi, Kimpurusha, Harivarsha, Ilavrita, Ramya, Hiranvat, Kuru, Bhadras'wa, and Ketumala [*4], who was a prince ever active in the practice of piety.

Hear next, Maitreya, in what manner Agnidhra apportioned Jambu-dwipa amongst his nine sons. He gave to Nabhi the country called Hima, south of the Himavat, or snowy mountains. The country of Hemakuta he gave to Kimpurusha; and to Harivarsha, the country of

[p. 163]

[paragraph continues] Nishadha. The region in the centre of which mount Meru is situated he conferred on Ilavrita; and to Ramya, the countries lying between it and the Nila mountain. To Hiranvat his father gave the country lying to the north of it, called S'weta; and, on the north of the S'weta mountains, the country bounded by the S'ringavan range he gave to Kuru. The countries on the east of Meru he assigned to Bhadras'wa; and Gandhamadana, which lay west of it, he gave to Ketumala [*5].' Having installed his sons sovereigns in these several regions, the pious king Agnidhra retired to a life of penance at the holy place of pilgrimage, S'alagrama [*6].

The eight Varshas, or countries, Kimpurusha and the rest, are places of perfect enjoyment, where happiness is spontaneous and uninterrupted. In them there is no vicissitude, nor the dread of decrepitude or death: there is no distinction of virtue or vice, nor difference of degree as better or worse, nor any of the effects produced in this region by the revolutions of ages.

Nabhi, who had for his portion the country of Himahwa, had by his queen Meru the magnanimous Rishabha; and he had a hundred sons, the eldest of whom was Bharata. Rishabha having ruled with equity and wisdom, and celebrated many sacrificial rites, resigned the sovereignty of the earth to the heroic Bharata, and, retiring to the hermitage of Pulastya, adopted the life of an anchoret, practising religious penance, and performing all prescribed ceremonies, until, emaciated by his austerities, so as to be but a collection of skin and fibres, he put a pebble in his mouth, and naked went the way of all flesh [*7]. The country was

[p. 164]

termed Bharata from the time that it was relinquished to Bharata by his father, on his retiring to the woods [*8].

Bharata, having religiously discharged the duties of his station, consigned the kingdom to his son Sumati, a most virtuous prince; and, engaging in devout practices, abandoned his life at the holy place, S'alagrama: he was afterwards born again as a Brahman, in a distinguished family of ascetics. I shall hereafter relate to you his history.

From the illustrious Sumati was born Indradyumna: his son was Parameshthin: his son was Pratihara, who had a celebrated son, named

[p. 165]

[paragraph continues] Pratihartta: his son was Bhava, who begot Udgitha, who begot Prastara; whose son was Prithu. The son of Prithu was Nakta: his son was Gaya: his son was Nara; whose son was Virat. The valiant son of Virat was Dhimat, who begot Mahanta; whose son was Manasyu; whose son was Twashtri: his son was Viraja: his son was Raja: his son was S'atajit, who had a hundred sons, of whom Viswagjyotish was the eldest [*9]. Under these princes, Bharata-varsha (India) was divided into nine portions (to be hereafter particularized); and their descendants successively held possession of the country for seventy-one periods of the aggregate of the four ages (or for the reign of a Manu).

This was the creation of Swayambhuva Manu, by which the earth was peopled, when he presided over the first Manwantara, in the Kalpa of Varaha [*10]

Footnotes

^161:1 The text reads Kanya; and the commentator has, 'he married the daughter of Kardama, whose name was Kanya.' The copies agree in the reading, and the Vayu has the same name, Kanya; but the Markandeya, which is the same in other respects as our text, has Kamya: Kamya also is the name elsewhere given by the Vayu to the daughter of Kardama (<page 83>. n. ). Kamya, as has been noticed, appears in the Brahma and Hari V. (<page 53>. n. ) as the mother of Priyavrata, but erroneously; and the same authorities specify a Kamya as the wife of that sovereign. So the commentator on the Hari V. states, 'another Kamya is mentioned (in the text), the daughter of Kardama, the wife of Priyavrata.' [p. 162] The name Kanya is therefore most probably an error of the copyists. The Bhagavata calls the wife of Priyavrata, Varhishmati, the daughter of Vis'wakarman.

^162:2 These names nearly agree in the authorities which specify the descendants of Priyavrata, except in the Bhagavata: that has an almost entirely different series of names, or Agnidhra, Idhmajihwa, Yajnabahu, Mahavira, Hiranyaretas, Medhatithi, Ghritaprishtha, Savana, Vitihotra, and Kavi; with one daughter, Urjjaswati. It also calls the Manus Uttama, Tamasa, and Raivata the sons of Priyavrata by another wife.

^162:3 According to the Bhagavata, he drove his chariot seven times round the earth, and the ruts left by the wheels became the beds of the oceans, separating it into seven Dwipas.

^162:4 Even the Bhagavata concurs with the other Puranas in this series of Priyavrata's grandsons.

^163:5 Of these divisions, as well as of those of the earth, and of the minor divisions of the Varshas, we have further particulars in the following chapter.

^163:6 This place of pilgrimage has not been found elsewhere. The term is usually applied to a stone, an ammonite, which is supposed to be a type of Vishnu, and of which the worship is enjoined in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma P. and in the Brahma Vaivartta, authorities of no great weight or antiquity. As these stones are found chiefly in the Gandak river, the Salagrama Tirtha was probably at the source of that stream, or at its confluence with the Ganges. Its sanctity, and that of the stone, are probably of comparatively modern origin.

^163:7 'The great road,' or 'road of heroes.' The pebble was intended either to compel perpetual silence, or to prevent his eating. The Bhagavata [p. 164] adverts to the same circumstance. That work enters much more into detail on the subject of Rishabha's devotion, and particularizes circumstances not found in any other Purana. The most interesting of these are the scene of Rishabha's wanderings, which is said to be Konka, Venkata, Kutaka, and southern Karnataka, or the western part of the Peninsula; and the adoption of the Jain belief by the people of those countries. Thus it is said, "A king of the Konkas, Venkatas, and Kutakas, named Arhat, having heard the tradition of Rishabha's practices (or his wandering about naked, and desisting from religious rites), being infatuated by necessity, under the evil influence of the Kali age, will become needlessly alarmed, and abandon his own religious duty, and will foolishly enter upon an unrighteous and heretical path. Misled by him, and bewildered by the iniquitous operation of the Kali age, disturbed also by the delusions of the deity, wicked men will, in great numbers, desert the institutes and purifications of their own ritual; will observe vows injurious and disrespectful to the gods; will desist from ablutions, mouth-washings, and purifications, and will pluck out the hair of the head; and will revile the world, the deity, sacrifices, Brahmans, and the Vedas." It is also said, that Sumati, the son of Bharata, will be irreligiously worshipped by some infidels, as a divinity. Besides the import of the term Arhat, or Jain, Rishabha is the name of the first, and Sumati of the fifth Tirthakara, or Jain saint of the present era. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the Bhagavata intends this sect; and as the Jain system was not matured until a comparatively modern date, this composition is determined to be also recent. The allusions to the extension of the Jain faith in the western parts of the Peninsula, may serve to fix the limit of its probable antiquity to the 11th or 12th century, when the Jains seem to have been flourishing in Guzerat and the Konkan. As. Res. XVII. 232.

^164:8 This etymology is given in other Puranas; but the Matsya and Vayu have a different one, deriving it from the Manu, called Bharata, or the cherisher, one who rears or cherishes progeny. The Vayu has, in another place, the more common explanation also: ###.

^165:9 The Agni, Kurma, Markandeya, Linga, and Vayu Puranas agree with the Vishnu in these genealogical details. The Bhagavata has some additions and variations of nomenclature, but is not essentially different. It ends, however, with S'atajit, and cites a stanza which would seem to make Viraja the last of the descendants of Priyavrata.

^165:10 The descendants of Priyavrata were the kings of the earth in the first or Swayambhuva Manwantara. Those of Uttanapada, his brother, are placed rather incongruously in the second or Swarochisha Manwantara: whilst, with still more palpable inconsistency, Daksha, a descendant of Uttanapada, gives his daughter to Kas'yapa in the seventh or Vaivaswata Manwantara. It seems probable that the patriarchal genealogies are older than the chronological system of Manwantaras and Kalpas, and have been rather clumsily distributed amongst the different periods.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 166]

  

CHAP. II.

Description of the earth. The seven Dwipas and seven seas. Jambu-dwipa. Mount Meru: its extent and boundaries. Extent of Ilavrita. Groves, lakes, and branches of Meru. Cities of the gods. Rivers. The forms of Vishnu worshipped in different Varshas.

MAITREYA.--You have related to me, Brahman, the creation of Swayambhuva; I am now desirous to hear from you a description of the earth: how many are its oceans and islands, its kingdoms and its mountains, its forests and rivers and the cities of the gods, its dimensions, its contents, its nature, and its form.

PARAS'ARA.--You shall hear, Maitreya, a brief account of the earth from me: a full detail I could not give you in a century.

The seven great insular continents are Jambu, Plaksha, Salmali, Kus'a, Krauncha, S'aka, and Pushkara: and they are surrounded severally by seven great seas; the sea of salt water (Lavana), of sugar-cane juice (Ikshu), of wine (Sura), of clarified butter (Sarpi), of curds (Dadhi), of milk (Dugdha), and of fresh water (Jala) [*1].

Jambu-dwipa is in the centre of all these: and in the centre of this continent is the golden mountain Meru. The height of Meru is eighty-four thousand Yojanas; and its depth below the surface of the earth is

[p. 167]

sixteen thousand. Its diameter at the summit is thirty-two thousand Yojanas; and at its base, sixteen thousand: so that this mountain is like the seed-cup of the lotus of the earth [*2].

The boundary mountains (of the earth) are Himavan, Hemakuta, and Nishadha, which lie south of Meru; and Nila, S'weta, and S'ringi, which are situated to the north of it. The two central ranges (those next to Meru, or Nishadha and Nila) extend for a hundred thousand (Yojanas, running east and west). Each of the others diminishes ten thousand Yojanas, as it lies more remote from the centre. They are two thousand Yojanas in height, and as many in breadth [*3]. The Varshas or countries between these ranges are Bharata (India), south of the Himavan mountains;

[p. 168]

next Kimpurusha, between Himavan and Hemakuta; north of the latter, and south of Nishadha, is Hariversha; north of Meru is Ramyaka, extending from the Nila or blue mountains to the S'weta (or white) mountains; Hiranmaya lies between the S'weta and S'ringi ranges; and Uttarakuru is beyond the latter, following the same direction as Bharata [*4]. Each of these is nine thousand Yojanas in extent. Ilavrita is of similar dimensions, but in the centre of it is the golden mountain Meru, and the country extends nine thousand Yojanas in each direction from the four sides of the mountain [*5]. There are four mountains in this Varsha, formed as buttresses to Meru, each ten thousand Yojanas in elevation: that on the east is called Mandara; that on the south, Gandhamadana; that on the west, Vipula; and that on the north, Supars'wa [*6]: on each of these stands severally a Kadamba-tree, a Jambu-tree, a Pipal, and a Vata [*7]; each spreading over eleven hundred Yojanas, and towering aloft like banners on the mountains. From the Jambu-tree the insular continent Jambu-dwipa derives its appellations. The apples of that tree are as large as elephants: when they are rotten, they fall upon the crest of the mountain, and from their expressed juice is formed the Jambu river, the waters of which are drunk by the inhabitants; and in consequence of drinking of that stream, they pass their days in content and health, being subject neither to perspiration, to foul odours, to decrepitude, nor organic decay. The soil on the banks of the river, absorbing the Jambu juice, and being dried by gentle breezes, becomes the gold termed Jambunada, of which the ornaments of the Siddhas are fabricated.

[p. 169]

The country of Bhadras'wa lies on the east of Meru, and Ketumala on the west; and between these two is the region of Ilavrita. On the east of the same is the forest Chaitraratha; the Gandhamadana wood is on the south; the forest of Vaibhraja is on the west; and the grove of Indra, or Nandana, is on the north. There are also four great lakes, the waters of which are partaken of by the gods, called Arunoda, Mahabhadra, S'itoda, and Manasa [*8].

The principal mountain ridges which project from the base of Meru, like filaments from the root of the lotus, are, on the east, S'itanta, Mukunda, Kurari, Malyavan, and Vaikanka; on the south, Trikuta, S'is'ira, Patanga, Ruchaka, and Nishadha; on the west, S'ikhivasas, Vaidurya, Kapila, Gandhamadana, and Jarudhi; and on the north, S'ankhakuta, Rishabha, Naga, Hansa, and Kalanjara. These and others extend from between the intervals in the body, or from the heart, of Meru [*9].

On the summit of Meru is the vast city of Brahma, extending fourteen thousand leagues, and renowned in heaven; and around it, in the cardinal points and the intermediate quarters, are situated the stately cities of Indra and the other regents of the spheres [*10]. The capital of Brahma

[p. 170]

is enclosed by the river Ganges, which, issuing from the foot of Vishnu, and washing the lunar orb, falls here from the skies [*11], and, after encircling the city, divides into four mighty rivers, flowing in opposite directions. These rivers are the S'ita, the Alakananda, the Chakshu, and the Bhadra. The first, falling upon the tops of the inferior mountains, on the east side of Meru, flows over their crests, and passes through the country of Bhadras'wa to the ocean: the Alakananda flows south, to the country of Bharata, and, dividing into seven rivers on the way, falls into the sea: the Chakshu falls into the sea, after traversing all the western mountains, and passing through the country of Ketumala: and the

[p. 171]

[paragraph continues] Bhadra washes the country of the Uttara kurus, and empties itself into the northern ocean [*12].

Meru, then, is confined between the mountains Nila and Nishadha (on the north and south), and between Malyavan and Gandhamadana (on the west and east [*13]): it lies between them like the pericarp of a lotus. The countries of Bharata, Ketumala, Bhadras'wa, and Uttarakuru lie, like leaves of the lotus of the world, exterior to the boundary mountains. Jathara and Devakuta are two mountain ranges, running north and south, and connecting the two chains of Nishadha and Nila. Gandhamadana

[p. 172]

and Kailasa extend, east and west, eighty Yojanas in breadth, from sea to sea. Nishadha and Pariyatra are the limitative mountains on the west, stretching, like those on the east, between the Nila and Nishadha ranges: and the mountains Tris'ringa and Jarudhi are the northern limits of Meru, extending, east and west, between the two seas [*14]. Thus I have repeated to you the mountains described by great sages as the boundary mountains, situated in pairs, on each of the four sides of Meru. Those also, which have been mentioned as the filament mountains (or spurs), S'itanta and the rest, are exceedingly delightful. The vallies embosomed amongst them are the favourite resorts of the Siddhas and Charanas: and there are situated upon them agreeable forests, and pleasant cities, embellished with the palaces of Vishnu, Lakshmi, Agni, Surya, and other deities, and peopled by celestial spirits; whilst the Yakshas, Rakshasas, Daityas, and Danavas pursue their pastimes in the vales. These, in short, are the regions of Paradise, or Swarga, the seats of the righteous, and where the wicked do not arrive even after a hundred births.

[p. 173]

In the country of Bhadras'wa, Vishnu resides as Hayasira (the horse-headed); in Ketumala, as Varaha (the boar); in Bharata, as the tortoise (Kurma); in Kuru, as the fish (Matsya); in his universal form, every where; for Hari pervades all places: he, Maitreya, is the supporter of all things; he is all things. In the eight realms of Kimpurusha and the rest (or all exclusive of Bharata) there is no sorrow, nor weariness, nor anxiety, nor hunger, nor apprehension; their inhabitants are exempt from all infirmity and pain, and live in uninterrupted enjoyment for ten or twelve thousand years. Indra never sends rain upon them, for the earth abounds with water. In those places there is no distinction of Krita, Treta, or any succession of ages. In each of these Varshas there are respectively seven principal ranges of mountains, from which, oh best of Brahmans, hundreds of rivers take their rise [*15].

Footnotes

^166:1 The geography of the Puranas occurs in most of these works; and in all the main features, the seven Dwipas, seven seas, the divisions of Jambu-dwipa, the situation and extent of Meru, and the subdivisions of Bharata, is the same. The Agni and Brahma are word for word the same with our text; and the Kurma, Linga, Matsya, Markandeya, and Vayu present many passages common to them and the Vishnu, or to one another. The Vayu, as usual, enters most fully into particulars. The Bhagavata differs in its nomenclature of the subordinate details from all, and is followed by the Padma. The others either omit the subject, or advert to it but briefly. The Mahabharata, Bhishma Parva, has an account essentially the same, and many of the stanzas are common to it and different Puranas. It does not follow the same order, and has some peculiarities; one of which is calling Jambu-dwipa, Sudars'ana, such being the name of the Jambu-tree: it is said also to consist of two portions, called Pippala and S'as'a, which are reflected in the lunar orb, as in a mirror.

^167:2 The shape of Meru, according to this description, is that of an inverted cone; and by the comparison to the seed-cup its form should be circular: but there seems to be some uncertainty upon this subject amongst the Pauranics. The Padma compares its form to the bell-shaped flower of the Dhatura. The Vayu represents it as having four sides of different colours; or, white on the east, yellow on the south, black on the west, and red on the north; but notices also various opinions of the outline of the mountain, which, according to Atri, had a hundred angles; to Bhrigu, a thousand: Savarni calls it octangular; Bhaguri, quadrangular; and Varshayani says it has a thousand angles: Galava makes it saucer-shaped; Garga, twisted, like braided hair; and others maintain that it is circular. The Linga makes its eastern face of the colour of the ruby; its southern, that of the lotus; its western, golden; and its northern, coral. The Matsya has the same colours as the Vayu, and both contain this line: 'Four-coloured, golden, four-cornered lofty:' but the Vayu compares its summit, in one place, to a saucer; and observes that its circumference must be thrice its diameter. The Matsya also, rather incompatibly, says the measurement is that of a circular form, but it is considered quadrangular. According to the Buddhists of Ceylon, Meru is said to be of the same diameter throughout. Those of Nepal conceive it to be shaped like a drum. A translation of the description of Meru and its surrounding mountains, contained in the Brahmanda, which is the same exactly as that in the Vayu, occurs in the As. Researches, VIII. 343. There are some differences in Col. Wilford's version from that which my MSS. would authorize, but they are not in general of much importance. Some, no doubt, depend upon variations in the readings of the different copies: of others, I must question the accuracy.

^167:3 This diminution is the necessary consequence of the diminished radius of the circle of Jambu-dwipa, as the mountain ranges recede from the centre.

^168:4 These, being the two outer Varshas, are said to take the form of a bow; that is, they are exteriorly convex, being segments of the circle.

^168:5 The whole diameter of Jambu-dwipa has been said to be 100,000 Yojanas. This is thus divided from north to south: Ilavrita, in the centre, extends each way 9000, making 18000: Meru itself; at the base, is 16000: the six Varshas, at 9000 each, are equal to 54000: and the six ranges, at 2000 each, are 12000: and 18 + 16 + 54 + 12 = 100. From east to west the Varshas are of the extent necessary to occupy the space of the circle.

^168:6 The Bhagavata and Padma call these Mandara, Merumandara, Supars'wa, and Kumuda.

^168:7 Nauclea Kadamba, Eugenia Jambu, Ficus religiosa, and F. Indica. The Bhagavata substitutes a mango-tree for the Pipal; placing it on Mandara, the Jambu on Merumandara, the Kadamba on Supars'wa, and the Vata on Kumuda.

^169:8 The Bhagavata substitutes Sarvatobhadra for the Gandhamadana forest; and calls the lakes, lakes of milk, honey, treacle, and sweet water.

^169:9 The Vayu gives these names, and many more; and describes at great length forests, lakes, and cities of gods and demigods upon these fabulous mountains, or in the valleys between them. (As. Res. VIII. 354.)

^169:10 The Lokapalas, or eight deities in that character, Indra, Yama, Varuna, Kuvera, Vivaswat, Soma, Agni, and Vayu. Other cities of the gods are placed upon the spurs, or filament mountains, by the Vayu; or that of Brahma on Hemas'ringa, of S'ankara on Kalanjara, of Garuda on Vaikanka, and of Kuvera on Kailasa. Himavat is also specified by the same work as the scene of S'iva's penance, and marriage with Uma; of his assuming the form of a Kirata, or forester: of the birth of Kartikeya, in the S'ara forest; and of his dividing the mountain Krauncha with his spear. This latter legend, having been somewhat misunderstood by Col. Wilford, is made the theme of one of his fanciful verifications. "Here, he (the author of the Vayu) says, in the forest of S'ankha, was born Shadanana or Kartikeya, Mars with six faces. Here he wished or formed the resolution of going to the mountains of Crauncha, Germany, part of Poland, &c. to rest and recreate himself after his fatigues in the wars of the gods with the giants. There, in the skirts of the mountains [p. 170] of Crauncha, he flung his sword; the very same which Attila, in the fifth century, asserted he had found under a clod of earth. It was placed in his tomb, where it is probably to be found." As. Res. VIII. 364. The text of which this is in part a representation is, ###. The legend here alluded to is told at length in the Vamana Purana. Mahishasura, flying from the battle, in which Taraka had been slain by Kartikeya, took refuge in a cave in the Krauncha mountain. A dispute arising between Kartikeya and Indra, as to their respective prowess, they determined to decide the question by circumambulating the mountain; the palm to be given to him who should first go round it. Disagreeing about the result, they appealed to the mountain, who untruly decided in favour of Indra. Kartikeya, to punish his injustice, hurled his lance at the mountain Krauncha, and pierced at once it and the demon Mahisha. Another division of Krauncha is ascribed to Paras'urama. Megha Duta, v.59. Krauncha is also sometimes considered to be the name of an Asura, killed by Kartikeya; but this is perhaps some misapprehension of the Pauranic legend by the grammarians, springing out of the synonymes of Kartikeya, Kraunchari, Kraunchadarana, &c., implying the foe or destroyer of Krauncha, occurring in the Amara, and other Koshas.

^170:11 The Bhagavata is more circumstantial. The river flowed over the great toe of Vishnu's left foot, which had previously, as he lifted it up, made a fissure in the shell of the mundane egg, and thus gave entrance to the heavenly stream. The Vayu merely brings it from the lunar orb, and takes no notice of Vishnu's interposition. In a different passage it describes the detention of Ganga amidst the tresses of S'iva, in order to correct her arrogance, until the divinity was moved by the penance and prayers of king Bhagiratha to set her free. The Mahabharata represents S'iva's bearing the river for a hundred years on his head, merely to prevent its falling too suddenly on the mountains.

^171:12 Although the Vayu has this account, it subsequently inserts another, which is that also of the Matsya and Padma. In this the Ganges, after escaping from S'iva, is said to have formed seven streams; the Nalini, Hladini, and Pavani going to the east; the Chakshu, S'ita, and Sindhu to the wrest; and the Bhagirathi to the south. The Mahabharata calls them Vaswaukasara, Nalini, Pavani, Ganga, S'ita, Sindhu, and Jambunadi. The more usual legend, however, is the first, and it offers some trace of actual geography. Mr. Faber, indeed, thinks that Meru, with the surrounding Varsha of Ilavrita, and its four rivers, is a representation of the garden of Eden. (Pagan Idolatry, I. 315.) However this may he, it seems not unlikely to have originated in some imperfect account of four great rivers flowing from the Himalaya, and the high lands north of that range, towards the cardinal points: the Bhadra, to the north, representing the Oby of Siberia; and the S'ita, the river of China, or Hoangho. The Alakananda is well known as a main branch of the Ganges, near its source; and the Chakshus is very possibly, as Major Wilford supposed, the Oxus. (As. Res. VIII. 309.) The printed copy of the Bhagavata, and the MS. Padma, read Bankshu; but the former is the more usual reading. It is said, in the Vayu, of Ketumala, through which this river runs, that it is peopled by various races of barbarians.

^171:13 The text applies the latter name so variously as to cause confusion: it is given to one of the four buttresses of Meru, that on the south; to one of the filament mountains, on the west; to a range of boundary mountains, on the south; and to the Varsha of Ketumala: here another mountain range is intended, or a chain running north and south, upon the east of Ilavrita, connecting the Nila and Nishadha ranges. Accordingly the Vayu states it to be 34000 Yojanas in extent; that is, the diameter of Meru 16000, and the breadth of Ilavrita on each side of it, or together 18000. A similar range, that of Malyavan, bounds Ilavrita on the west. It was probably to avoid the confusion arising from similarity of. nomenclature, that the author of the Bhagavata substituted different names for Gandhamadana in the other instances, calling the buttress, as we have seen, Merumandara; the southern forest, Sarvatobhadra; and the filament mountain, Hansa; restricting the term Gandhamadana to the eastern range: a correction, it may be remarked, corroborative of a subsequent date.

^172:14 These eight mountains are similarly enumerated in the Bhagavata and Vayu, but no mention is made in them of any seas, and it is clear that the eastern and western oceans cannot be intended, as the mountains Malyavat and Gandhamadana intervene. The commentator would seem to understand 'Arnava' as signifying 'mountain,' as he says between the seas means within Malyavat and Gandhamadana; The Bhagavata describes these eight mountains as circling Meru for 18000 Yojanas in each direction, leaving, according to the commentator, an interval of a thousand Yojanas between them and the base of the central mountain, and being 2000 high, and as many broad: they may be understood to be the exterior barriers of Meru, separating it from Ilavritta. The names of these mountains, according to the Bhagavata, are Jathara and Devakuta on the east, Pavana and Paripatra on the west, Tris'ringa and Makara on the north, and Kailasa and Karavira on the south. Without believing it possible to verify the position of these different creations of the legendary geography of the Hindus, it can scarcely admit of doubt that the scheme was suggested by imperfect acquaintance with the actual character of the country, by the four great ranges, the Altai, Muztag or Thian-shan, Ku-en-nun, and Himalaya, which traverse central Asia in a direction from east to west, with a greater or less inclination from north to south, which are connected or divided by many lofty transverse ridges, which enclose several large lakes, and which give rise to the great rivers that water Siberia, China, Tartary, and Hindustan. (Humboldt on the mountains of Central Asia, and Ritter. Geogr. Asia.)

^173:15 More ample details of the Varshas are given in the Mahabharata, Bhagavata, Padma, Vayu, Kurma, Linga, Matsya, and Markandeya Puranas; but they are of an entirely fanciful nature. Thus of the Ketumala-varsha it is said, in the Vayu, the men are black, the women of the complexion of the lotus; the people subsist upon the fruit of the Panasa or jack-tree, and live for ten thousand years, exempt from sorrow or sickness: seven Kula or main ranges of mountains in it are named, and a long list of countries and rivers is added, none of which can be identified with any actually existing, except perhaps the greats river the Suchakshus, the Amu or Oxus. According to the Bhagavata, Vishnu is worshipped as Kamadeva in Ketumala. The Vayu says the object of adoration there is Is'wara, the son of Brahma. Similar circumstances are asserted of the other Varshas. See also As. Res. VIII. 352.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 174]

  

CHAP. III.

Description of Bharata-varsha: extent: chief mountains: nine divisions: principal rivers and mountains of Bharata proper: principal nations: superiority over other Varshas, especially as the seat of religious acts. (Topographical lists.)

THE country that lies north of the ocean, and south of the snowy mountains, is called Bharata, for there dwelt the descendants of Bharata. It is nine thousand leagues in extent [*1], and is the land of works, in consequence of which men go to heaven, or obtain emancipation.

The seven main chains of mountains in Bharata are Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, S'uktimat, Riksha, Vindhya, and Paripatra [*2].

From this region heaven is obtained, or even, in some cases, liberation

[p. 175]

from existence; or men pass from hence into the condition of brutes, or fall into hell. Heaven, emancipation, a state in mid-air, or in the subterraneous realms, succeeds to existence here, and the world of acts is not the title of any other portion of the universe.

The Varsha of Bharata is divided into nine portions, which I will name to you; they are Indra-dwipa, Kaserumat, Tamravarna, Gabhastimat, Naga-dwipa, Saumya, Gandharba, and Varuna; the last or ninth Dwipa is surrounded by the ocean, and is a thousand Yojanas from north to south [*3].

On the east of Bharata dwell the Kiratas (the barbarians); on the west, the Yavanas; in the centre reside Brahmans, Kshetriyas, Vais'yas, and S'udras, occupied in their respective duties of sacrifice, arms, trade, and service [*4].

The S'atadru, Chandrabhaga, and other rivers, flow from the foot of

[p. 176]

[paragraph continues] Himalaya: the Vedasmriti and others from the Paripatra mountains: the Narmada and Surasa from the Vindhya hills: the Tapi, Payoshni, and Nirvindhya from the Riksha mountains; the Godaveri, Bhimarathi, Krishnaveni, and others, from the Sahya mountains: the Kritamala, Tamraparni, and others, from the Malaya hills: the Trisama, Rishikulya, &c. from the Mahendra: and the Rishikulya, Kumari, and others, from the S'uktimat mountains. Of such as these, and of minor rivers, there is an infinite number; and many nations inhabit the countries on their borders [*5].

The principal nations of Bharata are the Kurus and Panchalas, in the middle districts: the people of Kamarupa, in the east: the Pundras,

[p. 177]

[paragraph continues] Kalingas, Magadhas, and southern nations, are in the south: in the extreme west are the Saurashtras, S'uras, Bhiras, Arbudas: the Karushas and Malavas, dwelling along the Paripatra mountains: the Sauviras, the Saindhavas, the Hunas, the Salwas, the people of S'akala, the Madras, the Ramas, the Ambashthas, and the Parasikas, and others. These nations drink of the water of the rivers above enumerated, and inhabit their borders, happy and prosperous [*6].

[p. 178]

In the Bharata-varsha it is that the succession of four Yugas, or ages, the Krita, the Treta, the Dwapara, and Kali, takes place; that pious ascetics engage in rigorous penance; that devout men offer sacrifices; and that gifts are distributed; all for the sake of another world. In Jambu-dwipa, Vishnu, consisting of sacrifice, is worshipped, as the male of sacrificial rites, with sacrificial ceremonies: he is adored under other forms elsewhere. Bharata is therefore the best of the divisions of Jambu-dwipa, because it is the land of works: the others are places of enjoyment alone. It is only after many thousand births, and the aggregation of much merit, that living beings are sometimes born in Bharata as men. The gods themselves exclaim, "Happy are those who are born, even from the condition of gods, as men in Bharata-varsha, as that is the way to the pleasures of Paradise, or the greater blessing of final liberation. Happy are they who, consigning all the unheeded rewards of their acts to the supreme and eternal Vishnu, obtain existence in that land of works, as their path to him. We know not, when the acts that have obtained us heaven shall have been fully recompensed [*7], where we shall renew corporeal confinement; but we know that those men are fortunate who are born with perfect faculties [*8] in Bharata-varsha."

I have thus briefly described to you, Maitreya, the nine divisions of Jambu-dwipa, which is a hundred thousand Yojanas in extent, and which is encircled, as if by a bracelet, by the ocean of salt water, of similar dimensions.

Footnotes

^174:1 As Bharata-varsha means India, a nearer approach to the truth, with regard to its extent, might have been expected; and the Vayu has another measurement, which is not much above twice the actual extent, or 1000 Yojanas from Kumari (Comorin) to the source of the Ganges.

^174:2 These are called the Kula parvatas, family mountains, or mountain ranges or systems. They are similarly enumerated in all the authorities, and their situation may be determined with some confidence by the rivers which flow from them. Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orissa and the northern Circars to Gondwana, part of which, near Ganjam, is still called Mahindra Malei, or hills of Mahindra: Malaya is the southern portion of the western Ghats: S'uktimat is doubtful, for none of its streams can be identified with any certainty: Sahya is the northern portion of the western Ghauts, the mountains of the Konkan: Riksha is the mountains of Gondwana: Vindhya is the general name of the chain that stretches across central India, but it is here restricted to the eastern division; according to the Vayu it is the part south of the Narmada, or the Sathpura range: Paripatra, as frequently written Pariyatra, is the northern and western portion of the Vindhya: the name, indeed, is still given to a range of mountains in Guzerat (see Col. Tod's map of Rajasthan), but the Chambal and other rivers of Malwa, which are said to flow from the Pariyatra mountains, do not rise in that province. All these mountains therefore belong to one system, and are connected together. The classification seems to have been known to Ptolemy, as he specifies seven ranges of mountains, although his names do not correspond, with exception of the Vindus mons: of the others, the Adisathrus and Uxentus agree nearly in position with the Pariyatra and Riksha: the Apocopi, Sardonix, Bettigo, and Orudii must be left for consideration. The Bhagavata, Vayu, Padma, and Markandeya add a list of inferior mountains to these seven.

^175:3 This last is similarly left without a name in all the works: it is the most southerly, that on the borders of the sea, and no doubt intends India proper. Wilford places Isere a division called Kumarika. No description is anywhere attempted of the other divisions. To these the Vayu adds six minor Dwipas, which are situated beyond sea, and are islands, Anga-dwipa, Yama-d., Matsya-d., Kumuda or Kus'a-d., Varaha-d., and Sankha-d.; peopled for the most part by Mlechchhas, but who worship Hindu divinities. The Bhagavata and Padma name eight such islands, Swarnaprastha, Chandras'ukla, Avarttana, Ramanaka, Mandahara, Panchajanya, Sinhala, and Lanka. Col. Wilford has endeavoured to verify the first series of Upadwipas, making Varaha Europe; Kus'a, Asia Minor, &c.; S'ankha, Africa; Malaya, Malacca: Yama is undetermined; and by Anga, he says, they understand China. How all this may be is more than doubtful, for in the three Puranas in which mention is made of them, very little more is said upon the subject.

^175:4 By Kiratas, foresters and mountaineers are intended, the inhabitants to the present day of the mountains east of Hindustan. The Yavanas, on the west, may be either the Greeks of Bactria and the Punjab--to whom there can be little doubt the term was applied by the Hindus--or the Mohammedans, who succeeded them in a later period, and to whom it is now applied. The Vayu calls them both Mlechchhas, and also notices the admixture of barbarians with Hindus in India proper. The same passage, slightly varied, occurs in the Mahabharata: it is said especially of the mountainous districts, and may allude therefore to the Gonds and Bhils of central India, as well as to the Mohammedans of the north-west. The specification implies that infidels and outcastes had not yet descended on the plains of Hindustan.

^176:5 This is a very meagre list, compared with those given in other Puranas. That of the Vayu is translated by Col. Wilford, As. Res. vol. VIII; and much curious illustration of many of the places by the same writer occurs, As. Res. vol. XIV. The lists of the Mahabharata, Bhagavata, and Padma are given without any arrangement: those of the Vayu, Matsya, Markandeya, and Kurma are classed as in the text. Their lists are too long for insertion in this place. Of the rivers named in the text, most are capable of verification. The S'atadru, 'the hundred channelled'--the Zaradrus of Ptolemy, Hesidrus of Pliny--is the Setlej. The Chandrabhaga, Sandabalis, or Acesines, is the Chinab. The Vedasmriti in the Vayu and Kurma is classed with the Vetravati or Betwa, the Charmanwati or Chambal, and Sipra and Para, rivers of Malwa, and may be the same with the Beos of the maps. The Narmada or Narbadda, the Namadus of Ptolemy, is well known; according to the Vayu it rises, not in the Vindhya, but in the Riksha mountains, taking its origin in fact in Gondwana. The Surasa is uncertain. The Tapi is the Tapti, rising also in Gondwana: the other two are not identified. The Godaveri preserves its name: in the other two we have the Beemah and the Krishna. For Kritamala the Kurma reads Ritumala, but neither is verified. The Tamraparni is in Tinivelly, and rises at the southern extremity of the western Ghats. The Rishikulya, that rises in the Mahendra mountain, is the Rasikulia or Rasikoila, which flows into the sea near Ganjam. The Trisama is undetermined. The text assigns another Rishikulya to the S'uktimat mountains, but in all the other authorities the word is Rishika. The Kumari might suggest some connexion with Cape Comorin, but that the Malaya mountains seem to extend to the extreme south. A Rishikulya river is mentioned (Vana P. v. 3026) as a Tirtha in the Mahabharata, in connexion apparently with the hermitage of Vas'ishtha, which in another passage (v. 4096) is said to be on mount Arbuda or Abu. In that case, and if the reading of the text be admitted for the name of the river, the S'uktimat range would be the mountains of Guzerat; but this is doubtful.

^177:6 The list of nations is as scanty as that of the rivers: it is, however, omitted altogether in the Bhagavata. The Padma has a long catalogue, but without arrangement; so has the Mahabharata. The lists of the Vayu, Matsya, and Markandeya class the nations as central, northern, eastern, southern, and western. The names are much the same in all, and are given in the 8th vol. of the As. Res. from the Brahmanda, or, for it is the same account, the Vayu. The Markandeya has a second classification, and, comparing Bharata-varsha to a tortoise, with its head to the east, enumerates the countries in the head, tail, flanks, and feet of the animal. It will be sufficient here to attempt an identification of the names in the text, but some further illustration is offered at the end of the chapter. The Kurus are the people of Kurukshetra, or the upper part of the Doab, about Delhi. The Panchalas, it appears from the Mahabharata, occupied the lower part of the Doab, extending across the Jumna to the Chambal. Kulluka Bhatta, in his commentary on Manu, II. 59, places them at Kanoj. Kamarupa is the north-eastern part of Bengal, and western portion of Asam. Pundra is Bengal proper, with part of south Behar and the Jungle Mahals. Kalinga is the sea-coast west of the mouths of the Ganges, with the upper part of the Coromandel coast. Magadha is Behar. The Saurashtras are the people of Surat, the Surastrene of Ptolemy. The S'uras and Bhiras, in the same direction, may be the Suri and Phauni or Phryni of Strabo. The Arbudas must be the people about mount Abu, or the natives of Mewar. The Karushas and Malavas are of course the people of Malwa. The Sauviras and Saindhavas are usually conjoined as the Sindhu-Sauviras, and must be the nations of Sindh and western Rajputana. By the Minas we are to understand the white Huns or Indo-Scythians, who were established in the Punjab and along the Indus at the commencement of our era, as we know from Arrian, Strabo, and Ptolemy, confirmed by recent discoveries of their coins, The S'alwas or, as also read, S'alyas are placed by the Vayu and Matsya amongst the central nations, and seem to have occupied part of Rajasthan, a S'alwa Raja being elsewhere described as engaging in hostilities with the people of Dwaraka in Guzerat. S'akala, as I have elsewhere noticed, is a city in the Punjab (As. Res. XV. 108), the Sagala of Ptolemy (ibid. 107); the Mahabharata makes it the capital of the Madras, the Mardi of the ancients; but they are separately named in the text, and were situated something more to the south-east. [p. 178] The Ramas and Ambashthas are not named in the other Puranas, but the latter are amongst the western, or more properly north-western nations subjugated by Nakula, in his Dig-vijaya. Mahabh. Sabha P. Ambas and Ambashthas are included in the list extracted by Col. Wilford from the Varaha Sanhita, and the latter are supposed by him to be the Ambastae of Arrian. The Parasikas carry us into Persia, or that part of it adjoining to the Indus. As far as the enumeration of the text extends, it seems applicable to the political and geographical divisions of India about the era of Christianity.

^178:7 Enjoyment in Swarga, like punishment in Naraka, is only for a certain period, according to the merit or demerit of the individual. When the account is balanced, the man is born again amongst mankind.

^178:8 A crippled or mutilated person, or one whose organs are defective, cannot at once obtain liberation; his merits must first secure his being born again perfect and entire.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 179]

  

TOPOGRAPHICAL LISTS,

From the Mahabharata, Bhishma Parva, II. 342.

  

MOUNTAINS AND RIVERS [*1].

SANJAYA speaks to Dhritarashtra.--Hear me, monarch, in reply to your inquiries, detail to you the particulars of the country of Bharata.

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, S'uktimat [*2], Gandhamadana, Vindhya, and Paripatra are the seven mountain ranges: as subordinate portions of them are thousands of mountains; some unheard of, though lofty, extensive, and abrupt; and others better known, though of lesser elevation, and inhabited by people of low stature [*3]: there pure and degraded tribes, mixed together, drink [*4] of the following streams: the stately Ganga, the Sindhu, and the Saraswati [*5]; the Godavari, Narmada, and the great river

[p. 181]

[paragraph continues] Bahuda [*6]; the S'atadru, Chandrabhaga, and great river Yamuna; the Drishadwati [*7], Vipas'a [*8], and Vipapa, with coarse sands; the Vetravati, the deep Krishnaveni, the Iravati [*9], Vitasta [*10], Pavoshni [*11], and

[p. 182]

[paragraph continues] Devika [*12]; the Vedasmrita, Vedavati [*13], Tridiva [*14], Ikshumalavi [*15], Karishini, Chitrabaha, the deep Chitrasena, the Gomati, the Dhutapapa, and the great river Gandaki [*16]; the Kaus'iki, Nis'chita [*17], Kritya, Nichita, Lohatarini [*18], Rahasya, S'atakumbha, and also the S'arayu [*19], the Charmanvati, Chandrabhaga [*20], Hastisoma, Dis, S'aravati [*21], Payoshni, Para [*22], and Bhimarathi [*23], Kaveri [*24], Chulaka [*25], Vina [*26], Satabala, Nivara, Mahita [*27],

[p. 183]

Suprayoga [*28] Pavitra [*29], Kundala, Sindhu [*30], Rajani [*31], Puramalini, Purvabhirama, Vira, Bhima [*32], Oghavati, Palas'ini [*33], Papahara, Mahendra, Patalavati [*34], Karishini, Asikni, the great river Kus'achira [*35], the Makari [*36], Pravara, Mena [*37], Hema, and Dhritavati [*38], Puravati [*39], Anushna [*40], Saivya, Kapi [*41], Sadanira [*42], Adhrishya, the great river Kus'adhara [*43], Sadakanta [*44], S'iva, Viravati, Vastu, Suvastu [*45], Gauri, Kampana [*46], Hiranvati, Vara, Virankara, Panchami, Rathachitra, Jyotiratha, Viswamitra [*47], Kapinjala, Upendra, Bahula, Kuchira [*48], Madhuvahini [*49], Vinadi [*50], Pinjala, Vena, Tungavena [*51], Vidis'a [*52], Krishnavena, Tamra, Kapila, Selu, Suvama [*53], Vedas'wa, Haris'rava, Mahopama [*54], S'ighra, Pichchhala [*55], the deep Bharadwaji, the Kaus'iki, the Sona [*56], Bahuda, and Chandrama, Durga,

[p. 184]

[paragraph continues] Amtras'ila [*57], Brahmabodhya, Vrihadvati, Yavaksha [*58], Rohi, Jambunadi, Sunasa [*59], Tamasa [*60], Dasi, Vasa, Varana, Asi [*61], Nala, Dhritamati, Purnas'a [*62], Tamasi [*63], Vrishabha, Brahmamedhya, Vrihadvati. These and many other large streams, as the Krishna [*64], whose waters are always salubrious, and the slow-flowing Mandavahini [*65], the Brahmani [*66], Mahagauri, Durga [*67], Chitropala [*68], Chitraratha, Manjula [*69], Mandakini [*70], Vaitarani [*71], the great river Kos'a [*72], the Muktimati [*73], Maninga [*74], Pushpaveni, Utpalavati, Lohitya [*75], Karatoya [*76], Vrishakahwa [*77], Kumari, Rishikulya [*78], Marisha, Saraswati, Mandakini, Punya [*79], Sarvasanga; all these, the

[p. 185]

universal mothers, productive of abundance, besides hundreds of inferior note, are the rivers of Bharata, according to remembrance [*80].

  

PEOPLE AND COUNTRIES.

Next hear from me, descendant of Bharata, the names of the inhabitants of the different countries, They are the Kurus, Panchalas [*1], S'alwas, Madreyas, and dwellers in thickets (Jangalas), S'urasenas [*2], Kalingas [*3], Bodhas [*4], Malas [*5], Matsyas [*6], Sukutyas [*7], Sauvalyas [*8], Kuntalas [*9],

[p. 186]

[paragraph continues] Kas'ikosalas [*10], Chedyas [*11], Matsyas [*12], Karushas [*13], Bhojas [*14], Sindhupulindas [*15], Uttamas [*16], Das'arnas [*17], Mekalas [*18], Utkalas [*19], Panchalas [*20],

[p. 187]

[paragraph continues] Kaus'ijas [*21], Naikaprishthas [*22], Dhurandharas [*23], Sodhas [*24], Madrabhujingas [*25], Kas'is [*26], Aparakas'is, Jatharas, Kukuras, Dasarnas, Kuntis, Avantis [*27], Aparakuntis [*28], Goghnatas [*29], Mandakas, Shandas [*30], Vidarbhas [*31], Rupavahikas [*32],

[p. 188]

[paragraph continues] As'wakas [*33], Pansurashtras, Goparashtras [*34], Karitis [*35], the people of Adhivajya [*36], Kuladya [*37], Mallarashtra [*38], and Kerala [*39]; the Varapasis [*40], Apavarhas [*41], Chakras [*42], Vakratapas and S'akas [*43], Videhas [*44], Magadhas [*45], Swakshas [*46], Malayas [*47], and Vijayas [*48]; the Angas [*49], Vangas [*50], Kalingas [*51] and Yakrillomas, Mallas [*52], Sudellas [*53], Prahladas, Mahikas [*54] and

[p. 189]

[paragraph continues] S'as'ikas [*55], Bahlikas [*56], Vatadhanas [*57], Abhiras [*58] and Kalajoshakas [*59], Aparantas [*60], Parantas, Pahnavas [*61], Charmamandalas [*62], Atavis'ikharas and Merubhutas [*63], Upavrittas, Anupavrittas, Swarashtras [*64], Kekayas [*65],

[p. 190]

[paragraph continues] Kuttaparantas [*66], Maheyas [*67], Kakshas [*68], dwellers on the sea-shore, and the Andhas and many tribes residing within and without the hills; the Malajas [*69], Magadhas [*70], Manavarjjakas [*71]; those north of the Mahi (Mahyuttaras), the Pravrisheyas, Bhargavas [*72], Pundras [*73], Bhargas [*74], Kiratas, Sudeshtas; and the people on the Yamuna (Yamunas), S'akas, Nishadas [*75], Nishadhas [*76], Anarttas [*77]; and those in the south-west (Nairritas), the Durgalas, Pratimasyas [*78], Kuntalas, Kus'alas [*79], Tiragrahas,

[p. 191]

[paragraph continues] Surasenas, Ijikas [*80], Kanyakagunas, Tilabaras, Samiras, Madhumattas, Sukandakas, Kas'miras [*81], Sindhusauviras [*82], Gandharas [*83], Dars'akas [*84], Abhisaras [*85], Utulas [*86], S'aivalas [*87], and Bahlikas [*88]; the people of Darvi [*89], the

[p. 192]

[paragraph continues] Vanavas, Darvas, Vatajamarathorajas, Bahubadhas [*90], Kauravyas, Sudamas [*91], Sumallis, Badhnas, Karishakas, Kulindapatyakas, Vatayanas [*92], Das'arnas [*93], Romanas [*94], Kus'avindus, Kakshas [*95], Gopala-kakshas [*96], Jangalas [*97], Kuruvarnakas [*98], Kiratas, Barbaras [*99], Siddhas, Vaidehas [*100] Tamraliptas [*101], Audras [*102], Paundras [*103], dwellers in sandy tracts (S'ais'ikatas), and in mountains (Parvatiyas). Moreover, chief of the sons of Bharata, there are the nations of the south, the Draviras [*104], Keralas [*105], Prachyas [*106], Mushikas [*107], and Vanavasakas [*108]; the Karnatakas [*109], Mahishakas [*110], Vikalyas [*111] and Mushakas [*112], Jillikas [*113], Kuntalas [*114], Sauhridas,

[p. 193]

[paragraph continues] Nalakananas [*115], Kaukuttakas [*116], Cholas [*117], Kaunkanas [*118], Malavanas [*119], Samangas, Karakas, Kukkuras, Angaras [*120], Dhwajinyutsavasanketas [*121], Trigarttas [*122], S'alwasenis, S'akas [*123], Kokarakas [*124], Proshtas, Samavegavasas [*125]. There are also the Vindhyachulukas [*126], Pulindas and Kalkalas [*127], Malavas [*128], Mallavas [*129], Aparavallabhas, Kulindas [*130], Kalavas [*131], Kunthakas [*132], Karatas [*133], Mushakas, Tanabalas [*134], Saniyas [*135], Ghatasrinjayas [*136], Alindayas [*137], Pas'ivatas [*138], Tanayas [*139], Sunayas [*140], Das'ividarbhas [*141], Kantikas [*142], Tanganas [*143], Paratanganas, northern and

[p. 194]

other fierce barbarians (Mlechchhas), Yavanas [*144], Chinas [*145], Kambojas [*146]; ferocious and uncivilized races, S'akridgrahas [*147], Kulatthas [*148], Hunas, and Parasikas [*149]; also Ramanas [*150], Chinas, Das'amalikas [*151], those living near the Kshatriyas, and Vais'yas and S'udras [*152]; also

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] S'udras [*153], Abhiras [*154], Daradas [*155], Kas'miras, with Pattis [*156], Khasiras [*157], Antacharas or borderers, Pahnavas [*158], and dwellers in mountain caves

[p. 196]

[paragraph continues] (Girigahvaras [*159]), Atreyas, Bharadwajas [*160], Stanayoshikas [*161], Proshakas [*162], Kalinga [*163], and tribes of Kiratas, Tomaras, Hansamargas, and Karabhanjikas [*164]. These and many other nations, dwelling in the east and in the north, can be only thus briefly noticed [*165].

Footnotes

^179:1 In attempting to verify the places or people specified in the text, various difficulties are to be encountered, which must serve to apologize for but partial success. Some are inherent in the subject, such as the changes which have taken place in the topography of India since the lists were compiled, and the imperfectness of the specification itself: states and tribes and cities have disappeared, even from recollection, and some of the natural features of the country, especially the rivers, have undergone a total alteration. Buchanan (Description of Eastern Hindustan), following Rennell over the same ground at an interval of some thirty or forty years, remarks that many of the streams laid down in the Bengal Atlas (the only series of maps of India yet published, that can be regarded as of authority) are no longer to be traced. Then the lists which are given are such mere catalogues, that they afford no clue to verification beyond names; and names have been either changed or so corrupted, as to be no longer recognizable. On the other hand, much of the difficulty arises from our own want of knowledge. Scattered through the Puranas and other works, the names given in the topographical lists recur with circumstances which fix their locality; but these means of verification have not yet been sufficiently investigated. There are also geographical treatises in Sanscrit, which there is reason to believe afford much accurate and interesting information: they are not common. Col. Wilford speaks of having received a number from Jaypur, but upon his death they disappeared. After a considerable interval some of his MSS. were purchased for the Calcutta Sanscrit College, but by far the larger portion of his collection had been dispersed. A few leaves only on geographical subjects were found, from which I translated and published a chapter on the geography of some of the districts of Bengal: (Calcutta Quarterly Magazine, Dec. 1824:) the details were accurate and valuable, though the compilation was modern. Notwithstanding these impediments, however, we should be able to identify at least mountains and rivers to a much greater extent than is now practicable, if our maps were not so miserably defective in their nomenclature. None of our surveyors or geographers have been Oriental scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been conversant with the spoken language of the country: they have consequently put down names at [p. 180] random, according to their own inaccurate appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are crowded with appellations which bear no similitude whatever either to past or present denominations. We need not wonder that we cannot discover Sanscrit names in English maps, when, in the immediate vicinity of Calcutta, Barnagore represents Varahanagar, Dakshineswar is metamorphosed into Duckinsore,and Ulubaria is Anglicised into Willoughbruy. Going a little farther off, we have Dalkisore for Darikeswari, Midnapore for Medinipur, and a most unnecessary accumulation of consonants in Caughmahry for Kakamari. There is scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of extreme indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is in some degree, perhaps, a national defect.

^180:2 The printed edition reads S'aktimat, which is also found in some MSS., but the more usual reading is that of the text. I may here add that a S'uktimat mountain occurs in Bhima's invasion of the eastern region. Mahabh. Sabha P. Gandhamadana here takes the place of Riksha.

^180:3 For additional mountains in the Vayu, see Asiatic Researches, VIII. 334 The Bhagavata, Padma, and Markandeya add the following: Mainaka, which it appears from the Ramayana is at the source of the Sone, that river being termed Mainakaprabhava. 'Kishkindhya Kanda;' Trikuta, called also in Hemachanchra's vocabulary Suvela; Rishabha, Kutaka, Konwa, Devagiri (Deogur or Ellora, the mountain of the gods; the Apocopi are said by Ptolemy to be also called mountains of the gods); Rishyamuka, in the Dekhin, where the Pampa rises; S'ri-s'aila or S'ri-parvata, near the Krishna (As. Res. V. 303); Venkata, the hill of Tripati, Varidhara, Mangala-prastha, Drona, Chitrakuta (Chitrakote in Bundelkhand), Govarddhana (near Mathura), Raivata, the range that branches off from the western portion of the Vindhya towards the north, extending nearly to the Jumna; according to Hemachandra it is the Girinara range; it is the Aravali of Tod; Kakubha, Nila (the blue mountains of Orissa), Gohamukha, Indrakila, Ramagiri (Ram-tek, near Nag-pur), Valakrama, Sudhama, Tungaprastha, Naga (the hills east of Ramghur), Bodhana, Pandara, Durjayanta, Arbuda (Abu in Guzerat), Gomanta (in the western Ghats), Kutas'aila, Kritasmara, and Chakora. Many single mountains are named in different works.

^180:4 See note 4, p. 175.

^180:5 The Sarsuti, or Caggar or Gaggar, N. W. of Tahnesar. See below, note [*6].

^181:6 The Bahuda is elsewhere said to rise in the Himalaya. Wilford considers it to be the Mahanada, which falls into the Ganges below Malda. The Mahabharata has amongst the Tirthas, or places of pilgrimage, two rivers of this name, one apparently near the Saraswati, one more to the east. Hemachandra gives as synonymes Arjuni and Saitavahini, both implying the 'white river:' a main feeder of the Mahanada is called Dhavali or Daub, which has the same meaning.

^181:7 The Drishadwati is a river of considerable importance in the history of the Hindus, although no traces of its ancient name exist. According to Manu it is one boundary of the district called Brahmavartta, in which the institution of castes, and their several duties, had for ever existed: implying that in other places they were of more recent origin. This holy land, 'made by the gods,' was of very limited extent. Its other boundary was the Saraswati. That the Drishadwati was not far off we learn from Manu, as Kurukshetra, Matsya, Panchala, and S'urasena, or the upper part of the Doab, and country to the east, were not included in Brahmavartta; they constituted Brahmarshi-des'a, contiguous to it: Kulluka Bhatta explains Anantara, 'something less or inferior;' but it more probably means 'not divided from,' 'immediately contiguous.' We must look for the Drishadwati, therefore, west of the Jumna. In the Tirtha Yatra of the Mahabharata we find it forming one of the boundaries of Kurukshetra. It is there said, 'Those who dwell on the south of the Saraswati, and north of the Drishadwati, or in Kurukshetra, dwell in heaven.' In the same place, the confluence of the Drishadwati with a stream of Kurukshetra, called the Kaus'iki, is said to be of peculiar sanctity. Kurukshetra is the country about Tahnesur or Sthanes'wara, where a spot called Kurukhet still exists, and is visited in pilgrimage. The Kirin-kshetra of Manu may be intended for the country of the Kurus, in the more immediate vicinity of Delhi. According to Wilford, the Drishadwati is the Caggar; in which case our maps have taken the liberty of transposing the names of the rivers, as the Caggar now is the northern stream, and the Sursooty the southern, both rising in the Himalaya, and uniting to form one river, called Gagar or Caggar in the maps, but more correctly Sarsuti or Saraswati; which then runs south-west, and is lost in the desert. There have no doubt been considerable changes here, both in the nomenclature and in the courses of the rivers.

^181:8 The Beyah, Hyphasis, or Bibasis.

^181:9 The Ravi or Hydraotes or Adris.

^181:10 The Jhelum, but still called in Kashmir the Vitasta, the Bidaspes or Hydaspes.

^181:11 This river, according to the Vishnu P., rises from the Riksha mountains, but the Vayu and Kurma bring it from the Vindhya or Sathpura range. There are several indications of its position in the Mahabharata, but none very precise. Its [p. 182] source appears to be near that of the Krishna: it flows near the beginning of the Dandaka forest, which should place it rather near to the sources of the Godavari: it passes through Vidarbha or Berar, and, Yudhishthira having bathed in it, comes to the Vaidurya mountain and the Narmada river. These circumstances make it likely that the Payin Ganga is the river in question.

^182:12 The Deva, or Goggra.

^182:13 Both these are from the Paripatra range. In some MSS. the latter is read Vedasini and Vetasini. In the Ramayana occur Veda and Vedavainasika, which may be the same, as they seem to be in the direction of the Sone. One of them may be the Beos of eastern Malwa, but it rises in the Riksha mountain.

^182:14 From Paripatra, Kurma; from Mahendra, Vayu.

^182:15 One copy has Ikshumalini; two others, Ikshula and Krimi: one MS. of the Vayu has an Ikshula from Mahendra: the Matsya has Ikshuda; Wilford's list has Drakshala.

^182:16 Of these rivers, the two first are named in the Padma P., but not in the Vayu, &c. The Gomati in Oude, the Gandak, and the Kosi are well known. The Dhutapapa is said to rise in the Himalaya.

^182:17 In different MSS. read Michita and Nisrita. In the Vayu and Matsya, Nis'chira or Nirvira is said to flow from the Himalaya.

^182:18 Also Lohatarani and Lohacharini.

^182:19 The Sarayu or Sarju is commonly identified with the Deva. Wilford says it is so by the Pauranics, but we have here proof to the contrary. They are also distinguished by the people of the country. Although identical through great part of their course, they rise as different streams, and again divide and enter the Ganges by distinct branches.

^182:20 The recurrence of the same name in this, as in several similar subsequent instances, is possibly an error of the copyist; but it is also sometimes likely that one name is applied to different rivers. In one MS. we have, in place of this word, Chaitravati; and in another Vetravati.

^182:21 Read also S'atavari. According to Wilford, the S'aravati is the Ban-ganga.

^182:22 The Vayu has Para, which is a river in Malwa, the Parvati. MSS. read Vani and Vena.

^182:23 According to the Vayu, this rises in the Sahya m., and flows towards the south: it is therefore the Beema of Aurungabad.

^182:24 The Kaveri is well known, and has always borne the same appellation, being the Chaberis of Ptolemy.

^182:25 Read Chuluka.

^182:26 Read also Tapi; the Tapti river of the Dekhin.

^182:27 Read Ahita and Sahita.

^183:28 Rises in the Sahya mountain, and flows southwards: Vayu, &c.

^183:29 Read Vichitra.

^183:30 Several rivers are called by this name, as well as the Indus: there is one of some note, the Kali Sindh in Malwa.

^183:31 Also Vajini.

^183:32 This agrees best in name with the Beema: it is also mentioned as a tirtha in the Mahabharata.

^183:33 From S'uktimat: Kurma and Vayu. There is a Balasan from the eastern portion of the Himalaya, a feeder of the Mahanada, which may be the Palasini, if the mountain be in this direction.

^183:34 Also Pippalalavati. The Vayu has a Pippala from the Riksha mountain.

^183:35 Also Kus'avira.

^183:36 Also Mahika and Marundachi.

^183:37 Also S'ena.

^183:38 Read Kritavati and Ghritavati.

^183:39 Also Dhus'ulya.

^183:40 Also Atikrishna.

^183:41 In place of both Suvarthachi.

^183:42 From Paripatra: Vayu and Matsya.

^183:43 Also Kus'anara.

^183:44 Also S'as'ikanta.

^183:45 Also Vastra and Suvastra.

^183:46 One of the tirthas in the Mahabharata.

^183:47 According to the Mahabharata, this rises in the Vaidurya mountain, part of the southern Vindhya or Sathpura range.

^183:48 Also Kuvira.

^183:49 Three MSS. agree in reading this Ambuvahini.

^183:50 Also Vainadi.

^183:51 Also Kuvena: it is possibly meant for the Tungabhadra or Toombudra.

^183:52 A river in Malwa, so called from the city of the same name, which I have elsewhere conjectured to be Bhilsa. Megha Duta, 31. There is a 'Bess' river in the maps, which joins the Betwa at Bhilsa, and is probably the river of the text.

^183:53 The Varna or Suvama, 'the beautiful river,' Wilford identifies with the Ramganga.

^183:54 Also Mahapaga, 'the great river.' 

^183:55 Also Kuchchila.

^183:56 The Sona river, rising in Mainaka or Amarakantak, and flowing east to the Ganges.

^184:57 This and the preceding both rise from the Vindhya mountain: the latter is also read Antassila, 'the river flowing within or amidst rocks.'

^184:58 Also Paroksha.

^184:59 We have a Surana in the Vayu, and Surasa in the Kurma and Matsya, flowing from the Riksha mountain.

^184:60 The Tamasa or Tonse, from Riksha.

^184:61 This and the preceding scarcely merit a place amongst the rivers, being two small streams which fall into the Ganges east and west of Benares, which is thence denominated Varanasi.

^184:62 Parnas'a or Varnas'a, from the Paripatra mountain.

^184:63 Also Manavi.

^184:64 The Krishna of the Dakhin is probably here intended, although its more ordinary designation seems to be that already specified, Krishnavena or Krishnaveni. The meaning is much the same; the one being the 'dark river,' the other simply the 'dark,' the Niger.

^184:65 A river from S'uktimat: Vayu.

^184:66 A river in Cuttack, according to Wilford: it is one of the tirthas of the Mahabharata, and apparently in a different direction. Buchanan (Eastern Hindustan) has a river of this name in Dinajpur.

^184:67 Both from the Vindhya: Vayu and Kurma. There is a Goaris in Ptolemy in central India.

^184:68 From Riksha: Vayu.

^184:69 Also Munja and Makaravahini.

^184:70 From Riksha: Vayu. According to the Mahabharata, it rises in the mountain Chitrakote.

^184:71 The Baitarani in Cuttack. It is named in the Mahabharata as a river of Kalinga.

^184:72 Also read Nipa and Koka.

^184:73 From Riksha, but read also S'uktimati, which is the reading of the Matsya. Wilford considers it to be the Swarnarekka of Cuttack.

^184:74 Also Anaga and Suranga; perhaps the preferable reading should be Sumanga, a river .flowing from Mainaka, according to the Mahabharata.

^184:75 Part of the Brahmaputra.

^184:76 A considerable river in the east, flowing between Dinajpur and Rangpur.

^184:77 Also Vrishasahwa.

^184:78 This and the preceding flow from S'uktimat, according to the , Matsya, and Kurma. The last occurs also Rishika.

^184:79 Also Suparna. The Punya is  to be the Pun-pun of Behan, but there is also a Parna river in the same province.

^185:80 It is possible that further research will identify more than those attempted to be verified in the foregoing notes, as well as meet with others readily recognizable. In the authorities consulted several occur not comprehended in the text, as the Kuhu and Ikshu, from the Himalaya; Vritraghni, Chandana (Chandan of Bhagalpur), Mahi (the Mahy of western Malwa), S'ipra, and Avanti (rivers near Ujayin), from Paripatra; Mahanada in Orissa, Druma, Dasarna (Dhosaun in Bundelkhand), Chitrakuta, S'roni or S'yena, Pis'achika, Banjula, Baluvahini, and Matkuna, all from Riksha; Nirvindhya, Madra, Nishadha, S'inibahu, Kumudvati, and Toya, from Vindhya; Banjula, from Sahya; Kritamala, Tamraparni, Pushpajati, and Utpalavati, from Malaya; Langulini and Vansadhara, from Mahendra; and Mandaga and Kripa or Rupa, from S'uktimat. In the Ramayana we have, besides some already specified, the Ruchira, Pampa, eastern Saraswati, Vegavati or Vyki of Madura, and Varada or Wurda of Berar; and we have many others in the Mahabharata and different works, from which the Sanscrit appellations of most of the Indian rivers might be, with some little time and trouble, collected.

^185:1 The people of the upper part of the Doab. The two words might also be understood as denoting the Panchalas of the Kuru country, there being two divisions of the tribe: see below, note [*20].

^185:2 The S'urasenas were the inhabitants of Mathura, the Suraseni of Arrian.

^185:3 The people of the upper part of the Coromandel coast, well known in the traditions of the eastern Archipelago as Kling. Ptolemy has a city in that part called Caliga; and Pliny, Calingae proximi mari.

^185:4 One of the tribes of central India, according to the Vayu: it is also read Bahyas.

^185:5 The Malas and Malavarttis are placed, in the Vayu and Matsya, amongst the central nations. The Markandeya reads Gavavarttis. Wilford considers Mala to be the Mal-bhum of Medinipur. As noticed in the Megha Duta, I have supposed it to be situated in Chattisgarh. p. 21, note.

^185:6 The people of Dinajpur, Rangpur, and Cooch Behar. Calcutta Mag. Dec. 1824.

^185:7 Read Kus'andas, Kus'alyas, Kus'adhyas, Kisadhajas, and placed in central India.

^185:8 Also Saus'alyas and Saus'ulyas.

^185:9 Kuntala is in one place one of the central countries; in another, one of the southern: the name is applied in inscriptions [p. 186] to the province in which Curgode is situated, part of the Adoni district: (As. Res. IX. 427:) and consistently with this position it is placed amongst the dependant or allied states of Vidarbha in the Dada Kumara. Calcutta Quarterly Mag. Sept. 1827.

^186:10 A central nation: Vayu. The Ramayana places them in the east. The combination indicates the country between Benares and Oude.

^186:11 Chedi is usually considered as Chandail, on the west of the Jungle Mehals, towards Nagpur. It is known, in times subsequent to the Puranas, as Ranastambha.

^186:12 Some copies read Vatsa, and the other Puranas have such a name amongst the central countries; the people perhaps of Vatsa, Raja of Kausambhi, near the junction of the Jumna and the Ganges. There are, however, two Matsyas, one of which, according to the Yantra Samrat, is identifiable with Jaypur. In the Dig-vijaya of Nakula he subdues the Matsyas farther to the west, or in Guzerat.

^186:13 Situated on the back of the Vindhya range: Vayu and Matsya. They are generally named with the people of Malava, which confirms this locality. They are said to be the posterity of Karusha, one of the sons of Vaivaswata Manu.

^186:14 These are also placed along the Vindhya chain, but at different times appear to have occupied different positions. They were a kindred tribe with the Andhakas and Vrishnis, and a branch of the Yadavas. A Bhoja Raja is amongst the warriors of the Mahabharata. At a later period, Bhoja, the Raja of Dhar, preserves an indication of this people; and from him the Bhojpuris, a tribe still living in western Behar, profess to be descended: they are not improbably relics of the older tribe. Bhoja is also used sometimes as a synonyme of Bhojakata, a city near the Narmada, founded by Rukmi, brother-in-law of Krishna, and before that, prince of Kundina or Condavir.

^186:15 Pulinda is applied to any wild or barbarous tribe; those here named are some of the people of the deserts along the Indus; but Pulindas are met with in many other positions, especially in the mountains and forests across central India, the haunts of the Bhils and Gonds. So Ptolemy places the Pulindai along the banks of the Narmada to the frontiers of Larice; the Lata or Lar of the Hindus; Kandesh and part. of Guzerat.

^186:16 In the other three Puranas we have Uttamarnas, on the Vindhya range.

^186:17 The people of the 'ten forts,' subsequently multiplied to 'thirty-six,' such being the import of Chattisgerh, which seems to be in the site of Dasarna. Megha Duta, p. 30, note.

^186:18 A Vindhya tribe, according to the other Puranas. The locality is confirmed by mythological personations; for Mekala is said to be a Rishi, the father of the river Narmada; thence called Mekala and Mekalakanya: the mountain where it rises is also called Mekaladri. The Ramayana places the Mekalas amongst the southern tribes.

^186:19 Utkala is still the native name of Orissa.

^186:20 These may be the southern Panchalas. [p. 187] When Drona overcame Drupada, king of Panchala, as related in the Mahabharata, Adi Parva, he retained half the country, that north of the Ganges, and restored to its former chief the other half, south of that river as far as to the Chambal. The capital of the latter became Makandi on the Ganges; and the country included also Kampilya, the Kampil of the Mohammedans, but placed by them in the Doab. The capital of the northern portion was Ahikshetra, a name traceable in the Adisathrus of Ptolemy, though the position differs: but Ahikshetra or Ahichchatra, as it is also written, seems to have been applied to more than one city.

^187:21 Perhaps the people of Tirhut, along the Kosi.

^187:22 'Having more than one back;' probable some nickname or term of derision. Thus we have, in the Ramayana and other works, enumerated amongst tribes, the Karna-pravaranas, 'those who wrap themselves up in their ears;' Ashta-karnakas, 'the eight-eared;' or Oshtha-karnakas, 'having lips extending to their ears;' Kakamukhas, 'crow-faced;' Ekapadukas, 'one-footed,' or rather 'one-slippered:' exaggerations of national ugliness, or allusions to peculiar customs, which were not literally intended, although they may have furnished the Mandevilles of ancient and modern times with some of their monsters. The spirit of the nomenclature is shewn by these tribes being associated with Kiratas, 'barbarians,' and Yavanas, either Greeks or Mohammedans.

^187:23 A preferable reading seems to be Yugandhara: a city in the Punjab so called is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Karna P.

^187:24 Read Bodhas, Godhas, and Saudhas. There is a Rajput tribe called Sodha.

^187:25 This may consist of two names, and is so read in MSS., or the latter term occurs Kalingas; both terms are repeated. Besides the Machu of the north, a similar word,. Madru, is applied to Madura in the south. As. Res. IX. 428. The Ramayana has Madras in the east, as well as in the north.

^187:26 The people of the Benares district, and that opposite.

^187:27 The inhabitants of Ujayin.

^187:28 These should be opposite to the Kuntis, but where either is situated does not appear.

^187:29 The best reading is Gomanta, part of the Konkan about Goa.

^187:30 The more usual reading is Khandas; one MS. has Parnas.

^187:31 A country of considerable extent and power at various periods. The name remains in Beder, which may have been the ancient capital; but the kingdom seems to have corresponded with the great part of Berar and Kandesh. It is mentioned in the Ramayana and the Puranas amongst the countries of the south.

^187:32 Also Rupavasikas. There is a Rupa river from the S'uktimat mountain, the vicinity of which may be alluded to. We have Rupasas or Rupapas amongst the southern tribes of the Puranas.

^188:33 Read also As'malas and As'makas: the latter are enumerated amongst the people of the south in the Ramayana, and in the Vayu, Matsya, and Markandeya P. There is a prince of the same name of the solar dynasty.

^188:34 Gova or Kuva is an ancient name of the southern Konkan, and may be intended in this place by the Gopa country; or it may imply 'the district of cow-herds,' that is, of Nomadic tribes.

^188:35 Also read Kulatis and Panitakas.

^188:36 Read also Adhirajya and Adhirashtra, which mean the same, 'the over or superior kingdom.'

^188:37 Also Kus'adhya, Kus'anda, and Mukuntha.

^188:38 Also Vallirashtra. There are Mallas in the east, along the foot of the Himalaya, in Bhima's Dig-vijaya; but we should rather look for them in the north-west, in the site of the Malli of Arrian. We have in the Puranas, Maharashtra, the Mahratta country, which may be here intended.

^188:39 Two copies read Kevala; one, Kambala, The text is probably wrong, as we have Kerala below.

^188:40 Also Varayasis and Varavasis: one copy has, what is likely to be most correct, Vanarasyas, the monkey-faced people.'

^188:41 Read Upavaha and Pravaha.

^188:42 The MSS. agree in reading this Vakra.

^188:43 The S'akas occur again, more than once, which may be possibly unnecessary repetition: but these people, the Sakai and Sacae of classical writers, the Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy, extended, about the commencement of our era, along the west of India, from the Hindu Koh to the mouths of the Indus.

^188:44 The inhabitants of Tirhut.

^188:45 The people of South Bahar.

^188:46 Also read Mahyas and Suhmas: the latter is probably correct. The Suhmas and Prasuhmas were found in the east by Bhima; and Suhma is elsewhere said to be situated east of Bengal, towards the sea, the king and the people being Mlechchhas, that is not Hindus: it would correspond therefore with Tiperah and Aracan.

^188:47 Also read Malajas, but less correctly perhaps. The Malayas are the people of the southern Ghats.

^188:48 We have Pravijayas in the east, according to the Puranas.

^188:49 Anga is the country about Bhagalpur, of which Champa was the capital.

^188:50 Eastern Bengal.

^188:51 We have had these before, but they are repeated perhaps in conformity to the usual classification, which connects them with the two preceding, being derived in the genealogical lists from a common ancestor.

^188:52 In Bhima's Dig-vijaya we have two people of this name, both in the east; one along the foot of the Himalaya, and the other more to the south.

^188:53 Uniformly read in the MSS. Sudeshna.

^188:54 Three copies read Mahishas. We [p. 189] have Mahishakas amongst the southern people in the Puranas; and a Mahishiki in the Ramayana, also in the south: the latter may be connected with Mahishmati, which Sahadeva visits in his southern invasion, and which has been elsewhere conjectured to be in Mysur. (Calcutta Annual Register, 1822,) There is also a Mahishmati on the road to the south (Mahabh. Udyoga P.), which is commonly identified with Chuli Mahes'war, on the Narmada.

^189:55 Also Rishikas; people placed by the Ramayana both in the north and in the south. Arjuna visits the former, and exacts from them eight horses. Dig-vijaya.

^189:56 Also read Bahikas, which we may here prefer, as the Bahlikas are subsequently named: the former are described in the Mahabharata, Karna Parva, with some detail, and comprehend the different nations of the Punjab, from the Setlej to the Indus.

^189:57 These are included amongst the northern nations; Vayu, &c.; but in Nakula's Dig-vijaya they are in the west.

^189:58 The Abhiras, according to the Puranas, are also in the north: in the Ramayana and Mahabh. Sabha P. they are in the west. The fact seems to be, that the people along the Indus, from Surat to the Himalaya, are often regarded as either western or northern nations, according to the topographical position of the writer: in either case the same tribes are intended.

^189:59 The MSS. read Kalatoyakas, a people placed by the Puranas in the north.

^189:60 The Vayu reads Aparitas, a northern nation. There are Aparytae in Herodotus, classed with a people bordering on India, the Gandari. The term in the text signifies also borderers,' and is probably correct, as opposed to the following word Parantas; the latter signifying those beyond, and the former those not beyond the borders. The latter has for Parantas, Paritas; and the Matsya, Paradas.

^189:61 Also Pahlavas, a northern or northwestern nation, often mentioned in Hindu writings, in Manu, the Ramayana, the Puranas, &c. They were not a Hindu people, and may have been some of the tribes between India and Persia.

^189:62 Also Charmakhandikas, but the sense is the same; those living in the district Mandala or Khanda of Charma: they are a northern people: Vayu, &c. Pliny mentions a king of a people so called, "Charmarum rex."

^189:63 Read Marubhaumas; more satisfactorily, as it means the inhabitants of Marubhumi, 'the desert;' the sands of Sindh.

^189:64 Also Surashtras, which is no doubt more correct; the inhabitants of Surat.

^189:65 The Kekayas or Kaikeyas appear amongst the chief nations in the war of the Mahabharata, their king being a kinsman of Krishna. The Ramayana, II. 53, specifies their position beyond, or west of, the Vipas'a.

^190:66 We have in the Puranas Kuttapracharanas and Kuttapravaranas amongst the mountain tribes.

^190:67 These may be people upon the Mahi river: they are named amongst the southern nations by the Vayu, &c., but the west is evidently intended.

^190:68 Read also Kachchas: the Purana have Kachchiyas. The form is equally applicable to people dwelling in districts contiguous to water and in marshy spots, and denotes the province still called Cutch.

^190:69 Also read Adhya, Antya, and Andhra: the latter is the name of Telingana, the Andhri of Pliny.

^190:70 Three MSS. have Malada, a people of the east in Bhima's Dig-vijaya.

^190:71 Also Manavalakas.

^190:72 A people of the east.

^190:73 The western provinces of Bengal, or, as sometimes used in a more comprehensive sense, it includes the following districts: Rajshahi, Dinajpur, and Rangpur; Nadiya, Birbhum, Burdwan, part of Midnapur, and the Jungle Mahals; Ramgerh, Pachete, Palamow, and part of Chunar. See an account of Pundra, translated from what is said to be part of the Brahmanda section of the Bhavishyat Purana. Calcutta Quart. Mag. Dec. 1824.

^190:74 There is considerable variety in this term, Larga, Marja, Samuttara, and Samantara; probably neither is correct. Bhargas are amongst the people subdued in the east by Bhima.

^190:75 These are foresters and barbarians in general.

^190:76 Notwithstanding the celebrity of this country, as the kingdom of Nala, it does not appear exactly where it was situated: we may conclude it was not far from Vidharba (Berar) as that was the country of Damayanti. From the directions given by Nala to Damayanti, it is near the Vindhya mountain and Payoshni river, and roads lead from it across the Riksha mountain to Avanti and the south, as well as to Vidarbha and to Kos'ala. Nalopakhyana, sec. 9.

^190:77 These are always placed in the west: they are fabled to be the descendants of Anartta, the son of Saryati, who founded the capital Kus'asthali afterwards Dwaraka, on the sea-shore in Guzerat.

^190:78 Also Pratimatsyas; those opposite or adjacent to the Matsyas.

^190:79 Also Kus'ajas and Kos'alas; the latter is probably correct, as the name does not occur in any other form than that of Kasikos'ala above. Kos'ala is a name variously applied. Its earliest and most celebrated application is to the country on the banks of the Sar.ayu, the kingdom of Rama, of which Ayodhya was the capital. Ramayana, I. s. 5. In the Mahabharata we [p. 191] have one Kos'ala in the east, and another in the south, besides the Prak-kos'alas and Uttara-kos'alas in the east and north, The Puranas place the Kos'alas amongst the people or the back of Vindhya;' and it would appear from the Vayu that Kus'a, the son of Rama, transferred his kingdom to a more central position; he ruled over Kos'ala at his capital of Kus'asthali or Kus'avati, built upon the Vindhyan precipices: the same is alluded to in the Patala Khanda of the Padma Purana, and in the Raghu Vans'a, for the purpose of explaining the return of Kus'a to Ayodhya. Certainly in later times the country of Kos'ala lay south of Oude, for in the Ratnavali the general of Vatsa surrounds the king of Kos'ala in the Vindhya mountains: (Hindu Theatre, II. 305:) and, as noticed in the same work, (p. 267,) we have in the Puranas, Sapta Kos'alas, or seven Kos'alas. An inscription found at Ratnapur in Chattisgarh, of which I have an unpublished translation, states that Sri-deva, the governor of Malahari Mandala, having obtained the favour of Prithwideva, king of Kos'ala, was enabled to build temples, and dig tanks, &c., indicating the extension of the power of Kos'ala across the Ganges in that direction. The inscription is dated Samvat 915, or A. D. 858. The Kos'ala of the Puranas and of the dramatic and poetic writers was however more to the west, along a part of the Vindhya range. Ptolemy has a Kontakossula in the south, probably one of the Kos'alas of the Hindus.

^191:80 Also Itikas; perhaps the Ishikas or Aishikas of the Vayu, &c. a people of the south.

^191:81 The people of Kashmir.

^191:82 One of the chief tribes engaged in the war of the Mahabharata. The Ramayana places them in the west; the Puranas in the north. The term Sindhu shews their position to have been upon the Indus, apparently in the Punjab.

^191:83 These are also a people of the northwest, found both on the west of the Indus and in the Punjab, and well known to classical authors as the Gandarii and Gandaridae. As. Res. XV. 103; also Journal of the R. As. Soc.; Account of the Foe-kue-ki.

^191:84 From the context this should probably be Darvakas, the people of a district usually specified in connexion with the succeeding.

^191:85 These are the inhabitants of the country bordering on Cashmir, to the south and west; known to the Greeks as the kingdom of Abisares. It often occurs in composition with Darya, as Darvabhisara. As. Res. XV. 24.

^191:86 Also read Ulutas and Kulutas: the Ramayana has Kolukas or Kaulutas amongst the western tribes.

^191:87 Also with the short vowel, S'aivalas.

^191:88 The Vahlikas or Bahlikas are always associated with the people of the north, west, and ultra-Indian provinces, and are usually considered to represent the Bactrians, or people of Balkh. It is specified in the Mahabh. Udyoga P. as famous for its horses, a reputation the country bordering upon it, at least Bokhara and Maimena, still preserves: and in Arjuna's Dig-vijaya it is said to be difficult of approach.

^191:89 These are probably intended for the [p. 192] neighbours of the Abhisaras: they are found in the north by Arjuna, Dig-vijaya, and are there termed also Kshatriyas.

^192:90 Also read Bahubadhya and Bahurada.

^192:91 The name occurs in the Ramayana as that of a mountain in the Punjab or in the Bahika country. II. 53.

^192:92 The MSS. agree in reading this Vanayava or Vanayus, a people in the northwest, also famous for horses.

^192:93 A better reading is Dasapars'wa, as we have had Das'arnas before.

^192:94 Also Ropanas; quere, Romans?

^192:95 Also Gachchas and Kachchas: the last is the best reading, although it has occurred before.

^192:96 Also Gopala-kachchas: they are amongst the eastern tribes in Bhima's Dig-vijaya.

^192:97 Or Langalas.

^192:98 Kurujangalas, or the people of the forests in the upper part of the Doab: it is also read Paravallabhas.

^192:99 The analogy to 'barbarians' is not in sound only, but in all the authorities these are classed with borderers and foreigners and nations not Hindu.

^192:100 Also Dahas, in which we should have a resemblance to the Scythian Dahae.

^192:101 Or Tamaliptas or Damaliptas; the people at the western mouth of the Ganges in Medinipur and Tamluk. Tamralipti was a celebrated sea-port in the fourth century, (Account of the Poe-kue-ki,) and retained its character in the ninth and twelfth. Das'a Kumara Charitra and Vrihat Katha; also Journ. Royal As. Soc.

^192:102 The people of Odra or Orissa.

^192:103 The inhabitants of Pundra: see note [*73].

^192:104 The people of the Coromandel coast, from Madras southwards; those by whom the Tamil language is spoken.

^192:105 The people of Malabar proper.

^192:106 Also Prasyas. Prachyas properly means the people of the east, the Prasii of the Greeks, east of the Ganges.

^192:107 Mushika is the southernmost part of the Malabar coast, Cochin and Travancore.

^192:108 Also Vanavasinas and Vanavasikas; the inhabitants of Banawasi, the Banavasi of Ptolemy, a town the remains of which are still extant in the district of Sunda.

^192:109 The people of the centre of the Peninsula, the proper Kernata or Carnatie.

^192:110 The people of Mysore: see note [*54].

^192:111 Also Vikalpas.

^192:112 Also Pushkalas,

^192:113 Also Karnikas.

^192:114 Read Kuntikas.

^193:115 Variously read Nalakalaka, Nabhakanana, and Tilakanija.

^193:116 Kaukundaka and Kaukuntaka.

^193:117 The inhabitants of the lower part of the Coromandel coast; so called after them Chola-mandala.

^193:118 People of the Konkan: according to some statements there are seven districts so named.

^193:119 Malavanara and S'alavanaka.

^193:120 These two words are sometimes compounded as Kukkurangara: it is also read Kanurajada.

^193:121 This is a questionable name, though the MSS. agree. We have in Arjuna's Dig-vijaya, Utsavamanketa; and in Nakula's, to the west, Utsavasanketa.

^193:122 These are amongst the warriors of the Mahabharata; they are included in all the lists amongst the northern tribes, and are mentioned in the Rajatarangini as not far from Kashmir: they are considered to be the people of Lahone.

^193:123 Also Vyukas and Vrikas: the latter are specified amongst the central nations: Vayu, &c.

^193:124 Kokavakas and Kokanakhas.

^193:125 S'aras and Vegasaras; also Parasancharakas.

^193:126 Vindhyapalakas and Vindhyamulikas: the latter, those at the foot of Vindhya, are named in the Pauranik lists amongst the southern tribes.

^193:127 Balwala and Valkaja.

^193:128 Also Malaka and Majava.

^193:129 Also Vallabhas, which from the succeeding word may be conjectured to be correct. A city named Vallabhi makes a great figure in the traditions of Rajputana. See Tod's Rajasthan.

^193:130 One of the tribes in the west or north-west subdued by Arjuna.

^193:131 Kalada and Dohada.

^193:132 Kundala, Karantha, and Mandaka: the latter occurs in the Ramayana amongst the eastern nations.

^193:133 Kurata, Kunaka.

^193:134 Stanabala.

^193:135 Satirtha, Satiya, Nariya.

^193:136 The S'rinjayas are a people from the north-west amongst the warriors of the Mahabharata: the reading may be incorrect. It occurs also Putisrinjaya.

^193:137 Also Aninda.

^193:138 Also Sivata, Sirala, Syuvaka.

^193:139 Tanapa, Stanapa, Sutapa.

^193:140 Pallipanjaka and Vidarbha.

^193:141 Dadhividarbha, but three copies have Rishika. Great variety, and no doubt great inaccuracy, prevails in the MSS. in several of the names ]sere given: they are not found elsewhere.

^193:142 The reading of three copies is Kakas: there is a tribe so called on the banks of the Indus, as it leaves the mountains.

^193:143 These and the following are mountaineers [p. 194] in the north-west. The former are placed by the Puranas in the north, and the Vayu includes them also amongst the mountain tribes. The Ramayana has Tankanas in the north.

^194:144 The term Yavanas, although in later times applied to the Mohammedans, designated formerly the Greeks, as observed in the valuable notes on the translation of the Birth of Uma, from the Kumara Sambhava. (Journal As. Soc. of Bengal, July 1833.) The Greeks were known throughout western Asia by the term w ywn, Yavan; or Ion, Iaones; the Yavana, ###, of the Hindus; or as it occurs in its Prakrit form, in the very curious inscription decyphered by Mr. Prinsep, (J. As. Soc. Beng. Feb. 1838,) Yona: the term Yona Raja being there associated with the name Antiochus, in all likelihood Antiochus the Great, the ally of the Indian prince Sophagasenas, about B. C. 210. That the Macedonian or Bactrian Greeks were most usually intended is not only probable from their position and relations with India, but from their being usually named in concurrence with the north-western tribes, Kambojas, Daradas, Paradas, Bahlikas, S'akas, &c. in the Ramayana, Mahabharata, Puranas, Manu, and in various poems and plays.

^194:145 Chinas, or Chinese, or rather the people of Chinese Tartary, are named in the Ramayana and Manu, as well as in the Puranas. If the designation China was derived from the Tsin dynasty, which commenced B. C. 260, this forms a limit of antiquity for the works in question. The same word however, or Tsin, was the ancient appellation of the northern province of Shen-sy, and it may have reached the Hindus from thence at an earlier period.

^194:146 These Wilford regards as the people of Arachosia. They are always mentioned together with the north-western tribes, Yavanas, S'akas, and the like: they are also famous for their hoses; and in the Ramayana they are said to be covered with golden lotuses. What is meant is doubtful, probably some ornament or embellishment of their dress. We have part of the name, or Kambi, in the Cambistholi of Arrian: the last two syllables, no doubt, represent the Sanscrit Sthala, 'place,' 'district;' and the word denotes the dwellers in the Kamba or Kambis country: so Kamboja may be explained those born in Kamba or Kambas.

^194:147 Also S'akridvaha or S'akridguha.

^194:148 Also Kulachchas and Kuntalas: the Puranas have Kupathas amongst the mountain tribes.

^194:149 Also Parataka: the first is not a common form in the Puranas, although it is in poetical writings, denoting, no doubt, the Persians, or people of Pars or Fars: the latter, also read Paradas, may imply the same, as beyond (Para) the Indus.

^194:150 We have Ramathas in Nakula's Dig-vijaya, and in the Vayu and Matsya.

^194:151 Das'amanas and Des'amanikas, in the north: Vayu and Matsya.

^194:152 The passage occurs in the Vayu and Markandeya Puranas, as well as in the Mahabharata; but the purport is not very distinct, and the proper reading is doubtful. [p. 195] In three MSS. of the latter it occurs ### the latter pada is the same in all: the former, is ### in a fourth copy, in two copies of the Vayu it is ###. None of these are intelligible, and the Markandeya furnishes the reading followed, Modern geographers have supposed the Cathaei, Cathari, and Chatriaei of the ancients, in the lower parts of the Punjab, to mean a people of Kshatriyas; but no such people occur directly named in our lists. Considering that the text is speaking of barbarous and foreign tribes, perhaps no particular nation is here meant, and it may be intended as an epithet of those which follow, or of Vais'ya (agricultural) and S'udra (servile or low) tribes, living either near to, or after the manner of Kshatriyas: in that case a better reading would be, ###. According to Manu, various northern tribes, the S'akas, Kambojas, Paradas, Pahlavas, Kiratas, Daradas, and Khasas, and even the Chinas and Yavanas, are degraded Kshatriyas, in consequence of neglecting religious rites. X. 43, 44. According to the Pauranik legend they were overcome in war by Sagara, and degraded from their original caste. See book IV.

^195:153 Here we have a people called S'udras by all the authorities, and placed in the west or north-west, towards the Indus. They have been ingeniously, and with probability, conjectured by Mr. Lassen to be the Oxydracae; for S'udraka is equally correct with S'udra; and in place of Oxydrakai various MSS. of Strabo, as quoted by Siebenkees, read Sidrakai and Sydrakai: the latter is precisely the Sanscrit appellation. Pliny also has Sudraci for the people who formed the limit of Alexander's eastern conquests, or those hitherto inaccurately called Oxydracae.

^195:154 These are always conjoined with the S'udras, as if conterminous. Their situation is no doubt correctly indicated by Ptolemy by the position of Abiria above Pattalene on the Indus.

^195:155 The Durds are still where they were at the date of our text, and in the days of Strabo and Ptolemy; not exactly, indeed, at the sources of the Indus, but along its course, above the Himalaya, just before it descends to India; a position which might well be taken for its head.

^195:156 Also read Pas'us, 'brutes.' If the term might be altered to Palli, it would imply 'village or pastoral tribes.'

^195:157 Also Khasikas and Khasakas. The first of these is probably most correct, being equivalent to Khasas, barbarians named along with the S'akas and Daradas by Manu, &c.; traces of whom may be sought amongst the barbarous tribes on the north-east of Bengal, the Kasiyas; or it has been thought that they may be referred to the situation of Kashgar. Two copies have, in place of this, Tukharas, and the same occurs in the Ramayana; the Vayu has Tusharas, but the Markandeya, Tukhara: these are probably the Tochari, Tachari, or Thogari, a tribe of the S'akas, by whom Bactria was taken from the Greeks, and from whom Tocharestan derives the name it still bears.

^195:158 Also Pahlavas and Pallavas. The form in the text is the more usual.

^196:159 The Ramayana has Gahvaras. The mountains from Kabul to Bamian furnish infinitely numerous instances of cavern habitations.

^196:160 These two, according to the Vayu, are amongst the northern nations; but they might be thought to be religious fraternities, from the sages Atri and Bharadwaja.

^196:161 The latter member of the compound occurs poshikas, payikas, and yodhikas, 'cherishers,' 'drinkers,' or 'fighters:' the first term denotes the female breast.

^196:162 Also Dronakas, 'people of vallies.'

^196:163 Also Kajingas. Kalingas would be here out of place.

^196:164 These and the preceding are included by the Vayu amongst the mountain tribes of the north.

^196:165 Many names indeed might be added to the catalogue from the lists referred to in the Vayu, Matsya, and Markandeya Puranas, as well as several capable of verification from the Ramayana, and other passages of the Mahabharata. This is not the place however to exhaust the subject, and it has been prosecuted too far perhaps already. It is evident that a very considerable proportion of the names recorded can be verified, and that many of them may be traced in the geographical notices of India left by the historians of Alexander's expedition. That more cannot be identified is owing in a great measure to incomplete research; and a more extensive examination of the authorities would no doubt discover passages where circumstances, as well as names, are given by which the places would be recognised. It is evident, however, that much embarrassment also arises from the inaccuracy of manuscripts, which vary widely and irreconcilably. I have given instances from four different copies of the text; one in my own possession, three in the library of the East India Company; all very excellent copies, but manifestly erroneous in many respects in their nomenclature of places, and particularly of those which are least known. No assistance is to be had from any commentary, as the subject is one of little interest in native estimation.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 197]

  

CHAP. IV.

Account of kings, divisions, mountains, rivers, and inhabitants of the other Dwipas, viz. Plaksha, S'almala, Kus'a, Krauncha, S'aka, and Pushkara: of the oceans separating them: of the tides: of the confines of the earth: the Lokaloka mountain. Extent of the whole.

IN the same manner as Jambu-dwipa is girt round about by the ocean of salt water, so that ocean is surrounded by the insular continent of Plaksha; the extent of which is twice that of Jambu-dwipa.

Medhatithi, who was made sovereign of Plaksha, had seven sons, S'antabhaya, S'is'ira, Sukhodaya, Ananda, S'iva, Kshemaka, and Dhruva; and the Dwipa was divided amongst them, and each division was named after the prince to whom it was subject. The several kingdoms were bounded by as many ranges of mountains, named severally Gomeda, Chandra, Narada, Dundubhi, Somaka, Sumanas, and Vaibhraja. In these mountains the sinless inhabitants ever dwell along with celestial spirits and gods: in them are many holy places; and the people there live for a long period, exempt from care and pain, and enjoying uninterrupted felicity. There are also, in the seven divisions of Plaksha, seven rivers, flowing to the sea, whose names alone are sufficient to take away sin: they are the Anutapta, S'ikhi, Vipasa, Tridiva, Kramu, Amrita, and Sukrita. These are the chief rivers and mountains of Plaksha-dwipa, which I have enumerated to you; but there are thousands of others of inferior magnitude. The people who drink of the waters of those rivers are always contented and happy, and there is neither decrease nor increase amongst them [*1], neither are the revolutions of the four ages known in these Varshas: the character of the time is there uniformly that of

[p. 198]

the Treta (or silver) age. In the five Dwipas, worthy Brahman, from Plaksha to S'aka, the length of life is five thousand years, and religious merit is divided amongst the several castes and orders of the people. The castes are called Aryaka, Kuru, Vivasa, and Bhavi, corresponding severally with Brahman, Kshetriya, Vais'ya, and S'udra. In this Dwipa is a large fig-tree (F. religiosa), of similar size as the Jambu-tree of Jambu-dwipa; and this Dwipa is called Plaksha, after the name of the tree. Hari, who is all, and the creator of all, is worshipped in this continent in the form of Soma (the moon). Plaksha-dwipa is surrounded, as by a disc, by the sea of molasses, of the same extent as the land. Such, Maitreya, is a brief description of Plaksha-dwipa.

The hero Vapushmat was king of the next or S'almala-dwipa, whose seven sons also gave designations to seven Varshas, or divisions. Their names were S'weta, Harita, Jimuta, Rohita, Vaidyuta, Manasa, and Suprabha. The Ikshu sea is encompassed by the continent of Salmala, which is twice its extent. There are seven principal mountain ranges, abounding in precious gems, and dividing the Varshas from each other; and there are also seven chief rivers. The mountains are called Kumuda, Unnata, Valahaka, Drona, fertile in medicinal herbs, Kanka, Mahisha, and Kakkudwat. The rivers are Yauni, Toya, Vitrishna, Chandra, S'ukla, Vimochani, and Nivritti; all whose waters cleanse away sins. The Brahmans, Kshetriyas, Vais'yas, and S'udras of this Dwipa, called severally Kapilas, Arunas, Pitas, and Rohitas (or tawny, purple, yellow, and red), worship the imperishable soul of all things, Vishnu, in the form of Vayu (wind), with pious rites, and enjoy frequent association with the gods. A large S'almali (silk-cotton) tree grows in this Dwipa, and gives it its name. The Dwipa is surrounded by the Sura sea (sea of wine), of the same extent as itself.

The Sura sea is entirely encircled by Kus'a-dwipa, which is every way twice the size of the preceding continent. The king, Jyotishmat, had seven sons, Udbhida, Venuman, Swairatha, Lavana, Dhriti, Prabhakara, and Kapila, after whom the seven portions or Varshas of the island were called Udbhida, &c. There reside mankind along with Daityas and Danavas, as well as with spirits of heaven and gods. The four

[p. 199]

castes, assiduously devoted to their respective duties, are termed Damis, S'ushmis, Snehas, and Mandehas, who, in order to be relieved of the obligations imposed upon them in the discharge of their several functions, worship Janarddana, in the form of Brahma, and thus get rid of the unpleasant duties which lead to temporal rewards. The seven principal mountains in this Dwipa are named Vidruma, Hemas'aila, Dyutiman, Pushpavan, Kus'es'aya, Hari, and Mandara; and the seven rivers are Dhutapapa, S'iva, Pavitra, Sammati, Vidyudambha, Mahhvanya, Sarvapapahara: besides these, there are numerous rivers and mountains of less importance. Kus'a-dwipa is so named from a clump of Kus'a grass (Poa) growing there. It is surrounded by the Ghrita sea (the sea of butter), of the same size as the continent.

The sea of Ghrita is encompassed by Krauncha-dwipa, which is twice as large as Kus'a-dwipa. The king of this Dwipa was Dyutiman, whose sons, and the seven Varshas named after them, were Kus'ala, Mallaga, Ushna, Pivara, Andhakaraka, Muni, and Dundubhi. The seven boundary mountains, pleasing to gods and celestial spirits, are Krauncha, Vamana, Andhakaraka, Devavrit, Pundarikavan, Dundubhi, and Mahas'aila; each of which is in succession twice as lofty as the series that precedes it, in the same manner as each Dwipa is twice as extensive as the one before it. The inhabitants reside there without apprehension, associating with the bands of divinities. The Brahmans are called Pushkaras; the Kshetriyas, Pushkalas: the Vais'yas are termed Dhanyas; and the S'udras, Tishyas. They drink of countless streams, of which the principal are denominated Gauri, Kumudwati, Sandhya, Ratri, Manojava, Kshanti, and Pundarika. The divine Vishnu, the protector of mankind, is worshipped there by the people, with holy rites, in the form of Rudra. Krauncha is surrounded by the sea of curds, of a similar extent; and that again is encompassed by S'aka-dwipa.

The sons of Bhavya, the king of S'aka-dwipa, after whom its Varshas were denominated, were Jalada, Kumara, Sukumara, Manichaka, Kusumoda, Maudaki, and Mahadruma. The seven mountains separating the countries were Udayagiri, Jaladhara, Raivataka, S'yama, Ambikeya, Ramya, and Kes'ari. There grows a large Saka (Teak) tree, frequented

[p. 200]

by the Siddhas and Gandharbas, the wind from which, as produced by its fluttering leaves, diffuses delight. The sacred lands of this continent are peopled by the four castes. Its seven holy rivers, that wash away all sin, are the Sukumari, Kumari, Nalini, Dhenuka, Ikshu, Venuka, and Gabhasti. There are also hundreds and thousands of minor streams and mountains in this Dwipa: and the inhabitants of Jalada and the other divisions drink of those waters with pleasure, after they have returned to earth from Indra's heaven. In those seven districts there is no dereliction of virtue; there is no contention; there is no deviation from rectitude. The caste of Mriga is that of the Brahman; the Magadha, of the Kshetriya; the Manasa, of the Vais'ya; and the Mandaga of the S'udra: and by these Vishnu is devoutly worshipped as the sun, with appropriate ceremonies. S'aka-dwipa is encircled by the sea of milk, as by an armlet, and the sea is of the same breadth as the continent which it embraces [*2]

The Kshiroda ocean (or sea of milk) is encompassed by the seventh Dwipa, or Pushkara, which is twice the size of Saka-dwipa. Savana, who was made its sovereign, had but two sons, Mahavira and Dhataki, after whom the two Varshas of Pushkara were so named. These are divided by one mighty range of mountains, called Manasottara, which runs in a circular direction (forming an outer and an inner circle). This mountain is fifty thousand Yojanas in height, and as many in its breadth; dividing the Dwipa in the middle, as if with a bracelet, into two divisions, which are also of a circular form, like the mountain that separates them. Of these two, the Mahavira-varsha is exterior to the circumference of Manasottara, and Dhataki lies within the circle; and both are frequented by heavenly spirits and gods. There are no other mountains in Pushkara, neither are there any rivers [*3]. Men in this Dwipa live a thousand years, free from sickness and sorrow, and unruffled by anger or affection.

[p. 201]

[paragraph continues] There is neither virtue nor vice, killer nor slain: there is no jealousy, envy, fear, hatred, covetousness, nor any moral defect: neither is there truth or falsehood. Food is spontaneously produced there, and all the inhabitants feed upon viands of every flavour. Men there are indeed of the same nature with gods, and of the same form and habits. There is no distinction of caste or order; there are no fixed institutes; nor are rites performed for the sake of advantage. The three Vedas, the Puranas, ethics, and polity, and the laws of service, are unknown. Pushkara is in fact, in both its divisions, a terrestrial paradise, where time yields happiness to all its inhabitants, who are exempt from sickness and decay. A Nyagrodha-tree (Ficus indica) grows on this Dwipa, which is the especial abode of Brahma, and he resides in it, adored by the gods and demons. Pushkara is surrounded by the sea of fresh water, which is of equal extent with the continent it invests [*4].

In this manner the seven island continents are encompassed successively by the seven oceans, and each ocean and continent is respectively of twice the extent of that which precedes it. In all the oceans the water remains at all times the same in quantity, and never, increases or diminishes; but like the water in a caldron, which, in consequence of

[p. 202]

its combination with heat, expands, so the waters of the ocean swell with the increase of the moon. The waters, although really neither more nor less, dilate or contract as the moon increases or wanes in the light and dark fortnights. The rise and fall of the waters of the different seas is five hundred and ten inches [*5].

Beyond the sea of fresh water is a region of twice its extent, where the land is of gold, and where no living beings reside. Thence extends the Lokaloka mountain, which is ten thousand Yojanas in breadth, and as many in height; and beyond it perpetual darkness invests the mountain all around; which darkness is again encompassed by the shell of the egg [*6].

Such, Maitreya, is the earth, which with its continents, mountains, oceans, and exterior shell, is fifty crores (five hundred millions) of

[p. 203]

[paragraph continues] Yojanas in extent [*7]. It is the mother and nurse of all creatures, the foundation of all worlds, and the chief of the elements.

Footnotes

^197:1 So the commentator explains the terms Avasarpini and Utsarpini; but these words most commonly designate divisions of time peculiar to the Jainas; during the former of which men are supposed to decline from extreme felicity to extreme distress; and in the latter, to ascend from misery to happiness. The author of the text had possibly the Jaina use of these terms in view; and if so, wrote after their system was promulgated.

^200:2 The Kurma is the only Purana in which the white island, S'weta-dwipa, the abode of Vishnu, is included in the geography of the world: an incidental description of it is quoted by Col. Wilford from the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana (As. Res. XI. 99); and it is in this and in the Brahma Vaivartta that allusions to it are most frequent and copious.

^200:3 A slight alteration has been here made in the order of the description.

^201:4 The description of the Dwipas in the Agni, Brahma, Kurma, and Vayu Puranas agrees with that of our text. The Markandeya, Linga, and Matsya contain no details. The Bhagavata and Padma follow the same order as the Vishnu, &c. but alter all the names, and, many of the measurements. The account of the Mahabharata is very irregular and confused. The variations throw no additional light upon the geographical system of the Puranas. Some traces of this appear discoverable in the west; and the seven Dwipas, with their surrounding seas, may have some connexion with the notion of the seven climates, as Col. Wilford has supposed. That learned, but fanciful writer bestowed great pains upon the verification of these fictions, and imagined the different Dwipas to represent actual divisions of the globe: Jambu being India; Kus'a, the Kush of Scripture, or the countries between Mesopotamia and India: Plaksha being Asia Minor; S'almali, eastern Europe; Krauncha, Germany; S'aka, the British isles; and Pushkara, Iceland. The white or silver island, or island of the moon, was also, according to him, the island of Great Britain. Whatever may be thought of his conclusions, his essays on these subjects, particularly in the eighth, tenth, and eleventh volumes of the Asiatic Researches, contain much curious and interesting matter.

^202:5 Although the Hindus seem to have had a notion of the cause of the tides, they were not very accurate observers of the effect. The extreme rise of the tide in the Hugli river has never exceeded twenty feet, and its average is about fifteen. (As. Res. vol. XVIII. Kyd on the Tides of the Hugli.)

^202:6 The Anda kataha. The Kataha is properly a shallow hemispherical vessel, a saucer; but compounded in this form, implies the shell of the mundane egg. The Bhagavata thus describes these portions of the world: "Beyond the sea of fresh water is the mountain belt, called Lokaloka, the circular boundary between the world and void space. The interval between Meru and Manasottara is the land of living beings. Beyond the fresh water sea is the region of gold, which shines like the bright surface of a mirror, but from which no sensible object presented to it is ever reflected, and consequently it is avoided by living creatures. The mountain range by which it is encircled is termed Lokaloka, because the world is separated by it from that which is not world; for which purpose it was placed by Is'wara on the limit of the three worlds; and its height and breadth are such that the rays of the heavenly luminaries, from the sun to the polar-star, which spread over the regions within the mountain, cannot penetrate beyond it." According to Col. Wilford, however, there is a chasm in the belt, and a sea beyond it, where Vishnu abides; but he has not given his authorities for this. (As. Res. XI. 54.) The Mohammedan legends of Koh Kaf, 'the stony girdle that surrounds the world,' are evidently connected with the Lokaloka of the Hindus. According to the S'iva Tantra, the El Dorado, at the foot of the Lokaloka mountains, is the play-ground of the gods.

^203:7 This comprises the planetary spheres; for the diameter of the seven zones and oceans--each ocean being of the same diameter as the continent it encloses, and each successive continent being twice the diameter of that which precedes it--amounts to but two crones and fifty-four lacs. The golden land is twice the diameter of Pushkara, or two crones and fifty-six lacs; and the Lokaloka is but ten thousand Yojanas. So that the whole is five crores ten lacs and ten thousand (5.10.10.000). According to the S'iva Tantra, the golden land is ten crores of Yojanas, making, with the seven continents, one fourth of the whole measurement. Other calculations occur, the incompatibility of which is said by the commentators on our text, and on that of the Bhagavata, to arise from reference being made to different Kalpas, and they quote the same stanza to this effect: 'Whenever any contradictions in different Puranas are observed, they are ascribed by the pious to differences of Kalpas and the like.'

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

CHAP. V.

Of the seven regions of Patala, below the earth. Narada's praises of Patala. Account of the serpent S'esha. First teacher of astronomy and astrology.

PARAS'ARA.--The extent of the surface of the earth has been thus described to you, Maitreya. Its depth below the surface is said to be seventy thousand Yojanas, each of the seven regions of Patala extending downwards ten thousand. These seven, worthy Muni, are called Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Gabhastimat, Mahatala, Sutala, and Patala [*1]. Their soil is severally white, black, purple, yellow, sandy, stony, and of gold. They are embellished with magnificent palaces, in which dwell numerous Danavas, Daityas, Yakshas, and great snake-gods. The Muni Narada, after his return from those regions to the skies [*2], declared amongst the celestials that Patala was much more delightful than Indra's heaven. "What," exclaimed the sage, "can be compared to Patala, where the Nagas are decorated with brilliant and beautiful and pleasure-shedding jewels? who will not delight in Patala, where the lovely daughters of the Daityas and Danavas wander about, fascinating even the most austere; where the rays of the sun diffuse light, and not heat, by day; and where the moon shines by night for illumination, not for cold; where the sons of Danu, happy in the enjoyment of delicious viands and strong wines, know not how time passes? There are beautiful groves and streams and lakes where the lotus blows; and the skies are resonant with the Koil's song. Splendid ornaments, fragrant perfumes, rich unguents, the blended music of the lute and pipe and tabor; these and many other enjoyments are the common portion of the Danavas, Daityas, and snake-gods, who inhabit the regions of Patala [*3]."

[p. 205]

Below the seven Patalas is the form of Vishnu, proceeding from the quality of darkness, which is called S'esha [*4], the excellencies of which neither Daityas nor Danavas can fully enumerate. This being is called Ananta by the spirits of heaven, and is worshipped by sages and by gods. He has a thousand heads, which are embellished with the pure and visible mystic sign [*5]: and the thousand jewels in his crests give light to all the regions. For the benefit of the world he: deprives the Asuras of their strength. He rolls his eyes fiercely, as if intoxicated. He wears a single ear-ring, a diadem, and wreath upon each brow; and shines like the white mountains topped with flame. He is clothed in purple raiment, and ornamented with a white necklace, and looks like another Kailasa, with the heavenly Ganga flowing down its precipices. In one hand he holds a plough, and in the other a pestle; and he is attended by Varuni (the goddess of wine), who is his own embodied radiance. From his mouths, at the end of the Kalpa, proceeds the venomed fire that, impersonated as Rudra, who is one with Balarama, devours the three worlds.

[p. 206]

S'esha bears the entire world, like a diadem, upon his head, and he is the foundation on which the seven Patalas rest. His power, his glory, his form, his nature, cannot be described, cannot he comprehended by the gods themselves. Who shall recount his might, who wears this whole earth, like a garland of flowers, tinged of a purple dye by the radiance of the jewels of his crests. When Ananta, his eyes rolling with intoxication, yawns, then earth, with all her woods, and mountains, and seas, and rivers, trembles. Gandharbas, Apsarasas, Siddhas, Kinnaras, Uragas, and Charanas are unequal to hymn his praises, and therefore he is called the infinite (Ananta), the imperishable. The sandal paste, that is ground by the wives of the snake-gods, is scattered abroad by his breath, and sheds perfume around the skies.

The ancient sage Garga [*6], having propitiated S'esha, acquired from him a knowledge of the principles of astronomical science, of the planets, and of the good and evil denoted by the aspects of the heavens.

The earth, sustained upon the head of this sovereign serpent, supports in its turn the garland of the spheres, along with their inhabitants, men, demons, and gods.

Footnotes

^204:1 In the Bhagavata and Padma P. they are named Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala, and Patala. The Vayu has Rasatala, Sutala, Vitala, Gabhastala, Mahatala, S'ritala, and Patala. There are other varieties.

^204:2 Allusion is here made, perhaps, to the description given in the Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, p. 218, of Narada's and Matali's visit to Patala. Several of the particulars there given are not noticed in the Puranas.

^204:3 There is no very copious description of Patala in any of the Puranas. The most circumstantial are those of the Vayu and Bhagavata: the latter has been repeated, [p. 205] with some additions, in the first chapters of the Patala Khanda of the Padma Purana. The Mahabharata and these two Puranas assign different divisions to the Danavas, Daityas, and Nagas; placing Vasuki and the other Naga chiefs in the lowest: but the Vayu has the cities of the principal Daityas and Nagas in each; as in the first, those of the Daitya Namuchi, and serpent Kaliya; in the second, of Hayagriva and Takshaka; in the third, of Prahlada and Hemaka; in the fourth, of Kalanemi and Vainateya; in the fifth, of Hiranyaksha and Kirmira; and in the sixth, of Puloman and Vasuki: besides others. Bali the Daitya is the sovereign of Patala, according to this authority. The Mahabharata places Vasuki in Rasatala, and calls his capital Bhogavati. The regions of Patala, and their inhabitants, are oftener the subjects of profane, than of sacred fiction, in consequence of the frequent intercourse between mortal heroes and the Naga-kanyas, or serpent-nymphs. A considerable section of the Vrihat Katha, the Suryaprabha lambaka, consists of adventures and events in this subterraneous world.

^205:4 S'esha is commonly described as being in this situation: he is the great serpent on which Vishnu sleeps during the intervals of creation, and upon whose numerous heads the world is supported. The Puranas, making him one with Balarama or Sankarshana, who is an impersonation or incarnation of S'esha, blend the attributes of the serpent and the demigod in their description.

^205:5 With the Swastika, a particular diagram used in mystical ceremonies.

^206:6 One of the oldest writers on astronomy amongst the Hindus. According to Mr. Bentley, his Sanhita dates 548 B. C. (Ancient Astron. of the Hindus, p. 59.)

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 207]

  

CHAP. VI.

Of the different hells or divisions of Naraka, below Patala: the crimes punished in them respectively: efficacy of expiation: meditation on Vishnu the most effective expiation.

PARAS'ARA.--I will now, great Muni, give you an account of the hells which are situated beneath the earth and beneath the waters [*1], and into which sinners are finally sent.

The names of the different Narakas are as follows: Raurava, S'ukara, Rodha, Tala, Vis'asana, Mahajwala, Taptakumbha, Lavana, Vimohana, Rudhirandha, Vaitarani, Krimis'a, Krimibhojana, Asipatravana, Krishna, Lalabhaksha, Daruna, Puyavaha, Papa, Vahnijwala, Adhos'iras, Sandansa, Kalasutra, Tamas, Avichi, S'wabhojana, Apratishtha, and another Avichi [*2]. These and many other fearful hells are the awful provinces of the kingdom of Yama, terrible with instruments of torture and with fire; into which are hurled all those who are addicted when alive to sinful practices [*3].

The man who bears false witness through partiality, or who utters any falsehood, is condemned to the Raurava (dreadful) hell. He who causes abortion, plunders a town, kills a cow, or strangles a man, goes to the

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] Rodha hell (or that of obstruction). The murderer of a Brahman, stealer of gold, or drinker of wine, goes to the Sukara (swine) hell; as does any one who associates with them. The murderer of a man of the second or third castes, and one who is guilty of adultery with the wife of his spiritual teacher, is sentenced to the Tala (padlock) hell: and one who holds incestuous intercourse with a sister, or murders an ambassador, to Taptakumbha (or the hell of heated caldrons). The seller of his wife, a gaoler, a horsedealer, and one who deserts his adherents, falls into the Taptaloha (red-hot iron) hell. He who commits incest with a daughter-in-law or a daughter is cast into the Mahajwala hell (or that of great flame): and he who is disrespectful to his spiritual guide, who is abusive to his betters, who reviles the Vedas, or who sells them [*4], who associates with women in a prohibited degree, into the Lavana (salt) hell. A thief and a contemner of prescribed observances falls into Vimohana (the place of bewildering). He who hates his father, the Brahmans, and the gods, or who spoils precious gems, is punished in the Krimibhaksha hell (where worms are his food): and he who practises magic rites for the harm of others, in the hell called Krimis'a (that of insects). The vile wretch who eats his meal before offering food to the gods, to the manes, or to guests, falls into the hell called Lalabhaksha (where saliva is given for food). The maker of arrows is sentenced to the Vedhaka (piercing) hell: and the maker of lances, swords, and other weapons, to the dreadful hell called Vis'asana (murderous). He who takes unlawful gifts goes to the Adhomukha (or head-inverted) hell; as does one who offers sacrifices to improper objects, and an observer of the stars (for the prediction of events). He who eats by himself sweetmeats mixed with his rice [*5], and a Brahman who vends Lac, flesh, liquors, sesamum, or salt, or one who commits violence, fall into the hell (where matter flows, or) Puyavaha; as do they who rear cats, cocks, goats, dogs, hogs, or birds. Public performers [*6], fishermen, the follower of one born in adultery, a poisoner,

[p. 209]

an informer, one who lives by his wife's prostitution [*7], one who attends to secular affairs on the days of the Parvas (or full and new moon, &c.) [*8], an incendiary, a treacherous friend, a soothsayer, one who performs religious ceremonies for rustics, and those who sell the acid Asclepias, used in sacrifices, go to the Rudhirandha hell (whose wells are of blood). He who destroys a bee-hive, or pillages a hamlet, is condemned to the Vaitarani hell. He who causes impotence, trespasses on others' lands, is impure, or who lives by fraud, is punished in the hell called (black, or) Krishna. He who wantonly cuts down trees goes to the Asipatravana hell (the leaves of whose trees are swords): and a tender on sheep, and hunter of deer, to the hell termed Vahnijwala (or fiery flame); as do those who apply fire to unbaked vessels (potters). The violator of a vow, and one who breaks the rules of his order, falls into the Sandansa (or hell of pincers): and the religious student who sleeps in the day, and is, though unconsciously, defiled; and they who, though mature, are instructed in sacred literature by their children, receive punishment in the hell called S'wabhojana (where they feed upon dogs). These hells, and hundreds and thousands of others, are the places in which sinners pay the penalty of their crimes. As numerous as are the offences that men commit, so many are the hells in which they are punished: and all who deviate from the duties imposed upon them by their caste and condition, whether in thought, word, or deed, are sentenced to punishment in the regions of the damned [*9].

The gods in heaven are beheld by the inhabitants of hell, as they move with their heads inverted; whilst the god, as they cast their eyes

[p. 210]

downwards, behold the sufferings of those in hell [*10]. The various stages of existence, Maitreya, are inanimate things, fish, birds, animals, men, holy men, gods, and liberated spirits; each in succession a thousand degrees superior to that which precedes it: and through these stages the beings that are either in heaven or in hell are destined to proceed, until final emancipation be obtained [*11]. That sinner goes to Naraka who neglects the due expiation of his guilt.

For, Maitreya, suitable acts of expiation have been enjoined by the great sages for every kind of crime [*12]. Arduous penances for great sins, trifling ones for minor offences, have been propounded by Swayambhuva and others: but reliance upon Krishna is far better than any such expiatory acts, as religious austerity, or the like. Let any one who repents of the sin of which he may have been culpable have recourse to this best of all expiations, remembrance of Hari [*13]: by addressing his thoughts to Narayana at dawn, at night, at sunset, and midday, a man shall be quickly cleansed from all guilt: the whole heap of worldly sorrows is dispersed by meditating on Hari; and his worshipper, looking upon heavenly fruition as an impediment to felicity, obtains final emancipation. He

[p. 211]

whose mind is devoted to Hari in silent prayer, burnt-offering, or adoration, is impatient even of the glory of the king of the gods. Of what avail is ascent to the summit of heaven, if it is necessary to return from thence to earth. How different is the meditation on Vasudeva, which is the seed of eternal freedom. Hence, Muni, the man who thinks of Vishnu, day and night, goes not to Naraka after death, for all his sins are atoned for.

Heaven (or Swarga) is that which delights the mind; hell (or Naraka) is that which gives it pain: hence vice is called hell; virtue is called heaven [*14]. The selfsame thing is applicable to the production of pleasure or pain, of malice or of anger. Whence then can it be considered as essentially the same with either? That which at one time is a source of enjoyment, becomes at another the cause of suffering; and the same thing may at different seasons excite wrath, or conciliate favour. It follows, then, that nothing is in itself either pleasurable or painful; and pleasure and pain, and the like, are merely definitions of various states of mind. That which alone is truth is wisdom; but wisdom may be the cause of confinement to existence; for all this universe is wisdom, there is nothing different from it; and consequently, Maitreya, you are to conclude that both knowledge and ignorance are comprised in wisdom [*15].

I have thus described to you the orb of the earth; the regions below its surface, or Patalas; and the Narakas, or hells; and have briefly enumerated its oceans, mountains, continents, regions, and rivers: what else do you wish to hear?

Footnotes

^207:1 The Bhagavata places the Narakas above the waters. The commentator on our text endeavours to reconcile the difference, by explaining the text to imply a dark cavity in which the waters are received, not the original abysses where they were collected at first, and above which Tartarus lies.

^207:2 Some of these names are the same that are given by Manu, b. IV. v. 88-90. Kulluka Bhatta refers to the Markandeya P. for a description of the twenty-one divisions of hell; but the account there given is not more ample than that of our text. The Bhagavata enumerates twenty-eight, but many of the names differ from the above. In the last instance the term Avichi is either inaccurately repeated, or the adjective Apara is intended to distinguish it from the previous Avichi. In Manu, Mahavichi occurs.

^207:3 The Padma P. (Kriya Yoga Sara) and the S'iva Dharma, which appears to be a section of the Skanda P., contain a number of interesting circumstances previous to the infliction of punishment. It appears also from them that Yama fulfils the office of judge of the dead, as well as sovereign of the damned; all that die appearing before him, and being confronted with Chitragupta, the recorder, by whom their actions have been registered. The virtuous are thence conveyed to Swarga, or Elysium, whilst the wicked are driven to the different regions of Naraka, or Tartarus.

^208:4 'Who teaches the Vedas for hire.' This notion still prevails, and renders the few Pandits who are acquainted with the Vedas very unwilling to teach them for a gratuity.

^208:5 'Thereby,' observes the commentator, 'defrauding or disappointing children.'

^208:6 Rangopajivina: the commentator explains it wrestlers and boxers, but Ranga applies to any stage or arena.

^209:7 The term in the text is Mahishika, which might mean a feeder of buffaloes; but the commentator quotes a text from the Smriti, authorizing the sense above followed.

^209:8 This is the interpretation of Parvakari; it is also read Parvagami, he who cohabits with his wife on prohibited days.'

^209:9 An account of Naraka is found in only a few of the Puranas, and in less detail than in the text. The Bhagavata and Vayu have similar descriptions of them. The Markandeya enters into detail in some of the instances only. A short account is found in the S'iva, Garura, and Brahma Vaivartta P. and in the Kas'i Khanda of the Skanda P. The fullest descriptions, however, are those mentioned in a previous note as being in the S'iva Dharma of the Skanda, and Kriya Yoga Sara of the Padma; works of a somewhat equivocal character, and belonging rather to Tantra than Pauranik literature.

^210:10 The commentator observes that the sight of heavenly bliss is given to the damned in order to exacerbate their torments; whilst the inflictions of hell are exhibited to the gods to teach them disregard of even heavenly enjoyments, as they are but of temporary duration.

^210:11 That is, when punishment or reward in hell or heaven, proportioned to the sin or virtue of the individual, has been received, he must be born again as a stone or plant, and gradually migrate through the several inferior conditions, until he is once more born a man; his future state is then in his own power.

^210:12 Manu is here especially intended, as the commentator observes.

^210:13 This remembrance of Vishnu is the frequent reiteration of any or all of his names: hence the lower orders of Hindus procure a starling or parrot, that, in the act of teaching it to cry Rama or Krishna or Radha, they may themselves repeat these appellations; the simple recitation of which, even if accidentally, irreverently, or reluctantly performed, is meritorious. Thus according to the Vishnu Disarms Tantra: 'Let a man ever and every where repeat the names of the discus-armed (Vishnu); for its repetition, even by one who is impure, is a means of purification. Hari removes all sins, even when invoked by evil-minded persons, as fire burns one by whom it is unwillingly approached.'

^211:14 The object of the text, according to the commentator, is to shew that the common notions of heaven and hell are erroneous; that they are only temporal pleasure and temporal pain; and virtue and vice, being the origin of transient, and therefore unreal effects, are themselves unrealities: there is nothing real but faith in Vishnu.

^211:15 Text and comment are here somewhat obscure; but the purport of the former seems to be the explanation of the existence of Jnyan wisdom, both as a genus and a species: in the former case it is all that is; and in the latter, it may be either true or false wisdom: the latter being influenced by notions of self or individuality, and therefore the cause of confinement to existence; the former dissipating the belief of self, and being therefore the cause of liberation from bodily being.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

  

CHAP. VII.

Extent and situation of the seven spheres, viz. earth, sky, planets, Mahar-loka, Janaloka, Tapo-loka, and Satya-loka. Of the egg of Brahma, and its elementary envelopes. Of the influence of the energy of Vishnu.

MAITREYA.--The sphere of the whole earth has been described to me by you, excellent Brahman, and I am now desirous to hear an account of the other spheres above the world, the Bhuvar-loka and the rest, and the situation and the dimensions of the celestial luminaries.

PARAS'ARA. The sphere of the earth (or Bhur-loka), comprehending its oceans, mountains, and rivers, extends as far as it is illuminated by the rays of the sun and moon; and to the same extent, both in diameter and circumference, the sphere of the sky (Bhuvar-loka) spreads above it (as far upwards as to the planetary sphere, or Swar-loka) [*1]. The solar orb is situated a hundred thousand leagues from the earth; and that of the moon an equal distance from the sun. At the same interval above the moon occurs the orbit of all the lunar constellations. The planet Budha (Mercury) is two hundred thousand leagues above the lunar mansions. S'ukra (Venus) is at the same distance from Mercury. Angaraka (Mars) is as far above Venus; and the priest of the gods (Vrihaspati, or Jupiter) as far from Mars: whilst Saturn (Sani) is two hundred and fifty thousand leagues beyond Jupiter. The sphere of the seven Rishis (Ursa Major) is a hundred thousand leagues above Saturn; and at a similar height above the seven Rishis is Dhruva (the pole-star), the pivot or axis of the whole planetary circle. Such, Maitreya, is the elevation of the three spheres (Bhur, Bhuvar, Swar) which form the region of the consequences of works. The region of works is here (or in the land of Bharata) [*2].

[p. 213]

Above Dhruva, at the distance of ton million leagues, lies the sphere of saints, or Mahar-loka, the inhabitants of which dwell in it throughout a Kalpa, or day of Brahma. At twice that distance is situated Janaloka, where Sanandana and other pure-minded sons of Brahma, reside. At four times the distance, between the two last, lies the Tapo-loka (the sphere of penance), inhabited by the deities called Vaibhrajas, who are unconsumable by fire. At six times the distance (or twelve Crores, a hundred and twenty millions of leagues) is situated Satya-loka, the sphere of truth, the inhabitants of which never again know death [*3].

[p. 214]

Wherever earthy substance exists, which may be traversed by the feet, that constitutes the sphere of the earth, the dimensions of which I have already recounted to you. The region that extends from the earth to the sun, in which the Siddhas and other celestial beings move, is the atmospheric sphere, which also I have described. The interval between the sun and Dhruva, extending fourteen hundred thousand leagues, is called by those who are acquainted with the system of the universe the heavenly sphere. These three spheres are termed transitory: the three highest, Jana, Tapa, and Satya, are styled durable [*4]: Maharloka, as situated between the two, has also a mixed character; for although it is deserted at the end of the Kalpa, it is not destroyed. These seven spheres, together with the Patalas, forming the extent of the whole world, I have thus, Maitreya, explained to you.

The world is encompassed on every side and above and below by the shell of the egg of Brahma, in the same manner as the seed of the wood-apple [*5] is invested by its rind. Around the outer surface of the shell flows water, for a space equal to ten times the diameter of the world. The waters, again, are encompassed exteriorly by fire; fire by air; and air by Mind; Mind by the origin of the elements (Ahankara); and that by Intellect: each of these extends ten times the breadth of that which

[p. 215]

it encloses; and the last is encircled by the chief Principle, Pradhana [*6], which is infinite, and its extent cannot be enumerated: it is therefore called the boundless and illimitable cause of all existing things, supreme nature, or Prakriti; the cause of all mundane eggs, of which there are thousands and tens of thousands, and millions and thousands of millions, such as has been described [*7]. Within Pradhana resides Soul, diffusive, conscious, and self-irradiating, as fire is inherent in flint [*8], or sesamum oil in its seed. Nature (Pradhana) and soul (Puman) are both of the character of dependants, and are encompassed by the energy of Vishnu, which is one with the soul of the world, and which is the cause of the separation of those two (soul and nature) at the period of dissolution; of their aggregation in the continuance of things; and of their combination at the season of creation [*9]. In the same manner as the wind ruffles the surface of the water in a hundred bubbles, which of themselves are inert, so the energy of Vishnu influences the world, consisting of inert nature and soul. Again, as a tree, consisting of root, stem, and branches, springs from a primitive seed, and produces other seeds, whence grow other trees analogous to the first in species, product, and origin, so from the first unexpanded germ (of nature, or Pradhana) spring Mahat (Intellect)

[p. 216]

and the other rudiments of things; from them proceed the grosser elements; and from them men and gods, who are succeeded by sons and the sons of sons. In the growth of a tree from the seed, no detriment occurs to the parent plant, neither is there any waste of beings by the generation of others. In like manner as space and time and the rest are the cause of the tree (through the materiality of the seed), so the divine Hari is the cause of all things by successive developements (through the materiality of nature) [*10]. As all the parts of the future plant, existing in the seed of rice, or the root, the culm, the leaf, the shoot, the stem, the bud, the fruit, the milk, the grain, the chaff, the ear, spontaneously evolve when they are in approximation with the subsidiary means of growth (or earth and water), so gods, men, and other beings, involved in many actions (or necessarily existing in those states which are the consequences of good or evil acts), become manifested only in their full growth, through the influence of the energy of Vishnu.

This Vishnu is the supreme spirit (Brahma), from whence all this world proceeds, who is the world, by whom the world subsists, and in whom it will be resolved. That spirit (or Brahma) is the supreme state of Vishnu, which is the essence of all that is visible or invisible; with which all that is, is identical; and whence all animate and inanimate existence is derived. He is primary nature: he, in a perceptible form, is the world: and in him all finally melts; through him all things endure. He is the performer of the rites of devotion: he is the rite: he is the fruit which it bestows: he is the implements by which it is performed. There is nothing besides the illimitable Hari.

Footnotes

^212:1 Bhur-loka, the terrestrial sphere, is earth and the lower regions; from thence to the sun is the Bhuvar-loka, or atmospheric sphere; and from the sun to Dhruva is the Swar-loka, or heaven; as subsequently explained in the text, and in other Puranas.

^212:2 A similar account of the situations and distances of the planets occurs in the Padma, Kurma, and Vayu Puranas. The Bhagavata has one or two varieties, but they are of no great importance.

^213:3 An account of these Lokas is met with only in a few of the Puranas, and is not much more detailed in them than in our text. The Vayu is most circumstantial. According to that authority, Mahar, which is so called from a mystical term Maha, is the abode of the Ganadevas, the Yamas and others, who are the regents or rulers of the Kalpa, the Kalpadhikaris they are so designated also in the Kurma. The Kas'i Khanda refers the name to Mahas, 'light,' the sphere being invested with radiance. Its inhabitants are also called lords of the Kalpa: but the commentator explains this to denote Bhrigu and the other patriarchs, whose lives endure for a day of Brahma. The different accounts agree in stating, that when the three lower spheres are consumed by fire, Mahar-loka is deserted by its tenants, who repair to the next sphere, or Jana-loka. Jana-loka, according to the Vayu, is the residence of the Rishis and demigods during the night of Brahma, and is termed Jana because the patriarchs are the progenitors of mankind. The Kas'i Khanda agrees with the Vishnu in peopling it with Sanandana and the other ascetic sons of Brahma, and with Yogis like themselves. These are placed by the Vayu in the Tapo-loka, and they and the other sages, and the demigods, after repeated appearances in the world, become at last Vairajas in the Brahma or Satya loka. After many divine ages of residence there with Brahma, they are, along with him, absorbed, at the end of his existence into the indiscrete. The commentator on the Kas'i Khanda explains Vairaja to mean 'relating to, or derived from, Brahma or Viraj.' The Vairajas are there, as in the Vishnu Purana, placed in the Tapo-loka, and are explained to be ascetics, mendicants, anchorets, and penitents, who have completed a course of rigorous austerities. It maybe doubted, however, if the Pauraniks have very precise notions regarding these spheres and their inhabitants, The Puranas of a decidedly sectarial character add other and higher worlds to the series. Thus the Kurma identifies Brahma-loka with Vishnu-loka, and has a Rudra-loka above it. The S'iva places Vishnu-loka above Brahma-loka, and Rudra-loka above that. In [p. 214] the Kas'i Khanda as we have, instead of those two, Vaikuntha and Kailasa, as the lofty worlds of Vishnu and S'iva; whilst the Brahma Vaivartta has above all a Go-loka, a world or heaven of cows and Krishna. These are all evidently additions to the original system of seven worlds, in which we have probably some relation to the seven climates of the ancients, the seven stages or degrees of the earth of the Arabs, and the seven heavens of the Mohammedans, if not to the seven Amshaspends of the Parsis. Seven, suggested originally perhaps by the seven planets, seems to have been a favourite number with various nations of antiquity. Amongst the Hindus it was applied to a variety of sacred or mythological objects, which are enumerated in a verse in the Hanuman Nataka. Rama is described there as piercing seven palm-trees with an arrow, on which other groups of seven take fright, as the seven steeds of the sun, the seven spheres, Munis, seas, continents, and mothers of the gods.

^214:4 Kritika and Akritika; literally 'made and unmade:' the former being renewed every Kalpa, the latter perishing only at the end of Brahma's life.

^214:5 Of the Kapittha (Feronia Elephantum).

^215:6 See before the order in which the elements are evolved (<page 14>).

^215:7 The followers of Anaximander and Democritus taught "an apeiria kosmun 'an infinity of worlds;' and that not only successive in that space which this world of ours is conceived now to occupy, in respect of the infinity of past and future time, but also a contemporary infinity of coexistent worlds, at all times, throughout endless and unbounded space." Intellect. System, I. 303.

^215:8 Literally 'in wood,' the attrition of two pieces of which does not create, but developes, their latent heat and flame.

^215:9 Thus in Scipio's dream the divinity is made the external limit of the universe: "Novem tibi orbibus vel potius globis connexa sunt omnia, quorum unus est caelestis externus qui reliquos omnes complectitur, summus ipse deus arcens et continens ceteros:" which Macrobius explains as to be understood of the Supreme First Cause of all things, only in respect of his supremacy over all, and from his comprehending as well as creating all things, and being regarded as the soul of the world: "Quod et virtutes omnes, quae illam primae omnipotentiam summitates sequuntur, aut ipse faciat aut ipse contineat: ipsam denique Jovem veteres vocaverunt, et apud theologos Jupiter est mundi anima." In Somn. Scip. c. XVII.

^216:10 The two passages in parentheses are the additions of the commentator, intended to explain how the deity is the material cause of the world. He is not so of his own essence, not so immediately, but through the interposition of Pradhana: 'As however he is the source of Prakriti, he must be considered the material as well as immaterial cause of being.'

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 217]

  

CHAP. VIII.

Description of the sun: his chariot; its two axles: his horses. The cities of the regents of the cardinal points. The sun's course: nature of his rays: his path along the ecliptic. Length of day and night. Divisions of time: equinoxes and solstices, months, years, the cyclical Yuga, or age of five years. Northern and southern declinations. Saints on the Lokaloka mountain. Celestial paths of the Pitris, gods, Vishnu. Origin of Ganga, and separation, on the top of Meru, into four great rivers.

PARAS'ARA.--Having thus described to you the system of the world in general, I will now explain to you the dimensions and situations of the sun and other luminaries.

The chariot of the sun is nine thousand leagues in length, and the pole is of twice that longitude [*1]; the axle is fifteen millions and seven hundred thousand leagues long [*2]; on which is fixed a wheel with three naves, five spokes, and six peripheries, consisting of the ever-during year; the whole constituting the circle or wheel of time [*3]. The chariot has another axle, which is forty-five thousand five hundred leagues long [*4].

[p. 218]

[paragraph continues] The two halves of the yoke are of the same length respectively as the two axles (the longer and the shorter). The short axle, with the short yoke, are supported by the pole-star: the end of the longer axle, to which the wheel of the car is attached, moves on the Manasa mountain [*5]. The seven horses of the sun's car are the metres of the Vedas, Gayatri, Vrihati, Ushnih, Jayati, Trishtubh, Anushtubh, and Pankti.

The city of Indra is situated on the eastern side of the Manasottara mountain; that of Yama on the southern face; that of Varuna on the west; and that of Soma on the north: named severally Vaswokasara, Samyamani, Mukhya, and Vibhavari [*6].

The glorious sun, Maitreya, darts like an arrow on his southern course, attended by the constellations of the Zodiac. He causes the difference between day and night, and is the divine vehicle and path of the sages who have overcome the inflictions of the world. Whilst the sun, who is the discriminator of all hours, shines in one continent in midday, in the opposite Dwipas, Maitreya, it will be midnight: rising and setting are at all seasons, and are always (relatively) opposed in the different cardinal and intermediate points of the horizon. When the sun becomes visible to any people, to them he is said to rise; when he disappears from their

[p. 219]

view, that is called his setting. There is in truth neither rising nor setting of the sun, for he is always; and these terms merely imply his presence and his disappearance.

When the sun (at midday) passes over either of the cities of the gods, on the Manasottara mountain (at the cardinal points), his light extends to three cities and two intermediate points: when situated in an intermediate point, he illuminates two of the cities and three intermediate. points (in either case one hemisphere). From the period of his rise the sun moves with increasing rays until noon, when he proceeds towards his setting with rays diminishing (that is, his heat increases or diminishes in proportion as he advances to, or recedes from, the meridian of any place). The east and west quarters are so called from the sun's rising and setting there [*7]. As far as the sun shines in front, so far he shines behind and on either hand, illuminating all places except the summit of Meru, the mountain of the immortals; for when his rays reach the court of Brahma, which is there situated, they are repelled and driven back by the overpowering radiance which there prevails: consequently there is always the alternation of day and night, according as the divisions of the continent lie in the northern (or southern) quarter, or inasmuch as they are situated north (or south) of Meru [*8].

[p. 220]

The radiance of the solar orb, when the sun has set, is accumulated in fire, and hence fire is visible at a greater distance by night than by day: during the latter a fourth of the rays of fire blend with those of the sun, and from their union the sun shines with greater intensity by day. Elemental light, and heat derived from the sun or from fire, blending with each other, mutually prevail in various proportions, both by day and night. When the sun is present either in the southern or the northern hemisphere, day or night retires into the waters, according as they are invaded by darkness or light: it is from this cause that the waters look dark by day, because night is within them; and they look white by night, because at the setting of the sun the light of day takes refuge in their bosom [*9].

When the sun has travelled in the centre of Pushkara a thirtieth part of the circumference of the globe, his course is equal in time to one Muhurtta [*10]; and whirling round like the circumference of the wheel of a potter, he distributes day and night upon the earth. In the commencement of his northern course, the sun passes to Capricornus, thence to Aquarius, thence to Pisces, going successively from one sign of the Zodiac to another. After he has passed through these, the sun attains his equinoctial movement (the vernal equinox), when he makes the day and night of equal duration. Thenceforward the length of the night decreases, and the day becomes longer, until the sun reaches the end of Gemini, when he pursues a different direction, and, entering Cancer, begins his declension to the south. As the circumference of a potter's

[p. 221]

wheel revolves most rapidly, so the sun travels rapidly on his southern journey: he flies along his path with the velocity of wind, and traverses a great distance in a short time. In twelve Muhurttas he passes through thirteen lunar asterisms and a half during the day; and during the night he passes through the same distance, only in eighteen Muhurttas. As the centre of the potter's wheel revolves more slowly than the circumference, so the sun in his northern path again revolves with less rapidity, and moves over a less space of the earth in a longer time, until, at the end of his northern route, the day is again eighteen Muhurttas, and the night twelve; the sun passing through half the lunar mansions by day and by night in those periods respectively. As the lump of clay on the centre of the potter's wheel moves most slowly, so the polar-star, which is in the centre of the zodiacal wheel, revolves very tardily, and ever remains in the centre, as the clay continues in the centre of the wheel of the potter.

The relative length of the day or night depends upon the greater or less velocity with which the sun revolves through the degrees between the two points of the horizon. In the solstitial period, in which his diurnal path is quickest, his nocturnal is slowest; and in that in which he moves quick by night, he travels slowly by day. The extent of his journey is in either case the same; for in the course of the day and night he passes through all the signs of the Zodiac, or six by night, and the same number by day: the length and shortness of the day are measured by the extent of the signs; and the duration of day and night by the period which the sun takes to pass through them [*11]. In his northern

[p. 222]

declination the sun moves quickest by night, and slowest by day; in his southern declination the reverse is the case.

The night is called Usha, and the day is denominated Vyushta, and the interval between them is called Sandhya. On the occurrence of the awful Sandhya, the terrific fiends termed Mandehas attempt to devour the sun; for Brahma denounced this curse upon them, that, without the power to perish, they should die every day (and revive by night), and therefore a fierce contest occurs daily between them and the sun [*12]. At this season pious Brahmans scatter water, purified by the mystical Omkara, and consecrated by the Gayatri [*13]; and by this water, as by a thunderbolt, the foul fiends are consumed. When the first oblation is offered with solemn invocations in the morning rite [*14], the thousand-rayed deity shines forth with unclouded splendour. Omkara is Vishnu the mighty, the substance of the three Vedas, the lord of speech; and by its enunciation those Rakshasas are destroyed. The sun is a principal part of Vishnu, and light is his immutable essence, the active manifestation of which is excited by the mystic syllable Om. Light effused by the utterance of Omkara becomes radiant, and burns up entirely the Rakshasas called Mandehas. The performance of the Sandhya (the morning) sacrifice must never therefore be delayed, for he who neglects it is guilty of the murder of the sun. Protected thus by the Brahmans and the pigmy sages called Balakhilyas, the sun goes on his course to give light to the world.

[p. 223]

Fifteen twinklings of the eye (Nimeshas) make a Kashtha; thirty Kashthas, a Kala; thirty Kalas, a Muhurtta (forty-eight minutes); and thirty Muhurttas, a day and night: the portions of the day are longer or shorter, as has been explained; but the Sandhya is always the same in increase or decrease, being only one Muhurtta [*15]. From the period that a line may be drawn across the sun (or that half his orb is visible) to the expiration of three Muhurttas (two hours and twenty-four minutes), that interval is called Pratar (morning), forming a fifth portion of the day. The next portion, or three Muhurttas from morning, is termed Sangava (forenoon): the three next Muhurttas constitute mid-day: the afternoon comprises the next three Muhurttas: the three Muhurttas following are considered as the evening: and the fifteen Muhurttas of the day are thus classed in five portions of three each. But the day consists of fifteen Muhurttas only at the equinoxes, increasing or diminishing in number in the northern and southern declinations of the sun, when the day encroaches on the night, or the night upon the day. The equinoxes occur in the seasons of spring and autumn, when the sun enters the signs of Aries and Libra. When the sun enters Capricorn (the winter solstice), his northern progress commences; and his southern when he enters Cancer (the summer solstice).

Fifteen days of thirty Muhurttas each are called a Paksha (a lunar fortnight); two of these make a month; and two months, a solar season; three seasons a northern or southern declination (Ayana); and those two compose a year. Years, made up of four kinds of months [*16], are distinguished

[p. 224]

into five kinds; and an aggregate of all the varieties of time is termed a Yoga, or cycle. The years are severally called Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Idvatsara, Anuvatsara, and Vatsara. This is the time called a Yuga [*17].

The mountain range that lies most to the north (in Bharata-varsha) is called S'ringavan (the horned), from its having three principal elevations (horns or peaks), one to the north, one to the south, and one in the centre; the last is called the equinoctial, for the sun arrives there in the middle of the two seasons of spring and autumn, entering the equinoctial points in the first degree of Aries and of Libra, and making day and night of equal duration, or fifteen Muhurttas each. When the sun, most excellent sage, is in the first degree of the lunar mansion, Krittika, and the moon is in the. fourth of Vis'akha, or when the sun is in the third

[p. 225]

degree of Vis'akha, and the moon is in the head of Krittika (these positions being cotemporary with the equinoxes), that equinoctial season is holy (and is styled the Mahavishubha, or the great equinox) [*18]. At this time offerings are to be presented to the gods and to the manes, and gifts are to be made to the Brahmans by serious persons; for such donations are productive of happiness. Liberality at the equinoxes is always advantageous to the donor: and day and night; seconds, minutes, and hours; intercalary months; the day of full moon (Paurnamasi); the day of conjunction (Amavasya), when the moon rises invisible; the day when it is first seen (S'inivali); the day when it first disappears (Kuhu); the day when the moon is quite round (Raka); and the day when one digit is deficient (Anumati), are all seasons when gifts are meritorious.

The sun is in his northern declination in the months Tapas, Tapasya, Madhu, Madhava, S'ukra, and S'uchi; and in his southern in those of Nabhas, Nabhasya, Isha, Urja, Sahas, Sahasya [*19].

On the Lokaloka mountain, which I have formerly described to you,

[p. 226]

reside the four holy protectors of the world; or Sudhaman and Sankhapad, the two sons of Kardama, and Hiranyaroman, and Ketumat [*20]. Unaffected by the contrasts of existence, void of selfishness, active, and unencumbered by dependants, they take charge of the spheres, themselves abiding on the four cardinal points of the Lokaloka mountain.

On the north of Agastya, and south of the line of the Goat, exterior to the Vaiswanara path, lies the road of the Pitris [*21]. There dwell the great

[p. 227]

[paragraph continues] Rishis, the offerers of oblations with fire, reverencing the Vedas, after whose injunctions creation commenced, and who were discharging the duties of ministrant priests: for as the worlds are destroyed and renewed, they institute new rules of conduct, and reestablish the interrupted ritual of the Vedas. Mutually descending from each other, progenitor springing from descendant, and descendant from progenitor, in the alternating succession of births, they repeatedly appear in different housed and races along with their posterity, devout practices and instituted observances, residing to the south of the solar orb, as long as the moon and stars endure [*22].

The path of the gods lies to the north of the solar sphere, north of the Nagavithi [*23], and south of the seven Rishis. There dwell the Siddhas, of subdued senses, continent and pure, undesirous of progeny, and therefore victorious over death: eighty-eight thousand of these chaste beings tenant the regions of the sky, north of the sun, until the destruction of the universe: they enjoy immortality, for that they are holy; exempt from covetousness and concupiscence, love and hatred; taking no part in the procreation of living beings, and detecting the unreality of the properties of elementary matter. By immortality is meant existence to the end of the Kalpa: life as long as the three regions (earth, sky, and heaven) last is called exemption from (reiterated) death [*24]. The consequences of acts of iniquity or piety, such as Brahmanicide or an As'wamedha, endure for a similar period, or until the end of a Kalpa [*25], when all within the interval between Dhruva and the earth is destroyed.

[p. 228]

The space between the seven Rishis and Dhruva [*26], the third region of the sky, is the splendid celestial path of Vishnu (Vishnupada), and the abode of those sanctified ascetics who are cleansed from every soil, and in whom virtue and vice are annihilated. This is that excellent place of Vishnu to which those repair in whom all sources of pain are extinct, in consequence of the cessation of the consequences of piety or iniquity, and where they never sorrow more. There abide Dharma, Dhruva, and other spectators of the world, radiant with the superhuman faculties of Vishnu, acquired through religious meditation; and there are fastened and inwoven to all that is, and all that shall ever be, animate or inanimate. The seat of Vishnu is contemplated by the wisdom of the Yogis, identified with supreme light, as the radiant eye of heaven. In this portion of the heavens the splendid Dhruva is stationed, and serves for the pivot of the atmosphere. On Dhruva rest the seven great planets, and on them depend the clouds. The rains are suspended in the clouds, and from the rains come the water which is the nutriment and delight of all, the gods and the rest; and they, the gods, who are the receivers of oblations, being nourished by burnt-offerings, cause the rain to fall for the support of created beings. This sacred station of Vishnu, therefore, is the support of the three worlds, as it is the source of rain.

From that third region of the atmosphere, or seat of Vishnu, proceeds the stream that washes away all sin, the river Ganga, embrowned with the unguents of the nymphs of heaven, who have sported in her waters. Having her source in the nail of the great toe of Vishnu's left foot, Dhruva [*27] receives her, and sustains her day and night devoutly on his head; and thence the seven Rishis practise the exercises of austerity in her waters, wreathing their braided locks with her waves. The orb of the moon, encompassed by her accumulated current, derives augmented lustre from her contact. Falling from on high, as she issues from the moon; she alights on the summit of Meru, and thence flows to the four

[p. 229]

quarters of the earth, for its purification. The S'ita, Alakananda, Chakshu, and Bhadra are four branches of but one river, divided according to the regions towards which it proceeds. The branch that is known as the Alakananda was borne affectionately by Mahadeva, upon his head, for more than a hundred years, and was the river which raised to heaven the sinful sons of Sagara, by washing their ashes [*28]. The offences of any man who bathes in this river are immediately expiated, and unprecedented virtue is engendered. Its waters, offered by sons to their ancestors in faith for three years, yield to the latter rarely attainable gratification. Men of the twice-born orders, who offer sacrifice in this river to the lord of sacrifice, Purushottama, obtain whatever they desire, either here or in heaven. Saints who are purified from all soil by bathing in its waters, and whose minds are intent on Kes'ava, acquire thereby final liberation. This sacred stream, heard of, desired, seen, touched, bathed in, or hymned, day by day, sanctifies all beings; and those who, even at a distance of a hundred leagues, exclaim "Ganga, Ganga," atone for the sins committed during three previous lives. The place whence this river proceeds, for the purification of the three worlds, is the third division of the celestial regions, the seat of Vishnu [*29].

Footnotes

^217:1 The sun's car is 10.000 Yojanas broad, and as many deep, according to the Vayu and Matsya. The Bhagavata makes it thirty-six hundred thousand long, and one fourth that broad. The Linga agrees with the text.

^217:2 There is no great difference in this number in other accounts. The length of this axle, which extends from Meru to Manasa, is nearly equal to the semidiameter of the earth, which, according to the Matsya P., is 18.950.000 Yojanas.

^217:3 The three naves are the three divisions of the day, morning, noon, and night; the five spokes are the five cyclic years; and the six peripheries are the six seasons. The Bhagavata explains the three naves to be three periods of the year, of four months each, and gives twelves spokes as types of the twelve months. The Vayu, Matsya, and Bhavishya Puranas enter into much more detail. According to them, the parts of the wheel are the same as above described: the body of the car is the year; its upper and lower half are the two solstices; Dharma is its flag; Artha and Kama the pins of the yoke and axle; night is its fender; Nimeshas form its floor; a moment is the axle-tree; an instant the pole; minutes are its attendants; and hours its harness.

^217:4 This shorter axle is, according to the Bhagavata, one fourth of the longer.

^218:5 We are to understand here, both in the axle and yoke, two levers, one horizontal, the other perpendicular. The horizontal arm of the axle has a wheel at one end; the other extremity is connected with the perpendicular arm. To the horizontal arm of the yoke are harnessed the horses; and its inner or right extremity is secured to the perpendicular. The upper ends of both perpendiculars are supposed to be attached to Dhruva, the pole-star, by two aerial cords, which are lengthened in the sun's southern course, and shortened in his northern; and retained by which to Dhruva, as to a pivot, the wheel of the car traverses the summit of the Manasottara mountain on Pushkara-dwipa, which runs like a ring round the several continents and oceans. The contrivance is commonly compared to an oil mill, and was probably suggested by that machine as constructed in India. As the Manasottara mountain is but 50.000 leagues high, and Meru 84.000, whilst Dhruva is 1500.000, both levers are inclined at obtuse angles to the nave of the wheel and each other. In images of the sun, two equal and semicircular axles connect a central wheel with the sides of the car.

^218:6 In the Linga the city of Indra is called Amaravati; and in it and the Vayu that of Varuna is termed Sukha.

^219:7 The terms Purva and Apara mean properly 'before and behind;' but 'before' naturally denotes the east, either because men, according to a text of the Vedas, spontaneously face, as if to welcome the rising sun, or because they are enjoined by the laws so to do. When they face the rising sun, the west is of course behind them. The same circumstance determines the application of the term Dakshina, properly 'right,' dexios, or 'dexterum,' to the south. Uttara, 'other' or 'last,' necessarily implies the north.

^219:8 This is rather obscure, but it is made out clearly enough in the commentary, and in the parallel passages in the Vayu, Matsya, Linga, Kurma, and Bhagavata. The sun travels round the world, keeping Meru always on his right: to the spectator who fronts him therefore, as he rises, Meru must be always on the north; and as the sun's rays do not penetrate beyond the centre of the mountain, the regions beyond, or to the north of it, must be in darkness; whilst those on the south of it must be in light: north and south being relative, not absolute terms, depending upon the position of the spectator with regard to the sun and to Meru. So the commentator: ###. [p. 220] It was probably through some misapprehension of this doctrine that Major Wilford asserted, "by Meru the Pauraniks understand in general the north pole, but the context of the Puranas is against this supposition." As. Res. VIII. 286. There is no inconsistency, however, in Meru's being absolutely in the centre of the world, and relatively north to the inhabitants of the several portions, to all of whom the east is that quarter where the sun first appears, and the other quarters are thereby regulated.

^220:9 Similar notions are contained in the Vayu.

^220:10 The sun travels at the rate of one-thirtieth of the earth's circumference in a Muhurtta, or 31.50.000 Yojanas; making the total 9 crores and 45 lakhs, or 9.45.00.000; according to the Vayu, Lingo, and Matsya Puranas.

^221:11 This passage, which is somewhat at variance with the general doctrine, that the length of the day depends upon the velocity of the sun's course, and which has not been noticed in any other Pauranik text, is defended by the commentator, upon the authority of the Jyotishs'astra, or astronomical writings. According to them, he asserts, the signs of the Zodiac are of different extent. Aquarius, Pisces, and Aries are the shortest; Taurus, Capricornus, and Gemini are something longer; Leo and Scorpio longer still; and the remaining four the longest of all. According to the six which the sun traverses, the day or night will be the longer or shorter. The text is, ###. The apparent contradiction may however be reconciled by understanding the sun's slow motion, and the length of a sign, to be equivalent terms.

^222:12 The same story occurs in the Vayu, with the addition that the Mandehas are three crores in number. It seems to be an ancient legend, imperfectly preserved in some of the Puranas.

^222:13 The sacred syllable Om has been already described (p. <page 1>. n. ). The Gayatri, or holiest verse of the Vedas, not to be uttered to ears profane, is a short prayer to the sun, identified as the supreme, and occurs in the tenth hymn of the fourth section of the third Ashtaka of the Sanhita of the Rig-veda: 'We meditate on that excellent light of the divine sun: may he illuminate our minds.' Such is the fear entertained of profaning this text, that copyists of the Vedas not unfrequently refrain from transcribing it, both in the Sanhita and Bhashya.

^222:14 Or, in the text, with the prayer that commences with the words Surya jyotir, 'That which is in the sun (or light) is adorable,' &c. The whole prayer is given in Colebrooke's account of the religious ceremonies of the Hindus. As. Res. V. 355.

^223:15 But this comprehends the two Sandhyas, 'morning and evening twilight.' Two Naris, or half a Muhurtta before sunrise, constitute the morning Sandhya; and the same interval after sunset the evening. Sandhya, meaning 'junction,' is so termed as it is the juncture or interval between darkness and light; as in the Vayu and Matsya: ###.

^223:16 The four months are named in the Vayu, and are, 1. the Saura, or solar-sydereal, consisting of the sun's passage through a sign of the Zodiac: 2. the Saumya or Chandra or lunar month, comprehending thirty lunations or Tithis, and reckoned most usually from new moon to new moon, though sometimes from full moon to full moon: 3. the Savana or solar month, containing thirty days of sunrise and sunset: and 4. the Nakshatra or lunar [p. 224] asterismal month, which is the moon's revolution through the twenty-eight lunar mansions.

^224:17 The five years forming this Yuga, or cycle, differ only in denomination, being composed of the months above described, with such Malamasas, or intercalary months, as may be necessary to complete the period, according to Vriddha Garga. The cycle comprehends, therefore, sixty solar- sydereal months of 1800 days; sixty-one solar months, or 1830 days; sixty-two lunar months, or 1860 lunations; and sixty-seven lunar-asterismal months, or 1809 such days. Col. Warren, in his Kala Sankalita, considers these years to be severally cycles. "In the cycle of sixty," he observes, "are contained five cycles of twelve years, each supposed equal to one year of the planet (Jupiter). I only mention this cycle because I found it mentioned in some books; but I know of no nation nor tribe that reckons time after that account. The names of the five cycles, or Yugs, are, 1. Samvatsara, 2. Parivatsara, 3. Idvatsara, 4. Anuvatsara, 5. Udravatsara. The name of each year is determined from the Nakshatra, in which Vrihaspati sets and rises heliacally, and they follow in the order of the lunar months." K. S. 212. It may be reasonably doubted, however, if this view be correct; and the only connexion between the cycle of five years and that of Vrihaspati may be the multiplication of the former by the latter (5 x 12), so as to form the cycle of sixty years: a cycle based, the commentator remarks, upon the conjunction (Yuga) of the sun and moon in every sixtieth year. The original and properly Indian cycle, however, is that of five years, as Bentley remarks. "The astronomers of this period (1181 B. C.) framed a cycle of five years for civil and religious ceremonies." Ancient and modern Hindu Astronomy. It is in fact, as Mr. Colebrooke states, the cycle of the Vedas, described in the Jyotish, or astronomical sections, and specified in the institutes of Paras'ara as the basis of calculation for larger cycles. As. Res. VIII. 470.

^225:18 Reference is here made apparently, though indistinctly, to those positions of the planets which indicate, according to Bentley, the formation of the lunar mansions by Hindu astronomers, about 1424 B. C. Hindu Astronomy, p. 3 and 4. The Vayu and Linga Puranas specify the positions of the other planets at the same time, or the end, according to the former, of the Chakshusha Manwantara. At that time the sun was in Vis'akha, the moon in Krittika, Venus in Pushya, Jupiter in Purvaphalguni, Mars in Ashadha, Budha in Dhanishtha, S'ani in Revati, Ketu in Aslesha, and Rahu in Bharani. There are differences between some of these and the positions cited by Bentley, but most of them are the same. He considers them to have been observations of the occultations of the moon by the planets, in the respective lunar mansions, 1424-5 B. C. According to the Vayu, these positions or origins of the planets are from the Vedas: ###. The Linga, less accurately perhaps, reads ### referring it to the works of law.

^225:19 These are the names of the months which occur in the Vedas, and belong to a system now obsolete, as was noticed by Sir Wm. Jones. As. Res. III. 258. According to the classification of the text, they correspond severally with the lunar months Magha, Phalguna, Chaitra, Vais'akha, Jyeshtha, Asharha, or from December to June; and with S'ravana, Bhadra, Aswina, Kartika, Agrahayana, and Pausha, from July to December. From this order of the two series of the months, as occurring in the Vedas, Mr. Colebrooke infers, upon astronomical computations, their date to be about fourteen centuries prior to the Christian era. As. Res. VII. 283.

^226:20 The Vayu has the same names, but ascribes a different descent to the first, making Sudhaman the son of Viraja. Sankhapad is the son of Kardama: the other two are the sons of Parjanya and Rajas, consistently with the origin ascribed to these Lokapalas in the patriarchal genealogies of that Purana (see <page 83>).

^226:21 Allusion is here made to some divisions of the celestial sphere which are not described in any other part of the text. The fullest, but still in some respects a confused and partly inaccurate account is given in the Matsya Purana; but a more satisfactory description occurs in the comment on the Bhagavata, there cited from the Vayu, but not found in the copies consulted on the present occasion. According to those details, the path (Marga) of the sun and other planets amongst the lunar asterisms is divided into three portions or Avashthanas, northern, southern, and central, called severally Airavata, Jaradgava (Ajagava, Matsya P.), and Vaiswanara. Each of these, again, is divided into three parts or Vithis: those of the northern portion are termed Nagavithi, Gajavithi, and Airavati; those of the centre are Arshabhi Govithi, and Jaradgavi; and those of the south are named Ajavithi, Mrigavithi, and Vaiswanari. Each of these Vithis comprises three asterisms.

          Nagavithi

       Aswini
   Bharani
   Krittika

     
      Gajavithi

       Rohini
   Mrigas'iras
   Ardra

     
      Airavati

       Punarvasu
   Pushya
   Aslesha

     
      Arshabhi

       Magha
   Purvaphalguni
   Uttaraphalguni

     
      Govithi

       Hasta
   Chitra
   Swati

     
      Jaradgavi

       Vis'akha
   Anuradha
   Jyeshtha

     
      Ajavithi

       Mula
   Purvashadha
   Uttarashadha

     
      Mrigavithi

       
   Dhanishtha
   Satabhisha

     
      Vaiswanari

       Purva   Bhadrapada
   Uttara Bhadrapada
   Revati.

     
   [paragraph continues] See also As. Res. IX. table of Nakshatras, 346. Agastya is Canopus; and the line of the goat, or Ajavithi, comprises asterisms which contain stars in Scorpio and Sagittarius.

^227:22 A marginal note in one MS. explains the phrase of the text, ### to signify as far as to the moon and stars; but the Pitri yana, or path of the Pitris, lies amongst the asterisms; and, according to the Pauranik system of the heavens, it is not clear what could be meant by its being bounded by the moon and stars. The path south of the solar orb is, according to the Vedas, that of smoke or darkness.

^227:23 The stars of the Nagavithi are those of Aries and Taurus; and by the seven Rishis we are here to understand Ursa Major.

^227:24 This, according to the Vedas, is all that is to be understood of the immortality of the gods: they perish at the period of universal dissolution.

^227:25 That is, generally as affecting created beings, not individuals, whose acts influence their several successive births.

^228:26 From Ursa Major to the polar star.

^228:27 The popular notion is, that S'iva or Mahadeva receives the Ganges on his head; but this, as subsequently explained, is referred, by the Vaishnavas at least, to the descent of the Alakananda, or Ganges of India, not to the celestial Ganges.

^229:28 Or, in other words, 'flows into the sea.' The legend here alluded to is more fully detailed in a subsequent book.

^229:29 The situation of the source of the Ganges of heaven identifies it with the milky way.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 230]

  

CHAP. IX.

Planetary system, under the type of a S'is'umara or porpoise. The earth nourished by the sun. Of rain whilst the sun shines. Of rain from clouds. Rain the support, of vegetation, and thence of animal life. Narayana the support of all beings.

THE form of the mighty Hari which is present in heaven, consisting of the constellations, is that of a porpoise, with Dhruva situated in the tail. As Dhruva revolves, it causes the moon, sun, and stars to turn round also; and the lunar asterisms follow in its circular path; for all the celestial luminaries are in fact bound to the polar-star by aerial cords. The porpoise-like figure of the celestial sphere is upheld by Narayana, who himself, in planetary radiance, is seated in its heart; whilst the son of Uttanapada, Dhruva, in consequence of his adoration of the lord of the world, shines in the tail of the stellar porpoise [*1]. The upholder of the porpoise-shaped sphere is the sovereign of all, Janarddana. This sphere is the supporter of Dhruva; and by Dhruva the sun is upstayed. Upon the sun depends this world, with its gods, demons, and men. In what manner the world depends upon the sun, be attentive, and you shall hear.

During eight months of the year the sun attracts the waters, which are the essence of all fluids, and then pours them upon earths (during the other four months) as rain [*2]: from rain grows corn; and by corn the whole world subsists. The sun with his scorching rays absorbs the moisture of the earth, and with them nourishes the moon. The moon communicates, through tubes of air, its dews to the clouds, which, being composed of smoke, fire, and wind (or vapour), can retain the waters with which they are charged: they are therefore called Abhras, because their contents are not dispersed [*3]. When however they are broken to

[p. 231]

pieces by the wind, then watery stores descend, bland, and freed front every impurity by the sweetening process of time. The sun, Maitreya, exhales watery fluids from four sources, seas, rivers, the earth, and living creatures. The water that the sun has drawn up from the Ganga of the skies he quickly pours down with his rays, and without a cloud; and men who are touched by this pure rain are cleansed from the soil of sin, and never see hell: this is termed celestial ablution. That rain which falls whilst the sun is shining, and without a cloud in the sky, is the water of the heavenly Ganges, shed by the solar rays. If, however, rain falls from a bright and cloudless sky whilst the sun is in the mansion of Krittika and the other asterisms counted by odd numbers, as the third, fifth, &c., the water, although that of the Ganga of the sky, is scattered, by the elephants of the quarters, not by the rays of the sun: it is only when such rain falls, and the sun is in the even asterisms, that it is distributed by his beams [*4].

The water which the clouds shed upon earth is in truth the ambrosia of living beings, for it gives fertility to the plants which are the support of their existence. By this all vegetables grow and are matured, and become the means of maintaining life. With them, again, those men

[p. 232]

who take the law for their light perform daily sacrifices, and through them give nourishment to the gods. And thus sacrifices, the Vedas, the font' castes, with the Brahmans at their head, all the residences of the gods, all the tribes of animals, the whole world, all are supported by the rains by which food is produced. But the rain is evolved by the sun; the sun is sustained by Dhruva; and Dhruva is supported by the celestial porpoise-shaped sphere, which is one with Narayana. Narayana, the primeval existent, and eternally enduring, seated in the heart of the stellar sphere, is the supporter of all beings.

Footnotes

^230:1 A more particular description of this porpoise occurs farther on.

^230:2 Consequently, the Linga P. observes, there is no waste of water in the universe, as it is in constant circulation.

^230:3 The theory of the clouds is more fully detailed in the Vayu, Linga, and Matsya [p. 231] Puranas: it is the same in its general tenor, but comprises additional circumstances. Clouds, according to those authorities, are of three classes: 1. Agneya, originating from fire or heat, or in other words evaporation: they are charged with wind and rain, and are of various orders, amongst which are those called Jimuta, from their supporting life; 2. Brahmaja, born from the breath of Brahma: these are the clouds whence thunder and lightning proceed: and 3. Pakshaja, or clouds which were originally the wings of the mountains, and which were cut off by Indra: these are also termed Pushkaravarttakas, from their including water in their vortices: they are the largest and most formidable of all, and are those which, at the end of the Yugas and Kalpas, poor down the waters of the deluge. The shell of the egg of Brahma, or of the universe, is formed of the primitive clouds.

^231:4 According to the Vayu, the water scattered by the elephants of the quarters is in summer dew, and in winter snow; or the latter is brought by the winds from a city called Pundra, which lies between the Himavat and Hemakuta mountains, and falls down upon the former. In like manner, also, as heat radiates from the sun, so cold radiates from the moon.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 233]

  

CHAP. X.

Names of the twelve Adityas. Names of the Rishis, Gandharbhas, Apsarasas, Yakshas, Uragas, and Rakshasas, who attend the chariot of the sun in each month of the year. Their respective functions.

PARAS'ARA.--Between the extreme northern and southern points the sun has to traverse in a year one hundred and eighty degrees, ascending and descending [*1]. His car is presided over by divine Adityas, Rishis, heavenly singers and nymphs, Yakshas, serpents, and Rakshasas (one of each being placed in it in every month). The Aditya Dhatri, the sage Pulastya, the Gandharba Tumburu, the nymph Kratusthala, the Yaksha Rathakrit, the serpent Vasuki, and the Rakshas Heti, always reside in the sun's car, in the month of Madhu or Chaitra, as its seven guardians. In Vais'akh or Madhava the seven are Aryamat, Pulaha, Nareda, Punjikasthali, Rathaujas, Kachanira, and Praheti. In S'uchi or Jyeshtha they are Mitra, Atri, Haha, Mena, Rathaswana, Takshaka, and Paurusheya. In the month S'ukra or Ashadha they are Varuna, Vas'ishtha, Huhu, Sahajanya, Rathachitra, Naga, and Budha. In the month Nabhas (or Sravana) they are Indra, Angiras, Viswavasu, Pramlocha, S'rotas, and Elapatra (the name of both serpent and Rakshas). In the month Bhadrapada they are Vivaswat, Bhrigu, Ugrasena, Anumlocha, Apurana, S'ankhapala, and Vyaghra. In the month of Aswin they are Pushan, Gautama, Suruchi, Ghritachi, Sushena, Dhananjaya, and Vata. In the month of Kartik they are Parjanya, Bharadwaja, (another) Viswavasu, Viswachi, Senajit, Airavata, and Chapa. In Agrahayana or Margas'irsha they are Ansu, Kas'yapa, Chitrasena, Urvasi, Tarkshya, Mahapadma, and Vidyut. In the month of Pausha, Bhaga, Kratu, Urnayu, Purvachitti,

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] Arishtanemi, Karkotaka, and Sphurja are the seven who abide in the orb of the sun, the glorious spirits who scatter light throughout the universe. In the month of Magha the seven who are in the sun are Twashtri, Jamadagni, Dhritarashtra, Tilottama, Ritajit, Kambala, and Brahmapeta. Those who abide in the sun in the month Phalguna are Vishnu, Visvamitra, Suryaverchchas, Rambha, Satyajit, Aswatara, and Yajnapeta.

In this manner, Maitreya, a troop of seven celestial beings, supported by the energy of Vishnu, occupies during the several months the orb of the sun. The sage celebrates his praise, and the Gandharba sings, and the nymph dances before him: the Rakshas attends upon his steps, the serpent harnesses his steeds, and the Yaksha trims the reins: the numerous pigmy sages, the Balakhilyas, ever surround his chariot. The whole troop of seven, attached to the sun's car, are the agents in the distribution of cold, heat, and rain, at their respective seasons [*2].

Footnotes

^233:1 It might be doubted whether the text meant 180 in each hemisphere or in both, but the sense is sufficiently clear in the Vayu, &c., and the number of Mandalas travelled in the year is 360: the Mandalas, 'circles' or 'degrees,' being in fact the sun's diurnal revolutions, and their numbers corresponding with the days of the solar year; as in the Bhavishya P. 'The horses of the sun travel twice 180 degrees in a year, internal and external (to the equator), in the order of the days.'

^234:2 A similar enumeration of the attendants upon the sun's car occurs in the Vayu, &c. For Yakshas, the generic term there employed is Gramanis, but the individuals are the same. The Kurma and Bhavishya refer the twelve Adityas to different months:--

           

       Vishnu.

       Kurma.

       Bhavishya.

     
      Dhatri

       Chaitra

       Vais'akha

       Kartika

     
      Aryamat

       Vais'akha

       Chaitra

       Vais'akha

     
      Mitra

       Jyeshtha

       Margas'irsha   

       Margas'irsha

     
      Varuna

       Ashadha

       Magha

       Bhadra

     
      Indra

       S'ravana

       Jyeshtha

       Aswina

     
      Vivaswat     

       Bhadra

       S'ravana

       Jyeshtha

     
      Pushan

       Aswina

       Phalguna

       Pausha

     
      Parjanya

       Kartika

       Aswina

       S'ravana

     
      Ansu

       Margas'irsha   

       Ashadha

       Ashadha

     
      Bhaga

       Pausha

       Bhadra

       Magha

     
      Twashtri

       Magha

       Kartika

       Phalguna

     
      Vishnu

       Phalguna

       Pausha

       Chaitra.

     
   

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 235]

  

CHAP. XI.

The sun distinct from, and supreme over, the attendants on his car: identical with the three Vedas and with Vishnu: his functions.

MAITREYA.--You have related to me, holy preceptor, the seven classes of beings who are ever present in the solar orb, and are the causes of heat and cold: you have also described to me their individual functions, sustained by the energy of Vishnu: but you have not told me the duty of the sun himself; for if, as you say, the seven beings in his sphere are the causes of heat, cold, and rain, how can it be also true, as you have before mentioned, that rain proceeds from the sun? or how can it be asserted that the sun rises, reaches the meridian, or sets, if these situations be the act of the collective seven.

PARAS'ARA.--I will explain to you, Maitreya, the subject of your inquiry. The sun, though identified with the seven beings in his orb, is distinct from them as their chief. The entire and mighty energy of Vishnu, which is called the three Vedas, or Rich, Yajush, and Saman, is that which enlightens the world, and destroys its iniquity. It is that also which, during the continuance of things, is present as Vishnu, actively engaged in the preservation of the universe, and abiding as the three Vedas within the sun. The solar luminary, that appears in every month, is nothing else than that very supreme energy of Vishnu which is composed of the three Vedas, influencing the motions of the planet; for the Richas (the hymns of the Rig-veda) shine in the morning, the prayers of the Yajush at noon, and the Vrihadrathantara and other portions of the Saman in the afternoon. This triple impersonation of Vishnu, distinguished by the titles of the three Vedas, is the energy of Vishnu, which influences the positions of the sun [*1].

[p. 236]

But this triple energy of Vishnu is not limited to the sun alone, for Brahma, Purusha (Vishnu), and Rudra are also made up of the same triform essence. In creation it is Brahma, consisting of the Rig-veda in preservation it is Vishnu, composed of the Yajur-veda; and in destruction Rudra, formed of the Sama-veda, the utterance of which is consequently inauspicious [*2].

Thus the energy of Vishnu, made up of the three Vedas, and derived from the property of goodness, presides in the sun, along with the seven beings belonging to it; and through the presence of this power the planet shines with intense radiance, dispersing with his beams the darkness that spreads over the whole world: and hence the Munis praise him, the quiristers and nymphs of heaven sing and dance before him, and fierce spirits and holy sages attend upon his path. Vishnu, in the form of his active energy, never either rises or sets, and is at once the. sevenfold sun and distinct from it. In the same manner as a man approaching a mirror, placed upon a stand, beholds in it his own image, so the energy (or reflection) of Vishnu is never disjoined (from the sun's car, which is the stand of the mirror), but remains month by month in the sun (as in the mirror), which is there stationed.

The sovereign sun, oh Brahman, the cause of day and night, perpetually revolves, affording delight to the gods, to the progenitors, and to mankind. Cherished by the Sushumna ray of the sun [*3], the moon is fed to the full in the fortnight of its growth; and in the fortnight of its wane the ambrosia of its substance is perpetually drunk by the immortals, until the last day of the half month, when the two remaining digits are drunk by the progenitors: hence these two orders of beings are nourished

[p. 237]

by the sun. The moisture of the earth, which the sun attracts by his rays, he again parts with for the fertilization of the grain, and the nutriment of all terrestrial creatures; and consequently the sun is the source of subsistence to every class of living things, to gods, progenitors, mankind, and the rest. The sun, Maitreya, satisfies the wants of the gods for a fortnight (at a time); those of the progenitors once a month; and those of men and other animals daily.

Footnotes

^235:1 This mysticism originates in part apparently from a misapprehension of metaphorical texts of the Vedas, such as 'that triple knowledge (the Vedas) shines;' and 'the hymns of the Rich shine;' and in part from the symbolization of the light of religious truth by the light of the [p. 236] sun, as in the Gayatri, <page 222>. n. . To these are to be added the sectarial notions of the Vaishnavas.

^236:2 The formulae of the Sama-veda are not to be used along with those of the Rich and Yajush, at sacrifices in general.

^236:3 The Vayu, Linga, and Matsya P. specify several of the rays of the sun from amongst the many thousands which they say proceed from him. Of these, seven are principal, termed Sushumna, Harikes'a, Vis'wakarman, Vis'wakarya, Sampadvasu, Arvavasu, and Swaraj, supplying heat severally to the moon, the stars, and to Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 238]

  

CHAP. XII.

Description of the moon: his chariot, horses, and course: fed by the sun: drained periodically of ambrosia by the progenitors and gods. The chariots and horses of the planets: kept in their orbits by aerial chains attached to Dhruva. Typical members of the planetary porpoise. Vasudeva alone real.

PARAS'ARA.--The chariot of the moon has three wheels, and is drawn by ten horses, of the whiteness of the Jasmine, five on the right half (of the yoke), five on the left. It moves along the asterisms, divided into ranges, as before described; and, in like manner as the sun, is upheld by Dhruva; the cords that fasten it being tightened or relaxed in the same way, as it proceeds on its course. The horses of the moon, sprung from the bosom of the waters [*1], drag the car for a whole Kalpa, as do the coursers of the sun. The radiant sun supplies the moon, when reduced by the draughts of the gods to a single Kala, with a single ray; and in the same proportion as the ruler of the night was exhausted by the celestials, it is replenished by the sun, the plunderer of the waters: for the gods, Maitreya, drink the nectar and ambrosia accumulated in the moon during half the month, and from this being their food they are immortal. Thirty-six thousand three hundred and thirty-three divinities drink the lunar ambrosia. When two digits remain, the moon enters the orbit of the sun, and abides in the ray called Ama; whence the period is termed Amavasya. In that orbit the moon is immersed for a day and night in the water; thence it enters the branches and shoots of the trees; and thence goes to the sun. Consequently any one who cuts off a branch, or casts down a leaf, when the moon is in the trees (the day of its rising invisible), is guilty of Brahmanicide. When the remaining portion of the moon consists of but a fifteenth part, the progenitors approach it in the afternoon, and drink the last portion, that sacred Kali which is composed of ambrosia, and contained in the two digits of

[p. 239]

the form of the moon [*2]. Having drank the nectar effused by the lunar rays on the day of conjunction, the progenitors are satisfied, and remain tranquil for the ensuing month. These progenitors (or Pitris) are of three classes, termed Saumyas, Varhishadas, and Agnishwattas [*3]. In this manner the moon, with its cooling rays, nourishes the gods in the light fortnight, the Pitris in the dark fortnight; vegetables, with the cool nectary aqueous atoms it sheds upon them; and through their developement it sustains men, animals, and insects; at the same time gratifying them by its radiance.

The chariot of the son of Chandra, Budha or Mercury, is composed of the elementary substances air and fire, and is drawn by eight bay horses of the speed of the wind. The vast car of S'ukra (Venus) is drawn by earth-born horses [*4], is equipped with a protecting fender and a floor, armed with arrows, and decorated by a banner. The splendid car of

[p. 240]

[paragraph continues] Bhauma (Mars) is of gold, of an octagonal shape, drawn by eight horses, of a ruby red, sprung from fire. Vrihaspati (Jupiter), in a golden car drawn by eight pale-coloured horses, travels from sign to sign in the period of a year: and the tardy-paced S'ani (Saturn) moves slowly along in a car drawn by piebald steeds. Eight black horses draw the dusky chariot of Rahu, and once harnessed are attached to it for ever. On the Parvas (the nodes, or lunar and solar eclipses), Rahu directs his course from the sun to the moon, and back again from the moon to the sun [*5]. The eight horses of the chariot of Ketu are of the dusky red colour of Lac, or of the smoke of burning straw.

I have thus described to you, Maitreya, the chariots of the nine planets, all which are fastened to Dhruva by aerial cords. The orbs of all the planets, asterisms, and stars are attached to Dhruva, and travel accordingly in their proper orbits, being kept in their places by their respective bands of air. As many as are the stars, so many are the chains of air that secure them to Dhruva; and as they turn round, they cause the pole-star also to revolve. In the same manner as the oil-man himself, going round, causes the spindle to revolve, so the planets travel round, suspended by cords of air, which are circling round a (whirling) centre. The air, which is called Pravaha, is so termed because it bears along the planets, which turn round, like a disc of fire, driven by the aerial wheel [*6].

The celestial porpoise, in which Dhruva is fixed, has been mentioned, but you shall hear its constituent parts in more detail, as it is of great efficacy; for the view of it at night expiates whatever sin has been committed during the day; and those who behold it live as many years as there are stars in it, in the sky, or even more. Uttanapada is to be considered as its upper jaw; Sacrifice as its lower. Dharma is situated on its brow; Narayana in its heart. The Aswins are its two fore feet;

[p. 241]

and Varuna and Aryamat its two hinder legs. Samvatsara is its sexual organ; Mitra its organ of excretion. Agni, Mahendra, Kas'yapa, and Dhruva, in succession, are placed in its tail; which four stars in this constellation never set [*7].

I have now described to you the disposition of the earth and of the stars; of the insular zones, with their oceans and mountains, their Varshas or regions, and their inhabitants: their nature has also been explained, but it may be briefly recapitulated.

From the waters, which are the body of Vishnu, was produced the lotus-shaped earth, with its seas and mountains. The stars are Vishnu; the worlds are Vishnu; forests, mountains, regions, rivers, oceans are Vishnu: he is all that is, all that is not. He, the lord, is identical with knowledge, through which he is all forms, but is not a substance. You must conceive therefore mountains, oceans, and all the diversities of earth and the rest, are the illusions of the apprehension. When knowledge is pure, real, universal, independent of works, and exempt from defect, then the varieties of substance, which are the fruit of the tree of desire, cease to exist in matter. For what is substance? Where is the thing that is devoid of beginning, middle, and end, of one uniform

[p. 242]

nature? How can reality be predicated of that which is subject to change, and reassumes no more its original character? Earth is fabricated into a jar; the jar is divided into two halves; the halves are broken to pieces; the pieces become dust; the dust becomes atoms. Say, is this reality? though it be so understood by man, whose self-knowledge is impeded by his own acts. Hence, Brahman, except discriminative knowledge, there is nothing any where, or at any time, that is real. Such knowledge is but one, although it appear manifold, as diversified by the various consequences of our own acts. Knowledge perfect, pure, free from pain, and detaching the affections from all that causes affliction; knowledge single and eternal--is the supreme Vasudeva, besides whom there is nothing. The truth has been thus communicated to you by me; that knowledge which is truth; from which all that differs is false. That information, however, which is of a temporal and worldly nature has also been imparted to you; the sacrifice, the victim, the fire, the priests, the acid juice, the gods, the desire for heaven, the path pursued by acts of devotion and the rest, and the worlds that are their consequences, have been displayed to you. In that universe which I have described, he for ever migrates who is subject to the influence of works; but he who knows Vasudeva to be eternal, immutable, and of one unchanging, universal form, may continue to perform them [*8], as thereby he enters into the deity.

Footnotes

^238:1 So is the car, according to the Vayu. The orb of the moon, according to the Linga, is only congealed water; as that of the sun is concentrated heat.

^239:2 There is some indistinctness in this account, from a confusion between the division of the moon's surface into sixteen Kalas or phases, and its , as a receptacle of nectar, into fifteen Kalas or digits, corresponding to the fifteen lunations, on the fourteen of which, during the wane, the gods drink the amrita, and on the fifteenth of which the Pitris exhaust the remaining portion. The correspondence of the two distinctions appears to be intended by the text, which terms the remaining digit or Kala, composed of Amrita, the form or superficies of the two Kalas. This, the commentator observes, is the fifteenth, not the sixteenth. The commentator on our text observes, also, that the passage is sometimes read ###, Lava meaning 'a moment,' 'a short period.' The Matsya and Vayu express the parallel passage so as to avoid all perplexity, by specifying the two Kalas as referring to time, and leaving the number of nectareous Kalas undefined: 'They, the Pitris, drink the remaining Kalas in two Kalas of time.' Col. Warren explains Kala, or, as he 'writes it, Cala, in one of its acceptations, 'the phases of the moon, of which the Hindus count sixteen.' Kala Sankalita, 359. So the Bhagavata terms the moon, and the Vayu, after noticing the exhaustion of the fifteenth portion on the day of conjunction, states the recurrence of increase or wane to take place in the sixteenth phase at the beginning of each fortnight.

^239:3 The Vayu and Matsya add a fourth class, the Kavyas; identifying them with the cyclic years; the Saumyas and Agnishwattas with the seasons; and the Varhishads with the months.

^239:4 The Vayu makes the horses ten in number, each of a different colour.

^240:5 The Matsya, Linga, and Vayu add the circumstance of Rahu's taking up, on these occasions, the circular shadow of the earth.

^240:6 The different bands of air attached to Dhruva are, according to the commentator, varieties of the Pravaha wind; but the Kurma and Linga enumerate seven principal winds which perform this function, of which the Pravaha is one.

^241:7 The four last are therefore stars in the circle of perpetual apparition. One of these is the pole-star; and in Kas'yapa we have a verbal affinity to Cassiopeia. The S'is'umara, or porpoise, is rather a singular symbol for the celestial sphere; but it is not more preposterous than many of the constellations of classical fiction. The component parts of it are much more fully detailed, in the Bhagavata, whence it has been translated by Sir Wm. Jones. As. Res. II. 402. The Bhagavata, however, mystifies the description, and says it is nothing more than the Dharana, or symbol, by which Vishnu, identified with the starry firmament, is to be impressed upon the mind in meditation. The account of the planetary system is, as usual, fullest in the Vayu, with which the Linga and Matsya nearly agree. The Bhavishya is nearly, also, the same. They all contain many passages common to them and to our text. In the Agni, Padma, Kurma, Brahma, Garuda, and Vamana descriptions occur which enter into less detail than the Vishnu, and often use its words, or passages found in other Puranas. Many intimations of a similar system occur in the Vedas, but whether the whole is to be found in those works is yet to be ascertained. It must not be considered as a correct representation of the philosophical astronomy of the Hindus, being mixed up with, and deformed by, mythological and symbolical fiction.

^242:8 Only, however, as far as they are intended to propitiate Vishnu, and not for any other purpose.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 243]

  

CHAP. XIII.

Legend of Bharata. Bharata abdicates his throne, and becomes an ascetic: cherishes a fawn, and becomes so much attached to it as to neglect his devotions: he dies: his successive births: works in the fields, and is pressed as a palankin-bearer for the Raja of Sauvira: rebuked for his awkwardness: his reply: dialogue between him and the king.

MAITREYA.--Reverend sir [*1], all that I asked of you has been thoroughly explained; namely, the situation of the earth, oceans, mountains, rivers, and planetary bodies; the system of the three worlds, of which Vishnu is the stay. The great end of life has also been expounded by you, and the preeminence of holy knowledge. It now remains that you fulfil the promise you made some time since [*2], of relating to me the story of king Bharata, and how it happened that a monarch like him, residing constantly at the sacred place S'alagrama, and engaged in devotion, with his mind ever applied to Vasudeva, should have failed, through time sanctity of the shrine, and the efficacy of his abstractions, to obtain final emancipation; how it was that he was born again as a Brahman; and what was done by the magnanimous Bharata in that capacity: all this it is fit that you inform me.

PARAS'ARA.--The illustrious monarch of the earth resided, Maitreya, for a considerable period at S'alagrama, his thoughts being wholly dedicated to god, and his conduct distinguished by kindness and every virtue, until he had effected, in the highest degree, the entire control over his mind. The Raja was ever repeating the names, Yajnes'a, Achyuta, Govinda, Madhava, Ananta, Kes'ava, Krishna, Vishnu, Hrishikes'a; nothing else did be utter, even in his dreams; nor upon anything but those names, and their import, did he ever meditate. He accepted fuel, flowers, and holy grass, for the worship of the deity, but

[p. 244]

performed no other religious rites, being engrossed by disinterested, abstract devotion.

On one occasion he went to the Mahanadi [*3], for the purpose of ablution: he bathed there, and performed the ceremonies usual after bathing, Whilst thus occupied, there came to the same place a doe big with young, who had come out of the forest to drink of the stream. Whilst quenching her thirst, there was heard on a sudden the loud and fearful roaring of a lion; on which the doe, being excessively alarmed, jumped out of the water upon the bank. In consequence of this great leap, her fawn was suddenly brought forth, and fell into the river; and the king, seeing it carried away by the current, caught hold of the young animal, and saved it from being drowned. The injury received by the deer, by her violent exertion, proved fatal, and she lay down, and died; which being observed by the royal ascetic, he took the fawn in his arms, and returned with it to his hermitage: there he fed it and tended it every day, and it throve and grew up under his care. It frolicked about the cell, and grazed upon the grass in its vicinity; and whenever it strayed to a distance, and was alarmed at a wild beast, it ran back thither for safety. Every morning it sallied forth from home, and every evening returned to the thatched shelter of the leafy bower of Bharata.

Whilst the deer was thus the inmate of his hermitage, the mind of the king was ever anxious about the animal, now wandering away, and now returning to his side, and he was unable to think of anything else. He had relinquished his kingdom, his children, all his friends, and now indulged in selfish affection for a fawn. When absent for a longer time than ordinary, he would fancy that it had been carried off by wolves, devoured by a tiger, or slain by a lion. "The earth," he would exclaim, "is embrowned by the impressions of its hoofs. What has become of the young deer, that was born for my delight? How happy I should be

[p. 245]

if he had returned from the thicket, and I felt his budding antlers rubbing against my arm. These tufts of sacred grass, of which the heads have been nibbled by his new teeth, look like pious lads chanting the Sama-veda [*4]." Thus the Muni meditated whenever the deer was long absent from him; and contemplated him with a countenance animated with pleasure as he stood by his side. His abstraction was interrupted, the spirit of the king being engrossed by the fawn, even though he had abandoned family, wealth, and dominion. The firmness of the prince's mind became unsteady, and wandered with the wanderings of the young deer. In the course of time the king became subject to its influence. He died, watched by the deer, with tears in its eyes, like a son mourning for his father; and he himself, as he expired, cast his eyes upon the animal, and thought of nothing else, being wholly occupied with one idea.

In consequence of this predominant feeling at such a season, he was born again, in the Jambumarga forests, as a deer [*5], with the faculty of recollecting his former life; which recollection inspiring a distaste for the world, he left his mother, and again repaired to the holy place S'alagrama. Subsisting there upon dry grass and leaves, he atoned for the acts which had led to his being born in such a condition; and upon his death he was next born as a Brahman, still retaining the memory of his prior existence. He was born in a pious and eminent family of ascetics, who were rigid observers of devotional rites. Possessed of all true wisdom, and acquainted with the essence of all sacred writings, he beheld soul as contradistinguished from matter (Prakriti). Embued with knowledge of self, he beheld the gods and all other beings as in reality the same. It did not happen to him to undergo investiture with the Brahmanical thread, nor to read the Vedas with a spiritual preceptor, nor to perform ceremonies, nor to study the scriptures. Whenever spoken to, he replied incoherently and in ungrammatical and unpolished

[p. 246]

speech. His person was unclean, and he was clad in dirty garments. Saliva dribbled from his mouth, and he was treated with contempt by all the people. Regard for the consideration of the world is fatal to the success of devotion. The ascetic who is despised of men attains the end of his abstractions. Let therefore a holy man pursue the path of the righteous, without murmuring; and though men contemn him, avoid association with mankind. This, the counsel of Hiranyagarbha [*6], did the Brahman call to mind, and hence assumed the appearance of a crazy ideot in the eyes of the world. His food was raw pulse, potherbs, wild fruit, and grains of corn. Whatever came in his way he ate, as part of a necessary, but temporary infliction [*7]. Upon his father's death he was set to work in the fields by his brothers and his nephews, and fed by them with vile food; and as he was firm and stout of make, and a simpleton in outward act, he was the slave of every one that chose to employ him, receiving sustenance alone for his hire.

The head servant of the king of Sauvira, looking upon him as an indolent, untaught Brahman, thought him a fit person to work without pay (and took him into his master's service to assist in carrying the palankin.)

The king having ascended his litter, on one occasion, was proceeding to the hermitage of Kapila, on the banks of the Ikshumati river [*8], to consult the sage, to whom the virtues leading to liberation were known, what was most desirable in a world abounding with care and sorrow. Amongst those who by order of his head servant had been compelled gratuitously to carry the litter was the Brahman, who had been equally pressed into this duty, and who, endowed with the only universal knowledge, and remembering his former existence, bore the burden as the means of expiating the faults for which he was desirous to atone. Fixing his eyes upon the pole, he went tardily along, whilst the other

[p. 247]

bearers moved with alacrity; and the king, feeling the litter carried unevenly, called out, "Ho bearers! what is this? Keep equal pace together." Still it proceeded unsteadily, and the Raja again exclaimed, "What is this? how irregularly are you going!" When this had repeatedly occurred, the palankin-bearers at last replied to the king, "It is this man, who lags in his pace." "How is this?" said the prince to the Brahman, "are you weary? You have carried your burden but a little way; are you unable to bear fatigue? and yet you look robust." The Brahman answered and said, "It is not I who am robust, nor is it by me that your palankin is carried. I am not wearied, prince, nor am I incapable of fatigue." The king replied, "I clearly see that you are stout, and that the palankin is borne by you; and the carriage of a burden is wearisome to all persons." "First tell me," said the Brahman, "what it is of me that you have clearly seen [*9], and then you may distinguish my properties as strong or weak. The assertion that you behold the palankin borne by me, or placed on me, is untrue. Listen, prince, to what I have to remark. The place of both the feet is the ground; the legs are supported by the feet; the thighs rest upon the legs; and the belly reposes on the thighs; the chest is supported by the belly; and the arms and shoulders are propped up by the chest: the palankin is borne upon the shoulders, and how can it be considered as my burden? This body which is seated in the palankin is defined as Thou; thence what is elsewhere called This, is here distinguished as I and Thou. I and thou and others are constructed of the elements; and the elements, following the stream of qualities, assume a bodily shape; but qualities, such as goodness and the rest, are dependant upon acts; and acts, accumulated in ignorance, influence the condition of all beings [*10]. The pure, imperishable soul, tranquil, void of qualities, preeminent over nature (Prakriti), is one, without increase or diminution, in all bodies. But if it be equally exempt from increase or diminution, then with what propriety

[p. 248]

can you say to me, 'I see that thou art robust?' If the palankin rests on the shoulders, and they on the body; the body on the feet, and the feet on the earth; then is the burden borne as much by you as by me [*11]. When the nature of men is different, either in its essence or its cause, then may it be said that fatigue is to be undergone by me. That which is the substance of the palankin is the substance of you and me and all others, being an aggregate of elements, aggregated by individuality."

Having thus spoken, the Brahman was silent, and went on bearing the palankin; but the king leaped out of it, and hastened to prostrate himself at his feet; saying, "Have compassion on me, Brahman, and cast aside the palankin; and tell me who thou art, thus disguised under the appearance of a fool." The Brahman answered and said, "Hear me, Raja,. Who I am it is not possible to say: arrival at any place is for the sake of fruition; and enjoyment of pleasure, or endurance of pain, is the cause of the production of the body. A living being assumes a corporeal form to reap the results of virtue or vice. The universal cause of all living creatures is virtue or vice: why therefore inquire the cause (of my being the person I appear)." The king said, "Undoubtedly virtue and vice are the causes of all existent effects, and migration into several bodies is for the purpose of receiving their consequences; but with respect to what you have asserted, that it is not possible for you to tell me who you are, that is a matter which I am desirous to hear explained. How can it be impossible, Brahman, for any one to declare himself to be that which he is? There can be no detriment to one's-self from applying to it the word I." The Brahman said, "It is true that there is no wrong done to that which is one's-self by the application to it of the word I; but the term is characteristic of error, of conceiving that to be the self (or soul) which is not self or soul. The tongue articulates the word I, aided by the lips, the teeth, and the palate; and these are the origin of the expression, as they are the causes of the production of speech. If by these instruments speech is able to utter the word I, it is nevertheless

[p. 249]

improper to assert that speech itself is I [*12]. The body of a man, characterized by hands, feet, and the like, is made up of various parts; to which of these can I properly apply the denomination I? If another being is different specifically from me, most excellent monarch, then it may be said that this is I; that is the other: but when one only soul is dispersed in all bodies, it is then idle to say, Who are you? who am I? Thou art a king; this is a palankin; these are the bearers; these the running footmen; this is thy retinue: yet it is untrue that all these are said to be thine. The palankin on which thou sittest is made of timber derived from a tree. What then? is it denominated either timber or a tree? People do not say that the king is perched upon a tree, nor that he is seated upon a piece of wood, when you have mounted your palankin. The vehicle is an assemblage of pieces of timber, artificially joined together: judge, prince, for yourself in what the palankin differs really from the wood. Again; contemplate the sticks of the umbrella, in their separate state. Where then is the umbrella? Apply this reasoning to thee and to me [*13]. A man, a woman, a cow, a goat, a horse, an elephant, a bird, a tree, are names assigned to various bodies, which are the consequences of acts. Man [*14] is neither a god, nor a man, nor a brute, nor a tree; these are mere varieties of shape, the effects of acts. The thing which in the world is called a king, the servant of a king, or by any other appellation, is not a reality; it is the creature of our imaginations: for what is there in the world, that is subject to vicissitude, that does not in the course of time go by different names. Thou art called the monarch of the world; the son of thy father; the enemy

[p. 250]

of thy foes; the husband of thy wife; the father of thy children. What shall I denominate thee? How art thou situated? Art thou the head or the belly? or are they thine? Art thou the feet? or do they belong to thee? Thou art, oh king, distinct in thy nature from all thy members! Now then, rightly understanding the question, think who I am; and how it is possible for me, after the truth is ascertained (of the identity of all), to recognise any distinction, or to speak of my own individuality by the expression I.'

Footnotes

^243:1 One copy addresses Paras'ara, Bhagavan sarvabhutesa, 'Sacred sovereign, lord of all creatures;' rather an unusual title for a sage, even though an inspired one. The other two copies begin, Samyagakhyatam, 'All has been thoroughly explained.'

^243:2 See page 264.

^244:3 The Mahanadi is properly a river in Orissa, but the name is applicable to any great stream, and its connexion with S'alagrama Tirtha makes it probable that it is intended for the Gandaki or Gandaka, in which the S'alagram or Ammonite is most abundantly found. It may be here noticed that S'alagrama is named amongst the Tirthas in the Mahabharata: see <page 163>.

^245:4 The applicability of this simile is not explained by the commentator: it refers possibly to the cropped or shaven heads of the religious students.

^245:5 According to the Bhagavata, Jambumarga is the Kalanjara mountain or Kalanjar in Bundelkhand.

^246:6 Hiranyagarbha or Brahma is named here instead of the Yoga doctrine, which is sometimes ascribed to him as its author.

^246:7 As a Kala sanyama, a state of suffering or mortification lasting only for a season; or, in other words, bodily existence; the body being contemplated as a sore, for which food is the unguent; drink, the lotion; and dress, the bandage.

^246:8 A river in the north of India.

^247:9 That is, What have you discerned of me, my body, life, or soul?

^247:10 The condition--that is, the personal individuality--of any one is the consequence of his acts; but the same living principle animates him which is common to all living things.

^248:11 The body is not the individual; therefore it is not the individual, but the body, or eventually the earth, which bears the burden.

^249:12 That is, speech, or any or all of the faculties or senses, is not soul.

^249:13 The aggregate limbs and senses no more constitute the individual, than the accidental combination of certain pieces of wood makes the fabric anything else than wood: in like manner as the machine is still timber, so the body is still mere elementary matter. Again; the senses and limbs, considered separately, no more constitute the man, than each individual stick constitutes the umbrella. Whether separate or conjoined, therefore, the parts of the body are mere matter; and as matter does not make up man, they do not constitute an individual.

^249:14 The term in this and the preceding clause is Puman; here used generically, there specifically.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 251]

  

CHAP. XIV.

Dialogue continued. Bharata expounds the nature of existence, the end of life, and the identification of individual with universal spirit.

PARAS'ARA.--Having heard these remarks, full of profound truth, the king was highly pleased with the Brahman, and respectfully thus addressed him: "What you have said is no doubt the truth; but in listening to it my mind is much disturbed. You have shewn that to be discriminative wisdom which exists in all creatures, and which is the great principle that is distinct from plastic nature; but the assertions--'I do not bear the palankin---the palankin does not rest upon me--the body, by which the vehicle is conveyed, is different from me--the conditions of elementary beings are influenced by acts, through the influence of the qualities, and the qualities are the principles of action;'--what sort of positions are these. Upon these doctrines entering into my ears, my mind, which is anxious to investigate the truth, is lost in perplexity. It was my purpose, illustrious sage, to have gone to Kapila Rishi, to inquire of him what in this life was the most desirable object: but now that I have heard from you such words, my mind turns to you, to become acquainted with the great end of life. The Rishi Kapila is a portion of the mighty and universal Vishnu, who has come down upon earth to dissipate delusion; and surely it is he who, in kindness to me, has thus manifested himself to me in all that you have said. To me, thus suppliant, then, explain what is the best of all things; for thou art an ocean overflowing with the waters of divine wisdom." The Brahman replied to the king, "You, again, ask me what is the best of all things, not what is the great end of life [*1]; but there are many things which are

[p. 252]

considered best, as well as those which are the great ends (or truths) of life. To him who, by the worship of the gods, seeks for wealth, prosperity, children, or dominion, each of these is respectively best. Best is the rite or sacrifice, that is rewarded with heavenly pleasures. Best is that which yields the best recompense, although it be not solicited. Self-contemplation, ever practised by devout ascetics, is to them the best. But best of all is the identification of soul with the supreme spirit. Hundreds and thousands of conditions may be called the best; but these are not the great and true ends of life. Hear what those are. Wealth cannot be the true end of life, for it may be relinquished through virtue, and its characteristic property is expenditure for the gratification of desire. If a son were final truth, that would be equally applicable to a different source; for the son that is to one the great end of life, becomes the father of another. Final or supreme truth, therefore, would not exist in this world, as in all these cases those objects which are so denominated are the effects of causes, and consequently are not finite. If the acquisition of sovereignty were designated by the character of being the great end of all, then finite ends would sometimes be, and sometimes cease to be. If you suppose that the objects to be effected by sacrificial rites, performed according to the rules of the Rik, Yajur, and Sama Vedas, be the great end of life, attend to what I have to say. Any effect which is produced through the causality of earth partakes of the character of its origin, and consists itself of clay; so any act performed by perishable agents, such as fuel, clarified butter, and Kus'a grass, must itself be of but temporary efficacy. The great end of life (or truth) is considered by the wise to be eternal; but it would be transient, if it were accomplished through transitory things. If you imagine that this great truth is the performance of religious acts, from which no recompense is sought, it is not so; for such acts are the means of obtaining liberation, and truth is (the end), not the means. Meditation on self, again, is said to be for the sake of supreme truth; but the object of this is to establish distinctions (between soul and body), and the great truth of all is without distinctions. Union of self with supreme spirit is said to be the great end of all; but this is false; for one substance cannot become substantially

[p. 253]

another [*2]. Objects, then, which are considered most desirable are infinite. What the great end of all is, you shall, monarch, briefly learn from me. It is soul: one (in all bodies), pervading, uniform, perfect, preeminent over nature (Prakriti), exempt from birth, growth, and decay, omnipresent, undecaying, made up of true knowledge, independent, and unconnected with unrealities, with name, species, and the rest, in time present, past, or to come. The knowledge that this spirit, which is essentially one, is in one's own and in all other bodies, is the great end, or true wisdom, of one who knows the unity and the true principles of things. As one diffusive air, passing through the perforations of a flute, is distinguished as the notes of the scale (Sherga and the rest), so the nature of the great spirit is single, though its forms be manifold, arising from the consequences of acts. When the difference of the investing form, as that of god or the rest, is destroyed, then there is no distinction."

Footnotes

^251:1 You ask what is S'reyas, not what is Paramartha: the first means literally 'best,' 'most excellent,' and is here used to denote temporary and special objects, or sources of happiness, as wealth, posterity, power, &c.; the latter is the one great object or end of life, true wisdom or truth, knowledge of the real and universal nature of soul.

^253:2 But this is to be understood as applying to the doctrines which distinguish between the vital spirit (Jivatma) and the supreme spirit (Paramatma), the doctrine of the Yoga. It is here argued, that it is absurd to talk of effecting a union between the soul of man and supreme soul; for if they are distinct essentially, they cannot combine; if they are already one and the same, it is nonsense to talk of accomplishing their union. The great end of life or truth is not to effect the union of two things, or two parts of one thing, but to know that all is unity.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

CHAP. XV.

Bharata relates the story of Ribhu and Nidagha. The latter, the pupil of the former, becomes a prince, and is visited by his preceptor, who explains to him the principles of unity, and departs.

PARAS'ARA continued.--Having terminated these remarks, the Brahman repeated to the silent and meditating prince a tale illustrative of the doctrines of unity. "Listen, prince," he proceeded, "to what was formerly uttered by Ribhu, imparting holy knowledge to the Brahman Nidagha. Ribhu was a son of the supreme Brahma, who, from his innate disposition, was of a holy character, and acquainted with true wisdom. Nidagha, the son of Pulastya, was his disciple; and to him Ribhu communicated willingly perfect knowledge, not doubting of his being fully confirmed in the doctrines of unity, when he had been thus instructed.

"The residence of Pulastya was at Viranagara, a large handsome city on the banks of the Devika river. In a beautiful grove adjoining to the stream the pupil of Ribhu, Nidagha, conversant with devotional practices, abode. When a thousand divine years had elapsed, Ribhu went to the city of Pulastya, to visit his disciple. Standing at the doorway, at the end of a sacrifice to the Vis'wadevas, he was seen by his scholar, who hastened to present him the usual offering, or Arghya, and conducted him into the house; and when his hands and feet were washed, and he was seated, Nidagha invited him respectfully to eat (when the following dialogue ensued):--

"Ribhu. 'Tell me, illustrious Brahman, what food there is in your house; for I am not fond of indifferent viands.'

"Nidagha. 'There are cakes of meal, rice, barley, and pulse in the house; partake, venerable sir, of whichever best pleases you.'

"Ribhu. 'None of these do I like; give me rice boiled with sugar, wheaten cakes, and milk with curds and molasses.'

"Nidagha. 'Ho dame, be quick, and prepare whatever is most delicate and sweet in the house, to feed our guest.'

[p. 255]

"Having thus spoken, the wife of Nidagha, in obedience to her husband's commands, prepared sweet and savoury food, and set it before the Brahman; and Nidagha, having stood before him until he had eaten of the meal which he had desired, thus reverentially addressed him:--

"Nidagha. 'Have you eaten sufficiently, and with pleasure, great Brahman? and has your mind received contentment from your food? Where is your present residence? whither do you purpose going? and whence, holy sir, have you now come?'

"Ribhu. 'A hungry man, Brahman, must needs be satisfied when he has finished his meal. Why should you inquire if my hunger has been appeased? When the earthy element is parched by fire, then hunger is engendered; and thirst is produced when the moisture of the body has been absorbed (by internal or digestive heat). Hunger and thirst are the functions of the body, and satisfaction must always be afforded me by that by which they are removed; for when hunger is no longer sensible, pleasure and contentment of mind are faculties of the intellect: ask their condition of the mind then, for man is not affected by them. For your three other questions, Where I dwell? Whither I go? and Whence I come? hear this reply. Man (the soul of man) goes every where, and penetrates every where, like the ether; and is it rational to inquire where it is? or whence or whither thou goest? I neither am going nor coming, nor is my dwelling in any one place; nor art thou, thou; nor are others, others; nor am I, I. If you wonder what reply I should make to your inquiry why I made any distinction between sweetened and unsweetened food, you shall hear my explanation. What is there that is really sweet or not sweet to one eating a meal? That which is sweet, is no longer so when it occasions the sense of repletion; and that which is not sweet, becomes sweet when a man (being very hungry) fancies that it is so. What food is there that first, middle, and last is equally grateful. As a house built of clay is strengthened by fresh plaster, so is this earthly body supported by earthly particles; and barley, wheat, pulse, butter, oil, milk, curds, treacle, fruits, and the like, are composed of atoms of earth. This therefore is to be understood by you, that the mind which properly judges of what is or is not sweet

[p. 256]

is impressed with the notion of identity, and that this effect of identity tends to liberation.'

"Having heard these words, conveying the substance of ultimate truth, Nidagha fell at the feet of his visitor, and said, 'Shew favour unto me, illustrious Brahman, and tell me who it is that for my good has come hither, and by whose words the infatuation of my mind is dissipated.' To this, Ribhu answered, 'I am Ribhu, your preceptor, come hither to communicate to you true wisdom; and having declared to you what that is, I shall depart. Know this whole universe to be the one undivided nature of the supreme spirit, entitled Vasudeva.' Thus having spoken, and receiving the prostrate homage of Nidagha, rendered with fervent faith, Ribhu went his way."

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 257]

  

CHAP. XVI.

Ribhu returns to his disciple, and perfects him in divine knowledge. The same recommended to the Raja by Bharata, who thereupon obtains final liberation. Consequences of hearing this legend.

"AFTER the expiration of another thousand years, Ribhu again repaired to the city where Nidagha dwelt, to instruct him farther in true wisdom. When he arrived near the town, he beheld a prince entering into it, with a splendid retinue; and his pupil Nidagha standing afar off, avoiding the crowd; his throat shrivelled with starvation, and bearing from the thicket fuel and holy grass. Ribhu approached him, and saluting him reverentially (as if he was a stranger) demanded why he was standing in such a retired spot. Nidagha replied, 'There is a great crowd of people attending the entrance of the king into the town, and I am staying here to avoid it.' 'Tell me, excellent Brahman,' said Ribhu, 'for I believe that thou art wise, which is here the king, and which is any other man.' The king,' answered Nidagha, is he who is seated on the fierce and stately elephant, vast as a mountain peak; the others are his attendants.' You have shewn me,' observed Ribhu, 'at one moment the elephant and the king, without noticing any peculiar characteristic by which they may be distinguished. Tell me, venerable sir, is there any difference between them? for I am desirous to know which is here the elephant, which is the king.' 'The elephant,' answered Nidagha, 'is underneath; the king is above him. Who is not aware, Brahman, of the relation between that which bears and that which is borne?' To this Ribhu rejoined, 'Still explain to me, according to what I know of it, this matter: what is it that is meant by the word underneath, and what is it that is termed above?' As soon as he had uttered this, Nidagha jumped upon Ribhu, and said, 'Here is my answer to the question you have asked: I am above, like the Raja.; you are underneath, like the elephant. This example, Brahman, is intended for your information.' Very well,' said Ribhu, you, it seems, are as it were the Raja, and I am like the elephant; but come now do you tell me which of us two is you; which is I.'

[p. 258]

"When Nidagha heard these words, he immediately fell at the feet o the stranger, and said, Of a surety thou art my saintly preceptor Ribhu the mind of no other person is so fully imbued with the doctrines of unity as that of my teacher, and hence I know that thou art he.' To this Ribhu replied, 'I am your preceptor, by name Ribhu, who, pleased with: the dutiful attention he has received, has come to Nidagha to give him instruction: for this purpose have I briefly intimated to you divine truth, the essence of which is the non-duality of all.' Having thus spoken to Nidagha, the Brahman Ribhu went away, leaving his disciple profoundly impressed, by his instructions, with belief in unity. He beheld all beings thenceforth as the same with himself, and, perfect in holy knowledge, obtained final liberation.

"In like manner do thou, oh king, who knowest what duty is, regarding equally friend or foe, consider yourself as one with all that exists in the world. Even as the same sky is apparently diversified as white or blue, so Soul, which is in truth but one, appears to erroneous vision distinct in different persons. That One, which here is all things, is Achyuta (Vishnu); than whom there is none other. He is I; he is thou; he is all: this universe is his form. Abandon the error of distinction."

PARAS'ARA resumed.--The king, being thus instructed, opened his eyes to truth, and abandoned the notion of distinct existence: whilst the Brahman, who, through the recollection of his former lives, had acquired perfect knowledge, obtained now exemption from future birth. Whoever narrates or listens to the lessons inculcated in the dialogue between Bharata and the king, has his mind enlightened, mistakes not the nature of individuality, and in the course of his migrations becomes fitted for ultimate emancipation [*1].

Footnotes

^258:1 This legend is a good specimen of a sectarial graft upon a Pauranik stem. It is in a great measure peculiar to the Vishnu P., as although it occurs also in the Bhagavata, it is narrated there in a much more concise manner, and in a strain that looks like an abridgment of our text.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 259]

  

VISHNU PURANA.

  

BOOK III.

  

CHAP. I.

Account of the several Manus and Manwantaras. Swarochisha the second Manu: the divinities, the Indra, the seven Rishis of his period, and his sons. Similar details of Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata, Chakshusha, and Vaivaswata. The forms of Vishnu, as the preserver, in each Manwantara. The meaning of Vishnu.

MAITREYA.--The disposition of the earth and of the ocean, and the system of the sun and the planets, the creation of the gods and the rest, the origin of the Rishis, the generation of the four castes, the production of brute creatures, and the narratives of Dhruva and Prahlada, have been fully related by thee, my venerable preceptor. I am now desirous to hear from you the series of all the Manwantaras, as well as an account of those who preside over the respective periods, with S'akra, the king of the gods, at their head.

PARAS'ARA.--I will repeat to you, Maitreya, in their order, the different Manwantaras; those which are past, and those which are to come.

The first Manu was Swayambhuva, then came Swarochisha, then Auttami, then Tamasa, then Raivata, then Chakshusha: these six Manus have passed away. The Manu who presides over the seventh Manwantara, which is the present period, is Vaivaswata, the son of the sun.

The period of Swayambhuva Manu, in the beginning of the Kalpa, has already been described by me, together with the gods, Rishis, and other personages, who then flourished [*1]. I will now, therefore, enumerate

[p. 260]

the presiding gods, Rishis, and sons of the Manu, in the Manwantara of Swarochisha [*2]. The deities of this period (or the second Manwantara) were the classes called Paravatas and Tushitas [*3]; and the king of the gods was the mighty Vipas'chit. The seven Rishis [*4] were Urja, Stambha,

[p. 261]

[paragraph continues] Prana, Dattoli, Rishabha, Nis'chara, and Arvarivat; and Chaitra, Kimpurusha, and others, were the Manu's sons [*5].

In the third period, or Manwantara of Auttami [*6], Sus'anti was the Indra, the king of the gods; the orders of whom were the Sudhamas, Satyas, S'ivas, , and Vasavertis [*7]; each of the five orders consisting of twelve divinities. The seven sons of Vas'ishtha were the seven Rishis [*8]; and Aja, Paras'u, Divya, and others, were the sons of the Manu [*9].

[p. 262]

The Surupas, Haris, Satyas, and S'udhis [*10] were the classes of gods, each comprising twenty-seven, in the period of Tamasa, the fourth Manu [*11]. S'ivi was the Indra, also designated by his performance of a hundred sacrifices (or named S'atakratu). The seven Rishis were Jyotirdhama, Prithu, Kavya, Chaitra, Agni, Vanaka, and Pivara [*12]. The sons of Tamasa were the mighty kings Nara, Khyati, S'antahaya, Janujangha, and others [*13].

In the fifth interval the Manu was Raivata [*14]: the Indra was Vibhu: the classes of gods, consisting of fourteen each, were the Amitabhas, Abhutarajasas, Vaikunthas, and Sumedhasas [*15]: the seven Rishis were

[p. 263]

[paragraph continues] Hiranyaroma, Vedasri, Urddhabahu, Vedabahu, Sudhaman, Parjanya, and Mahamuni [*16]: the sons of Raivata were Balabandhu, Susambhavya, Satyaka, and other valiant kings.

These four Manus, Swarochisha, Auttami, Tamasa, and Raivata, were all descended from Priyavrata, who, in consequence of propitiating Vishnu by his devotions, obtained these rulers of the Manwantaras for his posterity.

Chakshusha was the Manu of the sixth period [*17]: in which the Indra was Manojava: the five classes of gods were the Adyas, Prastutas, Bhavyas, Prithugas, and the magnanimous Lekhas, eight of each [*18]: Sumedhas, Virajas, Havishmat, Uttama, Madhu, Abhinaman, and Sahishnu were the seven sages [*19]: the kings of the earth, the sons of Chakshusha, were the powerful Uru, Puru, S'atadyumna, and others.

[p. 264]

The Manu of the present period is the wise lord of obsequies, the illustrious offspring of the sun: the deities are the Adityas, Vasus, and Rudras; their sovereign is Purandara: Vas'ishtha, Kas'yapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Gautama, Vis'wamitra, and Bharadwaja are the seven Rishis: and the nine pious sons of Vaivaswata Manu are the kings Ikshwaku, Nabhaga, Dhrishta, Sanyati, Narishyanta, Nabhanidishta, Karusha, Prishadhra, and the celebrated Vasumat [*20].

The unequalled energy of Vishnu combining with the quality of goodness, and effecting the preservation of created things, presides over all the Manwantaras in the form of a divinity. Of a portion of that divinity Yajna was born in the Swayambhuva Manwantara, the will-begotten progeny of Akuti [*21]. When the Swarochisha Manwantara had arrived, that divine Yajna was born as Ajita, along with the Tushita gods, the sons of Tushita. In the third Manwantara, Tushita was again born of Satya, as Satya, along with the class of deities so denominated. In the next period, Satya became Hari, along with the Haris, the

[p. 265]

children of Hari. The excellent Hari was again born in the Raivata Manwantara, of Sambhuti, as Manasa, along with the gods called Abhutarajasas. In the next period, Vishnu was born of Vikunthi, as Vaikuntha, along with the deities called Vaikunthas. In the present Manwantara, Vishnu was again born as Vamana, the son of Kas'yapa by Aditi. With three paces he subdued the worlds, and gave them, freed from all embarrassment, to Purandara [*22]. These are the seven persons by whom, in the several Manwantaras, created beings have been protected. Because this whole world has been pervaded by the energy of the deity, he is entitled Vishnu, from the root Vis, 'to enter' or 'pervade;' for all the gods, the Manus, the seven Rishis, the sons of the Manus, the Indras the sovereigns of the gods, all are but the impersonated might of Vishnu [*23].

Footnotes

^259:1 The gods were said to be the Yamas (<page 54>); the Rishis were Marichi, Angiras, &c. (<page 49>. n. ); and the sons were Priyavrata and Uttanapada (<page 53>). The Vayu adds to the Yamas, the Ajitas, who share with the former, it observes, sacrificial [p. 260] offerings. The Matsya, Padma, Brahma P. and Hari Vans'a substitute for the sons, the grandsons of Swayambhuva, Agnidhra and the rest (<page 162>).

^260:2 This Manu, according to the legend of his birth in the Markandeya P., was the son of Swarochish, so named from the splendour of his appearance when born, and who was the son of the nymph Varuthini by the Gandharba Kali. The text, in another place, makes him a son of Priyavrata.

^260:3 The Vayu gives the names of the individuals of these two classes, consisting each of twelve. It furnishes also the nomenclature of all the classes of divinities, and of the sons of the Manus in each Manwantara. According to the same authority, the Tushitas were the sons of Kratu: the Bhagavata calls them the sons of Tushita by Vedas'iras. The divinities of each period are, according to the Vayu, those to whom offerings of the Soma juice and the like are presented collectively.

^260:4 The Vayu describes the Rishis of each Manwantara as the sons, or in some cases the descendants in a direct line, of the seven sages, Atri, Angiras, Bhrigu, Kas'yapa, Pulaha, Pulastya, and Vas'ishtha; with some inconsistency, for Kas'yapa, at least, did not appear himself until the seventh, Manwantara. In the present series Urja is the son of Vas'ishtha, Stambha springs from Kas'yapa, Prana from Bhrigu, Dattoli is the son of Pulastya, Rishabha descends from Angiras, Nis'chara from Atri, and Arvarivat is the son of Pulaha. The Brahma P. and Hari Vans'a have a rather different list, or Aurva, Stambha, Kas'yapa, Prana, Vrihaspati, Chyavana, and Dattoli; but the origin of part of this difference is nothing more than an imperfect quotation from the Vayu Purana; the two first, Aurva and Stambha, being specified as the son of Vas'ishtha and the descendant of Kas'yapa, and then the parentage of the rest being omitted: to complete the seven, therefore, Kas'yapa becomes one of them. Some other errors of this nature occur in these two works, and from the same cause, a blundering citation of the Vayu, which is named as their authority. A curious peculiarity also occurs in these mistakes. They are confined to the first eight Manwantaras. The Brahma P. omits all details of the last six, and the Hari Vans'a inserts them fully and correctly, agreeably to the authority of the Vayu. It looks, therefore, as if the compiler of the Hari Vans'a had followed the Brahma, as far as it went, right or wrong; but had had recourse to the original Vayu P. when the Brahma failed him. Dattoli is sometimes written Dattoni and Dattotri; and the latter appears to have been the case with the copy of the Hari Vans'a employed by M. Langlois, who makes one of the Rishis of this Manwantara, "le penitent Atri." He is not without countenance in some such reading, for the Padma P. changes the name to Dattatreya, no doubt suggested by Datta-atri. [p. 261] Dattatreya, however, is the son of Atri; whilst the Vayu calls the person of the text the son of Pulastya. There can be no doubt therefore of the correct reading, for the son of Pulastya is Dattoli. (<page 83>.)

^261:5 The Vayu agrees with the text in these names, adding seven others. The Bhagavata has a different series. The Padma has four other names, Nabha, Nabhasya, Prasriti, Bhavana. The Brahma has ten names, including two of these, and several of the names of the Rishis of the tenth Manwantara. The Matsya has the four names of the Padma for the sons of the Manu, and gives seven others, Havindhra, Sukrita, Murtti, Apas, Jyotir, Aya, Smrita (the names of the Brahma), as the seven Prajapatis of this period, and sons of Vas'ishtha. The sons of Vas'ishtha, however, belong to the third Manwantara, and bear different appellations. There is, no doubt, some blundering here in all the books except the Vayu, and those which agree with it.

^261:6 The name occurs Auttami, Auttama, and Uttama. The Bhagavata and Vayu agree with our text (<page 263>) in making him a descendant from Priyavrata. The Markandeya calls him the son of Uttama, the son of Uttanapada: and this appears to be the correct genealogy, both from our text and the Bhagavata.

^261:7 The Brahma and Hari Vans'a have, in place of these, the Bhanus; but the Vayu and Markandeya concur with the text.

^261:8 All the authorities agree in this; but the Brahma and Hari Vans'a appear to furnish a different series also; or even a third, according to the French translation: 'Dans le troisieme Manwantara parurent comme Saptarchis les fils de Vasichtha, de son nom appeles Vasichthas, les fils de Hiranyagarbha et les illustres enfans d'Ourdja.' The text is, ### &c. The meaning of which is, 'There were (in the first Manwantara) seven celebrated sons of Vas'ishtha, who (in the third Manwantara) were sons of Brahma (i. e. Rishis), the illustrious posterity of Urjja. We have already seen that Urjja was the wife of Vas'ishtha, by whom she had seven sons, Rajas,' &c. (see <page 83>), in the Swayambhuva Manwantara; and these were born again as the Rishis of the third period. The names of these persons, according to the Matsya and Padma, are however very different from those of the sons of Vas'ishtha, given <page 83>, or Kaukundihi, Kurundi, Dalaya, S'ankha, Pravahita, Mita, and Sammita.

^261:9 The Vayu adds ten other names to those of the text. The Brahma gives ten [p. 262] altogether different. The Bhagavata an Padma have each a separate nomenclature.

^262:10 Of these, the Brahma and Hari V notice only the Satyas: the Matsya and Padma have only Sadhyas. The Vayu Bhagavata, Kurma, and Markandeya agree with the text.

^262:11 He is the son of Priyavrata, according to the text, the Vayu, &c. The Markandeya has a legend of his birth by a doe; and from his being begotten in dark, tempestuous weather, he derives his name.

^262:12 Severally, according to the Vayu, the progeny of Bhrigu, Kas'yapa, Angiras, Pulastya, Atri, Vas'ishtha, and Pulaha. There is considerable variety in some of the names. Thus the Matsya has Kavi, Prithu, Agni, Salpa, Dhimat, Kapi, Akapi. The Hari Vans'a has Kavya, Prithu, Agni, Jahnu, Dhatri, Kapivat, Akapivat. For the two last the Vayu reads Gatra and Vanapitha. The son of Pulaha is in his place (<page 83>. n. ), Arvarivat or Vanakapivat. Gatra is amongst the sons of Vas'ishtha (<page 83>). The Vayu is therefore probably most correct, although our text, in regard to these two denominations, admits of no doubt.

^262:13 The Vayu, &c. agree with the text; the Vayu naming eleven. The Brahma, Matsya, and Padma have a series of ten names, Sutapas, Tapomula, &c.; of which, seven are the Rishis of the twelfth Manwantara.

^262:14 Raivata, as well as his three predecessors, is regarded usually as a descendant of Priyavrata. The Markandeya has a long legend of his birth, as the son of king Durgama by the nymph Revati, sprung from the constellation Revati, whom Ritavach, a Muni, caused to fall from heaven. Her radiance became a lake on mount Kumuda, thence called Raivataka; and from it appeared the damsel, who was brought up by Pramucha Muni. Upon the marriage of Revati, the Muni, at her request, restored the asterism to its place in the skies.

^262:15 The Brahma inserts of these only the Abhutarajasas, with the remark, that 'they were of like nature (with their name):' i. e. they were exempt from the quality of passion. M. Langlois, in rendering the parallel passage of the Hari Vans'a, has confounded the epithet and the subject: 'dont les dieux furent les Pracritis, depourvu de [p. 263] colere et de passion.' He is also at a loss what to do with the terms Pariplava and Raibhya, in the following passage; ### asking, 'qu'est ce que Pariplava? qu'est ce que Rebhya?' If he had had the commentary at hand, these questions would have been unnecessary: they are there said to be two classes of divinities.

^263:16 There is less variety in these names than usual. Vedabahu is read Devabahu; Sudhaman, Satyanetra; and Mahamuni, Muni, Yajur, Vas'ishtha, and Yadudhra. According to the Vayu, those of the text are respectively of the lineage of Angiras, Bhrigu, Vas'ishtha, Pulastya, Atri, Pulaha, and Kas'yapa. There is considerable variety in the names of the Manu's sons.

^263:17 Chakshusha, according to the best authorities, descended from Dhruva (see p. 98); but the Markandeya has a legend of his birth as the son of a Kshatriya, named Anamitra; of his being exchanged at his birth for the son of Vis'ranta Raja, and being brought up by the prince as his own; of his revealing the business when a man, and propitiating Brahma by his devotions; in consequence of which he became a Manu. In his former birth he was born from the eye of Brahma; whence his name, from Chakshush, 'the eye.'

^263:18 The authorities agree as to the number, but differ as to the names; reading for Adyas, Aryas and Apyas; for Prastutas, Prabhutas and Prasutas; for Prithugas, Prithukas and Prithusas; and, which is a more wide deviation, Ribhus for Bhavyas. M. Langlois omits the Prasutas, and inserts Divaukasas; but the latter, meaning 'divinities,' is only an epithet. The Hari Vans'a has, ###---. The comment adds, ###.

^263:19 The Vayu reads Sudhaman for the first name; Unnata for Uttama; and Abhimana for Abhinaman. The latter occurs also Abhinamin (Matsya) and Atinaman (Hari V.) The latter reads, no doubt incorrectly, Bhrigu, Nabha, and [p. 264] Vivaswat for Uttama, Madhu, and Havishmat. The sons of Chakshusha are enumerated, <page 98>.

^264:20 There is no great variety of nomenclature in this Manwantara. The Vayu adds to the deities the Sadhyas, Vis'was, Maruts, and gods sprung from Bhrigu and Angiras. The Bhagavata adds the Ribhus: and most include the two Aswins as a class. Of the Maruts, however, the Hari Vans'a remarks that they are born in every Manwantara, seven times seven (or forty-nine); that in each Manwantara four times seven, or twenty-eight, obtain emancipation, but their places are filled up by persons reborn in that character. So the commentator explains the passages ### and ### &c. ### Comment. ### Comment. It may be suspected, however, that these passages have been derived from the simple statement of the Matsya, that in all the Manwantaras classes of Rishis appear by seven and seven, and having established a code of law and morality, depart to felicity. The Vayu has a rather different list of the seven Rishis; or Vasumat, the son of Vas'ishtha; Vatsara, descended from Kas'yapa; Vis'wamitra, the son of Gadhi, and of the Kus'ika race; Jamadagni, son of Kuru, of the race of Bhrigu; Bharadwaja, son of Vrihaspati; S'aradwat, son of Gautama, of the family of Utatthya; and Brahmakosha or Atri, descended from Brahma. All the other authorities agree with our text.

^264:21 The nominal father being the patriarch Ruchi. (See <page 54>.)

^265:22 There is no further account of this incarnation in the Vishnu Purana. Fuller details occur in the Bhagavata, Kurma, Matsya, and Vamana Puranas. The first of these (b. VIII. c. 15-23) relates the penance and sacrifices of Bali, son of Virochana, by which he had overcome Indra and the gods, and obtained supreme dominion over the three spheres. Vishnu, at the request of the deities, was born as a dwarf, Vamana, the son of Aditi by Kas'yapa; who, applying to Bali for alms, was promised by the prince whatever he might demand, notwithstanding S'ukra, the preceptor of the Daityas, apprised him whom he had to deal with. The dwarf demanded as much space as he could step over at three steps; and upon the assent of Bali, enlarged himself to such dimensions as to stride over the three worlds. Being worshipped however by Bali and his ancestor Prahlada, he conceded to them the sovereignty of Patala.

^265:23 See the same etymology, <page 3>. n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 266]

  

CHAP. II.

Of the seven future Manus and Manwantaras. Story of Sanjna and Chhaya, wives of the sun. Savarni, son of Chhaya, the eighth Manu. His successors, with the divinities, &c. of their respective periods. Appearance of  in each of the four Yugas.

MAITREYA.--You have recapitulated to me, most excellent Brahman, the particulars of the past Manwantaras; now give me some account of those which are to come.

PARAS'ARA.--Sanjna, the daughter of Vis'wakarman, was the wife of the sun, and bore him three children, the Manu (Vaivaswata), Yama, and the goddess Yami (or the Yamuna river). Unable to endure the fervours of her lord, Sanjna gave him Chhaya [*1] as his handmaid, and repaired to the forests to practise devout exercises. The sun, supposing Chhaya to be his wife Sanjna, begot by her three other children, S'anais'chara (Saturn), another Manu (Savarni), and a daughter Tapati (the Tapti river). Chhaya, upon one occasion, being offended with Yama [*2], the son of Sanjna, denounced an imprecation upon him, and thereby revealed to Yama and to the sun that she was not in truth Sanjna, the mother of the former. Being further informed by Chhaya that his wife had gone to the wilderness, the sun beheld her by the eye of meditation engaged in austerities, in the figure of a mare (in the region of Uttara Kuru). Metamorphosing himself into a horse, he rejoined his wife, and begot three other children, the two Aswins and Revanta, and

[p. 267]

then brought Sanjna back to his own dwelling. To diminish his intensity, Vis'wakarman placed the luminary on his lathe, to grind off some of his effulgence; and in this manner reduced it an eighth, for more than that was inseparable [*3]. The parts of the divine Vaishnava splendour, residing in the sun, that were filed off by Vis'wakarman, fell blazing down upon the earth, and the artist constructed of them the discus of Vishnu, the trident of S'iva, the weapon [*4] of the god of wealth, the lance of Kartikeya, and the weapons of the other gods: all these Vis'wakarman fabricated from the superfluous rays of the sun [*5].

The son of Chhaya, who was called also a Manu, was denominated Savarni [*6], from being of the same caste (Savarna) as his elder brother, the Manu Vaivaswata. He presides over the ensuing or eighth Manwantara; the particulars of which, and the following, I will now relate. In the period in which Savarni shall be the Manu, the classes of the gods will be Sutapas, Amitabhas, and Mukhyas; twenty-one of each. The seven Rishis will be Diptimat, Galava, Rama, Kripa, Drauni; my son Vyasa will be the sixth, and the seventh will be Rishyasringa [*7]. The Indra will be Bali, the sinless son of Virochana, who through the favour of Vishnu is actually sovereign of part of Patala. The royal progeny of Savarni will be Virajas, Arvarivas, Nirmoha, and others.

[p. 268]

The ninth Manu will be Daksha-savarni [*8]. The Paras, Marichigarbhas, and Sudharmas will be the three classes of divinities, each consisting of twelve; their powerful chief will be the Indra Adbhuta. Savana, Dyutimat, Bhavya, Vasu, Medhatithi, Jyotishman, and Satya will be the seven Rishis. Dhritaketu, Driptiketu, Panchahasta, Mahamaya, Prithus'rava, and others, will be the sons of the Manu.

In the tenth Manwantara the Manu will be Brahma-savarni: the gods will be the Sudhamas, Viruddhas, and S'atasankhyas: the Indra will be the mighty S'anti: the Rishis will be Havishman, Sukriti, Satya, Apammurtti, Nabhaga, Apratimaujas, and Satyaketu: and the ten sons of the Manu will be Sukshetra, Uttarnaujas, Harishena, and others.

In the eleventh Manwantara the Manu will be Dharma-savarni: the principal classes of gods will be the Vihangamas, Kamagamas, and Nirmanaratis, each thirty in number [*9]; of whom Vrisha will be the Indra: the Rishis will be Nis'chara, Agnitejas, Vapushman, Vishnu, Aruni, Havishman, and Anagha: the kings of the earth, and sons of the Manu, will be Savarga, Sarvadharma, Devanika, and others.

In the twelfth Manwantara the son of Rudra, Savarni, will be the Manu: Ritudhama will be the Indra: and the Haritas, Lohitas, Sumanasas, and Sukarmas will be the classes of gods, each comprising fifteen.

[p. 269]

[paragraph continues] Tapaswi, Sutapas, Tapomurtti, Taporati, Tapodhriti, Tapodyuti, and Tapodhana will be the Rishis: and Devavan, Upadeva, Devas'reshta, and others, will be the Manu's sons, and mighty monarchs on the earth.

In the thirteenth Manwantara the Manu will be Rauchya [*10]: the classes of gods, thirty-three in each, will be the Sudhamans, Sudharmans, and Sukarmans; their Indra will be Divaspati: the Rishis will be Nirmoha, Tatwadersin, Nishprakampa, Nirutsuka, Dhritimat, Avyaya, and Sutapas: and Chitrasena, Vichitra, and others, will be the kings.

In the fourteenth Manwantara, Bhautya will be the Manu [*11]; Suchi, the Indra: the five classes of gods will be the Chakshushas, the Pavitras, Kanishthas, Bhrajiras, and Vavriddhas: the seven Rishis will be Agnibahu, S'uchi, S'ukra, Magadha, Gridhra, Yukta, and Ajita: and the sons of the Manu will be Uru, Gabhira, Bradhna, and others, who will be kings, and will rule over the earth [*12].

At the end of every four ages there is a disappearance of the Vedas, and it is the province of the seven Rishis to come down upon earth from heaven to give them currency again. In every Krita age the Manu (of the period) is the legislator or author of the body of law, the Smriti: the

[p. 270]

deities of the different classes receive the sacrifices during the Manwantaras to which they severally belong: and the sons of the Manu them. selves, and their descendants, are the sovereigns of the earth for the whole of the same term. The Manu, the seven Rishis, the gods, the sons of the Manu, who are the kings, and Indra, are the beings who preside over the world during each Manwantara.

An entire Kalpa, oh Brahman, is said to comprise a thousand ages, or fourteen Manwantaras [*13]; and it is succeeded by a night of similar duration; during which, he who wears the form of Brahma, Janarddana, the substance of all things, the lord of all, and creator of all, involved in his own illusions, and having swallowed up the three spheres, sleeps upon the serpent S'esha, amidst the ocean [*14]. Being after that awake, he, who is the universal soul, again creates all things as they were before, in combination with the property of foulness (or activity): and in a portion of his essence, associated with the property of goodness, he, as the Manus, the kings, the gods, and their Indras, as well as the seven Rishis, is the preserver of the world. In what manner Vishnu, who is characterised by the attribute of providence during the four ages, effected their preservation, I will next, Maitreya, explain.

In the Krita age, Vishnu, in the form of Kapila and other inspired teachers, assiduous for the benefit of all creatures, imparts to them true wisdom. In the Treta age he restrains the wicked, in the form of a universal monarch, and protects the three worlds [*15]. In the Dwapara age, in the person of Veda-vyasa, he divides the one Veda into four, and

[p. 271]

distributes it into innumerable branches: and at the end of the Kali or fourth age he appears as Kalki, and reestablishes the iniquitous in the paths of rectitude. In this manner the universal spirit preserves, creates, and at last destroys, all the world.

Thus, Brahman, I have described to you the true nature of that great being who is all things, and besides whom there is no other existent thing, nor has there been, nor will there be, either here or elsewhere. I have also enumerated to you the Manwantaras, and those who preside over them. What else do you wish to hear?

Footnotes

^266:1 That is, her shadow or image. It also means 'shade.' The Bhagavata, however, makes both Sanjna and Chhaya daughters of Vis'wakarman. According to the Matsya, Vivaswat, the son of Kas'yapa and Aditi, had three wives, Rajni, the daughter of Raivata, by whom he had Revanta; Prabha, by whom he had Prabhata; and by Sanjna, the daughter of Twashtri, the Manu and Yama and Yamuna. The story then proceeds much as in the text.

^266:2 Yama, provoked at her partiality for her own children, abused Chhaya, and lifted up his foot to kick her. She cursed him to have his leg affected with sores and worms; but his father bestowed upon him a cock, to eat the worms, and remove the discharge; and Yama, afterwards propitiating Mahadeva, obtained the rank of Lokapala, and sovereign of Tartarus.

^267:3 The Matsya says he trimmed the sun every where except in the feet, the extent of which he could not discern. Consequently in pictures or images the feet of the sun must never be delineated, under pain of leprosy, &c.

^267:4 The term is S'ivika, which properly means 'a litter,' The commentator calls it Astra, 'a weapon.'

^267:5 This legend is told, with some variations of no great importance, in the Matsya, Markandeya, and Padma P. (Swarga Khanda), in the Bhagavata, and Hari Vans'a, &c.

^267:6 The Markandeya, whilst it admits Savarni to be the son of the sun, has a legend of his former birth, in the Swarochisha Manwantara, as Suratha Raja, who became a Manu by having then propitiated Devi. It was to him that the Durga Mahatmya or Chandi, the popular narrative of Durga's triumphs over various demons, was narrated.

^267:7 The Vayu has Jamadagnya or Paras'urama, of the Kus'ika race; Galava, of that of Bhrigu; Dwaipayana (or Vyasa), of the family of Vas'ishtha; Kripa, the son of S'aradwat; Diptimat, descended from Atri; Rishyasringa, from Kas'yapa; and Aswatthaman, the son of Drona, of the Bharadwaja family. The Matsya and Padma have Satananda in place of Diptimat.

^268:8 The four following Savarnis are described in the Vayu as the mind-engendered sons of a daughter of Daksha, named either Suvrata (Vayu) or Priya (Brahma) by himself and the three gods, Brahma, Dharma, and Rudra, to whom he presented her on mount Meru; whence they are called also Meru-savarnis. They are termed Savarnis from their being of one family or caste. According to the same authority, followed by the Hari Vans'a, it appears that this Manu is also called Rohita. Most of the details of this and the following Manwantaras are omitted in the Matsya, Brahma, Padma, and Markandeya Puranas. The Bhagavata and Kurma give the same as our text; and the Vayu, which agrees very nearly with it, is followed in most respects by the Hari Vans'a. The Matsya and Padma are peculiar in their series and nomenclature of the Manus themselves, calling the 9th Rauchya, 10th Bhautya, 11th Merusavarni, son of Brahma, 12th Ritu, 13th Ritadhaman, and 14th Viswaksena. The Bhagavata calls the two last Manus, Deva-savarni and Indra-savarni.

^268:9 Hence the Vayu identifies the first with days, the second with nights, and the third with hours.

^269:10 The son of the Prajapati Ruchi (Vayu, &c.), by the nymph Manini, the daughter of the Apsaras Pramlocha (Markandeya).

^269:11 Son of Ravi, by the goddess Bhuti, according to the Vayu; but the Markandeya makes Bhuti the son of Angiras, whose pupil S'anti, having suffered the holy fire to go out in his master's absence, prayed to Agni, and so propitiated him, that he not only relighted the flame, but desired S'anti to demand a further boon. S'anti accordingly solicited a son for his Guru; which son was Bhuti, the father of the Manu Bhautya.

^269:12 Although the Puranas which give an account of the Manwantaras agree in some of the principal details, yet in the minor ones they offer many varieties, some of which have been noticed. These chiefly regard the first six and the eighth. Except in a few individual peculiarities, the authorities seem to arrange themselves in two classes; one comprehending the Vishnu, Vayu, Kurma, Bhagavata, and Markandeya; and the other the Matsya, Padma, Brahma, and Hari Vans'a. The Markandeya, although it agrees precisely with the Vishnu in its nomenclature, differs from it, and from all, in devoting a considerable number of its pages to legends of the origin of the Manus, all of which are evidently of comparatively recent invention, and several of which have been no doubt suggested by the etymology of the names of the Manus.

^270:13 A thousand ages of the gods and fourteen Manwantaras are not precisely the same thing, as has been already explained. (See <page 24>. n. .)

^270:14 The order of the text would imply, that as Brahma he sleeps upon S'esha; but if this be intended, it is at variance with the usual legend, that it is as Vishnu or Narayana that the deity sleeps in the intervals of dissolution. The commentator accordingly qualifies the phrase Brahmarupadhara by the term Diva: 'Vishnu wears the form of Brahma by day; by night he sleeps on S'esha, in the person of Narayana.' This however may be suspected to be an innovation upon an older system; for in speaking of the alternations of creation and dissolution, they are always considered as consentaneous with the day and night of Brahma alone.

^270:15 As a Chakravarttin.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 272]

  

CHAP. III.

Division of the Veda into four portions, by a Vyasa, in every Dwapara age. List of the twenty-eight Vyasas of the present Manwantara. Meaning of the word Brahma.

MAITREYA.--I have learnt from you, in due order, how this world is Vishnu; how it is in Vishnu; how it is from Vishnu: nothing further is to be known: but I should desire to hear how the Vedas were divided, in different ages, by that great being, in the form of Veda-vyasa? who were the Vyasas of their respective eras? and what were the branches into which the Vedas were distributed?

PARAS'ARA.--The branches of the great tree of the Vedas are so numerous, Maitreya, that it is impossible to describe them at length. I will give you a summary account of them.

In every Dwapara (or third) age, Vishnu, in the person of Vyasa, in order to promote the good of mankind, divides the Veda, which is properly but one, into many portions: observing the limited perseverance, energy, and application of mortals, he makes the Veda fourfold, to adapt it to their capacities; and the bodily form which he assumes, in order to effect that classification, is known by the name of Veda-vyasa. Of the different Vyasas in the present Manwantara [*1], and the branches which they have taught, you shall have an account.

Twenty-eight times have the Vedas been arranged by the great Rishis in the Vaivaswata Manwantara in the Dwapara age, and consequently eight and twenty Vyasas have passed away; by whom, in their respective periods, the Veda has been divided into four. In the first Dwapara age the distribution was made by Swayambhu (Brahma) himself; in the second, the arranger of the Veda (Veda-vyasa) was Prajapati (or Manu); in the third, Us'anas; in the fourth, Vrihaspati; in the fifth, Savitri; in the sixth, Mrityu (Death, or Yama); in the seventh, Indra; in the eighth, Vas'ishtha; in the ninth, Saraswata; in the tenth, Tridhaman; in

[p. 273]

the eleventh, Trivrishan; in the twelfth, Bharadwaja; in the thirteenth, Antariksha; in the fourteenth, Vapra; in the fifteenth, Trayyaruna [*2]; in the sixteenth, Dhananjaya; in the , Kritanjaya; in the eighteenth, Rina; in the nineteenth, Bharadwaja; in the twentieth, Gotama; in the twenty-first, Uttama, also called Haryatma; in the twenty-second, Vena, who is likewise named Rajas'ravas; in the twenty-third, Somas'ushmapana, also Trinavindu; in the twenty-fourth, Riksha, the descendant of Bhrigu, who is known also by the name Valmiki; in the twenty-fifth, my father S'akti was the Vyasa; I was the Vyasa of the twenty-sixth Dwapara, and was succeeded by Jaratkaru; the Vyasa of the twenty-eighth, who followed him, was Krishna Dwaipayana. These are the twenty-eight elder Vyasas, by whom, in the preceding Dwapara ages, the Veda has been divided into four. In the next Dwapara, Drauni (the son of Drona) will be the Vyasa, when my son, the Muni Krishna Dwaipayana, who is the actual Vyasa, shall cease to be (in that character) [*3].

The syllable Om is defined to be the eternal monosyllabic Brahma [*4]. The word Brahma is derived from the root Vriha (to increase), because it is infinite (spirit), and because it is the cause by which the Vedas (and

[p. 274]

all things) are developed. Glory to Brahma, who is addressed by that mystic word, associated eternally with the triple universe [*5], and who is one with the four Vedas. Glory to Brahma, who, alike in the destruction and renovation of the world, is called the great and mysterious cause of the intellectual principle (Mahat); who is without limit in time or space, and exempt from diminution or decay; in whom (as connected with the property of darkness) originates worldly illusion; and in whom resides the end of soul (fruition or liberation), through the properties of light and of activity (or goodness and foulness). He is the refuge of those who are versed in the Sankhya philosophy; of those who have acquired control over their thoughts and passions. He is the invisible, imperishable Brahma; varying in form, invariable in substance; the chief principle, self-engendered; who is said to illuminate the caverns of the heart; who is indivisible, radiant, undecaying, multiform. To that supreme Brahma be for ever adoration.

That form of Vasudeva, who is the same with supreme spirit, which is Brahma, and which, although diversified as threefold, is identical, is the lord, who is conceived by those that contemplate variety in creation to be distinct in all creatures. He, composed of the Rik, Sauna, and Yajur-Vedas, is at the same time their essence, as he is the soul of all embodied spirits. He, distinguished as consisting of the Vedas, creates the Vedas, and divides them by many subdivisions into branches: he is the author of those branches: he is those aggregated branches; for he, the eternal lord, is the essence of true knowledge [*6].

Footnotes

^272:1 The text has, 'Hear from me an account of the Vyasas of the different Manwantaras;' but this is inconsistent with what follows, in which the enumeration is confined to the Vaivaswata Manwantara.

^273:2 This name occurs as that of one of the kings of the solar dynasty, and is included by Mr. Colebrooke amongst the persons of royal descent, who are mentioned as authors of hymns in the Rig-veda. As. Res. VIII. 383.

^273:3 A similar list of Vyasas is given in the Kurma and Vayu Puranas. Many of the individuals appear as authors of different hymns and prayers in the Vedas; and it is very possible that the greater portion, if not all of them, had a real existence, being the framers or teachers of the religion of the Hindus before a complete ritual was compiled.

^273:4 We have already had occasion to explain the sanctity of this monosyllable (see <page 1>, n. ), which ordinarily commences different portions of the Vedas, and which, as the text describes it, is identified with the supreme, undefinable deity, or Brahma. So in the Bhagavad-gita: 'Repeating Om, the monosyllable, which is Brahma, and calling me to mind:' which is not exactly the same idea that is conveyed by Schlegel's version; 'Monosyllabum mysticum Om pronuntiando, numen adorans, mei memor;' where 'numen adorans,' although it may be defended as necessary to the sense, is not expressed by the words of the text, nor compatible with Hindu notions. In one of the MSS. employed, the transcriber has evidently been afraid of desecrating this sacred monosyllable, and has therefore altered the text, writing it ### instead of ###.

^274:5 The daily prayers of the Brahman commence with the formula, Om bhuh, bhuvah, swar: Om earth, sky, heaven: these are the three mystical terms called Vyahritis, and are scarcely of less sanctity than the Pranava itself. Their efficacy, and the order of their repetition preceding the Gayatri, are fully detailed in Manu, II. 76-81. In the Mitakshara they are directed to be twice repeated mentally, with Om prefixed to each; Om bhuh, Om bhuvah, Om swar; the breath being suppressed by closing the lips and nostrils.

^274:6 The form or sensible type of Vasudeva is here considered to be the monosyllable Om, and which is one with the three mystical words, Bhuh, Bhuvar, Swar, and with the Vedas: consequently the Vyahritis and the Vedas are also forms of Vasudeva, diversified as to their typical character, but essentially one and the same.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 275]

  

CHAP. IV.

Division of the Veda, in the last Dwapara age, by the Vyasa Krishna Dwaipayana. Paila made reader of the Rich; Vais'ampayana of the Yajush; Jaimini of the Shun; and Sumantu of the Atharvan. Suta appointed to teach the historical poems. Origin of the four parts of the Veda. Sanhitas of the Rig-veda.

PARAS'ARA.--The original Veda, in four parts, consisted of one hundred thousand stanzas; and from it sacrifice of ten kinds [*1], the accomplisher of all desires, proceeded. In the twenty-eighth Dwapara age my son Vyasa separated the four portions of the Veda into four Vedas. In the same manner as the Vedas were arranged by him, as Vedavyasa, so were they divided in former periods by all the preceding Vyasas, and by myself: and the branches into which they were subdivided by him were the same into which they had been distributed in every aggregate of the four ages. Know, Maitreya, the Vyasa called Krishna Dwaipayana to be the deity Narayana; for who else on this earth could have composed the Mahabharata [*2]? Into what portions the Vedas were arranged by my magnanimous son, in the Dwapara age, you shall hear.

When Vyasa was enjoined by Brahma to arrange the Vedas in different books, he took four persons, well read in those works, as his disciples. He appointed Paila reader of the Rich [*3]; Vais'ampayana of

[p. 276]

the Yajush; and Jaimini of the Soma-veda: and Sumantu, who was conversant with the Atharva-veda, was also the disciple of the learned Vyasa. He also took Suta, who was named Lomaharshana, as his pupil in historical and legendary traditions [*4].

There was but one Yajur-veda; but dividing this into four parts, Vyasa instituted the sacrificial rite that is administered by four kinds of priests: in which it was the duty of the Adhwaryu to recite the prayers (Yajush) (or direct the ceremony); of the Hotri, to repeat the hymns (Richas); of the Udgatri, to chaunt other hymns (Sama); and of the Brahman, to pronounce the formulae called Atharva. Then the Muni, having collected together the hymns called Richas, compiled the Rigveda; with the prayers and directions termed Yajushas he formed the Yajur-veda; with those called Sama, Sama-veda; and with the Atharvas he composed the rules of all the ceremonies suited to kings, and the function of the Brahman agreeably to practice [*5].

[p. 277]

This vast original tree of the Vedas, having been divided by him into four principal stems, soon branched out into an extensive forest. In the first place, Paila divided the Rig-veda, and gave the two Sanhitas (or collections of hymns) to Indrapramati and to Bashkali. Bashkali [*6] subdivided his Sanhita into four, which he gave to his disciples Baudhya, Agnimathara, Yajnawalka, and Paras'ara; and they taught these secondary shoots from the primitive branch. Indrapramati imparted his Sanhita to his son Mandukeya, and it thence descended through successive generations, as well as disciples [*7]. Vedamitra, called also S'akalya, studied the same Sanhita, but he divided it into five Sanhitas, which he distributed amongst as many disciples, named severally Mudgala, Goswalu, Vatsya, S'aliya, and S'is'ira [*8]. Sakapurni made a different division of the original Sanhita into three portions, and added a glossary (Nirukta), constituting a fourth [*9]. The three Sanhitas were given to his three pupils, Krauncha,

[p. 278]

[paragraph continues] Vaitalaki, and Valaka; and a fourth, (thence named) Niruktakrit, had the glossary [*10]. In this way branch sprang from branch. Another Bashkali [*11] composed three other Sanhitas, which he taught to his disciples Kalayani, Gargya, and Kathajava [*12]. These are they by whom the principal divisions of the Rich have been promulgated [*13].

Footnotes

^275:1 According to the Grihya portion of the Sama-veda, there are five great sacrificial ceremonies; 1. Agnihotra, burnt-offerings, or libations of clarified butter on sacred fire; 2. Ders'apaurnamasa, sacrifices at new and full moon; 3. Chaturmasya, sacrifices every four months; 4. Pas'u-yajna or As'wamedha, sacrifice of a horse or animal; and 5. Soma-yajna, offerings and libations of the juice of the acid asclepias. These, again, are either Prakrita, 'simple,' or Vaikrita, 'modified;' and being thus doubled, constitute ten.

^275:2 The composition of the Mahabharata is always ascribed to the Vyasa named Krishna Dwaipayana, the cotemporary of the events there described. The allusion in the text establishes the priority of the poem to the Vishnu Purana.

^275:3 Or rather, 'he took Paila as teacher.' The expression is, Rigveda s'ravakam Pailam jagraha. S'ravaka means properly 'he who causes to hear,' 'a lecturer,' 'a preacher;' although, as in the case of its applicability to the laity of the Buddhists and Jainas, it [p. 276] denotes a disciple. The commentator however observes, that the text is sometimes read 'one who had gone through the Rig-veda.' So in the preceding verse it is said, 'he took four persons, well read in the Vedas, as his disciples,' and again it is said, 'Sumantu, conversant with the Atharva-veda, was his disciple.' It is clear, therefore, that the Vedas were known, as distinct works, before Krishna Dwaipayana; and it is difficult to understand how he earned his title of arranger, or Vyasa: at any rate, in undertaking to give order to the prayers and hymns of which the Vedas consist, Paila and the others were rather his coadjutors than disciples; and it seems probable that the tradition records the first establishment of a school, of which the Vyasa was the head, and the other persons named were the teachers.

^276:4 The Itihasa and Puranas; understanding by the former, legendary and traditional narratives. It is usually supposed that by the Itihasa the Mahabharata is especially meant; but although this poem is ascribed to Krishna Dwaipayana, the recitation of it is not attributed to his pupil, Roma or Loma-harshana: it was first narrated by Vais'ampayana, and after him by Sauti, the son of Lomaharshana.

^276:5 From this account, which is repeated in the Vayu P., it appears that the original Veda was the Yajush, or in other words was a miscellaneous body of precepts, formulae, prayers, and hymns, for sacrificial ceremonies; Yajush being derived by the grammarians from Yaj, 'to worship.' The derivation of the Vayu Purana, however, is from Yuj, 'to join,' 'to employ;' the formulae being those especially applied to sacrificial rites, or set apart for that purpose from the general collection: [p. 277] ### again, ### The commentator on the text however, citing the former of these passages from the Vayu, reads it, confining the derivation to Yaj, 'to worship.' The concluding passage, relating to the Atharvan, refers, in regard to regal ceremonies, to those of expiation, S'anti, &c. The function of the Brahman is not explained; but from the preceding specification of the four orders of priests who repeat at sacrifices portions of the several Vedas, it relates to the office of the one that is termed specifically the Brahman: so the Vayu has 'He constituted the function of the Brahman at sacrifices with the Atharva-veda.'

^277:6 Both in our text and in that of the Vayu this name occurs both Bashkala and Bashkali. Mr. Colebrooke writes it Bahkala and Bahkali. As. Res. VIII. 374.

^277:7 The Vayu supplies the detail. Mandukeya, or, as one copy writes, Markandeya, taught the Sanhita to his son Satyas'ravas; he to his son Satyahita; and he to his son Satyas'ri. The latter had three pupils, S'akalya, also called Devamitra (sic in MS.), Rathantara, and another Bashkali, called also Bharadwaja. The Vayu has a legend of S'akalya's death, in consequence of his being defeated by Yajnavalkya in a disputation at a sacrifice celebrated by Janaka.

^277:8 These names in the Vayu are Mudgala, Golaka, Khaliya, Matsya, S'ais'ireya.

^277:9 The commentator, who is here followed by Mr. Colebrooke, states that he was a pupil of Indrapramati; but from the Vayu it appears that S'akapurni was another name of Rathantara, the pupil of Satyas'ri, the author of three Sanhitas and a Nirukta, or glossary; whence Mr. Colebrooke supposes him the same with Yaska. As. Res. VIII. 375. It is highly probable that the text of the Vayu may be made to correct that of the Vishnu in this place, which is inaccurate, notwithstanding the copies agree: they read, ###. [p. 278] Here S'akapurnir-atha-itaram is the necessary construction; but quere if it should not be S'akapurni Rathantara. The parallel passage in the Vayu is, ###. Now in describing the pupils of Satyas'ri, Rathantara was named clearly enough: ###. In another passage it would seem to be implied that this Bashkali was the author of the Sanhitas, and Rathantara of the Nirukta only: ###. However this may be, his being the author of the Nirukta identifies him with S'akapurni, and makes it likely that the two names should come in juxta-position in our text, as well as in the Vayu. It must be admitted, however, that there are some rather inexplicable repetitions in the part of the Vayu where this account occurs, although two copies agree in the reading. That a portion of the Vedas goes by the name of Rathantara we have seen (<page 42>); but as far as is yet known, the name is confined to different prayers or hymns of the Uhya Gana of the Sama-veda. The text of the Vishnu also admits of a different explanation regarding the work of S'akapurni, and instead of a threefold division of the original, the passage may mean that he composed a third Sanhita. So Mr. Colebrooke says "the Vishnu P. omits the S'akhas of As'walayana and Sankhyayana, and intimates that S'akapurni gave the third varied edition from that of Indrapramati." The Vayu, however, is clear in ascribing three Sanhitas or S'akhas to S'akapurni.

^278:10 In the Vayu the four pupils of Sakapurni are called Kenava, Dalaki, S'atavalaka, and Naigama.

^278:11 This Bashkali may either be, according to the commentator, the pupil of Paila, who, in addition to the four Sanhitas previously noticed, compiled three others; or he may be another Bashkali, a fellow-pupil of S'akapurni. The Vayu makes him a disciple of Satyas'ri, the fellow-pupil of S'akalya and Rathantara, and adds the name or title Bharadwaja.

^278:12 In the Vayu they are called Nandayaniya, Pannagari, and Arjjava.

^278:13 Both the Vishnu and Vayu Puranas omit two other principal divisions of the Rich, those of As'walayana and Sankhyayana or the Kaus'itaki. As. Res. VIII. 375. There is no specification of the aggregate number of Sanhitas of the Rich in our text, or in the Vayu; but they describe eighteen, including the Nirukta; or as Mr. Colebrooke states, sixteen (As. Res. VIII. 374); that is, omitting the two portions of the original, as divided by Paila. The Kurma Purana states the number at twenty-one; but treatises on the study of the Vedas reduce the S'akhas of the Rich to five.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 279]

  

CHAP. V.

Divisions of the Yajur-veda. Story of Yajnawalkya: forced to give up what he has learned: picked up by others, forming the Taittiriya-yajush. Yajnawalkya worships the sun, who communicates to him the Vajasneyi-yajush.

PARAS'ARA.--Of the tree of the Yajur-veda there are twenty-seven branches, which Vais'ampayana, the pupil of Vyasa, compiled, and taught to as many disciples [*1]. Amongst these, Yajnawalkya, the son of Brahmarata, was distinguished for piety and obedience to his preceptor.

It had been formerly agreed by the Munis, that any one of them who, at a certain time, did not join an assembly held on mount Meru should incur the guilt of killing a Brahman, within a period of seven nights [*2]. Vais'ampayana alone failed to keep the appointment, and consequently killed, by an accidental kick with his foot, the child of his sister. He then addressed his scholars, and desired them to perform the penance expiatory of Brahmanicide on his behalf. Without any hesitation Yajnawalkya refused, and said, "How shall I engage in penance with these miserable and inefficient Brahmans?" On which his Guru, being incensed, commanded him to relinquish all that he had learnt from him. "You speak contemptuously," he observed, "of these young Brahmans, but of what use is a disciple who disobeys my commands?" "I spoke," replied Yajnawalkya, "in perfect faith; but as to what I have read from you, I have had enough: it is no more than this--" (acting as if he would eject it from his stomach); when he brought up the texts of the Yajush in substance stained with blood. He then departed. The other scholars of Vais'ampayana, transforming themselves to partridges (Tittiri), picked

[p. 280]

up the texts which he had disgorged, and which from that circumstance were called Taittiriya [*3]; and the disciples were called the Charaka professors of the Yajush, from Charana, 'going through' or 'performing' the expiatory rites enjoined by their master [*4].

Yajnawalkya, who was perfect in ascetic practices, addressed himself strenuously to the sun, being anxious to recover possession of the texts of the Yajush. "Glory to the sun," he exclaimed, "the gate of liberation, the fountain of bright radiance, the triple source of splendour, as the Rig, the Yajur, and the Sama Vedas. Glory to him, who, as fire and the moon, is one with the cause of the universe: to the sun, that is charged with radiant heat, and with the Sushumna ray (by which the moon is fed with light): to him who is one with the notion of time, and all its divisions of hours, minutes, and seconds: to him who is to be

[p. 281]

meditated upon as the visible form of Vishnu, as the impersonation of the mystic Om: to him who nourishes the troops of the gods, having filled the moon with his rays; who feeds the Pitris with nectar and ambrosia, and who nourishes mankind with rain; who pours down or absorbs the waters in the time of the rains, of cold, and of heat. Glory be to Brahma, the sun, in the form of the three seasons: he who alone is the dispeller of the darkness of this earth, of which he is the sovereign lord: to the god who is clad in the raiment of purity be adoration. Glory to the sun, until whose rising man is incapable of devout acts, and water does not purify, and touched by whose rays the world is fitted for religious rites: to him who is the centre and source of purification. Glory to Savitri, to Surya, to Bhaskara, to Vivaswat, to Aditya, to the first-born of gods or demons. I adore the eye of the universe, borne in a golden car, whose banners scatter ambrosia."

Thus eulogized by Yajnawalkya, the sun, in the form of a horse, appeared to him, and said, "Demand what you desire." To which the sage, having prostrated himself before the lord of day, replied, "Give me a knowledge of those texts of the Yajush with which even my preceptor is unacquainted." Accordingly the sun imparted to him the texts of the Yajush called Ayatayama (unstudied), which were unknown to Vais'ampayana: and because these were revealed by the sun in the form of a horse, the Brahmans who study this portion of the Yajush are called Vajis (horses). Fifteen branches of this school sprang from Kanwa and other pupils of Yajnawalkya [*5].

Footnotes

^279:1 The Vayu divides these into three classes, containing each nine, and discriminated, northern, middle, and eastern. Of these, the chiefs were severally S'yamayani, Aruni, and Analavi, or Alambi. With some inconsistency, however, the same authority states that Vais'ampayana composed and gave to his disciples eighty-six Sanhitas.

^279:2 The parallel passage in the Vayu rather implies that the agreement was to meet within seven nights.

^280:3 Also called the black Yajush. No notice of this legend, as Mr. Colebrooke observes (As. Iles. VIII. 376), occurs in the Veda itself; and the term Taittiriya is more rationally accounted for in the Anukramani or index of the black Yajush. It is there said that Vais'ampayana taught it to Yaska, who taught it to Tittiri, who also became a teacher; whence the term Taittiriya, for a grammatical rule explains it to mean, 'The Taittiriyas are those who read what was said or repeated by Tittiri.' Panini, 4. 3. 102. The legend, then, appears to be nothing more than a Pauranik invention, suggested by the equivocal sense of Tittiri, a proper name or a partridge. Much of the mythos of the Hindus, and obviously of that of the Greeks and Romans, originates in this source. It was not confined, at least amongst the former, to the case that Creuzer specifies; "Telle ou telle expression cessa d'etre comprise, et l'on inventa des mythes pour eclaircir ces malentendus;" but was wilfully perpetrated, even where the word was understood, when it afforded a favourable opportunity for a fable. It may be suspected in the present instance that the legend is posterior, not only to the Veda, but to the grammatical rule, or it would have furnished Panini with a different etymology.

^280:4 This is another specimen of the sort of Paronomasia explained in the preceding note. The Charakas are the students of a S'akha, so denominated from its teacher Charaka. (As. Res. VIII. 377.) So, again, Panini 4. 3. 107: 'The readers of that which is said by Charaka are Charakas:' Charaka has no necessary connexion with Chara, 'to go.' The Vayu states they were also called Chatakas, from Chat, 'to divide,' because they shared amongst them their master's guilt. 'Those pupils of Vais'ampayana were called Chatakas by whom the crime of Brahmanicide was shared; and Charakas from its departure.'

^281:5 The Vayu names the fifteen teachers of these schools, Kanwa, Vaidheya, S'alin, Madhyandina, Sapeyin, Vidagdha, Uddalin, Tamrayani, Vatsya, Galava, S'ais'iri, Atavya, Parna, Virana, and Samparayana, who were the founders of no fewer than 101 branches of the Vajasaneyi, or white Yajush. Mr. Colebrooke specifies several of these, as the Jabalas, Baudhayanas, Tapaniyas, &c. As. Res. VIII. 376.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 282]

  

CHAP. VI.

Divisions of the Sama-veda: of the Atharva-veda. Four Pauranik Sanhitas. Names of the eighteen Puranas. Branches of knowledge. Classes of Rishis.

YOU shall now hear, Maitreya, how Jaimini, the pupil of Vyasa, divided the branches of the Sama-veda. The son of Jaimini was Sumantu, and his son was Sukarman, who both studied the same Sanhita under Jaimini [*1]. The latter composed the Sahasra Sanhita (or compilation of a thousand hymns, &c.), which he taught to two disciples, Hiranyanabha, also named Kaus'alya (or of Kos'ala), and Paushyinji [*2]. Fifteen disciples of the latter were the authors of as many Sanhitas: they were called the northern chaunters of the Saman. As many more, also the disciples of Hiranyanabha, were termed the eastern chaunters of the Saman, founding an equal number of schools. Lokakshi, Kuthumi, Kushidi, and Langali were the pupils of Paushyinji; and by them and their disciples many other branches were formed. Whilst another scholar of Hiranyanabha, named Kriti, taught twenty-four Sanhitas to as many pupils; and by them, again, was the Sama-veda divided into numerous branches [*3].

I will now give you an account of the Sanhitas of the Atharva-veda. The illustrious Muni Sumantu taught this Veda to his pupil Kabandha, who made it twofold, and communicated the two portions to Devaders'a and to Pathya. The disciples of Devaders'a were Maudga, Brahmabali,

[p. 283]

[paragraph continues] S'aulkayani, and Pippalada. Pathya had three pupils, Jajali, Kumudadi, and S'aunaka; and by all these were separate branches instituted. S'aunaka having divided his Sanhita into two, gave one to Babhru, and the other to Saindhavayana; and from them sprang two schools, the Saindhavas and Munjakes'as [*4]. The principal subjects of difference in the Sanhitas of the Atharva-veda are the five Kalpas or ceremonials: the Nakshatra Kalpa, or rules for worshipping the planets; the Vaitana Kalpa, or rules for oblations, according to the Vedas generally; the Sanhita Kalpa, or rules for sacrifices, according to different schools; the Angirasa Kalpa, incantations and prayers for the destruction of foes and the like; and the Santi Kalpa, or prayers for averting evil [*5].

Accomplished in the purport of the Puranas, Vyasa compiled a Pauranik Sanhita, consisting of historical and legendary traditions, prayers and hymns, and sacred chronology [*6]. He had a distinguished disciple, Suta, also termed Romaharshana, and to him the great Muni communicated the Puranas. Suta had six scholars, Sumati, Agnivarchas, Mitrayu, S'ans'apayana, Akritavrana, who is also called Kas'yapa, and Saverni. The three last composed three fundamental Sanhitas; and Romaharshana himself compiled a fourth, called Romaharshanika. The substance of which four Sanhitas is collected into this (Vishnu) Purana.

The first of all the Puranas is entitled the Brahma. Those who are

[p. 284]

acquainted with the Puranas enumerate eighteen, or the Brahma, Padma, Vaishnava, S'aiva, Bhagavata, Naradiya, Markandeya, Agneya, Bhavishyat, Brahma Vaivartta, Lainga, Varaha, Skanda, Vamana, Kaurmma, Matsya, Garura, Brahmanda. The creation of the world, and its successive reproductions, the genealogies of the patriarchs and kings, the periods of the Manus, and the transactions of the royal dynasties, are narrated in all these Puranas. This Purana which I have repeated to you, Maitreya, is called the Vaishnava, and is next in the series to the Padma; and in every part of it, in its narratives of primary and subsidiary creation, of families, and of periods, the mighty Vishnu is declared in this Purana [*7].

The four Vedas, the six Angas (or subsidiary portions of the Vedas, viz. S'iksha, rules of reciting the prayers, the accents and tones to be observed; Kalpa, ritual; Vyakarana, grammar; Nirukta, glossarial comment; Chhandas, metre; and Jyotish, (astronomy), with Mimansa (theology), Nyaya (logic), Dharma (the institutes of law), and the Puranas, constitute the fourteen principal branches of knowledge: or they are considered as eighteen, with the addition of these four; the Ayur-veda, medical science (as taught by Dhanwantari); Dhanur-veda, the science of archery or arms, taught by Bhrigu; Gandharba-veda, or the drama, and the arts of music, dancing, &c., of which the Muni Bharata was the author; and the Artha s'astram, or science of government, as laid down first by Vrihaspati.

There are three kinds of Rishis, or inspired sages; royal Rishis, or princes who have adopted a life of devotion, as Viswamitra; divine Rishis, or sages who are demigods also, as Narada; and Brahman Rishis, or sages who are the sons of Brahma, or Brahmans, as Vas'ishtha and others [*8].

[p. 285]

I have thus described to you the branches of the Vedas, and their subdivisions; the persons by whom they were made; and the reason why they were made (or the limited capacities of mankind). The same branches are instituted in the different Manwantaras. The primitive Veda, that of the progenitor of all things, is eternal: these branches are but its modifications (or Vikalpas).

I have thus related to you, Maitreya, the circumstances relating to the Vedas, which you desired to hear. Of what else do you wish to be informed [*9]?

Footnotes

^282:1 The Vayu makes Sukarman the grandson of Sumantu, his son being called Sunwat.

^282:2 Some copies read Paushpinji. The Vayu agrees with our text, but alludes to a legend of Sukarman having first taught a thousand disciples, but they were all killed by Indra, for reading on an unlawful day, or one when sacred study is prohibited.

^282:3 The Vayu specifies many more names than the Vishnu, but the list is rather confused. Amongst the descendants of those named in the text, Rayananiya (or Ranayaniya), the son of Lokakshi, is the author of a Sanhita still extant: Saumitri his son was the author of three Sanhitas: Paras'ara, the son of Kuthumi, compiled and taught six Sanhitas: and S'aligotra, a son of Langali, established also six schools. Kriti was of royal descent: he and Paushyinji were the two most eminent teachers of the Sama-veda.

^283:4 According to the commentator, Munjakes'a is another name for Babhru; but the Vayu seems to consider him as the pupil of Saindhava, but the text is corrupt.

^283:5 The Vayu has an enumeration of the verses contained in the different Vedas, but it is very indistinctly given in many respects, especially as regards the Yajush. The Rich is said to comprise 8600 Richas. The Yajush, as originally compiled by Vyasa, 12000: of which the Vajasaneyi contains 1900 Richas, and 7600 Brahmanas; the Charaka portion contains 6026 stanzas: and consequently the whole exceeds 12000 verses. The stanzas of the Saman are said to be 8014; and those of the Atharvan 5980. Mr. Colebrooke states the verses of the whole Yajush to be 1987; of the Salapalka Brahmana of the same Veda 7624; and of the Atharvan 6015.

^283:6 Or of stories (Akhyanas) and minor stories or tales (Upakhyanas); of portions dedicated to some particular divinity, as the S'iva-gita, Bhagavad-gita, &c.; and accounts of the periods called Kalpas, as the Brahma Kalpa, Varaha Kalpa, &c.

^284:7 For remarks upon this enumeration, see Introduction.

^284:8 A similar enumeration is given in the Vayu, with some additions. Rishi is derived from Rish, 'to go to' or 'approach.' The Brahmarshis, it is said, are descendants of the five patriarchs, who were the founders of races or Gotras of Brahmans, or Kas'yapa, Vas'ishtha, Angiras, Atri, and Bhrigu. The Devarshis are Nara and Narayana, the sons of Dharma; the Balakhilyas, who sprung from Kratu; Kardama, the son of Pulaha; Kuvera, the son of Pulastya; Achala, the son of Pratyusha; [p. 285] Narada and Parvata, the sons of Kas'yapa. Brahmarshis are Ikshwaku and other princes. The Brahmarshis dwell in the sphere of Brahma; the Devarshis in the region of the gods; and the Rajarshis in the heaven of Indra.

^285:9 No notice is taken here of a curious legend which is given in the Mahabharata, in the Gada Parvan. It is there said, that during a great drought the Brahmans, engrossed by the care of subsistence, neglected the study of the sacred books, and the Vedas were lost. The Rishi Saraswata alone, being fed with fish by his mother Saraswati, the personified river so named, kept up his studies, and preserved the Hindu scriptures. At the end of the famine the Brahmans repaired to him to be taught, and sixty thousand disciples again acquired a knowledge of the Vedas from Saraswata. This legend appears to indicate the revival, or more probably the introduction, of the Hindu ritual by the race of Brahmans, or the people called Saraswata; for, according to the Hindu geographers, it was the name of a nation, as it still is the appellation of a class of Brahmans who chiefly inhabit the Panjab. (As. Res. VII. 219, 338, 341.) The Saraswata Brahmans are met with in many parts of India, and are usually fair-complexioned, tall, and handsome men. They are classed in the Jati malas, or popular lists of castes, amongst the five Gaura Brahmans, and are divided into ten tribes: they are said also to be especially the Purohits or family priests of the Kshatriya or military castes: (see the Jati mala, printed in Price's Hindi Selections, II. 280:) circumstances in harmony with the purport of the legend, and confirmatory of the Saraswatas of the Panjab having been prominent agents in the establishment of the Hindu religion in India. The holy land of the Hindus, or the primary seat, perhaps, of Brahmanism, has for one of its boundaries the Saraswati river: see <page 181>, n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 286]

  

CHAP. VII.

By what means men are exempted from the authority of Yama, as narrated by Bhishma to Nakula. Dialogue between Yama and one of his attendants. Worshippers of Vishnu not subject to Yama. How they are to be known.

MAITREYA.--You have indeed related to me, most excellent Brahman, all that I asked of you; but I am desirous to hear one thing which you have not touched on. This universe, composed of seven zones, with its seven subterrestrial regions, and seven spheres--this whole egg of Brahma.--is every where swarming with living creatures, large or small, with smaller and smallest, and larger and largest; so that there is not the eighth part of an inch in which they do not abound. Now all these are captives in the chains of acts, and at the end of their existence become slaves to the power of Yama, by whom they are sentenced to painful punishments. Released from these inflictions, they are again born in the condition of gods, men, or the like: and thus living beings, as the S'astras apprise us, perpetually revolve. Now the question I have to ask, and which you are so well able to answer, is, by what acts men may free themselves from subjection to Yama?

PARAS'ARA.--This question, excellent Muni, was once asked by Nakula [*1] of his grandfather Bhishma; and I will repeat to you the reply made by the latter.

Bhishma said to the prince, "There formerly came on a visit to me a friend of mine, a Brahman, from the Kalinga country, who told me that he had once proposed this question to a holy Muni, who retained the recollection of his former births, and by whom what was, and what will be, was accurately told. Being importuned by me, who placed implicit faith in his words, to repeat what that pious personage had imparted to him, he at last communicated it to me; and what he related I have never met with elsewhere.

[p. 287]

"Having, then, on one occasion, put to him the same question which you have asked, the Kalinga Brahman recalled the story that had been told him by the Muni--the great mystery that had been revealed to him by the pious sage, who remembered his former existence--a dialogue that occurred between Yama and one of his ministers.

"Yama beholding one of his servants with his noose in his hand, whispered to him, and said, 'Keep clear of the worshippers of Madhusudana. I am the lord of all men, the Vaishnavas excepted. I was appointed by Brahma, who is reverenced by all the immortals, to restrain mankind, and regulate the consequences of good and evil in the universe. But be who obeys Hari, as his spiritual guide, is here independent of me; for Vishnu is of power to govern and control me. As gold is one substance still, however diversified as bracelets, tiaras, or earrings, so Hari is one and the same, although modified in the forms of gods, animals, and man. As the drops of water, raised by wind from the earth, sink into the earth again when the wind subsides, so the varieties of gods, men, and animals, which have been detached by the agitation of the qualities, are reunited, when that disturbance ceases, with the eternal. He who through holy knowledge diligently adores the lotus foot of that Hari, who is reverenced by the gods, is released from all the bonds of sin; and you must avoid him as you would avoid fire fed with oil.'

"Having heard these injunctions of Yama, the messenger addressed the lord of righteousness, and said, 'Tell me, master, how am I to distinguish the worshipper of Hari, who is the protector of all beings?' Yama replied, 'You are to consider the worshipper of Vishnu, him who never deviates from the duties prescribed to his caste; who looks with equal indifference upon friend or enemy; who takes,; nothing (that is not his own), nor injures any being. Know that person of unblemished mind to be a worshipper of Vishnu. Know him to be a devout worshipper of Hari, who has placed Janarddana in his pure mind, which has been freed from fascination, and whose soul is undefiled by the soil of the Kali age. Know that excellent man to be a worshipper of Vishnu, who, looking upon gold in secret, holds that which is another's wealth but as grass, and devotes all his thoughts to the lord. Pure is he as a mountain

[p. 288]

of clear crystal; for how can Vishnu abide in the hearts of men with malice and envy, and other evil passions? the glowing heat of fire abides not in a cluster of the cooling rays of the moon. He who lives pure in thought, free from malice, contented, leading a holy life, feeling tenderness for all creatures, speaking wisely and kindly, humble and sincere, has Vasudeva ever present in his heart. As the young Sal-tree by its beauty declares the excellence of the juices which it has imbibed from the earth, so when the eternal has taken up his abode in the bosom of any one, that man is lovely amidst the beings of this world. Depart, my servant, quickly from those men whose sins have been dispersed by moral and religious merit [*2], whose minds are daily dedicated to the imperceptible deity, and who are exempt from pride, uncharitableness, and malice. In the heart in which the divine Hari, who is without beginning or end, abides, armed with a sword, a shell, and a mace, sin cannot remain; for it cannot coexist with that which destroys it, as darkness cannot continue in the world when the sun is shining. The eternal makes not his abode in the heart of that man who covets another's wealth, who injures living creatures, who speaks harshness and untruth, who is proud of his iniquity, and whose mind is evil. Janarddana occupies not his thoughts who envies another's prosperity, who calumniates the virtuous, who never sacrifices nor bestows gifts upon the pious, who is blinded by the property of darkness. That vile wretch is no worshipper of Vishnu, who through avarice is unkind to his nearest friends and relations, to his wife, children, parents, and dependants. The brute-like man whose thoughts are evil, who is addicted to unrighteous acts, who ever seeks the society of the wicked, and suffers no day to pass without the perpetration of crime, is no worshipper of Vasudeva. Do you proceed afar off from those in whose hearts Ananta is enshrined;

[p. 289]

from him whose sanctified understanding conceives the supreme male and ruler, Vasudeva, as one with his votary, and with all this world. Avoid those holy persons who are constantly invoking the lotus-eyed Vasudeva, Vishnu, the supporter of the earth, the immortal wielder of the discus and the shell, the asylum of the world. Come not into the sight of him in whose heart the imperishable soul resides, for he is defended from my power by the discus of his deity: he is designed for another world (for the heaven of Vishnu).'

"'Such,' said the Kalinga Brahman, 'were the instructions communicated by the deity of justice, the son of the sun, to his servants, as they were repeated to me by that holy personage, and as I have related them to you, chief of the house of Kuru' (Bhishma). So also, Nakula, I have faithfully communicated to you all I heard from my pious friend, when he came from his country of Kalinga to visit me. I have thus explained to you, as was fitting, that there is no protection in the ocean of the world except Vishnu; and that the servants and ministers of Yama, the king of the dead himself, and his tortures, are all unavailing against one who places his reliance on that divinity."

I have thus, resumed Paras'ara, related to you what you wished to hear, and what was said by the son of Vivaswat [*3]. What else do you wish to hear?

Footnotes

^286:1 Nakula is one of the Pandava princes, and consequently grand-nephew, not grandson, of Bhishma: he is great grandson of Paras'ara; and it is rather an anomaly for the latter to cite a conversation in which Nakula formerly bore a part.

^288:2 Or Yama and Niyama. The duties intended by these terms are variously enumerated. The commentator on the text specifics under the first head, absence of violence or cruelty to other beings (Ahinsa), honesty (Asteya), truth (Satya), chastity (Brahmacharyya), and disinterestedness or non-acceptance of gifts (Aparigraha). Under Niyama are comprehended purity (S'aucha), contentment (Santosha), devotion (Tapas), study of the Vedas (Swadhyaya), and adoration of the supreme (Is'wara-pranidhana).

^289:3 Or Vaivaswata. This section is called the Yama gita.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 290]

  

CHAP. VIII.

How Vishnu is to be worshipped, as related by Aurva to Sagara. Duties of the four castes, severally and in common: also in time of distress.

MAITREYA.--Inform me, venerable teacher, how the supreme deity, the lord of the universe, Vishnu, is worshipped by those who are desirous of overcoming the world; and what advantages are reaped by men, assiduous in his adoration, from the propitiated Govinda.

PARAS'ARA.--The question you have asked was formerly put by Sagara to Aurva [*1]. I will repeat to you his reply.

Sagara having bowed down before Aurva, the descendant of Bhrigu, asked him what were the best means of pleasing Vishnu, and what would be the consequence of obtaining his favour. Aurva replied, "He who pleases Vishnu obtains all terrestrial enjoyments; heaven and a place in heaven; and what is best of all, final liberation: whatever he wishes, and to whatever extent, whether much or little, he receives it, when Achyuta is content with him. In what manner his favour is to be secured, that also I will, oh king, impart to you, agreeably to your desire. The supreme Vishnu is propitiated by a man who observes the institutions of caste, order, and purificatory practices: no other path is the way to please him. He who offers sacrifices, sacrifices to him; he who murmurs prayer, prays to him; he who injures living creatures, injures him; for Hari is all beings. Janarddana therefore is propitiated by him

[p. 291]

who is attentive to established observances, and follows the duties prescribed for his caste. The Brahman, the Kshatriya, the Vais'ya, and the S'udra, who attends to the rules enjoined his caste, best worships Vishnu. Kes'ava is most pleased with him who does good to others; who never utters abuse, calumny, or untruth; who never covets another's wife or another's wealth, and who bears ill-will towards none; who neither beats nor slays any animate or inanimate thing; who is ever diligent in the service of the gods, of the. Brahmans, and of his spiritual preceptor; who is always desirous of the welfare of all creatures, of his children, and of his own soul; in whose pure heart no pleasure is derived from the imperfections of love and hatred. The man, oh monarch, who conforms to the duties enjoined by scriptural authority for every caste and condition of life, is he who best worships Vishnu: there is no other mode."

Aurva having thus spoken, Sagara said to him, "Tell me then, venerable Brahman, what are the duties of caste and condition [*2]: I am desirous of knowing them." To which Aurva answered and said, "Attentively listen to the duties which I shall describe as those severally of the Brahman, the Kshatriya, the Vais'ya, and the S'udra. The Brahman should make gifts, should worship the gods with sacrifices, should be assiduous in studying the Vedas, should perform ablutions and libations with water, and should preserve the sacred flame. For the sake of subsistence he may offer sacrifices on behalf of others, and may instruct them in the S'astras; and he may accept presents of a liberal description in a becoming manner (or from respectable persons, and at an appropriate season). He must ever seek to promote the good of others, and do evil unto none; for the best riches of a Brahman are universal benevolence. He should look upon the jewels of another person as if they

[p. 292]

were pebbles; and should, at proper periods, procreate offspring by his wife. These are the duties of a Brahman.

"The man of the warrior tribe should cheerfully give presents to Brahmans, perform various sacrifices, and study the scriptures. His especial sources of maintenance are arms and the protection of the earth. The guardianship of the earth is indeed his especial province: by the discharge of this duty a king attains his objects, and realizes a share of the merit of all sacrificial rites. By intimidating the bad, and cherishing the good, the monarch who maintains the discipline of the different castes secures whatever region he desires.

"Brahma, the great parent of creation, gave to the Vais'ya the occupations of commerce and agriculture, and the feeding of flocks and herds, for his means of livelihood; and sacred study, sacrifice, and donation are also his duties, as is the observance of fixed and occasional rites.

"Attendance upon the three regenerate castes is the province of the S'udra, and by that he is to subsist, or by the profits of trade, or the earnings of mechanical labour. He is also to make gifts; and he may offer the sacrifices in which food is presented, as well as obsequial offerings [*3].

[p. 293]

"Besides these their respective obligations, there are duties equally incumbent upon all the four castes. These are, the acquisition of property, for the support of their families; cohabitation with their wives, for the sake of progeny; tenderness towards all creatures, patience, humility, truth, purity, contentment, decency of decoration, gentleness of speech, friendliness; and freedom from envy and repining, from avarice, and from detraction. These also are the duties of every condition of life.

"In times of distress the peculiar functions of the castes may be modified, as you shall hear. A Brahman may follow the occupations of a Kshatriya or a Vais'ya; the Kshatriya may adopt those of the Vais'ya; and the Vais'ya those of the Kshatriya: but these two last should never descend to the functions of the S'udra, if it be possible to avoid them [*4]; and if that be not possible, they must at least shun the functions of the mined castes. I will now, Raja, relate to you the duties of the several Asramas or conditions of life."

Footnotes

^290:1 Sagara, as we shall see, was a king of the solar race. Aurva was a sage, the grandson of Bhrigu. When the sons of king Kritavirya persecuted and slew the children of Bhrigu, to recover the wealth which their father had lavished upon them, they destroyed even the children in the womb. One of the women of the race of Bhrigu, in order to preserve her embryo, secreted it in her thigh (Uru), whence the child on his birth was named Aurva: from his wrath proceeded a flame, that threatened to destroy the world; but at the persuasion of his ancestors he cast it into the ocean, where it abode with the face of a horse. Aurva was afterwards religious preceptor to Sagara, and bestowed upon him the Agneyastram, or fiery weapon, with which he conquered the tribes of barbarians, who had invaded his patrimonial possessions. Mahabh. Adi Parvan, Dana Dharma P., Hari .

^291:2 Most of the Puranas, especially the Kurma, Padma, Vamana, Agni, and Garuda, contain chapters or sections more or less in detail upon the moral and ceremonial duties of the Hindus; and a considerable portion of the Mahabharata, especially in the Moksha Dharma Parvan, is devoted to the same subject. No other Pauranik work, however, contains a series of chapters exactly analogous to those which follow, and which contain a compendious and systematic description of the Acharas, or personal and social obligations of the Hindus. The tenor of the whole is conformable to the institutes of Manu, and many passages are the same.

^292:3 The Pakayajna, or sacrifice in which food is offered, implies either the worship of the Vis'wadevas, the rites of hospitality, or occasional oblations, on building a house, the birth of a child, or any occasion of rejoicing. It is to be understood, however, that this injunction intends his performing these ceremonies through the agency of a Brahman, as a S'udra cannot repeat the Mantras or prayers that accompany them; and it might be a question how far he might be present, for he ought not even to hear such prayers repeated. The performance of funeral rites involves some personal share, and the S'udra must present the cakes, but it must be done without Mantras; as the Mitakshara; 'This rite (the presentation of cakes) must be performed by the S'udras, without formula:, on the twelfth day.' The Vayu P. directs the performance of the five great sacrifices by S'udras, only omitting the Mantras: It may be suspected that the Puranas relaxed in some degree from the original rigour; for it may be inferred that the great ceremonies were altogether withheld from S'udras in the time of Manu, who declares that none have any right or part (Adhikara) in his code except those who perform rites with Mantras, or the three regenerate castes (II. 16); and denounces as heinous sins teaching the [p. 293] Vedas to S'udras, performing sacrifices for them, or taking gifts from them. X. 309, 110, 111. Yajnawalkya, however, allows them to perform five great rites with the Namaskara, or the simple salutation: which Gotama confirms. Some restrict the sense of Mantra, also, to the prayers of the Vedas, and allow the S'udras to use those of the Puranas; as S'ulapani: and the Titthi Tatwa is cited in the S'udra Kamalakara as allowing them any Mantras except those of the Vedas.

^293:4 This last clause reconciles what would else appear to be an incompatibility with Manu, who permits the Vais'ya in time of distress to descend to the servile acts of a S'udra. X. 98.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 294]

  

CHAP. IX.

Duties of the religious student, householder, hermit, and mendicant.

AURVA continued.--"When the youth has been invested with the thread of his caste, let him diligently prosecute the study of the Vedas, in the house of his preceptor, with an attentive spirit, and leading a life of continence. He is to wait upon his Guru, assiduously observant of purificatory practices, and the Veda is to be acquired by him, whilst he is regular in the performance of religious rites. In the morning Sandhya he is first to salute the sun; in the evening, fire; and then to address his preceptor with respect. He must stand when his master is standing; move when he is walking; and sit beneath him when he is seated: he must never sit, nor walk, nor stand when his teacher does the reverse. When desired by him, let him read the Veda attentively, placed before his preceptor; and let him eat the food he has collected as alms, when permitted by his teacher [*1]. Let him bathe in water which has first been used for his preceptor's ablutions; and every morning bring fuel and water, and whatsoever else may be required.

"When the scriptural studies appropriate to the student have been completed, and he has received dismissal from his Guru, let the regenerate man enter into the order of the householder; and taking unto himself, with lawful ceremonies, house, wife, and wealth, discharge to the best of his ability the duties of his station [*2]; satisfying the manes with funeral cakes; the gods with oblations; guests with hospitality; the sages with holy study; the progenitors of mankind with progeny; the spirits with the residue of oblations; and all the world with words of truth [*3]. A

[p. 295]

householder secures heaven by the faithful discharge of these obligations. There are those who subsist upon alms, and lead an erratic life of self-denial, at the end of the term during which they have kept house. They wander over the world to see the earth, and perform their ablutions, with rites enjoined by the Vedas, at sacred shrines: houseless, and without food, and resting for the night at the dwelling at which they arrive in the evening. The householder is to them a constant refuge and parent: it is his duty to give them a welcome, and to address them with kindness; and to provide them, whenever they come to his house, with a bed, a seat, and food. A guest disappointed by a householder, who turns away from his door, transfers to the latter all his own misdeeds, and bears away his religious merit [*4]. In the house of a good man, contumely, arrogance, hypocrisy, repining, contradiction, and violence are annihilated: and the householder who fully performs this his chief duty of hospitality is released from every kind of bondage, and obtains the highest of stations after death.

"When the householder, after performing the acts incumbent on his condition, arrives at the decline of life, let him consign his wife to the care of his sons, and go himself to the forests [*5]. Let him there subsist upon leaves, roots, and fruit; and suffer his hair and beard to grow, and braid the former upon his brows; and sleep upon the ground: his dress must be made of skin or of Kas'a or Kus'a grasses; and he must bathe thrice a day; and he must offer oblations to the gods and to fire, and treat all that come to him with hospitality: he must beg alms, and present food to all creatures: he must anoint himself with such unguents as the woods afford; and in his devotional exercises he must be endurant of heat and cold. The sage who diligently follows these rules, and leads the life of the hermit (or Vanaprastha), consumes, like fire, all imperfections, and conquers for himself the mansions of eternity.

"The fourth order of men is called that of the mendicant; the circumstances of which it is fit, oh king, that you should hear from me. Let the unimpassioned man, relinquishing all affection for wife, children,

[p. 296]

and possessions, enter the fourth order [*6]. Let him forego the three objects of human existence (pleasure, wealth, and virtue), whether secular or religious, and, indifferent to friends, be the friend of all living beings. Let him, occupied with devotion, abstain from wrong, in act, word, or thought, to all creatures, human or brute; and equally avoid attachment to any. Let him reside but for one night in a village, and not more than five nights at a time in a city; and let him so abide, that good-will, and not animosity, may be engendered. Let him, for the support of existence, apply for alms at the houses of the three first castes, at the time when the fires have been extinguished, and people have eaten. Let the wandering mendicant call nothing his own, and suppress desire, anger, covetousness, pride, and folly. The sage who gives no cause for alarm to living beings need never apprehend any danger from them. Having deposited the sacrificial fire in his own person, the Brahman feeds the vital flame, with the butter that is collected as alms, through the altar of his mouth; and by means of his spiritual fire he proceeds to his own proper abode. But the twice-born man [*7], who seeks for liberation, and is pure of heart, and whose mind is perfected by self-investigation, secures the sphere of Brahma, which is tranquil, and is as a bright flame that emits not smoke."

Footnotes

^294:1 These directions are the same as those prescribed by Manu, though not precisely in the same words. II. 175, et seq.

^294:2 So Manu, III. 4, &c.

^294:3 The great obligations, or, as Sir Wm. Jones terms them, sacraments, the Mahayajnas, or great sacrifices, are, according to Manu, but five; Brahmayajna, sacred study; Pitriyajna, libations to the manes; Devayajna, burnt-offerings to the gods; Baliyajna, offerings to all creatures; and Nriyajna, hospitality. III. 70, 71. The Prajapatiyajna, or propagation of offspring, and Satyayajna, observance of truth, are apparently later additions.

^295:4 This is also the doctrine of Manu, III. 100.

^295:5 Manu, VI. 3, &c.

^296:6 Manu, VI. 33, &c.

^296:7 The text uses the term Dwijati, which designates a man of the three first castes. The commentator cites various authorities to prove that its sense should be Brahman only, who alone is permitted to enter the fourth order.--'Entrance into the fourth order is never for the Kshatriya and Vais'ya. Entrance into the fourth order is for Brahmans, according to Swayambhu. So says Dattatreya: "Let the Brahman proceed from his dwelling is also the expression of Yama, Samvartta, and Baudhayana."' But this is not the general understanding of the law, nor was it originally so restricted apparently. Manu does not so limit it.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 297]

  

CHAP. X.

Ceremonies to be observed at the birth and naming of a child. Of marrying, or leading a religious life. Choice of a wife. Different modes of marrying.

SAGARA then addressed Aurva, and said, "You have described to me, venerable Brahman, the duties of the four orders and of the four castes. I am now desirous to hear from you the religious institutes which men should individually observe, whether they be invariable, occasional, or voluntary. Describe these to me; for all things are known, chief of Bhrigu's race, unto you." To this Aurva replied, "I will communicate to you, oh king, that which you have asked, the invariable and occasional rites which men should perform: do you attend.

"When a son is born, let his father perform for him the ceremonies proper on the birth of a child, and all other initiatory rites, as well as a S'raddha, which is a source of prosperity. Let him feed a couple of Brahmans, seated with their faces to the east; and according to his means offer sacrifices to the gods and progenitors. Let him present to the manes [*1] balls of meat mixed with curds, barley, and jujubes, with the part of his hand sacred to the gods, or with that sacred to Prajapati [*2]. Let a Brahman perform such a S'raddha, with all its offerings and circumambulations, on every occasion of good fortune [*3].

"Next, upon the tenth day after birth, let the father give a name to his child; the first term of which shall be the appellation of a god, the second of a man, as S'arman or Varman; the former being the appropriate designation of a Brahman, the latter of a warrior; whilst Gupta

[p. 298]

and Dasa are best fitted for the names of Vais'yas and S'udras [*4]. A name should not be void of meaning; it should not be indecent, nor absurd, nor ill-omened, nor fearful; it should consist of an even number of syllables; it should not be too long nor too short, nor too full of long vowels; but contain a due proportion of short vowels, and be easily articulated. After this and the succeeding initiatory rites [*5], the purified youth is to acquire religious knowledge, in the mode that has been described, in the dwelling of his spiritual guide.

"When he has finished his studies, and given the parting donation to his preceptor, the man who wishes to lead the life of a householder must take a wife. If he does not propose to enter into the married state, he may remain as a student with his teacher, first making a vow to that effect, and employ himself in the service of his preceptor and of that preceptor's descendants; or he may at once become a hermit, or adopt the order of the religious mendicant, according to his original determination [*6].

"If he marry, he must select a maiden who is of a third of his age [*7]; one who has not too much hair, but is not without any; one who is not

[p. 299]

very black nor yellow complexioned, and who is not from birth a cripple or deformed. He must not marry a girl who is vicious or unhealthy, of low origin, or labouring under disease; one who has been ill brought up; one who talks improperly; one who inherits some malady from father or mother; one who has a beard, or who is of a masculine appearance; one who speaks thick or thin, or croaks like a raven; one who keeps her eyes shut, or has the eyes very prominent; one who has hairy legs, or thick ancles; or one who has dimples in her cheeks when she laughs [*8]. Let not a wise and prudent man marry a girl of such a description: nor let a considerate man wed a girl of a harsh skin; or one with white nails; or one with red eyes, or with very fat hands and feet; or one who is a dwarf, or who is very tall; or one whose eyebrows meet, or whose teeth are far apart, and resemble tusks. Let a householder marry a maiden who is in kin at least five degrees remote from his mother, and seven from his father, with the ceremonies enjoined by law [*9].

"The forms of marriage are eight, the Brahma, Daiva, the Arsha, Prajapatya, Asura, Gandharba, Rakshasa, and Pais'acha; which last is the worst [*10]: but the caste to which either form has been enjoined as lawful by inspired sages should avoid any other mode of taking a wife. The householder who espouses a female connected with him by similarity of religious and civil obligations, and along with her discharges the duties of his condition, derives from such a wife great benefits."

Footnotes

^297:1 To the Nandimukhas. The Pitris, or progenitors, are so termed here from words occurring in the prayer used on the occasion of a festive S'raddha. As. Res. VII. 270.

^297:2 With the Daiva tirtha, the tips of the fingers; or with the Prajapatya tirtha, the part of the hand at the root of the little finger. Manu, II. 58, 59. The second is called by Manu the Kaya tirtha, from Ka, a synonyme of Prajapati.

^297:3 The S'raddha is commonly an obsequial or funeral sacrifice, but it implies offerings to the progenitors of an individual and of mankind, and always forms part of a religious ceremony on an occasion of rejoicing or an accession of prosperity, this being termed the Abhyudaya or Vriddhi S'raddha. As. Res. VII. 270.

^298:4 So Manu, II. 30, 31, 32. The examples given in the comment are, Somas'arman, Indravarman, Chandragupta, and S'ivadasa, respectively appropriate appellations of men of the four castes.

^298:5 Or Sanskaras; initiatory ceremonies, purificatory of the individual at various stages.

^298:6 Or the vow or pledge he has taken, that he will follow for life the observances of the student or ascetic; both of which are enumerated in the Nirnaya Sindhu, as acts prohibited in the Kali age; a man is not to continue a student or Brahmachari, i. e. a caenobite, for life; nor is he to become a mendicant without previously passing through the order of householder. In practice, however, the prohibition is not unfrequently disregarded.

^298:7 By this is to be understood, according to the commentator, merely a young girl, but at the same time one not immature; for otherwise, he observes, a man of thirty, by which age he completes his sacred studies, would espouse a girl of but ten years of age. According to Manu, however, the period of religious study does not terminate until thirty-six; and in the East a girl of twelve would be marriageable. The text of Yajnawalkya has merely the word Yaviyasi, 'a very young woman.' It is worthy of remark here, that neither that text, nor the text of Manu, nor the interpretation of our text, authorizes the present practice of the nuptials of children. The obligation imposed upon a man of a life of perfect continence until he is more than thirty is singularly Malthusian.

^299:8 For the credit of Hindu taste it is to be noticed that the commentator observes the hemistich in which this last clause occurs is not found in all copies of the text.

^299:9 See Manu, III. 5, &c.

^299:10 These different modes of marriage a described by Manu, III. 27, &c.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 300]

  

CHAP. XI.

Of the Sadacharas, or perpetual obligations of a householder. Daily purifications, ablutions, libations, and oblations: hospitality: obsequial rites: ceremonies to be observed at meals, at morning and evening worship, and on going to rest.

SAGARA again said to Aurva, "Relate to me, Muni, the fixed observances of the householder, by attending to which he will never be rejected from this world or the next."

Aurva replied to him thus: "Listen, prince, to an account of those perpetual observances, by adhering to which both worlds are subdued. Those who are called Sadhus (saints) are they who are free from all defects; and the term Sat means the same, or Sadhu: those practices or observances (Acharas) which they follow are therefore called Sadacharas, the institutions or observances of the pious [*1].' The seven Rishis, the Manus, the patriarchs, are they who have enjoined and who have practised these observances. Let the wise man awake in the Muhurtta of Brahma. (or in the third Muhurtta, about two hours before sunrise), and with a composed mind meditate on two of the objects of life (virtue and wealth), and on topics not incompatible with them. Let him also think upon desire, as not conflicting with the other two; and thus contemplate with equal indifference the three ends of life, for the purpose of counter- acting the unseen consequences of good or evil acts. Let him avoid wealth and desire, if they give uneasiness to virtue; and abstain from virtuous or religious acts, if they involve misery, or are censured by the world [*2]. Having risen, he must offer adoration to the sun; and then, in

[p. 301]

the south-east quarter, at the distance of a bowshot or more, or any where remote from the village, void the impurities of nature. The water that remains after washing his feet he must throw away into the courtyard of the house. A wise man will never void urine on his own shadow, nor on the shadow of a tree, nor on a cow, nor against the sun, nor on fire, nor against the wind, nor on his Guru, nor men of the three first castes; nor will he pass either excrement in a ploughed field, or pasturage, or in the company of men, or on a high road, or in rivers and the like, which are holy, or on the bank of a stream, or in a place where bodies are burnt; or any where quickly. By day let him void them with his face to the north, and by night with his face to the south, when he is not in trouble. Let him perform these actions in silence, and without delay; covering his head with a cloth, and the ground with grass. Let him not take, for the purposes of cleanliness, earth from an ant-hill, nor a rat-hole, nor from water, nor from the residue of what has been so used, nor soil that has been employed to plaster a cottage, nor such as has been thrown up by insects, or turned over by the plough. All such kinds of earth let him avoid, as means of purification. One handful is sufficient after voiding urine; three after passing ordure: then ten handfulls are to be rubbed over the left hand, and seven over both hands. Let him then rince his mouth with water that is pure, neither fetid, nor frothy, nor full of bubbles; and again use earth to cleanse his feet, washing them well with water. He is to drink water then three times, and twice wash his face with it; and next touch with it his head, the cavities of the eyes, ears, and nostrils, the forehead, the navel, and the heart [*3]. Having finally washed his mouth, a man is to clean and dress his hair, and to decorate his person, before a glass, with unguents, garlands, and perfumes. He is then, according to the custom of his caste, to acquire wealth, for the sake of subsistence; and with a lively faith worship the gods. Sacrifices with the acid juice, those with clarified butter, and those with offerings of food, are comprehended in

[p. 302]

wealth: wherefore let men exert themselves to acquire wealth for these purposes [*4].

"As preparatory to all established rites of devotion the householder should bathe in the water of a river, a pond, a natural channel, or a mountain torrent; or he may bathe upon dry ground, with water drawn from a well, or taken from a, river, or other source, where there is any objection to bathing on the spot [*5]. When bathed, and clad in clean clothes, let him devoutly offer libations to the gods, sages, and progenitors, with the parts of the hand severally sacred to each. He must scatter water thrice, to gratify the gods; as many times, to please the Rishis; and once, to propitiate Prajapati: he must also make three libations, to satisfy the progenitors. He must then present, with the part of the hand sacred to the manes, water to his paternal grandfather and great-grandfather, to his maternal grandfather, great-grandfather, and his father; and at pleasure to his own mother and his mother's mother and grandmother, to the wife of his preceptor, to his preceptor, his maternal uncle, and other relations [*6], to a dear friend, and to the

[p. 303]

king. Let him also, after libations have been made to the gods and the rest, present others at pleasure for the benefit of all beings, reciting inaudibly this prayer; 'May the gods, demons, Yakshas, serpents, Rakshasas, Gandharbas, Pisachas, Guhyakas, Siddhas, Kushmandas, trees, birds, fish, all that people the waters, or the earth, or the air, be propitiated by the water I have presented to them. This water is given by me for the alleviation of the pains of all those who are suffering in the realms of hell. May all those who are my kindred, and not my kindred, and who were my relations in a former life, all who desire libations from me, receive satisfaction from this water. May this water and sesamum, presented by me, relieve the hunger and thirst of all who are suffering from those inflictions, wheresoever they may be [*7].' Presentations of water, given in the manner, oh king, which I have described, yield gratification to all the world: and the sinless man, who in the sincerity of faith pours out these voluntary libations, obtains the merit that results from affording nutriment to all creatures.

"Having then rinced his mouth, he is to offer water to the sun, touching his forehead with his hands joined, and with this prayer; 'Salutation to Vivaswat, the radiant, the glory of Vishnu; to the pure illuminator of the world; to Savitri, the granter of the fruit of acts.' He is then to perform the worship of the house, presenting to his tutelary deity water, flowers, and incense. He is next to offer oblations with fire, not preceded by any other rite, to Brahma [*8]. Having invoked Prajapati, let him pour oblations reverently to his household gods, to Kas'yapa and to Anumati [*9], in succession. The residue of the oblation let him offer to

[p. 304]

the earth, to water, and to rain, in a pitcher at hand; and to Dhatri and Vidhatri at the doors of his house, and in the middle of it to Brahma. Let the wise man also offer the Bali, consisting of the residue of the oblations, to Indra, Yama, Varuna, and Soma, at the four cardinal points of his dwelling, the east and the rest; and in the north-east quarter he will present it to Dhanwantari [*10]. After having thus worshipped the domestic deities, he will next offer part of the residue to all the gods (the Vis'wadevas); then, in the north-west quarter, to Vayu (wind); then, in all directions, to the points of the horizon, to Brahma, to the atmosphere, and to the sun; to all the gods, to all beings, to the lords of beings, to the Pitris, to twilight. Then taking other rice [*11], let the householder at pleasure cast it upon a clean spot of ground, as an offering to all beings, repeating with collected mind this prayer; 'May gods, men, animals, birds, saints, Yakshas, serpents, demons, ghosts, goblins, trees, all that desire food given by me; may ants, worms, moths, and other insects, hungered and bound in the bonds of acts; may all obtain satisfaction from the food left them by me, and enjoy happiness. May they who have neither mother, nor father, nor relations, nor food, nor the means of preparing it, be satisfied and pleased with the food presented for their contentment [*12]. Inasmuch as all beings, and this food, and I, and Vishnu are not different, I therefore give for their sustenance the food that is one with the body of all creatures. May all beings, that are comprehended in the fourteen orders of existent things [*13], be satisfied with the food bestowed by me for their gratification, and be delighted.'

[p. 305]

[paragraph continues] Having uttered this prayer, let the devout believer cast the food upon the ground, for the nourishment of all kinds of beings; for the householder is thence the supporter of them all. Let him scatter food upon the ground for dogs, outcasts, birds, and all fallen and degraded persons.

"The householder is then to remain at eventide in his courtyard as long as it takes to milk a cow [*14], or longer if he pleases, to await the arrival of a guest. Should such a one arrive, he is to be received with a hospitable welcome; a seat is to be offered to him, and his feet are to be washed, and food is to be given him with liberality, and he is to be civilly and kindly spoken to; and when he departs, to be sent away by his host with friendly wishes. A householder should ever pay attention to a guest who is not an inhabitant of the same village, but who comes from another place, and whose name and lineage are unknown. He who feeds himself, and neglects the poor and friendless stranger in want of hospitality, goes to hell. Let a householder who has a knowledge of Brahma reverence a guest, without inquiring his studies, his school, his practices, or his race [*15].

"A householder should also at the perpetual S'raddha entertain another Brahman, who is of his own country, whose family and observances are known, and who performs the five sacramental rites. He is likewise to present to a Brahman learned in the Vedas four handfulls of food, set apart with the exclamation Hanta; and he is to give to a mendicant religious student three handfulls of rice, or according to his pleasure when he has ample means. These, with the addition of the mendicant before described, are to be considered as guests; and he who treats these four descriptions of persons with hospitality acquits himself of the debt due to his fellow men. The guest who departs disappointed from any house, and proceeds elsewhere, transfers his sins to the owner of that mansion, and takes away with him such a householder's merits. Brahma, Prajapati, Indra, fire, the Vasus, the sun, are present in the person of a

[p. 306]

guest, and partake of the food that is given to him. Let a man therefore be assiduous in discharging the duties of hospitality; for he who eats his food without bestowing any upon a guest feeds only upon iniquity.

"In the next place the householder must provide food for a married damsel, remaining in her father's dwelling; for any one who is ill; for a pregnant woman; for the aged and the infants of his house; and then he may eat himself. He who eats whilst these are yet unfed is guilty of sin in this life, and when he dies is condemned in hell to feed upon phlegm. So he who eats without performing ablutions is fed in hell with filth; and he who repeats not his prayers, with matter and blood: he who eats unconsecrated food, with urine; and he who eats before the children and the rest are fed is stuffed in Tartarus with ordure. Hear therefore, oh king of kings, how a householder should feed, so that in eating no sin may be incurred, that invariable health and increased vigour may be secured, and all evils and hostile machinations may be averted. Let the householder, having bathed, and offered libations to the gods and manes, and decorated his hand with jewels, proceed to take his meal, after having repeated the introductory prayers, and offered oblations with fire, and having given food to guests, to Brahmans, to his elders, and to his family. He must not eat with a single garment on, nor with wet hands and feet, but dressed in clean clothes, perfumed, and wearing garlands of flowers: he must not eat with his face to any intermediate point of the horizon, but fronting the east or the north: and thus, with a smiling countenance, happy and attentive, let him partake of food, of good quality, wholesome, boiled with clean water, procured from no vile person nor by improper means, nor improperly cooked. Having given a portion to his hungry companions, let him take his food without reproach out of a clean handsome vessel, which must not be placed upon a low stool or bed. He must not eat in an unfit place or out of season, nor in an incommodious attitude; nor must he first cast any of his meal into the fire. Let his food be made holy with suitable texts; let it be good of its kind; and it must not be stale, except in the case of fruit or meat [*16]; nor must it be of

[p. 307]

dry vegetable substances, other than jujubes [*17] or preparations of molasses; but never must a man eat of that of which the juices have been extracted [*18]. Nor must a man eat so as to leave no residue of his meal, except in the case of flour, cakes, honey, water, curds, and butter. Let him, with an attentive mind, first taste that which has a sweet flavour: he may take salt and sour things in the middle course, and finish with those which are pungent and bitter. The man who commences his meal with fluids, then partakes of solid food, and finishes with fluids again, will ever be strong and healthy. In this manner let him feed without fault, silent, and contented with his food; taking, without uttering a word, to the extent of five handfulls, for the nutriment of the vital principle. Having eaten sufficiently, the householder is then to rinse his mouth, with his face turned towards the east or the north; and having again sipped water, he is to wash his hands from the wrist downwards. With a pleased and tranquil spirit he is then to take a seat, and call to memory his tutelary deity; and then he is thus to pray: 'May fire, excited by air, convert this food into the earthly elements of this frame, and in the space afforded by the etherial atmosphere cause it to digest, and yield me satisfaction! May this food, in its assimilation, contribute to the vigour of the earth, water, fire, and air of my body, and afford unmixed gratification! May Agasti, Agni, and submarine fire effect the digestion of the food of which I have eaten; may they grant me the happiness which its conversion into nutriment engenders; and may health ever animate my form! May Vishnu, who is the chief principle of all invested with bodily structure and the organs of sense, be propitiated by my faith in him, and influence the assimilation of the invigorating food which I

[p. 308]

have eaten! For verily Vishnu is the eater and the food and the nutriment: and through this belief may that which I have eaten be digested.'

"Having repeated this prayer, the householder should rub his stomach with his hand, and without indolence perform such rites as confer repose, passing the day in such amusements as are authorized by holy writings, and are not incompatible with the practices of the righteous; until the Sandhya, when he must engage in pious meditation. At the Sandhya, at the close of the day he must perform the usual rites before the sun has quite set; and in the morning he must perform them before the stars have disappeared [*19]. The morning and evening rites must never be neglected, except at seasons of impurity, anxiety, sickness, or alarm. He who is preceded by the sun in rising, or sleeps when the sun is setting, unless it proceed from illness and the like, incurs guilt which requires atonement; and therefore let a man rise before the sun in the morning, and sleep not until after be has set. They who sinfully omit both the morning and the evening service go after death to the hell of darkness. In the evening, then, having again dressed food, let the wife of the householder, in order to obtain the fruit of the Vais'wadeva rite, give food, without prayers, to outcasts and unclean spirits. Let the householder himself, according to his means, again shew hospitality to any guest who may arrive, welcoming him with the salutation of evening, water for his feet, a seat, a supper, and a bed. The sin of want of hospitality to a guest who comes after sunset is eight times greater than that of turning away one who arrives by day. A man should therefore most especially shew respect to one who comes to him in the evening for shelter, as the attentions that gratify him will give pleasure to all the gods. Let the householder, then, according to his ability, afford a guest food, potherbs, water, a bed, a mat, or, if he can do no more, ground on which to lie.

"After eating his evening meal, and having washed his feet, the householder is to go to rest. His bed is to be entire, and made of wood: it is not to be scanty, nor cracked, nor uneven, nor dirty, nor infested by insects,

[p. 309]

nor without a bedding: and he is to sleep with his head either to the east or to the south; any other position is unhealthy. In due season a man should approach his wife, when a fortunate asterism prevails, in an auspicious moment, and on even nights, if she is not unbathed, sick, unwell, averse, angry, pregnant, hungry, or over-fed. He should be also free from similar imperfections, should be neatly attired and adorned, and animated by tenderness and affection. There are certain days on which unguents, flesh, and women are unlawful, as the eighth and fourteenth. lunar days, new moon and full moon [*20], and the entrance of the sun into a new sign. On these occasions the wise will restrain their appetites, and occupy themselves in the worship of the gods, as enjoined by holy writ, in meditation, and in prayer; and he who behaves differently will fall into a hell where ordure will be his food. Let not a man stimulate his desires by medicines, nor gratify them with unnatural objects, or in public or holy places. Let him not think incontinently of another's wife, much less address her to that end; for such a man will be born in future life as a creeping insect. He who commits adultery is punished both here and hereafter; for his days in this world are cut short, and when dead he falls into hell. Thus considering, let a man approach his own wife in the proper season, or even at other times."

Footnotes

^300:1 Sir Wm. Jones renders Achara, 'the immemorial customs of good men' (Manu, II. 6); following the explanation of Kulluka Bhatta, which is much the same as that of our text. 'Achara means the use of blankets or bark, &c. for dress. Sadhus are pious or just men.' Acharas are, in fact, all ceremonial and purificatory observances or practices, not expiatory, which are enjoined either by the Vedas or the codes of law.

^300:2 That is, he may omit prescribed rites, if they are attended with difficulty or danger: he may forego ablutions, if they disagree with his health; and he may omit pilgrimage to holy shrines, if the way to them is infested by robbers. Again, it is injoined in certain ceremonies to eat meat, or drink wine; but these practices [p. 301] are generally reprehended by pious persons, and a man may therefore disregard the injunction.

^301:3 Many of these directions are given by Manu, IV. 45, &c.

^302:4 That is, wealth is essential to the performance of religious rites, and it is also the consequence of performing them. A householder should therefore diligently celebrate them, that he may acquire property, and thus be enabled to continue to sacrifice. According to Gautama there are seven kinds of each of the three sorts of sacrificial rites particularized in the text, or those in which the Soma juice, oiled butter, or food are presented. Of the latter, according to Manu, there are four varieties, the offering of food to the Vis'wadevas, to spirits, to deceased ancestors, and to guests. II. 86. The seven of Gautama are, offerings to progenitors on certain eighth days of the fortnight, at the full and change, at S'raddhas generally, and to the manes on the full moon of four different months, or S'ravan, Agrahayana, Chaitra, and Aswin.

^302:5 A person may perform his ablutions in his own house, if the weather or occupation prevent his going to the water. If he be sick, he may use warm water; and if bathing be altogether injurious, he may perform the Mantra snana, or repeat the prayers used at ablution, without the actual bath.

^302:6 The whole series is thus given by Mr. Colebrooke; As. Res. V. 367. Triple libations of tila (sesamum seeds) and water are to be given to the father, paternal grandfather, and great grandfather; to the mother, maternal grandfather, great grandfather, and great great grandfather: and single libations are to be offered to the paternal and maternal grandmother and great grandmother, to the paternal uncle, brother, son, grandson, daughter's son, son-in-law, maternal uncle, sister's son, father's sister's son, mother's sister, and [p. 303] other relatives. With exception of those, however, offered to his own immediate ancestors, which are obligatory, these libations are optional, and are rarely made. 

^303:7 The first part of this prayer is from the Sama-veda, and is given by Mr. Colebrooke. As. Res. V. 367.

^303:8 The rite is not addressed to Brahma specially, but he is to be invoked to preside over the oblations offered to the gods and sages subsequently particularized.

^303:9 Kas'yapa, the son of Kas'yapa, is Aditya, or the sun. Anumati is the personified moon, wanting a digit of full. The objects and order of the ceremony here succinctly described differ from those of which Mr. Colebrooke gives an account (As. Res. VII. 236), and from the form of oblations given by Ward (Account of the Hindus, II. 447); but, as observed by Mr. Colebrooke, "oblations are made with such ceremonies, and in such form, as are [p. 304] adapted to the religious rite which is intended to be subsequently performed." As. Res. VII. 237.

^304:10 See also Manu, III. 84, &c. and the As. Res. VII. 275.

^304:11 Or this ceremony may be practised instead of the preceding.

^304:12 This prayer is said by Mr. Colebrooke to be taken from the Puranas (As. Res. VII. 275): he translates the last clause, May they who have neither food, nor means of obtaining it.' In our text the phrase is ### which the commentator explains by ### understanding Anna siddhi to mean 'means of dressing food,' Paka sadhana. The following passages of the prayer are evidently peculiar to the Vishnu Purana.

^304:13 Either fourteen classes of Bhutas or spirits, or the same number of living beings, or eight species of divine, one of human, and five of animal creatures.

^305:14 This, according to the commentator, is equal to the fourth part of a Ghatika, which, considering the latter synonymous with Muhurtta, or one-thirtieth of the day and night, would be twelve minutes.

^305:15 These precepts, and those which follow, are of the same tenor as those given by Manu on the subject of hospitality (III. 99, &c.), but more detailed.

^306:16 By stale, as applied to meat, is intended in this place probably meat which has been previously dressed as part of an offering to the gods or manes: meat which [p. 307] is dressed in the first instance for an individual being prohibited; as by Yajnawalkya: 'Let him avoid flesh killed in vain;' or that which is not the residue of an offering to the gods, &c. So also Manu, V. 7.

^307:17 By dried vegetables, &c. is to be understood unboiled vegetables, or potherbs dressed without being sprinkled with water: Instead of 'jujubes,' the reading is sometimes 'myrobalans:' the other term, ###, is explained 'sweet-meats.' The construction here, however, is somewhat obscure.

^307:18 As oil-cake, or the sediment of any thing after expression.

^308:19 So Manu, II. 101. and IV. 93.

^309:20 So Manu, IV. 128.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 310]

  

CHAP. XII.

Miscellaneous obligations--purificatory, ceremonial, and moral.

AURVA continued.--"Let a respectable householder ever venerate the gods, kine, Brahmans, saints, aged persons, and holy teachers. Let him observe the two daily Sandhyas, and offer oblations to fire. Let him dress in untorn garments, use delicate herbs and flowers, wear emeralds and other precious stones, keep his hair smooth and neat, scent his person with agreeable perfumes, and always go handsomely attired, decorated with garlands of white flowers. Let him never appropriate another's property, nor address him with the least unkindness. Let him always speak amiably and with truth, and never make public another's faults. Let him not desire another's prosperity, nor seek his enmity. Let him not mount upon a crazy vehicle, nor take shelter under the bank of a river (which may fall upon him). A wise man will not form a friendship nor walk in the same path with one who is disesteemed, who is a sinner or a drunkard, who has many enemies, or who is lousy, with a harlot or her gallant, with a pauper or a liar, with a prodigal, a slanderer, or a knave. Let not a man bathe against the strength of a rapid stream, nor enter a house on fire, nor climb to the top of a tree; nor (in company) clean his teeth or blow his nose, nor gape without covering his mouth, nor clear his throat, nor cough, nor laugh loudly, nor emit wind with noise, nor bite his nails, nor cut grass, nor scratch the ground [*1], nor put his beard into his mouth, nor crumble a clod of clay; nor look upon the chief planetary bodies when he is unclean. Let him not express disgust at a corpse, for the odour of a dead body is the produce of the moon. Let a decent man ever avoid by night the place where four roads meet, the village tree, the grove adjacent to the place where bodies are burnt, and a loose woman. Let him not pass across the shadow of a venerable person, of an image, of a deity, of a flag, of a heavenly luminary [*2]. Let him not travel alone through a forest, nor sleep by

[p. 311]

himself in an empty house [*3]. Let him keep remote from hair, bones, thorns, filth, remnants of offerings, ashes, chaff, and earth [*4] wet with water in which another has bathed. Let him not receive the protection of the unworthy, nor attach himself to the dishonest. Let him not approach a beast of prey; and let him not tarry long when he has risen from sleep. Let him not lie in bed when he is awake, nor encounter fatigue when it is time to rest. A prudent man will avoid, even at a distance, animals with tusks and horns; and he will shun exposure to frost, to wind, and to sunshine. A man must neither bathe, nor sleep, nor rinse his mouth whilst he is naked [*5]: he must not wash his mouth, or perform any sacred rite, with his waistband unfastened: and he must not offer oblations to fire, nor sacrifice to the gods, nor wash his mouth, nor salute a Brahman, nor utter a prayer, with only one garment on. Let him never associate with immoral persons: half an instant is the limit for the intercourse of the righteous with them. A wise man will never engage in a dispute with either his superiors or inferiors: controversy and marriage are to be permitted only between equals. Let not a prudent man enter into contention: let him avoid uprofitable enmity. A small loss may be endured; but he should shun the wealth that is acquired by hostility.

"When a man has bathed, he must not wipe his limbs with a towel nor with his hands, nor shake his hair, nor rinse his mouth before he has risen. Let him not (when sitting) put one foot over another, nor stretch forth his foot, in the presence of a superior, but sit with modesty in the posture called Virasana (or on his knees). He must never pass round a temple upon his left hand, nor perform the ceremony of circumambulating any venerable object in the reverse direction. A decent man will not spit, nor eject any impurity, in front of the moon, fire, the sun, water, wind, or any respectable person [*6]; nor will he void urine standing, nor upon the highway: he will never step over phlegm, ordure, urine, or blood; nor is the expectoration of the mucus of the throat allowable at the time of eating, offering sacrifices or oblations, or repeating prayers, or in the presence of a respectable person.

[p. 312]

"Let not a man treat women with disrespect, nor let him put entire faith in them. Let him not deal impatiently with them, nor set them over matters of importance. A man who is attentive to the duties of his station will not go forth from his house without saluting the chaplets, flowers, gems, clarified butter, and venerable persons in it. At proper seasons he will salute respectfully the places where four roads meet, when engaged in offering oblations with fire. Let him liberally relieve the virtuous who are poor, and reverence those who are learned in the Vedas. He who is a worshipper of the gods and sages, who gives cakes and water to the manes, and who exercises hospitality, obtains the highest regions after death. He who speaks wisely, moderately, and kindly, goes to those worlds which are the inexhaustible sources of happiness. He who is intelligent, modest, devout, and who reverences wisdom, his superiors, and the aged, goes to heaven.

"On the days called Parvas, on periods of impurity, upon unseasonable thunder, and the occurrence of eclipses or atmospheric portents, a wise man must desist from the study of the Vedas [*7]. The pious man who suppresses anger and envy, who is benevolent to all, and allays the fears of others, secures, as the least of his rewards, enjoyment in Swarga. A man should carry an umbrella, as a defence against sun and rain; he should bear a staff when he goes by night, or through a wood; and he should walk in shoes, if he desires to keep his body from harm. As he goes along he should not look up, nor about him, nor afar off, but keep his eyes upon the ground to the extent of a couple of yards.

"The householder who expels all sources of imperfection is in a great degree acquitted of the three ordinary objects of existence, desire, wealth, and virtue; sinless amongst the sinful; speaking amicably to all men; his whole soul melting with benevolence; final felicity is in his grasp. The earth is upheld by the veracity of those who have subdued their passions, and, following righteous practices, are never contaminated by desire, covetousness, and wrath. Let therefore a wise man ever speak the truth when it is agreeable, and when the truth would inflict

[p. 313]

pain let him hold his peace. Let him not utter that which, though acceptable, would be detrimental; for it were better to speak that which would be salutary, although it should give exceeding offence [*8]. A considerate man will always cultivate, in act, thought, and speech, that which is good for living beings, both in this world and in the next [*9]."

Footnotes

^310:1 Manu, IV. 71. "He who breaks clay, or cuts grass, or bites his nails, will speedily fall to ruin."

^310:2 Manu, IV. 130.

^311:3 Manu, IV. 57.

^311:4 Ib. id. 78.

^311:5 Ib. id. 45.

^311:6 Ib. id. 52.

^312:7 Manu, IV. 101, &c. The legislator is much more copious on this subject than the author of the Purana.

^313:8 So Manu, IV. 538. "Let him say what is true, but let him say what is pleasing. Let him speak no disagreeable truth, nor let him speak agreeable falsehood. This is a primeval rule."

^313:9 That the preceding chapter agrees in many respects very closely with the contents of the fourth book of the Institutes of Manu, on economics and private morals, will be evident from the instances cited of some of the parallel passages. Several others might have been adduced.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 314]

  

CHAP. XIII.

Of S'raddhas, or rites in honour of ancestors, to be performed on occasions of rejoicing. Obsequial ceremonies. Of the Ekoddishta or monthly S'raddha, and the Sapindana or annual one. By whom to be performed.

AURVA continued.--"The bathing of a father without disrobing is enjoined when a son is born; and he is to celebrate the ceremony proper for the event, which is the S'raddha offered upon joyous occasions [*1]. With composed mind, and thinking on nothing else, the Brahman should offer worship to both the gods and progenitors, and should respectfully circumambulate, keeping Brahmans on his left hand, and give them food. Standing with his face to the east, he should present, with the

[p. 315]

parts of the hand sacred to the gods and to Prajapati, balls of food [*2], with curds, unbruised grain, and jujubes; and should perform, on every accession of good fortune, the rite by which the class of progenitors termed Nandimukha is propitiated [*3]. A householder should diligently worship the Pitris so named, at the marriage of a son or daughter, on entering a new dwelling, on giving a name to a child, on performing his tonsure and other purificatory ceremonies, at the binding of the mother's hair during gestation, or on first seeing the face of a son, or the like.

[p. 316]

[paragraph continues] The S'raddha on such occasions, however, has been briefly alluded to. Hear now, oh king, the rules for the performance of obsequial rites.

"Having washed the corpse with holy water, decorated it with garlands, and burnt it without the village, the kinsmen, having bathed with their clothes on, are to stand with their faces to the south, and offer libations to the deceased, addressing him by name, and adding, 'wherever thou mayest be [*4].' They then return, along with the cattle coming from pasture, to the village; and upon the appearance of the stars retire to rest, sleeping on mats spread upon the earth. Every day (whilst the mourning lasts) a cake or ball of food [*5] is to be placed on the ground, as an offering to the deceased; and rice, without flesh, is to be daily eaten. Brahmans are to be fed for as many days as the mourner pleases, for the soul of the defunct derives satisfaction accordingly as his relatives are content with their entertainment. On the first day, or the third, or seventh, or ninth (after the death of a person), his kinsmen should change their raiment, and bathe out of doors, and offer a libation of water, with (tila) sesamum-seeds. On the fourth day [*6] the ashes and bones should be collected: after which the body of one connected with the deceased by offerings of funeral cakes may be touched (by an indifferent person), without thereby incurring impurity; and those who are related only by presentation of water are qualified for any occupation [*7].

[p. 317]

[paragraph continues] The former class of relatives may use beds, but they must still refrain from unguents and flowers, and must observe continence, after the ashes and bones have been collected (until the mourning is over). When the deceased is a child, or one who is abroad, or who has been degraded, or a spiritual preceptor, the period of uncleanness is but brief, and the ceremonies with fire and water are discretional. The food of a family in which a kinsman is deceased is not to be partaken of for ten days [*8]; and during that period, gifts, acceptance, sacrifice, and sacred study are suspended. The term of impurity for a Brahman is ten days; for a Kshatriya, twelve; for a Vais'ya, half a month; and a whole month for a S'udra [*9]. On the first day after uncleanness ceases, the nearest relation of the deceased should feed Brahmans at his pleasure, but in uneven numbers, and offer to the deceased a ball of rice upon holy grass placed near the residue of the food that has been eaten. After the guests have been fed, the mourner, according to his caste, is to touch water, a weapon, a goad, or a staff, as he is purified by such contact. He may then resume the duties prescribed for his caste, and follow the avocation ordinarily pursued by its members.

"The S'raddha enjoined for an individual is to be repeated on the day of his death (in each month for a year) [*10], but without the prayers and rites performed on the first occasion, and without offerings to the Vis'wadevas. A single ball of food is to be offered to the deceased, as the purification of one person, and Brahmans are to be fed. The Brahmans are to be asked by the sacrificer if they are satisfied; and upon their assent, the prayer, 'May this ever satisfy such a one' (the deceased) is to be recited.

[p. 318]

"This is the S'raddha called Ekoddishta, which is to be performed monthly to the end of a twelvemonth from the death of a person; at the expiration of which the ceremony called Sapindana is to be observed. The practices of this rite are the same as those of the monthly obsequies, but a lustration is to be made with four vessels of water, perfumes, and sesamum: one of these vessels is considered as dedicated to the deceased, the other three to the progenitors in general; and the contents of the former are to be transferred to the other three, by which the deceased becomes included in the class of ancestors, to whom worship is to be addressed with all the ceremonies of the S'raddha. The persons who are competent to perform the obsequies of relations connected by the offering of the cake are the son, grandson, great grandson, a kinsman of the deceased, the descendants of a brother, or the posterity of one allied by funeral offerings. In absence of all these, the ceremony may be instituted by those related by presentations of water only, or those connected by offerings of cakes or water to maternal ancestors. Should both families in the male line be extinct, the last obsequies may be performed by women, or by the associates of the deceased in religious or social institutions, or by any one who becomes possessed of the property of a deceased kinsman.

"Obsequial rites are of three descriptions, initiative, intermediate, and subsequent [*11]. The first are those which are observed after the burning of the corpse until the touching of water, weapons, &c. (or until the cessation of uncleanness). The intermediate ceremonies are the Sraddhas called Ekoddishta, which are offered every month: and the subsequent rites are those which follow the Sapindikarana, when the deceased is admitted amongst the ancestors of his race; and the ceremonies are thenceforth general or ancestral. The first set of rites (as essential) are to be performed by the kindred of the father or mother, whether connected by the offering of the cake or of water, by the associates of the deceased, or by the prince who inherits his property.

[p. 319]

[paragraph continues] The first and the last rites are both to be performed by sons and other relations, and by daughter's sons, and their sons; and so are the sacrifices on the day of the person's death. The last class, or ancestral rites, are to be performed annually, with the same ceremonies as are enjoined for the monthly obsequies; and they may be also performed by females. As the ancestral rights are therefore most universal, I will describe to you, oh king, at what seasons, and in what manner, they should be celebrated."

Footnotes

^314:1 The offerings of the Hindus to the Pitris partake of the character of those of the Romans to the lares and manes, but bear a more conspicuous part in their ritual. They are said indeed by Manu (III. 203), in words repeated in the Vayu and Matsya Puranas and Hari Vans'a, to be of more moment than the worship of the gods: These ceremonies are not to be regarded as merely obsequial; for independently of the rites addressed to a recently deceased relative, and in connexion with him to remote ancestors and to the progenitors of all beings, which are of a strictly obsequial or funereal description, offerings to deceased ancestors, and the Pitris in general, form an essential ceremony on a great variety of festive and domestic occasions. The Nirnaya Sindhu, in a passage referred to by Mr. Colebrooke (As. Res. VII.), specifies the following S'raddhas: 1. The Nitya, or perpetual; daily offerings to ancestors in general: 2. The Naimittika, or occasional; as the Ekoddishta,or obsequial offerings on account of a kinsman recently deceased: 3. The Kamya, voluntary; performed for the accomplishment of a special design: 4. The Vriddhi; performed on occasions of rejoicing or prosperity: 5. The Sapindana; offerings to all individual and to general ancestors: 6. The Parvana S'raddha; offerings to the manes on certain lunar days called Parvas, or day of full moon and new moon, and the eighth and fourteenth days of the lunar fortnight: 7. The Goshthi; for the advantage of a number of learned persons, or of an assembly of Brahmans, invited for the purpose: 8. The S'uddhi; one performed to purify a person from some defilement; an expiatory S'raddha: 9. The Karmanga; one forming part of the initiatory ceremonies, or Sanskaras, observed at conception, birth, tonsure, &c.: 10. The Daiva; to which the gods are invited: 11. The Yatra S'raddha; held by a person going a journey: and 12. The Pushti S'raddha; one performed to promote health and [p. 315] wealth. Of these, the four which are considered the most solemn are the rite performed for a parent, or near relative, lately deceased; that which is performed for kindred collectively; that observed on certain lunar days; and that celebrated on occasions of rejoicing. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 271.

^315:2 Manu directs the balls to be made from the remainder of the clarified butter constituting the previous oblation to the gods. III. 215. Kulluka Bhatta explains, however, the oblation to consist partly of Anna food, or boiled rice. The latter is the article of which the balls chiefly consist. Yajnawalkya directs them to be made of rice and sesamum-seeds. The Vayu P. adds to these two ingredients, honey and butter: but various kinds of fruit, of pulse, and of grain, and water, frankincense, sugar, and milk, are also mixed up in the Pindas. Their size also differs; and according to Angiras, as quoted by Hemadri in the S'raddha Mayukha, they may be of the dimension of the fruit of the jujube, or of the hog-plum, of the fruit of the Bel, or of the wood-apple, or of a fowl's egg. Some authorities direct Pindas of a different size for different S'raddhas; prescribing them no larger than the wood-apple at the first or pure funereal ceremony, and as big as a cocoa-nut at the monthly and annual S'raddha. In practice the Pinda is usually of such a magnitude that it may be conveniently held by the hand.

^315:3 We have here the authority of the text for classing the Nandimukhas amongst the Pitris (see p. 297): the verse is ###, and the same Gana or class is presently again named: ### The Mantra of the Vriddhi or festival S'raddha is also said, in the Nirnaya Sindhu, to be ###. According to the authorities, however, which are cited in that work, there seems to be some uncertainty about the character of the Nandimukhas; and they are addressed both as Pitris and gods: being in the former case either the ancestors prior to the great grandfather, ancestors collectively, or a certain class of them; and in the latter, being identified with the Vis'wadevas, or a class of them called also Urddhavaktra. The term Nandimukha is also applied to the rite itself, or to the Vriddhi S'raddha, and to one addressed to maternal ancestors. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 268, &c.

^316:4 "An oblation of water must be next presented from the joined palms of the hand, naming the deceased and the family from which he sprang, and saying, 'May this oblation reach thee.'" As. Res. VII. 244. The text has, ###.

^316:5 The proper period of mourning is ten days, on each of which offerings of cakes, and libations of water, are to be made to the deceased, augmenting the number of cakes each day, so that on the last day ten cakes are presented. When the period is shorter, the same number of ten cakes must be distributed amongst the several days, or they may be all presented on one day. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 429.

^316:6 It should be, more correctly, on that day on which the mourning ceases, or, as previously mentioned, the first, third, seventh, or ninth; but the authorities vary, and, besides these, the second and fourth days, and certain days of the fortnight or month, are specified. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 432.

^316:7 They are no longer unclean. The Sapindas, or those connected by offerings of cakes to common ancestors, extend to seven degrees, ascending or descending. The Samanodakas, or those similarly connected by presentations of water, to fourteen degrees.

^317:8 That is, a mere guest or stranger is not to partake of it. The food directed to be given to Brahmans is given in general only to the relatives of the deceased, who are already unclean. In this respect our text and the modern practice seem to differ from the primitive system, as described by Manu, III. 187. The eleventh or twelfth day is the term on which the S'raddha which crowns the whole of the funeral rites is to be performed, and when Brahmans are to be invited. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 437.

^317:9 The number of Pindas, however, is for each case the same, or ten. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 429.

^317:10 So Manu, III. 251. It may be doubted if the monthly S'raddha was part [p. 318] of the ancient system, although Kulluka Bhatta supposes it to be referred to (v. 548), and supplies the fancied omission of the text.

^318:11 Purva, 'first;' Madhyama, 'middle;' and Uttara, 'last.'

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 320]

  

CHAP. XIV.

Of occasional S'raddhas, or obsequial ceremonies: when most efficacious, and at what places.

AURVA proceeded.--"Let the devout performer of an ancestral oblation propitiate Brahma, Indra, Rudra, the As'wins, the sun, fire, the

[p. 321]

[paragraph continues] Vasus, the winds, the Vis'wadevas, the sages, birds, men, animals, reptiles, progenitors, and all existent things, by offering adoration to them

[p. 322]

monthly, on the fifteenth day of the moon's wane (or dark fortnight), or on the eighth day of the same period in certain months, or at particular seasons, as I will explain.

"When a householder finds that any circumstance has occurred, or a distinguished guest has arrived, on which account ancestral ceremonies are appropriate, the should celebrate them. He should offer a voluntary sacrifice upon any atmospheric portent, at the equinoctial and solstitial periods, at eclipses of the sun and moon, on the sun's entrance into a zodiacal sign, upon unpropitious aspects of the planets and asterisms, on dreaming unlucky dreams, and on eating the grain of the year's harvest. The Pitris [*1] derive satisfaction for eight years from ancestral offerings upon the day of new moon when the star of the conjunction [*2] is Anuradha, Vis'akha, or Swati; and for twelve years when it is Pushya, Ardra, or Punarvasu. It is not easy for a man to effect his object, who is desirous of worshipping the Pitris or the gods on a day of new moon when the stars are those of Dhanishtha, Purvabhadrapada, or S'atabhisha. Hear also an account of another class of Sraddhas, which afford especial contentment to progenitors, as explained by Sanatkumara, the son of Brahma, to the magnanimous Pururavas, when full of faith and devotion to the Pitris he inquired how he might please them. The third lunar day of the month Vais'akha (April, May), and the ninth of Kartika

[p. 323]

[paragraph continues] (October, November), in the light fortnight; the thirteenth of Nabha (July, August), and the fifteenth of Magha (January, February), in the dark fortnight; are called by ancient teachers the anniversaries of the first day of a Yuga, or age (Yugadya), and are esteemed most sacred. On these days, water mixed with sesamum-seeds should be regularly presented to the progenitors of mankind; as well as on every solar and lunar eclipse; on the eighth lunations of the dark fortnights of Agrahayana, Magha, and Phalguna (December--February); on the two days commencing the solstices, when the nights and days alternately begin to diminish; on those days which are the anniversaries of the beginning of the Manwantaras; when the sun is in the path of the goat; and on all occurrences of meteoric phenomena. A S'raddha at these seasons contents the Pitris for a thousand years: such is the secret which they have imparted. The fifteenth day of the dark half of the month Magha, when united with the conjunction of the asterism over which Varuna presides (Satabhisha), is a season of no little sanctity, when offerings are especially grateful to the progenitors. Food and water presented by men who are of respectable families, when the asterism Dhanishtha is combined with the day of new moon, content the Pitris for ten thousand years; whilst they repose for a whole age when satisfied by offerings made on the day of new moon when Ardra is the lunar mansion.

"He who, after having offered food and libations to the Pitris, bathes in the Ganges, Satlaj, Vipas'a (Beyah), Saraswati, or the Gomati at Naimisha, expiates all his sins. The Pitris also say, 'After having received satisfaction for a twelvemonth, we shall further derive gratification by libations offered by our descendants at some place of pilgrimage, at the end of the dark fortnight of Magha.' The songs of the Pitris confer purity of heart, integrity of wealth, prosperous seasons, perfect rites, and devout faith; all that men can desire. Hear the verses that constitute those songs, by listening to which all those advantages will be secured, oh prince, by you. 'That enlightened individual who begrudges not his wealth, but presents us with cakes, shall be born in a distinguished family. Prosperous and affluent shall that man ever be, who in honour of us gives to the Brahmans, if he is wealthy, jewels, clothes,

[p. 324]

land, conveyances, wealth, or any valuable presents; or who, with faith and humility, entertains them with food, according to his means, at proper seasons. If he cannot afford to give them dressed food, he must, in proportion to his ability, present them with unboiled grain, or such gifts, however trifling, as he can bestow. Should he be utterly unable even to do this, he must give to some eminent Brahman, bowing at the same time before him, sesamum-seeds adhering to the tips of his fingers, and sprinkle water to us, from the palms of his hands, upon the ground; or he must gather, as he may, fodder for a day, and give it to a cow; by which he will, if firm in faith, yield us satisfaction. If nothing of this kind is practicable, he must go to a forest, and lift up his arms to the sun and other regents of the spheres, and say aloud--I have no money, nor property, nor grain, nor any thing whatever it for an ancestral offering. Bowing therefore to my ancestors, I hope the progenitors will be satisfied with these arms tossed up in the air in devotion.' These are the words of the Pitris themselves; and he who endeavours, with such means as he may possess, to fulfil their wishes, performs the ancestral rite called a S'raddha."

Footnotes

^322:1 [p. 320] We may here take the opportunity of inquiring who are meant by the Pitris; and, generally speaking, they may be called a race of divine beings, inhabiting celestial regions of their own, and receiving into their society the spirits of those mortals for whom the rite of fellowship in obsequial cakes with them, the Sapindikarana, has been duly performed. The Pitris collectively, therefore, include a man's ancestors; but the principal members of this order of beings are of a different origin. The Vayu, Matsya, and Padma Puranas, and Hari Vans'a, profess to give an account of the original Pitris. The account is much the same, and for the most part in the same words, in all. They agree in distinguishing the Pitris into seven classes; three of which are without form, or composed of intellectual, not elementary substance, and assuming what forms they please; and four are corporeal. When they come to the enumeration of the particular classes they somewhat differ, and the accounts in all the works are singularly imperfect. According to a legend given by the Vayu and the Hari Vans'a, the first Pitris were the sons of the gods. The gods having offended Brahma, by neglecting to worship him, were cursed by him to become fools; but upon their repentance he directed them to apply to their sons for instruction. Being taught accordingly the rites of expiation and penance by their sons, they addressed them as fathers; whence the sons of the gods were the first Pitris. So the  has 'The Pitris are born in the Manwantaras as the sons of the gods.' The Hari Vans'a makes the sons assume the character of fathers, addressing them, 'Depart, children.' Again; the Vayu P. declares the seven orders of Pitris to have been originally the first gods, the Vairajas, whom Brahma, with the eye of Yoga, beheld in the eternal spheres, and who are the gods of the gods. Again; in the same work we have the incorporeal Pitris called Vairajas, from being the sons of the Prajapati Viraja. The Matsya agrees with this latter statement, and adds that the gods worship them. The Hari Vans'a has the same statement, but more precisely [p. 321] distinguishes the Vairajas as one class only of the incorporeal Pitris. The commentator states the same, calling the three incorporeal Pitris, Vairajas, Agnishwattas, and Varhishads; and the four corporeal orders, Sukalas, Angirasas, Suswadhas, and Somapas. The Vairajas are described as the fathers of Mena, the mother of Uma. Their abode is variously termed the Santanika, Sanatana, and Soma loka. As the posterity of Viraja, they are the Somasads of Manu. The other classes of Pitris the three Puranas agree with Manu in representing as the sons of the patriarchs, and in general assign to them the same offices and posterity. They are the following:--

Agnishwattas--sons of Marichi, and Pitris of the gods (Manu, Matsya, Padma): living in Soma-loka, and parents of Achchoda (Matsya, Padma, Hari Vans'a). The Vayu makes them residents of Viraja-loka, sons of Pulastya, Pitris of the demigods and demons, and parents of Pivari; omitting the next order of Pitris, to whom these circumstances more accurately refer. The commentator on the Hari V. derives the name from Agnishu, 'in or by oblations to fire,' and Atta, 'obtained,' 'invoked.'

Varhishads--sons of Atri, and Pitris of the demons (Manu): sons of Pulastya, Pitris of the demons, residents in Vaibhraja, fathers of Pivari (Matsya, Padma, Hari V.).

These three are the formless or incorporeal Pitris.

Somapas--descendants of Bhrigu, or sons of Kavi by Swadha, the daughter of Agni; and Pitris of the Brahmans (Manu and Vayu P.). The Padma calls them Ushmapas. The Hari V. calls the Somapas, to whom it ascribes the same descent as the Vayu, the Pitris of the S'udras; and the Sukalas the Pitris of the Brahmans.

Havishmantas--in the solar sphere, sons of Angiras, and Pitris of the Kshatriyas (Manu, Vayu, Matsya, Padma, Hari Vans'a).

Ajyapas--sons of Kardama, Pitris of the Vais'yas, in the Kamaduha-loka (Manu, &c.); but the lawgiver calls them the sons of Pulastya. The Pitris of the Vais'yas are called Kavyas in the Nandi Upapurana; and in the Hari Vans'a and its comment they are termed Suswadhas, sons of Kardama, descended from Pulaha.

Sukalins--sons of Vas'ishtha, and Pitris of the S'udras (Manu and Vayu P.). They are not mentioned in the Padma. The Matsya inserts the name and descent, but specifies them as amongst the incorporeal Pitris. It may be suspected that the passage is corrupt. The Hari Vans'a makes the Sukalas sons of Vas'ishtha, the Pitris of the Brahmans; and gives the title of Somapas to the Pitris of the S'udras. In general this work follows the Vayu; but with omissions and transpositions, as if it had carelessly mutilated its original.

Besides these Pitris or progenitors, other heavenly beings are sometimes made to adopt a similar character: thus Manu says, "The wise call our fathers Vasus; our paternal grandfathers, Rudras; our paternal great grandfathers, Adityas; agreeably [p. 322] to a text of the Vedas:" that is, these divine beings are to be meditated upon along with, and as not distinct from, progenitors. Hemadri quotes the Nandi Upapurana for a different practice, and directs Vishnu to be identified with the father, Brahma with the grandfather, and S'iva with the great grandfather. This, however, is S'aiva innovation. The Vaishnavas direct Aniruddha to be regarded as one's-self, and Pradyumna, Sankarshana, and Vasudeva as the three ancestors. Again, they are identified with Varuna, Prajapatya, and Agni; or, again, with months, seasons, and years. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 284. It may be doubted how far any of these correctly represent the original notions inculcated by the texts of the Vedas, from which, in the most essential particulars, they are derived.

^322:2 When the Yogatara, or principal star seen, is the chief star or stars of these asterisms or lunar mansions respectively, see the table given by Mr. Colebrooke: As. Res. IX. p. 346. The first three named in the text are stars in Scorpio, Libra, and Arcturus: the second three are stars in Cancer, Gemini, and Orion: and the third are stars in the Dolphin, Pegasus, and Aquarius.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 325]

  

CHAP. XV.

What Brahmans are to be entertained at S'raddhas. Different prayers to be recited. Offerings of food to be presented to deceased ancestors.

AURVA proceeded.--"Hear next, oh prince, what description of Brahman should be fed at ancestral ceremonies. he should be one studied in various triplets of the Rich and Yajur Vedas [*1]; one who is acquainted with the six supplementary sciences of the Vedas [*2]; one who understands the Vedas; one who practises the duties they enjoin [*3]; one who exercises penance; a chanter of the principal Sama-veda [*4], an officiating priest, a sister's son, a daughter's son, a son-in-law, a father-in-law, a maternal uncle, an ascetic, a Brahman who maintains the five fires, a pupil, a kinsman; one who reverences his parents. A man should first employ the Brahmans first specified in the principal obsequial

[p. 326]

rite; and the others (commencing with the ministering priest) in the subsidiary ceremonies instituted to gratify his ancestors.

"A false friend, a man with ugly nails or black teeth, a ravisher, a Brahman who neglects the service of fire and sacred study, a vender of the Soma plant, a man accused of any crime, a thief, a calumniator, a Brahman who conducts religious ceremonies for the vulgar; one who instructs his servant in holy writ, or is instructed in it by his servant; the husband of a woman who has been formerly betrothed to another; a man who is undutiful to his parents; the protector of the husband of a woman of the servile caste, or the husband of a woman of the servile caste; and a Brahman who ministers to idols--are not proper persons to be invited to au ancestral offering [*5]. On the first day let a judicious man invite eminent teachers of the Vedas, and other Brahmans; and according to their directions determine what is to be dedicated to the gods, and what to the Pitris. Associated with the Brahmans, let the institutor of an obsequial rite abstain from anger and incontinence. He who having eaten himself in a S'raddha, and fed Brahmans, and appointed them to their sacred offices, is guilty of incontinence, thereby sentences his progenitors to shameful suffering. In the first place, the Brahmans before described are to be invited; but those holy men who come to the house without an invitation are also to be entertained. The guests are to be reverently received with water for their feet, and the like; and the entertainer, holding holy grass in his hand, is to place them, after they have rinsed their mouths, upon seats. An uneven number of Brahmans is to be invited in sacrifices to the manes; an even or uneven number in those presented to the gods; or one only on each occasion [*6].

"Then let the householder, inspired by religious faith, offer oblations to the maternal grandfather, along with the worship of the Vis'wadevas [*7],

[p. 327]

or the ceremony called Vais'wadeva, which comprehends offerings to both paternal and maternal ancestors, and to ancestors in general. Let him feed the Brahmans who are appropriated to the gods, and to maternal ancestors, with their faces to the north; and those set apart for the paternal ancestors, and ancestors in general, with their faces to the east. Some say that the viands of the S'raddha should be kept distinct for these two sets of ancestors, but others maintain that they are to be fed with the same food, at the same time. Having spread Kus'a grass for seats, and offered libations according to rule, let the sensible man invoke the deities, with the concurrence of the Brahmans who are present [*8]. Let the man who is acquainted with the ritual offer a libation to the gods with water and barley, having presented to them flowers, perfumes, and incense. Let him offer the same to the Pitris, placed upon his left; and with the consent of the Brahmans, having first provided seats of Kus'a grass doubled, let him invoke with the usual prayers the manes to the ceremony, offering a libation, on his left hand, of water and sesamum. He will then, with the permission of the Brahmans, give food to any guest who arrives at the time, or who is desirous of victuals, or who is passing along the road; for holy saints

[p. 328]

and ascetics, benefactors of mankind, are traversing this earth, disguised in various shapes [*9]. On this account let a prudent man welcome a person who arrives at such a season; for inattention to a guest frustrates the consequences of an ancestral offering.

"The sacrificer is then to offer food, without salt or seasoning, to fire [*10], three several times, with the consent of the assistant Brahmans; exclaiming first, 'To fire, the vehicle of the oblations; to the manes Swaha!' Next addressing the oblation to Soma, the lord of the progenitors; and giving the third to Vaivaswata. He is then to place a very little of the residue of the oblation in the dishes of the Brahmans; and next, presenting them with choice viands, well dressed and seasoned, and abundant, he is to request them civilly to partake of it at their pleasure. The Brahmans are to eat of such food attentively, in silence, with cheerful countenances, and at their ease. The sacrificer is to give it to them, not churlishly, nor hurriedly, but with devout faith.

"Having next recited the prayer for the discomfiture of malignant spirits [*11], and scattered sesamum-seeds upon the ground, the Brahmans who have been fed are to be addressed, in common with the ancestors of the sacrificer, in this manner: 'May my father, grandfather, and great grandfather, in the persons of these Brahmans, receive satisfaction! May my father, grandfather, and great grandfather derive nutriment from these oblations to fire! May my father, grandfather, and great grandfather derive satisfaction from the balls of food placed by me upon the ground! May my father, grandfather, and great grandfather be pleased with what I have this day offered them in faith! May my maternal grandfather, his father, and his father, also enjoy contentment from my offerings! May all the gods experience gratification, and all evil beings perish! May the lord of sacrifice, the imperishable deity

[p. 329]

[paragraph continues] Hari, be the acceptor of all oblations made to the manes or the gods! and may all malignant spirits, and enemies of the deities, depart from the rite.'

"When the Brahmans have eaten sufficiently, the worshipper must scatter some of the food upon the ground, and present them individually with water to rinse their mouths; then, with their assent, he may place upon the ground balls made up of boiled rice and condiments, along with sesamum-seeds. With the part of his hand sacred to the manes he must offer sesamum-seeds, and water from his joined palms; and with the same part of his hand he must present cakes to his maternal ancestors. He should in lonely places, naturally beautiful, and by the side of sacred streams, diligently make presents (to the manes and the Brahmans) [*12]. Upon Kus'a grass, the tips of which are pointed to the south, and lying near the fragments of the meat, let the householder present the first ball of food, consecrated with flowers and incense, to his father; the second to his grandfather; and the third to his great grandfather; and let him satisfy those who are contented with the wipings of his hand, by wiping it with the roots of Kus'a grass [*13]. After presenting balls of food to his maternal ancestors in the same manner, accompanied by perfumes and incense, he is to give to the principal Brahmans water to rinse their mouths; and then, with attention and piety, he is to give the Brahmans gifts, according to his power, soliciting their benedictions, accompanied with the exclamation 'Swadha [*14]!' Having made presents to the Brahmans, he is to address himself to the gods, saying, 'May they who are the Vis'wadevas be pleased with this oblation!' Having thus said, and the blessings to be solicited having been granted by the Brahmans, he is to dismiss first the paternal ancestors, and then the gods. The order is the same with the maternal ancestors and the gods in respect to food, donation, and dismissal. Commencing with the

[p. 330]

washing of the feet, until the dismissing of the gods and Brahmans, the ceremonies are to be performed first for paternal ancestors, and then for ancestors on the mother's side. Let him dismiss the Brahmans with kindly speeches and profound respect, and attend upon them at the end of the S'raddha; until permitted by them to return. The wise man will then perform the invariable worship of the Vis'wadevas, and take' his own meal along with his friends, his kinsmen, and his dependants.

"In this manner an enlightened householder will celebrate the obsequial worship of his paternal and maternal ancestors, who, satisfied by his offerings, will grant him all his desires. Three things are held pure at obsequies, a daughter's son, a Nepal blanket, and sesamum-seeds [*15]; and the gift, or naming, or sight of silver is also propitious [*16]. The person offering a S'raddha should avoid anger, walking about, and hurry; these three things are very objectionable. The Vis'wadevas, and paternal and maternal ancestors, and the living members of a man's family are all nourished by the offerer of ancestral oblations.

[p. 331]

"The class of Pitris derives support from the moon, and the moon is sustained by acts of austere devotion. Hence the appointment of one who practises austerities is most desirable. A Yogi set before a thousand Brahmans enables the institutor of obsequial rites to enjoy all his desires [*17]."

Footnotes

^325:1 The Brahmans here particularized are termed Trinachiketa, Trimadhu, and Trisuparna; and are so denominated, according to the commentator, from particular parts of the Vedas. The first is so called from studying or reciting three Anuvakas of the Kathaka branch of the Yajur-veda, commencing with the term Trinachiketa; the second, from three Anuvakas of the same Veda, beginning Madhuvata, &c.; and the third, from a similar portion, commencing Brahmavan namami. The first and third terms occur in Manu, III. 185; and Kulluka Bhatta explains Trinachiketa to mean a portion of the Yajur-veda, and the Brahman who studies it; and Trisuparna, a part of the Rich, and the Brahman who is acquainted with it. The Nirnaya Sindhu explains the terms m a like manner, but calls the Trisuparna, as well as the Trinachiketa prayers, portions of the Yajush. The Trimadhu it assigns to the Rich. Other explanations are also given to the terms Trinachiketa and Trisuparna: the first being explained a Brahman who thrice performs the ceremony called Chayana; and the last, one who, after the seven ascending generations, worships the Pitris termed Somapas. These explanations are however considered less correct than the preceding, and which are thus given in the authority cited: ###.

^325:2 For the six Angas, see <page 284>.

^325:3 So the commentator distinguishes the Vedavit, the Brahman who understands the meaning of the text of the Vedas, from the S'rotriya, who practises the rites he studies.

^325:4 Portions of the Saman contained in the Aranyaka are called the Jyeshtha, 'elder' or 'principal' Saman.

^326:5 Manu, III. 150, &c.

^326:6 As two or five at a ceremony dedicated to the gods; three at the worship of the Pitris. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 311.

^326:7 The worship of the Vis'wadevas (see <page 321>) forms a part of the general S'raddhas, and of the daily sacrifices of the householder. According to the Vayu this was a privilege conferred upon them by Brahma and the Pitris, as a reward for religious austerities practised by them upon Himalaya. Their introduction as a [p. 327] specific class seems to have originated in the custom of sacrificing to the gods collectively, or to all the gods, as the name Vis'wadevas implies. They appear, however, as a distinct class in the Vedas, and their assumption of this character is therefore of ancient date. The daily offering to them is noticed by Manu, III. 90, 172; and offerings to 'the gods' are also enjoined at the beginning and end of a S'raddha. Kulluka Bhatta understands here the Vis'wadevas, and it probably is so; but in another verse different divinities are specified: "First having satisfied Agni, Soma, Yama, with clarified butter, let him proceed to satisfy the manes of his progenitors." v. 211. Manu also directs them to be worshipped first and last in order. See As. Res. VII. 265, 271, &c.

^327:8 The text is 'with their assent;' but no noun occurs in the sentence with which the relative is connected. It must mean the Brahmans, however, as in this passage of Vriddha Par tiara; 'Let the sacrificer place his left hand on the Brahman's right knee, and say, "Shall I invoke the Vis'wadevas?" and being desired to invoke them, let him address them with the two Mantras, "Vis'wadevas, he is come! Vis'wadevas, hear him!"'

^328:9 This notion occurs more than once in the Vayu, in nearly the same words.

^328:10 This places the initiatory oblations noticed by Manu (see note [*7]) subsequent to the offerings to the Vis'wadevas.

^328:11 The Rakshoghna Mantra: the extinguishing of a lamp, lighted to keep off evil spirits, which is accompanied by a Mantra, or prayer. As. Res. VII. 274.

^329:12 Part of this passage is in the words of Manu, III. 207. It is omitted in the MSS. in the Bengali character.

^329:13 Manu, III. 296.

^329:14 "Then let the Brahmans address him, saying, 'Swadha!' for in all ceremonies relating to deceased ancestors, the word Swadha is the highest benison." Manu, III. 252.

^330:15 We have here the words of Manu; III. 235. Three things are held pure at such obsequies, the daughter's son, the Nepal blanket, and sesamum-seed.' Sir Wm. Jones's translation of these terms rests upon the explanation of Kulluka Bhatta of this and the verse preceding; 'Let him give his daughter's son, though a religious student, food at a S'raddha, and the blanket for a seat.' The commentator on our text says that some understand by Dauhitra, clarified butter made from the milk of a cow fed with grass gathered on the day of new moon; and some explain it a plate or dish of buffalo horn. Kutapa he interprets by Ashtama Muhurtta, the eighth hour of the day, or a little after noon, although he admits that some render it a blanket made of goats' wool. These explanations are also noticed in the Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 302; and, upon the authority of the Matsya P., Kutapa is said to mean eight things; which equally consume (Tapa) all sin (Ku), or noon, a vessel of rhinoceros' horn, a nepal blanket, silver, holy grass, sesamum, kine, and a daughter's son.

^330:16 So the Matsya P. has 'the gift, sight, and name of silver are desired.' The notion originates with Manu, III. 202.

^331:17 The same doctrine is inculcated by the Vayu P.; but it appears to be a Pauranik innovation, for Manu places the Brahman intent on scriptural knowledge and on austere devotion on a level, and makes no mention of the Yogi. III, 134.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 332]

  

CHAP. XVI.

Things proper to be offered as food to deceased ancestors: prohibited things. Circumstances vitiating a S'raddha: how to be avoided. Song of the Pitris, or progenitors, heard by Ikshwaku.

AURVA continued.--"Ancestors are satisfied for a month with offerings of rice or other grain, with clarified butter [*1], with fish, or the flesh of the hare, of birds, of the hog, the goat, the antelope, the deer, the gayal, or the sheep, or with the milk of the cow, and its products [*2]. They are for ever satisfied with flesh (in general), and with that of the long-eared white goat in particular. The flesh of the rhinoceros, the Kalas'aka potherb, and honey, are also especial sources of satisfaction to those worshipped at ancestral ceremonies. The birth of that man is the occasion of satisfaction to his progenitors who performs at the due time their obsequial rites at Gaya. Grains that spring up spontaneously, rice growing wild, Panic of both species (white or black), vegetables that grow in forests, are fit for ancestral oblations; as are barley, wheat, rice, sesamum, various kinds of pulse, and mustard. On the other hand, a householder must not offer any kind of grain that is not consecrated by religious ceremonies on its first coming into season; nor the pulse called Rajamasha, nor millet, nor lentils, nor gourds, nor garlick, nor onions, nor nightshade, nor camels' thorn, nor salt, nor the efflorescence of salt deserts, nor red vegetable extracts, nor any thing that looks like salt, nor any thing that is not commendable; nor is water fit to be offered at a S'raddha that has been brought by night, or has been abandoned, or

[p. 333]

is so little as not to satisfy a cow, or smells badly, or is covered with froth. The milk of animals with undivided hoofs, of a camel, a ewe, a deer, or a buffalo, is unfit for ancestral oblations. If an obsequial rite is looked at by a eunuch, a man ejected from society, an outcast, a heretic, a drunken man, or one diseased, by a cock, a naked ascetic [*3], a monkey, a village hag, by a woman in her courses or pregnant, by an unclean person, or by a carrier of corpses, neither gods nor progenitors will partake of the food. The ceremony should therefore be performed in a spot carefully enclosed. Let the performer cast sesamum on the ground, and drive away malignant spirits. Let him not give food that is fetid, or vitiated by hairs or insects, or mixed with acid gruel, or stale. Whatever suitable food is presented with pure faith, and with the enunciation of name and race, to ancestors, at an obsequial oblation, becomes food to them (or gives them nourishment). In former times, O king of the earth! this song of the Pitris was heard by Ikshwaku, the son of Manu, in the groves of Kalapa (on the skirts of the Himalaya mountains): 'Those of our descendants shall follow a righteous path who shall reverently present us with cakes at Gaya. May he be born in our race who shall give us, on the thirteenth of Bhadrapada and Magha, milk, honey, and clarified butter; or when he marries a maiden, or liberates a black bull [*4], or performs any domestic ceremony agreeable to rule, accompanied by donations to the Brahmans [*5]!"

Footnotes

^332:1 See Manu, III. 266, &c. The articles are much the same; the periods of satisfaction somewhat vary.

^332:2 The expression Gavya implies all that is derived from a cow, but in the text it is associated with 'flesh;' and, as the commentator observes, some consider the flesh of the cow to be here intended: but this, he adds, relates to other ages. In the Kali or present age it implies milk and preparations of milk, The sacrifice of a cow or calf formed part of the ancient S'raddha. It then became typical, or a bull was turned loose, instead of being slaughtered; and this is still practised on some . In Manu, the term Gavya is coupled with others, which limit its application: 'A whole year with the milk of cows, and food made of that milk.' III. 272.

^333:3 Nagna is literally 'naked,' but, as explained in the following chapter, means a Jain mendicant. No such person is included by Manu (III. 239, &c.) amongst those who defile a S'raddha by looking upon it. The Vayu contains the same prohibition.

^333:4 Nila vrisha; but this animal is not altogether or always black. In the Brahma P., as quoted in the Nirnaya Sindhu, it is said to be of a red colour, with light face and tail, and white hoofs and horns; or a white bull, with black face, &c.; or a black bull, with white face, tail, and feet.

^333:5 Very full descriptions of the S'raddha occur in almost all the Puranas, especially in the Vayu, Kurma, Markandeya, Vamana, and Garuda. The Matsya and Padma (S'rishthi Khanda) contain descriptions which are much the same as that of the Vayu. The accounts of the Brahma, Agni, and Varaha are less full and regular than in some of the others; and in none of them is the subject so fully and perspicuously treated as in our text. For satisfactory information, however, the S'raddha Mayukha and the Nirnaya Sindhu should be consulted.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 334]

  

CHAP. XVII.

Of heretics, or those who reject the authority of the Vedas: their origin, as described by Vas'ishtha to Bhishma: the gods, defeated by the Daityas, praise Vishnu: an illusory being, or Buddha, produced from his body.

PARAS'ARA.--Thus, in former days, spake the holy Aurva to the illustrious monarch Sagara, when he inquired concerning the usages proper to be practised by mankind; and thus I have explained to you the whole of those observances against which no one ought to transgress.

MAITREYA.--You have told me, venerable sir, that an ancestral rite is not to be looked upon by certain persons, amongst whom you mentioned such as were apostates. I am desirous to learn whom you intended by that appellation; what practices bestow such a title upon a man; and what is the character of the individual to whom you alluded.

PARAS'ARA.--The Rig, Yajur, and Sama Vedas constitute the triple covering of the several castes, and the sinner who throws this off is said to be naked (or apostate). The three Vedas are the raiment of all the orders of men, and when that is discarded they are left bare [*1]. On this subject hear what I heard my grandfather, the pious Vas'ishtha, relate to the magnanimous Bhishma:

[p. 335]

There was formerly a battle between the gods and demons, for the period of a divine year, in which the gods were defeated by the demons under the command of Hrada [*2]. The discomfited deities fled to the northern shore of the milky ocean, where engaging in religious penance they thus prayed to Vishnu: "May the first of beings, the divine Vishnu, be pleased with the words that we are about to address to him, in order to propitiate the lord of all worlds; from which mighty cause all created things have originated, and into whom they shall again dissolve! Who is able to declare his praise? We, who have been put to shame by the triumph of our foes, will glorify thee, although thy true power and might be not within the reach of words. Thou art earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, crude matter, and primeval soul: all this elementary creation, with or without visible form, is thy body; all, from Brahma to a stock, diversified by place and time. Glory to thee, who art Brahma, thy first form, evolved from the lotus springing from thy navel, for the purpose of creation. Glory to thee, who art Indra, the sun, Rudra, the Vasus, fire, the winds, and even also ourselves. Glory to they, Govinda, who art all demons, whose essence is arrogance and want of discrimination, unchecked by patience or self-control. Glory to thee, who art the Yakshas, whose nature is charmed with sounds, and whose frivolous hearts perfect knowledge cannot pervade. Glory to thee, who art all fiends, that walk by night, sprung from the quality of darkness, fierce, fraudulent, and cruel. Glory to thee, Janarddana, who art that piety which is the instrument of recompensing the virtues of those who abide in heaven. Glory to thee, who art one with the saints, whose perfect nature is ever blessed, and traverses unobstructed all permeable elements. Glory to thee, who art one with the serpent race, double-tongued, impetuous, cruel, insatiate of enjoyment, and abounding with wealth. Glory to thee, who art one with the Rishis, whose nature is free from sin or defect, and is identified with wisdom and tranquillity. Glory to thee, oh lotus-eyed, who art one with time, the form that devours, without remorse, all created things at the termination of the Kalpa. Glory to thee, who art Rudra, the being that

[p. 336]

dances with delight after he has swallowed up all things, the gods and the rest, without distinction. Glory to thee, Janarddana, who art man, the agent in developing the results of that activity which proceeds from the quality of foulness. Glory to thee, who art brute animals, the universal spirit that tends to perversity, which proceeds from the quality of darkness, and is encumbered with the twenty-eight kinds of obstructions [*3]. Glory to thee, who art that chief spirit which is diversified in the vegetable world, and which, as the essence of sacrifice, is the instrument of accomplishing the perfection of the universe. Glory to thee, who art every thing, and whose primeval form is the objects of perception, and heaven, and animals, and men, and gods. Glory to thee, who art the cause of causes, the supreme spirit; who art distinct from us and all beings composed of intelligence and matter and the like, and with whose primeval nature there is nothing that can be compared. We bow to thee, O lord, who hast neither colour, nor extension, nor bulk, nor any predicable qualities; and whose essence, purest of the pure, is appreciable only by holy sages. We bow to thee, in the nature of Brahma, untreated, undecaying; who art in our bodies, and in all other bodies, and in all living creatures; and besides whom there is nothing else. We glorify that Vasudeva, the sovereign lord of all, who is without soil, the seed of all things, exempt from dissolution, unborn, eternal, being in essence the supreme condition of spirit, and in substance the whole of this universe."

Upon the conclusion of their prayers, the gods beheld the sovereign deity Hari, armed with the shell, the discus, and the mace, riding on Garuda. Prostrating themselves before him, they addressed him, and said, "Have compassion upon us, O lord, and protect us, who have come to thee for succour from the Daityas. They have seized upon the three worlds, and appropriated the offerings which are our portion, taking care not to transgress the precepts of the Veda. Although we, as well as they, are parts of thee, of whom all beings consist, yet we behold the world impressed by the ignorance of unity, with the belief of its separate existence. Engaged in the duties of their respective orders,

[p. 337]

and following the paths prescribed by holy writ, practising also religious penance, it is impossible for us to destroy them. Do thou, whose wisdom is immeasurable, instruct us in some device by which we may be able to exterminate the enemies of the gods."

When the mighty Vishnu heard their request, he emitted from his body an illusory form, which he gave to the gods, and thus spake This deceptive vision shall wholly beguile the Daityas, so that, being led astray from the path of the Vedas, they may be put to death; for all gods, demons, or others, who shall be opposed to the authority of the Veda, shall perish by my might, whilst exercised for the preservation of the world. Go then, and fear not: let this delusive vision precede you; it shall this day be of great service unto you, oh gods!"

Footnotes

^334:1 This idea is expressed in nearly the same terms in the Vayu P.: 'The three Vedas are the covering of all beings, and they who throw it off through delusion are called Nagnas, naked.' The notion is probably original with neither of the Puranas, and the metaphorical sense of the term is not that in which it was first employed; ascetics, whether of the Bauddha or of the Digambara order of Jains, being literally Nagnas, or going naked. The qualified application of it, however, was rendered necessary by the same practice being familiar to ascetics of the orthodox faith. To go naked was not necessarily a sign of a heretic, and therefore his nudity was understood to be, rejecting the raiment of holy writ. Thus the Vayu P. extends the word to all ascetics, including naked Brahmans, who practise austerities fruitlessly, that is, heretically or hypocritically: 'The Brahman who unprofitably bears a staff, shaves his head, goes naked, makes a vow, or mutters prayers, all such persons are called Nagnas and the like.'

^335:2 A son of Hiranyakas'ipu (<page 124>).

^336:3 See <page 35>. n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 338]

  

CHAP. XVIII.

Buddha goes to the earth, and teaches the Daityas to contemn the Vedas: his sceptical doctrines: his prohibition of animal sacrifices. Meaning of the term Bauddha. Jainas and Bauddhas; their tenets. The Daityas lose their power, and are overcome by the gods. Meaning of the term Nagna. Consequences of neglect of duty. Story of S'atadhanu and his wife S'aivya. Communion with heretics to be shunned.

PARAS'ARA.--After this, the great delusion, having proceeded to earth, beheld the Daityas engaged in ascetic penances upon the banks of the Narmada river [*1]; and approaching them in the semblance of a naked mendicant, with his head shaven, and carrying a bunch of peacock's feathers [*2], he thus addressed them in gentle accents: "Ho, lords of the Daitya race! wherefor is it that you practise these acts of penance? is it with a view to recompense in this world, or in another?" "Sage," replied the Daityas, "we pursue these devotions to obtain a reward hereafter; why should you make such an inquiry?" "If you are desirous of final emancipation," answered the seeming ascetic, "attend to my words, for you are worthy of a revelation which is the door to ultimate felicity. The duties that I will teach you are the secret path to liberation; there are none beyond or superior to them: by following them you shall obtain either heaven or exemption from future existence. You, mighty beings, are deserving of such lofty doctrine." By such persuasions, and by many specious arguments, did this delusive being mislead the Daityas from the tenets of the Vedas; teaching that the same thing might be for the sake of virtue and of vice; might be, and might not be; might or might not contribute to liberation; might be the

[p. 339]

supreme object, and not the supreme object; might be effect, and not be effect; might be manifest, or not be manifest; might be the duty of those who go naked, or who go clothed in much raiment: and so the Daityas were seduced from their proper duties by the repeated lessons of their illusory preceptor, maintaining the equal truth of contradictory tenets [*3]; and they were called Arhatas [*4], from the phrase he had employed of "Ye are worthy (Arhatha) of this great doctrine;" that is, of the false doctrines which he persuaded them to embrace.

The foes of the gods being thus induced to apostatize from the religion of the Vedas, by the delusive person sent by Vishnu, became in their turn teachers of the same heresies, and perverted others; and these, again, communicating their principles to others, by whom they were still further disseminated, the Vedas were in a short time deserted by most of the Daitya race. Then the same deluder, putting on garments of a red colour, assuming a benevolent aspect, and speaking in soft and agreeable tones, addressed others of the same family, and said to them, "If; mighty demons, you cherish a desire either for heaven or for final repose, desist from the iniquitous massacre of animals (for sacrifice), and hear from me what you should do. Know that all that exists is composed of discriminative knowledge. Understand my words, for they have been uttered by the wise. This world subsists without support, and engaged in the pursuit of error, which it mistakes for knowledge, as well as vitiated by passion and the rest, revolves in the straits of existence." In this manner, exclaiming to them, "Know!" (Budhyadwam), and they replying, "It is known" (Budhyate), these Daityas were induced by the

[p. 340]

arch deceiver to deviate from their religious duties (and become Bauddhas), by his repeated arguments and variously urged persuasions [*5], When they had abandoned their own faith, they persuaded others to do the same, and the heresy spread, and many deserted the practices enjoined by the Vedas and the laws.

The delusions of the false teacher paused not with the conversion of the Daityas to the Jaina and Bauddha heresies, but with various erroneous tenets he prevailed upon others to apostatize, until the whole were led astray, and deserted the doctrines and observances inculcated by the three Vedas. Some then spake evil of the sacred books; some blasphemed the gods; some treated sacrifices and other devotional ceremonies with scorn; and others calumniated the Brahmans. "The precepts," they cried, "that lead to the injury of animal life (as in sacrifices) are highly reprehensible. To say that casting butter into flame is productive of reward, is mere childishness. If Indra, after having obtained godhead by multiplied rites, is fed upon the wood used as fuel in holy fire, he is lower than a brute, which feeds at least upon leaves. If an animal slaughtered in religious worship is thereby raised to heaven, would it not be expedient for a man who institutes a sacrifice to kill his own father for a victim? If that which is eaten by one at a S'raddha gives satisfaction to another, it must be unnecessary for one who resides at a distance to bring food for presentation in person [*6]." "First, then, let it be determined what may be (rationally) believed by mankind, and then," said their preceptor, "you will find that felicity may be expected from my instructions. The words of authority do not, mighty Asuras, fall from heaven: the text that has reason is alone to be acknowledged by me, and by such as you are [*7]." By such and similar

[p. 341]

lessons the Daityas were perverted, so that not one of them admitted the authority of the Vedas.

When the Daityas had thus declined from the path of the holy writings, the deities took courage, and gathered together for battle. Hostilities accordingly were renewed, but the demons were now defeated and slain by the gods, who had adhered to the righteous path. The armour of religion, which had formerly protected the Daityas, had been discarded by them, and upon its abandonment followed their destruction [*8].

Thus, Maitreya, you are to understand that those who have seceded from their original belief are said to be naked, because they have thrown off the garment of the Vedas. According to the law there are four conditions or orders of men (of the three first castes), the religious student, the householder, the hermit, and the mendicant. There is no fifth state; and the unrighteous man who relinquishes the order of the householder, and does not become either an anchoret or a mendicant, is also a naked (seceder). The man who neglects his permanent observances for one day and night, being able to perform them, incurs thereby sin for one day; and should he omit them, not being in trouble, for a fortnight, he can be purified only by arduous expiation. The virtuous must stop to gaze upon the sun after looking upon a person who has allowed a year to elapse without the observance of the perpetual ceremonies; and they must bathe with their clothes on should they have touched him: but for the individual himself no expiation has been declared. There is no sinner upon earth more culpable than one in whose dwelling the gods, progenitors, and spirits, are left to sigh unworshipped. Let not a man associate, in residence, sitting, or society, with him whose person or whose house has been blasted by the sighs of the gods, progenitors, and spirits. Conversation, interchange of civilities, or association with a man who for a twelvemonth has not discharged his

[p. 342]

religious duties, is productive of equality of guilt; and the person who eats in the house of such a man, or sits down with him, or sleeps on the same couch with him, becomes like him instantaneously. Again; he who takes his food without shewing reverence to the gods, progenitors, spirits, and guests, commits sin. How great is his sin! The Brahmans, and men of the other castes, who turn their faces away from their proper duties, become heretics, and are classed with those who relinquish pious works. Remaining in a place where there is too great an intermixture of the four castes is detrimental to the character of the righteous. Men fall into hell who converse with one who takes his food without offering a portion to the gods, the sages, the manes, spirits, and guests. Let therefore a prudent person carefully avoid the conversation, or the contact, and the like, of those heretics who are rendered impure by their desertion of the three Vedas. The ancestral rite, although performed with zeal and faith, pleases neither gods nor progenitors if it be looked upon by apostates.

It is related that there was formerly a king named S'atadhanu, whose wife S'aivya was a woman of great virtue. She was devoted to her husband, benevolent, sincere, pure, adorned with every female excellence, with humility, and discretion. The Raja and his wife daily worshipped the god of gods, Janarddana, with pious meditations, oblations to fire, prayers, gifts, fasting, and every other mark of entire faith, and exclusive devotion. On one occasion, when they had fasted on the full moon of Kartika, and had bathed in the Bhagirathi, they beheld, as they came up from the water, a heretic approach them, who was the friend of the Raja's military preceptor. The Raja, out of respect to the latter, entered into conversation with the heretic; but not so did the princess; reflecting that she was observing a fast, she turned from him, and cast her eyes up to the sun. On their arrival at home, the husband and wife, as usual, performed the worship of Vishnu, agreeably to the ritual. After a time the Raja, triumphant over his enemies, died; and the princess ascended the funeral pile of her husband.

In consequence of the fault committed by S'atadhanu, by speaking to an infidel when he was engaged in a solemn fast, he was born again as a

[p. 343]

dog. His wife was born as the daughter of the Raja of Kas'i, with a knowledge of the events of her preexistence, accomplished in every science, and endowed with every virtue. Her father was anxious to give her in marriage to some suitable husband, but she constantly opposed his design, and the king was prevented by her from accomplishing her nuptials. With the eye of divine intelligence she knew that her own husband had been regenerate as a dog, and going once to the city of Vaidis'a she saw the dog, and recognised her former lord in him. Knowing that the animal was her husband, she placed upon his neck the bridal garland, accompanying it with the marriage rites and prayers: but he, eating the delicate food presented to him, expressed his delight after the fashion of his species; at which she was much ashamed, and, bowing reverently to him, thus spake to her degraded spouse: "Recall to memory, illustrious prince, the ill-timed politeness on account of which you have been born as a dog, and are now fawning upon me. In consequence of speaking to a heretic, after bathing in a sacred river, you have been condemned to this abject birth. Do you not remember it?" Thus reminded, the Raja recollected his former condition, and was lost in thought, and felt deep humiliation. With a broken spirit he went forth from the city, and falling dead in the desert, was born anew as a jackal. In the course of the following year the princess knew what had happened, and went to the mountain Kolahala to seek for her husband. Finding him there, the lovely daughter of the king of the earth said to her lord, thus disguised as a jackal, "Dost thou not remember, oh king, the circumstance of conversing with a heretic, which I called to thy recollection when thou wast a dog?" The Raja, thus addressed, knew that what the princess had spoken was true, and thereupon desisted from food, and died. He then became a wolf; but his blameless wife knew it, and came to him in the lonely forest, and awakened his remembrance of his original state. "No wolf art thou," she said, "but the illustrious sovereign S'atadhanu. Thou wast then a dog, then a jackal, and art now a wolf." Upon this, recollecting himself, the prince abandoned his life, and became a vulture; in which form his lovely queen still found him, and aroused him to a knowledge of the past. "Prince,"

[p. 344]

she exclaimed, "recollect yourself: away with this uncouth form, to which the sin of conversing with a heretic has condemned you!" The Raja was next born as a crow; when the princess, who through her mystical powers was aware of it, said to him, "Thou art now thyself the eater of tributary grain, to whom, in a prior existence, all the kings of the earth paid tribute [*9]." Having abandoned his body, in consequence of the recollections excited by these words, the king next became a peacock, which the princess took to herself, and petted, and fed constantly with such food as is agreeable to birds of its class. The king of Kas'i instituted at that time the solemn sacrifice of a horse. In the ablutions with which it terminated the princess caused her peacock to be bathed, bathing also herself; and she then reminded S'atadhanu how he had been successively born as various animals. On recollecting this, he resigned his life. He was then born as the son of a person of distinction; and the princess now assenting to the wishes of her father to see her wedded, the king of Kas'i caused it to be made known that she would elect a bridegroom from those who should present themselves as suitors for her hand. When the election took place, the princess made choice of her former lord, who appeared amongst the candidates, and again invested him with the character of her husband. They lived happily together, and upon her father's decease S'atadhanu ruled over the country of Videha. He offered many sacrifices, and gave away many gifts, and begot sons, and subdued his enemies in war; and having duly exercised the sovereign power, and cherished benignantly the earth, he died, as became his warrior birth, in battle. His queen again followed him in death, and, conformably to sacred precepts, once more mounted cheerfully his funeral pile. The king then, along with his princess, ascended beyond the sphere of Indra to the regions where all desires are for ever gratified, obtaining ever-during and unequalled happiness in heaven, the perfect felicity that is the rarely realised reward of conjugal fidelity [*10].

[p. 345]

Such, Maitreya, is the sin of conversing with a heretic, and such are the expiatory effects of bathing after the solemn sacrifice of a horse, as I have narrated them to you. Let therefore a man carefully avoid the discourse or contact of an unbeliever, especially at seasons of devotion, and when engaged in the performance of religious rites preparatory to a sacrifice. If it be necessary that a wise man should look at the sun, after beholding one who has neglected his domestic ceremonies for a month, how much greater need must there be of expiation after encountering one who has wholly abandoned the Vedas? one who is supported by infidels, or who disputes the doctrines of holy writ? Let not a person treat with even the civility of speech, heretics, those who do forbidden acts, pretended saints, scoundrels, sceptics [*11], and hypocrites. Intercourse with such iniquitous wretches, even at a distance, all association with schismatics, defiles; let a man therefore carefully avoid them.

These, Maitreya, are the persons called naked, the meaning of which term you desired to have explained. Their very looks vitiate the performance of an ancestral oblation; speaking to then destroys religious merit for a whole day. These are the unrighteous heretics to whom a man must not give shelter, and speaking to whom effaces whatever merit he may that day have obtained. Men, indeed, fall into hell as the consequence of only conversing with those who unprofitably assume the twisted hair, and shaven crown; with those who feed without offering food to gods, spirits, and guests; and those who are excluded from the presentation of cakes, and libations of water, to the manes.

Footnotes

^338:1 The situation chosen for the first appearance of the heresy agrees well enough with the great prevalence of the Jain faith in the west of India in the eleventh and twelfth centuries (As. Res. XVI. 318), or perhaps a century earlier, and is a circumstance of some weight in investigating the date of the Vishnu Purana.

^338:2 A bunch of peacock's feathers is still an ordinary accompaniment of a Jain mendicant. According to the Hindi poem, the Prithu Rai Charitra, it was borne by the Buddhist Amara Sinha; but that work is not, perhaps, very good authority for Bauddha observances, at least of an ancient date.

^339:3 In this and the preceding contradictions it is probable that the writer refers, although not with much precision, to the sceptical tenets of the Jainas, whence they are called commonly Syadvadis, assertors of probabilities, or of what may be. These usually form seven categories, or, 1. a thing is; 2. it is not; 3. it is, and it is not; 4. it is not definable; 5. it is, but is not definable; 6. it is not, neither is it definable; 7. it is, and it is not, and is not definable. Hence the Jains are also termed Saptavadis and Saptabhangis, assertors and oppugners of seven propositions. As. Res. XVII. 271; and Trans. Royal As. Soc. I. 555.

^339:4 Here is farther confirmation of the Jains being intended by our text, as the term Arhat is more particularly applied to them, although it is also used by the Buddhists.

^340:5 We have therefore the Bauddhas noticed as a distinct set. If the author wrote from a personal knowledge of Buddhists in India, he could not have written much later than the 10th or 11th century.

^340:6 That is, according to the commentator, a S'raddha may be performed for a man who is abroad by any of his kinsmen who are tarrying at home; it will be of equal benefit to him as if he offered it himself; he will equally eat of the consecrated food.

^340:7 We have in these passages, no doubt, allusion to the Varhaspatyas, or followers of Vrihaspati, who seem to have been numerous and bold at some period anterior to the 14th century. As. Res. XVI. 5.

^341:8 We may have in this conflict of the orthodox divinities and heretical Daityas some covert allusion to political troubles, growing out of religious differences, and the final predominance of Brahmanism. Such occurrences seem to have preceded the invasion of India by the Mohammedans, and prepared the way for their victories.

^344:9 There is a play upon the word Bali, which means 'tribute,' or 'fragments of a meal scattered abroad to the birds,' &c.

^344:10 The legend is peculiar to the Vishnu Purana, although the doctrine it inculcates is to be found elsewhere.

^345:11 Haitukas, 'causalists;' either the followers of the Nyaya or 'logical' philosophy, or Bauddhas, those who take nothing upon authority, and admit nothing that cannot be proved; or it is explained, those who by argument cast a doubt upon the efficacy of acts of devotion.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 346] [p. 347]

  

VISHNU PURANA.

  

BOOK IV.

  

CHAP. I.

Dynasties of kings. Origin of the solar dynasty from Brahma. Sons of the Manu Vaivaswata. Transformations of Ila or Sudyumna. Descendants of the sons of Vaivaswat; those of Nedishtha. Greatness of Marutta. Kings of Vais'ali. Descendants of S'aryati. Legend of Raivata; his daughter Revati married to Balarama.

MAITREYA.--Venerable preceptor, you have explained to me the perpetual and occasional ceremonies which are to be performed by those righteous individuals who are diligent in their devotions; and you have also described to me the duties which devolve upon the several castes, and on the different orders of the human race. I have now to request you will relate to me the dynasties of the kings who have ruled over the earth [*1].

PARAS'ARA.--I will repeat to you, Maitreya, an account of the family of Manu, commencing with Brahma, and graced by a number of religious, magnanimous, and heroic princes. Of which it is said, "The lineage of him shall never be extinct, who daily calls to mind the race of

[p. 348]

[paragraph continues] Manu, originating with Brahma [*2]." Listen therefore, Maitreya, to the entire series of the princes of this family, by which all sin shall be effaced.

Before the evolution of the mundane egg, existed Brahma, who was Hiranyagarbha, the form of that supreme Brahma which consists of Vishnu as identical with the Rig, Yajur, and Sama Vedas; the primeval, uncreated cause of all worlds. From the right thumb of Brahma was born the patriarch Daksha [*3]; his daughter was Aditi, who was the mother of the sun. The Manu Vaivaswata was the son of the celestial luminary; and his sons were Ikshwaku, Nriga, Dhrishta, S'aryati, Narishyanta, Prans'u, Nabhaga, Nedishta, Karusha, and Prishadhra [*4].

[p. 349]

[paragraph continues] Before their birth, the Manu being desirous of sons, offered a sacrifice for that purpose to Mitra and Varuna; but the rite being deranged, through an irregularity of the ministering priest, a daughter, Ila, was produced [*5]. Through the favour of the two divinities, however, her sex

[p. 350]

was changed, and she became a man, named Sudyumna. At a subsequent period, in consequence of becoming subject to the effects of a malediction once pronounced by S'iva, Sudyumna was again transformed to a woman in the vicinity of the hermitage of Budha, the son of the deity of the moon. Budha saw and espoused her, and had by her a son named Pururavas. After his birth, the illustrious Rishis, desirous of restoring Sudyumna to his sex, prayed to the mighty Vishnu, who is the essence of the four Vedas, of mind, of every thing, and of nothing; and who is in the form of the sacrificial male; and through his favour Ila once more became Sudyumna, in which character he had three sons, Utkala, Gaya, and Vinata [*6].

In consequence of his having been formerly a female, Sudyumna was excluded from any share in his paternal dominions; but his father, at the suggestion of Vas'ishtha, bestowed upon him the city Pratishthana [*7], and he gave it to Pururavas.

[p. 351]

Of the other sons of the Manu, Prishadhra, in consequence of the crime of killing a cow, was degraded to the condition of a S'udra [*8]. From Karusha descended the mighty warriors termed Karushas (the sovereigns of the north [*9]). The son of Nedishtha, named Nabhaga, became

[p. 352]

a Vais'ya [*10]: his son was Bhalandana [*11]; whose son was the celebrated Vatsapri [*12]: his son was Pransu; whose son was Prajani [*13]; whose son was Khanitra [*14]; whose son was the very valiant Chakshupa [*15]; whose son was Vins'a [*16]; whose son was Vivins'ati [*17]; whose son was Khaninetra; whose son was the powerful, wealthy, and valiant Karandhama [*18]; whose son was Avikshi (or Avikshit [*19]); whose son was the mighty Marutta, of whom this well known verse is recited; "There never was beheld on earth a sacrifice equal to the sacrifice of Marutta: all the implements

[p. 353]

and utensils were made of gold. Indra was intoxicated with the libations of Soma juice, and the Brahmans were enraptured with the magnificent donations they received. The winds of heaven encompassed the rite as guards, and the assembled gods attended to behold it [*20]." Marutta was a Chakravartti, or universal monarch: he had a son named Narishyanta [*21]; his son was Dama [*22]; his son was Rajyavarddhana; his son was Sudhriti; his son was Nara; his son was Kevala; his son was Bandhumat; his son was Vegavat; his son was Budha [*23]; his son was Trinavindu, who had a daughter named Ilavila [*24]. The celestial nymph Alambusha becoming enamoured of Trinavindu, bore him a son named Vis'ala, by whom the city Vaisali was founded [*25].

[p. 354]

The son of the first king of Vais'ali was Hemachandra; his son was Suchandra; his son was Dhumras'wa; his son was Srinjaya [*26]; his son was Sahadeva [*27]; his son was Kris'as'wa; his son was Somadatta, who celebrated ten times the sacrifice of a horse; his son was Janamejaya; and his son was Sumati [*28]. These were the kings of Vais'ali; of whom  is said, "By the favour of Trinavindu all the monarchs of Vais'ali were long lived, magnanimous, equitable, and valiant."

S'aryati, the fourth son of the Manu, had a daughter named Sukanya, who was married to the holy sage Chyavana [*29]: he had also a righteous son, called Anartta. The son of the latter was Revata [*30], who ruled over

[p. 355]

the country called after his father Anartta, and dwelt at the capital denominated Kus'asthali [*31]. The son of this prince was Raivata or Kakudmin, the eldest of a hundred brethren. He had a very lovely daughter, and not finding any one worthy of her hand, he repaired with her to the region of Brahma to consult the god where a fit bridegroom was to be met with. When he arrived, the quiristers Haha, Huhu, and others, were singing before Brahma; and Raivata, waiting till they had finished, imagined the ages that elapsed during their performance to be but as a moment. At the end of their singing, Raivata prostrated himself before Brahma, and explained his errand. "Whom should you wish for a son-in-law?" demanded Brahma; and the king mentioned to him various persons with whom he could be well pleased. Nodding his head gently, and graciously smiling, Brahma said to him, "Of those whom you have named the third or fourth generation no longer survives, for many successions of ages have passed away whilst you were listening to our songsters: now upon earth the twenty-eighth great age of the present Manu is nearly finished, and the Kali period is at hand. You must therefore bestow this virgin gem upon some other husband, for you are now alone, and your friends, your ministers, servants, wife, kinsmen, armies, and treasures, have long since been swept away by the hand of time." Overcome with astonishment and alarm, the Raja then said to Brahma, "Since I am thus circumstanced, do thou, lord, tell me unto whom the maiden shall be given:" and the creator of the world, whose throne is the lotus, thus benignantly replied to the prince, as he stood bowed and humble before him: "The being of whose commencement, course, and termination, we are ignorant; the unborn and omnipresent essence of all things; he whose real and infinite nature and essence we do not know--is the supreme Vishnu. He is time, made up of moments and hours and years; whose influence is the source of perpetual change. He is the universal form of all things, from birth to death. He is

[p. 356]

eternal, without name or shape. Through the favour of that imperishable being am I the agent of his power in creation: through his anger is Rudra the destroyer of the world: and the cause of preservation, Purusha, proceeds also from him. The unborn having assumed my person creates the world; in his own essence he provides for its duration; in the form of Rudra he devours all things; and with the body of Ananta he upholds them. Impersonated as Indra and the other gods he is the guardian of mankind; and as the sun and moon he disperses darkness. Taking upon himself the nature of fire he bestows warmth and maturity; and in the condition of the earth nourishes all beings. As one with air he gives activity to existence; and as one with water he satisfies all wants: whilst in the state of ether, associated with universal aggregation, he furnishes space for all objects. He is at once the creator, and that which is created; the preserver, and that which is preserved; the destroyer, and, as one with all things, that which is destroyed; and, as the indestructible, he is distinct from these three vicissitudes. In him is the world; he is the world; and he, the primeval self-born, is again present in the world. That mighty Vishnu, who is paramount over all beings, is now in a portion of himself upon the earth. That city Kus'asthali which was formerly your capital, and rivalled the city of the immortals, is now known as Dwaraka [*32], and there reigns a portion of that divine being in the person of Baladeva; to him, who appears as a man, present her as a wife: he is a worthy bridegroom for this excellent damsel, and she is a suitable bride for him."

Being thus instructed by the lotus-born divinity, Raivata returned with his daughter to earth, where he found the race of men dwindled in stature, reduced in vigour, and enfeebled in intellect. Repairing to the city of Kus'asthali, which he found much altered, the wise monarch bestowed his unequalled daughter on the wielder of the ploughshare, whose breast was as fair and radiant as crystal. Beholding the damsel

[p. 357]

of excessively lofty height, the chief, whose banner is a palm-tree, shortened her with the end of his ploughshare, and she became his wife. Balarama having espoused, agreeably to the ritual, Revati, the daughter of Raivata, the king retired to the mountain Himalaya, and ended his days in devout austerities [*33].

Footnotes

^347:1 The complete series of the different dynasties is found elsewhere only in the Vayu, the Brahmanda (which is the same), the Matsya, and the Bhagavata Puranas. The Brahma P. and the Hari Vans'a, the Agni, Linga, Kurma, and Garuda Puranas have lists of various extent, but none beyond the families of Pandu and Krishna. The Markandeya contains an account of a few of the kings of the solar dynasty alone; and the Padma, of a part of the solar and lunar princes only, besides accounts of individuals. In the Ramayana, Mahabharata, and in the other Puranas, occasional short genealogies and notices of individual princes occur. In general there is a tolerable conformity, but this is not invariably the case, as we shall have occasion to observe.

^348:2 In the historical passages of all the Puranas in which such occur, and especially in the Vishnu and Vayu, verses, apparently the fragments of a more ancient narrative, are frequently cited. It may also be noticed, as a peculiarity of this part of the Purana, that the narration is in prose.

^348:3 Daksha is elsewhere said to have been one of the mind-born sons of Brahma, or to have been the son of the Prachetasas: see <page 115>. n. .

^348:4 According to the nomenclature sometimes followed, and as we shall have reason to conclude intended in this place, there are ten sons of Manu. The commentator regards them, however, as but nine, considering Nabhaga-nedishta but one name, or Nedishta the father of Nabhaga. The number is generally stated to be nine, although there is some variety in the names, particularly in this name, which occurs Nabhagadishta, Nabhagarishtha; and also separated, as Nabhaga, Nabhaga, or Nabhaga; Nedishta, Dishta, and Arishta: the latter, as in the Kurma, distinctly stated, ###. Again, ### Brahma P. The commentator on the Hari Vans'a quotes the Vedas for Nabhagadishta: ### but the name occurs as Nabhanedishtha in the Aitareya Brahmana of the Rigveda, where a story is told of his being excluded from all share of his inheritance, on the plea of his being wholly devoted to a religious life. See also As. Res. VIII. 384. The name as ordinarily written, Na-bhaga, 'no-share,' has nevertheless an obvious connexion with the legend. The name of Nriga is found only in our text, the Padma, and the Bhagavata: the Vayu has Najava. Prans'u is also the reading of the Vayu and Agni, but not of the rest, which have Vena, Vanya, Danda, Kus'anabha or Kavi, in its place. The Mahabharata, Adi P., p. 113, has Vena, Dhrishnu, Narishyanta, Nabhaga, Ikshwaku, Karusha, S'aryati, Ila, Prishadhra, and Nabhagarishta. The Padma P., in the Patala Khanda, says there were 'ten,' and names them Ikshwaku, Nriga, Dishta, Dhrishta, Karusha, S'aryati, Narishyanta, Prishadhra, Nabhaga, and Kavi.

^349:5 'That sacrifice being wrongly offered, through the improper invocations of the Hotri.' It is also read 'frustrated.' This is rather a brief and obscure allusion to what appears to be an ancient legend, and one that has undergone various modifications. According to the Matsya, no change of sex took place in the first instance. The eldest son of Manu was Ida or Ila, whom his father appointed sovereign of the seven Dwipas. In his progress round his dominions, Ila came to the forest of S'ambhu or S'iva; entering into which, he was changed to a female, Ila, agreeably to a promise made formerly by S'iva to Parvati, who had been once unseasonably broken in upon by some sages, that such a transformation should be inflicted on every male who trespassed upon the sacred grove. After a season, the brothers of Ila sought for him, and finding him thus metamorphosed, applied to Vas'ishtha, their father's priest, to know the cause. He explained it to them, and directed them to worship S'iva and his bride. They did so, accordingly; and it was announced by the deities, that, upon the performance of an As'wamedha by Ikshwaku, Ila should become a Kimpurusha, named Sudyumna, and that he should be a male one month, and a female another month, alternately. The Vayu, which is followed by most of the other authorities, states, that upon Manu's offering their share of the sacrifice to Mitra and Varuna, instead of a boy, a girl was born: according to the Vedas. Manu desired her to follow him; whence her name Ila (from ila or ida, 'come'. There, however, Manu propitiates Mitra and Varuna, and the girl Ila is changed into the boy Ila or Sudyumna by their favour: as the Markandeya. Sudyumna's subsequent change to a female again, is told much as in the Matsya; but his being alternately male and female is not mentioned in the Vayu any more than it is in our text. The Bhagavata agrees in that respect with the Matsya, but it has evidently embellished the earlier part of the legend by the introduction of another character, S'raddha, the wife of the Manu. It is said that it was by her instigation, as she was desirous of having a girl, that the ministering Brahmans altered the purpose of the rite, in consequence of which a girl, instead of a boy, was born. The similarity of the name has induced the learned author of the Origin of Pagan Idolatry to conceive that he has found the Ila of the Hindus in the Il or Ilus of the Phoenicians. "The Phoenician Il is the masculine Ila of the Hindus and Indo-Scythae, and Ila was a title of Manu or Buddha, who was preserved in the ark at the time of the deluge:" I. 156: and he thence concludes that Ila must be Noah; whilst other circumstances in his Phoenician history identify [p. 350] him with Abraham. I. 159. Again; "Ilus or Il is a regular Cuthic name of Buddha, which the Phoenicians, I have no doubt, brought with them; for Buddha or Manu, in the character of Ina, is said to have married his own daughter, who is described as the offspring of an ancient personage that was preserved in an ark at the time of the deluge." I. 223. Now whatever connexion there may be between the names of Ila, Il, Ilus, Ilium, Ila 'the earth,' and Ilos 'slime,' there is no very obvious resemblance between the Pauranik legends of Ila and the Mosaic record; nor do the former authorize the particulars of Ina stated by Mr. Faber, on the authority probably of Col. Wilford. The Manu Satyavrata, who was preserved in the ark, is never called Ila, nor is he the father of Ila. Buddha was not so preserved, nor is Ila ever a title of Buddha. Budha (not Buddha), the husband of Ila, never appears as her father, nor is he a Manu, nor is she the daughter of any ancient personage preserved in an ark. There is not therefore, as far as I am aware, any circumstance in the history of Ila or Ila which can identify either with Abraham or Noah.

^350:6 The Matsya calls the name of the third Haritas'wa; the Vayu &c., Vinatas'wa; the Markandeya, Vinaya; and the Bhagavata, Vimala. All but the last agree in stating that Utkala (Orissa) and Gaya in Behar are named after the two first. The Matsya calls the third the sovereign of the east, along with the Kauravas; the Vayu makes him king of the west. The Bhagavata calls them all three rulers of the south.

^350:7 The authorities agree in this location of Sudyumna. Pratishthana was situated on the eastern side of the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna; the country between which rivers was the territory of the direct male descendants of Vaivaswata. In the Hari Vaasa it is said that he [p. 351] reigned in Pratishthana, having killed Dhrishtaka, Ambarisha, and Danda. M. Langlois had no doubt 79-4: in his copy, as he renders it, 'Il donna naissance a trois enfans;' though, as he observes, Hamilton had called these the sons of Ikshwaku. The Brahma P. has not this passage, nor does the commentator on the Hari Vans'a give any explanation; neither does any thing of the kind occur elsewhere. We have however, subsequently in the text, Danda named as a son of Ikshwaku; and in the Padma P., Srishti Khanda, and in the Uttara Khanda of the , we have a detailed narrative of Danda, the son of Ikshwaku, whose country was laid waste by an imprecation of Bhargava, whose daughter that prince had violated. His kingdom became in consequence the Dandaka forest. The Mahabharata, Dana Dharma, alludes to the same story. If therefore the preferable reading of the Hari Vans'a be Suta, 'son,' it is at variance with all other authorities. At the same time it must be admitted, that the same work is singular in asserting any collision between Danda and his brothers and Sudyumna, and the passage seems to have grown out of that careless and ignorant compilation which the Hari Vans'a so perpetually presents. It is not improbably a gratuitous perversion of this passage in the Matsya; 'Ambarisha was the son of Nabhaga; and Dhrishta had three sons.'

^351:8 This story has been modified apparently at different periods, according to a progressive horror of the crime. Our text simply states the fact. The Vayu says he was hungry, and not only killed, but ate the cow of his spiritual preceptor, Chyavana. In the Markandeya he is described as being out a hunting, and killing the cow of the father of Babhravya, mistaking it for a Gavaya or Gayal. The Bhagavata, as usual, improves upon the story, and says that Prishadhra was appointed by his Guru Vas'ishtha to protect his cattle. In the night a tiger made his way into the fold, and the prince in his haste, and in the dark, killed the cow upon which he had fastened, instead of the tiger. In all the authorities the effect is the same, and the imprecation of the offended sage degraded Prishadhra to the caste of a S'udra. According to the Bhagavata, the prince led a life of devotion, and perishing in the flame of a forest, obtained final liberation. The obvious purport of this legend, and of some that follow, is to account for the origin of the different castes from one common ancestor.

^351:9 The Bhagavata also places the Karushas in the north; but the country of the Karushas is usually placed upon the Paripatra or Vindhya mountains (see <page 186>. n. ).

^352:10 The Vayu has Nabhaga, the son of Arishta; the Markandeya has, the son of Dishta; the Bhagavata also calls him the son of Dishta. According to that authority, he became a Vais'ya by his actions. The other Puranas generally agree that the descendants of this person became Vais'yas; but the Matsya and Vayu do not notice it. The Markandeya details a story of Nabhaga's carrying off and marrying the daughter of a Vais'ya; in consequence of which he was degraded, it is said, to the same caste, and deprived of his share of the patrimonial sovereignty, which his son and successor recovered. The Brahma P. and Hari Vans'a assert that two sons of Nabhagarishta again became Brahmans; but the duties of royalty imply the Kshatriya caste of his posterity; and the commentator on our text observes that the son of Nabhaga was born before his father's degradation, and consequently the race continued Kshatriya; an assertion unsupported by any authority, and it must therefore appear that .a race of Vais'ya princes was recognised by early traditions.

^352:11 Bhanandana: Bhagavata.

^352:12 Vatsapriti: Bhagavata. Vatsasri: Markandeya. The latter has a story of the destruction of the Daitya Kujambha by Viduratha, the father of Sunanda, the wife a of Vatsasri. The Vayu has Sahasrari.

^352:13 Pramati: Bhagavata.

^352:14 According to the Markandeya, the priests of the royal family conspired against this prince, and were put to death by his ministers.

^352:15 Chakshusha: Bhagavata.

^352:16 Vira: Markandeya.

^352:17 Rambha precedes Vivins'ati: Bhagav.

^352:18 Balas'wa or Balakas'wa or Subalas'wa, according to the Markandeya, which explains his name Karandhama to denote his creation of an army, when besieged by his revolted tributaries, by breathing on his hands.

^352:19 Both forms occur, as the commentator observes. The Markandeya has a long story of this prince's carrying off the daughter of Vis'ala, king of Vaidis'a. Being attacked and captured by his confederated rivals, he was rescued by his father, but was so much mortified by his disgrace, that he vowed never to marry nor reign. The princess, also becoming an ascetic, met with him in the woods, and they were finally espoused; but Avikshit kept his other vow, and relinquished his succession in favour of his son, who succeeded to the kingdoms of both Karandhama and Vis'ala,

^353:20 Most of our authorities quote the same words, with or without addition. The Vayu adds, that the sacrifice was conducted by Samvartta, whom the Bhagavata terms a Yogi, the son of Angiras; and that Vrihaspati was so jealous of the splendour of the rite, that a great quarrel ensued between him and Samvartta. How it involved the king is not told, but apparently in consequence, Marutta, with his kindred and friends, was taken by Samvartta to heaven. According to the Markandeya, Marutta was so named from the paternal benediction, 'May the winds be thine,' or 'be propitious to thee.' He reigned, agreeably to that record, 85000 years.

^353:21 Omitted in the Bhagavata.

^353:22 A rather chivalric and curious story is told of Dama in the Markandeya. His bride Sumana, daughter of the king Das'arha, was rescued by him from his rivals. One of them, Bapushmat, afterwards killed Marutta, who had retired into the woods, after relinquishing his crown to his son. Dama in retaliation killed Bapushmat, and made the Pinda, or obsequial offering to his father, of his flesh: with the remainder he fed the Brahmans of Rakshasa origin: such were the kings of the solar race.

^353:23 The Bhagavata has Bandhavat, Oghavat, and Bandha.

^353:24 The Vayu and Bhagavata both add that she was the wife of Vis'ravas, and mother of Kuvera. In the Linga P. she is said to have been the wife of Pulastya, and mother of Vis'ravas. The weight of authority is in favour of the former statement. See <page 83>. n. .

^353:25 The Bhagavata names three sons, Vis'ala, S'unyabandhu, and Dhumaketu. Vais'ali is a city of considerable renown in Indian tradition, but its site is a subject of some uncertainty. Part of the difficulty arises from confounding it with Vis'ala, another name of Ujayin; ### Hemachandra. Also in the Megha Duta; 'Having arrived at Avanti, proceed to the illustrious city before indicated, [p. 354] Vis'ala.' 'To the city Ujjayini, named Vis'ala. Comment. Vais'ali however appears to be very differently situated. According to the Buddhists, amongst whom it is celebrated as a chief seat of the labours of S'akhya and his first disciples, it is the same as Prayaga or Allahabad; but the Ramayana (I. 45) places it much lower down, on the north bank of the Ganges, nearly opposite to the mouth of the Sone; and it was therefore in the modern district of Saran, as Hamilton (Genealogies of the Hindus) conjectured. In the fourth century it was known to the Chinese traveller Fa-hian as Phi-she-li, on the right bank of the Gandak, not far from its confluence with the Ganges. Account of the Foe-kue-ki: Trans. R. As. Soc. no. IX. p. 128.

^354:26 Dhumraksha and Samyama: Bhagavata.

^354:27 The text is clear enough; but, as elsewhere noticed (Hindu Theatre, II. 296), the commentator on the Bhagavata interprets the parallel passage, very differently, or 'Kris'as'wa with Devaja,' or, as some copies read, Devaka or Daivata, as if there were two sons of Samyama.

^354:28 The Bhagavata changes the order of these two, making Janamejaya the son of Sumati; or Pramati, Vayu. Sumati, king of Vais'ali, is made cotemporary with Rama: Ramayana, I.47. 17. The dynasty of Vais'ala kings is found only in our text, the Vayu, and Bhagavata. Hamilton places them from 1920 to 1240 B. C.; but the latter is incompatible with the date he assigns to Rama, of 1700 B. C. The co-temporary existence of Sumati and Rama, however, is rather unintelligible, as, according to our lists, the former is the thirty-fourth, and the latter the sixtieth, from Vaivaswata Manu.

^354:29 The circumstances of their marriage, of Chyavana's appropriating a share of offerings to the Aswini Kumaras, and of sis quarrel with Indra in consequence, are old in detail in the Bhagavata and Padma Puranas.

^354:30 In most of the other Puranas, Reva or Raiva. The Linga and Matsya insert Rochamana before him; and the Bhagavata adds to Anartta, Uttanavarhish and Bhurishena.

^355:31 The Bhagavata ascribes the foundation of Kus'asthali to Revata, who built it, it is said, within the sea. The subsequent legend shews that it was the same, or on the same spot, as Dwaraka; and Anartta was therefore part of Cutch or Guzerat. See <page 190>. n. .

^356:32 So called from its many Dwaras or gateways: ### Vayu.

^357:33 The object of this legend, which is told by most of the authorities, is obviously to account for the anachronism of making Balarama cotemporary with Raivata; the one early in the Treta age, and the other at the close of the Dwapara.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 358]

  

CHAP. II.

Dispersion of Revata's descendants: those of Dhrishta: those of Nabhaga. Birth of Ikshwaku, the son of Vaivaswata: his sons. Line of Vikukshi. Legend of Kakutstha; of Dhundhumara; of Yuvanas'wa; of Mandhatri: his daughters married to Saubhari.

PARAS'ARA.--Whilst Kakudmin, surnamed Raivata, was absent on his visit to the region of Brahma, the evil spirits or Rakshasas named Punyajanas destroyed his capital Kus'asthali. His hundred brothers, through dread of these foes, fled in different directions; and the Kshatriyas, their descendants, settled in many countries [*1].

From Dhrishta, the son of the Manu, sprang the Kshatriya race of Dharshtaka [*2].

The son of Nabhaga was Nabhaga [*3]; his son was

[p. 359]

[paragraph continues] Ambarisha [*4]; his son was Virupa [*5]; his son was Prishadas'wa; his son was Rathinara, of whom it is sung, "These, who were Kshatriyas by birth, the heads of the family of Rathinara, were called Angirasas (or sons of Angiras), and were Brahmans as well as Kshatriyas [*6]."

Ikshwaku was born from the nostril of the Manu, as he happened to sneeze [*7]. He had a hundred sons, of whom the three most distinguished were Vikukshi, Nimi, and Danda. Fifty of the rest, under Sakuni, were the protectors of the northern countries. Forty-eight were the princes of the south [*8].

[p. 360]

Upon one of the days called Ashtaka [*9], Ikshwaku being desirous of celebrating ancestral obsequies, ordered Vikukshi to bring him flesh suitable for the offering. The prince accordingly went into the forest, and killed many deer, and other wild animals, for the celebration. Being weary with the chase, and being hungered, he sat down, and ate a hare; after which, being refreshed, he carried the rest of the game to his father. Vas'ishtha, the family priest of the house of Ikshwaku, was summoned to consecrate the food; but he declared that it was impure, in consequence of Vikukshi's having eaten a hare from amongst it (making it thus, as it were, the residue of his meal). Vikukshi was in consequence abandoned by his offended father, and the epithet S'as'ada (hare-eater) was affixed to him by the Guru. On the death of Ikshwaku, the dominion of the earth descended to S'as'ada [*10], who was succeeded by his son Puranjaya.

In the Treta age a violent war [*11] broke out between the gods and the Asuras, in which the former were vanquished. They consequently had recourse to Vishnu for assistance, and propitiated him by their adorations. The eternal ruler of the universe, Narayana, had compassion upon them, and said, "What you desire is known unto me. Hear how your wishes shall be fulfilled. There is an illustrious prince named Puranjaya, the son of a royal sage; into his person I will infuse a portion of myself, and having descended upon earth I will in his person subdue all your enemies. Do you therefore endeavour to secure the aid

[p. 361]

of Puranjaya for the destruction of your foes." Acknowledging with reverence the kindness of the deity, the immortals quitted his presence, and repaired to Puranjaya, whom they thus addressed: "Most renowned Kshatriya, we have come to thee to solicit thy alliance against our enemies: it will not become thee to disappoint our hopes." The prince replied, "Let this your Indra, the monarch of the spheres, the god of a hundred sacrifices, consent to carry me upon his shoulders, and I will wage battle with your adversaries as your ally." The gods and Indra readily answered, "So be it;" and the latter assuming the shape of a bull, the prince mounted upon his shoulder. Being then filled with delight, and invigorated by the power of the eternal ruler of all movable and immovable things, he destroyed in the battle that ensued all the enemies of the gods; and because he annihilated the demon host whilst seated upon the shoulder (or the hump, Kakud) of the bull, he thence obtained the appellation Kakutstha (seated on the hump [*12]).

The son of Kakutstha was Anenas [*13], whose son was Prithu, whose son was Viswagas'wa [*14], whose son was Ardra [*15], whose son was Yuvanas'wa, whose son was S'ravasta, by whom the city of S'ravasti [*16] was founded. The son of S'ravasta was Vrihadas'wa, whose son was Kuvalayas'wa. This prince, inspired with the spirit of Vishnu, destroyed the Asura Dhundhu, who had harassed the pious sage Uttanka; and he was thence entitled Dhundhumara [*17]. In his conflict with the demon

[p. 362]

the king was attended by his sons, to the number of twenty-one thousand; and all these, with the exception of only three, perished in the engagement, consumed by the fiery breath of Dhundhu. The three who survived were Dridhas'wa, Chandras'wa, and Kapilas'wa; and the son and successor of the elder of these was Haryyas'wa; his son was Nikumbha; his son was Sanhatas'wa; his son was Kris'as'wa; his son was Prasenajit; and his son was another Yuvanas'wa [*18].

Yuvanas'wa had no son, at which he was deeply grieved. Whilst residing in the vicinage of the holy Munis, he inspired them with pity for his childless condition, and they instituted a religious rite to procure him progeny. One night during its performance the sages having

[p. 363]

placed a vessel of consecrated water upon the altar had retired to repose. It was past midnight, when the king awoke, exceedingly thirsty; and unwilling to disturb any of the holy inmates of the dwelling, he looked about for something to drink. In his search he came to the water in the jar, which had been sanctified and endowed with prolific efficacy by sacred texts, and he drank it. When the Munis rose, and found that the water had been drunk, they inquired who had taken it, and said, "The queen that has drunk this water shall give birth to a mighty and valiant son." "It was I," exclaimed the Raja, "who unwittingly drank the water!" and accordingly in the belly of Yuvanas'wa was conceived a child, and it grew, and in due time it ripped open the right side of the Raja, and was born, and the Raji, did not die. Upon the birth of the child, "Who will be its nurse?" said the Munis; when, Indra, the king of the gods, appeared, and said, "He shall have me for his nurse" (mam dhasyati); and hence the boy was named Mandhatri. Indra put his fore finger into the mouth of the infant, who sucked it, and drew from it heavenly nectar; and he grew up, and became a mighty monarch, and reduced the seven continental zones under his dominion. And here a verse is recited; "From the rising to the going down of the sun, all that is irradiated by his light, is the land of Mandhatri, the son of Yuvanas'wa [*19]."

Mandhatri married Vindumati, the daughter of S'as'avindu, and had by her three sons, Purukutsa, Ambarisha, and Muchukunda; he had also fifty daughters [*20].

The devout sage Saubhari, learned in the Vedas, had spent twelve years immersed in a piece of water; the sovereign of the fish in which, named Sammada, of large bulk, had a very numerous progeny. His children and his grandchildren were wont to frolic around him in all

[p. 364]

directions, and he lived amongst them happily, playing with them night and day. Saubhari the sage, being disturbed in his devotions by their sports, contemplated the patriarchal felicity of the monarch of the lake, and reflected, "How enviable is this creature, who, although horn in a degraded state of being, is ever thus sporting cheerfully amongst his offspring and their young. Of a truth he awakens in my mind the wish to taste such pleasure, and I also will make merry amidst my children." Having thus resolved, the Muni came up hastily from the water, and, desirous of entering upon the condition of a householder, went to Mandhatri to demand one of his daughters as his wife. As soon as he was informed of the arrival of the sage, the king rose up from his throne, offered him the customary libation, and treated him with the most profound respect. Having taken a seat, Saubhari said to the Raja, "I have determined to marry: do you, king, give me one of your daughters as a wife: disappoint not my affection. It is not the practice of the princes of the race of Kakutstha to turn away from compliance with the wishes of those who come to them for succour. There are, O monarch, other kings of the earth to whom daughters have been born, but your family is above all renowned for observance. of liberality in your donations to those who ask your bounty. You have, O prince, fifty daughters; give one of them to me, that so I may be relieved from the anxiety I suffer through fear that my suit may be denied."

When Mandhatri heard this request, and looked upon the person of the sage, emaciated by austerity and old age, he felt disposed to refuse his consent; but dreading to incur the anger and imprecation of the holy man, he was much perplexed, and, declining his head, was lost a while in thought. The Rishi, observing his hesitation, said, "On what, O Raja, do you meditate? I have asked for nothing which may not be readily accorded: and what is there that shall he unattainable to you, if my desires be gratified by the damsel whom you must needs give unto me?" To this, the king, apprehensive of his displeasure, answered and said, "Grave sir, it is the established usage of our house to wed our daughters to such persons only as they shall themselves select from suitors of fitting rank; and since this your request is not yet made known to my

[p. 365]

maidens, it is impossible to say whether it may be equally agreeable to them as it is to me. This is the occasion of my perplexity, and I am at a loss what to do." This answer of the king was fully understood by the Rishi, who said to himself, "This is merely a device of the Raja to evade compliance with my suit: the has reflected that I am an old man, having no attractions for women, and not likely to be accepted by any of his daughters: even be it so; I will be a match for him:" and he then spake aloud, and said, "Since such is the custom, mighty prince, give orders that I be admitted into the interior of the palace. Should any of the maidens your daughters be willing to take me for a bridegroom, I will have her for my bride; if no one be willing, then let the blame attach alone to the years that I have numbered." Having thus spoken, he was silent.

Mandhatri, unwilling to provoke the indignation of the Muni, was accordingly obliged to command the eunuch to lead the sage into the inner chambers; who, as he entered the apartments, put on a form and features of beauty far exceeding the personal charms of mortals, or even of heavenly spirits. His conductor, addressing the princesses, said to them, "Your father, young ladies, sends you this pious sage, who has demanded of him a bride; and the Raja has promised him, that he will not refuse him any one of you who shall choose him for her husband." When the damsels heard this, and looked upon the person of the Rishi, they were equally inspired with passion and desire, and, like a troop of female elephants disputing the favours of the master of the herd, they all contended for the choice. "Away, away, sister!" said each to the other; "this is my election, he is my choice; he is not a meet bridegroom for you; he has been created by Brahma on purpose for me, as I have been created in order to become his wife: he has been chosen by me before you; you have no right to prevent his becoming my husband." In this way arose a violent quarrel amongst the daughters of the king, each insisting upon the exclusive election of the Rishi: and as the blameless sage was thus contended for by the rival princesses, the superintendent of the inner apartments, with a downcast look, reported to the king what had occurred. Perplexed more than ever by this

[p. 366]

information, the Raja exclaimed, "What is all this! and what am I to do now! What is it that I have said!" and at last, although with extreme reluctance, he was obliged to agree that the Rishi should marry all his daughters.

Having then wedded, agreeably to law, all the princesses, the sage took them home to his habitation, where he employed the chief of architects, Vis'wakarman, equal in taste and skill to Brahma himself, to construct separate palaces for each of his wives: he ordered him to provide each building with elegant couches and seats and furniture, and to attach to them gardens and groves, with reservoirs of water, where the wild-duck and the swan should sport amidst beds of lotus flowers. The divine artist obeyed his injunctions, and constructed splendid apartments for the wives of the Rishi; in which by command of Saubhari, the inexhaustible and divine treasure called Nanda [*21] took up his permanent abode, and the princesses entertained all their guests and dependants with abundant viands of every description and the choicest quality.

After some period had elapsed, the heart of king Mandhatri yearned for his daughters, and he felt solicitous to know whether they were happily circumstanced. Setting off therefore on a visit to the hermitage of Saubhari, he beheld upon his arrival a row of beautiful crystal palaces, shining as brilliantly as the rays of the sun, and situated amidst lovely gardens, and reservoirs of pellucid water. Entering into one of these magnificent palaces, he found and embraced a daughter, and said to her, as the tears of affection and delight trembled in his eyes, "Dear child, tell me how it is with you. Are you happy here? or not? Does the great sage treat you with tenderness? or do you revert with regret to your early home?" The princess replied, "You behold, my father, how delightful a mansion I inhabit, surrounded by lovely gardens and lakes, where the lotus blooms, and the wild swans murmur. Here I have delicious viands, fragrant unguents, costly ornaments, splendid raiment, soft beds, and every enjoyment that affluence can procure. Why then should I call to memory the place of my birth? To your favour am I

[p. 367]

indebted for all that I possess. I have only one cause of anxiety, which is this; my husband is never absent from my dwelling: solely attached to me, he is always at my side; he never goes near my sisters; and I am concerned to think that they must feel mortified by his neglect: this is the only circumstance that gives me uneasiness."

Proceeding to visit another of his daughters, the king, after embracing her, and sitting down, made the same inquiry, and received the same account of the enjoyments with which the princess was provided: there was also the same complaint, that the Rishi was wholly devoted to her, and paid no attention to her sisters. In every palace Mandhatri heard the same story from each of his daughters in reply to his questions; and with a heart overflowing with wonder and delight he repaired to the wise Saubhari, whom he found alone, and, after paying homage to him, thus addressed him: "Holy sage, I have witnessed this thy marvellous power; the like miraculous faculties I have never known any other to possess. How great is the reward of thy devout austerities!" Having thus saluted the sage, and been received by him with respect, the Raja resided with him for some time, partaking of the pleasures of the place, and then returned to his capital.

In the course of time the daughters of Mandhatri bore to Saubhari a hundred and fifty sons, and day by day his affection for his children became more intense, and his heart was wholly occupied, with the sentiment of self [*22]. "These my sons," he loved to think, "will charm me with their infant prattle; then they will learn to walk; they will then grow up to youth and to manhood: I shall see them married, and they will have children; and I may behold the children of those children." By these and similar reflections, however, he perceived that his anticipations every day outstripped the course of time, and at last he exclaimed, "What exceeding folly is mine! there is no end to my desires. Though all I hope should come to pass for ten thousand or a hundred thousand years, still new wishes would spring up. When I have seen my infants walk; when I have beheld their youth, their manhood, their marriage, their progeny; still my expectations are unsatisfied,

[p. 368]

and my soul yearns to behold the descendants of their descendants. Shall I even see them, some other wish will be engendered; and when that is accomplished, how is the birth of fresh desires to he prevented? I have at last discovered that there is no end to hope, until it terminates in death; and that the mind which is perpetually engrossed by expectation, can never be attached to the supreme spirit. My mental devotions, whilst immersed in water, were interrupted by attachment to my friend the fish. The result of that connexion was my marriage; and insatiable desires are the consequences of my married life. The pain attendant upon the birth of my single body, is now augmented by the cares attached to fifty others, and is farther multiplied by the numerous children whom the princesses have borne to me. The sources of affliction will be repeatedly renewed by their children, and by their espousals, and by their progeny, and will be infinitely increased: a married life is a mine of individual anxiety. My devotions, first disturbed by the fish of the pool, have since been obstructed by temporal indulgence, and I have been beguiled by that desire for progeny which was communicated to me by association with Sammada. Separation from the world is the only path of the sage to final liberation: from commerce with mankind innumerable errors proceed. The ascetic who has accomplished a course of self-denial falls from perfection by contracting worldly attachments: how much more likely should one so fall whose observances are incomplete? My intellect has been a prey to the desire of married happiness; but I will now so exert myself for the salvation of my soul, that, exempt from human imperfections, I may be exonerated from human sufferings. To that end I will propitiate, by arduous penance, Vishnu, the creator of the universe, whose form is inscrutable, who is smaller than the smallest, larger than the largest, the source of darkness and of light, the sovereign god of gods. On his everlasting body, which is both discrete and indiscrete substance, illimitably mighty, and identical with the universe, may my mind, wholly free from sin, be ever steadily intent, so that I may be born no more. To him I fly for refuge; to that Vishnu, who is the teacher of teachers, who is one with all beings, the pure eternal lord of all, without beginning, middle, or end, and besides whom is nothing."

Footnotes

^358:1 According to the Vayu, the brothers of Raivata founded a celebrated race called S'aryata, from S'aryati. The Brahma P. says they took refuge in secret places (gahana); for which the Hari Vans'a substitutes (parvata gana) mountains. The Vayu has neither, and says merely that they were renowned in all regions.

^358:2 So the Vayu, Linga, Agni, Brahma, and Hari Vans'a. The Matsya names three sons of Dhrishta, Dhrishtaketu, Chitranatha, and Ranadhrishta. The Bhagavata adds, that the sons of Dhrishta obtained Brahmanhood upon earth, though born Kshatriyas.

^358:3 But who is Nabhaga? for, as above observed, c. 1. n. 2, the son of the Manu is Nabhaga-nedishta, and there is in that case no such person as Nabhaga: on the other hand, if Nabhaga and Nedishta he distinct names, we have ten sons of Vaivaswata, as in the Bhagavata. The descendants of Nedishta, through his son Nabhaga, have been already specified; and after all, therefore, we must consider the text as intending a distinct person by the name Nabhaga; and such a name does occur in the lists of the Agni, Kurma, Matsya, and Bhagavata, unquestionably distinct from that with which it is also sometimes compounded. The Bhagavata repeats the legend of the Aitareya Brahmana, with some additions, and says that Nabhaga having protracted his period of study beyond the usual age, his brothers appropriated his share of the patrimony. On his applying for his portion, they consigned their father to him, by whose advice he assisted the descendants of Angiras in a sacrifice, and they presented him with all the wealth that was left at its termination. Rudra claimed it as his; and Nabhaga acquiescing, the god confirmed the gift, by which he became possessed of [p. 359] an equivalent for the loss of territory. Most of the authorities recognise but one name here, variously read either Nabhaga or Nabhaga, the father of Ambarisha. The Vayu, as well as the Bhagavata, concurs with the text.

^359:4 The Bhagavata considers Ambarisha as a king, who reigned apparently on the banks of the Yamuna. He is more celebrated as a devout worshipper of Vishnu, whose discus protected him from the wrath of Durvasas, and humbled that choleric saint, who was a portion of S'iva: a legend which possibly records a struggle between two sects, in which the votaries of Vishnu, headed by Ambarisha, triumphed.

^359:5 The Agni, Brahma, and Matsya stop with Ambarisha. The Vayu and Bhagavata proceed as in the text, only the latter adds to Virupa, Ketumat and S'ambhu.

^359:6 The same verse is cited in the Vayu, and affords an instance of a mixture of character, of which several similar cases occur subsequently. Kshatriyas by birth, become Brahmans by profession; and such persons are usually considered as Angirasas, followers or descendants of Angiras, who may have founded a school of warrior-priests. This is the obvious purport of the legend of Nabhaga's assisting the sons of Angiras to complete their sacrifice, referred to in a former note, although the same authority has devised a different explanation. Rathinara (or Rathitara, as read in some copies, as well as by the Bhagavata and Vayu) being childless, Angiras begot on his wife sons radiant with divine glory, who as the sons of the monarch by his wife were Kshatriyas, but were Brahmans through their actual father. This however is an afterthought, not warranted by the memorial verse cited in our text.

^359:7 So the Bhagavata.

^359:8 The Matsya says that Indra (Devarat) was born as Vikukshi, and that Ikshwaku had one hundred and fourteen other sons, who were kings of the countries south of Meru; and as many who reigned north of that mountain. The Vayu and most of the other authorities agree in the number of one hundred, of whom fifty, with S'akuni at their head, are placed in the north; and forty-eight in the south, according to the Vayu, of whom Vimati was the chief. The same authority specifies also Nimi and Danda as sons of Ikshwaku, as does the Bhagavata, with the addition of their reigning in the central regions. The distribution of the rest in [p. 360] that work is twenty-five in the west, as many in the east, and the rest elsewhere; that is, the commentator adds, north and south. It seems very probable that by these sons of Ikshwaku we are to understand colonies or settlers in various parts of India.

^360:9 See <page 322>, <page 323>.

^360:10 The Vayu states that he was king of Ayodhya, after the death of Ikshwaku. The story occurs in all the authorities, more or less in detail.

^360:11 The Vayu says it was in the war of the starling and the stork; a conflict between Vas'ishtha and Viswamitra, metamorphosed into birds, according to the Bhagavata; but that work assigns it to a different period, or the reign of Haris'chandra. If the tradition have any import, it may refer to the ensigns of the contending parties; for banners, with armorial devices, were, as we learn from the Mahabharata, invariably borne by princes and leaders.

^361:12 The Bhagavata adds, that he captured the city of the Asuras, situated in the west; whence his name Puranjaya, 'victor of the city:' he is also termed Paranjaya, 'vanquisher of foes:' he is also called Indravaha, 'borne by Indra.'

^361:13 Suyodhana: Matsya, Agni, Kurma.

^361:14 Vis'waka: Linga. Vis'wagandhi: Bhagav. Vishtaras'wa: Brahma P. and Hari V.

^361:15 Andhra: Vayu. Ayu: Agni. Chandra: Bhagavata.

^361:16 S'avasta and S'avasti: Bhagav. S'ravasti: Matsya, Linga, and Kurma, which also say that S'ravasti was in the country of Gaura, which is eastern Bengal; but it is more usually placed in Kos'ala, by which a part of Oude is commonly understood. In my Dictionary I have inserted S'ravanti, upon the authority of the Trikanda S'esha, but it is no doubt an error for S'ravasti; it is there also called Dharmapattana, being a city of some sanctity in the estimation of the Buddhists. It is termed by Fa-Hian, She-wei; by Hwan Tsang, She-lo-va-si-ti; and placed by both nearly in the site of Fyzabad in Oude. Account of the Foe-kue-ki.

^361:17 This legend is told in much more [p. 362] detail in the Vayu and Brahma Puranas. Dhundhu hid himself beneath a sea of sand, which Kuvalyas'wa and his sons dug up, undeterred by the flames which checked their progress, and finally destroyed most of them. The legend originates probably in the occurrence of some physical phenomenon, as an earthquake or volcano.

^362:18 The series of names agrees very well to Sanhatas'wa, called Varhanas'wa in the Bhagavata. We have there some variations, and some details not noticed in our text. The Vayu, Brahma, Agni, Linga, Matsya, and Kurma, ascribe two sons to Sanhatas'wa, whom the two first name Kris'as'wa and Akris'as'wa, and the rest Kris'as'wa and Ranas'wa. Senajit or Prasenajit is generally, though not always, termed the son of the younger brother; but the commentator on the Hari Vans'a calls him the son of Sanhatas'wa, whilst the Matsya, Agni, Linga, and Kurma omit him, and make Mandhatri the son of Ranas'wa. The mother of Prasenajit and the wife of Akris'as'wa or Sanhatas'wa, according to the different interpretations, was the daughter of Himavat, known as Drishadvati, the river so termed (<page 181>, n. .) The wife of Yuvanas'wa, according to the Vayu, or of Prasenajit, according to the Brahma, was Gauri, the daughter of Rantinara, who, incurring the imprecation of her husband, became the Bahuda river (<page 181>. n. ). The Brahma and Hari Vans'a call Yuvanas'wa her son; but in another place the Hari Vans'a contradicts itself, calling Gauri the daughter of Matimara, of the race of Puru, the mother of Mandhatri; here following apparently the Matsya, in which it is so stated. The Brahma P. is not guilty of the inconsistency. The Vayu of course gives the title to Mandhatri, with the addition that he was called Gaurika, after his mother. Mandhatri's birth from Gauri is the more remarkable, as it is incompatible with the usual legend given in our text and in the Bhagavata, which seems therefore to have been of subsequent origin, suggested by the etymology of the name. In the Bhagavata, Mandhatri is also named Trasadasyu, or the terrifier of thieves.

^363:19 The Vayu cites this same verse and another, with the remark, that they were uttered by those acquainted with the Puranas and with genealogies.

^363:20 The Brahma and Agni omit Ambarisha, for whom the Matsya substitutes Dharmasena. The following legend of Saubhari occurs elsewhere only in the Bhagavata, and there less in detail.

^366:21 The great Nidhi: a Nidhi is a treasure, of which there are several belonging to Kuvera; each has its guardian spirit, or is personified.

^367:22 Of Mamata, 'mineness;' the notion that wives, children, wealth, belong to an individual, and are essential to his happiness.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 369]

  

CHAP. III.

Saubhari and his wives adopt an ascetic life. Descendants of Mandhatri. Legend of Narmada and Purukutsa. Legend of Tris'anku. Bahu driven from his kingdom by the Haihayas and Talajanghas. Birth of Sagara: he conquers the barbarians, imposes upon them distinguishing usages, and excludes them from offerings to fire, and the study of the Vedas.

HAVING thus communed with himself, Saubhari abandoned his children, his home, and all his splendour, and, accompanied by his wives, entered the forest, where he daily practised the observances followed by the ascetics termed Vaikhanasas (or anchorets having families), until he had cleansed himself from all sin. When his intellect had attained maturity, he concentrated in his spirit the sacramental fires [*1], and became a religious mendicant. Then having consigned all his acts to the supreme, he obtained the condition of Achyuta, which knows no change, and is not subject to the vicissitudes of birth, transmigration, or death. Whoever reads, or hears, or remembers, or understands, this legend of Saubhari, and his espousal of the daughters of Mandhatri, shall never, for eight successive births, be addicted to evil thoughts, nor shall he act unrighteously, nor shall his mind dwell upon improper objects, nor shall he be influenced by selfish attachments. The line of Mandhatri is now resumed.

The son of Ambarisha, the son of Mandhatri, was Yuvanas'wa; his son was Harita [*2], from whom the Angirasa Haritas were descended [*3].

[p. 370]

In the regions below the earth the Gandharbas called Mauneyas (or sons of the Muni Kas'yapa), who were sixty millions in number, had defeated the tribes of the Nagas, or snake-gods, and seized upon their most precious jewels, and usurped their dominion. Deprived of their power by the Gandharbas, the serpent chiefs addressed the god of the gods, as he awoke from his slumbers; and the blossoms of his lotus eyes opened while listening to their hymns. They said, "Lord, how shall we be delivered from this great fear?" Then replied the first of males, who is without beginning, "I will enter into the person of Purukutsa, the son of Mandhatri, the son of Yuvanas'wa, and in him will I quiet these iniquitous Gandharbas." On hearing these words, the snake-gods bowed and withdrew, and returning to their country dispatched Narmada to solicit the aid of Purukutsa [*4].

Narmada accordingly went to Purukutsa, and conducted him to the regions below the earth, where, being filled with the might of the deity, he destroyed the Gandharbas. He then returned to his own palace; and the snake-gods, in acknowledgment of Narmada's services, conferred upon her as a blessing, that whosoever should think of her, and invoke her name, should never have any dread of the venom of snakes. This is the invocation; "Salutation be to Narmada in the morning; salutation be to Narmada at night; salutation be to thee, O Narmada! defend me

[p. 371]

from the serpent's poison." Whoever repeats this day and night, shall never be bitten by a snake in the dark nor in entering a chamber; nor shall he who calls it to mind when he eats suffer any injury from poison, though it be mixed with his food. To Purukutsa also the snake-gods announced that the series of his descendants should never be cut off.

Purukutsa had a son by Narmada named Trasadasyu, whose son was Sambhuta [*5], whose son was Anaranya, who was slain, by Ravana in his triumphant progress through the nations. The son of Anaranya was Prishadas'wa; his son was Haryyas'wa; his son was Sumanas [*6]; his son was Tridhanwan; his son was Trayyaruna; and his son was Satyavrata, who obtained the appellation of Tris'anku, and was degraded to the condition of a Chandala, or outcast [*7]. During a twelve years' famine Tris'anku provided the flesh of deer for the nourishment of the wife and children of Viswamitra, suspending it upon a spreading fig-tree on the borders of the Ganges, that he might not subject them to the indignity of receiving presents from an outcast. On this account Vis'wamitra, being highly pleased with him, elevated him in his living body to heaven [*8].

[p. 372]

The son of Tris'anku was Haris'chandra [*9]; his son was

[p. 373]

[paragraph continues] Rohitas'wa [*10]; his son was Harita [*11]; his son was Chunchu [*12], who had two sons named Vijaya and Sudeva. Ruruka [*13] was the son of Vijaya, and his own son was Vrika, whose son was Bahu (or Bathuka). This prince was vanquished by the tribes of Haihayas and Talajanghas [*14], anti his country was overrun by them; in consequence of which he fled into the forests with his wives. One of these was pregnant, and being an object of jealousy to a rival queen, the latter gave her poison to prevent her delivery. The poison had the effect of confining the child in the womb for seven years. Bahu, having waxed old, died in the neighbourhood of the residence of the Muni Aurva. His queen having constructed his pile, ascended it with the determination of accompanying him in death; but the sage Aurva, who knew all things, past, present, and to come, issued forth from his hermitage, and forbade her, saying, "Hold! hold! this is unrighteous; a valiant prince, the monarch of many realms, the

[p. 374]

offerer of many sacrifices, the destroyer of his foes, a universal emperor, is in thy womb; think not of committing so desperate an act!" Accordingly, in obedience to his injunctions, she relinquished her intention. The sage then conducted, her to his abode, and after some time a very splendid boy was there born. Along with him the poison that had been given to his mother was expelled; and Aurva, after performing the ceremonies required at birth, gave him on that account the name of Sagara (from Sa, 'with,' and Gara, 'poison'). The same holy sage celebrated his investure with the cord of his class, instructed him fully in the Vedas, and taught him the use of arms, especially those of fire, called after Bhargava.

When the boy had grown up, and was capable of reflection, he said to his mother one day, "Why are we dwelling in this hermitage? where is my father? and who is he?" His mother, in reply, related to him all that had happened. Upon hearing which he was highly incensed, and vowed to recover his patrimonial kingdom; and exterminate the Haihayas and Talajanghas, by whom it had been overrun. Accordingly when he became a man he put nearly the whole of the Haihayas to death, and would have also destroyed the S'akas, the Yavanas, Kambojas, Paradas, and Pahnavas [*15], but that they applied to Vas'ishtha, the

[p. 375]

family priest of Sagara, for protection. Vas'ishtha regarding them as annihilated (or deprived of power), though living, thus spake to Sagara: "Enough, enough, my son, pursue no farther these objects of your wrath, whom you may look upon as no more. In order to fulfil your vow I have separated them from affinity to the regenerate tribes, and from the duties of their castes." Sagara, in compliance with the injunctions of his spiritual guide, contented himself therefore with imposing upon the vanquished nations peculiar distinguishing marks. He made the Yavanas [*16] shave their heads entirely; the S'akas he compelled to shave (the upper) half of their heads; the Paradas wore their hair long; and the Pahnavas let their beards grow, in obedience to his commands [*17]. Them also, and other Kshatriya races, he deprived of the established usages of oblations to fire and the study of the Vedas; and thus separated from religious rites, and abandoned by the Brahmans, these different tribes became Mlechchhas. Sagara, after the recovery of his kingdom, reigned over the seven-zoned earth with undisputed dominion [*18].

[p. 376]

This page consists solely of footnotes.

Footnotes

^369:1 So Manu; "Having reposited, as the law directs, the holy fires in his breast," &c. VI. 25.

^369:2 The Vayu, Linga, Kurma, and Bhagavata agree in this series; the others omit it.

^369:3 The words of the text are ###, and the commentator explains the phrase, 'the Angirasa Brahmans, of whom the Harita family was the chief.' The Linga reads, 'Harita was the son of Yuvanas'wa, whose sons were the Haritas; they were on the part (or followers) of Angiras, and were Brahmans with the properties of Kshatriyas.' The Vayu has, 'Harita was the son of Yuvanas'wa, from whom were many called [p. 370] Haritas; they were sons of Angiras, and Brahmans with the properties of Kshatriyas.' The Bhagavata has only, These (Ambarisha, Purukutsa, and Harita) were, according to S'ridhara Swami's comment, the chiefs of Mandhatri's descendants, being founders of three several branches: or it may mean, he says, merely that they had Mandhatri for their progenitor, Mandhatri being by some also named Angiras, according to As'walayana. It may be questioned if the compilers of the Puranas, or their annotators, knew exactly what to make of this and similar phrases, although they were probably intended to intimate that some persons of Kshatriya origin became the. disciples of certain Brahmans, particularly of Angiras, and afterwards founders of schools of religious instruction themselves. Mandhatri himself is the author of a hymn in the Rig-veda. As. Res. VIII. 385. Harita is the name of an individual sage, considered as the son of Chyavana, and to whom a work on law is attributed. It is probably rather that of a school, however, than of an individual.

^370:4 Narmada, the personified Nerbudda river, was, according to the Bhagavata, the sister of the Nagas.

^371:5 We have some varieties here. Instead of Trasadasyu the Matsya has Dussaha, whom it makes the husband of Narmada, and father of Sambhuti, the father of Tridhanwan. The Bhagavata omits Sambhuti; the Linga makes him the brother of Trasadasyu; and the Agni has in his place Sudhanwan.

^371:6 Vrishadas'wa: Vayu. The Matsya, Agni, and Brahma omit all between Sambhuta and Tridhanwan. The Bhagavata has a rather different series, or Anaranya, Haryyas'wa, Aruna, Tribandhana, Tris'anku. As Anaranya is famous in Hindu story, and Trayyaruna is a contributor to the Rig-veda, their omission shews careless compilation.

^371:7 The Vayu states he was banished by his father for his wickedness (Adharma). The Brahma P. and Hari Vans'a detail his iniquity at length; and it is told more concisely in the Linga. He carried off the betrothed wife of another man, one of the citizens according to the two former, of Vidarbha according to the latter: for this, his father, by the advice of Vas'ishtha, banished him, and he took refuge with S'wapakas. The Ramayana has a different story, and ascribes Tris'anku's degradation to the curse of the sons of Vas'ishtha, to whom the king had applied to conduct his sacrifice, after their father had refused to do so. Before that, he is described as a pious prince, and the object of his sacrifice was to ascend to heaven.

^371:8 The occurrence of the famine, and Satyavrata's care of the wife and family of Vis'wamitra, are told, with some variations, in the Vayu, which has been followed by [p. 372] the Brahma and Hari Vans'a. During the famine, when game finis he kills the cow of Vas'ishtha; and for the three crimes of displeasing his father, killing a cow, and eating flesh not previously consecrated, he acquires the name of Tris'anku (tri, 'three,' s'anku, 'sin'). Vas'ishtha refusing to perform his regal inauguration, Vis'wamitra celebrates the rites, and on his death elevates the king in his mortal body to heaven. The Ramayana relates the same circumstance, but assigns to it a different motive, Vis'wamitra's resentment of the refusal of the gods to attend Tris'anku's sacrifice. That work also describes the attempt of the gods to cast the king down upon earth, and the compromise between them and Vis'wamitra, by which Tris'anku was left suspended, head downwards, in mid-air, forming a constellation in the southern hemisphere, along with other new planets and stars formed by Vis'wamitra. The Bhagavata has an allusion to this legend, saying that Tris'anku is still visible in heaven. The Vayu furnishes some further information from an older source. Both my copies leave a blank where it is marked, and a similar passage does not elsewhere occur; but the word should probably be ###, and the whole may be thus rendered: 'Men acquainted with the Puranas recite these two stanzas; "By the favour of Vis'wamitra the illustrious Tris'anku shines in heaven along with the gods, through the kindness of that sage. Slowly passes the lovely night in winter, embellished by the moon, decorated with three watches, and ornamented with the constellation Tris'anku:"' This legend is therefore clearly astronomical, and alludes possibly to some reformation of the sphere by Vis'wamitra, under the patronage of Tris'anku, and in opposition to a more ancient system advocated by the school of Vas'ishtha. It might be no very rash conjecture, perhaps, to identify Tris'anku with Orion, the three bright stars of whose belt may have suggested the three S'ankus (stakes or pins) which form his name.

^372:9 The Pauranik lists generally dismiss Haris'chandra very summarily, but he makes a conspicuous figure in legends of an apparently later date. In the Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, it is stated that he resides in the court of Indra, to which he was elevated for his performance of the Rajasuya sacrifice, and for his unbounded liberality. This seems to have served as the groundwork of the tale told in the Markandeya and Padma Puranas, of his having given his whole country, his wife and son, and finally himself, to Vis'wamitra, in satisfaction of his demands for Dakshina. In consequence he was elevated with his subjects to heaven, from whence, having been insidiously led by Nareda to boast of his merits, he was again precipitated. His repentance of his pride, however, arrested his downward descent, and he and his train paused in mid-air. The city of Haris'chandra is popularly believed to be at times still [p. 373] visible in the skies. The indignation of Vas'ishtha at Vis'wamitra's insatiableness produced a quarrel, in which their mutual imprecations changed them to two birds, the S'arali, a sort of Turdus, and the Baka, or crane. In these forms they fought for a considerable term, until Brahma interposed, and reconciled them. The Bhagavata alludes to this story, in its notice of Haris'chandra; but the Vayu refers the conflict to the reign of a different prince: see c. 2. n. 11. According to the S'iva P., Haris'chandra was an especial worshipper of that deity; and his wife Satyavati was a form of Jaya, one of Durga's handmaids.

^373:10 Also read Rohita. Traces of his name appear in the strong holds of Rotas, in Behar and in the Panjab. The Bhagavata has a legend of his having been devoted to Varuna, before his birth, by his father, who having on various pleas deferred offering his son as promised, was afflicted by a dropsy. Rohita at last purchased S'unahs'ephas, who was offered as a victim in his stead: see hereafter, note on S'unahs'ephas.

^373:11 Omitted: Agni, Linga, and Matsya.

^373:12 Omitted: Agni. Dhundhu: Linga and Kurma. Champa, founder of Champamalini: Bhagavata. But all other authorities make Champa a different person, a descendant of Anga: see family of Ann, of the lunar race.

^373:13 Kuruka: Linga and Kurma. Bharuka: Bhagavata.

^373:14 Descendants of Yadu. The first springs from a prince who is the twelfth, and the second from one who is the eighteenth, in the lunar line, and both are thus cotemporary with a prince who is the thirty-fifth of the solar dynasty. The Vayu adds, that they were assisted by S'akas, Yavanas, Kambojas, Paravas, and Pahlavas.

^374:15 The Haihayas we shall have farther occasion to notice. The S'akas are, no doubt, the Sacae or Sakai of the classical geographers, Scythians and Indo-Scythians, Turk or Tartar tribes, who established themselves, about a century and a half before our era, along the western districts of India, and who are not improbably connected with our Saxon forefathers. The Yavanas are the Ionians or Greeks. The Kambojas were a people on the northwest of India, of whom it is said that they were remarkable for a capital breed of horses. There is an apparent trace of their name in the Caumogees of Kaferistan, who may have retreated to the mountains before the advance of the Turk tribes. (Elphinstone's Caubul, 619: see also before, <page 194>. n. .) The Paradas and Pahlavas or Pahnavas may designate other bordering tribes in the same direction, or on the confines of Persia. Along with these, in the legend that follows, the Bhagavata enumerates Barbaras. The Vayu adds Mahishikas, Chaulas, Darvas, and Khasas: the two former of which are people on the Malabar and Coromandel coasts; the two latter are usually placed amongst the mountaineers of the Hindu Kosh. The Brahma P. lengthens the list with the Kolas, the forest races of eastern Gondwana; the Sarpas and the[p. 375] Keralas, who are the people of Malabar. The Hari Vans'a still farther extends the enumeration with the Tusharas or Tokharas, the Turks of Tokharestan; the Chinas, Chinese; the Madras, people in the Panjab; the Kishkindhas, in Mysore; Kauntalas, along the Narbudda; Bangas, Bengalis; S'alwas, people in western India; and the Konkanas, or inhabitants of the Concan. It is evident from the locality of most of the additions of the last authority, that its compiler or corrupter has been a native of the Dekhin.

^375:16 And Kambojas: Vayu.

^375:17 The Asiatic nations generally shave the head either wholly or in part. Amongst the Greeks it was common to shave the fore part of the head, a custom introduced, according to Plutarch, by the Abantes, whom Homer calls opithen komountes and followed, according to Xenophon, by the Lacedaemonians. It may be doubted, however, if the Greeks or Ionians ever shaved the head completely. The practice prevails amongst the Mohammedans, but it is not universal. The S'akas, Scythians or Tartars, shave the fore part of the head, gathering the hair at the back into a long tail, as do the Chinese. The mountaineers of the Himalaya shave the crown of the head, as do the people of Kaferistan, with exception of a single tuft. What Oriental people wore their hair long, except at the back of the head, is questionable; and the usage would be characteristic rather of the Teutonic and Gothic nations. The ancient Persians had long bushy beards, as the Persepolitan sculptures demonstrate. In Chardin's time they were out of fashion, but they were again in vogue in that country in the reign of the last king, Fateh Shuh.

^375:18 So the Vayu, &c.; and a similar [p. 376] statement is given in Manu, X. 44, where to the S'akas, Yavanas, Kambojas, Paradas, and Pahnavas, are added the Pandaras (people of western Bengal), Odras (those of Orissa), Draviras (of the Coromandel coast), Chinas (Chinese), Kiratas (mountaineers), and Daradas (Durds of the Hindu Koh). From this passage, and a similar one in the Ramayana, in which the Chinas are mentioned, the late Mr. Klaproth inferred those works to be not older than the third century B. C., when the reigning dynasty of Thsin first gave that name to China (see also <page 194>. n. .) It was probable, he supposed, that the Hindus became acquainted with the Chinese only about 200 B. C., when their arms extended to the Oxus; but it is difficult to reconcile this date with the difference of style between the Ramayana particularly and the works of the era of Vikramaditya. It would seem more likely that the later appellations were interpolated. It must have been a period of some antiquity, when all the nations from Bengal to the Coromandel coast were considered as Mlechchhas and outcasts.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 377]

  

CHAP. IV.

The progeny of Sagara: their wickedness: he performs an As'wamedha: the horse stolen by Kapila: found by Sagara's sons, who are all destroyed by the sage: the horse recovered by Ans'umat: his descendants. Legend of Mitrasaha or Kalmashapada, the son of Sudasa. Legend of Khatwanga. Birth of Rama and the other sons of Das'aratha. Epitome of the history of Rama: his descendants, and those of his brothers. Line of Kus'a. Vrihadbala, the last, killed in the great war.

SUMATI the daughter of Kas'yapa, and Kesini the daughter of Raja Viderbha, were the two wives of Sagara [*1]. Being without progeny, the king solicited the aid of the sage Aurva with great earnestness, and the Muni pronounced this boon, that one wife should bear one son, the upholder of his race, and the other should give birth to sixty thousand sons; and he left it to them to make their election. Kesini chose to have the single son; Sumati the multitude: and it came to pass in a short time that the former bore Asamanjas [*2], a prince through whom the dynasty continued; and the daughter of Vinata (Sumati) had sixty thousand sons. The son of Asamanjas was Ans'umat.

Asamanjas was from his boyhood of very irregular conduct. His father hoped that as he grew up to manhood he would reform; but finding that he continued guilty of the same immorality, Sagara abandoned him. The sixty thousand sons of Sagara followed the example of their brother Asamanjas. The path of virtue and piety being obstructed in the world by the sons of Sagara, the gods repaired to the Muni Kapila, who was a portion of Vishnu, free from fault, and endowed with all true wisdom. Having approached him with respect, they said, "O lord, what will become of the world, if these sons of Sagara are permitted to go on in the evil ways which they have learned from Asamanjas! Do thou, then, assume a visible form, for the protection of the afflicted

[p. 378]

universe." "Be satisfied," replied the sage, "in a brief time the sons of Sagara shall be all destroyed."

At that period Sagara commenced the performance of the solemn sacrifice of a horse, who was guarded by his own sons: nevertheless some one stole the animal, and carried it off into a chasm in the earth, Sagara commanded his sons to search for the steed; and they, tracing him by the impressions of his hoofs, followed his course with perseverance, until coming to the chasm where he had entered, they proceeded to enlarge it, and dug downwards each for a league. Coming to Patala, they beheld the horse wandering freely about, and at no great distance from him they saw the Rishi Kapila sitting, with his head declined in meditation, and illuminating the surrounding space with radiance as bright as the splendours of the autumnal sun, shining in an unclouded sky. Exclaiming, "This is the villain who has maliciously interrupted our sacrifice, and stolen the horse! kill him! kill him!" they ran towards him with uplifted weapons. The Muni slowly raised his eyes, and for an instant looked upon them, and they were reduced to ashes by the sacred flame that darted from his person [*3].

When Sagara learned that his sons, whom he had sent in pursuit of the sacrificial steed, had been destroyed by the might of the great Rishi Kapila, he dispatched Ans'umat, the son of Asamaujas, to effect the animals recovery. The youth, proceeding by the deep path which the princes had dug, arrived where Kapila was, and bowing respectfully, prayed to him, and so propitiated him, that the saint said, "Go, my

[p. 379]

son, deliver the horse to your grandfather; and demand a boon; thy grandson shall bring down the river of heaven on the earth." Ans'umat requested as a boon that his uncles, who had perished through the sage's displeasure, might, although unworthy of it, be raised to heaven through his favour. "I have told you," replied Kapila, "that your grandson shall bring down upon earth the Ganges of the gods; and when her waters shall wash the bones and ashes of thy grandfather's sons, they shall be raised to Swarga. Such is the efficacy of the stream that flows from the toe of Vishnu, that it confers heaven upon all who bathe in it designedly, or who even become accidentally immersed in it: those even shall obtain Swarga, whose bones, skin, fibres, hair, or any other part, shall be left after death upon the earth which is contiguous to the Ganges." Having acknowledged reverentially the kindness of the sage, Ans'umat returned to his grandfather, and delivered to him the horse. Sagara, on recovering the steed, completed his sacrifice; and in affectionate memory of his sons, denominated Sagara the chasm which they had dug [*4].

The son of Ans'umat was Dilipa [*5]; his son was Bhagiratha, who brought Ganga down to earth, whence she is called Bhagirathi. The son of Bhagiratha was S'ruta [*6]; his son was Nabhaga [*7]; his son was Ambarisha; his son was Sindhudwipa; his son was Ayutas'wa [*8]; his son was Rituparna, the friend of Nala, skilled profoundly in dice [*9]. The

[p. 380]

son of Rituparna was Sarvakama [*10]; his son was Sudasa; his son was Saudasa, named also Mitrasaha [*11].

[p. 381]

The son of Sudasa having gone into the woods to hunt, fell in with a couple of tigers, by whom the forest had been cleared of the deer. The king slew one of these tigers with an arrow. At the moment of expiring, the form of the animal was changed, and it became that of a fiend of fearful figure, and hideous aspect. Its companion, threatening the prince with its vengeance, disappeared.

After some interval Saudasa celebrated a sacrifice, which was conducted by Vas'ishtha. At the close of the rite Vas'ishtha went out; when the Rakshas, the fellow of the one that had been killed in the figure of a tiger, assumed the semblance of Vas'ishtha, and came and said to the king, "Now that the sacrifice is ended, you must give me flesh to eat: let it be cooked, and I will presently return." Having said this, he withdrew, and, transforming himself into the shape of the cook, dressed some human flesh, which he brought to the king, who, receiving it on a plate of gold, awaited the reappearance of Vas'ishtha. As soon as the Muni returned, the king offered to him the dish. Vas'ishtha surprised at such want of propriety in the king, as his offering him meat to eat, considered what it should be that was so presented, and by the efficacy of his meditations discovered that it was human flesh. His mind being agitated with wrath, he denounced a curse upon the Raja, saying, "Inasmuch as you have insulted all such holy men as we are, by giving me what is not to be eaten, your appetite shall henceforth be excited by similar food."

"It was yourself," replied the Raja to the indignant sage, "who commanded this food to be prepared." "By me!" exclaimed Vas'ishtha; "how could that have been?" and again having recourse to meditation, he detected the whole truth. Foregoing then all displeasure towards the king, he said, "The food to which I have sentenced you shall not be your sustenance for ever; it shall only be so for twelve years." The king, who had taken up water in the palms of his hands, and was prepared to curse the Muni, now considered that Vas'ishtha was his spiritual guide, and being reminded by Madayanti his queen that it ill became him to denounce an imprecation upon a holy teacher, who was the guardian divinity of his race, abandoned his intention.

[p. 382]

[paragraph continues] Unwilling to cast the water upon the earth, lest it should wither up the grain, for it was impregnated with his malediction, and equally reluctant to throw it up into the air, lest it should blast the clouds, and dry up their contents, he threw it upon, his own feet. Scalded by the heat which the water had derived from his angry imprecation, the feet of the Raja became spotted black and white, and he thence obtained the name of Kalmashapada, or he with the spotted (kalmasha) feet (pada).

In consequence of the curse of Vas'ishtha, the Raja became a cannibal every sixth watch of the day for twelve years, and in that state wandered through the forests, and devoured multitudes of men. On one occasion he beheld a holy person engaged in dalliance with his wife. As soon as they saw his terrific form, they were frightened, and endeavoured to escape; but the regal Rakshasa overtook and seized the husband. The wife of the Brahman then also desisted from flight, and earnestly entreated the savage to spare her lord, exclaiming, "Thou, Mitrasaha, art the pride of the royal house of Ikshwaku, not a malignant fiend! it is not in thy nature, who knowest the characters of women, to carry off and devour my husband." But all was in vain, and, regardless of her reiterated supplications, he ate the Brahman, as a tiger devours a deer. The Brahman's wife, furious with wrath, then addressed the Raja, and said, "Since you have barbarously disturbed the joys of a wedded pair, and killed my husband, your death shall be the consequence of your associating with your queen." So saying, she entered the flames.

At the expiration of the period of his curse Saudasa returned home. Being reminded of the imprecation of the Brahmani by his wife Madayanti, he abstained from conjugal intercourse, and was in consequence childless; but having solicited the interposition of Vas'ishtha, Madayanti became pregnant. The child, however, was not born for seven years, when the queen, becoming impatient, divided the womb with a sharp stone, and was thereby delivered. The child was thence called As'maka (from As'man, 'a stone'). The son of As'maka was Mulaka, who, when the warrior tribe was extirpated upon earth, was surrounded and concealed by a number of females; whence he was denominated Narikavacha

[p. 383]

[paragraph continues] (having women for armour) [*12]. The son of Mulaka was Das'aratha; his son was Ilavila; his son was Vis'wasaha; his son was Khatwanga, called also Dilipa [*13], who in a battle between the gods and the Asuras, being called by the former to their succour, killed a number of the latter. Having thus acquired the friendship of the deities in heaven, they desired him to demand a boon. He said to them, "If a boon is to be accepted by me, then tell me, as a favour, what is the duration of my life." "The length of your life is but an hour," the gods replied. On which, Khatwanga, who was swift of motion, descended in his easy-gliding chariot to the world of mortals. Arrived there, he prayed, and said, "If my own soul has never been dearer to me than the sacred Brahmans; if I have never deviated from the discharge of my duty; if I have never regarded gods, men, animals, vegetables, all created things, as different from the imperishable; then may I, with unswerving step, attain to that divine being on whom holy sages meditate!" Having thus spoken, he was united with that supreme being, who is Vasudeva; with that elder of all the gods, who is abstract existence, and whose form cannot be described. Thus he obtained absorption, according to this stanza, which was repeated formerly by the seven Rishis; "Like unto Khatwanga will be no one upon earth, who having come from heaven, and dwelt an hour amongst men, became united with the three worlds by his liberality and knowledge of truth [*14]."

The son of Khatwanga was Dirghabahu; his son was Raghu; his son was Aja; his son was Das'aratha [*15]. The god from whose navel the

[p. 384]

lotus springs became fourfold, as the four sons of Das'aratha, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and S'atrughna, for the protection of the world. Rama, whilst yet a boy, accompanied Viswamitra, to protect his sacrifice, and slew Tadaka. He afterwards killed Maricha with his resistless shafts; and Subahu and others fell by his arms. He removed the guilt of Ahalya by merely looking upon her. In the palace of Janaka he broke with ease the mighty bow of Mahes'wara, and received the hand of Sita, the daughter of the king, self-born from the earth, as the prize of his prowess. He humbled the pride of Paras'urama, who vaunted his triumphs over the race of Haihaya, and his repeated slaughters of the Kshatriya tribe. Obedient to the commands of his father, and cherishing no regret for the loss of sovereignty, he entered the forest,

[p. 385]

accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and by his wife, where he killed in conflict Viradha, Kharadushana and other Rakshasas, the headless giant Kabandha, and Bali the monkey monarch. Having built a bridge across the ocean, and destroyed the whole Rakshasa nation, he recovered his bride Sita, whom their ten-headed king Ravana had carried off, and returned to Ayodhya with her, after she had been purified by the fiery ordeal from the soil contracted by her captivity, and had been honoured by the assembled gods, who bore witness to her virtue [*16].

Bharata made himself master of the country of the Gandharbas, after destroying vast numbers of them; and S'atrughna having killed the Rakshasa chief Lavana, the son of Madhu, took possession of his capital Mathura.

Having thus, by their unequalled valour and might, rescued the whole world from the dominion of malignant fiends, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and S'atrughna reascended to heaven, and were followed by those of the people of Kos'ala who were fervently devoted to these incarnate portions of the supreme Vishnu.

Rama and his brothers had each two sons. Kus'a and Lava were the sous of Rama; those of Lakshmana were Angada and Chandraketu; the sons of Bharata were Taksha and Pushkara; and Subahu and S'urasena [*17] were the sons of S'atrughna.

[p. 386]

The son of Kus'a was Atithi; his son was Nishadha; his son was Nala [*18]; his son was Nabhas; his son was Pundarika; his son was Kshemadhanwan; his son was Devanika; his son was Ahinagu [*19]; his son was Paripatra; his son was Dala [*20]; his son was Chhala [*21]; his son was Uktha [*22]; his son was Vajranabha; his son was S'ankhanabha [*23]; his son was Abhyutthitas'wa [*24]; his son was Vis'wasaha [*25]; his son was Hiranyanabha, who was a pupil of the mighty Yogi Jaimini, and communicated the knowledge of spiritual exercises to Yajnawalkya [*26]. The son of this

[p. 387]

saintly king was Pushya; his son was Dhruvasandhi [*27]; his son was Sudars'ana; his son was Agnivarna; his son was S'ighra; his son was Maru [*28], who through the power of devotion (Yoga) is still living in the village called Kalapa, and in a future age will be the restorer of the Kshatriya race in the solar dynasty. Maru had a son named Prasus'ruta; his son was Susandhi; his son was Amarsha; his son was Mahaswat [*29]; his son was Vis'rutavat [*30]; and his son was Vrihadbala, who was killed in the great war by Abhimanyu, the son of Anjuna. These are the most distinguished princes in the family of Ikshwaku: whoever listens to the account of them will be purified from all his sins [*31].}

Footnotes

^377:1 So the Ramayana. Sumati is called the daughter of Arishtanemi: the Mahabharata calls her S'aivya. The story of Sagara and his descendants is told at length in the Ramayana, first book, and in the Mahabharata, Vana Parva, III. 106, et seq., as well as in most of the Puranas.

^377:2 Or Panchajana: Brahma.

^378:3 The Bhagavata has, for a Purana, some curious remarks on this part of the story, flatly denying its truth. 'The report is not true, that the sons of the king were scorched by the wrath of the sage; for how can the quality of darkness, made up of anger, exist in a world-purifying nature, consisting of the quality of goodness; the dust of earth, as it were, in the sky? How should mental perturbation distract that sage, who was one with the supreme, and who has promulgated that Sankhya philosophy, which is a strong vessel, by which he who is desirous of liberation passes over the dangerous ocean of the world by the path of death?'

^379:4 Sagara is still the name of the ocean, and especially of the bay of Bengal, at the mouth of the Ganges. On the shore of the island called by the same name, tradition places a Kapilas'rama, or hermitage of Kapila, which is still the scene of an annual pilgrimage. Other legends assign a very different situation for the abode of the ascetic, or the foot of the Himalaya, where the Ganges descends to the plains. There would be no incompatibility, however, in the two sites, could we imagine the tradition referred to a period when the ocean washed, as it appears once to have done, the base of the Himalaya, and Saugor (Sagara) was at Haridwar.

^379:5 Or Khatwanga: Brahma and Hari Vans'a: but this is apparently an error. See note [*14].

^379:6 Omitted: Matsya and Agni. Vis'ruta: Linga.

^379:7 Nabhin: Bhagavata.

^379:8 Ayutayus: Vayu, Linga, and Kurma. S'rutayus: Agni. Ayutajit: Brahma.

^379:9 'knowing the heart of the dice.' The same epithet, as well as that of 'friend of Nala,' is given him in the Vayu, Bhagavata, and Brahma Puranas, [p. 380] and in the Hari Vans'a, and leaves no doubt of their referring to the hero of the story told in the Mahabharata. Nara however, as we shall hereafter see, is some twenty generations later than Rituparna in the same family; and the Vayu therefore thinks it necessary to observe that two Nalas are noticed in the Puranas, and the one here adverted to is the son of Virasena; whilst the other belongs to the family of Ikshwaku. The same passage occurs in the Brahma P. and Hari V.; and the commentator on the latter observes, 'Nala the son of Nishadha is different from Nala the son of Virasena.' It is also to be observed, that the Nala of the tale is king of Nishadha, and his friend Rituparna is king of Ayodhya. The Nala of the race of Ikshwaku is king of Ayodhya: he is the son of Nishadha, however, and there is evidently some confusion between the two. We do not find Virasena or his son in any of the lists. See n. [*19].

^380:10 There is considerable variety in this part of the lists, but the Vayu and Bhagavata agree with our text. The Matsya and others make Kalmashapada the son or grandson of Rituparna, and place Sarvakama or Sarvakarman after him. See further on.

^380:11 The Vayu, Agni, Brahma, and Hari Vans'a read Amitrasaha, 'foe-enduring;' but the commentator on our text explains it Mitra, a name of Vas'ishtha, Saha, 'able to bear' the imprecation of; as in the following legend, which is similarly related in the Bhagavata. It is not detailed in the Vayu. A full account occurs in the Mahabharata, Adi P., s. 176, but with many and important variations. Kalmashapada, whilst hunting, encountered S'aktri, the son of Vas'ishtha, in the woods; and on his refusing to make way, struck the sage with his whip. S'aktri cursed the king to become a cannibal; and Viswamitra, who had a quarrel with Vas'ishtha, seized the opportunity to direct a Rakshas to take possession of the king, that he might become the instrument of destroying the family of the rival saint. Whilst thus influenced, Mitrasaha, a Brahman, applied to Kalmashapada for food, and the king commanded his cook to dress human flesh, and give it to the Brahman, who, knowing what it was, repeated the curse of S'aktri, that the king should become a cannibal; which taking effect with double force, Kalmashapada began to eat men. One of his first victims was S'aktri, whom he slew and ate; and then killed and devoured, under the secret impulse of Vis'wamitra's demon, all the other sons of Vas'ishtha. Vas'ishtha however liberated him from the Rakshas who possessed him, and restored him to his natural character. The imprecation of the Brahman's wife, and its consequences, are told in the Mahabharata as in the text; but the story of the water falling on his feet appears to have grown out of the etymology of his name, which might have referred to some disease of the lower extremities, the prince's designation being at length, Mitrasaha Saudasa Kalmashapada, or Mitrasaha, son of Sudasa, with the swelled feet.

^383:12 His name Mulaka, or 'the root,' refers also to his being the stem whence the Kshatriya races again proceeded. It may be doubted if the purport of his title Narikavacha is accurately explained by the text.

^383:13 This prince is confounded with an earlier Dilipa by the Brahma P. and Hari Vans'a.

^383:14 The term for his obtaining final liberation is rather unusual; 'By whom the three worlds were affected or beloved:' the three worlds being identified with their source, or the supreme. The text says of this stanza ###, and the Vayu, citing it, says ###, the legend is therefore from the Vedas.

^383:15 The lists here differ very materially, as the following comparison will best shew: [p. 384]

          Vishnu.

       Matsya.

       Ramayana.

     
      Kalmashapada

       Kalmashapada

       Kalmashapada

     
      As'maka

       Sarvakarman

       S'ankana

     
      Mulaka

       Anaranya

       Sudars'ana

     
      Das'aratha

       Nighna

       Agnivarna

     
      Ilavila

       Anamitra

       S'ighraga

     
      Vis'wasaha

       Raghu

       Maru

     
      Dilipa

       Dilipa

       Prasusruka

     
      Dirghabahu

       Aja

       Ambarisha

     
      Raghu

       Dirghabahu

       Nahusha

     
      Aja

       Ajapala

       Yayati

     
      Das'aratha

       Das'aratha

       Nabhaga

     
       

        

       Aja

     
       

        

       Das'aratha.

     
   [paragraph continues] The Vayu, Bhagavata, Kurma, and Linga agree with our text, except in the reading of a few names; as S'ataratha for Das'aratha the first; Vairivira for Ilavila; and Kritasarman, Vriddhasarman, or Vriddhakarman, for Vis'wasaha. The Agni and Brahma and Hari Vans'a agree with the second series, with similar occasional exceptions; shewing that the Puranas admit two series, differing in name, but agreeing in number. The Ramayana, however, differs from both in a very extraordinary manner, and the variation is not limited to the cases specified, as it begins with Bhagiratha, as follows:

          Puranas.

       Ramayana.

     
      Bhagiratha

       Bhagiratha

     
      S'ruta

       Kakutshtha

     
      Nabhaga

       Raghu

     
      Ambarisha

       Kalmashapada

     
      Sindhudwipa

        

     
      Ayutas'wa

        

     
      Rituparna

        

     
      Sarvakama

        

     
      Sudasa

        

     
      Kalmashapada.

        

     
   [paragraph continues] The entire Pauranik series comprises twenty descents, and that of the Ramayana sixteen. Some of the last names of the poem occur amongst the first of those of the Puranas, but there is an irreconcilable difference in much of the nomenclature. The Agni, under the particular account of the descent of Rama, has for his immediate predecessors Raghu, Aja, Das'aratha, as in our text; and the author of the Raghu Vans'a agrees with the Puranas from Dilipa downwards.

^385:16 This is an epitome of the Ramayana, the heroic poem of Valmiki, on the subject of Rama's exploits. A part of the Ramayana was published, with a translation by Messrs. Carey and Marshman, several years since; but a much more correct edition of the text of the two first books, with a Latin translation of the first, and part of the second, have been more recently published by Professor Schlegel; a work worthy of his illustrious name. A summary of the story may be found in Sir Wm. Jones's Works, Maurice's Hindustan, Moor's Pantheon, &c. It is also the subject of the Uttara Rama Charitra in the Hindu Theatre, in the introduction to which an outline of the whole is given. The story is therefore, no doubt, sufficiently familiar even to English readers. It seems to be founded on historical fact; and the traditions of the south of India uniformly ascribe its civilization, the subjugation or dispersion of its forest tribes of barbarians, and the settlement of civilized Hindus, to the conquest of Lanka by Rama.

^385:17 The Vayu specifies the countries or cities over which they reigned. Anguda and Chitraketu, as the Vayu terms the latter, governed countries near the Himalaya, [p. 386] the capitals of which were Angadi and Chandravaktra. Taksha and Pushkara were sovereigns of Gandhara, residing at Takshas'ila and Pushkaravati. Subahu and S'urasena reigned at Mathura; and in the latter we might be satisfied to find the S'urasenas of Arrian, but that there is a subsequent origin, of perhaps greater authenticity, in the family of Yadu, as we shall hereafter see. 'Kus'a built Kus'asthali on the brow of the Vindhya, the capital of Kos'ala; and Lava reigned at S'ravasti (see p. <page 355>. <page 361>) in Uttara (northern) Kos'ala:' &c. The Raghu Vaasa describes Kus'a as returning from Kus'avati to Ayodhya, after his father's death; but it seems not unlikely that the extending power of the princes of the Doab, of the lunar family, compelled Rama's posterity to retire more to the west and south.

^386:18 The Bhagavata is the only Purana that omits this name, as if the author had been induced to correct the reading in order to avoid the necessity of recognising two Nalas. See above, n. 9.

^386:19 Here again we have two distinct series of princes, independently of variations of individual names. Instead of the list of the text, with which the Vayu and Bhagavata nearly, and the Brahma and Hari Vans'a indifferently conform, we have in the , Linga, Kurma, and Agni the following: Ahinagu, Sahasras'wa, Sahasraya or Sahasrabala, Chandravaloka, Tarapida or Taradhis'a, Chandragiri, Bhanuratha or Bhanumitra, and S'rutayus, with whom the list ends, except in the Linga, which adds Bahula, killed by Abhimanyu: enumerating therefore from Devanika but seven or eight princes to the great war, instead of twenty-three, as in the other series. The Raghu Vaasa gives much the same list as our text, ending with Agnivarna.

^386:20 Bala: Bhagavata. Nala: Hari V.

^386:21 Sthala: Bhagavata. S'ala: Vayu and Brahma. S'ila: Raghu Vans'a.

^386:22 Omitted: Bhagavata.

^386:23 S'ankha: Brahma. Khagana: Bhag.

^386:24 Dushitas'wa: Vayu. Adhyushitas'wa: Brahma. Vidhriti: Bhagavata.

^386:25 Omitted: Brahma and Bhagavata.

^386:26 Omitted: Brahma and Hari V.: but included with similar particulars by the Vayu, Bhagavata, and Raghu Vans'a: see also p. 283, where Kaus'alya is likewise given as the synonyme of Hiranyagarbha, being, as the commentator observes, his Visheshanam, his epithet or attribute, born [p. 387] in, or king of, Kos'ala. The Vayu accordingly terms him ###, but in the Bhagavata the epithet Kaus'alya is referred by the commentator to Yajnawalkya, the pupil of Hiranyanabha. The author of the Raghu Vans'a, not understanding the meaning of the term, has converted Kaus'alya into the son of Hiranyanabha. Raghu V. 18. 27. The Bhagavata, like our text, calls the prince the pupil of Jaimini. The Vayu, more correctly, 'the pupil of the sage's grandson.' There seems to be, however, something unusual in the account given of the relation borne by the individuals named to each other. As a pupil of Jaimini, Hiranyanabha is a teacher of the Sama-veda (see <page 283>), but Yajnawalkya is the teacher of the Vajasaneyi branch of the Yajush (<page 281>). Neither of them is specified by Mr. Colebrooke amongst the authorities of the Patanjala or Yoga philosophy; nor does either appear as a disciple of Jaimini in his character of founder of the Mimansa school. Trans. R. As. Soc. vol. I.

^387:27 Arthasiddhi: Brahma P. and Hari V.

^387:28 Maruta: Brahma P. and Hari V. These authorities omit the succeeding four names.

^387:29 Sahaswat: Vayu.

^387:30 Vis'wasaha: Bhagavata.

^387:31 The list closes here, as the author of the Puranas, Vyasa, is cotemporary with the great war. The line of Ikshwaku is resumed prophetically in the twenty-second chapter.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 388]

  

CHAP. V.

Kings of Mithila. Legend of Nimi, the son of Ikshwaku. Birth of Janaka. Sacrifice of Siradhwaja. Origin of Sita. Descendants of Kus'adhwaja. Kriti the last of the Maithila princes.

THE son of Ikshwaku, who was named Nimi [*1], instituted a sacrifice that was to endure for a thousand years, and applied to Vas'ishtha to offer the oblations. Vas'ishtha in answer said, that he had been preengaged by Indra for five hundred years, but that if the Raja, would wait for some time, he would come and officiate as superintending priest. The king made no answer, and Vas'ishtha went away, supposing that he had assented. When the sage had completed the performance of the ceremonies he had conducted for Indra, he returned with all speed to Nimi, purposing to render him the like office. When he arrived, however, and found that Nimi had retained Gautama and other priests to minister at his sacrifice, he was much displeased, and pronounced upon the king, who was then asleep, a curse to this effect, that since he had not intimated his intention, but transferred to Gautama the duty he had first entrusted to himself, Vas'ishtha, Nimi should thenceforth cease to exist in a corporeal form. When Nimi woke, and knew what had happened, he in return denounced as an imprecation upon his unjust preceptor, that he also should lose his bodily existence, as the punishment of uttering a curse upon him without previously communicating with him. Nimi then abandoned his bodily condition. The spirit of Vas'ishtha also leaving his body, was united with the spirits of Mitra and Varuna for a season, until, through their passion for the nymph Urvas'i, the sage was born again in a different shape. The corpse of Nimi was preserved from decay by being embalmed with fragrant oils and resins, and it remained as entire as if it were immortal [*2]. When the sacrifice

[p. 389]

was concluded, the priests applied to the gods, who had come to receive their portions, that they would confer a blessing upon the author of the sacrifice. The gods were willing to restore him to bodily life, but Nimi declined its acceptance, saying, "O deities, who are the alleviators of all worldly suffering, there is not in the world a deeper cause of distress than the separation of soul and body: it is therefore my wish to dwell in the eyes of all beings, but never more to resume a corporeal shape!" To this desire the gods assented, and Nimi was placed by them in the eyes of all living creatures; in consequence of which their eyelids are ever opening and shutting.

As Nimi left no successor, the Munis, apprehensive of the consequences of the earth being without a ruler, agitated the body of the prince, and produced from it a prince who was called Janaka, from being born without a progenitor. In consequence of his father being without a body (videha), he was termed also Vaideha, 'the son of the bodiless;' and the further received the name of Mithi, from having been produced by agitation (mathana) [*3]. The son of Janaka was Udavasu;

[p. 390]

his son was Nandivarddhana; his son was Suketu; his son was Devarata; his son was Vrihaduktha; his son was Mahavirya; his son was Satyadhriti; his son was Dhrishtaketu; his son was Haryyas'wa; his son was Maru; his son was Pratibandhaka; his son was Kritaratha; his son was Krita; his son was Vibudha; his son was Mahadhriti; his son was Kritirata; his son was Maharoman; his son was Suvarnaroman; his son was Hraswaroman; his son was Siradhwaja.

Siradhwaja ploughing the ground, to prepare it for a sacrifice which he instituted in order to obtain progeny, there sprang up in the furrow a damsel, who became his daughter Sita [*4]. The brother of Siradhwaja was Kus'adhwaja, who was king of Kas'i [*5]; he had a son also, named Bhanumat [*6]. The son of Bhanumat was Satadyumna; his son was S'uchi; his son was Urjjavaha; his son was S'atyadhwaja; his son was Kuni [*7]; his son was Anjana; his son was Ritujit; his son was Arishtanemi [*8]; his son was S'rutayus; his son was Supars'wa; his son was Sanjaya [*9]; his son was Kshemari [*10]; his son was Anenas [*11]; his son was Minaratha [*12]; his son was Satyaratha; his son was Satyarathi [*13]; his son was Upagu [*14]; his son was S'ruta [*15]; his son was Saswata [*16]; his son was Sudhanwan; his son was Subhasa; his son was Sus'ruta [*17]; his son was Jaya; his son was Vijaya; his son was Rita; his son was Sunaya [*18]; his son was Vitahavya;

[p. 391]

his son was Dhriti; his son was Bahulas'wa; his son was Kriti, with whom terminated the family of Janaka. These are the kings of Mithila, who for the most part will be [*19] proficient in spiritual knowledge [*20].

Footnotes

^388:1 None of the authorities, except the Vayu and Bhagavata, contain the series of kings noticed in this chapter.

^388:2 This shews that the Hindus were not unacquainted with the Egyptian art of embalming dead bodies. In the Kas'i Khanda, s. 30, an account is given of a Brahman who carries his mother's bones, [p. 389] or rather her corpse, from Setuhandha or Rames'wara to Kas'i. For this purpose he first washes it with the five excretions of a cow, and the five pure fluids, or milk, curds, ghee, honey, and sugar. He then embalms it with Yakshakarddama, a composition of Agallochum, camphor, musk, saffron, sandal, and a resin called Kakkola; and envelopes it severally with Netra vastra, flowered muslin; Pattamvara, silk; Surasa vastra, coarse cotton; Manjishtha, cloth dyed with madder; and Nepala Kambala, nepal blanketing. He then covers it with pure clay, and puts the whole into a coffin of copper, Tamra samputa. These practices are not only unknown, but would be thought impure in the present day.

^389:3 These legends are intended to explain, and were probably suggested by, the terms Vaideha and Mithila, applied to the country upon the Gandak and Kai rivers, the modern Tirhut. The Ramayana places a prince named Mithi between Nimi and Janaka, whence comes the name Mithila. In other respects the list of kings of Mithila agrees, except in a few names. Janaka the successor of Nimi is different from Janaka who is celebrated as the father of Sita. One of them, which, does not appear, is also renowned as a philosopher, and patron of philosophical teachers. Mahabharata, Moksha Dharma. According to the Vayu P., Nimi founded a city called Jayantapur, near the As'rama of Gautama. The remains of a city called Janakpur, on the northern skirts of the district, are supposed to indicate the site of a city founded by one of the princes so named.

^390:4 This identifies Siradhwaja with the second Janaka, the father-in-law of Rama. The story of Sita's birth, or rather discovery, is narrated in the Aranya Khanda of the Ramayana, the Vana Parva of the Mahabharata, and in the Vayu, Brahma Vaivartta, Kalika, and other Puranas.

^390:5 The Ramayana says, 'of Sankas'ya,' which is no doubt the correct reading. Fa Hian found the kingdom of Sang-kia-shi in the Doab, about Mainpuri. Account of the Foe-kue-ki. The Bhagavata makes Kus'adhwaja the son of Siradwaja.

^390:6 The Bhagavata differs from our authority here considerably, by inserting several princes between Kusadhwaja and Bhanumat; or, Dharmadhwaja, who has two sons, Kritadhwaja and Khandikya; the former is the father of Kes'idhwaja, the latter of Bhanumat. See the last book of the Vishnu.

^390:7 S'akuni, and the last of the series, according to the Vayu,

^390:8 Between this prince and S'uchi the series of the Bhagavata is Sanadhwaja, Urddhwaketu, Aja, Purujit. The following variations are from the same authority.

^390:9 Chitraratha.

^390:10 Kshemadhi.

^390:11 Omitted.

^390:12 Samaratha.

^390:13 Omitted.

^390:14 Upaguru.

^390:15 Upagupta.

^390:16 Vaswananta.

^390:17 Yuyudhana, Subhashana, S'ruta.

^390:18 S'unaka.

^391:19 ### is the reading of all the copies; but why the future verb, 'will be,' is used does not appear.

^391:20 Descendants of two of the other sons of the Manu are noticed in the Bhagavata; from Nriga, it is said, proceeded Sumati, Bhutajyotish, Vasu, Pratika, Oghavat, and his sister Oghavati, married to Sudars'ana. The Linga gives three sons to Nriga, Vrisha, Dhrishtaka, and Ranadhrishta, and alludes to a legend of his having been changed to a lizard by the curse of a Brahman. Narishyanta's descendants were Chitrasena, Daksha, Madhwat, Purva, Indrasena, Vitihotra, Satyas'rava, Urus'ravas, Devadatta, Agnives'ya, also called Jatukarna, a form of Agni, and progenitor of the Agnives'ya Brahmans. In the Brahma P. and Hari V. the sons of Narishyat, whom the commentator on the latter considers as the same with Narishyanta, are termed Sacas, Sacae or Scythians; whilst, again, it is said that the son of Narishyanta was Dama, or, as differently read, Yams. As this latter affiliation is stated in the authorities, it would appear as if this Narishyanta was one of the sons of the Manu; but this is only a proof of the carelessness of the compilation, for in the Vishnu, Vayu, and Markandeya Puranas, Narishyanta, the father of Dama, is the son of Marutta, the fourteenth of the posterity of Dishta or Nedishta.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 392]

  

CHAP. VI.

Kings of the lunar dynasty. Origin of Soma, or the moon: he carries off Tara, the wife of Vrihaspati: war between the gods and Asuras in consequence: appeased by Brahma. Birth of Budha: married to Ila, daughter of Vaivaswata. Legend of his son Pururavas, and the nymph Urvas'i: the former institutes offerings with fire: ascends to the sphere of the Gandharbas.

MAITREYA.--You have given me, reverend preceptor, an account of the kings of the dynasty of the sun: I am now desirous to hear a description of the princes who trace their lineage from the moon, and whose race is still celebrated for glorious deeds. Thou art able to relate it to me, Brahman, if thou wilt so favour me.

PARAS'ARA.--You shall hear from me, Maitreya, an account of the illustrious family of the moon, which has produced many celebrated rulers of the earth; a race adorned by the regal qualities of strength, valour, magnificence, prudence, and activity; and enumerating amongst its monarchs Nahusha, Yayati, Kartaviryarjuna, and others equally renowned. That race will I describe to you: do you attend.

Atri was the son of Brahma, the creator of the universe, who sprang from the lotus that grew from the navel of Narayana. The son of Atri was Soma [*1] (the moon), whom Brahma installed as the sovereign of plants, of Brahmans, and of the stars. Soma celebrated the Rajasuya sacrifice, and from the glory thence acquired, and the extensive dominion with which he had been invested, he became arrogant and licentious, and carried off Tara, the wife of Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the gods. In vain Vrihaspati sought to recover his bride; in vain Brahma commanded, and the holy sages remonstrated; Soma refused to relinquish her. Us'anas, out of enmity to Vrihaspati, took part with Soma. Rudra, who had studied under Angiras, the father of Vrihaspati, befriended his

[p. 393]

fellow-student. In consequence of Us'anas, their preceptor, joining Soma, Jambha, Kujambha, and all the Daityas, Danavas, and other foes of the gods, came also to his assistance; whilst Indra and all the gods were the allies of Vrihaspati.

Then there ensued a fierce contest, which, being on account of Taraka (or Tara), was termed the Tarakamaya or Taraka war. In this the gods, led by Rudra, hurled their missiles on the enemy; and the Daityas with equal determination assailed the gods. Earth, shaken to her centre by the struggle between such foes, had recourse to Brahma for protection; on which he interposed, and commanding Us'anas with the demons and Rudra with the deities to desist from strife, compelled Soma to restore Tara to her husband. Finding that she was pregnant, Vrihaspati desired her no longer to retain her burden; and in obedience to his orders she was delivered of a son, whom she deposited in a clump of long Munja grass. The child, from the moment of its birth, was endued with a splendour that dimmed the radiance of every other divinity, and both Vrihaspati and Soma, fascinated by his beauty, claimed him as their child. The gods, in order to settle the dispute, appealed to Tara; but she was ashamed, and would make no answer. As she still continued mute to their repeated applications, the child became incensed, and was about to curse her, saying, "Unless, vile woman, you immediately declare who is my father, I will sentence you to such a fate as shall deter every female in future from hesitating to speak the truth." On this, Brahma again interfered, and pacified the child; and then, addressing Tara, said, "Tell me, daughter, is this the child of Vrihaspati, or of Soma?" "Of Soma," said Tara, blushing. As soon as she had spoken, the lord of the constellations, his countenance bright, and expanding with rapture, embraced his son, and said, "Well done, my boy; verily thou art wise:" and hence his name was Budha [*2].

[p. 394]

It has already been related how Budha begot Pururavas by Ila. Pururavas [*3] was a prince renowned for liberality, devotion, magnificence, and love of truth, and for personal beauty. Urvas'i having incurred the imprecation of Mitra and Varuna, determined to take up her abode in the world of mortals; and descending accordingly, beheld Pururavas. As soon as she saw him she forgot all reserve, and disregarding the delights of Swarga, became deeply enamoured of the prince. Beholding her infinitely superior to all other females in grace, elegance, symmetry, delicacy, and beauty, Pururavas was equally fascinated by Urvas'i: both were inspired by similar sentiments, and mutually feeling that each was every thing to the other, thought no more of any other object. Confiding in his merits, Pururavas addressed the nymph, and said, "Fair creature, I love you; have compassion on me, and return my affection." Urvas'i, half averting her face through modesty, replied, "I will do so, if you will observe the conditions I have to propose." "What are they?" inquired the prince; "declare them." "I have two rams," said the nymph, "which I love as children; they must be kept near my bedside, and never suffered to be carried away: you must also take care never to he seen by me undressed; and clarified butter alone must be my food." To these terms the king readily gave assent.

After this, Pururavas and Urvas'i dwelt together in Alaka, sporting amidst the groves and lotus-crowned lakes of Chaitraratha, and the other forests there situated, for sixty-one thousand years [*4]. The love of

[p. 395]

[paragraph continues] Pururavas for his bride increased every day of its duration; and the affection of Urvas'i augmenting equally in fervour, she never called to recollection residence amongst the immortals. Not so with the attendant spirits at the court of Indra; and nymphs, genii, and quiristers, found heaven itself but dull whilst Urvas'i was away. Knowing the agreement that Urvas'i had made with the king, Vis'wavasu was appointed by the Gandharbas to effect its violation; and he, coming by night to the chamber where they slept, carried off one of the rams. Urvas'i was awakened by its cries, and exclaimed, Ah me! who has stolen one of my children? Had I a husband, this would not have happened! To whom shall I apply for aid?" The Raja overheard her lamentation, but recollecting that he was undressed, and that Urvas'i might see him in that state, did not move from the couch. Then the Gandharbas came and stole the other ram; and Urvas'i, hearing it bleat, cried out that a woman had no protector who was the bride of a prince so dastardly as to submit to this outrage. This incensed Pururavas highly, and trusting that the nymph would not see his person, as it was dark, he rose, and took his sword, and pursued the robbers, calling upon them to stop, and receive their punishment. At that moment the Gandharbas caused a flash of brilliant lightning to play upon the chamber, and Urvas'i beheld the king undressed: the compact was violated, and the nymph immediately disappeared. The Gandharbas, abandoning the rams, departed to the region of the gods.

Having recovered the animals, the king returned delighted to his couch, but there he beheld no Urvas'i; and not finding her any where, he wandered naked over the world, like one insane. At length coming to Kurukshetra, he saw Urvas'i sporting with four other nymphs of heaven in a lake beautified with lotuses, and he ran to her, and called her his wife, and wildly implored her to return. "Mighty monarch," said the nymph, "refrain from this extravagance. I am now pregnant: depart at present, and come hither again at the end of a year, when I will deliver to you a son, and remain with you for one night." Pururavas, thus comforted, returned to his capital. Urvas'i said to her companions, "This prince is a most excellent mortal: I lived with him

[p. 396]

long and affectionately united." "It was well done of you," they replied; "he is indeed of comely appearance, and one with whom we could live happily for ever."

When the year had expired, Urvas'i and the monarch met at Kurukshetra, and she consigned to him his first-born Ayus; and these annual interviews were repeated, until she had borne to him five sons. She then said to Pururavas, "Through regard for me, all the Gandharbas have expressed their joint purpose to bestow upon my lord their benediction: let him therefore demand a boon." The Raja replied, "My enemies are all destroyed, my faculties are all entire; I have friends and kindred, armies and treasures: there is nothing which I may not obtain except living in the same region with my Urvas'i. My only desire therefore is, to pass my life with her." When he had thus spoken, the Gandharbas brought to Pururavas a vessel with fire, and said to him, "Take this fire, and, according to the precepts of the Vedas, divide it into three fires; then fixing your mind upon the idea of living with Urvas'i, offer oblations, and you shall assuredly obtain your wishes." The Raja took the brasier, and departed, and came to a forest. Then he began to reflect that he had committed a great folly in bringing away the vessel of fire instead of his bride; and leaving the vessel in the wood, he went disconsolate to his palace. In the middle of the night he awoke, and considered that the Gandharbas had given him the brasier to enable him to obtain the felicity of living with Urvas'i, and that it was absurd in him to have left it by the way. Resolving therefore to recover it, he rose, and went to the place where he had deposited the vessel; but it was gone. In its stead he saw a young As'wattha tree growing out of a S'ami plant, and he reasoned with himself, and said, "I left in this spot a vessel of fire, and now behold a young As'wattha tree growing out of a S'ami plant. Verily I will take these types of fire to my capital, and there, having engendered fire by their attrition, I will worship it." Having thus determined, he took the plants to his city, and prepared their wood for attrition, with pieces of as many inches long as there are syllables in the Gayatri: he recited that holy verse, and rubbed together sticks of as many inches as he recited syllables in the

[p. 397]

[paragraph continues] Gayatri [*5]. Having thence elicited fire, he made it threefold, according to the injunctions of the Vedas, and offered oblations with it, proposing as the end of the ceremony reunion with Urvas'i. In this way, celebrating many sacrifices agreeably to the form in which offerings are presented with fire, Pururavas obtained a seat in the sphere of the Gandharbas, and was no more separated from his beloved. Thus fire, that was at first but one, was made threefold in the present Manwantara by the son of Ila [*6].

Footnotes

^392:1 The Vayu says the essence of Soma (Somatwa) issued from the eyes of Atri, and impregnated the ten quarters. The Bhagavata says merely that Soma was born from the eyes of Atri. The Brahma P. and Hari V. give a grosser name to the effusion.

^393:2 'He who knows.' Much erroneous speculation has originated in confounding this Budha, the son of Soma, and regent of the planet Mercury, 'he who knows,' the intelligent, with Buddha, any deified mortal, or 'he by whom truth is known;' or, as individually applicable, Gautama or S'akya, son of the Raja S'uddhodana, by [p. 394] whom the Buddhists themselves aver their doctrines were first promulgated. The two characters have nothing in common, and the names are identical only when one or other is misspelt.

^394:3 The story of Pururavas is told much in the same strain as follows, though with some variations, and in greater or less detail, in the Vayu, Matsya, Vamana, Padma, and Bhagavata Puranas. It is also referred to in the Mahabharata, vol. I. p. 113. It is likewise the subject of the Vikrama and Urvas'i of Kalidasa, in which drama the incidents offensive to good taste are not noticed. See Hindu Theatre, vol. I. p. 587. The Matsya Purana, besides this story, which is translated in the introduction to the drama, has in another part, c. 94, an account of a Pururavas, who, in the Chakshusha Manwantara, was king of Madra, and who by the worship of Vishnu obtained a residence with the Gandharbas.

^394:4 One copy has sixty-one years; the Brahma P. and Hari V. have fifty-nine: one period is as likely as the other.

^397:5 It does not appear why this passage is repeated. The length of the sticks, conformably to the number of syllables in the usual form of the Gayatri, would be twenty-four inches. The Bhagavata attaches to the operation a piece of mysticism of a Tantrika origin: Pururavas, whilst performing the attrition, mentally identifies himself and Urvas'i with the two sticks, and repeats the Mantra, ###.

^397:6 The division of one fire into three is ascribed to Pururavas by the Mahabharata and the rest. The commentator on the former specifies them as the Garhapatya, Dakshina, and Ahavaniya, which Sir Wm. Jones, Manu, II. 231, renders nuptial, ceremonial, and sacrificial fires; or rather, 1. household, that which is perpetually maintained by a householder; 2. a fire for sacrifices, placed to the south of the rest; and 3. a consecrated fire for oblations; forming the Tretagni, or triad of sacred fires, in opposition to the Laukika, or merely temporal ones. To Pururavas it would appear the triple arrangement was owing; but there are some other curious traditions regarding him, which indicate his being the author of some important innovations in the Hindu ritual. The Bhagavata says, that before his time there was but one Veda, one caste, one fire, and one god, Narayana; and that, in the beginning of the Treta age, Pururavas made them all 'three:' that is, according to the commentator, the ritual was then instituted: The Matsya P. has an account of this prince's going to the orbit of the sun and moon at every conjunction, when oblations to progenitors are to be offered, as if obsequial rites had originated with Pururavas. The Mahabharata states some still more remarkable particulars. 'The glorious Pururavas, endowed, although a mortal, with the properties of a deity, governing the thirteen islands of the ocean, engaged in hostilities with the Brahmans in the pride of his strength, and seized their jewels, as they exclaimed against his oppression. Sanatkumara came from the sphere of Brahma to teach him the rules of duty, but Pururavas did not accept his instructions, and the king, deprived of understanding by the pride of his power, and actuated by avarice, was therefore ever accursed by the offended great sages, and was destroyed.'

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 398]

  

CHAP. VII.

Sons of Pururavas. Descendants of Amavasu. Indra born as Gadhi. Legend of Richika and Satyavati. Birth of Jamadagni and Vis'wamitra. Paras'urama the son of the former. (Legend of Paras'urama.) Sunahs'ephas and others the sons of Vis'wamitra, forming the Kaus'ika race.

PURURAVAS had six sons, Ayus, Dhimat, Amavasu, Vis'wavasu, S'atayus, and S'rutayus [*1]. The son of Amavasu was Bhima [*2]; his son was Kanchana [*3]; his son was Suhotra [*4], whose  was Jahnu. This prince, whilst performing a sacrifice, saw the whole of the place overflowed by the waters of the Ganges. Highly offended at this intrusion, his eyes red with anger, he united the spirit of sacrifice with himself, by the power of his devotion, and drank up the river. The gods and sages upon this came to him, and appeased his indignation, and reobtained Ganga from him, in the capacity of his daughter (whence she is called Jahnavi) [*5].

[p. 399]

The son of Jahnu was Sumantu [*6]; his son was Ajaka; his son was Valakas'wa [*7]; his son was Kus'a [*8], who had four sons, Kus'amba, Kus'anabha, Amurttaya, and Amavasu [*9]. Kus'amba, being desirous of a son, engaged in devout penance to obtain one who should be equal to Indra. Observing the intensity of his devotions, Indra was alarmed lest a prince of power like his own should be engendered, and determined therefore to take upon himself the character of Kus'amba's son [*10]. He was accordingly born as Gadhi, of the race of Kus'a (Kaus'ika). Gadhi had a daughter named Satyavati. Richika, of the descendants of Bhrigu, demanded her in marriage. The king was very unwilling to give his daughter to a peevish old Brahman, and demanded of him, as the nuptial present, a thousand fleet horses, whose colour should be white, with one black ear. Richika having propitiated Varuna, the god of ocean, obtained from him, at the holy place called As'watirtha, a thousand such steeds; and giving them to the king, espoused his daughter [*11].

In order to effect the birth of a son, Richika [*12] prepared a dish of rice, barley, and pulse, with butter and milk, for his wife to eat; and at her

[p. 400]

request he consecrated a similar mixture for her mother, by partaking of which she should give birth to a prince of martial prowess. Leaving both dishes with his wife, after describing particularly which was intended for her, and which for her mother, the sage went forth to the forests. When the time arrived for the food to be eaten, the queen said to Satyavati, "Daughter, all persons wish their children to be possessed of excellent qualities, and would be mortified to see them surpassed by the merits of their mother's brother. It will be desirable for you, therefore, to give me the mess your husband has set apart for you, and to eat of that intended for me; for the son which it is to procure me is destined to be the monarch of the whole world, whilst that which your dish would give you must be a Brahman, alike devoid of affluence, valour, and power." Satyavati agreed to her mother's proposal, and they exchanged messes.

When Richika returned home, and beheld Satyavati, he said to her, "Sinful woman, what hast thou done! I view thy body of a fearful appearance. Of a surety thou hast eaten the consecrated food which was prepared for thy mother: thou hast done wrong. In that food I had infused the properties of power and strength and heroism; in thine, the qualities suited to a Brahman, gentleness, knowledge, and resignation. In consequence of having reversed my plans, thy son shall follow a warrior's propensities, and use weapons, and fight, and slay. Thy mother's son shall be born with the inclinations of a Brahman, and be addicted to peace and piety." Satyavati, hearing this, fell at her husband's feet, and said, "My lord, I have done this thing through ignorance; have compassion on me; let me not have a son such as thou hast foretold: if such there must be, let it be my grandson, not my son." The Muni, relenting at her distress, replied, "So let it be." Accordingly in due season she gave birth to Jamadagni; and her mother brought forth Viswamitra. Satyavati afterwards became the Kaus'iki river [*13]. Jamadagni married Renuka, the daughter of Renu, of the

[p. 401]

family of Ikshwaku, and had by her the destroyer of the Kshatriya race, Paras'urama, who was a portion of Narayana, the spiritual guide of the universe [*14].

Footnotes

^398:1 Considerable variety prevails in these names, and the Matsya, Padma, Brahma, and Agni enumerate eight. The lists are as follows:

          Mahabharata.

       Matsya.

       Agni.

       Kurma.

       Bhagavata.

     
      Ayus

       Ayus

       Ayus

       Ayus

       Ayus

     
      Dhimat

       Dhritimat

       Dhimat

       Mayus

       S'rutayus

     
      Amavasu

       Vasu

       Vasu

       Amayus

       Satyayus

     
      Dridhayus

       Dridhayus

       Us'rayus

       Vis'wayus

       Raya

     
      Vanayus

       Dhanayus

       Antayus

       S'atayus

       Vijaya

     
      S'atayus

       S'atayus

       S'atayus

       S'rutayus

       Jaya

     
       

       As'wayus

       Ritayus

        

        

     
       

       Divijata

       Divijata.

        

        

     
   [paragraph continues] The list of the Brahma is that of the Mahabharata, with the addition of S'atayus and Vis'wayus; and the Padma agrees with the Matsya.

^398:2 Son of Vijaya: Bhagavata. This line of princes is followed only in our text, the Vayu, Brahma, and Hari V., and the Bhagavata.

^398:3 Kanchanaprabha: Brahma.

^398:4 Hotraka: Bhagavata.

^398:5 The Brahma P. and Hari V. add of this prince, that he was the husband of Kaveri, the daughter of Yuvanas'wa, who by the imprecation of her husband became the Kaveri river: another indication of the Dakshina origin of these works. The [p. 399] Hari V. has another Jahnu, to whom it gives the same spouse, as we shall hereafter see.

^399:6 Sunuta: Brahma. Puru: Bhagavata.

^399:7 Valaka: Brahma. Ajaka: Bhagavata.

^399:8 The Brahma P. and Hari V. add that Kus'a was in alliance with the Pahlavas and foresters.

^399:9 Our authorities differ as to these names:

          Vayu.

       Brahma and Hari V.

       Bhagavata.

     
      Kus'as'wa   or,
   Kus'asthamba

       Kus'as'wa

       Kus'amba

     
      Kus'anabha

       Kus'anabha

       Kus'anabha

     
      Amurttarayasa

       Amurttimat

       Amurttaraya

     
      Vasu

       Kus'ika

       Vasu.

     
   [paragraph continues] The Ramayana has Kus'amba, Kus'anabha, Amurttarayasa, and Vasu; and makes them severally the founders of Kaus'ambi, of Mahodaya (which afterwards appears the same as Kanoj), Dharmaranya, and Girivraja; the latter being in the mountainous part of Magadha. I. s. 29.

^399:10 The Brahma and Hari V. make Gadhi the son of Kus'ika; the Vayu and Bhagavata, of Kus'anaba; the Ramayana, of Kus'anabha.

^399:11 The Ramayana notices the marriage, but has no legend. The Mahabharata, Vans P., has a rather more detailed narration, but much the same as in the text. According to the commentator, As'watirtha is in the district of Kanoj; perhaps at the confluence of the Kalanadi with the Ganges. The agency of the god of Ocean in procuring horses, is a rather curious additional coincidence between Varuna and Neptune.

^399:12 In the Mahabharata, Bhrigu, the father of Richika, prepares the Charu.

^400:13 So the Ramayana, after stating that Satyavati followed her husband in death, adds, that she became the Kaus'iki river; the Cosi, which, rising in Nepal, flows through Puraniya into the Ganges, opposite nearly to Rajamahal.

^401:14 The text omits the story of Paras'urama, but as the legend makes a great figure in the Vaishnava works in general, I have inserted it from the Mahabharata, where it is twice related, once in the Vana Parva, and once in the Rajadharma section of the S'anti Parva. It is told also at length in the ninth book of the Bhagavata, in the Padma and Agni Puranas, &c.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

  

LEGEND OF PARAS'URAMA.

(From the Mahabharata.)

"JAMADAGNI (the son of Richika [*15]) was a pious sage, who by the fervour of his devotions, whilst engaged in holy study, obtained entire possession of the Vedas. Having gone to king Prasenajit, he demanded in marriage his daughter Renuka, and the king gave her unto him. The descendant of Bhrigu conducted the princess to his hermitage, and dwelt with her there, and she was contented to partake in his ascetic life. They had four sons, and then a fifth, who was Jamadagnya, the last but not the least of the brethren, Once when her sons were all absent, to gather the fruits on which they fed, Renuka, who was exact in the discharge of all her duties, went forth to bathe. On her way to the stream she beheld Chitraratha, the prince of Mrittikavati, with a garland of lotuses on his neck, sporting with his queen in the water, and she felt envious of their felicity. Defiled by unworthy thoughts, wetted but not purified by the stream, she returned disquieted to the hermitage, and her husband perceived her agitation. Beholding her fallen from perfection, and shorn of the lustre of her sanctity, Jamadagni reproved her, and was exceeding wroth. Upon this there came her sons from the wood, first the eldest, Rumanwat, then Sushena, then Vasu, and then Vis'wavasu; and each, as he entered, was successively commanded by his father to put his mother to death; but amazed, and influenced by natural affection, neither of them made any reply: therefore Jamadagni was angry, and cursed them, and they became as idiots, and lost all

[p. 402]

understanding, and were like unto beasts or birds. Lastly, Rama returned to the hermitage, when the mighty and holy Jamadagni said unto him, 'Kill thy mother, who has sinned; and do it, son, without repining.' Rama accordingly took up his axe, and struck off his mother's head; whereupon the wrath of the illustrious and mighty Jamadagni was assuaged, and he was pleased with his son, and said, 'Since thou hast obeyed my commands, and done what was hard to be performed, demand from me whatever blessings thou wilt, and thy desires shall be all fulfilled.' Then Rama begged of his father these boons; the restoration of his mother to life, with forgetfulness of her having been slain, and purification from all defilement; the return of his brothers to their natural condition; and, for himself, invincibility in single combat, and length of days: and all these did his father bestow.

"It happened on one occasion, that, during the absence of the Rishi's sons, the mighty monarch Karttavirya, the sovereign of the Haihaya tribe, endowed by the favour of Dattatreya with a thousand arms, and a golden chariot that went wheresoever he willed it to go, came to the hermitage [*16] of Jamadagni, where the wife of the sage received him with all proper respect. The king, inflated with the pride of valour, made no return to her hospitality, but carried off with him by violence the calf of the milch cow of the sacred oblation [*17], and cast down the tall trees surrounding the hermitage. When Rama returned, his father told him what had chanced, and he saw the cow in affliction, and he was filled with wrath. Taking up his splendid bow [*18], Bhargava, the slayer of hostile heroes, assailed Karttavirya, who had now become subject to

[p. 403]

the power of death, and overthrew him in battle. With sharp arrows Rama cut off his thousand arms, and the king perished. The sons of Karttavirya, to revenge his death, attacked the hermitage of Jamadagni, when Rama was away, and slew the pious and unresisting sage, who called repeatedly, but fruitlessly, upon his valiant son. They then departed; and when Rama returned, bearing fuel from the thickets, he found his father lifeless, and thus bewailed his unmerited fate: 'Father, in resentment of my actions have you been murdered by wretches as foolish as they are base! by the sons of Karttavirya are you struck down, as a deer in the forest by the huntsman's shafts! Ill have you deserved such a death; you who have ever trodden the path of virtue, and never offered wrong to any created thing! How great is the crime that they have committed, in slaying with their deadly shafts an old man like you, wholly occupied with pious cares, and engaging not in strife! Much have they to boast of to their fellows and their friends, that they have shamelessly slain a solitary hermit, incapable of contending in arms!' Thus lamenting, bitterly and repeatedly, Rama performed his father's last obsequies, and lighted his funeral pile. He then made a vow that he would extirpate the whole Kshatriya race. In fulfilment of this purpose he took up his arms, and with remorseless and fatal rage singly destroyed in fight the sons of Karttavirya; and after them, whatever Kshatriyas he encountered, Rama, the first of warriors, likewise slew. Thrice seven times did the clear the earth of the Kshatriya caste [*19]; and he filled with their blood the five large lakes of Samanta-panchaka, from which he offered libations to the race of Bhrigu. There did he behold his sire again, and the son of Richika beheld his son, and told him what to do. Offering a solemn sacrifice to the king of the gods, Jamadagnya presented the earth to the ministering priests. To Kas'yapa he gave the altar made of gold, ten fathoms in length, and nine in height [*20]. With the permission of Kas'yapa, the Brahmans divided it in pieces amongst them, and they were thence

[p. 404]

called Khandavayana Brahmans. Having given the earth to Kas'yapa, the hero of immeasurable prowess retired to the Mahendra mountain, where he still resides: and in this manner was there enmity between him and the race of Kshatriyas, and thus was the whole earth conquered by Rama [*21]."

____________

The son of Viswamitra was S'unahs'ephas, the descendant of Bhrigu, given by the gods, and thence named Devarata [*22]. Viswamitra had

[p. 405]

other sons also, amongst whom the most celebrated were Madhuchhandas, Kritajaya, Devadeva, Ashtaka, Kachchapa, and Harita; these founded many families, all of whom were known by the name of Kaus'ikas, and intermarried with the families of various Rishis [*23].

Footnotes

^401:15 The circumstances of Richika's marriage, and the birth of Jamadagni and Vis'wamitra, are told much in the same manner as in our text both in the Mahabharata and Bhagavata.

^402:16 In the beginning of the legend occurs the account of Karttaviryarjuna, with the addition that he oppressed both men and gods. The latter applying to Vishnu for succour, he descended to earth, and was born as Paras'urama, for the especial purpose of putting the Haihaya king to death.

^402:17 In the Rajadharma the sons of the king carry off the calf. The Bhagavata makes the king seize upon the cow, by whose aid Jamadagni had previously entertained Arjuna and all his train: borrowing, no doubt, these embellishments from the similar legend of Vas'ishtha and Vis'wamitra, related in the Ramayana.

^402:18 The characteristic weapon of Rama is however an axe (paras'u), whence his name Rama, 'with the axe.' It was given to him by S'iva, whom the hero propitiated on mount Gandhamadana. He at the same time received instruction in the use of weapons generally, and the art of war. Raja Dharma.

^403:19 This more than 'thrice slaying of the slain' is explained in the Rajadharma to mean, that he killed the men of so many generations, as fast as they grew up to adolescence.

^403:20 It is sometimes read Narotsedha, 'as high as a man.'

^404:21 The story, as told in the Rajadharma section, adds, that when Rama had given the earth to Kas'yapa, the latter desired him to depart, as there was no dwelling for him in it, and to repair to the seashore of the south, where Ocean made for him (or relinquished to him) the maritime district named S'urparaka. The traditions of the Peninsula ascribe the formation of the coast of Malabar to this origin, and relate that Paras'urama compelled the ocean to retire, and introduced Brahmans and colonists from the north into Kerala or Malabar. According to some accounts he stood on the promontory of Dilli, and shot his arrows to the south, over the site of Kerala. It seems likely that we have proof of the local legend being at least as old as the beginning of the Christian era, as the mons Pyrrhus of Ptolemy is probably the mountain of Paras'u or Paras'urama. See Catalogue of Mackenzie Collection, Introd. p. xcv. and vol. II. p. 74. The Rajadharma also gives an account of the Kshatriyas who escaped even the thrice seven times repeated destruction of their race. Some of the Haihayas were concealed by the earth as women; the son of Viduratha, of the race of Puru, was preserved in the Riksha mountain, where he was nourished by the bears; Sarvakarman, the son of Saudasa, was saved by Paras'ara, performing the offices of a S'udra; Gopati, son of S'ivi, was nourished by cows in the forests; Vatsa, the son of Pratarddana, was concealed amongst the calves in a cow-pen; the son of Deviratha was secreted by Gautama on the banks of the Ganges; Vrihadratha was preserved in Gridhrakuta; and descendants of Marutta were saved by the ocean. From these the lines of kings were continued; but it does not appear from the ordinary lists that they were ever interrupted. This legend however, as well as that of the Ramayana, b. I. c. 52, no doubt intimates a violent and protracted struggle between the Brahmans and Kshatriyas for supreme domination in India, as indeed the text of the Mahabharata more plainly denotes, as Earth is made to say to Kas'yapa, 'The fathers and grandfathers of these Kshatriyas have been killed by the remorseless Rama in warfare on my account.'

^404:22 The story of S'unahs'ephas is told by different authorities, with several variations. As the author of various S'uktas in the Rich, he is called the son of Ajigartta. The Ramayana makes him the middle son of the sage Richika, sold to Ambarisha, king of Ayodhya, by his parents, to be a victim in a human sacrifice offered [p. 405] by that prince. He is set at liberty by Vis'wamitra, but it is not added that he was adopted. The Bhagavata concurs in the adoption, but makes S'unahs'ephas the son of Vis'wamitra's sister, by Ajigartta of the line of Bhrigu, and states his being purchased as a victim for the sacrifice of Haris'chandra (see n. . <page 372>). The Vayu makes him a son of Richika, but alludes to his being the victim at Haris'chandra's sacrifice. According to the Ramayana, Viswamitra called upon his sons to take the place of S'unahs'ephas, and on their refusing, degraded them to the condition of Chandalas. The Bhagavata says, that fifty only of the hundred sons of Viswamitra were expelled their tribe, for refusing to acknowledge S'unahs'ephas or Devarata as their elder brother. The others consented; and the Bhagavata expresses this; 'They said to the elder, profoundly versed in the Mantras, We are your followers:' as the commentator; ###. The Ramayana also observes, that S'unahs'ephas, when bound, praised Indra with Richas or hymns of the Rig-veda. The origin of the story therefore, whatever may be its correct version, must be referred to the Vedas; and it evidently alludes to some innovation in the ritual, adopted by a part only of the Kaus'ika families of Brahmans.

^405:23 The Bhagavata says one hundred sons, besides Devarata and others, as Ashtaka, Harita, &c. Much longer lists of names are given in the Vayu, Bhagavata, Brahma, and Hari V. The two latter specify the mothers. Thus Devas'ravas, Kati (the founder of the Katyayanas), and Hiranyaksha were sons of S'ilavati; Renuka, Galava, Sankriti, Mudgala, Madhuchchandas, and Devala were sons of Renu; and Ashtaka, Kachchhapa, and Harita were the sons of Drishadvati. The same works enumerate the Gotras, the families or tribes of the Kaus'ika Brahmans: these are, Parthivas, Devaratas, Yajnawalkyas, Samarshanas, Udumbaras, Dumlanas, Tarakayanas, Munchatas, Lohitas, Renus, Karishus, Babhrus, Paninas, Dhyanajyapyas, S'yalantas, Hiranyakshas, S'ankus, Galavas, Yamadutas, Devalas, S'alankayanas, Bashkalas, Dadativadaras, S'aus'ratas, S'aindhavayanas, Nishnatas, Chunchulas, S'alankrityas, Sankrityas, Vadaranyas, and an infinity of others, multiplied by intermarriages with other tribes, and who, according to the Vayu, were originally of the regal caste, like Viswamitra; but, like him, obtained Brahmanhood through devotion. Now these Gotras, or some of them at least, no doubt existed, partaking more of the character of schools of doctrine, but in which teachers and scholars were very likely to have become of one family by intermarrying; and the whole, as well as their original founder, imply the interference of the Kshatriya caste with the Brahmanical monopoly of religious instruction and composition.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 406]

  

CHAP. VIII.

Sons of Ayus. Line of Kshatravriddha, or kings of Kas'i. Former birth of Dhanwantari. Various names of Pratarddana. Greatness of Alarka.

AYUS, the eldest son of Pururavas, married the daughter of Rahu (or Arahu), by whom he had five sons, Nahusha, Kshatravriddha [*1], Rambha [*2], Raji, and Anenas [*3].

The son of Kshatravriddha was Suhotra [*4], who had three sons, Kas'a [*5], Les'a [*6], and Ghritsamada. The son of the last was S'aunaka [*7], who first established the distinctions of the four castes [*8]. The son of Kas'a was Kas'iraja [*9]; his son was Dirghatamas [*10]; his son was Dhanwantari, whose nature was exempt from human infirmities, and who in every existence had been master of universal knowledge. In his past life (or when he was produced by the agitation of the milky sea), Narayana had conferred upon him the boon, that he should subsequently be born in the

[p. 407]

family of Kasiraja, should compose the eightfold system of medical science [*11], and should be thereafter entitled to a share of offerings made to the gods. The son of Dhanwantari was Ketumat; his son was Bhimaratha; his son was Divodasa [*12]; his son was Pratarddana, so

[p. 408]

named from destroying the race of Bhadras'renya. He had various other appellations, as S'atrujit, 'the victor over his foes,' from having vanquished all his enemies; Vatsa, or 'child,' from his father's frequently calling him by that name; Ritadhwaja, 'he whose emblem was truth,' being a great observer of veracity; and Kuvalayas'wa, because he had a horse (as'wa) called Kuvalaya [*13]. The son of this prince was Alarka, of whom this verse is sung in the present day; "For sixty thousand and sixty hundred years no other youthful monarch except Alarka, reigned over the earth [*14]." The son of Alarka was

[p. 409]

[paragraph continues] Santati [*15]; his son was Sunitha; his son was Suketu; his son was Dharmaketu; his son was Satyaketu; his son was Vibhu; his son was Suvibhu; his son was Sukumara; his son was Dhrishtaketu; his son was Vainahotra; his son was Bharga; his son was Bhargabhumi; from whom also rules for the four castes were promulgated [*16]. These are the Kas'ya

[p. 410]

princes, or descendants of Kas'a [*17]. We will now enumerate the descendants of Raji.

Footnotes

^406:1 Dharmavriddha: Vayu. Vriddhas'arman: Matsya. Yajnas'arman: Padma.

^406:2 Darbha: Agni. Dambha: Padma.

^406:3 Vipapman: Agni and Matsya. Vidaman: Padma. The two last authorities proceed no farther with this line.

^406:4 Sunahotra: Vayu, Brahma.

^406:5 Kas'ya: Bhagavata.

^406:6 Sala: Vayu, Brahma, Hari V.: whose son was Arshtisena, father of Charanta; Vayu: of Kas'yapa; Brahma and Hari V.

^406:7 Here is probably an error, for the Vayu, Bhagavata, and Brahma agree in making S'unaka the son of Ghritsamada, and father of S'aunaka.

^406:8 The expression is 'The originator or causer of the distinctions (or duties) of the four castes.' The commentator, however, understands the expression to signify, that his descendants were of the four castes. So also the Vayu: 'The son of Ghritsamada was S'unaka, whose son was S'aunaka. Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vais'yas, and S'udras were born in his race; Brahmans by distinguished deeds.' The existence of but one caste in the age of purity, however incompatible with the legend which ascribes the origin of the four tribes to Brahma, is every where admitted. Their separation is assigned to different individuals, whether accurately to any one may be doubted; but the notion indicates that the distinction was of a social or political character.

^406:9 Kas'iya: Brahma.

^406:10 Dirghatapas: Vayu. Ghritsatamas: Agni. The Bhagavata inserts a Rashtra before this prince, and the Vayu a Dharma after him.

^407:11 The eight branches of medical science are, 1. S'alya, extraction of extraneous bodies; 2. S'alaka, treatment of external organic affections: these two constitute surgery: 3. Chikitsa, administration of medicines, or medical treatment in general; 4. Bhutavidya, treatment of maladies referred to demoniac possession; 5. Kaumarabhritya, midwifery and management of children; 6. Agada, alexipharmacy; 7. Rasayana, alchemical therapeutics; 8. Bajikarana, use of aphrodisiacs. Dhanwantari, according to the Brahma Vaivartta P., was preceded in medical science by Atreya, Bharadwaja, and Charaka: his pupil S'us'ruta is the reputed author of a celebrated work still extant. It seems probable that Kas'i or Benares was at an early period a celebrated school of medicine.

^407:12 Some rather curious legends are connected with this prince in the Vayu and Brahma Puranas, and Hari Vans'a, and especially in the Kas'i Khanda of the Skanda Purana. According to these authorities, S'iva and Parvati, desirous of occupying Kas'i, which Divodasa possessed, sent Nikumbha, one of the Ganas of the former, to lead the prince to the adoption of Buddhist doctrines; in consequence of which he was expelled from the sacred city, and, according to the Vayu, founded another on the banks of the Gomati. We have, however, also some singular, though obscure intimations of some of the political events of this and the succeeding reign. The passage of the Vayu is, 'The king Divodasa, having slain the hundred sons of Bhadras'renya, took possession of his kingdom, which was conquered by that hero. The son of Bhadras'renya, celebrated by the name of Durdama, was spared by Divodasa, as being an infant. Pratarddana was the son of Divodasa by Drishadvati; and by that great prince, desirous of destroying all enmity, (was recovered) that (territory) which had been seized by that young boy (Durdama).' This is not very explicit, and something is wanted to complete the sense. The Brahma P. and Hari V. tell the story twice over, chiefly in the words of the Vayu, but with some additions. In ch. 29. we have, first, the first three lines of the above extract; then comes the story of Benares being deserted; we then have the two next lines; then follow, 'That prince (Durdama) invading his patrimonial possessions, the territory which Divodasa had seized by force was recovered by the gallant son of Bhadhras'renya, Durddama, a warrior desirous, mighty king, [p. 408] to effect the destruction of his foes.' Here the victory is ascribed to Durddama, in opposition to what appears to be the sense of the Vayu, and what is undoubtedly that of our text, which says that he was called Pratarddana from destroying the race of Bhadras'renya, and S'atrujit from vanquishing all his foes. By Vairasya anta, 'the end of hostility or enmity,' is obviously not to be understood here, as M. Langlois has intimated, a friendly pacification, but the end or destruction of all enemies. In the 32d chapter of the Hari Vans'a we have precisely the same lines, slightly varied as to their order; but they are preceded by this verse; 'The city (that on the Gomati), before the existence of Benares, of Bhadras'renya, a pious prince of the Yadu race: This verse is not in the Brahma P. After giving the rest of the above quotation, except the last line, the passage proceeds, 'The king called Ashtaratha was the son of Bhimaratha; and by him, great king, a warrior desirous of destroying his foes was (the country) recovered, the children (of Durdama) being infants.' According to the same authority, we are here to understand Bhimaratha and Ashtaratha as epithets of Divodasa and Pratarddana. From these scanty and ill-digested notices it appears, that Divodasa, on being expelled from Benares, took some city and district on the Gomati from the family of Bhadras'renya; that Durdama recovered the country, and that Pratarddana again conquered it from his descendants. The alternation concerned apparently only bordering districts, for the princes of Mahishmati and of Kas'i continue, in both an earlier and a later series, in undisturbed possession of their capitals and their power.

^408:13 The Vayu, Agni, Brahma P., and Hari V. interpose two sons of Pratarddana, Garga or Bharga and Vatsa; and they make Vatsa the father of Alarka, except the Brahma, which has S'atrujit and Ritadhwaja as two princes following Vatsa.

^408:14 The Vayu, Brahma, and Hari V. repeat this stanza, and add that Alarka enjoyed such protracted existence through the favour of Lopamudra, and that having [p. 409] lived till the period at which the curs upon terminated, he killed the Rakshas Kshemaka, by whom it had been occupied after it was abandoned by Divodasa, and caused the city to be reinhabited. The Hari V. agrees as usual with the Brahma, except in the reading of one or two names. It is to be observed, however, that the Agni makes the Kas'i princes the descendants of Vitatha, the successor of Bharata. The Brahma P. and Hari V., determined apparently to be right, give the list twice over, deriving it in one place from Kshatravriddha, as in our text, the Vayu, and the Bhagavata; and in another, with the Agni, from Vitatha. The series of the Brahma, however, stops with Lauhi, the son of Alarka, and does not warrant the repetition which the carelessness of the compiler of the Hari Vans'a has superfluously inserted.

^409:15 Several varieties occur, in the series that follows, as the comparative lists will best shew:

          Bhagavata.

       Brahma.

       Vayu.

       Agni.

     
      Alarka

       Alarka

       Alarka

       Alarka

     
      Santati

       Sannati

       Sannati

       Dharmaketu

     
      Sunitha

       Sunitha

       Sunitha

       Vibhu

     
      Suketana

       Kshema

       Suketu

       Sukumara

     
      Dharmaketu

       Ketumat

       Dhrishtaketu

       Satyaketu

     
      Satyaketu

       Suketu

       Venuhotra

        

     
      Dhrishtaketu

       Dharmaketu

       Gargya

        

     
      Sukumara

       Satyaketu

       Gargabhumi

        

     
      Vitihotra

       Vibhu

       Vatsabhumi

        

     
      Bharga

       Anartta

        

        

     
      Bhargabhumi

       Sukumara

        

        

     
       

       Dhrishtaketu

        

        

     
       

       Venuhotri

        

        

     
       

       Bharga

        

        

     
       

       Vatsabhumi.

        

        

     
   

^409:16 Our text is clear enough, and so is the Bhagavata, but the Vayu, Brahma, and Hari V. contain additions of rather doubtful import. The former has, 'The son of Venuhotra was the celebrated Gargya; Gargabhumi was the son of Gargya; and Vatsa, of the wise Vatsa: virtuous Brahmans and Kshatriyas[p. 410] were the sons of these two.' By the second Vatsa is perhaps meant Vatsabhumi; and the purport of the passage is, that Gargya (or possibly rather Bharga, one of the sons of Pratarddana) and Vatsa were the founders of two races (Bhumi, 'earth,' implying 'source' or founder', who were Kshatriyas by birth, and Brahmans by profession. The Brahma and Hari V., apparently misunderstanding this text, have increased the perplexity. According to them, the son of Venuhotra was Bharga; Vatsabhumi was the son of Vatsa; and Bhargabhumi (Bhrigubhumi, Brahma) was from Bhargava. 'These sons of Angiras were born in the family of Bhrigu, thousands of great might, Brahmans, Kshatriyas and Vais'yas.' The commentator has, 'Another son of Vatsa, the father of Alarka, is described, Vatsabhumi, &c. From Bhargava, the brother of Vatsa. (They were) Angirasas from Galava belonging to that family, (and were born) in the family of Bhrigu from the descent of Vis'wamitra.' The interpretation is not very clear, but it authorizes the notion above expressed, that Vatsa and Bharga, the sons of Pratarddana, are the founders of two races of Kshatriya-Brahmans.

^410:17 On the subject of note [*12]. some farther illustration is derivable from the Mahabharata, S'anti P. Dana-dharma. Haryas'wa the king of the Kas'is, reigning between the Ganges and the Yamuna, or in the Do-ab, was invaded and slain by the Haihayas, a race descended, according to this authority, from S'aryati, the son of Manu (see p. 358). Sudeva, the son of Haryas'wa, was also attacked and defeated by the same enemies. Divodasa, his son, built and fortified Benares as a defence against the Haihayas, but in vain, for they took it, and compelled him to fly. He sought refuge with Bharadwaja, by whose favour he had a son born to him, Pratardana, who destroyed the Haihayas under their king Vitihavya, and reestablished the kingdom of Kas'i. Vitihavya, through the protection of Bhrigu, became a Brahman. The Mahabharata gives a list of his descendants, which contains several of the names of the Kas'ya dynasty of the text; thus, Ghritsamada is said to be his son, and the two last of the line are S'unaka and S'aunaka. See n. [*7].

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 411]

  

CHAP. IX.

Descendants of Raji, son of Ayus: Indra resigns his throne to him: claimed after his death by his sons, who apostatize from the religion of the Vedas, and are destroyed by Indra. Descendants of Pratikshatra, son of Kshatravriddha.

RAJI had five hundred sons, all of unequalled daring and vigour. Upon the occurrence of a war between the demons and the gods, both parties inquired of Brahma which would be victorious. The deity replied, "That for which Raji shall take up arms." Accordingly the Daityas immediately repaired to Raji, to secure his alliance; which he promised them, if they would make him their Indra after defeating the gods. To this they answered and said, "We cannot profess one thing, and mean another; our Indra is Prahlada, and it is for him that we wage war." Having thus spoken, they departed; and the gods then came to him on the like errand. He proposed to them the said conditions, and they agreed that he should be their Indra. Raji therefore joined the heavenly host, and by his numerous and formidable weapons destroyed the army of their enemies.

When the demons were discomfited, Indra placed the feet of Raji upon his head, and said, "Thou hast preserved me from a great danger, and I acknowledge thee as my father; thou art the sovereign chief over all the regions, and I, the Indra of the three spheres, am thy son." The Raja. smiled, and said, "Even be it so. The regard that is conciliated by many agreeable speeches is not to be resisted even when such language proceeds from a foe (much less should the kind words of a friend fail to win our affection)." He accordingly returned to his own city, and Indra remained as his deputy in the government of heaven.

When Raji ascended to the skies, his sons, at the instigation of Narada, demanded the rank of Indra as their hereditary right; and as the deity refused to acknowledge their supremacy, they reduced him to submission by force, and usurped his station. After some considerable time had elapsed, the god of a hundred sacrifices, Indra, deprived of his share of offerings to the immortals, met with Vrihaspati in a retired

[p. 412]

place, and said to him, "Cannot you give me a little of the sacrificial butter, even if it were no bigger than a jujube, for I am in want of sustenance?" "If," replied Vrihaspati, "I had been applied to by you before, I could have done any thing for you that you wished; as it is, I will endeavour and restore you in a few days to your sovereignty." So saying, he commenced a sacrifice for the purpose of increasing the might of Indra, and of leading the sons of Raji into error, and so effecting their downfall [*1]. Misled by their mental fascination, the princes became enemies of the Brahmans, regardless of their duties, and contemners of the precepts of the Vedas; and thus devoid of morality and religion, they were slain by Indra, who by the assistance of the priest of the gods resumed his place in heaven. Whoever hears this story shall retain for ever his proper place, and shall never be guilty of wicked acts.

Rambha, the third son of Ayus, had no progeny [*2]. Kshatravriddha had a son named Pratikshatra [*3]; his son was Sanjaya; his son was Vijaya [*4]; his son was Yajnakrit [*5]; his son was Harshavarddhana [*6]; his son was Sahadeva; his son was Adina [*7]; his son was Jayasena; his son was Sankriti; his son was Kshatradharman [*8]. These were the descendants of Kshatravriddha. I will now mention those of Nahusha.

Footnotes

^412:1 The Matsya says he taught the sons of Raji the Jinadharma or Jain religion.

^412:2 The Bhagavata enumerates however, as his descendants, Rabhasa, Gambhira, and Akriya, whose posterity became Brahmans. The same authority gives as the descendants of Anenas, the fourth son of Ayus, S'uddha, S'uchi, Trikakud, and S'antakhya.

^412:3 The Vayu agrees with our text in making Pratipaksha (Pratikshatra) the son of Kshattravriddha; but the Brahma P. and Hari V. consider Anenas to be the head of this branch of the posterity of Ayus. The Bhagavata substitutes Kus'a, the Les'a, of our text, the grandson of Kshatravriddha, for the first name; and this seems most likely to be correct. Although the different MSS. agree in reading ### it should be perhaps ### the patronymic Kshatravriddha; making then, as the Bhagavata does, Pratikshatra the son of the son of Kshatravriddha.

^412:4 Jaya: Bhagavata, Vayu.

^412:5 Vijaya: Vayu. Krita: Bhagavata,

^412:6 Haryas'wa: Brahma, Hari V. Haryavana: Bhagavata.

^412:7 The last of the list: Vayu. Ahina: Bhagavata.

^412:8 Kshatravriddha: Brahma, Hari V.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 413]

  

CHAP. X.

The sons of Nahusha. The sons of Yayati: he is cursed by S'ukra: wishes his sons to exchange their vigour for his infirmities. Puru alone consents. Yayati restores him his youth: divides the earth amongst his sons, under the supremacy of Puru.

YATI, Yayati, Sanyati, Ayati, Viyati, and Kriti were the six valiant sons of Nahusha [*1]. Yati declined the sovereignty [*2], and Yayati therefore succeeded to the throne. He had two wives, Devayani the daughter of Usanas, and S'armishtha the daughter of Vrishaparvan; of whom this genealogical verse is recited: "Devayani bore two sons, Yadu and Turvasu. Sarmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparvan, had three sons, Druhyu, Anu, and Puru [*3]." Through the curse of Us'anas, Yayati

[p. 414]

became old and infirm before his time; but having appeased his father-in-law, he obtained permission to transfer his decrepitude to any one who would consent to take it. He first applied to his eldest son Yadu, and said, "Your maternal grandfather has brought this premature decay upon me: by his permission, however, I may transfer it to you for a thousand years. I am not yet satiate, with worldly enjoyments, and wish to partake of them through the means of your youth. Do not refuse compliance with my request." Yadu, however, was not willing to take upon him his father's decay; on which his father denounced an imprecation upon him, and said, "Your posterity shall not possess dominion." He then applied successively to Druhyu, Turvasu, and Anu, and demanded of them their juvenile vigour. They all refused, and were in consequence cursed by the king. Lastly he made the same request of Sarmishtha's youngest son, Puru, who bowed to his father, and readily consented to give him his youth, and receive in exchange Yayati's infirmities, saying that his father had conferred upon him a great favour.

The king Yayati being thus endowed with renovated youth, conducted the affairs of state for the good of his people, enjoying such pleasures as were suited to his age and strength, and were not incompatible with virtue. He formed a connexion with the celestial nymph Vis'wachi, and was wholly attached to her, and conceived no end to his desires. The more they were gratified, the more ardent they became; as it is said in this verse, "Desire is not appeased by enjoyment: fire fed with sacrificial oil becomes but the more intense. No one has ever more than enough of rice, or barley, or gold, or cattle, or women: abandon therefore inordinate desire. When a mind finds neither good nor ill in all objects, but looks on all with an equal eye, then every thing yields it pleasure. The wise man is filled with happiness, who escapes from desire, which the feeble minded can with difficulty relinquish, and which grows not old with the aged. The hair becomes grey, the teeth fall out, as man advances in years; but the love of wealth, the love of life, are not impaired by age." "A thousand years

[p. 415]

have passed," reflected Yayati, "and my mind is still devoted to pleasure: every day my desires are awakened by new objects. I will therefore now renounce all sensual enjoyment, and fix my mind upon spiritual truth. Unaffected by the alternatives of pleasure and pain, and having nothing I may call my own, I will henceforth roam the forests with the deer."

Having made this determination, Yayati restored his youth to Puru, resumed his own decrepitude, installed his youngest son in the sovereignty, and departed to the wood of penance (Tapovana [*4]). To Turvasu he consigned the south-east districts of his kingdom; the west to Druhyu; the south to Yadu; and the north to Anu; to govern as viceroys under their younger brother Puru, whom he appointed supreme monarch of the earth [*5].

Footnotes

^413:1 The Bhagavata refers briefly to the story of Nahusha, which is told in the Mahabharata more than once, in the Vana Parva, Udyoga P., Dana Dharma P., and others; also in the Padma and other Puranas. He had obtained the rank of Indra; but in his pride, or at the suggestion of S'achi, compelling the Rishis to bear his litter, he was cursed by them to fall from his state, and reappear upon earth as a serpent. From this form he was set free by philosophical discussions with Yudhishthira, and received final liberation. Much speculation, wholly unfounded, has been started by Wilford's conjecture that the name of this prince, with Deva, 'divine,' prefixed, a combination which never occurs, was the same as Dionysius or Bacchus. Authorities generally agree as to the names of the first three of his sons: in those of the others there is much variety, and the Matsya, Agni, and Padma have seven names, as follows omitting the three first of the text:

          Matsya.

       Agni.

       Padma.

       Linga.

     
      Udbhava

       Udbhava

       Udbhava

       S'aryati

     
      Pans'chi

       Panchaka

       Pava

       Champaka

     
      Sunyati

       Palaka

       Viyati

       Andhaka

     
      Meghayati

       Megha

       Meghayati

        

     
   

^413:2 Or, as his name implies, he became a devotee, a Yati: Bhagavata, &c.

^413:3 The story is told in great detail in the Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata, also in the Bhagavata, with some additions evidently of a recent taste. S'armishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparvan, king of the Daityas, having quarrelled with Devayani, the daughter of S'ukra (the religious preceptor of the same race), had her thrown into a well. Yayati, hunting in the forest, found her, and taking her to her father, with his consent espoused her. Devayani, in resentment of S'armishtha's treatment, demanded that she should become her handmaid; and Vrishaparvan, afraid of S'ukra's displeasure, was compelled to comply. In the service of his queen, however, Yayati beheld S'armishtha, and secretly wedded her. Devayani complaining to her father of Yayati's infidelity, S'ukra inflicted on him premature decay, with permission to transfer it to any one willing to give him youth and strength in exchange, as is related in the text. The passage specifying the sons of Yayati is precisely the same in the Mahabharata [p. 414] as in our text, and is introduced in the same way.

^415:4 Bhrigutunga, according to the Brahma.

^415:5 The elder brothers were made Mandala-nripas, kings of circles or districts: Bhagavata. The situation of their governments is not exactly agreed upon.

           

       Vayu and
   Padma.

       Brahma
   and Hari V.

       Bhagavata.

     
      Turvasu

       South-east

       South-east

       West

     
      Druhyu

       West

       West

       South-east

     
      Yadu

       South-west

       South

       South

     
      Anu

       North

       North

       North

     
   [paragraph continues] The Linga describes the ministers and people as expostulating with Yayati, for illegally giving the supremacy to the youngest son; but he satisfies them by shewing that he was justified in setting the seniors aside, for want of filial duty. The Mahabharata, Udyoga P. Galava Charitra, has a legend of Yayati's giving a daughter to the saint Galava, who through her means obtains from different princes eight hundred horses, white with one black ear, as a fee for his preceptor Viswamitra. Yayati, after his death and residence in Indra's heaven, is again descending to earth, when his daughter's sons give him the benefit of their devotions, and replace him in the celestial sphere. It has the air of an old story. A legend in some respects similar has been related in our text, <page 399>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 416]

  

CHAP. XI.

The Yadava race, or descendants of Yadu. Karttavirya obtains a boon from Dattatreya: takes Ravana prisoner: is killed by Paras'urama: his descendants.

I WILL first relate to you the family of Yadu, the eldest son of Yayati, in which the eternal immutable Vishnu descended upon earth in a portion of his essence [*1]; of which the glory cannot be described, though for ever hymned in order to confer the fruit of all their wishes--whether they desired virtue, wealth, pleasure, or liberation--upon all created beings, upon men, saints, heavenly quiristers, spirits of evil, nymphs, centaurs, serpents, birds, demons, gods, sages, Brahmans, and ascetics. Whoever hears the account of the race of Yadu shall be released from all sin; for the supreme spirit, that is without form, and which is called Vishnu, was manifested in this family.

Yadu had four sons, Sahasrajit, Kroshti, Nala, and Raghu [*2]. S'atajit was the son of the elder of these, and he had three sons, Haihaya, Venu [*3], and Haya. The son of Haihaya was Dharmanetra [*4]; his son was Kunti [*5]; his son was Sahanji [*6]; his son was Mahishmat [*7]; his son

[p. 417]

was Bhadrasena [*8]; his son was Durdama; his son was Dhanaka [*9], who had four sons, Kritaviryya, Kritagni, Kritavarman, and Kritaujas. Kritaviryya's son was Arjuna, the sovereign of the seven Dwipas, the lord of a thousand arms. This prince propitiated the sage Dattatreya, the descendant of Atri, who was a portion of Vishnu, and solicited and obtained from him these boons--a thousand arms; never acting unjustly; subjugation of the world by justice, and protecting it equitably; victory over his enemies; and death by the hands of a person renowned in the three regions of the universe. With these means he ruled over the whole earth with might and justice, and offered ten thousand sacrifices. Of him this verse is still recited; "The kings of the earth will assuredly never pursue his steps in sacrifice, in munificence, in devotion, in courtesy, and in self-control." In his reign nothing was lost or injured; and so he governed the whole earth with undiminished health, prosperity, power, and might, for eighty five thousand years. Whilst sporting in the waters of the Narmada, and elevated with wine, Ravana came on his tour of triumph to the city Mahishmati, and there he who boasted of overthrowing the gods, the Daityas, the Gandharbas and their king, was taken prisoner by Karttavirya, and confined like a tame beast in a corner of his capital [*10]. At the expiration of his long reign Karttavirya was killed by Paras'urama, who was an embodied portion of the mighty Narayana [*11]. Of the hundred sons of this king, the five principal were S'ura [*12], S'urasena, Vrishana [*13], Madhu [*14], and

[p. 418]

[paragraph continues] Jayadhwaja [*15]. The son of the last was Talajangha, who had a hundred sons, called after him Talajanghas: the eldest of these was Vitihotra; another was Bharata [*16], who had two sons, Vrisha and Sujati [*17]. The son of Vrisha was Madhu [*18]; he had a hundred sons, the chief of whom was Vrishni, and from him the family obtained the name of Vrishni [*19]. From the name of their father, Madhu, they were also called Madhavas; whilst from the denomination of their common ancestor Yadu, the whole were termed Yadavas [*20].

[p. 419]

This page consists solely of footnotes.

Footnotes

^416:1 Or, 'in which Krishna was born.' It might have been expected, from the importance of this genealogy, that it would have been so carefully preserved, that the authorities would have closely concurred in its details. Although, however, the leading specifications coincide, yet, as we shall have occasion to notice, great and irreconcilable variations occur.

^416:2 The two first generally agree. There are differences in the rest; as,

          Vayu.

       Brahma.

       Bhagavata.

       Kurma.

     
      Nila

       Nala

       Nala

       Nila

     
      Ajita

       Anjika

       Aripu

       Jina

     
      Raghu

       Payoda

       Aripu

       Raghu

     
   [paragraph continues] The Brahma and Hari V. read Sahasrada for the first name; and the Linga has Balasani in place of Nala. The Agni makes S'atajit also a son of Yadu.

^416:3 Venuhaya: Bhagavata, &c. Uttanahaya: Padma. Vettahaya: Matsya. They were the sons of Sahasrada: Brahma and Hari V.

^416:4 Dharmatantra: Vayu. Dharma: Kurma.

^416:5 Kirtti: Vayu.

^416:6 Sanjneya: Vayu. Sankana: Agni. Sahanja of Sahanjani pura: Brahma. Sanjnita: Linga. Sanhana: Matsya. Sohanji: Bhagavata.

^416:7 By whom the city of Mahishmati on the Narbadda was founded: Brahma P., Hari V.

^417:8 So the Bhagavata; but the Vayu, more correctly, has Bhadrasrenya. See <page 407>. n. .

^417:9 Kanaka: Vayu, &c. Varaka: Linga. Andhaka: Kurma.

^417:10 According to the Vayu, Karttavirya was the aggressor, invading Lanka, and there taking Ravana prisoner. The circumstances are more usually narrated as in our text.

^417:11 See page 402. Karttavirya's fate was the consequence of an imprecation denounced by Apava or Vas'ishtha, the son of Varuna, whose hermitage had been burnt, according to the Mahabharata, Raja-dharma, by Chitrabhanu, or Fire, to whom the king had in his bounty presented the world. The Vayu makes the king himself the incendiary, with arrows given him by Surya to dry up the ocean.

^417:12 Urjjita: Bhagavata.

^417:13 Vrishabha: Bhagavata. Dhrishta: Matsya. Dhrishna: Kurma. Prishokta: Padma. Vrishni: Linga. Krishnaksha: Brahma.

^417:14 Krishna, in all except the Bhagavata.

^418:15 King of Avanti: Brahma and Hari Vans'a.

^418:16 Ananta: Vayu and Agni; elsewhere omitted.

^418:17 Durjaya only: Vayu, Matsya.

^418:18 This Madhu, according to the Bhagavata, was the son of Karttavirya. The Brahma and Hari V. make him the son of Vrisha, but do not say whose son Vrisha was. The commentator on the latter asserts that the name is a synonyme of Payoda, the son of Yadu, according to his authority, and to that alone.

^418:19 The Bhagavata agrees with our text, but the Brahma, Hari V., Linga, and Kurma make Vrishana the son of Madhu, and derive the family name of Vrishnis or Varshneyas from him.

^418:20 The text takes no notice of some collateral tribes, which appear to merit remark. Most of the other authorities, in mentioning the sons of Jayadhwaja, observe that from them came the five great divisions of the Haihaya tribe. These, according to the Vayu, were the Talajanghas, Vitihotras, Avantyas, Tundikeras, and Jatas. The Matsya and Agni omit the first, and substitute Bhojas; and the latter are included in the list in the Brahma, Padma, Linga, and Hari V. For Jatas the reading is Sanjatas or Sujatas. The Brahma P. has also Bharatas, who, as well as the Sujatas, are not commonly specified, it is said, 'from their great number.' They are in all probability invented by the compiler out of the names of the text, Bharata and Sujati. The situation of these tribes is central India, for the capital of the Talajanghas was Mahishmati or Chuli-Maheswar, still called, according to Col. Tod, Sahasra-bahuki-basti, 'the village of the thousand-armed;' that is, of Karttaviryya. Annals of Rajasthan, I. 39. n. The Tundikeras and Vitihotras are placed in the geographical lists behind the Vindhyan mountains, and the termination -kaira is common in the valley of the Narmada, as Bairkaira, &c., or we may have Tundikera abbreviated, as Tundari on the Tapti. The Avantyas were in Ujayin, and the Bhojas were in the neighbourhood probably of Dhar in Malwa. These tribes must have preceded, then, the Rajput tribes, by whom these countries are now occupied, or Rahtores, Chauhans, Pawars, Gehlotes, and the rest. There are still some vestiges of them, and a tribe of Haihayas still exists, at the top of the valley of Sohagpur in Bhagel-khand, aware of their ancient lineage, and though [p. 419] few in number, celebrated for their valour. Tod's Rajasthan, I. 39. The scope of the traditions regarding them, especially of their overrunning the country, along with S'akas and other foreign tribes, in the reign preceding that of Sagara (see p. 373), indicates their foreign origin also; and if we might trust to verbal resemblances, we might suspect that the Hayas and Haihayas of the Hindus had some connexion with the Hia, Hoiei-ke, Hoiei-hu, and similarly denominated Hun or Turk tribes, who make a figure in Chinese history. Des Guignes, Histoire des Huns, I. 7, 55, 231. II. 253, &c. At the same time it is to be observed that these tribes do not make their appearance until some centuries after the Christian era, and the scene of their first exploits is far from the frontiers of India: the coincidence of appellation may be therefore merely accidental. In the word Haya, which properly means 'a horse,' it is not impossible, however, that we have a confirmatory evidence of the Scythian origin of the Haihayas, as Col. Tod supposed; although we cannot with him imagine the word 'horse' itself is derived from haya. Rajasthan, I. 76.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 420]

  

CHAP. XII.

Descendants of Kroshtri. Jyamagha's connubial affection for his wife S'aivya: their descendants kings of Vidarbha and Chedi.

KROSHTRI, the son of Yadu [*1], had a son named Vrijinivat [*2]; his son was Swahi [*3]; his son was Rushadru [*4]; his son was Chitraratha; his son was S'as'avindu, who was lord of the fourteen great gems [*5]; he had a hundred thousand wives and a million of sons [*6]. The most renowned of them were Prithuyas'as, Prithukarman, Prithujaya, Prithukirtti, Prithudana, and Prithus'ravas. The son of the last of these six [*7] was Tamas [*8]; his son was Us'anas [*9], who celebrated a hundred sacrifices of the horse; his son was S'iteyus [*10]; his son was Rukmakavacha [*11]; his son was Paravrit, who lead five sons, Rukmeshu, Prithurukman, Jyamagha, Palita, and Harita [*12]. To this day the following verse relating to Jyamagha

[p. 421]

is repeated: "Of all the husbands submissive to their wives, who have been or who will be, the most eminent is the king Jyamagha [*13], who was the husband of S'aivya." S'aivya was barren; but Jyamagha was so much afraid of her, that he did not take any other wife. On one occasion the king, after a desperate conflict with elephants and horse, defeated a powerful foe, who abandoning wife, children, kin, army, treasure, and dominion, fled. When the enemy was put to flight, Jyamagha beheld a lovely princess left alone, and exclaiming, "Save me, father! Save me, brother!" as her large eyes rolled wildly with affright. The king was struck by her beauty, and penetrated with affection for her, and said to himself, "This is fortunate; I have no children, and am the husband of a sterile bride; this maiden has fallen into my hands to rear up to me posterity: I will espouse her; but first I will take her in my car, and convey her to my palace, where I must request the concurrence of the queen in these nuptials." Accordingly he took the princess into his chariot, and returned to his own capital.

When Jyamagha's approach was announced, S'aivya came to the palace gate, attended by the ministers, the courtiers, and the citizens, to welcome the victorious monarch: but when she beheld the maiden standing on the left hand of the king, her lips swelled and slightly quivered with resentment, and she said to Jyamagha, "Who is this light-hearted damsel that is with you in the chariot?" The king unprepared with a reply,

[p. 422]

made answer precipitately, through fear of his queen; "This is my daughter-in-law." "I have never had a son," rejoined S'aivya, "and you have no other children. Of what son of yours then is this girl the wife?" The king disconcerted by the jealousy and anger which the words of S'aivya displayed, made this reply to her in order to prevent further contention; "She is the young bride of the future son whom thou shalt bring forth." Hearing this, S'aivya smiled gently, and said, "So be it;" and the king entered into his great palace.

In consequence of this conversation regarding the birth of a son having taken place in an auspicious conjunction, aspect, and season, the queen, although passed the time of women, became shortly afterwards pregnant, and bore a son. His father named him Vidarbha, and married him to the damsel he had brought home. They had three sons, Kratha, Kais'ika [*14], and Romapada [*15]. The son of Romapada was Babhru [*16], and his son was Dhriti [*17]. The son of Kais'ika was Chedi, whose descendants were called the Chaidya kings [*18]. The son of Kratha was Kunti [*19]; his son was Vrishni [*20]; his son was Nirvriti [*21]; his son was Dasarha; his son was Vyoman; his son was Jimuta; his son was Vikriti [*22]; his son was Bhimaratha; his son was Navaratha [*23]; his son was Das'aratha [*24]; his son was S'akuni; his son was Karambhi; his son was Devarata; his son was Devakshatra [*25]; his son was Madhu [*26]; his son was Anavaratha; his

[p. 423]

son was Kuruvatsa; his son was Anuratha; his son was Puruhotra; his son was Ans'u; his son was Satwata, from whom the princes of this house were termed Satwatas. This was the progeny of Jyamagha; by listening to the account of whom, a man is purified from his sins.

Footnotes

^420:1 In the Brahma P. and Hari V. we have two families from Kroshtri; one which is much the same as that of the text; the other makes short work of a long story, as we shall again notice.

^420:2 Vajravat: Kurma.

^420:3 S'anti: Kurma. Swaha: Matsya. Tris'anku Linga.

^420:4 Vishansu: Agni. Rishabha: Linga. Kus'ika: Kurma. Rus'eku: Bhagavata.

^420:5 Or articles the best of their kind; seven animate, and seven inanimate; a wife, a priest, a general, a charioteer, a horse, an elephant, and a body of foot soldiers; or, instead of the last three, an executioner, an encomiast, a reader of the Vedas; and a chariot, an umbrella, a jewel, a sword, a shield, a banner, and a treasure.

^420:6 The text states this in plain prose, but the Vayu quotes a verse which makes out but a hundred hundred or 10,000 sons.

^420:7 The Matsya has the first, third, and fifth of our text, and Prithudharma, Prithukirtti, and Prithumat. The Kurma has also six names, but makes as many successions.

^420:8 Suyajna: Agni, Brahma, Matsya. Dharma: Bhagavata.

^420:9 Ushat: Brahma, Hari V.

^420:10 S'itikshu: Agni. S'ineyus: Brahma. Purujit: Bhagavata. The Vayu has Maruta and Kambalavarhish, brothers, instead.

^420:11 Considerable variety prevails here. The Brahma and Hari V. have Marutta the Rajarshi (a gross blunder, see <page 352>), Kambalavarhish, S'ataprasuti, Rukmakavacha: the Agni--Marutta, Kambalavarhish, Rukmeshu: whilst the Bhagavata makes Ruchaka son of Us'anas, and father to the five princes who in the text are the grandsons of Rukmakavacha.

^420:12 The Bhagavata has Rukmeshu, Rukman, Jyamagha, Prithu, and Purujit. The [p. 421] Vayu reads the two last names Parigha and Hari. The Brahma and Hari V. insert Parajit as the father of the five named as in the text.

^421:13 Most of the other authorities mention that the elder of the five brothers, Rukmeshu, succeeded his father in the sovereignty; and that the second, Prithurukman, remained in his brother's service. Palita and Harita were set over Videha (Linga) or Tirhut, and Jyamagha went forth to settle where he might: according to the Vayu he conquered Madhyades'a (the country along the Narmada), Mekala, and the S'uktimat mountains. So the Brahma P. states that he established himself along the Rikshavat mountain, and dwelt in S'uktimati. He names his son, as we shall see, Vidarbha: the country so called is Berar, and amongst his descendants we have the Chaidyas or princes of Boghelkand, and Chandail, and Dasarha, more correctly perhaps Dasarna, Chattisgher; so that this story of Jyamagha's adventures appears to allude to the first settlement of the Yadava tribes along the Narmada, more to the south and west than before.

^422:14 The Bhagavata has Kus'a; the Matsya, Kaus'ika: all the authorities agree in specifying three sons.

^422:15 Lomapada: Agni.

^422:16 Vastu: Vayu. Kriti: Agni.

^422:17 Ahuti: Vayu. Iti: Padma. Dyuti: Matsya. Bhriti: Kurma. This latter is singular in carrying on the line of Romapada for twelve generations farther.

^422:18 The Bhagavata, however, makes the princes of Chedi continuous from Romapada; as, Babhru, Dhriti, Us'ika, Chedi--the Chaidyas, amongst whom were Damaghosha and S'is'upala.

^422:19 Kumbhi: Padma.

^422:20 Dhrishta: Vayu. Dhrishti: Matsya,

^422:21 Nivritti: Vayu. Nidhriti: Agni. The Brahma makes three sons, Avanta, Das'arha, and Balivrishahan. In the Linga it is said of Dasarha that he was 'destroyer of the host of copper (faced; European?) foes.'

^422:22 Vikala: Matsya.

^422:23 Nararatha: Brahma, Hari V.

^422:24 Dridharatha: Agni. Devarata: Linga.

^422:25 Soma: Linga. Devanakshatra: Padma.

^422:26 There is great variety in the succeeding appellations: [p. 423]

          Bhagavata.

       Vayu.

       Brahma.

       Matsya.

       Padma.

       Kurma.

     
      Madhu

       Madhu

       Madhu

       Madhu

       Madhu

       Madhu

     
      Kuruvas'a

       Manu

       Manavas'as

       Uruvas

       Puru

       Kuru

     
      Anu

       Puruvatsa

       Purudwat

       Purudwat

       Punarvasu

       Anu

     
      Puruhotra
   Ayu

       Purudwat
   Satwa

       Madhu
   and Satwa

       Jantu

       Jantu

       Ansa

     
      Satwata

       Satwata

       Satwata

       Satwata

       Satwata

       Andhaka
   Satwata

     
   [paragraph continues] The Linga has Purushaprabhu, Manwat, Pratarddana, Satwata; and the Agni, Dravavasu, Puruhuta, Jantu, and Satwata. Some of these originate, no doubt, in the blunders of copyists, but they cannot all be referred to that source.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 424]

  

CHAP. XIII.

Sons of Satwata. Bhoja princes of Mrittikavati. Surya the friend of Satrajit: appears to him in a bodily form: gives him the Syamantaka gem: its brilliance and marvellous properties. Satrajit gives it to Prasena, who is killed by a lion: the lion killed by the bear Jambavat. Krishna suspected of killing Prasena, goes to look for him in the forests: traces the bear to his cave: fights with him for the jewel: the contest prolonged: supposed by his companions to be slain: he overthrows Jambavat, and marries his daughter Jambavati: returns with her and the jewel to Dwaraka: restores the jewel to Satrajit, and marries his daughter Satyabhama. Satrajit murdered by S'atadhanwan: avenged by Krishna. Quarrel between Krishna and Balarama. Akrura possessed of the jewel: leaves Dwaraka. Public calamities. Meeting of the Yadavas. Story of Akrura's birth: he is invited to return: accused by Krishna of having the Syamantaka jewel: produces it in full assembly: it remains in his charge: Krishna acquitted of having purloined it.

THE sons of Satwata were Bhajina, Bhajamana, Divya, Andhaka, Devavriddha, Mahabhoja, and Vrishni [*1]. Bhajamana had three sons, Nimi [*2], Krikana [*3], and Vrishni [*4], by one wife, and as many by another, S'atajit, Sahasrajit, and Ayutajit [*5]. The son of Devavriddha was Babhru of whom this verse is recited; "We hear when afar, and we behold when nigh, that Babhru is the first of men, and Devavriddha is equal to the gods: sixty-six persons following the precepts of one, and six thousand and eight who were disciples of the other, obtained immortality." Mahabhoja was a pious prince; his descendants were the Bhojas, the princes of Mrittikavati [*6], thence called Marttikavatas [*7]. Vrishni had two sons, Sumitra and Yudhajit [*8]; from the former Anamitra and S'ini were

[p. 425]

born [*9]. The son of Anamitra was Nighna, who had two sons, Prasena and Satrajit. The divine Aditya, the sun, was the friend of the latter.

On one occasion Satrajit, whilst walking along the sea shore, addressed his mind to Surya, and hymned his praises; on which the divinity appeared and stood before him. Beholding him in an indistinct shape, Satrajit said to the sun, "I have beheld thee, lord, in the heavens as a globe of fire: now do thou shew favour unto me, that I may see thee in thy proper form." On this the sun taking the jewel called Syamantaka from off his neck, placed it apart, and Satrajit beheld him of a dwarfish stature, with a body like burnished copper, and with slightly reddish eyes. Having offered his adorations, the sun desired him to demand a boon, and he requested that the jewel might become his. The sun presented it to him, and then resumed his place in the sky. Having obtained the spotless gem of gems, Satrajit wore it on his neck, and becoming as brilliant thereby as the sun himself, irradiating all the region with his splendour, he returned to Dwaraka. The inhabitants of that city, beholding him approach, repaired to the eternal male, Purushottama, who, to sustain the burden of the earth, had assumed a mortal form (as Krishna), and said to him, "Lord, assuredly the divine sun is coming to visit you." But Krishna smiled, and said, "It is not the divine sun, but Satrajit, to whom Aditya has presented the Syamantaka gem, and he now wears it: go and behold him without apprehension." Accordingly they departed. Satrajit having gone to his house, there deposited the jewel, which yielded daily eight loads of gold, and through its marvellous virtue dispelled all fear of portents, wild beasts, fire, robbers, and famine.

[p. 426]

Achyuta was of opinion that this wonderful gem should be in the possession of Ugrasena; but although he had the power of taking it from Satrajit, he did not deprive him of it, that he might not occasion ally disagreement amongst the family. Satrajit, on the other hand, fearing that Krishna would ask him for the jewel, transferred it to his brother Prasena. Now it was the peculiar property of this jewel, that although it was an inexhaustible source of good to a virtuous person, yet when worn by a man of bad character it was the cause of his death. Prasena having taken the gem, and hung it round his neck, mounted his horse, and went to the woods to hunt. In the chase he was killed by a lion. The lion, taking the jewel in his mouth, was about to depart, when he was observed and killed by Jambavat, the king of the bears, who carrying off the gem retired into his cave, and gave it to his son Sukumara to play with. When some time had elapsed, and Prasena did not appear, the Yadavas began to whisper one to another, and to say, "This is Krishna's doing: desirous of the jewel, and not obtaining it, he has perpetrated the murder of Prasena in order to get it into his possession."

When these calumnious rumours came to the knowledge of Krishna, he collected a number of the Yadavas, and accompanied by them pursued the course of Prasena by the impressions of his horse's hoofs. Ascertaining by this means that he and his horse had been killed by a lion, he was acquitted by all the people of any share in his death. Desirous of recovering the gem, he thence followed the steps of the lion, and at no great distance came to the place where the lion had been killed by the bear. Following the footmarks of the latter, he arrived at the foot of a mountain, where he desired the Yadavas to await him, whilst he continued the track. Still guided by the marks of the feet, he discovered a cavern, and had scarcely entered it when he heard the nurse of Sukumara saying to him, "The lion killed Prasena; the lion has been killed by Jambavat: weep not, Sukumara, the Syamantaka is your own." Thus assured of his object, Krishna advanced into the cavern, and saw the brilliant jewel in the hands of the nurse, who was giving it as a plaything to Sukumara. The nurse soon descried his

[p. 427]

approach, and marking his eyes fixed upon the gem with eager desire, called loudly for help. Hearing her cries, Jambavat, full of anger, came to the cave, and a conflict ensued between him and Achyuta, which lasted twenty-one days. The Yadavas who had accompanied the latter waited seven or eight days in expectation of his return, but as the foe of Madhu still came not forth, they concluded that he must have met his death in the cavern. "It could not have required so many days," they thought, "to overcome an enemy;" and accordingly they departed, and returned to Dwaraka, and announced that Krishna had been killed.

When the relations of Achyuta heard this intelligence, they performed all the obsequial rites suited to the occasion. The food and water thus offered to Krishna in the celebration of his S'raddha served to support his life, and invigorate his strength in the combat in which he was engaged; whilst his adversary, wearied by daily conflict with a powerful foe, bruised and battered in every limb by heavy blows, and enfeebled by want of food, became unable longer to resist him. Overcome by his mighty antagonist, Jambavat cast himself before him and said, "Thou, mighty being, art surely invincible by all the demons, and by the spirits of heaven, earth, or hell; much less art thou to be vanquished by mean and powerless creatures in a human shape; and still less by such as we are, who are born of brute origin. Undoubtedly thou art a portion of my sovereign lord Narayana, the defender of the universe." Thus addressed by Jambavat, Krishna explained to him fully that he had descended to take upon himself the burden of the earth, and kindly alleviated the bodily pain which the bear suffered from the fight, by touching him with his hand. Jambavat again prostrated himself before Krishna, and presented to him his daughter Jambavati, as an offering suitable to a guest. He also delivered to his visitor the Syamantaka jewel. Although a gift from such an individual was not fit for his acceptance, yet Krishna took the gem for the purpose of clearing his reputation. He then returned along with his bride Jambavati to Dwaraka..

When the people of Dwaraka beheld Krishna alive and returned, they were filled with delight, so that those who were bowed down with

[p. 428]

years recovered youthful vigour; and all the Yadavas, men and women, assembled round Anakadundubhi, the father of the hero, and congratulated him. Krishna related to the whole assembly of the Yadavas all that had happened, exactly as it had befallen, and restoring the Syamantaka jewel to Satrajit was exonerated from the crime of which he had been falsely accused. He then led Jambavati into the inner apartments.

When Satrajit reflected that he had been the cause of the aspersions upon Krishna's character, he felt alarmed, and to conciliate the prince he gave him to wife his daughter Satyabhama. The maiden had been previously sought in marriage by several of the most distinguished Yadavas, as Akrura, Kritavarman and S'atadhanwan, who were highly incensed at her being wedded to another, and leagued in enmity against Satrajit. The chief amongst them, with Akrura and Kritavarman, said to S'atadhanwan, "This caitiff Satrajit has offered a gross insult to you, as well as to us who solicited his daughter, by giving her to Krishna: let him not live: why do you not kill him, and take the jewel? Should Achyuta therefore enter into feud with you, we will take your part." Upon this promise S'atadhanwan undertook to slay Satrajit.

When news arrived that the sons of Pandu had been burned in  house of wax [*10], Krishna, who knew the real truth, set off for Baranavata to allay the animosity of Duryodhana, and to perform the duties his relationship required. S'atadhanwan taking advantage of his absence, killed Satrajit in his sleep, and took possession of the gem. Upon this coming to the knowledge of Satyabhama, she immediately mounted her chariot, and, filled with fury at her father's murder, repaired to Baranavata, and told her husband how Satrajit had been killed by S'atadhanwan in resentment of her having been married to another, and how he had carried off the jewel; and she implored him to take prompt measures to avenge such heinous wrong. Krishna, who is ever internally placid, being informed of these transactions, said to Satyabhama, as his eyes flashed with indignation, "These are indeed

[p. 429]

audacious injuries, but I will not submit to them from so vile a wretch. They must assail the tree, who would kill the birds that there have built their nests. Dismiss excessive sorrow; it needs not your lamentations to excite any wrath." Returning forthwith to Dwaraka, Krishna took Baladeva apart, and said to him, "A lion slew Prasena, hunting in the forests; and now Satrajit has been murdered by S'atadhanwan. As both these are removed, the jewel which belonged to them is our common right. Up then, ascend your car, and put S'atadhanwan to death."

Being thus excited by his brother, Balarama engaged resolutely in the enterprise; but S'atadhanwan, being aware of their hostile designs, repaired to Kritavarman, and required his assistance. Kritavarman, however, declined to assist him, pleading his inability to engage in a conflict with both Baladeva and Krishna. S'atadhanwan thus disappointed, applied to Akrura; but he said, "You must have recourse to some other protector. How should I be able to defend you? There is no one even amongst the immortals, whose praises are celebrated throughout the universe, who is capable of contending with the wielder of the discus, at the stamp of whose foot the three worlds tremble; whose hand makes the wives of the Asuras widows, whose weapons no host, however mighty, can resist: no one is capable of encountering the wielder of the ploughshare, who annihilates the prowess of his enemies by the glances of his eyes, that roll with the joys of wine; and whose vast ploughshare manifests his might, by seizing and exterminating the most formidable foes." "Since this is the case," replied S'atadhanwan, "and you are unable to assist me, at least accept and take care of this jewel." "I will do so," answered Akrura, "if you promise that even in the last extremity you will not divulge its being in my possession." To this S'atadhanwan agreed, and Akrura took the jewel; and the former mounting a very swift mare, one that could travel a hundred leagues a day, fled from Dwaraka.

When Krishna heard of S'atadhanwan's flight, he harnessed his four horses, S'aivya, Sugriva, Meghapushpa, and Balahaka, to his car, and, accompanied by Balarama, set off in pursuit. The mare held her speed,

[p. 430]

and accomplished her hundred leagues; but when she reached the country of Mithila, her strength was exhausted, and she dropped down and died. S'atadhanwan [*11] dismounting, continued his flight on foot. When his pursuers came to the place where the mare had perished, Krishna said to Balarama, "Do you remain in the car, whilst I follow the villain on foot, and put him to death; the ground here is bad; and the horses will not be able to drag the chariot across it." Balarama accordingly stayed with the car, and Krishna followed S'atadhanwan on foot: when he had chased him for two kos, he discharged his discus, and, although S'atadhanwan was at a considerable distance, the weapon struck off his head. Krishna then coining up, searched his body and his dress for the Syamantaka jewel, but found it not. He then returned to Balabhadra, and told him that they had effected the death of S'atadhanwan to no purpose, for the precious gem, the quintessence of all worlds, was not upon his person. When Balabhadra heard this, he flew into a violent rage, and said to Vasudeva, "Shame light upon you, to be thus greedy of wealth! I acknowledge no brotherhood with you. Here lies my path. Go whither you please; I have done with Dwaraka, with you, with all our house. It is of no use to seek to impose upon me with thy perjuries." Thus reviling his brother, who fruitlessly endeavoured to appease him, Balabhadra went to the city of Videha, where Janaka [*12] received him hospitably, and there he remained. Vasudeva returned to Dwaraka. It was during his stay in the dwelling of Janaka that Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, learned from Balabhadra the art of fighting with the mace. At the expiration of three years, Ugrasena and other chiefs of the Yadavas, being satisfied that Krishna had not the jewel, went to Videha, and removed Balabhadra's suspicions, and brought him home.

Akrura, carefully considering the treasures which the precious jewel secured to him, constantly celebrated religious rites, and, purified with holy prayers [*13], lived in affluence for fifty-two years; and through the

[p. 431]

virtue of that gem there was no dearth nor pestilence in the whole country [*14]. At the end of that period, S'atrughna, the great grandson of Satwata, was killed by the Bhojas, and as they were in bonds of alliance with Akrura, he accompanied them in their flight from Dwaraka. From the moment of his departure various calamities, portents, snakes, dearth, plague, and the like, began to prevail; so that he whose emblem is Garuda called together the Yadavas, with Balabhadra and Ugrasena, and recommended them to consider how it was that so many prodigies should have occurred at the same time. On this Andhaka, one of the elders of the Yadhu race, thus spake: "Wherever S'waphalka, the father of Akrura, dwelt, there famine, plague, dearth, and other visitations were unknown. Once when there was want of rain in the kingdom of Kasiraja, S'waphalka was brought there, and immediately there fell rain from the heavens. It happened also that the queen of Kas'iraja conceived, and was quick with a daughter; but when the time of delivery arrived, the child issued not from the womb. Twelve years passed away, and still the girl was unborn. Then Kas'iraja spake to the child, and said, 'Daughter, why is your birth thus delayed? come forth; I desire to behold you, why do you inflict this protracted suffering upon your mother?' Thus addressed, the infant answered, 'If, father, you will present a cow every day to the Brahmans, I shall at the end of three years more be born.' The king accordingly presented daily a cow to the Brahmans, and at the end of three years the damsel came into the world. Her father called her Gandini, and he subsequently gave her to S'waphalka, when he came to his palace for his benefit. Gandini, as long as she lived, gave a cow to the Brahmans every day. Akrura was her

[p. 432]

son by S'waphalka, and his birth therefore proceeds from a combination of uncommon excellence. When a person such as he is, is absent from us, is it likely that famine, pestilence, and prodigies should fail to occur? Let him then he invited to return: the faults of men of exalted worth must not be too severely scrutinized."

Agreeably to the advice of Audhaka the elder, the Yadavas sent a mission, headed by Kes'ava, Ugrasena, and Balabhadra, to assure Akrura that no notice would be taken of any irregularity committed by him; and having satisfied him that he was in no danger, they brought him back to Dwaraka. Immediately on his arrival, in consequence of the properties of the jewel, the plague, dearth, famine, and every other calamity and portent, ceased. Krishna, observing this, reflected [*15] that the descent of Akrura from Gandini and S'waphalka was a cause wholly disproportionate to such an effect, and that some more powerful influence must be exerted to arrest pestilence and famine. "Of a surety," said he to himself, "the great Syamantaka jewel is in his keeping, for such I have heard are amongst its properties. This Akrura too has been lately celebrating sacrifice after sacrifice; his own means are insufficient for such expenses; it is beyond a doubt that he has the jewel." Having come to this conclusion, he called a meeting of all the Yadavas at his house, under the pretext of some festive celebration. When they were all seated, and the. purport of their assembling had been explained, and the business accomplished, Krishna entered into conversation with Akrura, and, after laughing and joking, said to him, "Kinsman, you are a very prince in your liberality; but we know very well that the precious jewel which was stolen by Sudhanwan was delivered by him to you, and is now in your possession, to the great benefit of this kingdom. So let it remain; we all derive advantage from its virtues.

[p. 433]

[paragraph continues] But Balabhadra suspects that I have it, and therefore, out of kindness to me, shew it to the assembly." When Akrura, who had the jewel with him, was thus taxed, he hesitated what he should do. "If I deny that I have the jewel," thought he, "they will search my person, and find the gem hidden amongst my clothes. I cannot submit to a search." So reflecting, Akrura said to Narayana, the cause of the whole world, "It is true that the Syamantaka jewel was entrusted to me by S'atadhanwan, when he went from hence. I expected every day that you would ask me for it, and with much inconvenience therefore I have kept it until now. The charge of it has subjected me to so much anxiety, that I have been incapable of enjoying any pleasure, and have never known a moment's ease. Afraid that you would think me unfit to retain possession of a jewel so essential to the welfare of the kingdom, I forbore to mention to you its being in my hands; but now take it yourself, and give the care of it to whom you please." Having thus spoken, Akrura drew forth from his garments a small gold box, and took from it the jewel. On displaying it to the assembly of the Yadavas, the whole chamber where they sat was illuminated by its radiance. "This," said Akrura, "is the Syamantaka gem, which was consigned to me by S'atadhanwan: let him to whom it belongs now take it."

When the Yadavas beheld the jewel, they were filled with astonishment, and loudly expressed their delight. Balabhadra immediately claimed the jewel as his property jointly with Achyuta, as formerly agreed upon; whilst Satyabhama, demanded it as her right, as it had originally belonged to her father. Between these two Krishna considered himself as an ox between the two wheels of a cart, and thus spake to Akrura in the presence of all the Yadavas: "This jewel has been exhibited to the assembly in order to clear my reputation; it is the joint right of Balabhadra and myself, and is the patrimonial inheritance of Satyabhama. But this jewel, to be of advantage to the whole kingdom, should be taken charge of by a person who leads a life of perpetual continence: if worn by an impure individual, it will be the cause of his death. Now as I have sixteen thousand wives, I am not qualified to have the care of it. It is not likely that Satyabhama will agree to the

[p. 434]

conditions that would entitle her to the possession of the jewel; and as to Balabhadra, he is too much addicted to wine and the pleasures of sense to lead a life of self-denial. We are therefore out of the question, and all the Yadavas, Balabhadra, Satyabhama, and myself, request you, most bountiful Akrura, to retain the care of the jewel, as you have done hitherto, for the general good; for you are qualified to have the keeping of it, and in your hands it has been productive of benefit to the country. You must not decline compliance with our request." Akrura, thus urged, accepted the jewel, and thenceforth wore it publicly round his neck, where it shone with dazzling brightness; and Akrura moved about like the sun, wearing a garland of light.

He who calls to mind the vindication of the character of Krishna from false aspersions, shall never become the subject of unfounded accusation in the least degree, and living in the full exercise of his senses shall be cleansed from every sin [*16].

Footnotes

^424:1 The Agni acknowledges but four sons. but all the rest agree in the number, and mostly in the names, Mahabhoja is sometimes read Mahabhaga.

^424:2 Krimi: Brahma, Agni, Kurma.

^424:3 Panava: Vayu. Kramana: Brahma. Kripana: Padma. Kinkina: Bhagavata.

^424:4 Dhrishthi: Bhagavata, Brahma.

^424:5 The Brahma and Hari V. add to the first three S'ara and Puranjaya, and to the second Dasaka.

^424:6 By the Parnas'a river: Brahma P.: a river in Malwa.

^424:7 These are made incorrectly the descendants of Babhru in the Hari V. 

^424:8 The Bhagavata, Matsya, and Vayu [p. 425] agree in the main, as to the genealogy that follows, with our text. The Vayu states that Vrishni had two wives, Madri and Gandhari; by the former he had Yudhajit and Anamitra, and by the latter Sumitra and Devamidhush. The Matsya also names the ladies, but gives Sumitra to Gandhari, and makes Madri the mother of Yudhajit, Devamidhusha, Anamitra, and S'ini. The Agni has a similar arrangement, but substitutes Dhrishta for Vrishni, and makes him the fifteenth in descent from Satwata. The Linga, Padma, Brahma P., and Hari V. have made great confusion by altering, apparently without any warrant, the name of Vrishni to Kroshtri.

^425:9 The Bhagavata makes them sons of Yudhajit; the Matsya and Agni, as observed in the preceding note, his brothers as well as Sumitra's.

^428:10 This alludes to events detailed in the Mahabharata.

^430:11 The Vayu calls Sudhanwan or S'atadhanwan king of Mithila.

^430:12 A rather violent anachronism to make Janaka cotemporary with Balarama.

^430:13 The text gives the commencement of the prayer, but the commentator does not say whence it is taken: 'Oh, goddess! the [p. 431] murderer of a Kshatriya or Vais'ya, engaged in religious duties, is the slayer of a Brahman;' i. e. the crime is equally heinous. Perhaps the last word should be ### 'is.'

^431:14 Some of the circumstances of this marvellous gem seem to identify it with a stone of widely diffused celebrity in the East, and which, according to the Mohammedan writers, was given originally by Noah to Japhet; the Hijer al mattyr of the Arabs, Sang yeddat of the Persians, and Jeddah tash of the Turks, the possession of which secures rain and fertility. The author of the Habib us Seir gravely asserts that this stone was in the hands of the Mongols in his day, or in the tenth century.

^432:15 Krishna's reflecting, the commentator observes, is to be understood of him only as consistent with the account here given of him, as if he were a mere man; for, as he was omniscient, there was no occasion for him to reflect or reason. Krishna however appears in this story in a very different light from that in which he is usually represented; and the adventure, it may be remarked, is detached from the place in which we might have expected to find it, the narrative of his life, which forms the subject of the next book.

^434:16 The story of the Syamantaka gem occurs in the Bhagavata, Vayu, Matsya, Brahma, and Hari V., and is alluded to in other Puranas. It may be considered as one common to the whole series. Independently of the part borne in it by Krishna, it presents a curious and no doubt a faithful picture of ancient manners, in the loose self-government of a kindred clan, in the acts of personal violence which are committed, in the feuds which ensue, in the public meetings which are held, and the part that is taken by the elders and by the women in all the proceedings of the community.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 435]

  

CHAP. XIV.

Descendants of S'ini, of Anamitra, of S'waphalka and Chitraka, of Andhaka. The children of Devaka and Ugrasena. The descendants of Bhajamana. Children of S'ura: his son Vasudeva: his daughter Pritha married to Pandu: her children Yudhishthira and his brothers; also Karna by Aditya. The sons of Pandu by Madri. Husbands and children of S'ura's other daughters. Previous births of S'is'upala.

THE younger brother of Anamitra was S'ini; his son was Satyaka; his son was Yuyudhana, also known by the name of Satyaki; his son was Asanga; his son was Tuni [*1]; his son was Yugandhara [*2]. These princes were termed S'aineyas.

In the family of Anamitra, Pris'ni was born; his son was S'waphalka [*3], the sanctity of whose character has been described: the younger brother of S'waphalka was named Chitraka. S'waphalka had by Gandini, besides Akrura, Upamadgu, Mridura, S'arimejaya, Giri, Kshatropakshatra, S'atrughna, Arimarddana, Dharmadhris, Dhrishtasarman, Gandhamojavaha, and Prativaha. He had also a daughter, Sutara [*4].

Devavat and Upadeva were the sons of Akrura. The sons of Chitrika were Prithu and Vipritha, and many others [*5]. Andhaka had four sons, Kukkura, Bhajamana, S'uchi [*6], Kambalavarhish. The son of Kukkura was Vrishta [*7]; his son was Kapotaroman; his son was Viloman [*8];

[p. 436]

his son was Bhava [*9], who was also called Chandanodakadundubhi [*10]; he was a friend of the Gandharba Tumburu; his son was Abhijit; his son was Punarvasu; his son was Ahuka, and he had also a daughter named Ahuki. The sons of Ahuka were Devaka and Ugrasena. The former had four sons, Devavat, Upadeva, Sudeva, and Devarakshita, and seven daughters, Vrikadeva, Upadeva, Devarakshita, S'rideva, S'antideva, Sahadeva, and Devaki: all the daughters were married to Vasudeva. The sons of Ugrasena were Kansa, Nyagrodha, Sunaman, Kanka, S'anku, Subhumi, Rashtrapala, Yuddhamushthi, and Tushtimat; and his daughters were Kansa, Kansavati, Sutanu, Rashtrapali, and Kanki.

The son of Bhajamana [*11] was Viduratha; his son was S'ura; his son was S'amin [*12]; his son was Pratikshatra [*13]; his son was Swayambhoja [*14]; his son was Hridika, who had Kritavarman, S'atadhanu, Devamidhusha, and others [*15]. S'ura, the son of Devamidhusha  [*16], was married to Marisha, and had by her ten sons. On the birth of Vasudeva, who was one of these sons, the gods, to whom the future is manifest, foresaw that the divine being would take a human form in his family, and thereupon they sounded with joy the drums of heaven: from this circumstance Vasudeva was also called Anakadunbubhi [*17]. His brothers were Devabhaga, Devas'ravas, Anadhrishti, Karundhaka, Vatsabalaka, S'rinjaya,

[p. 437]

[paragraph continues] S'yama, S'amika, and Gandusha; and his sisters were Pritha, S'rutadeva, S'rutakirtti, S'rutas'ravas, and Rajadhidevi.

S'ura had a friend named Kuntibhoja, to whom, as he had no children, the presented in due form his daughter Pritha. She was married to Pandu, and bore him Yudhishthira, Bhima, and Arjuna, who were in fact the sons of the deities Dharma, Vayu (air), and Indra. Whilst she was yet unmarried, also, she had a son named Karna, begotten by the divine Aditya (the sun). Pandu had another wife, named Madri, who had by the twin sons of Aditya, Nasatya and Dasra, two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva [*18].

S'rutadeva was married to the Karusha prince Vriddhas'arman, and bore him the fierce Asura Dantavaktra. Dhrishtaketu, raja of Kaikeya [*19], married S'rutakirtti, and had by her Santarddana and four other sons, known as the five Kaikeyas. Jayasena, king of Avanti, married Rajadhidevi, and had Vinda and Anavinda. S'rutas'ravas was wedded to Damaghosha, raja of Chedi, and bore him S'is'upala [*20]. This prince was in a former existence the unrighteous but valiant monarch of the Daityas, Hiranyakas'ipu, who was killed by the divine guardian of creation (in the man-lion Avatara). He was next the ten-headed sovereign Ravana, whose unequalled prowess, strength, and power were overcome by the lord of the three worlds, Rama. Having been killed by the deity in the form of Raghava, he had long enjoyed the reward of his virtues in exemption from an embodied state, but had now received birth once more as S'is'upala, the son of Damaghosha, king of Chedi. In this character he renewed, with greater inveteracy than ever, his hostile hatred towards the god surnamed Pundarikaksha, a portion of the supreme being, who had descended to lighten the burdens of the earth; and was in consequence slain by him: but from the circumstance of his thoughts being constantly engrossed by the supreme being, S'is'upala was united with him after death; for the lord giveth to those to whom he is favourable whatever they desire, and he bestows a heavenly and exalted station even upon those whom he slays in his displeasure.

Footnotes

^435:1 Bhuti: Vayu. Kuni: Bhagavata. Dyumni: Matsya.

^435:2 The Agni makes these all brother's sons of Satyaka, and adds another, Rishabha, the father of S'waphalka.

^435:3 The authorities are not agreed here. S'waphalka, according to the Agni, as just remarked, comes from S'ini, the son of Anamitra. The Bhagavata, instead of Pris'ni, has Vrishni, son of Anamitra; the Brahma and Hari V. have Vrishni; and the Agni, Prishni, son of Yudhajit. The Matsya also makes Yudhajit the ancestor of Akrura, through Rishabha and Jayanta. Yudhajit in the Brahma, &c. is the son of Kroshtri.

^435:4 The different authorities vary in the reading of these names, though they generally concur in the number.

^435:5 The Matsya and Padma call them sons of Akrura, but no doubt incorrectly.

^435:6 S'ami: Vayu. S'as'i: Matsya. S'ini Agni. This last makes them the sons of Babhru, and calls the first Sundara.

^435:7 Vrishni: Bhagavata, Vayu, Matsya, &c. Dhrishta: Agni. Dhrishnu: Brahma, Hari V.

^435:8 The Bhagavata puts Viloman first. The Linga makes it an epithet of Kapotaroman, saying he was Vilomaja, 'irregularly begotten.' In place of Viloman we have Raivata, Vayu; Taittiri, Matsya; Tittiri, Agni.

^436:9 Nava: Agni. Bala: Linga. Nala: Matsya. Tomas: Kurma. Anu: Bhagavata.

^436:10 The Matsya, Vayu, and Agni agree with our text. The Linga, Padma, and Kurma read Anakadundubhi as a synonyme of Bala. The Brahma and Hari V. have no such name, but here insert Punarvasu, son of Taittiri. The Bhagavata has a different series, or Anu, Andhaka, Dundubhi, Arijit, Punarvasu, Ahuka.

^436:11 This Bhajamana is the son of Andhaka, according to all the best authorities; so the Padma calls this branch the Andhakas. The Agni makes him the son of Babhru.

^436:12 Vata, Nivata, S'amin: Vayu.

^436:13 Sonas'wa: Matsya. Sonaksha: Padma. S'ini: Bhajavata.

^436:14 Bhojaka: Agni. Bhoja: Padma.

^436:15 Ten sons: Matsya, &c.

^436:16 Devarha: Vayu, Padma, Agni, and Matsya; and a different series follows, or Kambalavarhish, Asamaujas, Samaujas, Sudanstra, Suvas'a, Dhrishta, Anamitra, Nighna, Satrajit. They all make Vasudeva the son of S'ura, however; but the three first leave it doubtful whether that S'ura was the son of Bhajamana or not. The Bhagavata and Brahma agree with the text, which is probably correct. The Brahma has S'ura son of Devamidhush, although it does not specify the latter amongst the sons of Hridika.

^436:17 Anaka a larger, and Dundubhi a smaller drum.

^437:18 The Mahabharata is the best authority for these circumstances.

^437:19 The Padma calls him king of Kashmir.

^437:20 The Brahma P. and Hari V. make S'rutadeva mother of S'is'upala, and Prithukirtti of Dantavaktra.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 438]

  

CHAP. XV.

Explanation of the reason why S'is'upala in his previous births as Hiranyakas'ipu and Ravana was not identified with Vishnu on being slain by him, and was so identified when killed as S'is'upala. The wives of Vasudeva: his children: Balarama and Krishna his sons by Devaki: born apparently of Rohini and Yasoda. The wives and children of Krishna. Multitude of the descendants of Yadu.

MAITREYA.--Most eminent of all who cultivate piety, I am curious to hear from you, and you are able to explain to me, how it happened that the same being who when killed by Vishnu as Hiranyakas'ipu and Ravana obtained enjoyments which, though scarcely attainable by the immortals, were but temporary, should have been absorbed into the eternal Hari when slain by him in the person of S'is'upala.

PARAS'ARA.--When the divine author of the creation, preservation, and destruction of the universe accomplished the death of Hiranyakas'ipu, he assumed a body composed of the figures of a lion and a man, so that Hiranyakas'ipu was not aware that his destroyer was Vishnu: although therefore the quality of purity, derived from exceeding merit, had been attained, yet his mind was perplexed by the predominance of the property of passion; and the consequence of that intermixture was, that he reaped, as the result of his death by the hands of Vishnu, only unlimited power and enjoyment upon earth, as Das'anana, the sovereign of the three spheres; he did not obtain absorption into the supreme spirit, that is without beginning or end, because his mind was not wholly dedicated to that sole object. So also Das'anana being entirely subject to the passion of love, and engrossed completely by the thoughts of Janaki, could not comprehend that the son of Das'aratha whom he beheld was in reality the divine Achyuta. At the moment of his death he was impressed with the notion that his adversary was a mortal, and therefore the fruit he derived from being slain by Vishnu was confined to his birth in the illustrious family of the kings of Chedi, and the exercise of extensive dominion. In this situation many circumstances brought the names of Vishnu to his notice, and on all these occasions the enmity that had accumulated through successive births influenced his

[p. 439]

mind; and in speaking constantly with disrespect of Achyuta, he was ever repeating his different appellations. Whether walking, eating, sitting, or sleeping, his animosity was never at rest, and Krishna was ever present to his thoughts in his ordinary semblance, having eyes as beautiful as the leaf of the lotus, clad in bright yellow raiment, decorated with a garland, with bracelets on his arms and wrists, and a diadem on his head; having four robust arms, bearing the conch, the discus, the mace, and the lotus. Thus uttering his names, even though in malediction, and dwelling upon his image, though in enmity, he beheld Krishna, when inflicting his death, radiant with resplendent weapons, bright with ineffable splendour in his own essence as the supreme being, and all his passion and hatred ceased, and he was purified front every defect. Being killed by the discus of Vishnu at the instant he thus meditated, all his sins were consumed by his divine adversary, and he was blended with him by whose might he had been slain. I have thus replied to your inquiries. He by whom the divine Vishnu is named or called to recollection, even in enmity, obtains a reward that is difficult of attainment to the demons and the gods: how much greater shall be his recompense who glorifies the deity in fervour and in faith!

Vasudeva, also called Anakadandubhi, had Rohini, Pauravi [*1], Bhadra, Madira, Devaki, and several other wives. His sons by Rohini were Balabhadra, Sarana, S'aru, Durmada, and others. Balabhadra espoused Revati, and had by her Nisatha and Ulmuka. The sons of S'arana were Marshti, Marshtimat, S'is'u, Satyadhriti, and others. Bhadras'wa, Bhadrabahu, Durgama, Bhuta, and others, were born in the family of Rohini (of the race of Puru). The sons of Vasudeva by Madira were Nanda, Upananda, Kritaka, and others. Bhadra bore him Upanidhi, Gada, and others. By his wife Vais'ali he had one son named Kaus'ika. Devaki bore him six sons, Kirttimat, Sushena, Udayin, Bhadrasena, Rijudas'a, and Bhadradeha; all of whom Kansa put to death [*2].

[p. 440]

When Devaki was pregnant the seventh time, Yoganidra (the sleep of devotion), sent by Vishnu, extricated the embryo from its maternal womb at midnight, and transferred it to that of Rohini; and from having been thus taken away, the child (who was Balarama) received the name of Sankarshana. Next, the divine Vishnu himself, the root of the vast universal tree, inscrutable by the understandings of all gods, demons, sages, and men, past, present, or to come, adored by Brahma and all the deities, he who is without beginning, middle, or end, being moved to relieve the earth of her load, descended into the womb of Devaki, and was born as her son Vasudeva. Yoganidra, proud to execute his orders, removed the embryo to Yasoda, the wife of Nanda the cowherd. At his birth the earth was relieved from all iniquity; the sun, moon, and planets shone with unclouded splendour; all fear of calamitous portents was dispelled; and universal happiness prevailed. From the moment he appeared, all mankind were led into the righteous path in him.

Whilst this powerful being resided in this world of mortals, he had sixteen thousand and one hundred wives; of these the principal were Rukmini, Satyabhama, Jambavati, Jatahas'ini, and four others. By these the universal form, who is without beginning, begot a hundred and eighty thousand sons, of whom thirteen are most renowned, Pradyumna, Charudeshna, Samba, and others. Pradyumna married Kakudwati, the daughter of Rukmin, and had by her Aniruddha. Aniruddha married Subhadra, the granddaughter of the same Rukmin, and she bore him a son named Vajra. The son of Vajra was Bahu; and his son was Sucharu [*3].

[p. 441]

In this manner the descendants of Yadu multiplied, and there were many hundreds of thousands of them, so that it would be impossible to repeat their names in hundreds of years. Two verses relating to them are current: "The domestic instructors of the boys in the use of arms amounted to three crores and eighty lacs (or thirty-eight millions). Who shall enumerate the whole of the mighty men of the Yadava race, who were tens of ten thousands and hundreds of hundred thousands in number?" Those powerful Daityas who were killed in the conflicts between them and the gods were born again upon earth as men, as tyrants and oppressors; and, in order to check their violence, the gods also descended to the world of mortals, and became members of the hundred and one branches of the family of Yadu. Vishnu was to them a teacher and a ruler, and all the Yadavas were obedient to his commands.

Whoever listens frequently to this account of the origin of the heroes of the race of Vrishni, shall be purified from all sin, and obtain the sphere of Vishnu.

Footnotes

^439:1 Pauravi is rather a title attached to a second Rohini, to distinguish her from the first, the mother of Balarama: she is also said by the Vayu to be the daughter of Bahlika.

^439:2 The enumeration of our text is rather imperfect. The Vayu names the wives of Vasudeva, Pauravi, Rohini, Madira, Rudra, Vais'akhi, Devaki; and adds two bondmaids, Sugandhi and Vanaraji. The [p. 440] Brahma P. and Hari V. name twelve wives, and two slaves; Rohini, Madira, Vais'akhi, Bhadra, Sunamni, Sahadeva, S'antideva, S'rideva, Devarakshita, Vrikadevi, Upadevi, Devaki; and S'antanu and Barava. The children of the two slaves, according to the Vayu, were Pundra, who became a king, and Kapila, who retired to the woods. In the Bhagavata we have thirteen wives, Pauravi, Rohini, Bhadra, Madira, Rochana, Ila, Devaki, Dhritadevi, S'antideva, Upadevi, S'rideva, Devarakshita, and Sahadeva: the last seven in this and the preceding list are the daughters of Devaka.

^440:3 The wives and children of Krishna are more particularly described in the next book. The Brahma P. and Hari V. add some details of the descendants of Vasudeva's brothers: thus Devabhaga is said to be the father of Uddhava; Anadhrishti of Devas'ravas, a great scholar or Pandit. Devas'ravas, another brother of Vasudeva, [p. 441] had S'atrughna and another son called Ekalavya, who for some cause being exposed when an infant, was found and brought up by the Nishadas, and was thence termed Nishadin. Vatsavat (Vatsabalaka) and Gandusha being childless, Vasudeva gave his son Kaus'ika to be adopted by the former, and Krishna gave Charudeshna and three others to the latter. Kanaka (Karundhaka) had two sons, Tantrija and Tantripala. Avaksrinjima (S'rinjaya) had also two, Vira and As'wahanu. The gracious S'amika became as the son (although the brother) of S'yama, and disdaining the joint rule which the princes of the house of Bhoja exercised, made himself paramount. Yudhishthira was his friend. The extravagant numbers of the Yadavas merely indicate that they were, as they undoubtedly were, a powerful and numerous tribe, of whom many traces exist in various parts of India.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 442]

  

CHAP. XVI.

Descendants of Turvasu.

PARAS'ARA.--I shall now summarily give you an account of the descendants of Turvasu.

The son of Turvasu was Vahni [*1]; his son was Gobanu [*2]; his son was Trais'amba [*3]; his son was Karandhama; his son was Marutta. Marutta had no children, and he therefore adopted Dushyanta, of the family of Puru; by which the line of Turvasu merged into that of Puru [*4]. This took place in consequence of the malediction denounced on his son by Yayati [*5].

Footnotes

^442:1 Varga: Agni.

^442:2 Bhanumat: Bhagavata, which also inserts Bhaga before him.

^442:3 Tribhanu: Vayu. Tris'anu: Brahma. Trais'ali: Agni. Tris'ari: Matsya.

^442:4 Besides Bharata, who, as will be hereafter seen, was the son of Dushyanta, the Vayu, Matsya, Agni, and Brahma Puranas enumerate several descendants in this line, for the purpose evidently of introducing, as the posterity of Turvasu, the nations of the south of India: the series is Varuttha, (Karutthama, Brahma), Andira (Akrira, Brahma); whose sons are Pandya, Karnata, Chola, Kerala; the Hari V. adds Kola, and the Agni very incorrectly Gandhara.

^442:5 The curse alluded to is the failure of his line (Prajasamuchcheda), denounced upon Turvasu as the punishment of refusing to take his father's infirmities upon him (see <page 414>). He was also sentenced to rule over savages and barbarians, Mlechchhas, or people not Hindus. The Mahabharata adds that the Yavanas sprang from Turvasu. As sovereign of the southeast, he should be the ancestor of the people of Arracan, Ava, &c.; but the authorities cited in the preceding note refer the nations of the Peninsula to him, and consequently consider them as Mlechchhas. Manu also places the Draviras or Tamuls amongst Mlechchhas; and these and similar passages indicate a period prior to the introduction of Hinduism into the south of India.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 443]

  

CHAP. XVII.

Descendants of Druhyu.

THE son of Druhyu was Babhru; his son was Setu; his son was Aradwat [*1]; his son was Gandhara [*2]; his son was Dharma [*3]; his son was Dhrita [*4]; his son was Duryaman [*5]; his son was Prachetas, who had a hundred sons, and they were the princes of the lawless Mlechchhas or barbarians of the north [*6].

Footnotes

^443:1 Also Araddha in MSS., and Aratta, Matsya, which last seems to be the preferable reading. The Vayu has Aruddha; the Brahma, Angarasetu; but Aratta is a northern country, contiguous to, or synonymous with, Gandhara.

^443:2 Of Gandhara it is said in the Vayu that it is a large country named after him, and is famous for its breed of horses: ###. The Matsya reads the beginning of the second line ###, shewing that Aratta and Gandhara are much the same. See <page 191>. n. .

^443:3 The Brahma P. and Hari V., in opposition to all the rest, make Dharma and his successors the descendants of Anu.

^443:4 Ghrita: Agni.

^443:5 Durdama: Vayu and Bhagavata. The Matsya, Brahma, and Agni insert a Vidupa, Duduha, or Vidula, before Prachetas.

^443:6 So the Bhagavata and Matsya. The Mahabharata says the descendants of Druhya are the Vaibhojas, a people unacquainted with the use of cars or beasts of burden, and who travel on rafts: they have no kings.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 444]

  

CHAP. XVIII.

Descendants of Anu. Countries and towns named after some of them, as Anga, Banga, and others.

ANU [*1], the fourth son of Yayati, had three sons, Sabhanara, Chakshusha, and Paramekshu [*2]. The son of the first was Kalanara [*3]; his son was S'rinjaya; his son was Puranjaya; his son was Janamejaya; his son was Mahamani [*4]; his son was Mahamanas, who had two sons, Us'inara and Titikshu. Us'inara had five sons, S'ivi, Trina [*5], Gara [*6], Krimi, Darvan [*7]. S'ivi had four sons, Vrishadarbha, Suvira, Kaikeya, and Madra [*8]. Titikshu had one son, Ushadratha [*9]; his son was Hema [*10]; his son was Sutapas; his son was Bali, on whose wife five sons were begotten by Dirghatamas, or Anga, Banga, Kalinga, Suhma, and Pundra [*11]; and their descendants, and the five countries they inhabited, were known by the same names [*12].

[p. 445]

The son of Anga was Para [*13]; his son was Divaratha; his son was Dharmaratha [*14]; his son was Chitraratha; his son was Romapada [*15], also called Das'aratha, to whom, being childless, Das'aratha, the son of Aja, gave his daughter S'anta to be adopted [*16]. After this, Romapada had a son named Chaturanga; his son was Prithulaksha; his son was Champa, who founded the city of Champa [*17]. The son of Champa was Haryyanga; his son was Bhadraratha, who had two sons, Vrihatkarman and Vrihadratha. The son of the first was Vrihadbhanu [*18]; his son was Vrihanmanas; his son was Jayadratha, who, by a wife who was the daughter of a Kshatriya father and Brahmani mother, had a son named Vijaya [*19];

[p. 446]

his son was Dhriti; his son was Dhritavrata; his son was Satyakarman; his son was Adhiratha [*20], who found Karna in a basket on the banks of the Ganges, where he had been exposed by his mother, Pritha. The son of Karna was Vrishasena [*21]. These were the Anga kings. You shall next hear who were the descendants of Puru.

Footnotes

^444:1 By some unaccountable caprice the Brahma P. and Hari V., unsupported by any other authority, here substitute for Anu the name of Kaksheyu, a descendant of Puru, and transfer the whole series of his posterity to the house of Puru.

^444:2 Paksha and Parapaksha: Vayu. Parameshu: Matsya. Paroksha: Bhagavata.

^444:3 Kalanala: Vayu. Kolahala: Matsya.

^444:4 Mahas'ala: Agni. Mahas'ila: Bhagav.

^444:5 Nriga: Agni. Vana: Bhagavata.

^444:6 Nava: Matsya. S'ama: Bhagavata.

^444:7 Vrata: Agni. Suvrata: Matsya. Daksha: Bhagavata. According to the Brahma P. and Hari V. the five sons of Us'inara were the ancestors of different tribes. S'ivi was the progenitor of the S'aivas; Nriga of the Yaudheyas; Nava of the Navarashtras; Vrata of the Ambashthas; and Krimi founded the city Krimila.

^444:8 Bhadra and Bhadraka: Matsya, Agni. These sons of S'ivi give name to different provinces and tribes in the west and north-west of India.

^444:9 Rushadratha: Agni. Tushadratha: Matsya.

^444:10 Phena: Agni. Sena: Matsya.

^444:11 Odra, or in some copies Andhra: Bhagavata.

^444:12 See <page 185>. n. ; <page 188>. n. , , ; and <page 190>. n. . Of Suhma it may be remarked, that it is specified in the Siddhanta Kaumudi as an example of Panini's rule; 17.3.24; by which Nagara compounded with names of countries in the east becomes Nagara, as Sauhmanagara, 'produced, &c. in a city of Suhma.' The descendants of Anu, according to the Mahabharata were all Mlechchhas. The last named work, as well as the Vayu and Matsya Puranas, have an absurd story of the circumstances of the birth of Dirghatamas, who was the son of Ujasi or Utathya, the elder brother of Vrihaspati by Mamata, and of his begetting Anga [p. 445] and the rest. They agree in assigning descendants of all four castes to them; the Vayu stating that Bali had ### and the Matsya ascribing it to a boon given by Brahma to Bali: 'Do thou establish the four perpetual castes.' Of these, the Brahmans are known as Baleyas: ###. The Matsya calls Bali, the son of Virochana, and 'existing for a whole Kalpa;' identifying him therefore, only in a different period and form, with the Bali of the Vamana Avatara.

^445:13 Anapana: Vayu. Khanapana: Bhagavata. Adhivahana: Agni. Dadhivahana: Matsya.

^445:14 This prince is said in the Vayu to have drank the Soma juice along with Indra.

^445:15 The Matsya and Agni insert a Satyaratha.

^445:16 This is noticed in the Ramayana, in the story of the hermit Rishyas'ringa, to whom S'anta was given in marriage. Her adoptive father is called in the Ramayana, as the is in the Agni and Matsya, Lomapada: the meaning is the same, 'hairy foot.' Ramayana, IX. X. See also Prelude to the Uttara Rama Cheritra, Hindu Theatre, I. 289.

^445:17 The Bhagavata differs here from all the other authorities in omitting Champa, the founder of Champapuri, a city of which traces still remain in the vicinity of Bhagalpur, having inserted him previously amongst the descendants of Ikshwaku (see <page 373>. n. ). Champa is every where recognised as the capital of Anga, and the translators of the Ramayana were very wide of the truth, when they conjectured that it might be Angwa or Ava.

^445:18 Vrihaddarbha: Brahma. The Bhagavata omits the two successors of Champa, and makes Vrihadratha, Vrihatkarman, and Vrihadbhanu, sons of Prithulaksha.

^445:19 The Vayu, Matsya, and Hari V. make Vijaya the brother of Jayadratha. The Bhagavata agrees with our text. The mother of Vijaya from her origin was of the Suta caste, the genealogist and charioteer. Manu, X. 47. Her son was of the same caste, children taking the caste of the mother: consequently the descendants of Vijaya, kings of Anga, were Sutas; and this explains the contemptuous application of the term Suta to Karna, the half brother of the Pandus; for he, as [p. 446] will presently be mentioned, was adopted into the Anga family, and succeeded to the crown.

^446:20 Some variety prevails in the series of princes here, but this arises from not distinguishing the collateral lines, the descendants of Jayadratha from those of Vijaya. The Vayu and Matsya give the latter as in our text, but they agree also with the Agni and Brahma in the successors of Jayadratha, as Dridharatha or Vrihadratha, and Janamejaya or Vis'wajit.

^446:21 Surasena: Vayu. Vikarna: Brahma.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 447]

  

CHAP. XIX.

Descendants of Puru. Birth of Bharata, the son of Dushyanta: his sons killed: adopts Bharadwaja or Vitatha. Hastin, founder of Hastinapur. Sons of Ajamidha, and the races derived from them, as Panchalas, &c. Kripa and Kripi found by S'antanu. Descendants of Riksha, the son of Ajamidha. Kurukshetra named from Kuru. Jarasandha and others, kings of Magadha.

THE son of Puru was Janamejaya; his son was Prachinvat; his son was Pravira; his son was Manasyu; his son was Bhayada [*1]; his son was Sudyumna [*2]; his son was Bahugava [*3]; his son was Samyati [*4]; his son was Ahamyati [*5]; his son was Raudras'wa [*6], who had ten sons, Riteyu [*7], Kaksheyu, Sthandileyu, Ghriteyu, Jaleyu, Sthaleyu, Santateyu, Dhaneyu, Vaneyu, and Vrateyu [*8]. The son of Riteyu was Rantinara [*9],

[p. 448]

whose sons were Tansu, Apratiratha, and Dhruva [*10]. The son of the second of these was Kanwa, and his son was Medhatithi, from whom the Kanwayana Brahmanas [*11] descended. Anila [*12] was the son of Tansu, and he had four sons, of whom Dushyanta was the elder [*13]. The son of

[p. 449]

[paragraph continues] Dushyanta was the emperor Bharata; a verse explanatory of his name is chaunted by the gods; "The mother is only the receptacle; it is the father by whom a son is begotten. Cherish thy son, Dushyanta; treat not S'akuntala with disrespect. Sons, who are born from the paternal loins, rescue their progenitors from the infernal regions. Thou art the parent of this boy; S'akuntala has spoken truth." From the expression 'cherish,' Bharaswa, the prince was called Bharata [*14].

Bharata had by different wives nine sons, but they were put to death by their own mothers, because Bharata remarked that they bore no resemblance to him, and the women were afraid that he would therefore desert them. The birth of his sons being thus unavailing, Bharata sacrificed to the Maruts, and they gave him Bharadwaja, the son of Vrihaspati by Mamata the wife of Utathya, expelled by the kick of Dirghatamas, his half brother, before his time. This verse explains the purport of his appellation; "'Silly woman,' said Vrihaspati, 'cherish this child of two fathers' (bhara dwa-jam). 'No, Vrihaspati,' replied Mamata, 'do you take care of him.' So saying, they both abandoned him; but from their expressions the boy was called Bharadwaja." He was also termed Vitatha, in allusion to the unprofitable (vitatha) birth of the sons of Bharata [*15]. The son of Vitatha was

[p. 450]

[paragraph continues] Bhavanmanyu [*16]; his sons were many, and amongst them the chief were Vrihatkshatra, Mahaviryya, Nara, and Garga [*17]. The son of Nara was Sankriti; his sons were Ruchiradhi and Rantideva [*18]. The son of Garga

[p. 451]

was Sini [*19], and their descendants called Gargyas and S'ainyas, although Kshatriyas by birth, became Brahmans [*20]. The son of Mahaviryya was Urukshaya [*21], who had three sons, Trayyaruna, Pushkarin, and Kapi [*22]; the last of whom became a Brahman. The son of Vrihatkshatra was Suhotra [*23], whose son was Hastin, who founded the city of

[p. 452]

[paragraph continues] Hastinapur [*24]. The sons of Hastin were Ajamidha [*25], Dwimidha, and Purumidha. One son of Ajamidha was Kanwa, whose son was Medhatithi [*26]; his other son was Vrihadishu, whose son was Vrihadvasu [*27]; his son was Vrihatkarman [*28]; his son was Jayadratha [*29]; his son was Vis'wajit [*30]; his son was Senajit, whose sons were Ruchiras'wa, Kas'ya, Dridhadhanush, and Vasahanu [*31]. The son of Ruchiras'wa was Prithusena; his son was Para; his son was Nipa; he had a hundred sons, of whom Samara, the principal, was the ruler of Kampilya [*32]. Samara had three sons, Para, Sampara, Sadas'wa. The son of Para was Prithu; his son was Sukriti; his son was Vibhratra [*33]; his son was Anuha, who married Kritwi, the daughter of S'uka (the son of Vyasa), and had by her Brahmadatta [*34];

[p. 453]

his son was Vis'waksena; his son was Udaksena [*35]; and his son was Bhallata [*36].

The son of Dwimidha [*37] was Yavinara; his son was Dhritimat [*38]; his son was Satyadhriti; his son was Dridhanemi; his son was Supars'wa [*39]; his son was Sumati; his son was Sannatimat; his son was Krita, to whom Hiranyanabha taught the philosophy of the Yoga, and he compiled twenty-four Sanhitas (or compendia) for the use of the eastern Brahmans, who study the Sama-veda [*40]. The son of Krita was Ugrayudha, by whose prowess the Nipa race of Kshatriyas was destroyed [*41]; his son was Kshemya; his son was Suvira; his son was Nripanjaya [*42]; his son was Bahuratha. These were all called Pauravas.

Ajamidha had a wife called Nilini, and by her he had a son named Nila; his son was S'anti; his son was S'us'anti; his son was Purujanu [*43]; his son was Chakshu [*44]; his son was Haryyas'wa [*45], who had five sons,

[p. 454]

[paragraph continues] Mudgala, S'rinjaya [*46], Vrihadishu, Pravira [*47], and Kampilya [*48]. Their father said, "These my five (pancha) sons are able (alam) to protect the countries;" and hence they were termed the Panchalas [*49]. From Mudgala descended the Maudgalya Brahmans [*50]: he had also a son named Bahwas'wa [*51], who had two children, twins, a son and daughter, Divodasa and Ahalya. The son of S'aradwat or Gautama by Ahalya was S'atananda [*52]; his son was Satyadhriti, who was a proficient in military science. Being enamoured of the nymph Urvas'i, Satyadhriti was the parent of two children, a boy and a girl. S'antanu, a Raja, whilst hunting, found these children exposed in a clump of long S'ara grass; and, compassionating their condition, took them, and brought them up. As they were nurtured through pity (kripa), they were called Kripa and Kripi. The latter became the wife of Drona, and the mother of Aswatthaman.

The son of Divodasa was Mitrayu [*53]; his son was Chyavana; his son

[p. 455]

was Sudasa; his son was Saudasa, also called Sahadeva; his son was Somaka; he had a hundred sons, of whom Jantu was the eldest, and Prishata the youngest. The son of Prishata was Drupada; his son was Dhrishtadyumna; his son was Drishtaketu.

Another son of Ajamidha was named Riksha [*54]; his son was Samvarana; his son was Kuru, who gave his name to the holy district Kurukshetra; his sons were Sudhanush, Jahnu, Parikshit, and many others [*55]. The son of Sudhanush was Suhotra; his son was Chyavana; his son was Kritaka [*56]; his son was Uparichara the Vasu [*57], who had seven children, Vrihadratha, Pratyagra, Kus'amba, Mavella, Matsya, and others. The son of Vrihadratha was Kus'agra; his son was Rishabha [*58]; his son was Pushpavat; his son was Satyadhrita [*59]; his son was Sudhanwan; and his son was Jantu. Vrihadratha had another son, who being born in two

[p. 456]

parts, which were put together (sandhita) by a female fiend named Jara, he was denominated Jarasandha [*60]; his son was Sahadeva; his son was Somapi [*61]; his son was Srutas'ravas [*62]. These were kings of Magadha.

Footnotes

^447:1 Abhayada: Vayu. Vitamaya: Agni. Vatayudha: Matsya. Charupada: Bhagavata. The Mahabharata, Adi P., p. 136, 138, has two accounts of the descendants of Puru, differing materially in the beginning from each other, and from the lists of the Puranas. In the first, Pravira is made the son of Puru; his son is Manasyu, who has three sons, S'akta, Sanhanana, and Vagmin; and there the line stops. Another son of Puru is Raudras'wa, whose sons are Richeyu and the rest, as in our text; making them the second in descent, instead of the eleventh. In the second list, the son of Puru is Janamejaya, whose successors are Prachinvat, Samyati, Ahamyati, S'arvabhauma, Jayatsena, Avachina, Ariha, Mahabhauma, Ayutanayin, Akrodhana, Devatithi, Ariha, Riksha, Matinara, who is therefore the fifteenth from Puru, instead of the fourth as in the first account, or the twelfth as in the text.

^447:2 Dhundu: Vayu. S'ambhu: Agni. Sudhanwan: Brahma.

^447:3 Bahuvidha: Agni and Matsya.

^447:4 Sampati: Agni.

^447:5 Omitted: Vayu. Bahuvadin: Matsya.

^447:6 Bhadras'wa: Matsya.

^447:7 Rajeyu: Vayu. Richeyu: Agni. They were the sons of the Apsaras Ghritachi: or of Misrakes'i: Mahabharata. The Brahma P. and Hari V. have very unaccountably, and in opposition to all other authorities, transferred the whole of the descendants of Anu to this family; substituting for Anu the second name in our text, Kaksheyu. (<page 444>.)

^447:8 The Vayu names also ten daughters, Rudra, S'udra, Madra, Subhaga, Amalaja, Tala, Khala, Gopajala, Tamrarasa, and Ratnakuti; and adds that they were married to Prabhakara, a Rishi of the race of Atri. The Brahma P. and Hari V. have a legend of the birth of Soma, the moon, from him and one of these ten; who succeeded to the power and prerogatives of Atri. The sons of the other wives were less distinguished, but they formed families eminent amongst holy Brahmans, called Swastyatreyas.

^447:9 Atimara or Atibhara: Bhagavata. [p. 448] Antinara: Matsya. Matinara: Mahabharata, Agni and Brahma. According to the Matsya and Hari V. (not in the Brahma P.), Gauri, the daughter of this prince, was the mother of Mandhatri, of the family of Ikshwaku.

^448:10 In place of these the Matsya has Amurttirayas and Nrichandra, and there are several varieties in the nomenclature. In place of the first we have Vasu or Trasu, Vayu; Tansurogha, Agni; Tansurodha, Brahma; and Sumati, Bhagavata. Pratiratha is read for the second in the Agni and Brahma; and for the third, Suratha, Agni; Subahu, Hari V.

^448:11 Medhatithi is the author of many hymns in the Rig-veda, and we have therefore Brahmans and religious teachers descended from Kshatriyas.

^448:12 Malina: Vayu. Raibhya: Bhagavata. Dharmanetra: Brahma P. The Hari V. omits him, making sad blundering work of the whole passage. Thus the construction is such as to intimate that Tansu or Tansurodha had a wife named Ila, the daughter of Medhatithi; that is, his brother's great-granddaughter: but this, as the commentator observes, is contrary to common sense, and he would read it therefore, 'The daughter of him who was named Ilin;' a Raja so called: but in the Vayu and Matsya we have Ilina, the daughter of Yama, married to Tansu, and mother of Malina or Anila; more correctly perhaps Ailina. The blunder of the Hari V. therefore arises from the compiler's reading Yasya, 'of whom,' instead of Yamasya, 'Yama.' It is not an error of transcription, for the metre requires Yasya, and the remark of the commentator proves the correctness of the reading. The name occurs Ilina, the son of Tansu, in the Mahabharata, agreeably to the Anuvans'a s'loka, which is there quoted. 'Saraswati bore Tansu to Matinara, and Tansu begot a son, Ilina, by Kalingi.'

^448:13 The Vayu, Matsya, and Bhagavata agree with our text in making these the grandsons of Tansu: even the Brahma P. concurs, but the Hari V. makes them his sons, having apparently transformed Tansosuta, the son of Tansu, into a synonyme of Tansu, or Tansurodha; as in these parallel passages: 'The son of Tansu was the illustrious sage Dharmanetra: Upadanavi had from him four excellent sons.' Brahma P. 'Tansurodha was a royal sage, the illustrious institutor of laws. Upadanavi had four sons from Tansurodha.' Hari V. The commentator explains Dharmanetra to be 'institutor [p. 449] of laws.' We have Upadanavi before, as the daughter of Vrishaparvan the Daitya, married to Hiranyaksha. Hamilton (Buchanan) calls her the wife of Sughora. The four sons are named in other authorities, with some variations: Dushyanta, Sushyanta or Rishyanta or Sumanta, Pravira and Anagha or Naya. The Mahabharata enumerates five, Dushyanta, S'ura, Bhima, Vasu, and Pravasu, but makes them the sons of Ilina and grandsons of Tansu.

^449:14 These two S'lokas are taken from the Mahabharata, Adi Parvan, p. 112, and are part of the testimony borne by a heavenly messenger to the birth of Bharata. They are repeated in the same book, in the account of the family of Puru, p. 139. They occur, with a slight variation of the order, in other Puranas, as the Vayu, &c., and shew the greater antiquity of the story of S'akuntala, although they do not narrate it. The meaning of the name Bharata is differently explained in S'akuntala; he is said to be so called from supporting' the world: he is also there named S'arvadamana, 'the conqueror of all.'

^449:15 The Brahma P. and Hari V., the latter especially, appear to have modified this legend, with the view perhaps of reconciling those circumstances which are related of Bharadwaja as a sage with his [p. 450] history as a king. Whilst therefore they state that Bharadwaja was brought by the winds to Bharata, they state that he was so brought to perform a sacrifice, by which a son was born, whom Bharadwaja also inaugurated. In the Vayu, Matsya, and Agni, however, the story is much more consistently narrated; and Bharadwaja, being abandoned by his natural parent, is brought by the winds, as a child, not as a sage; and being adopted by Bharata, is one and the same with Vitatha, as our text relates. Thus in the Vayu, the Maruts bring to Bharata, already sacrificing for progeny, Bharadwaja, the son of Vrihaspati; and Bharata receiving him, says, "This Bharadwaja shall be Vitatha." The Matsya also says, the Maruts in compassion took the child, and being pleased with Bharata's worship, gave it to him, and he was named Vitatha. And the Agni tells the whole story in one verse: 'Then the son of Vrihaspati, being taken by the winds; Bharadwaja was transferred with sacrifice, and was Vitatha.' The account given in the Bhagavata is to the same purpose. The commentator on the text also makes the matter clear enough: 'The name of Bharadwaja in the condition of son of Bharata was Vitatha.' It is clear that a new-born infant could not be the officiating priest at a sacrifice for his own adoption, whatever the compiler of the Hari Vans'a may please to assert. From Bharadwaja, a Brahman by birth, and king by adoption, descended Brahmans and Kshatriyas, the children of two fathers: The Mahabharata, in the Adi Parvan, tells the story very simply. In one place, p. 136. v. 3710, it says that Bharata, on the birth of his children proving vain, obtained from Bharadwaja, by great sacrifices, a son, Bhumanyu; and in another passage it makes Bhumanyu the son of Bharata by Sunanda, daughter of S'arvasena, king of Kas'i; p. 139. v. 3785. The two are not incompatible.

^450:16 Manyu: Bhagavata. Suketu: Agni. But the Brahma and Hari V. omit this and the next generation, and make Suhotra, Anuhotra, Gaya, Garga, and Kapila the sons of Vitatha: they then assign to Suhotra two sons, Kas'ika and Ghritsamati, and identify them and their descendants with the progeny of Ayu, who were kings of Kas'i (see <page 409>. n. ); a piece of confusion unwarranted by any other authority except the Agni.

^450:17 Vrihat, Aharya, Nara, Garga: Matsya.

^450:18 Guruvirya and Trideva: Vayu. The first is called Gurudhi, Matsya; and Guru, [p. 451] Bhagavata: they agree in Rantideva. The Bhagavata describes the great liberality of this prince, and his practice of Yoga. According to a legend preserved in the Megha Duta, his sacrifices of kine were so numerous, that their blood formed the river Charmanvati, the modern Chambal.

^451:19 S'ivi: Matsya.

^451:20 The other authorities concur in this statement; thus furnishing an additional instance of one caste proceeding from another. No reason is assigned: the commentator says it was from some cause.

^451:21 Durbhakshaya: Vayu. Urukshat: Matsya. Duritakshaya: Bhagavata.

^451:22 Trayyaruni, Pushkararuni, Kavi; all became Brahmans: ### Matsya: and there were three chief branches of the Kavyas, or descendants of Kavi; ### Gargas, Sankritis, and Kavyas. Ibid.

^451:23 In the Mahabharata, Suhotra is the son of Bhumanyu; and in one place the father of Ajamidha, &c., and in another of Hastin. The Brahma P. in some degree, and the Hari Vans'a in a still greater, have made most extraordinary confusion in the instance of this name. In our text and in all the best authorities we have three Suhotras, perfectly distinct: 1. Suhotra great-grandson of Amavasu, father of Jahnu, and ancestor of Viswamitra and the Kaus'ikas (see <page 308>); 2. Suhotra son of Kshatravriddha, and grandson of Ayus, and progenitor of the race of Kas'i kings (<page 406>); and 3. Suhotra the son of Vrihatkshatra, grandson of Vitatha, and parent of Hastin. In the two blundering compilations mentioned, we have, first (Hari V. c. 20), a Suhotra son of Vrihatkshatra, of the race of Puru; his descent is not given, but, from the names which follow Suhotra, the dynasty is that of our present text: secondly (Hari V. c. 27), Suhotra son of Kanchana, of the line of Amavasu, and father of Jahnu, &c.: thirdly (Hari V. c. 29), Suhotra the son of Kshatravriddha, and progenitor of the Kas'i kings: fourthly (Hari V. 32), we have the first and third of these personages confounded; Suhotra is made the son of Vitatha, and progenitor of the Kas'i kings, the dynasty of whom is repeated; thus connecting them with the line of Puru instead of Ayus, in opposition to all authority. Again, we have a notable piece of confusion, and Suhotra the son of Vitatha is made the father of Vrihat, the father of the three princes who in our text and in the Hari V. (c. 20) are the sons of Hastin; and amongst whom Ajamidha is made the father of Jahnu, and ancestor of the Kaus'ikas, instead of being, as in c. 27, and as every where else, of the family of Amavasu. The source of all this confusion is obvious. The compilers extracted all the authentic traditions accurately enough, but, puzzled by the identity of name, they have also [p. 452] mixed the different accounts together, and caused very absurd and needless perplexity. It is quite clear also that the Hari Vanua does not deserve the pains taken, and taken fruitlessly, by Mr. Hamilton and M. Langlois to reduce it to consistency. It is of no weight whatever as an authority for the dynasties of kings, although it furnishes some particular details, which it has picked up possibly from authentic sources not now available.

^452:24 It was finally ruined by the encroachments of the Ganges, but vestiges of it were, at least until lately, to be traced along the river, nearly in a line with Delhi, about sixty miles to the east.

^452:25 In one place, son of Suhotra; in another, grandson of Hastin: Mahabharata.

^452:26 The copies agree in this reading, yet it can scarcely be correct. Kanwa has already been noticed as the son of Apratiratha. According to the Bhagavata, the elder son of Ajamidha was Priyamedhas, from whom a tribe of Brahmans descended. The Matsya has Vrihaddhanush, and names the wife of Ajamidha, Dhumini. It also however, along with the Vayu, makes Kanwa the son of Ajamidha by his wife Kesini.

^452:27 Vrihaddhanush: Bhagavata. Also called Vrihaddharman: Hari V.

^452:28 Vrihatkaya: Bhagavata.

^452:29 Satyajit: Hari V.

^452:30 As'wajit: Matsya. Vis'ada: Bhagavata.

^452:31

          Bhagavata.

       Matsya.

       Hari V.

     
      Ruchiras'wa

       Ruchiras'wa

       Ruchira

     
      Kas'ya

       Kas'ya

       S'wetaketu

     
      Dridhahanu

       Dridhas'wa

       Mahimnara

     
      Vatsa

       Vatsa k. of   Avanti.

       Vatsa k. of   Avanti.

     
   

^452:32 Kampilya appears to be the Kampil of the Mohammedans, situated in the Doab. It was included in southern Panchala. The Matsya makes Samara the son of Kas'ya.

^452:33 Vibhraja in MSS., also in the Vayu.

^452:34 The Bhagavata omits the descents subsequent to Nipa, and makes Brahmadatta the son of Nipa by Sukriti. In the Hari V. is a curious legend of the different transmigrations of Brahmadatta and his six companions, who were successively as many Brahmans, then foresters, then [p. 453] deer, then water-fowl, then swans, and finally Brahmans again, when with the king they obtained liberation. According to the Bhagavata, Brahmadatta composed a treatise on the Yoga, a Yoga tantra.

^453:35 Dandasena: Hari V.

^453:36 Bhallaka: Vayu. Bhallada: Bhagavata. The Vayu makes him the last of the race. The Hari V. adds that he was killed by Karna. The Matsya names his successor Janamejaya, when the race of the Nipas was exterminated by Ugrayudha; as noticed below.

^453:37 So the Vayu and Bhagavata. The Matsya and Hari V., with less consistency, derive this family also from Ajamidha.

^453:38 Kritimat: Bhagavata.

^453:39 Between these two the Vayu inserts Mahat and Rukmaratha. The Matsya, Sudhanwan, S'arvabhauma, Mahapaurava, and Rukmadhara. The Brahma P., Sudharman, S'arvabhauma, Mahat, and Rukmaratha.

^453:40 The Bhagavata says he was the author of six Sanhitas of the Sama-veda. (See p. 282.)

^453:41 The Hari V. says he killed Nipa, the grandfather of Prishata, but it had previously stated that it was the son of Bhallata, several descents after Nipa, who was killed by Ugrayudha: and again (c. 32), Prishata, conformably to other authorities, appears as the father of Drupada, in the family of S'rinjaya. The Hari V. relates the destruction of Ugrayudha by Bhishma, in consequence of his demanding in marriage the widow of S'antanu: after which, Prishata, it is said, recovered possession of Kampilya.

^453:42 Puranjaya: Bhagavata.

^453:43 Purujati: Vayu. Puruja: Bhagavata. The Brahma P. and Hari V. omit Nila and S'anti.

^453:44 Riksha: Vayu. Prithu: Matsya. Arka: Bhagavata. Omitted: Brahma.

^453:45 Bahyaswa: Agni. Bhadras'wa: Mats. Bharmyaswa: Bhagavata.

^454:46 Jaya: Matsya. Sanjaya: Bhagavata.

^454:47 Yavinara: Agni and Bhagavata. Javinara: Matsya.

^454:48 Kapila: Mats. Krimilas'wa: Brahma.

^454:49 Panchala was at first the country north and west of Delhi, between the foot of the Himalaya and the Chambal. It was afterwards divided into northern and southern Panchala, separated by the Ganges. Makandi on the Ganges and Kampilya were the chief cities of the latter; Ahikshetra in the former. The Panchalas, according to the Mahabharata, expelled Samvarana from Hastinapur, but it was recovered by Kuru. The purport of the term Panchala is similarly explained in other Puranas. In the Mahabharata they are the grandsons of Ajamidha.

^454:50 The Matsya says that they, as well as the Kanwas, were all followers or partisans of Angiras: ###. The Hari V. has nearly the same words.

^454:51 Badhryas'wa: Vayu. Panchas'wa: Agni. Bandhyas'wa: Matsya. Bharmya: Bhagavata. But there is some indistinctness as to his descent. The Matsya and Hari V. give the son of Mudgala only his patronymic Maudgalya. According to the first, his son was Indrasena; and his son, Bandhyas'wa. The second makes Badhryas'wa the son of Maudgalya by Indrasena. The Bhagavata makes Bharmya, the patronymic of Mudgala, the son of Bharmyas'wa, and who is the father of Divodasa and Ahalya: ###. The commentator has, ###.

^454:52 In the Ramayana, S'atananda appears as the family priest of Janaka, the father of S'ita.

^454:53 From whom the Maitreya Brahmans were descended: Hari V. In the Matsya and Agni the son of Mitrayu is called Maitreya (see <page 3>). The Brahma P. and Hari V. here close the lineage of [p. 455] Divodasa: the Agni adds but one name, Somapi. They then proceed with the descendants of S'rinjaya, one of the Panchalas, or Panchadhanush, Somadatta, Sahadeva, and then as in our text. The Vayu and Bhagavata agree with the latter in making the line continuous from Divodasa. According to the Matsya and Brahma P. the race of Ajamidha became extinct in the person of Sahadeva, but Ajamidha himself was reborn as Somaka, in order to continue his lineage, which was thence called the Somaka family. It was in the reign of Drupada that the possessions of the Panchalas were divided; Drona, assisted by the Pandavas, conquering the country, and ceding the southern portion again to Drupada, as related in the Mahabharata. The two princes last named in the list figure in the great war.

^455:54 The Hari V. gives him two brothers, Dhumravarna and Sudars'ana. In the Mahabharata one list agrees with the text; the other calls Samvarana the son of Ajamidha by his wife Riksha.

^455:55 One other is named in the Bhagavata, Matsya, Brahma, and Agni; Animejaya, Arimarddana, and Nishadhas'wa. The Hari V. has Sudhanwat in place of Jahnu; having also Sudhanush.

^455:56 Krita: Vayu. Kritayajna: Brahma. Krimi: Matsya. Kriti: Bhagavata.

^455:57 The story of Uparichara, or a Vasu who by command of Indra became king of Chedi, is told in the Mahabharata, Adi Parvan (vol. I. p. 85). He is there said to have at first five sons, Vrihadratha, king of Magadha, Pratyagra, Kus'amba, also called Manivahana, Mavella, and Yadu, by his wife Girika; afterwards he has, by Adrika, an Apsaras condemned to the form of a fish, Matsya a son, and Satyavati or Kali a daughter: the latter was the mother of Vyasa. The same legend is referred to in the accounts of Uparichara and his family in the Bhagavata, Matsya, Hari V., &c.

^455:58 Vrishabha: Matsya.

^455:59 Satyahita: Vayu. Satyahita: Bhagavata. Satyadhrita or Pushya: Matsya.

^456:60 This story is told in the 16th section of the Sabha Parvan of the Mahabharata, where also he is called the son of Vrihadratha. In the Vayu he is the son of Satyahita. The Agni has Satyahita, Urjja, Sambhava, Jarasandha; and the Matsya, Satyadhrita, Dhanusha, S'arva, Sambhava, Jarasandha.

^456:61 Somadhi: Vayu. Udapi: Agni. Udayus: Brahma. Somavit: Matsya.

^456:62 S'rutakarman: Agni. S'rutas'arman Brahma.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 457]

  

CHAP. XX.

Descendants of Kuru. Devapi abdicates the throne: assumed by S'antanu: he is confirmed by the Brahmans: Bhishma his son by Ganga: his other sons. Birth of Dhritarashtra, Pandu, and Vidura. The hundred sons of Dhritarashtra. The five sons of Pandu: married to Draupadi: their posterity. Parikshit, the grandson of Arjuna, the reigning king.

PARIKSHIT, the son of Kuru, had four sons, Janamejaya, S'rutasena, Ugrasena, and Bhimasena [*1]. The son of Jahnu was Suratha; his son was Viduratha; his son was Sarvabhauma; his son was Jayasena Aravin; his son was Ayutayus; his son was Akrodhana; one of his sons was Devatithi, and another was called Riksha; his son was Dilipa; his son was Pratipa, who had three sons, Devapi, S'antanu, and Bahlika. The first adopted in childhood a forest life, and S'antanu became king. Of him this verse is spread through the earth; "S'antanu is his name, because if he lays his hands upon an old man, he restores him to youth, and by him men obtain tranquillity (s'anti)."

[p. 458]

In the kingdom over which S'antanu ruled there was no rain for twelve years. Apprehensive that the country would become a desert, the king assembled the Brahmans, and asked them why no rain fell, and what fault he had committed. They told him that he was as it were a younger brother married before an elder, for he was in the enjoyment of the earth, which was the right of his elder brother Devapi. "What then am I to do?" said the Raja: to which they replied, "Until the gods shall be displeased with Devapi, by his declining from the path of righteousness, the kingdom is his, and to him therefore you should resign it." When the minister of the king, Asmarisarin, heard this, he collected a number of ascetics who taught doctrines opposed to those of the Vedas, and sent them into the forest; where meeting with Devapi, they perverted the understanding of the simple-minded prince, and led him to adopt heretical notions. In the meantime, S'antanu being much distressed to think that he had been guilty of the offence intimated by the Brahmans, sent them before him into the woods, and then proceeded thither himself, to restore the kingdom to his elder brother. When the Brahmans arrived at the hermitage of Devapi, they informed him, that, according to the doctrines of the Vedas, succession to a kingdom was the right of the elder brother: but he entered into discussion with them, and in various ways advanced arguments which had the defect of being contrary to the precepts of the Vedas. When the Brahmans heard this, they turned to S'antanu, and said, "Come hither, Raja; you need give yourself no further trouble in this matter; the dearth is at an end: this man is fallen from his state, for he has uttered words of disrespect to the authority of the eternal, untreated Veda; and when the elder brother is degraded, there is no sin in the prior espousals of his junior." S'antanu thereupon returned to his capital, and administered the government as before; and his elder brother Devapi being degraded from his caste by repeating doctrines contrary to the Vedas, Indra poured down abundant rain, which was followed by plentiful harvests [*2].

[p. 459]

The son of Bahlika was Somadatta, who had three sons, Bhuri, Bhuris'ravas, and S'ala [*3].

The son of S'antanu was the illustrious and learned Bhishma, who was born to him by the holy river-goddess, Ganga; and he had by his wife Satyavati two sons, Chitrangada and Vichitraviryya. Chitrangada, whilst yet a youth, was killed in a conflict with a Gandharba, also called Chitrangada. Vichitraviryya married Amba and Ambalika, the daughters of the king of Kas'i; and indulging too freely in connubial rites, fell into a consumption, of which he died. By command of Satyavati, my son Krishna-dwaipayana, ever obedient to his mother's wishes [*4], begot upon the widows of his brother the princes Dhritarashtra and Pandu, and upon a female servant, Vidura. Dhritarashtra had Duryodhana, Duhsas'ana, and other sons, to the cumber of a hundred. Pandu having incurred the curse of a deer, whose mate he had killed in the chase, was deterred from procreating children; and his wife Kunti, bare to him in consequence three sons, who were begotten by the deities Dharma, Vayu, and Indra; namely, Yudhishthira, Bhima, and Arjuna: and his wife Madri had two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva, by the celestial sons of As'wini. These had each a son by Draupadi. The son of Yudhishthira was Prativindhya; of Bhima, S'rutasoma; of Arjuna, S'rutakirtti; of Nakula, S'atanika; and of Sahadeva, S'rutakarman. The Pandavas had also other sons [*5]. By his wife Yaudheyi, Yudhishthira had Devaka.

[p. 460]

[paragraph continues] The son of Bhima by Hidimba was Ghatotkacha, and he had also Sarvatraga by his wife Kas'i. The son of Sahadeva by Vijaya was Suhotra; and Niramitra was the son of Nakula by Karenumati. Arjuna had Iravat by the serpent-nymph Ulupi; Babhruvahana, who was adopted as the son of his maternal grandfather, by the daughter of the king of Manipura; and, by his wife Subhadra Abhimanyu, who even in extreme youth was renowned for his valour and his strength, and crushed the chariots of his foes in fight. The son of Abhimanyu by his wife Uttara was Parikshit, who, after the Kurus were all destroyed, was killed in his mother's womb by the magic Brahma weapon, hurled by Aswatthaman: he was however restored to life by the clemency of that being whose feet receive the homage of all the demons and the gods, and who for his own pleasure had assumed a human shape (Krishna). This prince, Parikshit, now reigns over the whole world with undivided sway [*6].

Footnotes

^457:1 This, although it occurs in other authorities, appears to be an error, for these are the sons of a subsequent Parikshit (see the next chapter, <page 461>). The Matsya omits Parikshit here, and the Bhagavata states that he had no children. In most of the Puranas, however, the line of Parikshit is continued, but there is very great confusion in the lineage. According to the Vayu, Janamejaya was the son of Parikshit, whose son was S'rutasena, whose son was Bhimasena. Janamejaya had also a son named Suratha; but Suratha was also the name of the son of Jahnu, from whom the line continues as in the text. The Brahma P. and Hari V. also make Suratha the son both of Janamejaya and of Jahnu; and they observe that there are two Rikshas, two Parikshits, three Bhimasenas, and two Janamejayas, in the lunar race. Some of the confusion probably originates with the Mahabharata, which, as before noticed, gives two lists from Puru to S'antanu, differing from one another and from all the lists of the Puranas. In the first of these lists such collateral names have been retained as appear to have furnished our text and that of other Puranas with distinct persons: thus making the members of one fraternity so many descents. Of the two lists, however, the second is probably to be regarded as the more recent, if not more correct; for Vais'ampayana repeats it at Janamejaya's request, because the latter is not satisfied with the summary account which the former had first communicated to him. Mahabh. vol. I, p. 136 and p. 138.

^458:2 The Mahabharata merely states that Devapi retired to a religious life. The story of his heresy is narrated, much as in the text, in the Bhagavata, Vayu, &c. The Matsya adds, that he was also leprous; on which account his subjects contemned him. [p. 459] He was probably set aside in favour of his younger brother, either on that account or on that of his heresy; such a disposition being conformable to Hindu law. According to the Bhagavata and Matsya he is still alive at a place called Kalapa grama, where, in the Krita age of the next Mahayuga, he will be the restorer of the Kshatriya race.

^459:3 The Matsya says that Bahlika had a hundred sons or lords of the Bahlikas.

^459:4 Before her marriage to S'antanu, Satyavati had a son, Krishna-dwaipayana or Vyasa, by Paras'ara: he was therefore the half brother of Vichitraviryya, and legally qualified to raise up offspring to him by his widow. This law is abrogated in the present age. The whole story of the sons of S'antanu is told at length in the Mahabharata.

^459:5 The Mahabharata names some of them rather differently, and adds some particulars. Thus Yaudheya was the son of Yudhishthira by his wife Devika, daughter of Govasana of the S'aivya tribe. The son of Bhimasena was Sarvaga, by Balandhara, princess of Kas'i; he had also Ghatokkacha by Hidimba. Abhimanyu was the [p. 460] son of Arjuna by Subhadra. The wives and sons of the other two are the same, but Karenumati is termed a princess  Chedi, and Vijaya of Madra.

^460:6 In the details immediately preceding, the Puranas generally concur, deriving them probably from the same source, the Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata, and employing very frequently the same words. The period at which the chapter closes is supposed to be that at which the Vyasa, who arranged or compiled the Puranas, is believed to have flourished. Parikshit died of the bite of a snake, according to the Mahabharata, Adi P. The Bhagavata is supposed to have been narrated to him in the interval between the bite and its fatal effect.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 461]

  

CHAP. XXI.

Future kings. Descendants of Parikshit, ending with Kshemaka.

I WILL now enumerate the kings who, will reign in future periods [*1]. The present monarch, Parikshit [*2], will have four sons, Janamejaya, S'rutasena, Ugrasena, and Bhimasena [*3]. The son of Janamejaya will be S'atanika [*4], who will study the Vedas under Yajnyawalkya, and military science with Kripa; but becoming dissatisfied with sensual enjoyments, he will acquire spiritual knowledge from the instructions of S'aunaka, and ultimately obtain salvation. His son will be Aswamedhadatta (a son given by the gods in reward for the sacrifice of a horse [*5]); his son will be Asima-krishna [*6]; his son will be Nichakra [*7], who will remove the capital to Kaus'ambi, in consequence of Hastinapura being washed away by the Ganges; his son will be Ushna [*8]; his son will be Chitraratha; his son

[p. 462]

will be Vrishnimat [*9]; his son will be Sushena; his son will be Sunitha [*10]; his son will be Richa [*11]; his son will be Nrichakshu [*12]; his son will be Sukhihala [*13]; his son will be Pariplava; his son will be Sunaya [*14]; his son will be Medhavin; his son will be Nripanjaya [*15]; his son will be Mridu [*16]; his son will be Tigma [*17]; his son will be Vrihadratha; his son will be Vasudana [*18]; and his son will be another S'atanika; his son will be Udayana [*19]; his son will be Ahinara [*20]; his son will be Khandapani [*21]; his son will be Niramitra [*22]; his son will be Kshemaka [*23]: of him this verse is recited; "The race which gave origin to Brahmans and Kshatriyas, and which was purified by regal sages, terminated with Kshemaka; in the Kali age [*24]."

Footnotes

^461:1 The style now adopted is that of prophecy, as Vyasa could not consistently have recorded the events which were posterior to his time.

^461:2 Also read Parikshita, Pariksha, and Parikshi.

^461:3 See <page 457>. The Vayu and Matsya relate, rather obscurely, a dispute between Janamejaya and Vais'ampayana, in consequence of the former's patronage of the Brahmans of the Vajasaneyi branch of the Yajur-veda, in opposition to the latter, who was the author of the black or original Yajush (see <page 279>). Janamejaya twice performed the As'wamedha according to the Vajasaneyi ritual, and established the Trisarvi, or use of certain texts by As'maka and others, by the Brahmans of Anga, and by those of the middle country. He perished however in consequence, being cursed by Vais'ampayana. Before their disagreement, Vais'ampayana related the Mahabharata to Janamejaya. Mahabh., Adi Parvan.

^461:4 The reading of the text is rather, 'his (Parikshit's) other son will be S'atanika;' but the commentator refers 'his' to Janamejaya. The Vayu, Matsya, and Bhagavata also make S'atanika the son of Janamejaya. The Brahma P. has a totally different series, or Parikshit, Suryapida, Chandrapida, Janamejaya, Satyakarna, S'wetakarna, Sukumara, and Ajas'yama.

^461:5 The Bhagavata interposes Sahasranika. The Vrihatkatha has the same descent, but calls the son of Sahasranika, Udayana or Vatsa. The Bhagavata has As'wamedhaja.

^461:6 Adhisama k.: Vayu. Adhisoma k.: Matsya. The former states that the Vayu P. was narrated in this king's reign, in the second year of a three years' sacrifice at Kurukshetra.

^461:7 Nemichakra: Bhagav. Vichakshus: Matsya. They agree with the text as to the removal of the capital, and the cause.

^461:8 Ukta: Bhag. Bhurijyeshtha: Matsya.

^462:9 Suchidratna, Vayu; Suchidrava, Mats.; Kaviratha, Bhag.; is interposed between Chitraratha and Vrishnimat.

^462:10 Sutirtha: Vayu.

^462:11 Ruchi: Vayu. Omitted: Mats. and Bhag.

^462:12 Chitraksha: Vayu.

^462:13 Sukhinala: Bhag.

^462:14 Sutapas: Mats.

^462:15 Puranjaya: Mats.

^462:16 Urva: Mats. Durva: Bhag.

^462:17 Tigmatman: Mats. Timi: Bhagavata.

^462:18 Sudasa: Bhag. Vasudaman: Mats.

^462:19 The Matsya concurs with the text (see above, note [*5]); the Bhagavata has Durdamana.

^462:20 Vahinara: Bhag.

^462:21 Dandapani: Bhag., Vayu, Mats.

^462:22 Nimi: Bhag.

^462:23 Kshepaka: Vayu.

^462:24 The same memorial verse is quoted in the Matsya and Vayu P., preceded by one which states the number of princes twenty-five. The specification however, commencing with S'atanika, is twenty-six or twenty-seven. The passage is, ###.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 463]

  

CHAP. XXII.

Future kings of the family of Ikshwaku, ending with Sumitra.

I WILL now repeat to you the future princes of the family of Ikshwaku [*1].

The son of Vrihadbala [*2] will be Vrihatkshana [*3]; his son will be Urukshepa [*4]; his son will be Vatsa [*5]; his son will be Vatsavyuha [*6]; his son will be Prativyoman [*7]; his son will be Divakara; his son will be Sahadeva [*8]; his son will be Vrihadas'wa [*9]; his son will be Bhanuratha [*10]; his son will be Supratitha [*11]; his son will be Marudeva [*12]; his son will be Sunakshatra; his son will be Kinnara [*13]; his son will be Antariksha; his son will be Suvarna [*14]; his son will be Amitrajit [*15]; his son will be Vrihadraja [*16]; his son will be Dharman [*17]; his son will be Kritanjaya; his son will be Rananjaya; his son will be Sanjaya; his son will be S'akya [*18]; his son will be S'uddhodana [*19]; his son will be Ratula [*20]; his son will be

[p. 464]

[paragraph continues] Prasenajit; his son will be Kshudraka; his son will be Kundaka [*21]; his son will be Suratha [*22]; his son will be Sumitra. These are the kings of the family of Ikshwaku, descended from Vrihadbala. This commemorative verse is current concerning them; "The race of the descendants of Ikshwaku will terminate with Sumitra: it will end in the Kali age with him [*23]."

Footnotes

^463:1 See <page 359>.

^463:2 Vrihadratha: Vayu,

^463:3 Vrihatkshaya: Vayu. Vrihadrana: Bhag. Omitted: Mats.

^463:4 Omitted: Vayu. Urukshaya: Mats. Urukriya: Bhag.

^463:5 Omitted by all three.

^463:6 Vatsavriddha: Bhag.

^463:7 Prativyuha: Vayu.

^463:8 The Bhagavata inserts Bhanu. The Matsya says that Ayodhya was the capital of Divakara. The Vayu omits the next twelve names; probably a defect in the copies.

^463:9 Dhruvas'wa: Mats.

^463:10 Bhanumat: Bhag. Bhavyaratha or Bhavya: Mats.

^463:11 Pratikas'wa: Bhag. Pratipas'wa: Mats.

^463:12 The Bhagavata and Matsya prefix a Supratipa or Supratika.

^463:13 Pushkara: Bhag.

^463:14 Suparvan or Sumantra: Mats. Sutapas: Bhag.

^463:15 Amantravit: Matsya.

^463:16 Vrihadbraja: Bhag,

^463:17 Omitted: Mats. Varhish: Bhag.

^463:18 The Bhagavata and Vayu have S'akya. My copy of the Matsya has S'adhya, but the Radcliffe MS., more correctly, no doubt, S'akya.

^463:19 In some copies Krodhodana; but it is also S'uddhodana, Mats. and Vayu; S'uddhoda, Bhag.

^463:20 Rahula: Vayu. Siddhartha or Pushkala: Mats. Langala: Bhag. This and the two preceding names are of considerable chronological interest; for S'akya is the name of the author or reviver of Buddhism, whose birth appears to have occurred in the seventh, and death in the sixth century before Christ (B. C. 621-543). There can be no doubt of the individual here intended, although he is out of his place, for he was the son, not the father, of S'uddhodana, and the father of Rahula; as he is termed in the Amara [p. 464] and Haima Koshas, S'audhodani or S'uddhodana suta the son of S'uddhodana, and Rahulasu the parent of Rahula: so also in the Mahawans'o, Siddhartha or S'akya is the son of S'uddhodano, and father of Rahulo. Turnour's translation, p. 9. Whether they are rightly included amongst the princes of the race of Ikshwaku is more questionable; for S'uddhodana is usually described as a petty prince, whose capital was not Ayodhya, but Kapila or Kapilavastu. At the same time it appears that the provinces of the Doab had passed into the possession of princes of the lunar line, and the children of the sun may have been reduced to the country north of the Ganges, or the modern Gorakhpur, in which Kapila was situated. The Buddhists do usually consider their teacher S'akya to be descended from Ikshwaku. The chronology is less easily adjusted, but it is not altogether incompatible. According to the lists of the text, S'akya, as the twenty-second of the line of Ikshwaku, is cotemporary with Ripunjaya, the twenty-second and last of the kings of Magadha, of the family of Jarasandha; but, agreeably to the Buddhist authorities, he was the friend of Bimbasara, a king who in the Pauranik list appears to be the fifth of the S'ais'unaga dynasty, and tenth from Ripunjaya. The same number of princes does not necessarily imply equal duration of dynasty, and Ikshwaku's descendants may have outlasted those of Jarasandha; or, as is more likely--for the dynasty was obscure, and is evidently imperfectly preserved--several descents may have been omitted, the insertion of which would reconcile the Pauranik lists with those of the Buddhists, and bring S'akya down to the age of Bimbasara. It is evident, from what occurs in other authorities, that the Aikshwakava princes are regarded as cotemporaries even of the S'ais'unaga dynasty: see c. 24. n. 17.

^464:21 Kshulika: Vayu. Kulaka or Kshullaka: Mats. Omitted: Bhag. In the Mahavira Charitra, a work written by the celebrated Hemachandra, in the twelfth century, we have a Prasenajit, king of Magadha, residing at Rajgriha, succeeded by S'renika, and he by Kulika. The Bauddhas have a Prasenajit cotemporary with S'akya, son of Mahapadma, king of Magadha. There is some confusion of persons either in the Pauranik genealogies or in the Buddhist and Jain traditions, but they agree in bringing the same names together about the same period.

^464:22 Omitted: Bhag.

^464:23 The Vayu and Bhagavata have the same stanza. We have here twenty-nine or thirty princes of the later solar line, cotemporary with the preceding twenty-six or twenty-seven of the later dynasty of the moon.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 465]

  

CHAP. XXIII.

Future kings of Magadha: descendants of Vrihadratha.

I WILL now relate to you the descendants of Vrihadratha, who will be the kings of Magadha. There have been several powerful princes of this dynasty, of whom the most celebrated was Jarasandha; his son was Sahadeva; his son is Somapi [*1]; his son will be S'rutavat [*2]; his son will be Ayutayus [*3]; his son will be Niramitra [*4]; his son will be Sukshatra [*5]; his son will be Vrihatkarman [*6]; his son will be Senajit [*7]; his son will be S'rutanjaya [*8]; his son will be Vipra [*9]; his son will be S'uchi [*10]; his son will be Kshemya [*11]; his son will be Suvrata [*12]; his son will be Dharma [*13]; his son will be Sus'uma [*14]; his son will be Dridhasena [*15]; his son will be Sumati [*16]; his son will be Suvala [*17]; his son will be Sunita [*18]; his son will be Satyajit [*19]; his son will be Vis'wajit [*20]; his son will be Ripunjaya [*21]. These are the Varhadrathas, who will reign for a thousand years [*22].

Footnotes

^465:1 Somadhi; Vayu, Matsya: and they now affect greater precision, giving the years of the reigns. Somadhi 58, V.; 50, M.

^465:2 S'rutas'ravas, 67 yrs. V.; 64, M,

^465:3 36 yrs. V.; Apratipa, 26, M.

^465:4 100 yrs. V.; 40, M.

^465:5 8 yrs. V.; 56, M.; Sunakshatra, Bhag.

^465:6 23 yrs. V. and M.; Vrihatsena, Bhag.

^465:7 23 yrs. V.; 50, M.; Karmajit, Bhag.

^465:8 40 yrs. V. and M.

^465:9 Mahabala, 25 yrs. V.; Vidhu, 28, M.

^465:10 58 yrs. V.; 64, M.

^465:11 28 yrs. V. and M.

^465:12 60 yrs. V.; 64, M.

^465:13 5 yrs. V.; Sunetra, 35, M.; Dharmanetra, Bhag.

^465:14 38 yrs. V.; Nivritti, 58, M.; Sama, Bhag.

^465:15 48 yrs. V.; Trinetra, 28, M.; Dyumatsena, Bhag.

^465:16 33 yrs. V.; Mahatsena, 48, M.

^465:17 22 yrs. V.; Netra, 33, M.

^465:18 40 yrs. V.; Abala, 32, M.

^465:19 80 yrs. V.; omitted, M.

^465:20 35 yrs. V.; omitted, M.

^465:21 50 yrs. V. and M.; Puranjaya and Vis'wajit are identified, Bhag.

^465:22 Our list and that of the Vayu specifies twenty-one kings after Sahadeva: the Bhagavata specifies twenty, and in another passage states that to be the number. My copy of the Matsya names but nineteen, and the Radcliffe but twelve; but both agree in making the total thirty-two. They all concur with the text also in stating that 1000 years had elapsed from the great war, at the death of the last Varhadratha prince; and this is more worthy of credit than the details, which are obviously imperfect.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 466]

  

CHAP. XXIV.

Future kings of Magadha. Five princes of the line of Pradyota. Ten S'ais'unagas. Nine Nandas. Ten Mauryas. Ten S'ungas. Four Kanwas. Thirty Andhrabhrityas. Kings of various tribes and castes, and periods of their rule. Ascendancy of barbarians. Different races in different regions. Period of universal iniquity and decay. Coming of Vishnu as Kalki. Destruction of the wicked, and restoration of the practices of the Vedas. End of the Kali, and return of the Krita, age. Duration of the Kali. Verses chanted by Earth, and communicated by Asita to Janaka. End of the fourth book.

THE last of the Vrihadratha dynasty, Ripunjaya, will have a minister named Sunika [*1], who having killed his sovereign, will place his son Pradyota upon the throne [*2]: his son will be Palaka [*3]; his son will be Vis'akhayupa [*4]; his son will be Janaka [*5]; and his son will be Nandivarddhana [*6]. These five kings of the house of Pradyota will reign over the earth for a hundred and thirty-eight years [*7].

The next prince will be S'is'unaga [*8]; his son will be Kakavarna [*9]; his son will be Kshemadharman [*10]; his son will be Kshatraujas [*11]; his son will be Vidmisara [*12]; his son will be Ajatas'atru [*13]; his son will be

[p. 467]

[paragraph continues] Dharbaka [*14]; his son will be Udayas'wa [*15]; his son will also be Nandivarddhana; and his son will be Mahanandi [*16]. These ten S'ais'unagas will be kings of the earth for three hundred and sixty-two years [*17].

The son of Mahananda will be born of a woman of the S'udra or servile class; his name will be Nanda, called Mahapadma, for he will be exceedingly avaricious [*18]. Like another Paras'urama, he will be the annihilator of the Kshatriya race; for after him the kings of the earth will be S'udras. He will bring the whole earth under one umbrella: he

[p. 468]

will have eight sons, Sumalya and others, who will reign after Mahapadma; and he and his sons [*19] will govern for a hundred years. The Brahman Kautilya will root out the nine Nandas [*20]

Upon the cessation of the race of Nanda, the Mauryas will possess the earth, for Kantilya will place Chandragupta [*21] on the throne: his son

[p. 469]

will be Vindusara [*22]; his son will be As'okavarddhana [*23]; his son will be

[p. 470]

[paragraph continues] Suyas'as [*24]; his son will be Das'aratha; his son will be Sangata; his son will be S'alis'uka; his son will be Somas'armman; his son will be Sas'adharman [*25]; and his successor will be Vrihadratha. These are the ten Mauryas, who will reign over the earth for a hundred and thirty-seven years [*26].

The dynasty of the S'ungas will next become possessed of the sovereignty; for Pushpamitra, the general of the last Maurya prince, will

[p. 471]

put his master to death, and ascend the throne [*27]: his son will be Agnimitra [*28]; his son will be Sujyeshtha [*29]; his son will be Vasumitra [*30]; his son will be Ardraka [*31]; his son will be Pulindaka [*32]; his son will be Ghoshavasu [*33]; his son will be Vajramitra [*34]; his son will be Bhagavata [*35]; his son will be Devabhuti [*36]. These are the ten S'ungas, who will govern the kingdom for a hundred and twelve years [*37].

Devabhuti, the last S'unga prince, being addicted to, immoral indulgences, his minister, the Kanwa named Vasudeva will murder him, and usurp the kingdom: his son will be Bhumimitra; his son will be Narayana; his son will be Sus'arman. These four Kanwas will be kings of the earth for forty-five years [*38].

[p. 472]

Sus'arman the Kanwa will be killed by a powerful servant named S'ipraka, of the Andhra tribe, who will become king, and found the Andhrabhritya dynasty [*39]: he will be succeeded by his brother Krishna [*40]; his son will be S'ri S'atakarni [*41]; his son will be Purnotsanga [*42]; his son will be S'atakarni (2nd) [*43]; his son will be Lambodara [*44]; his son will be Ivilaka [*45]; his son will be Meghaswati [*46]; his son will be Patumat [*47]; his

[p. 473]

son will be Arishtakarman [*48]; his son will be Hala [*49]; his son will be Talaka [*50]; his son will be Pravilasena [*51]; his son will be Sundara, named S'atakarni [*52]; his son will be Chakora S'atakarni [*53]; his son will be S'ivaswati [*54]; his son will be Gomatiputra [*55]; his son will be Pulimat [*56]; his son will be S'ivas'ri S'atakarni [*57]; his son will be S'ivaskandha [*58]; his son will be Yajnas'ri [*59]; his son will be Vijaya [*60]; his son will be Chandras'ri [*61]; his son will be Pulomarchish [*62]. These thirty Andhrabhritya kings will reign four hundred and fifty-six years [*63].

[p. 474]

After these, various races will reign, as seven Abhiras, ten Garddhabas, sixteen S'akas, eight Yavanas, fourteen Tusharas, thirteen Mundas,

[p. 475]

eleven Maunas, altogether seventy-nine princes [*64], who will be sovereigns

[p. 476]

of the earth for one thousand three hundred and ninety years; and

[p. 477]

then eleven Pauras will be kings for three hundred years [*65]. When they are destroyed, the Kailakila Yavanas will be kings; the chief of whom will be Vindhyas'akti; his son will be Puranjaya; his son will be Ramachandra; his son will be Adharma, from whom will be Varanga, Kritanandana, S'udhinandi, Nandiyas'as, S'is'uka, and Pravira; these will rule for a hundred and six years [*66]. From them will proceed thirteen sons;

[p. 478]

then three Bahlikas, and Pushpamitra, and Patumitra, and others, to the number of thirteen, will rule over Mekala [*67]. There will be nine

[p. 479]

kings in the seven Koalas, and there will be as many Naishadha princes [*68].

In Magadha a sovereign named Vis'wasphatika will establish other tribes; he will extirpate the Kshatriya or martial race, and elevate fishermen, barbarians, and Brahmans, and other castes, to power [*69]. The nine Nagas will reign in Padmavati, Kantipuri, and Mathura; and the Guptas of Magadha along the Ganges to Prayaga [*70]. A prince named

[p. 480]

[paragraph continues] Devarakshita will reign, in a city on the sea shore, over the Kos'alas, Odras, Pundras, and Tamraliptas [*71]. The Guhas will possess Kalinga, Mahihaka, and the mountains of Mahendra [*72]. The race of Manidhanu will occupy the countries of the Nishadas, Naimishikas, and Kalatoyas [*73].

[p. 481]

[paragraph continues] The people called Kanakas will possess the Amazon country, and that called Mushika [*74]. Men of the three tribes, but degraded, and Abhiras and S'udras, will occupy S'aurashtra, Avanti, S'ura, Arbuda, and Marubhumi: and S'udras, outcastes, and barbarians will be masters of the banks of the Indus, Darvika, the Chandrabhaga, and Kashmir [*75].

[p. 482]

These will all be contemporary monarchs, reigning over the earth; kings of churlish spirit, violent temper, and ever addicted to falsehood and wickedness. They will inflict death on women, children, and cows; they will seize upon the property of their subjects; they will be of limited power, and will for the most part rapidly rise and fall; their lives will be short, their desires insatiable, and they will display but little piety. The people of the various countries intermingling with them will follow their example, and the barbarians being powerful in the patronage of the princes, whilst purer tribes are neglected, the people will perish [*76]. Wealth and piety will decrease day by day, until

[p. 483]

the world will be wholly depraved. Then property alone will confer rank; wealth will be the only source of devotion; passion will be the sole bond of union between the sexes; falsehood will be the only means of success in litigation; and women will be objects merely of sensual gratification. Earth will be venerated but for its mineral treasures [*77]; the Brahmanical thread will constitute a Brahman; external types (as the staff and red garb) will be the only distinctions of the several orders of life; dishonesty will be the universal means of subsistence; weakness will be the cause of dependance; menace and presumption will be substituted for learning; liberality will be devotion; simple ablution will be purification [*78]; mutual assent will be marriage; fine clothes will be dignity [*79]; and water afar off will be esteemed a holy spring. Amidst all castes he who is the strongest will reign over a principality thus vitiated by many faults. The people, unable to bear the heavy burdens imposed upon them by their avaricious sovereigns, will take refuge amongst the valleys of the mountains, and will be glad to feed upon wild honey, herbs, roots, fruits, flowers, and leaves: their only covering will be the bark of trees, and they will be exposed to the cold, and wind, and sun, and rain. No man's life will exceed three and twenty years. Thus in the Kali age shall decay constantly proceed, until the human race approaches its annihilation.

When the practices taught by the Vedas and the institutes of law shall nearly have ceased, and the close of the Kali age shall be nigh, a

[p. 484]

portion of that divine being who exists of his own spiritual nature in the character of Brahma, and who is the beginning and the end, and who comprehends all things, shall descend upon earth: he will be born in the family of Vishnuyas'as, an eminent Brahman of Sambhala village, as Kalki, endowed with the eight superhuman faculties. By his irresistible might he will destroy all the Mlechchhas and thieves, and all whose minds are devoted to iniquity. He will then reestablish righteousness upon earth; and the minds of those who live at the end of the Kali age shall be awakened, and shall be as pellucid as crystal. The men who are thus changed by virtue of that peculiar time shall be as the seeds of human beings, and shall give birth to a race who shall follow the laws of the Krita age, or age of purity. As it is said; "When the sun and moon, and the lunar asterism Tishya, and the planet Jupiter, are in one mansion, the Krita age shall return [*80]."

Thus, most excellent Muni, the kings who are past, who are present, and who are to be, have been enumerated. From the birth of Parikshit to the coronation of Nanda it is to be known that 1015 years have elapsed [*81]. When the two first stars of the seven Rishis (the great Bear)

[p. 485]

rise in the heavens, and some lunar asterism is seen at night at an equal distance between them, then the seven Rishis continue stationary in that conjunction for a hundred years of men [*82]. At the birth of

[p. 486]

[paragraph continues] Parikshit they were in Magha, and the Kali age then commenced, which consists of 1200 (divine) years. When the portion of Vishnu (that had been born from Vasudeva) returned to heaven, then the Kali age commenced. As long as the earth was touched by his sacred feet, the Kali age could not affect it. As soon as the incarnation of the eternal Vishnu had departed, the son of Dharma, Yudhishthira, with his brethren, abdicated the sovereignty. Observing unpropitious portents, consequent upon Krishna's disappearance, he placed Parikshit upon the throne. When the seven Rishis are in Purvashadha, then Nanda will begin to reign [*83], and thenceforward the influence of the Kali will augment.

[p. 487]

The day that Krishna shall have departed from the earth will be the first of the Kali age, the duration of which you shall hear; it will continue for 360,000 years of mortals. After twelve hundred divine years shall have elapsed, the Krita age shall be renewed.

Thus age after age Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vais'yas, and S'udras, excellent Brahman, men of great souls, have passed away by thousands; whose names and tribes and families I have not enumerated to you, from their great number, and the repetition of appellations it would involve. Two persons, Devapi of the race of Puru, and Maru of the family of Ikshwaku, through the force of devotion continue alive throughout the whole four ages, residing at the village of Kalapa: they will return hither in the beginning of the Krita age, and, becoming members of the family of the Manu, give origin to the Kshatriya dynasties [*84]. In this manner the earth is possessed through every series of the three first ages, the Krita, Treta, and Dwapara, by the sons of the Manu; and some remain in the Kali age, to serve as the rudiments of renewed generations, in the same way as Devapi and Maru are still in existence.

I have now given you a summary account of the sovereigns of the earth; to recapitulate the whole would be impossible even in a hundred lives. These and other kings, who with perishable frames have possessed this ever-during world, and who, blinded with deceptive notions of individual occupation, have indulged the feeling that suggests, "This earth is mine--it is my son's--it belongs to my dynasty," have all passed away. So, many who reigned before them, many who succeeded them, and many who are yet to come, have ceased, or will cease, to be. Earth laughs, as if smiling with autumnal flowers, to behold her kings unable to effect the subjugation of themselves. I will repeat to you, Maitreya, the stanzas that were chanted by Earth, and which the Muni Asita communicated to Janaka, whose banner was virtue. "How great is the folly of princes, who are endowed with the faculty of reason, to cherish

[p. 488]

the confidence of ambition, when they themselves are but foam upon the wave. Before they have subdued themselves, they seek to reduce their ministers, their servants, their subjects, under their authority; they then endeavour to overcome their foes. 'Thus,' say they, 'will we conquer the ocean-circled earth;' and, intent upon their project, behold not death, which is not far off. But what mighty matter is the subjugation of the sea-girt earth to one who can subdue himself. Emancipation from existence is the fruit of self-control. It is through infatuation that kings desire to possess me, whom their predecessors have been forced to leave, whom their fathers have not retained. Beguiled by the selfish love of sway, fathers contend with sons, and brothers with brothers, for my possession. Foolishness has been the character of every king who has boasted, 'All this earth is mine--every thing is mine--it will be in my house for ever;' for he is dead. How is it possible that such vain desires should survive in the hearts of his descendants, who have seen their progenitor, absorbed by the thirst of dominion, compelled to relinquish me, whom he called his own, and tread the path of dissolution? When I hear a king sending word to another by his ambassador, 'This earth is mine; immediately resign your pretensions to it;' I am moved to violent laughter at first, but it soon subsides in pity for the infatuated fool."

These were the verses, Maitreya, which Earth recited, and by listening to which ambition fades away like snow before the sun. I have now related to you the whole account of the descendants of the Manu; amongst whom have flourished kings endowed with a portion of Vishnu, engaged in the preservation of the earth. Whoever shall listen reverently and with faith to this narrative, proceeding from the posterity of Manu, shall be purified entirely from all his sins, and, with the perfect possession of his faculties, shall live in unequalled affluence, plenty, and prosperity. He who has heard of the races of the sun and moon, of Ikshwa.ku, Jahnu, Mandhatri, Sagara, and Raghu, who have all perished; of Yayati, Nahusha, and their posterity, who are no more; of kings of great might, resistless valour, and unbounded wealth, who have been overcome by still more powerful time, and are now only a tale; he will learn wisdom, and forbear to call either children, or wife, or house, or

[p. 489]

lands, or wealth, his own. The arduous penances that have been performed by heroic men obstructing fate for countless years, religious rites and sacrifices of great efficacy and virtue, have been made by time the subject only of narration. The valiant Prithu traversed the universe, every where triumphant over his foes; yet he was blown away, like the light down of the Simal tree, before the blast of time. He who was Kartaviryya subdued innumerable enemies, and conquered the seven zones of the earth; but now he is only the topic of a theme, a subject for affirmation and contradiction [*85]. Fie upon the empire of the sons of Raghu, who triumphed over Das'anana, and extended their sway to the ends of the earth; for was it not consumed in an instant by the frown of the destroyer? Mandhatri, the emperor of the universe, is embodied only in a legend; and what pious man who hears it will ever be so unwise as to cherish the desire of possession in his soul? Bhagiratha, Sagara, Kakutstha, Das'anana, Rama, Lakshmana, Yudhishthira, and others, have been. Is it so? Have they ever really existed? Where are they now? we know not! The powerful kings who now are, or who will be, as I have related them to you, or any others who are unspecified, are all subject to the same fate, and the present and the future will perish and be forgotten, like their predecessors. Aware of this truth, a wise man will never be influenced by the principle of individual appropriation; and regarding them as only transient and temporal possessions, he will not consider children and posterity, lands and property, or whatever else is personal, to be his own.

Footnotes

^466:1 Munika, Vayu; Pulika, Matsya; S'unaka, Bhag.

^466:2 For 23 years, V. and M.

^466:3 24 yrs. V.; Tilaka or Balaka, 28, M.

^466:4 50 yrs. V.; 53, M.

^466:5 Ajaka, 21 yrs. V.; Suryaka, 21, M.; Rajaka, Bhag.

^466:6 20 yrs. V. and M.

^466:7 This number is also specified by the Vayu and Bhagavata, and the several years of the reigns of the former agree with the total. The particulars of the Matsya compose 145 years, but there is no doubt some mistake in them.

^466:8 S'is'unaka, who according to the Vayu and Matsya relinquished Benares to his son, and established himself at Girivraja or Rajgriha in Behar, reigns 40 years, V. and M.

^466:9 36 yrs. V. and M.

^466:10 Kshemakarman, 20 yrs. V.; Kshemadharmman, 36, M.

^466:11 40 yrs. V.; Kshemajit or Kshemarchis, 36, M.; Kshetrajna, Bhag.

^466:12 Vimbisara, 28 yrs. V.; Vindusena or Vindhyasena, 28, M.; Vidhisara, Bhag.

^466:13 25 yrs. V.; 27, M.: but the latter inserts a Kanwayana, 9 yrs., and Bhumimitra or Bhumiputra, 14 yrs., before him. In this and the preceding name we have appellations of considerable celebrity in the traditions of the Bauddhas. Vidmisara, read also Vindhusara, Vilwisara, &c., is most probably their Vimbasara, who was born at the same time with S'akya, and was reigning at Rajgriha when he began his religious career. The Mahawans'o says that Siddhatto and Bimbisaro were attached [p. 467] friends, as their fathers had been before them: <page 10>. S'akya is said to have died in the reign of Ajatas'atru, the son of Vimbasara, in the eighth year of his reign. The Vayu transposes these names, and the Matsya still more alters the order of Ajatas'atru; but the Bhagavata concurs with our text. The Buddhist authority differs from the Puranas materially as to the duration of the reigns, giving to Bimbisaro 52 years, and to Ajatasattu 32: the latter, according to the same, murdered his father. Mahawans'o, p. 10. We may therefore with some confidence claim for these princes a date of about six centuries B. C. They are considered co-temporary with Sudhodana, &c. in the list of the Aikshwakavas (<page 463>. n. ).

^467:14 Harshaka, 25 yrs. V.; Vansaka, 24, M.

^467:15 33 yrs. V.; Udibhi or Udasin, 33, M. According to the Vayu, Udaya or Udayas'wa founded Kusumapur or Pataliputra, on the southern angle of the Ganges. The legends of S'akya, consistently with this tradition, take no notice of this city in his peregrinations on either bank of the Ganges. The Mahawans'o calls the son and successor of Ajatas'atru, Udayibhadako (Udayinhhadraka): p. 15.

^467:16 42 and 43 yrs. V.; 40 and 43, M. The Mahawans'o has in place of these, Anuruddhako, Mundo, and Nagadaso; all in succession parricides: the last deposed by an insurrection of the people: p. 15.

^467:17 The several authorities agree in the number of ten S'ais'unagas, and in the aggregate years of their reigns, which the Matsya and the Bhagavata call 360: the Vayu has 362, with which the several periods correspond: the details of the Matsya give 363. The Vayu and Matsya call the S'ais'unagas, Kshatrabandhus, which may designate an inferior order of Kshatriyas: they also observe, that cotemporary with the dynasties already specified, the Pauravas, the Varhadrathas, and Magadhas, there were other races of royal descent; as, Aikshwakava princes, 24: Panchalas, 25, V.; 27, M: Kalakas or Kasakas or Kaseyas, 24: Haihayas, 24, V.; 28, M.: Kalingas, 32, V.; 40, M.: S'akas, V.; As'makas, M., 25: Kuravas, 26: Maithilas, 28: S'urasenas, 23: and Vitihotras, 20.

^467:18 The Bhagavata calls him Mahapadmapati, the lord of Mahapadma; which the commentator interprets, 'sovereign of an infinite host,' or 'of immense wealth;' Mahapadma signifying 100.000 millions. The Vayu and Matsya, however, consider Mahapadma as another name of Nanda.

^468:19 So the Bhagavata also; but it would be more compatible with chronology to consider the nine Nandas as so many descents. The Vayu and Matsya give eighty-eight years to Mahapadma, and only the remaining twelve to Sumalya and the rest of the remaining eight; these twelve years being occupied with the efforts of Kautilya to expel the Nandas. The Mahawans'o, evidently intending the same events, gives names and circumstances differently; it may be doubted if with more accuracy. On the deposal of Nagadaso, the people raised to the throne the minister Susunago, who reigned eighteen years. This prince is evidently confounded with the S'is'uuaga of the Puranas. He was succeeded by his son Kalasoko, who reigned twenty years; and he was succeeded by his sons, ten of whom reigned together for twenty-two years: subsequently there were nine, who, according to their seniority, reigned for twenty-two years. The Brahman Chanako put the ninth surviving brother, named Dhana-Nando (Rich-Nanda), to death, and installed Chandagutto. Mahawans'o, p. 15 and 21. These particulars, notwithstanding the alteration of some of the names, belong clearly to one story; and that of the Buddhists looks as if it was borrowed and modified from that of the Brahmans. The commentary on the Mahawans'o, translated by Mr. Turnour (Introduction, p. xxxviii.), calls the sons of Kalasoko 'the nine Nandas;' but another Buddhist authority, the Dipawans'o, omits Kalasoko, and says that Susunago had ten brothers, who after his demise reigned collectively twenty-two years. Journal of the As. Soc. of Bengal, Nov. 1838, p. 930.

^468:20 For the particulars of the story here alluded to, see the Mudra Rakshasa, Hindu Theatre, vol. II. Kautilya is also called, according to the commentator on our text, Vatsyayana, Vishnugupta, and Chanakya. According to the Matsya P., Kantilya retained the regal authority for a century; but there is some inaccuracy in the copies.

^468:21 This is the most important name in all the lists, as it can scarcely be doubted that he is the Sandrocottus, or, as Athenaeus writes more correctly, the Sandrocoptus, of the Greeks, as I have endeavoured to prove in the introduction to the Mudra Rakshasa. The relative positions of Chandragupta, Vidmisara, or Bimbisara, and Ajatas'atru, serve to confirm the identification. S'akya was cotemporary with both the latter, dying in the eighth year of Ajatas'atru's reign. The Mahawans'o says he reigned twenty-four years afterwards; but the Vayu makes his whole reign but twenty-five years, which would place the close of it B. C. 526. The rest of the S'ais'unaga dynasty, according to the Vayu and Matsya, reigned 143 or 140 years; bringing their close to B. C. 383. Another century being deducted for the duration of the Nandas, would place the accession of [p. 469] Chandragupta B. C. 283. Chandragupta was the cotemporary of Seleucus Nicator, who began his reign B. C. 310, and concluded a treaty with him B. C. 305. Although therefore his date may not be made out quite correctly from the Pauranik premises, yet the error cannot be more than twenty or thirty years. The result is much nearer the truth than that furnished by Buddhist authorities. According to the Mahawans'o a hundred years had elapsed from the death of Buddha to the tenth year of the reign of Kalasoko (p. 15). He reigned other ten years, and his sons forty-four, making a total of 154 years between the death of S'akya and the accession of Chandragupta, which is consequently placed B. C. 389, or above seventy years too early. According to the Buddhist authorities, Chan-ta-kutta or Chandragupta commenced his reign 396 B. C. Burmese Table; Prinsep's Useful Tables. Mr. Turnour, in his Introduction, giving to Kalasoko eighteen years subsequent to the century after Buddha, places Chandragupta's accession B. C. 381, which, he observes, is sixty years too soon; dating, however, the accession of Chandragupta front 323 B. C. or immediately upon Alexander's death, a period too early by eight or ten years at least. The discrepancy of dates, Mr. Turnour is disposed to think, proceeds from some intentional perversion of the buddhistical chronology. Introd. p. L. The commentator on our text says that Chandragupta was the son of Nanda by a wife named Mura, whence he and his descendants were called Mauryas. Col. Tod considers Maurya a corruption of Mori, the name of a Rajput tribe. The Tika on the Mahawans'o builds a story on the fancied resemblance of the word to Mayura, S. Mori, Pr. 'a peacock.' There being abundance of pea-fowl in the place where the Sakya tribe built a town, they called it Mori, and there princes were thence called Mauryas. Turnour, Introduction to the Mahawans'o, p. xxxix. Chandragupta reigned, according to the Vayu P., 24 years; according to the Mahawans'o, 34; to the Dipawasans'o, 24.

^469:22 So the Mahawans'o, Bindusaro. Burmese Table, Bin-tu-sara. The Vayu has Bhadrasara, 25 years; the Bhagavata, Varisara. The Matsya names but four princes of this race, although it concurs with the others in stating the series to consist of ten. The names are also differently arranged, and one is peculiar: they are, S'atadhanwan, Vrihadratha, S'uka, and Das'aratha.

^469:23 As'oka, 36 years, Vayu; S'uka, 26, Mats.; As'okavarddhana, Bhag.; As'oko and Dhammas'oko, Mahawans'o. This king is the most celebrated of any in the annals of the Buddhists. In the commencement of his reign he followed the Brahmanical faith, but became a convert to that of Buddha, and a zealous encourager of it. He is said to have maintained in his palace 64,000 Buddhist priests, and to have erected 84,000 columns or topes throughout India. A great convocation of Buddhist priests was held in the eighteenth year of his reign, which was followed by missions to Ceylon and other places. According to Buddhist chronology he ascended the throne 218 years after the death of Buddha, B. C. 325. As [p. 470] the grandson of Chandragupta, however, he must have been some time subsequent to this, or, agreeably to the joint duration of the reigns of Chandragupta and Bindusara, supposing the former to have commenced his reign about B. C. 315, forty-nine years later, or B. C. 266. The duration of his reign is said to have been thirty-six years, bringing it down to B. C. 230: but if we deduct these periods from the date assignable to Chandragupta, of B. C. 283, we shall place As'oka's reign from B. C. 234 to 198. Now it is certain that a number of very curious inscriptions, on columns and rocks, by a Buddhist prince, in an ancient form of letter, and the Pali language, exist in India; and that some of them refer to Greek princes, who can be no other than members of the Seleucidan and Ptolemaean dynasties, and are probably Antiochus the Great and Ptolemy Euergetes, kings of Syria and Egypt in the latter part of the third century before Christ. Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, February and March, 1838. The Indian king appears always under the appellation Piyadas'i or Priyadars'in, 'the beautiful;' and is entitled Devanam-piya, 'the beloved of the gods.' According to Buddhist authorities, the Rasawahini and Dipawans'o, quoted by Mr. Turnour (J. As. Soc. of Bengal, Dec. 1837, p. 1056, and Nov. 1838, p. 930), Piyadas'i or Piyadas'ano is identified both by name and circumstances with As'oka, and to him therefore the inscriptions must be attributed. Their purport agrees well enough with his character, and their wide diffusion with the traditionary report of the number of his monuments. His date is not exactly that of Antiochus the Great, but it is not very far different, and the corrections required to make it correspond are no more than the inexact manner in which both Brahmanical and Buddhist chronology is preserved may well be expected to render necessary.

^470:24 The name of Das'aratha, in a similar ancient character as that of Piyadas'i's inscriptions, has been found at Gaya amongst Buddhist remains, and like them decyphered by Mr. Prinsep, Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, Aug. 1837, p. 677. A different series of names occurs in the Vayu; or, Kus'ala, 8 yrs.; Bandhupalita, Indrapalita, Das'avarman, 7 yrs.; S'atadhara, 8 yrs.; and Vrihadas'wa, 7 yrs. The Bhagavata agrees in most of the names, and its omission of Das'aratha is corrected by the commentator.

^470:25 S'atadhanwan, Bhag.

^470:26 The Vayu says nine Sumurttyas reigned 137 years. The Matsya and Bhagavata have ten Mauryas, and 137 years. The detailed numbers of the Vayu and Matsya differ from their totals, but the copies are manifestly corrupt.

^471:27 The Bhagavata omits this name, but states that there were ten S'ungas, although, without Pushpamitra, only nine are named. The Vayu and Matsya have the same account of the circumstances of his accession to the throne; the former gives him a reign of sixty, the latter of thirty-six years. In a play attributed to Kalidasa, the Malavikagnimitra, of which Agnimitra is the hero, his father is alluded to as the Senani or general, as if he had deposed his master in favour, not of himself, but of his son. Agnimitra is termed king of Vidis'a, not of Magadha. Pushpamitra is represented as engaged in a conflict with the Yavanas on the Indus; thus continuing the political relations with the Greeks or Scythians of Bactria and Ariana. See Hindu Theatre, vol. I. 347.

^471:28 8 yrs. V.; omitted M.

^471:29 7 yrs. V. and M.; but the latter places him after Vasumitra; and in the drama the son of Agnimitra is called Vasumitra.

^471:30 8 yrs. V.; 10 yrs. M.

^471:31 Andraka, V.; Antaka, M.: they agree in his reign, 2 years. Bhadraka, Bhag.

^471:32 3 yrs. V. and M.

^471:33 3 yrs. V.; omitted, M.; Ghosha, Bhag.

^471:34 9 yrs. M.

^471:35 Bhaga, M.; 32 yrs. V. and M.

^471:36 Kshemabhumi, V.; Devabhumi, M.; 10 yrs. both.

^471:37 The Bhagavata says, 'more than a hundred.' The commentator explains it: 112. The Vayu and Matsya have the same period.

^471:38 The names of the four princes agree in all the authorities. The Matsya transfers the character of Vyasani to the minister, with the further addition of his being a Brahman; Dwija. In the lists given by Sir Wm. Jones and Col. Wilford, the four Kanwas are said to have reigned 345 years; but in seven copies of the Vishnu P., from different parts of India, the number is, as given in the text, forty-five. There is however authority for the larger number, both in the text of the Bhagavata and the comment. The former has, #### and the latter, ### [p. 472] There is no doubt therefore of the purport of the text; and it is only surprising that such a chronology should have been inserted in the Bhagavata, not only in opposition to all probability, but to other authority. The Vayu and Matsya not only confirm the lower number by stating it as a total, but by giving it in detail; thus:

          Vasudeva will   reign

        9 years

     
      Bhumimitra

       14

     
      Narayana

       12

     
      Sus'arman

       10

     
      Total

       45

     
   [paragraph continues] And six copies of the Matsya concur in this statement.

^472:39 The expressions Andhrajatiyas and Andhrabhrityas have much perplexed Col. Wilford, who makes three races out of one, Andhras, Andhrajatiyas, and Andhrabhrityas. As. Res. IX. 101. There is no warrant for three races in the Puranas, although the Matsya, and perhaps the Vayu, distinguishes two, as we shall hereafter see. Our text has but one, to which all the terms may be applied. The first of the dynasty was an Andhra by birth or caste (jatiya), and a servant (bhritya) of the last of the Kanwa race. So the Vayu; ###: the Matsya; ### and the Bhagavata; ###. The terms 'an Andhra by caste' and 'a Bhritya or servant,' with the addition, in the last passage, of Vrishala, 'a S'udra,' all apply to one person and one dynasty. Wilford has made wild work with his triad. The name of the first of this race is variously read: Sindhuka, Vayu; S'is'uka, Matsya; Balin, Bhag.; and, according to Wilford, Chhismaka in the Brahmanda P., and S'udraka or S'uraka in the Kumarika Khanda of the Skanda P. As. Res. IX. 107. He reigned 23 years, Vayu and Matsya. If the latter form of his name be correct, he may be the king who is spoken of in the prologue to the Mrichchhakati.

^472:40 10 yrs. V.; 18, M.

^472:41 56 yrs. V.; 18, M.; 10, Brahmanda, Wilford; Simalakarni, Mats.; S'antakarna, Bhag.

^472:42 Omitted, V.; 18 yrs. M.; Paurnamasa, Bhag.

^472:43 Omitted, V. and Bhag.; 56 yrs. M.; but the latter has before him a S'rivaswani, 18 yrs.

^472:44 18 yrs. M.

^472:45 Apilaka, 12 yrs. V. and M.; Chivilika or Vivilika, Bhag.

^472:46 Omitted, V. and M.

^472:47 Patumavi, 24 yrs. V.; Drirhamana, Bhag.

^473:48 Nemi-krishna, 25 yrs. V.; Arishtakarni, 25 yrs. M.

^473:49 Hala, 1 yr. V.; 5 yrs. M.; Haleya, Bhag.

^473:50 Mandalaka, 5 yrs. M.; omitted, Bhag.

^473:51 Purishasena, 21 yrs. V.; Purindrasena, 5 yrs. Mats.; Purishataru, Bhag.

^473:52 S'atakarni only, V. and M.; the first gives him three years, the second but one. Sunanda, Bhag.

^473:53 Chakora, 6 months, V.; Vikarni, 6 months, M.

^473:54 28 yrs. V. and M.

^473:55 Gotamiputra, 21 yrs. V. and M.

^473:56 Pulomat, 28 yrs. M.; Purimat, Bhag.

^473:57 Omitted, V.; 7 yrs. M.; Medhas'iras, Bhag.

^473:58 Omitted, V.; 7 yrs. M.

^473:59 29 yrs. V.; 9 yrs. M.

^473:60 6 yrs. V. and M.

^473:61 Dandas'ri, 3 yrs. V.; Chandras'ri, 10 yrs. M.; Chandravijaya, Bhag.

^473:62 Pulovapi, 7 yrs. V.; Pulomat, 7 yrs. M.; Sulomadhi, Bhag.

^473:63 The Vayu and Bhagavata state also 30 kings, and 456 years; the Matsya has 29 kings, and 460 years. The actual enumeration of the text gives but 24 names; that of the Bhagavata but 23; that of the Vayu but 17. The Matsya has the whole 29 names, adding several to the list of our text; and the aggregate of the reigns amounts to 435 years and 6 months. The difference between this and the total specified arises probably from some inaccuracy in the MSS. As this list appears to be fuller than any other, it may be advisable to insert it as it occurs in the Radcliffe copy of the Matsya P.

          1.

       S'is'uka

       23

       yrs.

     
      2.

       Krishna

       18

        

     
      3.

       Simalakarni

       18

        

     
      4.

       Purnotsanga

       18

        

     
      5.

       S'rivaswani

       18

        

     
      6.

       S'atakarni

       56

        

     
      7.

       Lambodara

       18

        

     
      8.

       Apitaka

       12

        

     
      9.

       Sangha

       18

        

     
      10.

       S'atakarni

       18

        

     
      11.

       Skandhaswati

       7

        

     
      12.

       Mrigendra

       3

        

     
      13.

       Kuntalaswati

       28

        

     
      14.

       Swatikarna

       1

        

     
      15.

       Pulomavit

       36

        

     
      16.

       Gorakshas'was'ri

       25

        

     
      17.

       Hala

       5

        

     
      18.

       Mantalaka

       5

        

     
      19.

       Purindrasena

       5

        

     
      20.

       Rajadaswati

       0

       6 months

     
      21.

       S'ivas'wati

       28

        

     
      22.

       Gautamiputra

       21

        

     
      23.

       Pulomat

       28

       [p. 474]

     
      24.

       S'ivas'ri

       7

        

     
      25.

       Skandhaswati

       7

        

     
      26.

       Yajnas'ri

       9

        

     
      27.

       Vijaya

       6

        

     
      28.

       Vadas'ri

       10

        

     
      29.

       Pulomat

       7

        

     
       

       Total

       435

       yrs. 6 m.

     
   [paragraph continues] Several of the names vary in this list from those in my copy. The adjuncts Swati and S'atikarna appear to be conjoined or not with the other appellations, according to the convenience of, the metre, and seem to be the family designations or titles. The dynasty is of considerable chronological interest, as it admits of some plausible verifications. That a powerful race of Andhra princes ruled in India in the beginning of the Christian era, we learn from Pliny, who describes them as possessed of thirty fortified cities, with an army of 100,000 men and 1000 elephants. The Andrae of this writer are probably the people of the upper part of the peninsula, Andhra being the proper designation of Telingana. The Peutingerian tables, however, place the Andre-Indi on the banks of the Ganges, and the southern princes may have extended or shifted the site of their power. Towards the close of the dynasty we find names that appear to agree with those of princes of middle India, of whom mention is made by the Chinese; as, Yue-gnai (Yajnas'ri), king of Kiapili, A. D. 408; Des Guignes, I. 45; and Ho-lo-mien (Puloman), king of Magadha in 621; ibid. I. 56. The Pauranik lists place these two princes more nearly together, but we cannot rely implicitly upon their accuracy. Calculating from Chandragupta downwards, the Indian date of Yajna and the Chinese Yue-gnai corresponds; for we have,

          10

       Mauryas

       137

       yrs.

     
      10

       S'ungas

       112

        

     
      4

       Kanwas

       45

        

     
      27

       Andhras

       437

        

     
       

        

       731

        

     
       

       Deduct for   Chandragupta's date

       312

       B. C.

     
       

        

       419

       A. C.

     
   [paragraph continues] A date remarkably near that derivable from the Chinese annals. If the Indian Puloman be the same with the Chinese Ho-lo-mien, there must be some considerable omission in the Pauranik dynasty. There is a farther identification in the case of Ho-lo-mien, which makes it certain that a prince of Magadha is intended, as the place of his residence is called by the Chinese Kia-so-mo-pulo-ching and Potoli-tse-Ching; or in Sanscrit, Kusuma-pura and Patali-putra. The equivalent of the latter name consists, not only in the identity of the sounds Patali and Po-to-li, but in the translation of 'putra' by 'tse;' each word meaning in their respective languages 'son.' No doubt can be entertained therefore that the city intended is the metropolis of Magadha, Pataliputra or Palibothra. Wilford identifies Pulomat or Puloman with the Po-lo-muen of the Chinese; but Des Guignes interprets Po-lo-muen kue, 'royaume des Brahmanes.' Buchanan (Hamilton), following the Bhagavata as to the name of the last king, Sulomadhi, would place him about A. D. 846; but his premises are far from accurate, [p. 475] and his deduction in this instance at least is of no weight. Geneal. of the Hindus, Introd. p. 16. He supposes the Andhra kings of Magadha to have retained their power on the Ganges until the Mohammedan invasion, or the twelfth century, when they retired to the south, and reigned at Warankal in Telingana. Inscriptions and coins, however, confirm the statement of the Puranas, that a different dynasty succeeded to the Andhras some centuries before the Mohammedan conquests; and the Chinese also record, that upon the death of the king of Magadha, Ho-lo-mien (Puloman?), some time before A. D. 648, great troubles in India took place. Des Guignes. Some very curious and authentic testimony to the actual existence of these Andhra kings has been lately afforded by the discovery of an ancient inscription in Guzerat, in which Rudra Dama, the Kshatrapa or Satrap of Surashtra, is recorded to have repeatedly overcome S'atakarni, king of the southern country (Dakshinapatha). The inscription is without date, but it is in an old character, and makes mention of the two Maurya princes, Chandragupta and As'oka, as if not very long prior to its composition. Mr. J. Prinsep, to whom we are indebted for the decyphering and translating of this important document, has been also successful in decyphering the legends on a series of coins belonging to the princes of Surashtra, amongst whom the name of Rudra Dama occurs; and he is inclined, although with hesitation, to place these princes about a century after Anoka, or Rudra Dama about 153 B. C. J. As. Soc. Bengal, May 1837, and April 1838. According to the computation hazarded above from our text, the race of Andhra kings should not commence till about 20 years B. C., which would agree with Pliny's notice of them; but it is possible that they existed earlier in the south of India, although they established their authority in Magadha only in the first centuries of the Christian era.

^475:64 These parallel dynasties are thus particularized in our other authorities:

Abhiras, 7, M.; 10, V; kings of Avabhriti, 7, Bhag.

Garddabhins, 10, M. V. Bhag.

S'akas, 18, M. V.; Kankas, 16, Bhag.

Yavanas, 8, M. V. Bhag.

Tusharas, 14, M. V.; Tushkaras, 14, Bhag.

Marundas, 13, V.; Purundas, 13, M.; Surundas, 10, Bhag.

Maunas, 18, V.; Hunas, 19, M.; Maulas, 11, Bhag.

Total--85 kings, Vayu; 89, Matsya; 76, and 1399 years, Bhag.

[paragraph continues] The other two authorities give the years of each dynasty severally. The numbers are apparently intended to be the same, but those of the Matsya are palpable blunders, although almost all the MSS. agree in the reading. The chronology of the Vayu is, Abhiras, 67 years; Garddabhins, 72; S'akas, 380; Yavanas, 82; Tusharas, 500 (all the copies of the Matsya have 7000); Marundas, 200; and Mlechchhas, intending perhaps Maunas, 300 yrs. Total 1601 years, or less than 19 years to a reign. They are not however continuous, but nearly cotemporary dynasties; and if they comprise, as they probably do, the Greek and Scythian princes of the west of India, the periods may not be very wide [p. 476] of the truth. The Matsya begins the list with one more dynasty, another Andhra (see n. [*39]), of whom there were seven: 'When the dominion of the Andhras has ceased, there shall be seven other Andhras, kings of the race of their servants; and then nine Abhiras.' The passage of the Vayu, although somewhat similar in terms, has a different purport: 'Of these, the Andhras having passed away, there shall be seven cotemporary races; as, ten Abhiras,' &c. The passage is differently read in different copies, but this is the only intelligible reading. At the same time it subsequently specifies a period for the duration of the Andhra dynasty different from that before given, or three hundred years, as if a different race was referred to: 'The Andhras shall possess the earth two hundred years and one hundred.' The Matsya has twice five hundred: 'The S'riparvatiya Andhras twice five hundred years.' One MS. has more consistently fifty-two years. But there is evidently something faulty in all the MSS. The expression of the Matsya, 'S'riparvatiya Andhras,' is remarkable; S'riparvat being in Telingana. There is probably some confusion of the two races, the Magadha and Tailinga kings, in these passages of the Puranas. The Bhagavata has a dynasty of seven Andhra kings, but of a different period (see n. [*39]). Col. Wilford has attempted a verification of these dynasties; in some instances perhaps with success, though certainly not in all. The Abhiras he calls the shepherd kings of the north of India: they were more probably Greeks or Scythians or Parthians, along the lower Indus: traces of the name occur, as formerly observed, in the Abiria of Ptolemy, and the Ahirs as a distinct race still exist in Guzerat. Araish Mehfil. The S'akas are the Sacae, and the duration of their power is not unlikely to be near the truth. The eight Yavana kings may be, as he supposes, Greek princes of Bactria, or rather of western India. The Tusharas he makes the Parthians. If the Bhagavata has the preferable reading, Tushkaras, they were the Tochari, a Scythian race. The Murundas, or, as he has it, Maurundas, he considers to be a tribe of Huns, the Morundae of Ptolemy. According to the Matsya they were of Mlechchha origin, Mlechchha-sambhava. The Vayu calls them Arya-mlechchhas; quere, Barbarians of Ariana. Wilford regards the Maunas as also a tribe of Huns; and the word is in all the MSS. of the Matsya, Hunas; traces of whom may be still found in the west and south of India. Inscription at Merritch. Journ. R. As. vol. III. p. 103. The Garddabhins Wilford conjectures to be descendants of Bahram Gor, king of Persia; but this is very questionable. That they were a tribe in the west of India may be conjectured, as some strange tales prevail there of a Gandharba, changed to an ass, marrying the daughter of the king of Dhar. As. Res. VI. 35, and IX. 147; also 'Cutch' by Mrs. Postans, p. 18: fables suggested no doubt by the name Garddabha, signifying an ass. There is also [p. 477] evidently some affinity between these Garddabhins and the old Gadhia Pysa, or ass-money, as vulgarly termed, found in various parts of western India, and which is unquestionably of ancient date. Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, Dec. 1835, p. 688. It may be the coinage of the Garddabha princes; Garddabla, being the original of Gadha, meaning also an ass. I have elsewhere conjectured the possibility of their being current about a century and a half before our era. Journ. R. As. Soc. vol. III. 385. Col. Tod, quoting a parallel passage in Hindi, reads, instead of Garddhabhin, Gor-ind, which he explains the Indras or lords of Gor; but the reading is undoubtedly erroneous.

^477:65 The copies agree in reading Pauras, but the commentator remarks that it is sometimes Maunas, but they have already been specified; unless the term be repeated in order to separate the duration of this dynasty from that of the rest. Such seems to be the purport of the similar passage of the Bhagavata. These kings (Andhras, &c.) will possess the earth 1099 years, and the eleven Maulas 300.' No such name as Pauras occurs in the other authorities. The analogy of duration identifies them with the Mlechchhas of the Vayu: 'Eleven Mlechchhas will possess the earth for three centuries:' and the Vayu may refer to the Maunas, as no other period is assigned for them. The periods of the Bhagavata, 1099 and 300, come much to the same as that of our text, 1390; the one including the three centuries of the Maunas, the other stating it separately. The Vayu apparently adds it to the rest, thus making the total 1601, instead of 1390. It is evident that the same scheme is intended by the several authorities, although some inaccuracy affects either the original statement or the existing manuscripts.

^477:66 Kilakila, Kolakila, Kolikila, Kilinakila, as it is variously read. Sir Wm. Jones's Pandit stated that he understood it to be a city in the Mahratta country (As. Res. XI. 142); and there has been found a confirmation of his belief in an inscription, where Kilagila, as it is there termed, is called the capital of Marasinha Deva, king of the Konkan. Journ. R. As. Soc. vol. IV. p. 282. This inscription dates A. D. 1058. The Puranas refer probably to a long antecedent date, when the Greek princes, or their Indo-Scythic successors, following the course of the Indus, spread to the upper part of the western coast of the peninsula. The text calls them Yavanas; and the Vayu and Matsya say they were Yavanas in institutions, manners, and policy. The Bhagavata names five of their princes, Bhutananda, [p. 478] Bangiri, S'is'unandi, Yas'nandi, and Pravira, who will reign 106 years, and they are therefore imperfect representatives of the series in our text. The Matsya has no farther specific enumeration of any dynasty. The Vayu makes Pravira the son of Vindhyas'akti; the latter reigning 96 years, and the former 60: the latter is king of Kanchana puri, 'the golden city,' and is followed by four sons, whose names are not mentioned. Between Vindhyas'akti and Pravira, however, a dynasty of kings is introduced, some of the names of which resemble those of the Kilakila princes of the text. They are, Bhogin the son of Seshanaga, Sadachandra, Nakhavat, Dhanadhamita, Vins'aja, Bhutinanda--at a period before the end of the S'ungas? (the copies have ###)--Madhunandi, his younger brother Nandiyas'as; and in his race there will be three other Rajas, Dauhitra, S'is'uka, and Ripukayan. These are called princes of Vidis'a or Vides'a; the latter meaning perhaps 'foreign,' and constitute the Naga dynasty. Our text calls Vindhyas'akti a Murddhabhishikta, a warrior of a mixed race, sprung from a Brahman father and Kshatriya mother.

^478:67 The text of this passage runs thus: ###. 'Their sons,' the commentator explains by 'thirteen sons of Vindhyas'akti and the rest.' The Bhagavata has a different statement, identifying the sons of the Vindhya race with the Bahlikas, and making them thirteen: 'The Bahlikas will be their thirteen sons.' As the commentator; 'There will be severally thirteen sons, called Bahlikas, of Bhutananda and the rest.' The following verse 'Pushpamitra, a king, and then Durmitra:' who or what they were does not appear. The commentator says, Pushpamitra was another king, and Durmitra was his son. Here is evidently careless and inaccurate compilation. The Vayu, though not quite satisfactory, accords better with our text. 'Pravira,' it says, will have four sons: when the Vindhya race is extinct, there will be three Bahlika kings, Supratika, Nabhira, who will reign thirty years, and S'akyamanabhava (quere this name), king of the Mahishas. The Pushpamitras will then be, and the Patumitras also, who will be seven kings of Mekala. Such is the generation.' The plural verb with only two Bahlika names indicates some omission, unless we correct it to it 'they two will reign;' but the following name and title, S'akyamanabhava, king of the Mahishas, seems to have little connexion with the Bahlikas. If, in a subsequent part of the citation, the reading 'trayodas'a' be correct, it must then be thirteen Patumitras; but it will be difficult to know what to do with Sapta, 'seven' If for Santati we might read [p. 479] Saptati, 'seventy,' the sense might be, 'these thirteen kings ruled for seventy-seven years.' However this may be, it seems most correct to separate the thirteen sons or families of the Vindhya princes from the three Bahlikas, and them from the Pushpamitras and Patumitras, who governed Mekala, a country on the Narbada (see <page 186>. n. ). What the Bahlikas, or princes of Balkh, had to do in this part of India is doubtful. The Durmitra of the Bhagavata has been conjectured by Col. Tod (Trans. R. As. Soc. I. 325) to be intended for the Bactrian prince Demetrius: but it is not clear that even the Bhagavata considers this prince as one of the Bahlikas, and the name occurs nowhere else.

^479:68 For the situation of Kos'ala, see <page 190>. n. . The three copies of the Vayu read Komala, and call the kings, the Meghas, more strong than sapient. The Bhagavata agrees with our text. The Vayu says of the Naishadhas, or kings of Nishadha, that they were all of the race of Nala. The Bhagavata adds two other races, seven Andhras (see note [*63]) and kings of Vaidura, with the remark that these were all cotemporaries, being, as the commentator observes, petty or provincial rulers.

^479:69 The Vayu has Vis'wasphani and Vis'wasphini; the Bhagavata, Vis'wasphurtti, or in some MSS. Vis'waphuiji. The castes he establishes or places in authority, to the exclusion of the Kshatriyas, are called in all the copies of our text Kaivarttas, Patus, Pulindas, and Brahmans. The Vayu (three MSS.) has Kaivarttas, Panchakas, Pulindas, and Brahmans. The Bhagavata has, Pulindas, Yadus, and Madrakas. The Vayu describes Vis'wasphani as a great warrior, and apparently as a eunuch: He worshipped the gods and manes, and dying on the banks of the Ganges went to the heaven of Indra.

^479:70 Such appears to be the purport of our text. The nine Nagas might be thought to mean the same as the descendants of S'esha Naga, but the Vayu has another series here, analogous to that of the text: 'The nine Naka kings will possess the city Champavati, and the seven Nagas (?) the pleasant city Mathura. Princes of the Gupta race will possess all these countries, the banks of the Ganges to Prayaga and Saketa and Magadha.' [p. 480] This account is the most explicit, and probably most accurate, of all. The Nakas were Rajas of Bhagalpur; the Nagas, of Mathura; and the intermediate countries along the Ganges were governed by the Guptas, or Rajas of the Vais'ya caste. The Bhagavata seems to have taken great liberties with the account, as it makes Vis'wasphurtti king over Anuganga, the course of the Ganges from Haridwar, according to the commentator, to Prayaga, residing at Padmavati: omitting the Nagas altogether, and converting 'gupta' into an epithet of 'medini,' the preserved or protected earth. Wilford considers the Nagas, Nakas, and Guptas to be all the same: he says, 'Then came a dynasty of nine kings, called the nine Nagas or Nagas; these were an obscure tribe, called for that reason Guptavans'as, who ruled in Padmavati.' That city he calls Patna; but in the Malati and Madhava, Padmavati lies amongst the Vindhya hills. Kantipuri he makes Cotwal, near Gwalior. The reading of the Vayu, Champavati, however, obviates the necessity of all vague conjecture. According to Wilford there is a powerful tribe still called Nakas between the Jamuna and the Betwa. Of the existence and power of the Guptas, however, we have recently had ample proofs from inscriptions and coins, as in the Chandragupta and Samudragupta of the Allatabad column; Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, March and June, 1834; and Kumaragupta, Chandragupta, Samudragupta, S'as'igupta, &c. on the Archer coins, found at Kanoj and elsewhere; As. Res. XVII. pl. 1. fig. 5, 7, 13, 19; and Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, Nov. 1835, pl. 38 and 39; and in other numbers of the same Journal: in all which, the character in which the legends are written is of a period prior to the use of the modern Devanagari, and was current in all probability about the fifth century of our era, as conjectured by Mr. Prinsep: see his table of the modifications of the Sanscrit alphabet from 543 B. C. to 1200 A. D. Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, March 1838.

^480:71 The Vayu also mentions the descendants of Devarakshita or Daivarakshitas as kings of the Kos'alas, Tamralipta, and the sea coast; so far conforming with our text as to include the western parts of Bengal, Tamlook, Medinipur, and Orissa. One copy reads Andhra, perhaps for Odra, Orissa; and one has Champa for the capital, which is probably an error, although the two other MSS., being still more faulty, do not offer the means of correction.

^480:72 The Vayu has the same. The countries are parts of Orissa and Berar.

^480:73 The Vayu has sons of Manidhanya for the ruling dynasty, but names the countries those of the Naishadhas, Yudakas, S'as'ikas, and Kalatoyas. The first name applies to a tract of country near [p. 481] the Vindhya mountains, but the last to a country in the north. The west or southwest, however, is probably intended in this place.

^481:74 The Stri Rajya is usually placed in Bhote. It may perhaps here designate Malabar, where polyandry equally prevails. Mushika, or the country of thieves, was the pirate coast of the Konkan. The Vayu reads Bhokshyaka or Bhokhyaka for Mushika. The Bhagavata omits all these specifications subsequent to the notice of Viwasphurtti.

^481:75 From this we might infer that the Vishnu P. was compiled when the Mohammedans were making their first encroachments on the west. They seem to have invaded and to have settled in Sindh early in the eighth century, although Indian princes continued on the Indus for a subsequent period. Scriptor. Arab. de rebus Indicis. Gildemeister, p. 6. They were engaged in hostilities in 698 or 700 with the prince of Kabul, in whose name, however disguised by its Mohammedan representations of Ratil, Ratbal, or Ratibal, it is not difficult to recognise the genuine Hindu appellation of Ratanpal, or Ratnapal. Their progress in this direction has not been traced; but at the period of their invasion of Sindh they advanced to Multan, and probably established themselves there and at Lahore within a century. Kashmir they did not occupy till a much later date, and the Raja Tarangini takes no notice of any attacks upon it; but the Chinese have recorded an application from the king of Kashmir, Chin-tho-lo-pi-li, evidently the Chandrapida of the Sanscrit, for aid against the Arabs, about A. D. 713. Gildemeister, p. 13. Although, therefore, not actually settled at the Panjab so early as the beginning, they had commenced their incursions, and had no doubt made good their footing by the end of the eighth or commencement of the ninth century. This age of the Purana is compatible with reference to the cotemporary race of Gupta kings, from the fourth or fifth to the seventh or eighth century; or, if we are disposed to go farther back, we may apply the passage to the Greek and Indo-Scythian princes. It seems more likely to be the former period; but in all such passages in this or other Puranas there is the risk that verses inspired by the presence of Mohammedan rulers may have been interpolated into the original text. Had the Mohammedans of Hindustan, however, been intended by the latter, the indications would have been more distinct, and the localities assigned to them more central. Even the Bhagavata, the date of which we have good reason for conjecturing to be the middle of the twelfth century, and which influenced the form assumed about that time by the worship of Vishnu, cannot be thought to refer to the Mohammedan conquerors of [p. 482] upper India. It is there stated, that rulers fallen from their castes, or S'udras, will be the princes of Saurashtra, Avanti, Abhira, S'ura, Arbuda, and Malava; and barbarians, S'udras, and other outcastes, not enlightened by the Vedas, will possess Kashmir, Kaunti, and the banks of the Chandrabhaga and Indus.' Now it was not until the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries that the Mohammedans established themselves in Guzerat and Malwa, and the Bhagavata was unquestionably well known in various parts of India long before that time. (Account of Hindu Sects, As. Res. vol. XVI.) It cannot therefore allude to Mohammedans. By specifying the princes as seceders from the Vedas, there is no doubt that the barbarians and outcastes intended are so only in a religious sense; and we know from indisputable authorities that the western countries, Guzerat, Abu, Malava, were the chief seats, first of the Buddhists, and then of the Jainas, from a period commencing perhaps before the Christian era, and scarcely terminating with the Mohammedan conquest. Inscriptions from Abu, As. Res. vol. XVI.

^482:76 The commentator, having no doubt the existing state of things in view, interprets the passage somewhat differently: the original is, ###. The comment explains 'strong', and adds, the Mlechchhas will be in the centre, and the Aryyas at the end:' meaning, if any thing, that the unbelievers are in the heart of the country, and the Hindus on the borders: a description, however, never correct, except as applicable to the governments; and in that case inconsistent with the text, which had previously represented the bordering countries in the hands of outcastes and heretics. All that the text intends, is to represent infidels and foreigners high in power, and the Brahmans depressed. It is not unlikely that the reading is erroneous, notwithstanding the copies concur, and that the passage should be here the same as that of the Vayu; 'Intermixed with them, the nations, adopting every where barbaric [p. 483] institutions, exist in a state of disorder, and the subjects shall be destroyed.' The expression Mlechchhacharas'cha being used instead of Mlechchhas'charyas'cha. A passage similar to that of the text, noticing the intermixture of Hindus and barbarians, occurs in a different place (see <page 175>. n. ), and designates tare condition of India in all ages: at no period has the whole of the population followed Brahmanical Hinduism.

^483:77 That is, there will be no Tirthas, places held sacred, and objects of pilgrimage; no particular spot of earth will have any especial sanctity.

^483:78 Gifts will be made from the impulse of ordinary feeling, not in connexion with religious rites, and as an act of devotion; and ablution will be performed for pleasure or comfort, not religiously with prescribed ceremonies and prayers.

^483:79 The expression Sadves'adharin is explained to mean either one who wears fine clothes, or who assumes the exterior garb of sanctity. Either interpretation is equally allowable.

^484:80 The Bhagavata agrees with the text in these particulars. The chief star of Tishya is d in the constellation Cancer.

^484:81 All the copies concur in this reading. Three copies of the Vayu assign to the same interval 1050 years: and of the Matsya five copies have the same, or 1050 years; whilst one copy has 1500 years. The Bhagavata has 1115 years; which the commentator explains, 'a thousand years and a hundred with fifteen over.' He notices nevertheless, although he does not attempt to account for the discrepancy, that the total period from Parikshit to Nanda was actually, according to the duration of the different intermediate dynasties, as enumerated by all the authorities, fifteen centuries; viz.

          Magadha   kings

       1000

       yrs.

     
      Pradyota,   &c.

       138

        

     
      S'is'unaga,   &c.

       362

        

     
       

       1500

        

     
   [paragraph continues] The shorter period is best proportioned to the number of kings; for reckoning from Sahadeva, who was cotemporary with Parikshit, and taking the number of the Varhadrathas from the Matsya, we have thirty-two of them, five of the Pradyota race, and ten S'ais'unagas, or in all forty-seven; which, as the divisor of 1050, gives rather more than twenty-two years to a reign. The Vayu and the Matsya further specify the interval from Nanda to Pulomat, the last of the Andhra kings, as being 836 years; a total that does not[p. 485] agree exactly with the items previously specified:

          9

       Nandas

       100

       yrs.

     
      10

       Mauryas

       137

        

     
      10

       S'ungas

       112

        

     
      4

       Kanwas

       45

        

     
      29

       Andhras

       460

        

     
      62

        

       854

        

     
   [paragraph continues] In either case the average duration of reign is not improbable, as the highest number gives less than fourteen years to each prince. It is important to remember that the reign of Parikshit is, according to Hindu chronology, coeval with the commencement of the Kali age; and even therefore taking the longest Pauranik interval we have but sixteen centuries between Chandragupta--or considering him as the same with Sandrocoptos, nineteen centuries B. C.--for the beginning of the Kali age. According to the chronology of our text, however, it would be but B. C. 1415; to that of the Vayu and Matsya, B. C. 1450; and to that of the Bhagavata, 1515. According to Col. Wilford's computations (As. Res. vol. IX. Chron. Table, p. 116) the conclusion of the great war took place B. C. 1370: Buchanan conjectures it to have occurred in the thirteenth century B. C. Vyasa was the putative father of Pandu and Dhritarashtra, and consequently was cotemporary with the heroes of the great war. Mr. Colebrooke infers from astronomical data that the arrangement of the Vedas attributed to Vyasa took place in the fourteenth century B.C. Mr. Bentley brings the date of Yudhishthira, the chief of the Pandavas, to 575 B. C. (Historical View of Hindu Astronomy, p. 67); but the weight of authority is in favour of the thirteenth or fourteenth century B. C. for the war of the Mahabharata, and the reputed commencement of the Kali age.

^485:82 A similar explanation is given in the Bhagavata, Vayu, and Matsya Puranas; and like accounts from astronomical writers are cited by Mr. Colebrooke, As. Res. vol. IX. p. 358. The commentator on the Bhagavata thus explains the notion: "The two stars (Pulaha and Kratu) must rise or be visible before the rest, and whichever asterism is in a line south from the middle of those stars, is that with which the seven stars are united; and so they continue for one hundred years." Col. Wilford has also given a like explanation of the revolution of the Rishis; As. Res. vol. IX. p. 83. According to Bentley the notion originated in a contrivance of the astronomers to shew the quantity of the precession of the equinoxes. "This was by assuming an imaginary line or great circle passing through the poles of the ecliptic and the beginning of the fixed Magha, which circle was supposed to cut some of the stars in the Great Bear. The seven stars in the Great Bear the circle so assumed was called the line of the Rishis, and being fixed to the beginning of the lunar asterism Magha, the precession would be solved by stating the degree &c. of any moveable lunar mansion cut by that fixed line or circle as an [p. 486] index. Historical View of Hindu Astronomy, p. 65.

^486:83 The Bhagavata has the same; and this agrees with the period assigned for the interval between Parikshit and Nanda of 1050 years; as, including Magha, we have ten asterisms to Purvashadha, or 1000 years. The Vayu and Matsya are so very inaccurate in all the copies consulted, that it is not safe to affirm what they mean to describe. Apparently they state that at the end of the Andhra dynasty the Rishis will be in Krittika, which furnishes other ten asterisms; the whole being nearly in accordance with the chronology of the text, as the total interval from Parikshit to the last of the Andhras is 1050 + 836 =1886, and the entire century of each asterism at the beginning and end of the series need not be taken into account. The copies of the Matsya read, 'The seven Rishis are on a line with the brilliant Agni;' that is, with Krittika, of which Agni is the presiding deity. The Vayu intends in all probability the same phrase, but the three copies have, ### a very unintelligible clause. Again, it seems as if they intended to designate the end of the Andhra race as the period of a complete revolution, or 2700 years; for the Vayu has, 'The races at the end of the Andhas will be after 2700 years:' the Matsya has, ### and at the close of the passage, after specifying as usual that 'the seven Rishis were in Magha in the time of Parikshit,' the Vayu adds, ### a passage which, though repeated in the MSS., is obviously most inaccurate; although it might perhaps be understood to intimate that the Rishis will be in the twenty-fourth asterism after the Andhra race; but that would give only 1400 years from Parikshit to Pulomat; whilst if the twenty-fourth from Magha was intended, it would give 2400 years: both periods being incompatible with previous specifications. The Matsya has a different reading of the second line, but one not much more satisfactory; 'A hundred years of Brahma will be in the twenty-fourth (asterism?).' In neither of these authorities, however, is it proposed by the last-cited passages to illustrate the chronology of princes or dynasties: the specification [p. 487] of the period, whatever it may be, is that of the era at which the evil influence of the Kali age is to become most active and irresistible.

^487:84 The Bhagavata has the same. Devapi, as the commentator observes, being the restorer of the lunar, and Maru of the solar race.

^489:85 To be the cause of Sankalpa, 'conviction,' 'belief;' and Vikalpa, 'doubt,' 'disbelief.' The Bhagavata indulges in a similar strain, and often in the same words. The whole recalls the words of the Roman satirist;

	. . . I, demens, et saevas curre per Alpes,
	 Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 490] [p. 491]

  

VISHNU PURANA.

  

BOOK V.

  

CHAP. I.

The death of Kansa announced. Earth, oppressed by the Daityas, applies to the gods. They accompany her to Vishnu, who promises to give her relief. Kansa imprisons Vasudeva and Devaki. Vishnu's instructions to Yoganidra.

MAITREYA. [*1]--You have related to me a full account of all the different dynasties of kings, and of their successive transactions. I wish

[p. 492]

now to hear a more particular description, holy Rishi, of the portion of Vishnu [*2] that came down upon earth, and was born in the family of Yadu. Tell me also what actions he performed in his descent, as a part of a part of the supreme, upon the earth [*3].

PARAS'ARA.--I will relate to you, Maitreya, the account which you

[p. 493]

have requested; the birth of a part of a part of Vishnu, and the benefits which his actions conferred upon the world.

Vasudeva formerly married the daughter of Devaka, the illustrious Devaki, a maiden of celestial beauty. After their nuptials, Kansa, the increaser of the race of Bhoja, drove their car as their charioteer. As they were going along, a voice in the sky, sounding aloud and deep as thunder, addressed Kansa, and said, "Fool that you are, the eighth child of the damsel whom you are driving in the car shall take away your life [*4]!" On hearing this, Kansa drew his sword, and was about to put Devaki to death; but Vasudeva interposed, saying, "Kill not Devaki, great warrior; spare her life, and I will deliver to you every child that she may bring forth." Appeased by which promise, and relying on the character of Vasudeva, Kansa desisted from the attempt.

At that time, Earth, overburdened by her load, repaired to mount Meru to an assembly of the gods, and addressing the divinities, with Brahma at their head, related in piteous accents all her distress. "Agni," said Earth, "is the progenitor of gold; Surya, of rays of light [*5]: the parent and guide of me and of all spheres is the supreme Narayana, who is Brahma, the lord of the lord of patriarchs; the eldest of the eldest born; one with minutes and hours; one with time; having form, though indiscrete. This assemblage of yourselves, O gods, is but a part of him. The sun, the winds, the saints, the Rudras, the Vasus, the Aswins, fire, the patriarch creators of the universe, of whom Atri is the first, all are but forms of the mighty and inscrutable Vishnu. The Yakshas, Rakshasas, Daityas, spirits of evil, serpents, and children of Danu, the singers and nymphs of heaven, are forms of the great spirit, Vishnu. The heavens painted with planets, constellations, and stars; fire, water, wind, and myself, and every perceptible thing; the whole universe itself--consists of Vishnu. The multifarious forms of that manifold being encounter

[p. 494]

and succeed one another, night and day, like the waves of the sea. At this present season many demons, of whom Kalanemi is the chief, have overrun, and continually harrass, the region of mortals. The great Asura Kalanemi [*6], that was killed by the powerful Vishnu, has revived in Kansa, the son of Ugrasena, and many other mighty demons, more than I can enumerate, as Arishta, Dhenuka, Kes'in, Pralamba, Naraka, Sunda, and the fierce Bana, the son of Bali [*7], are born in the palaces of kings. Countless hosts of proud and powerful spirits, chiefs of the demon race, assuming celestial forms, now walk the earth; and, unable to support myself beneath the incumbent load, I come to you for succour. Illustrious deities, do you so act that I may be relieved from my burden, lest helpless I sink into the nethermost abyss."

When the gods had heard these complaints of Earth, Brahma at their request explained to them how her burden might be lightened. "Celestials," said Brahma, "all that Earth has said is undoubtedly true. I, Mahadeva, and you all, are but Narayana; but the impersonations of his power are for ever mutually fluctuating, and excess or diminution is indicated by the predominance of the strong, and the depression of the weak. Come therefore, let us repair to the northern coast of the milky sea, and having glorified Hari, report to him what we have heard. He, who is the spirit of all, and of whom the universe consists, constantly, for the sake of Earth, descends in a small portion of his essence to establish righteousness below." Accordingly Brahma, attended by the gods, went to the milky sea, and there, with minds intent upon him, praised him whose emblem is Garuda.

"O thou," said Brahma, "who art distinct from holy writ [*8]; whose double nature is twofold wisdom [*9], superior and inferior, and who art the

[p. 495]

essential end of both; who, alike devoid and possessed of form, art the twofold Brahma [*10]; smallest of the least, and largest of the large; all, and knowing all things; that spirit which is language; that spirit which is supreme; that which is Brahma, and of which Brahma is composed! Thou art the Rich, the Yajush, the Saman, and the Atharvan Vedas. Thou art accentuation, ritual, signification, metre, and astronomy; history, tradition, grammar, theology, logic, and law: thou who art inscrutable. Thou art the doctrine that investigates the distinctions between soul, and life, and body, and matter endowed with qualities [*11]; and that doctrine is nothing else but thy nature inherent in and presiding over it [*12]. Thou art imperceptible, indescribable, inconceivable; without name, or colour, or hands, or feet; pure, eternal, and infinite. Thou hearest without ears, and seest without eyes. Thou art one and multiform. Thou movest without feet; thou seizest without hands. Thou knowest all, but art not by all to be known [*13]. He who beholds thee as the most subtile of atoms, not substantially existent, puts an end to ignorance; and final emancipation is the reward of that wise man whose understanding cherishes nothing other than thee in the form of supreme delight [*14]. Thou art the common centre of all [*15], the protector of the

[p. 496]

world; and all beings exist in thee: all that has been, or will be, thou art. Thou art the atom of atoms; thou art spirit; thou only art distinct from primeval nature [*16]. Thou, as the lord of fire in four manifestations [*17], givest light and fertility to Earth. Thou art the eye of all, and wearer of many shapes, and unobstructedly traversest the three regions of the universe. As fire, though one, is variously kindled, and, though unchangeable in its essence, is modified in many ways, so thou, lord, who art one omnipresent form, takest upon thee all modifications that exist. Thou art one supreme; thou art that supreme and eternal state which the wise behold with the eye of knowledge. There is nothing else but thou, O lord; nothing else has been or will be. Thou art both discrete and indiscrete, universal and individual, omniscient, all-seeing, omnipotent, possessed of all wisdom and strength and power. Thou art liable neither to diminution nor increase; thou art independent and without beginning; thou art the subjugator of all. Thou art unaffected by weariness, sloth, fear, anger, or desire. Thou art free from soil, supreme, merciful [*18], uniform, undecaying, lord over all, the stay of all, the fountain of light, imperishable. To thee, uninvested by material envelopes [*19], unexposed to sensible imaginings, aggregate of elemental substance [*20], spirit supreme, be adoration. Thou assumest a shape, O pervader of the universe, not as the consequence of virtue or vice, nor from any mixture of the two, but for the sole object of maintaining piety in the world [*21]."

[p. 497]

The unborn, universal Hari, having heard with his mental ear these eulogiums, was pleased, and thus spake to Brahma: "Tell me, Brahma, what you and the gods desire: speak boldly, certain of success." Brahma, beholding the divine, universal form of Hari, quickly prostrated himself, and again renewed his praises. "Glory to thee, the thousand-formed, the thousand-armed, the many-visaged, many-footed; to thee, the illimitable author of creation, preservation, and destruction; most subtile of the subtile, most vast of the great: to thee, who art nature, intellect, and consciousness; and who art other spirit even than the spiritual root of those principles [*22]. Do thou shew favour upon us. Behold, lord, this earth, oppressed by mighty Asuras, and shaken to her mountain basements, comes to thee, who art her invincible defender, to be relieved from her burden. Behold me, Indra, the Aswins, Varuna, and Yama, the Rudras, the Vasus, the suns, the winds, fire, and all other celestials, prepared to execute whatever thou shalt will that we shall do. Do thou, in whom there is no imperfection, O sovereign of the deities, give thy orders to thy servants: lo, we are ready."

When Brahma had ended, the supreme lord plucked off two hairs, one white and one black, and said to the gods, "These my hairs shall descend upon earth, and shall relieve her of the burden of her distress [*23].

[p. 498]

[paragraph continues] Let all the gods also, in their own portions, go down to earth, and wage war with the haughty Asuras, who are there incorporate, and who shall every one of them be destroyed. Doubt not of this: they shall perish before the withering glance of mine eyes. This my (black) hair shall be impersonated in the eighth conception of the wife of Vasudeva, Devaki, who is like a goddess; and shall slay Kansa, who is the demon Kalanemi." Thus having spoken, Hari disappeared; and the gods bowing to him, though invisible, returned to the summit of mount Meru, from whence they descended upon earth.

The Muni Narada informed Kansa that the supporter of the earth, Vishnu, would be the eighth child of Devaki; and his wrath being excited by this report, he placed both Vasudeva and Devaki in confinement. Agreeably to his promise, the former delivered to Kansa each infant as soon as it was born. It is said that these, to the number of six, were the children of the demon Hiranyakas'ipu, who were introduced into the womb of Devaki, at the command of Vishnu, during the hours of Devaki's repose, by the goddess Yoganidra [*24], the great illusory energy of Vishnu, by whom, as utter ignorance, the whole world is beguiled. To her Vishnu said, "Go, Nidra, to the nether regions, and by my command conduct successively six of their princes to be conceived of Devaki. When these shall have been put to death by Kansa, the seventh conception shall be formed of a portion of S'esha, who is a part of me; and this you shall transfer, before the time of birth, to Rohini, another wife of Vasudeva, who resides at Gokula. The report shall run, that Devaki miscarries, through the anxiety of imprisonment, and dread of the Raja of the Bhojas. From being extracted from his mother's womb, the child shall be known by the name of Sankarshana, and he shall be valiant and strong, and like the peak of the white mountain in

[p. 499]

bulk and complexion. I will myself become incarnate in the eighth conception of Devaki; and you shall immediately take a similar character as the embryo offspring of Yas'oda. In the night of the eighth lunation of the dark half of the month Nabhas, in the season of the rains, I shall be born. You shall receive birth on the ninth. Impelled and aided by my power, Vasudeva shall bear me to the bed of Yas'oda, and you to that of Devaki. Kansa shall take you, and hold you up to dash you against a stone; but you shall escape from his grasp into the sky, where the hundred-eyed Indra shall meet and do homage to you, through reverence for me, and shall bow before you, and acknowledge you as his sister. Having slain Sumbha, Nisumbha, and numerous other demons [*25], you shall sanctify the earth in many places [*26]. Thou art wealth, progeny, fame, patience, heaven and earth, fortitude, modesty, nutrition, dawn, and every other female (form or property). They who address thee morning and afternoon with reverence and praise, and call thee Arya, Durga, Vedagarbha, Ambika, Bhadra, Bhadrakali, Kshemi, or Kshemankari, shall receive from my bounty whatever they desire. Propitiated with offerings of wine and flesh and various viands, thou shalt bestow upon mankind all their prayers. Through my favour all men shall ever have faith in thee. Assured of this, go, goddess, and execute my commands."

Footnotes

^491:1 The whole of this book is dedicated to the biography of Krishna. Many of the Puranas omit this subject altogether, or only allude to it occasionally. In others it is equally prominent. The Brahma P. gives the story exactly in the same words as our text: which has the best right to them may be questioned; but, as it is usually met with, the Brahma P. is a very heterogeneous compilation. The Hari Vans'a has a narrative more detailed than that of the text, with additions and embellishments of its own. The Brahma Vaivartta throughout celebrates the acts of Krishna; and one portion of it, the Krishna Janma Khanda, especially describes his boyhood and youth. The incidents are the same in general as those in the text, but they are lost amidst interminable descriptions of Krishna's sports with the Gopis and with his mistress Radha, a person not noticed elsewhere; the whole is in a style indicative of a modern origin. The Agni P. and Padma P. (Uttara Khanda) have accounts of Krishna, but they are mere summaries, compiled evidently from other works. The principal authority for the adventures of Krishna is the Bhagavata, the tenth book of which is exclusively devoted to him. It is this work which has, no doubt, mainly extended the worship of Krishna, as its popularity is evinced by its having been translated into all the spoken languages of India professing to have a literature. The Prem-sagar, its Hindi version, is well known; but there are also translations in Mahratta, Telugu, Tamil, &c. It does not seem likely, however, that the Vishnu P. has copied the Bhagavata; for although. its greater conciseness may sometimes look like abridgment, yet the descriptions are generally of a more simple and antiquated character. Here, as usual, the [p. 492] Mahabharata is no doubt the earliest extant authority; but it is not the earliest, for whilst it omits to narrate most of his personal adventures unconnected with his alliance with the Pandavas, it often alludes to them, and names repeatedly his capital, his wives, and his progeny. It also devotes a section, the Maus'ala P., to the destruction of the Yadavas. The story of Krishna the prince and hero must have been complete when the Mahabharata was compiled. It is doubtful, however, if Krishna the boy, and his adventures at Vrindavan, were not subsequent inventions. There are no allusions to them in the poem, of an unsuspicious nature. The only ones that I have met with are contained in a speech by S'is'upala, Sabha P., vol. I. p. 360, in which he reviles Krishna; but they may easily have been interpolated. There may be others scattered through the poem, but I have not observed them.

^492:2 The notices of Krishna's origin and character in various passages of the Mahabharata are by no means consistent, and indicate different dates at least. In an address to him by Arjuna, Vana P., vol. I. p. 436, he is said to have passed thousands of years in various holy places, engaged in arduous penances. He is frequently identified with the Rishi Narayana, or he and Arjuna are said to be Nara and Narayana. In the Dana-dharma he is represented as a worshipper of S'iva, and propitiating him and his wife Uma, and receiving as boons from them wives and children. As a warrior and prince he is always on the scene; but he is repeatedly called an Ans'a, or portion of Vishnu; whilst in a great number of places he is identified with Vishnu or Narayana, and is consequently 'all things.' This latter is his character, of course, amongst the Vaishnavas, agreeably to the text of the Bhagavata: 'Krishna is the lord (Vishnu) himself.'

^492:3 This is a still farther diminution of Krishna's dignity; he is not even a part, but 'a part of a part,' Ans'ans'avatara: but this, the commentator maintains, is to be understood only of his form or condition as man, not of his power, as it suffered no diminution, either in its primary or secondary state, as light by suffusion suffers no decrease; and a verse of the Veda is cited to this effect: 'Though that which is full be taken from what is full, yet the remainder is undiminished;' 'Krishna is nevertheless the very supreme Brahma, though it be a mystery how the supreme should assume the form of a man.' So the Bhagavata in one passage predicts that the Para-purusha, Purushottama or Vishnu, will be born visibly in the dwelling of Vasudeva.

^493:4 The Bhagavata tells the circumstance as in the text. The Hari Vans'a makes Narada apprise Kansa of his danger. Narada's interposition is not mentioned until afterwards by our authority. Devaki is the cousin of Kansa: see <page 436>.

^493:5 Agni, or fire, refines gold, burns away the dross, according to the commentator. The sun is the lord of the rays of light; or, as the cause of rain and vegetation, the lord of cattle. The phrase is, ###.

^494:6 According to the Vayu, Kalanemi or Kayabadha was a son of Virochana, the grandson of Hiranyakas'ipu: his death is described in the Hari Vans'a.

^494:7 These appear subsequently in the narration, and are destroyed by Krishna.

^494:8 Anamnaya; not the immediate object of the Vedas, which is devotion, not abstraction; ritual or worship, not knowledge.

^494:9 The two kinds of knowledge are termed Para, 'supreme,' and Apara, 'other' or 'subordinate;' the first is knowledge of Para Brahma, of spirit abstractedly considered, perfect knowledge derived from abstraction; the [p. 495] second is knowledge of S'abda Brahma, of spirit as described and taught in the Vedas, or their supplementary branches. The identity of the supreme with both descriptions of holy knowledge pervades the whole of the address.

^495:10 Para Brahma and S'abda Brahma: see the preceding note.

^495:11 The doctrine alluded to may be either intended generally, or in the several instances, the discussion of the spiritual soul and living soul, of body subtile and sensible, and of matter endowed with qualities, reference may be purposed to the Vedanta, Yoga, and Sankhya systems.

^495:12 That is, as the S'abda Brahma, the supreme is identical with philosophical doctrines, being the object, the instigator, and the result.

^495:13 This is taken from the Vedas, the original of which is quoted and translated by Sir Win. Jones: see his Works, XIII. 368. The passage is thus cited by the commentator on our text: 'Without hand or foot he runs, he grasps; without eyes he sees; and without ears he hears: he knoweth all that may be known, and no one knoweth him. Him they call the first great spirit.'

^495:14 Varenya rupa, explained by Paramananda murtti; he whose form or impersonation is supreme felicity.

^495:15 Literally 'navel of all.' [p. 496] The passage is also read 'Thou art all and the first;' the cause or creator.

^496:16 Or the passage is understood, 'Thou art one subsequently to Prakriti;' that is, thou art Brahma, the active will of the supreme, creating forms from rudimental matter.

^496:17 As the three fires enjoined by the Vedas, and the fire metaphorically of devotion; or lightnings, solar heat, fire generated artificially, and the fire of digestion or animal fire; or Vishnu in that character bestows beauty, vigour, power, and wealth.

^496:18 Prita: one copy has S'anta, 'calm,' 'undisturbed.'

^496:19 Beyond the separate layers or envelopes of elementary substances (see <page 19>); or, according to the Vedanta notions, uninvested by those grosser sheaths or coverings, derived from food and the like, by which subtile body is enclosed.

^496:20 Mahavibhuti sansthana. Vibhuti is explained by Prapancha, sensible, material, or elementary substance, constituting body.

^496:21 The passage is somewhat obscurely expressed, and is differently interpreted; [p. 497] it is, 'Not from no cause, nor from cause, nor from cause and no cause.' The term 'no cause' may, the commentator says, designate fixed prescribed duties, the Nityakarma; 'cause' may signify occasional sacrifices, the Kamya-karma: neither of these can form any necessity for Vishnu's descent, as they might of a mere mortal's being born on the earth: or Karana is explained to mean 'obtaining pleasure,' from Ka and Arana, 'obtaining;' obtaining happiness, or the cause of it, piety, virtue; and with the negative, Akarana, the reverse, pain, the consequence of wickedness. The purport is clear enough; it is merely meant to state that Vishnu is not subject to the necessity which is the cause of human birth.

^497:22 The term Pradhana, which is repeated in this passage, is explained in the second place to mean Puman, 'soul' or 'spirit.'

^497:23 The same account of the origin of Krishna is given in the Mahabharata, Adi P., vol. I. p. 266. The white hair is impersonated as Balarama; the black, as Krishna. The commentator on our text maintains that this is not to be literally understood: 'Vishnu did not intend that the two hairs should become incarnate, but he meant to signify, that, should he send them, they would be more than sufficient to destroy Kansa and his demons: or the birth of Rama and Krishna was a double illusion, [p. 498] typified by the two hairs.' This seems to be a refinement upon an older and somewhat undignified account of the origin of Krishna and his brother. The commentator on the Mahabharata argues that they are to be understood merely as the media by which Devaki and Rohini conceived.

^498:24 Yoganidra is the sleep of devotion or abstraction, the active principle of illusion, personified, and also termed Maya and Mahamaya, also Avidya or ignorance. In the Durga Mahatmya of the Markandeya Purana a she appears as Devi or Durga, the S'akti or bride of S'iva; but in our text as Vaishnavi, or the S'akti of Vishnu.

^499:25 Allusion is here made to the exploits of Durga, as celebrated especially in the Durga Mahatmya; and it must be posterior to the date of that or some similar composition. The passage may be an interpolation, as the Markandeya P. in general has the appearance of being a more recent compilation than the Vishnu.

^499:26 This refers to the Pitha sthanas, 'fifty-one places,' where, according to the Tantras, the limbs of S'ati fell, when scattered by her husband S'iva, as he bore her dead body about, and tore it to pieces, after she had put an end to her existence at Daksha's sacrifice. This part of the legend seems to be an addition to the original fable made by the Tantras, as it is not in the Puranas (see the story of Daksha's sacrifice). It bears some analogy to the Egyptian fable of Isis and Osiris. At the Pitha sthanas, however, of Jwalamukhi, Vindhyavasini, Kalighat, and others, temples are erected to the different forms of Devi or S'ati, not to the phallic emblem of Mahadeva, which, if present, is there as an accessory and embellishment, not as a principal, and the chief object of worship is a figure of the goddess; a circumstance in which there is an essential difference between the temples of Durga and shrines of Osiris.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 500]

  

CHAP. II

The conception of Devaki: her appearance: she is praised by the gods.

THE nurse of the universe, Jagaddhatri, thus enjoined by the god of gods, conveyed the six several embryos into the womb of Devaki [*1], and transferred the seventh after a season to that of Rohini; after which, Hari, for the benefit of the three regions, became incarnate as the conception of the former princess, and Yoganidra as that of Yas'oda, exactly as the supreme Vishnu had commanded. When the portion of Vishnu had become incorporate upon earth, the planetary bodies moved in brilliant order in the heavens, and the seasons were regular and genial. No person could bear to gaze upon Devaki, from the light that invested her; and those who contemplated her radiance felt their minds disturbed. The gods, invisible to mortals, celebrated her praises continually from the time that Vishnu was contained in her person. "Thou," said the divinities, "art that Prakriti, infinite and subtile, which formerly bore Brahma in its womb: then wast thou the goddess of speech, the energy of the creator of the universe, and the parent of the Vedas. Thou, eternal being, comprising in thy substance the essence of all created things, wast identical with creation: thou wast the parent of the triform sacrifice, becoming the germ of all things: thou art sacrifice, whence all fruit proceeds: thou art the wood, whose attrition engenders fire. As Aditi, thou art the parent of the gods; as Diti, thou art the mother of the Daityas, their foes. Thou art light, whence day is begotten: thou art humility, the mother of true wisdom: thou art kingly policy, the parent of order: thou art modesty, the progenitrix of affection: thou art desire, of whom love is born: thou art contentment, whence resignation is derived: thou art intelligence, the mother of knowledge: thou art patience, the parent of fortitude: thou art the heavens, and thy children are the stars: and from thee does all that exists proceed. Such, goddess,

[p. 501]

and thousands more, are thy mighty faculties; and now innumerable are the contents of thy womb, O mother of the universe. The whole earth, decorated with oceans, rivers, continents, cities, villages, hamlets, and towns; all the fires, waters, and winds; the stars, asterisms, and planets; the sky, crowded with the variegated chariots of the gods, and ether, that provides space for all substance; the several spheres of earth, sky, and heaven; of saints, sages, ascetics, and of Brahma; the whole egg of Brahma, with all its population of gods, demons, spirits, snake-gods, fiends, demons, ghosts, and imps, men and animals, and whatever creatures have life, comprised in him who is their eternal lord, and the object of all apprehension; whose real form, nature, name, and dimensions are not within human apprehension--are now with that Vishnu in thee. Thou art Swaha; thou art Swadha; thou art wisdom, ambrosia, light, and heaven. Thou hast descended upon earth for the preservation of the world. Have compassion upon us, O goddess, and do good unto the world. Be proud to bear that deity by whom the universe is upheld."

Footnotes

^500:1 It is mentioned in the preceding chapter that they were all put to death, in which the Hari Vans'a concurs. The Bhagavata makes Kansa spare them, and restore them to their parents, as he had nothing to apprehend from their existence.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 502]

  

CHAP. III.

Birth of Krishna: conveyed by Vasudeva to Mathura, and exchanged with the new-born daughter of Yas'oda. Kansa attempts to destroy the latter, who becomes Yoganidra.

THUS eulogized by the gods, Devaki bore in her womb the lotus-eyed deity, the protector of the world. The sun of Achyuta rose in the dawn of Devaki to cause the lotus petal of the universe to expand. On the day of his birth the quarters of the horizon were irradiate with joy, as if moonlight was diffused over the whole earth. The virtuous experienced new delight, the strong winds were hushed, and the rivers glided tranquilly, when Janarddana was about to be born. The seas with their own melodious murmurings made the music, whilst the spirits and the nymphs of heaven danced and sang: the gods, walking the sky, showered down flowers upon the earth, and the holy fires glowed with a mild and gentle flame. At midnight, when the supporter of all was about to be born, the clouds emitted low pleasing sounds, and poured down rain of flowers.

As soon as Anakadundubhi beheld the child, of the complexion of the lotus leaves, having four arms, and the mystic mark S'rivatsa on his breast, he addressed him in terms of love and reverence, and represented the fears he entertained of Kansa. "Thou art born," said Vasudeva, "O sovereign god of gods, bearer of the shell, the discus, and the mace; but now in mercy withhold this thy celestial form, for Kansa will assuredly put me to death when he knows that thou hast descended in my dwelling." Devaki also exclaimed, "God of gods, who art all things, who comprisest all the regions of the world in thy person, and who by thine illusion hast assumed the condition of an infant, have compassion upon us, and forego this thy four-armed shape, nor let Kansa, the impious son of Diti, know of thy descent."

To these applications Bhagavat answered and said, "Princess, in former times I was prayed to by thee and adored in the hope of progeny: thy prayers have been granted, for I am born thy son." So saying, he was silent: and Vasudeva, taking the babe, went out that same night; for the guards were all charmed by Yoganidra, as were the warders at

[p. 503]

the gates of Mathura, and they obstructed not the passage of Anakadundubhi. To protect the infant from the heavy rain that fell from the clouds of night, S'esha, the many-headed serpent, followed Vasudeva, and spread his hoods above their heads; and when the prince, with the child in his arms, crossed the Yamuna river, deep as it was, and dangerous with numerous whirlpools, the waters were stilled, and rose not above his knee.. On the bank he saw Nanda and the rest, who had come thither to bring tribute due to Kansa; but they beheld him not [*1]. At the same time Yas'oda was also under the influence of Yoganidra, whom she had brought forth as her daughter, and whom the prudent Vasudeva took up, placing his son in her place by the side of the mother: he then quickly returned home. When Yas'oda awoke, she found that she had been delivered of a boy, as black as the dark leaves of the lotus, and she was greatly rejoiced.

Vasudeva, bearing off the female infant of Yas'oda, reached his mansion unobserved, and entered and placed the child in the bed of Devaki: he then remained as usual. The guards were awakened by the cry of the new-born babe, and, starting up, they sent word to Kansa that Devaki had borne a child. Kansa immediately repaired to the residence of Vasudeva, where he seized upon the infant. In vain Devaki convulsively entreated him to relinquish the child: he threw it ruthlessly against a stone; but it rose into the sky, and expanded into a gigantic figure, having eight arms, each wielding some formidable weapon. This terrific being laughed aloud, and said to Kansa, "What avails it thee, Kansa, to have hurled me to the ground? he is born who shall kill thee, the mighty one amongst the gods, who was formerly thy destroyer. Now quickly secure him, and provide for thine own welfare." Thus having spoken, the goddess, decorated with heavenly perfumes and garlands, and hymned by the spirits of the air, vanished from before the eyes of Bhoja raja [*2].

Footnotes

^503:1 The Bhagavata more consistently makes Vasudeva find Nanda and the rest fast asleep in their houses, and subsequently describes their bringing tribute or tax (kara) to Kansa.

^503:2 Chief of the tribe of Bhoja, a branch of the Yadavas: see <page 424>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 504]

  

CHAP. IV.

Kansa addresses his friends, announces their danger, and orders male children to be put to death.

KANSA, much troubled in mind, summoned all his principal Asuras, Pralamba, Kes'in, and the rest, and said to them, "O valiant chiefs, Pralamba, Kes'in, Dhenuka, Putana, Arishta, and all the rest of you, hear my words. The vile and contemptible denizens of heaven are assiduously plotting against my life, for they dread my prowess: but, heroes, I hold them of no account. What can the impotent Indra, or the ascetic Hara, perform? or what can Hari accomplish, except the murder of his foes by fraud? What have we to fear from the Adityas, the Vasus, the Agnis, or any others of the immortals, who have all been vanquished by my resistless arms? Have I not seen the king of the gods, when he had ventured into the conflict, quickly retreat from the field, receiving my shafts upon his back, not bravely upon his breast? When in resentment he withheld the fertilizing showers from my kingdom, did not my arrows compel the clouds to part with their waters, as much as were required? Are not all the monarchs of the earth in terror of my prowess, and subject to my orders, save only Jarasandha my sire [*1]? Now, chiefs of the Daitya race, it is my determination to inflict still deeper degradation upon these evil-minded and unprincipled gods. Let therefore every man who is notorious for liberality (in gifts to gods and Brahmans), every man who is remarkable for his celebration of sacrifices, be put to death, that thus the gods shall be deprived of the means by which they subsist. The goddess who has been born as the infant child of Devaki has announced to me that he is again alive who in a former being was my death. Let therefore active search be made for whatever young children there may be upon earth, and let every boy in whom there are signs of unusual vigour be slain without remorse."

Having issued these commands, Kansa retired into his palace, and liberated Vasudeva and Devaki from their captivity. "It is in vain,"

[p. 505]

said he to them, "that I have slain all your children, since after all he who is destined to kill me has escaped. It is of no use to regret the past. The children you may hereafter have may enjoy life unto its natural close; no one shall cut it short." Having thus conciliated them, Kansa, alarmed for himself, withdrew into the interior apartments of his palace.

Footnotes

^504:1 Jarasandha, prince of Magadha, was the father-in-law of Kansa.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 506]

  

CHAP. V.

Nanda returns with the infants Krishna and Balarama to Gokula. Putana killed by the former. Prayers of Nanda and Yas'oda.

WHEN Vasudeva was set at liberty, he went to the waggon of Nanda, and found Nanda there rejoicing that a son was born to him [*1]. Vasudeva spake to him kindly, and congratulated him on having a son in his old age. "The yearly tribute," he added, "has been paid to the king, and men of property should not tarry near the court, when the business that brought them there has been transacted. Why do you delay, now that your affairs are settled? Up, Nanda, quickly, and set off to your own pastures; and let this boy, the son whom Rohini has borne me, accompany you, and be brought up by you as this your own son." Accordingly Nanda and the other cowherds, their goods being placed in their waggons, and their taxes having been paid to the king, returned to their village.

Some time after they were settled at Gokula, the female fiend Putana, the child-killer, came thither by night, and finding the little Krishna asleep, took him up, and gave him her breast to suck [*2]. Now whatever child is suckled in the night by Putana instantly dies; but Krishna, laying hold of the breast with both hands, sucked it with such violence, that he drained it of the life; and the hideous Putana, roaring aloud, and giving way in every joint, fell on the ground expiring. The inhabitants of Vraja awoke in alarm at the cries of the fiend, ran to the spot, and beheld Putana lying on the earth, and Krishna in her arms. Yas'oda snatching up Krishna, waved over him a cow-tail brush to guard him from harm, whilst Nanda placed dried cow-dung powdered upon his

[p. 507]

head; he gave him also an amulet [*3], saying at the same time, "May Hari, the lord of all beings without reserve, protect you; he from the lotus of whose navel the world was developed, and on the tip of whose tusks the globe was upraised from the waters. May that Kes'ava, who assumed the form of a boar, protect thee. May that Kes'ava, who, as the man-lion, rent with his sharp nails the bosom of his foe, ever protect thee. May that Kes'ava, who, appearing first as the dwarf, suddenly traversed in all his might, with three paces, the three regions of the universe, constantly defend thee. May Govinda guard thy head; Kes'ava thy neck; Vishnu thy belly; Janarddana thy legs and feet; the eternal and irresistible Narayana thy face, thine arms, thy mind, and faculties of sense. May all ghosts, goblins, and spirits malignant and unfriendly, ever fly thee, appalled by the bow, the discus, mace, and sword of Vishnu, and the echo of his shell. May Vaikuntha guard thee in the cardinal points; and in the intermediate ones, Madhusudana. May Rishikes'a defend thee in the sky, and Mahidhara upon earth." Having pronounced this prayer to avert all evil, Nanda put the child to sleep in his bed underneath the waggon. Beholding the vast carcass of Putana, the cowherds were filled with astonishment and terror.

Footnotes

^506:1 It is literally 'went to the cart' or 'waggon;' as if Nanda and his family dwelt in such a vehicle, as the Scythians are said to have done. The commentator explains S'akata 'the place of loosing or unharnessing the waggon.' In the Bhagavata, Vasudeva does not quit Mathura, but goes to the halting ground of Nanda, who has come to that city to pay his taxes: explained by the comment.

^506:2 In the Hari Vans'a this female fiend is described as coming in the shape of a bird.

^507:3 The Raksha, the preserver, or preservative against charms, is a piece of thread or silk, or some more costly material, bound round the wrist or arm, with an appropriate prayer such as that in the text. Besides its application to children, to avert the effects of evil eyes, or to protect them against Dains or witches, there is one day in the year, the Rakhi Purnima, or full moon in the month of S'ravan (July--August), when it is bound upon the wrists of adults by friendly or kindred Brahmans, with a short prayer or benediction. The Rakhi is also sent sometimes by persons of distinction, and especially by females, to members of a different family, or even race and nation, to intimate a sort of brotherly or sisterly adoption. Tod's Rajasthan, I. 312.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 508]

  

CHAP. VI.

Krishna overturns a waggon; casts down two trees. The Gopas depart to Vrindavana. Sports of the boys. Description of the season of the rains.

ON one occasion, whilst Madhusudana was asleep underneath the waggon, he cried for the breast, and kicking up his feet he overturned the vehicle, and all the pots and pans were upset and broken. The cowherds and their wives, hearing the noise, came exclaiming, "Ah! ah!" and there they found the child sleeping on his back. "Who could have upset the waggon?" said the cowherds. "This child," replied some boys, who witnessed the circumstance; "we saw him," said they, "crying, and kicking the waggon with his feet, and so it was overturned: no one else had any thing to do with it." The cowherds were exceedingly astonished at this account; and Nanda, not knowing what to think, took up the boy; whilst Yas'oda offered worship to the broken pieces of pots and to the waggon, with curds, flowers, fruit, and unbruised grain.

The initiatory rites requisite for the two boys were performed by Garga, who was sent to Gokula by Vasudeva for that purpose: he celebrated them without the knowledge of the cowherds [*1]; and the wise sage, eminent amongst the wise, named the elder of them Rama, and the other Krishna. In a short time they began to crawl about the ground, supporting themselves on their hands and knees, and creeping every where, often amidst ashes and filth. Neither Rohini nor Yas'oda was able to prevent them from getting into the cowpens, or amongst the calves, where they amused themselves by pulling their tails. As they disregarded the prohibitions of Yas'oda, and rambled about together constantly, she became angry, and taking up a stick, followed them, and threatened the dark-complexioned Krishna with a whipping. Fastening a cord round his waist, she tied him to the wooden mortar [*2], and being in

[p. 509]

a great passion, she said to him, "Now, you naughty boy, get away from hence if you can." She then went about her domestic affairs. As soon as she had departed, the lotus-eyed Krishna, endeavouring to extricate himself, pulled the mortar after him to the space between two Arjuna trees that grew near together: having dragged the mortar between these trees, it became wedged awry there, and as Krishna pulled it through, it pulled down the trunks of the trees. Hearing the crackling noise, the people of Vraja came to see what was the matter, and there they beheld the two large trees, with shattered stems and broken branches, prostrate on the ground, with the child fixed between them, with a rope round his belly, laughing, and shewing his white little teeth, just budded. It is hence that Krishna is called Damodara, from the binding of the rope (dama) round his belly (udara) [*3]. The elders of the cowherds, with Nanda at their head, looked upon these circumstances with alarm, considering them as of evil omen. "We cannot remain in this place," said they; "let us go to some other part of the forest; for here many evil signs threaten us with destruction; the death of Putana, the upsetting of the waggon, and the fall of the trees without their being blown down by the wind. Let us depart hence without delay, and go to Vrindavana, where terrestrial prodigies may no more disturb us."

Having thus resolved, the inhabitants of Vraja communicated their intention to their families, and desired them to move without delay. Accordingly they set off with their waggons and their cattle, driving before them their bulls and cows and calves; the fragments of their household stores they threw away, and in an instant Vraja was overspread with flights of crows. Vrindavana was chosen by Krishna, whom acts do not affect, for the sake of providing for the nourishment of the

[p. 510]

kine; for there in the hottest season the new grass springs up as verdantly as in the rains. Having repaired, then, from Vraja to Vrindavana, the inhabitants of the former drew up their waggons in the form of a crescent [*4].

As the two boys, Rama and Damodara, grew up, they were ever together in the same place, and engaged in the same boyish sports. They made themselves crests of the peacocks' plumes, and garlands of forest flowers, and musical instruments of leaves and reeds, or played upon the pipes used by the cowherds: their hair was trimmed like the wings of the crow [*5], and they resembled two young princes, portions of the deity of war: they were robust, and they roamed about, always laughing and playing, sometimes with each other, sometimes with other boys; driving along with the young cowherds the calves to pasture. Thus the two guardians of the world were keepers of cattle, until they had attained seven years of age, in the cow-pens of Vrindavan.

Then came on the season of the rains, when the atmosphere laboured with accumulated clouds, and the quarters of the horizon were blended into one by the driving showers. The waters of the rivers rose, and overflowed their banks, and spread beyond all bounds, like the minds of the weak and wicked transported beyond restraint by sudden prosperity. The pure radiance of the moon was obscured by heavy vapours, as the lessons of holy writ are darkened by the arrogant scoffs of fools (and unbelievers). The bow of Indra held its place in the heavens all unstrung, like a worthless man elevated by an injudicious prince to honour. The white line of storks appeared upon the back of the cloud, in such contrast as the bright conduct of a man of respectability opposes to the behaviour of a scoundrel. The ever-fitful lightning, in its new alliance with the sky, was like the friendship of a profligate for a man

[p. 511]

of worth. Overgrown by the spreading grain, the paths were indistinctly traced, like the speech of the ignorant, that conveys no positive meaning.

At this time Krishna and Rama, accompanied by the cow-boys, traversed the forests, that echoed with the hum of bees and the peacock's cry. Sometimes they sang in chorus, or danced together; sometimes they sought shelter from the cold beneath the trees; sometimes they decorated themselves with flowery garlands, sometimes with peacocks' feathers; sometimes they stained themselves of various hues with the minerals of the mountain; sometimes weary they reposed on beds of leaves, and sometimes imitated in mirth the muttering of the thundercloud; sometimes they excited their juvenile associates to sing, and sometimes they mimicked the cry of the peacock with their pipes. In this manner participating in various feelings and emotions, and affectionately attached to each other, they wandered, sporting and happy, through the wood. At eveningtide came Krishna and Balarama, like two cow-boys, along with the cows and the cowherds. At eveningtide the two immortals, having come to the cow-pens, joined heartily in whatever sports amused the sons of the herdsmen.

Footnotes

^508:1 The Bhagavata describes Garga's interview with Nanda, and the inducements of the latter to keep the former's celebration of the Sanskaras, or initiatory rites of the two boys, secret from the Gopas. Garga there describes himself as the Purdhit, or family priest, of the Yadavas.

^508:2 The Ulukhala, or mortar is a large [p. 509] wooden bowl on a solid stand of timber, both cut out of one piece; the pestle is also of wood; and they are used chiefly for bruising or threshing unwinnowed corn, and separating the chaff from the grain. As important agents in household economy, they are regarded as sacred, and even hymned in the Vedas.

^509:3 Our text, and that of the Hari Vans'a, take no notice of the legend of Nalakuvera and Manigriva, sons of Kuvera, who, according to the Bhagavata, had been metamorphosed, through a curse of Narada, into these two trees, and for whose liberation this feat of Krishna was intended.

^510:4 The Hari Vans'a, not satisfied with the prodigies which had alarmed the cowherds, adds another, not found, it is believed, any where else. The emigration, according to that work, originates, not with the Gopas, but the two boys, who wish to go to Vrindavana, and in order to compel the removal, Krishna converts the hairs of his body into hundreds of wolves, who so harass and alarm the inhabitants of Vraja, that they determine to abandon their homes.

^510:5 The Kaka-paksha, or crow's wing, implies the hair left on each side of the head, the top being shaved.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 512]

  

CHAP. VII.

Krishna combats the serpent Kaliya: alarm of his parents and companions: he overcomes the serpent, and is propitiated by him: commands him to depart from the Yamuna river to the ocean.

ONE day Krishna, unaccompanied by Rama, went to Vrindavan: he was attended by a troop of cowherds, and gaily decorated with wild flowers. On his way he came to the Yamuna, which was flowing in sportive undulations, and sparkling with foam, as if with smiles, as the waves dashed against the borders. Within its bed, however, was the fearful pool of the serpent Kaliya, boiling with the fires of poison [*1]; from the fumes of which, large trees upon the bank were blighted, and by whose waters, when raised by a gale into the air, birds were scorched. Beholding this dreadful lake, which was like another mouth of death, Madhusudana reflected that the wicked and poisonous Kaliya, who had been vanquished by himself (in the person of Garuda), and had been obliged to fly from the ocean (where he had inhabited the island Ramanaka), must be lurking at its bottom, and defiling the Yamuna, the consort of the sea, so that neither men nor cattle could slake their thirst by her waters. Such being the case, he determined to dislodge the Naga, and enable the dwellers of Vraja to frequent the vicinage without fear; for it was the especial purpose he considered of his descent upon earth to reduce to subjection all such violators of law. "Here," thought he, "is a Kadamba tree, which is sufficiently near; I can climb up it, and thence leap into the serpent's pool." Having thus resolved, he bound his clothes tightly about him, and jumped boldly into the lake of the serpent-king. The waters, agitated by his plunge amidst them, were scattered to a considerable distance from the bank, and the spray falling upon the trees, they were immediately set on fire by the heat of the

[p. 513]

poisonous vapour combined with the water; and the whole horizon was in a blaze. Krishna, having dived into the pool, struck his arms in defiance [*3], and the snake-king, hearing the sound, quickly came forth: his eyes were coppery red, and his hoods were flaming with deadly venom: he was attended by many other powerful and poisonous snakes, feeders upon air, and by hundreds of serpent-nymphs, decorated with rich jewels, whose earrings glittered with trembling radiance as the wearers moved along. Coiling themselves around Krishna, they all bit him with teeth from which fiery poison was emitted. Krishna's companions, beholding him in the lake, encompassed by the snakes, twining around him, ran off to Vraja, lamenting and bewailing aloud his fate. "Krishna," they called out, "has foolishly plunged into the serpent's pool, and is there bitten to death by the snake-king! Come and see." The cowherds and their wives and Yas'oda, hearing this news, which was like a thunderbolt, ran immediately to the pool, frightened out of their senses, and crying, "Alas! alas! where is he?" The Gopis were retarded by Yas'oda, who in her agitation stumbled and slipped at every step; but Nanda and the cowherds and the invincible Rama hastened to the banks of the Yamuna, eager to assist Krishna. There they beheld him apparently in the power of the serpent-king, encompassed by twining snakes, and making no effort to escape. Nanda, as soon as he set his eyes upon his son, became senseless; and Yas'oda also, when she beheld him, lost all consciousness. The Gopis, overcome with sorrow, wept, and called affectionately, and with convulsive sobs, upon Kes'ava. "Let us all," said they, "plunge with Yas'oda into the fearful pool of the serpent-king. We cannot return to Vraja; for what is day, without the sun? what night, without the moon? what is a herd of heifers, without its lord? what is Vraja, without Krishna? Deprived of him, we will go no more to Gokula. The forest will lose its delights; it will be like a lake without water. When this dark lotus leaf complexioned Hari is not present, there is no joy in the maternal dwelling. How strange is this! And as for you, ye cowherds, how, poor beings, will you live amidst the pastures, when you no longer

[p. 514]

behold the brilliant lotus eyes of Hari? Our hearts have been wiled away by the music of his voice. We will not go without Pundarikaksha to the folds of Nanda. Even now, though held in the coils of the serpent-king, see, friends, hew his face brightens with smiles as we gaze upon him."

When the mighty son of Rohini, Balarama, heard these exclamations of the Gopis, and with disdainful glance beheld the cowherds overcome with terror, Nanda gazing fixedly upon the countenance of his son, and Yas'oda unconscious, he spake to Krishna in his own character: "What is this, O god of gods! the quality of mortal is sufficiently assumed; dost thou not know thyself eternal? Thou art the centre of creation, as the nave is of the spokes of a wheel. A portion of thee have I also been born, as thy senior. The gods, to partake of thy pastimes as man, have all descended under a like disguise; and the goddesses have come down to Gokula to join in thy sports. Thou, eternal, hast last of all appeared below. Wherefore, Krishna, dost thou disregard these divinities, who, as cowherds, are thy friends and kin? these sorrowing females, who also are thy relations? Thou hast put on the character of man; thou hast exhibited the tricks of childhood: now let this fierce snake, though armed with venomed fangs, be subdued (by thy celestial vigour)."

Thus reminded of his real character by Rama, Krishna smiled gently, and speedily extricated himself from the coils of the snakes. Laying hold of the middle hood of their chief with both his hands, he bent it down, and set his foot upon the hitherto unbended head, and danced upon it in triumph. Wherever the snake attempted to raise his head, it was again trodden down, and many bruises were inflicted on the hood by the pressure of the toes of Krishna. Trampled upon by the feet of Krishna, as they changed position in the dance, the snake fainted, and vomited forth much blood [*3]. Beholding the head and neck of their lord thus injured, and the blood flowing from his mouth, the females of the snake-king implored the clemency of Madhusudana. "Thou art recognised,

[p. 515]

[paragraph continues] O god of gods!" they exclaimed; "thou art the sovereign of all; thou art light supreme, inscrutable; thou art the mighty lord, the portion of that supreme light. The gods themselves are unable worthily to praise thee, the lord self-existent: how then shall females proclaim thy nature? How shall we fully declare him of whom the egg of Brahma, made up of earth, sky, water, fire, and air, is but a small portion of a part? Holy sages have in vain sought to know thy eternal essence. We bow to that form which is the most subtile of atoms, the largest of the large; to him whose birth is without a creator, whose end knows no destroyer, and who alone is the cause of duration. There is no wrath in thee; for thine is the protection of the world; and hence this chastisement of Kaliya. Yet hear us. Women are to be regarded with pity by the virtuous: animals are humanely treated even by fools. Let therefore the author of wisdom have compassion upon this poor creature. Thyself, as an oviparous, hooded snake, art the upholder of the world. Oppressed by thee, he will speedily perish. What is this feeble serpent, compared to thee in whom the universe reposes? Friendship and enmity are felt towards equals and superiors, not for those infinitely beneath us. Then, sovereign of the world, have mercy upon us. This unfortunate snake is about to expire: give us, as a gift of charity, our husband."

When they had thus spoken, the Naga himself, almost exanimate, repeated feebly their solicitations for mercy. "Forgive me," the murmured, "O god of gods! How shall I address thee, who art possessed, through thine own strength and essence, of the eight great faculties, in energy unequalled? Thou art the supreme, the progenitor of the supreme (Brahma): thou art the supreme spirit, and from thee the supreme proceeds: thou art beyond all finite objects; how can I speak thy praise? How can I declare his greatness, from whom cone Brahma, Rudra, Chandra, Indra, the Maruts, the Aswins, the Vasus, and Adityas; of whom the whole world is an infinitely small portion, a portion destined to represent his essence; and whose nature, primitive or derived, Brahma and the immortals do not comprehend? How can I approach him, to whom the gods offer incense and flowers culled from the groves of Nandana; whose incarnate forms the king of the deities ever adores, unconscious of his real person; whom the sages, that have withdrawn

[p. 516]

their senses from all external objects, worship in thought, and enshrining his image in the purposes of their hearts, present to it the flowers of sanctity [*4]? I am quite unable, O god of gods, to worship or to hymn thee. Thy own clemency must alone influence thy mind to shew me compassion. It is the nature of snakes to be savage, and I am born of their kind: hence this is my nature, not mine offence. The world is created, as it is destroyed, by thee; and the species, form, and nature of all things in the world are thy work. Even such as thou hast created me in kind, in form, and in nature, such I am, and such are my actions: should I act differently, then indeed should I deserve thy punishment, for so thou hast declared [*5]. Yet that I have been punished by thee is indeed a blessing; for punishment from thee alone is a favour. Behold I am now without strength, without poison; deprived of both by thee. Spare me my life; I ask no more. Command me what I shall do."

Being thus addressed by Kaliya, Krishna replied, "You must not tarry here, nor any where in the stream of the Yamuna; depart immediately, with your family and followers, to the sea; where Garuda, the foe of the serpent race, will not harm you, when he sees the impressions of my feet upon your brow." So saying, Hari set the snake-king at liberty, who, bowing reverentially to his victor, departed to the ocean; abandoning, in the sight of all, the lake he had haunted, accompanied by all his females, children, and dependants. When the snake was gone, the Gopas hailed Govinda, as one risen from the dead, and embraced him, and bathed his forehead with tears of joy: others, contemplating the water of the river, now freed from peril, were filled with wonder, and sang the praise of Krishna, who is unaffected by works. Thus eminent by his glorious exploits, and eulogized by the Gopas and Gopas, Krishna returned to Vraja.

Footnotes

^512:1 The commentator says this means nothing more than that the waters of the pool were hot. I do not know if hot springs have been found in the bed or on the borders of the Jumna: the hot well of Sita-kund, near Mongir, is not far from the Ganges.

^513:3 Slapping the upper part of one arm with the hand of the other is a common act of defiance amongst Indian athletae.

^514:3 The expressions are ### and ### and Rechaka and Dandapata, which are said to be different dispositions of the feet in dancing; variations of the bhrama or pirouette; the latter is the a-plomb or descent. It is also read Dandapada-nipata, the falling of the feet, like that of a club.

^516:4 Bhava-pushpas: there are said to be eight such flowers, clemency, self-restraint, tenderness, patience, resignation, devotion, meditation, and truth.

^516:5 Both in the Vedas and in the institutes of law; where it is enjoined that every one shall discharge the duties of his caste and condition, and any deviation from them merits punishment; as by the texts 'In following prohibited observances, a person is punishable' and 'Who does acts unsuited to his natural disposition, incurs guilt.'

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 517]

  

CHAP. VIII.

The demon Dhenuka destroyed by Rama.

AGAIN, tending upon the herds, Kes'ava and Rama wandered through the woods, and on one occasion came to a pleasing grove of palms, where dwelt the fierce demon Dhenuka, feeding upon the flesh of deer. Beholding the trees covered with fruit, and desirous of gathering it, the cowherds called out to the brothers, and said, "See, Rama; see, Krishna; in this grove, belonging to the great Dhenuka, the trees are loaded with ripe fruit, the smell of which perfumes the air: we should like to eat some. Will you throw some down?" As soon as the boys had spoken, Sankarshana and Krishna shook the trees, and brought down the fruit on the ground. Hearing the noise of the falling fruit, the fierce and malignant demon Dhenuka, in the form of an ass, hastened to the spot in a great passion, and began to kick Rama on the breast with his hinder heels. Rama, however, seized him by both hind legs, and whirling him round until he expired, tossed his carcass to the top of a palm tree, from the branches of which it struck down abundance of fruit, like rain drops poured upon earth by the wind. The animals that were of kin to Dhenuka came running to his aid; but Krishna and Rama treated them in the same manner, until the trees were laden with dead asses, and the ground was strewed with ripe fruit. Henceforward the cattle grazed unobstructed in the palm grove, and cropped the new pasturage, where they had never before ventured [*1].

Footnotes

^517:1 This exploit is related in the Bhagavata, Hari Vans'a, and other Vaishnava Puranas, much in the same strain, but not always in the same place: it more commonly precedes the legend of the discomfiture of Kaliya.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 518]

  

CHAP. IX.

Sports of the boys in the forest. Pralamba the Asura comes amongst them: is destroyed by Rama, at the command of Krishna.

WHEN the demon in the form of an ass, and all his tribe, had been destroyed, the grove of palms became the favourite resort of the Gopas and their wives, and the sons of Vasudeva, greatly pleased, repaired to the Bhandira fig tree. They continued to wander about, shouting and singing, and gathering fruits and flowers from the trees; now driving the cows afar to pasture; now calling them by their names; now carrying the foot-ropes of the kine upon their shoulders; now ornamenting themselves with garlands of forest flowers, they looked like two young bulls when the horns first appear. Attired the one in yellow, and the other in sable garments, they looked like two clouds, one white, and one black, surmounted by the bow of Indra. Sporting mutually with frolics beneficial to the world, they roamed about like two monarchs over all the collected sovereigns of the earth. Assuming human duties, and maintaining the human character, they strayed through the thickets, amusing themselves with sports suited to their mortal species and condition, in swinging on the boughs of trees, or in boxing and wrestling and hurling stones.

Having observed the two lads thus playing about, the Asura Pralamba, seeking to devour them, came amongst the cowherd boys in the shape of one of themselves, and mixed, without being suspected, in their pastimes; for he thought, that, thus disguised, it would not be difficult to find an opportunity to kill, first Krishna, and afterwards the son of Rohini. The boys commenced playing at the game of leaping like deer, two and two together [*1]. Govinda was matched with Sridaman, and

[p. 519]

[paragraph continues] Balarama with Pralamba: the other boys were coupled with one another, and went leaping away. Govinda beat his companion, and Balarama his; and the boys who were on Krishna's side were also victorious. Carrying one another, they reached the Bhandira fig; and from thence those who were victors were conveyed back to the starting-ground by those who were vanquished. It being Pralamba's duty to carry Sankarshana, the latter mounted upon his shoulders, like the moon riding above a dark cloud; and the demon ran off with him, but did not stop: finding himself, however, unable to bear the weight of Balarama, he enlarged his bulk, and looked like a black cloud in the rainy season, Balarama beholding him like a scorched mountain, his head crowned with a diadem, and his neck hung round with garlands, having eyes as large as cart wheels, a fearful form, and shaking the earth with his tread, called out, as he was carried away, to his brother, "Krishna, Krishna, I am carried off by some demon, disguised as a cowherd, and huge as a mountain! What shall I do? Tell me, Madhusudana: the villain runs away with speed!" Krishna opened his mouth, smiling, for he well knew the might of the son of Rohini, and replied, "Why this subtle pretext of merely mortal nature? thou who art the soul of all the most subtile of subtile things. Remember yourself, the radical cause of the whole world; born before all cause, and all that is alone when the world is destroyed. Dost thou not know that you and I are alike the origin of the world, who have come down to lighten its load? The heavens are thy head; the waters are thy body; earth is thy feet; thy mouth is eternal fire; the moon is thy mind; the wind thy breath; thy arms and hands are the four regions of space. Thou hast, O mighty lord, a thousand heads, a thousand hands and feet and bodies; a thousand Brahmas spring from thee, who art before all, and whom the sages praise in myriads of forms. No one but I knoweth thy divine person. Thy incarnate person is glorified by all the gods. Knowest thou not, that, at the end of all, the universe disappears in thee? that, upheld by thee, this

[p. 520]

earth sustains living and inanimate things? and that, in the character of uncreated time, with its divisions of ages, developed from an instant, thou devourest the world? As the waters of the sea, when swallowed up by submarine flame, are recovered by the winds, and thrown, in the form of snow, upon the Himachala, where coming into contact with the rays of the sun, they reassume their watery nature [*2]; so the world, being devoured by thee at the period of dissolution, becomes of necessity, at the end of every Kalpa, the world again, through thy creative efforts. Thou and I, soul of the universe, are but one and the same cause of the creation of the earth, although, for its protection, we exist in distinct individuals. Calling to memory who thou art, O being of illimitable might, destroy of thyself the demon. Suspending a while your mortal character, do what is right."

Thus reminded by the magnanimous Krishna, the powerful Baladeva laughed, and squeezed Pralamba with his knees, striking him at the same time on the head and face with his fists, so as to beat out both his

[p. 521]

eyes. The demon, vomiting blood from his mouth, and having his brain forced through the skull, fell upon the ground, and expired. The Gopas, beholding Pralamba slain, were astonished, and rejoiced, and cried out, "Well done," and praised Balarama: and thus commended by his playfellows, and accompanied by Krishna, Bala, after the death of the daitya Pralamba, returned to Gokula [*3].

Footnotes

^518:1 Jumping with both feet at once, as deer bound, two boys together: the one that holds out longest, or comes to a given point first, is the victor, and the vanquished [p. 519] is then bound to carry him to the goal, if not already attained, and back again to the starting-post, on his shoulders. The Bhagavata does not specify the game, but mentions that the vanquished carry the victors on their backs.

^520:2 This passage is read and explained differently in different copies. In some it is, ###. And this is explained, 'The water of the ocean, devoured by the fire called Vadava, becoming condensed, or in the form of dew or snow, is seized by the wind called Kastaka, from which the Vadava fire has departed, consisting of a pipe of the solar rays, and being placed in the air, lies or is on the Himachala,' &c. This is rather an awkward and confused representation of the notion, and the other reading is somewhat preferable: it consists simply in substituting ### for ### that is, according to the commentary, 'The water devoured by the fire is thrown by the wind Ka, made of a solar ray &c., on the Himachala, where it assumes the form of snow;' and so on. However disfigured by inaccurate views of some of the instruments in operation, the physiology is in the main very correct, and indicates accurate observation of natural phenomena. The waters of the ocean, converted into vapour by solar heat, are raised by the same influence into the air, and thence borne by the winds to the summits of lofty mountain ranges, where they are arrested by a diminished temperature, descend in the form of snow, and again supply the streams that perpetually restore to the sea the treasures of which it is as perpetually plundered.

^521:3 According to the Hari Vans'a the gods themselves praised this proof of Rama's strength (bala), and hence he derived the name of Balarama.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 522]

  

CHAP. X.

Description of autumn. Krishna dissuades Nanda from worshipping Indra: recommends him and the Gopas to worship cattle and the mountains.

WHILST Kes'ava and Rama were sporting thus in Vraja, the rainy season ended, and was succeeded by the season of autumn, when the lotus is full blown. The small Saphari fish, in their watery burrows, were oppressed by the heat, like a man by selfish desires, who is devoted to his family. The peacocks, no longer animated by passion, were silent amidst the woods, like holy saints, who have come to know the unreality of the world. The clouds, of shining whiteness, exhausted of their watery wealth, deserted the atmosphere, like those who have acquired wisdom, and depart from their homes. Evaporated by the rays of the autumnal sun, the lakes were dried up, like the hearts of men when withered by the contact of selfishness. The pellucid waters of the season were suitably embellished by white water-lilies, as are the minds of the pure by the apprehension of truth. Brightly in the starry sky shone the moon with undiminished orb, like the saintly being, who has reached the last stage of bodily existence, in the company of the pious. The rivers and lakes slowly retired from their banks, as the wise by degrees shrink from the selfish attachment that connects them with wife and child. First abandoned by the waters of the lake, the swans again began to congregate, like false ascetics, whose devotions are interrupted, and they are again assailed by innumerable afflictions. The ocean was still and calm, and exhibited no undulations, like the perfect sage, who has completed his course of restraint, and has acquired undisturbed tranquillity of spirit. Every where the waters were as clear and pure as the minds of the wise, who behold Vishnu in all things. The autumnal sky was wholly free from clouds, like the heart of the ascetic, whose care's have been consumed by the fire of devotion. The moon allayed the fervours of the sun, as discrimination alleviates the pain to which egotism gives birth. The clouds of the atmosphere, the muddiness of the earth, the discoloration of the waters, were all removed by autumn, as abstraction detaches the senses

[p. 523]

from the objects of perception. The exercise of inspiring, suppressing, and expiring the vital air, was as if performed daily by the waters of the lakes (as they were full, and stationary, and then again declined) [*1].

At this season, when the skies were bright with stars, Krishna, repairing to Vraja, found all the cowherds busily engaged in preparing for a sacrifice to be offered to Indra [*2]; and going to the elders, he asked them, as if out of curiosity, what festival of Indra it was in which they took so much pleasure. Nanda replied to his question, and said, "S'atakratu or Indra is the sovereign of the clouds and of the waters: sent by him, the former bestow moisture upon the earth, whence springs the grain, by which we and all embodied beings subsist; with which also, and with water, we please the gods: hence too these cows bear calves, and yield milk, and are happy, and well nourished. So when the clouds are seen distended with rain, the earth is neither barren of corn, nor bare of verdure, nor is man distressed by hunger. Indra, the giver of water, having drank the milk of earth by the solar ray, sheds it again upon the earth for the sustenance of all the world. On this account all sovereign princes offer with pleasure sacrifices to Indra at the end of the rains, and so also do we, and so do other people."

When Krishna heard this speech from Nanda in regard to the worship of Indra, he determined to put the king of the celestials into a

[p. 524]

passion, and replied, "We, father, are neither cultivators of the soil, nor dealers in merchandise; we are sojourners in forests, and cows are our divinities. There are four branches of knowledge, logical, scriptural, practical, and political [*3]. Hear me describe what practical science is. Agriculture, commerce, and tending of cattle; the knowledge of these three professions constitutes practical science. Agriculture is the subsistence of farmers; buying and selling, of traders. Kine are our support. Thus the knowledge of means of support is threefold. The object that is cultivated by any one should be to him as his chief divinity; that should be venerated and worshipped, as it is his benefactor. He who worships the deity of another, and diverts from him the reward that is his due, obtains not a prosperous station either in this world or in the next. Where the land ceases to be cultivated there are bounds assigned, beyond which commences the forest; the forests are bounded by the hills, and so far do our limits extend. We are not shut in with doors, nor confined within walls; we have neither fields nor houses; we wander about happily wherever we list, travelling in our waggons [*4]. The spirits of these mountains, it is said, walk the woods in whatever forms they will, or in their proper persons sport upon their own precipices. If they should be displeased with those who inhabit the forests, then, transformed to lions and beasts of prey, they will kill the offenders. We then are bound to worship the mountains; to offer sacrifices to cattle. What have we to do with Indra? cattle and mountains are our gods. Brahmans offer worship with prayer; cultivators of the earth adore their landmarks; but we who tend our herds in the forests and mountains should worship them and our kine. Let prayer and offerings then be addressed

[p. 525]

to the mountain Govarddhana, and kill a victim in due form. Let the whole station collect their milk without delay, and feed with it the Brahmans and all who may desire to partake of it. When the oblations have been presented, and the Brahmans have been fed, let the Gopas circumambulate the cows, decorated with garlands of autumnal flowers. If the cowherds will attend to these suggestions, they will secure the favour of the mountain, of the cattle, and also mine."

When Nanda and the other Gopas heard these words of Krishna, their faces expanded with delight, and they said that he had spoken well. "You have judged rightly, child," exclaimed they; "we will do exactly as you have proposed, and offer adoration to the mountain." Accordingly the inhabitants of Vraja worshipped the mountain, presenting to it curds and milk and flesh; and they fed hundreds and thousands of Brahmans, and many other guests, who came to the ceremony, even as Krishna had enjoined: and when they had made their offerings, they circumambulated the cows and the bulls, that bellowed as loud as roaring clouds. Upon the summit of Govarddhana, Krishna presented himself, saying, "I am the mountain," and partook of much food presented by the Gopas; whilst in his own form as Krishna he ascended the hill along with the cowherds, and worshipped his other self [*5]. Having promised them many blessings, the mountain-person of Krishna vanished; and the ceremony being completed, the cowherds returned to their station.

Footnotes

^523:1 A set of very poor quibbles upon the terms of the Pranayama: or, Purana, drawing in the breath through one nostril; literally, 'filling:' Kumbhaka, closing the nostrils, and suppressing the breath; keeping it stationary or confined, as it were in a Kumbha, or waterpot: and Rechaka, opening the other nostril, and emitting the breath; literally, 'purging' or 'depletion.' The waters of the reservoirs, replenished in the beginning of the autumnal season by the previous rains, remain for a while full, until they are drawn off for irrigation, or reduced by evaporation: thus representing the three operations of Purana, Kumbhaka, and Rechaka.

^523:2 No public worship is offered to Indra at present; and the only festival in the Hindu kalendar, the S'akradhwajotthana, the erection of a flag in honour of S'akra or Indra, should be held on the twelfth or thirteenth of Bhadra, which is in the very middle of the rainy season; according to the Tithi Tatwa, following the authority of the Kalika and Bhavishyottara Puranas. The S'akradhwajotthana is also a rite to be performed by kings and princes. It may be doubted, therefore, if the text intends any particular or appointed celebration.

^524:3 Or, Anvikshiki, the science of inquiring by reasoning, Tarka, or logic: Trayi, the three Vedas collectively, or the doctrines they teach: Vartta, rendered 'practical,' is the knowledge of the means of acquiring subsistence: the fourth is Dandaniti, the science of government, both domestic and foreign.

^524:4 These nomadic habits are entirely lost sight of in the parallel passages of those Puranas in which the juvenile life of Krishna is narrated. The text of the Hari Vans'a is in most of the other verses precisely the same as that of the Vishnu P., putting however into the mouth of Krishna a long additional eulogium on the season of autumn.

^525:5 The Hari Vans'a says, 'an illusory Krishna, having become the mountain, ate the flesh that was offered.' Of course the 'personified' mountain is intended, as appears from several of the ensuing passages; as for instance, he says presently, 'I am satisfied; and then in his divine form he smiled.' The Hari Vans'a affords here, as in so many other places, proofs of its Dakhini origin. It is very copious upon the homage paid to the cattle, and their decoration with garlands and plumes of peacocks' feathers, of which our text takes no notice. But in the south of India there is a very popular festival, that of the Punjal, scarcely known in the north, when cattle are decorated and worshipped; a celebration which has no doubt suggested to the compiler of the Hari Vans'a the details which he describes.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 526]

  

CHAP. XI.

Indra, offended by the loss of his offerings, causes heavy rain to deluge Gokula. Krishna holds up the mountain Govarddhana to shelter the cowherds and their cattle.

INDRA, being thus disappointed of his offerings, was exceedingly angry, and thus addressed a cohort of his attendant clouds, called Samvarttaka: "Ho, clouds," he said, "hear my words, and without delay execute what I command. The insensate cowherd Nanda, assisted by his fellows, has withheld the usual offerings to us, relying upon the protection of Krishna. Now, therefore, afflict the cattle, that are their sustenance, and whence their occupation is derived, with rain and wind. Mounted upon my elephant, as vast as a mountain peak, I will give you aid in strengthening the tempest." When Indra ceased, the clouds, obedient to his commands, came down, in a fearful storm of rain and wind, to destroy the cattle. In an instant the earth, the points of the horizon, and the sky, were all blended into one by the heavy and incessant shower. The clouds roared aloud, as if in terror of the lightning's scourge, and poured down uninterrupted torrents. The whole earth was enveloped in impenetrable darkness by the thick and volumed clouds; and above, below, and on every side, the world was water. The cattle, pelted by the storm, shrunk cowering into the smallest size, or gave up their breath: some covered their calves with their flanks, and some beheld their young ones carried away by the flood. The calves, trembling in the wind, looked piteously at their mothers, or implored in low moans, as it were, the succour of Krishna. Hari, beholding all Gokula agitated with alarm, cowherds, cowherdesses, and cattle all in a state of consternation, thus reflected: "This is the work of Mahendra, in resentment of the prevention of his sacrifice, and it is incumbent on me to defend this station of herdsmen. I will lift up this spacious mountain from its stony base, and hold it up, as a large umbrella, over the cow-pens." Having thus determined, Krishna immediately plucked up the mountain Govarddhana, and held it aloft with one hand in sport, saying to the herdsmen, "Lo the mountain

[p. 527]

is on high; enter beneath it quickly, and it will shelter you from the storm: here you will be secure and at your ease in places defended from the wind: enter without delay, and fear not that the mountain will fall." Upon this, all the people, with their herds, and their waggons and goods, and the Gopis, distressed by the rain, repaired to the shelter of the mountain, which Krishna held steadily over their heads; and Krishna, as he supported the mountain, was contemplated by the dwellers of Vraja with joy and wonder; and, as their eyes opened wide with astonishment and pleasure, the Gopas and Gopis sang his praise. For seven days and nights did the vast clouds sent by Indra rain upon the Gokula of Nanda to destroy its inhabitants, but they were protected by the elevation of the mountain; and the slayer of Bala, Indra, being foiled in his purpose, commanded the clouds to cease. The threats of Indra having been fruitless, and the heavens clear, all Gokula came forth from its shelter, and returned to its own abode. Then Krishna, in the sight of the surprised inhabitants of the forests, restored the great mountain Govarddhana to its original site [*1].

Footnotes

^527:1 It seems not unlikely that this legend has some reference to the caves or cavern temples in various parts of India. A remarkable representation of it occurs upon the sculptured rocks of Mahabalipur. It is related much to the same purport in the Bhagavata, &c. S'is'upala, ridiculing the exploit, asserts that Govarddhana was nothing more than an ant hill.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 528]

  

CHAP. XII.

Indra comes to Gokula: praises Krishna, and makes him prince over the cattle. Krishna promises to befriend Arjuna.

AFTER Gokula had been saved by the elevation of the mountain, Indra became desirous of beholding Krishna. The conqueror of his foes accordingly mounted his vast elephant Airavata, and came to Govarddhana, where the king of the gods beheld the mighty Damodara tending cattle, and assuming the person of a cow-boy, and, although the preserver of the whole world, surrounded by the sons of the herdsmen: above his head he saw Garuda, the king of birds, invisible to mortals, spreading out his wings to shade the head of Hari. Alighting from his elephant, and addressing him apart, S'akra, his eyes expanding with pleasure, thus spake to Madhusudana: "Hear, Krishna, the reason why I have come hither; why I have approached thee; for thou couldest not otherwise conceive it. Thou, who art the supporter of all, hast descended upon earth, to relieve her of her burden. In resentment of my obstructed rites I sent the clouds to deluge Gokula, and they have done this evil deed. Thou, by raising up the mountain, hast preserved the cattle; and of a verity I am much pleased, O hero, with thy wondrous deed. The object of the gods is now, methinks, accomplished, since with thy single hand thou hast raised aloft this chief of mountains. I have now come by desire of the cattle [*1], grateful for their preservation, in order to install you as Upendra; and, as the Indra of the cows, thou shalt be called Govinda [*2]." Having thus said, Mahendra took a ewer from his elephant

[p. 529]

[paragraph continues] Airavata, and with the holy water it contained performed the regal ceremony of aspersion. The cattle, as the rite was celebrating, deluged the earth with their milk.

When Indra had, by direction of the kine, inaugurated Krishna, the husband of S'achi said to him affectionately, "I have thus performed what the cows enjoined me. Now, illustrious being, hear what farther I propose, with a view to facilitate your task. A portion of me has been born as Arjuna, the son of Pritha: let him ever be defended by thee, and he will assist thee in bearing thy burden. He is to be cherished by thee, Madhusudana, like another self." To this Krishna replied, "I know thy son, who has been born in the race of Bharata, and I will

[p. 530]

befriend him as long as I continue upon earth. As long as I am present, invincible S'akra, no one shall be able to subdue Arjuna in fight. When the great demon Kansa has been slain, and Arishta, Kes'in, Kuvalayapida, Naraka, and other fierce Daityas, shall have been put to death, there will take place a great war, in which the burden of the earth will be removed. Now therefore depart, and be not anxious on account of thy son; for no foe shall triumph over Arjuna whilst I am present. For his sake I will restore to Kunti all her sons; with Yudhishthira at their head, unharmed, when the Bharata war is at an end."

Upon Krishna's ceasing to speak, he and Indra mutually embraced; and the latter, mounting his elephant Airavata, returned to heaven. Krishna, with the cattle and the herdsmen, went his way to Vraja, where the wives of the Gopas watched for his approach.

Footnotes

^528:1 Gobhischa chodita; that is, 'delegated,' says the commentator, 'by the cow of plenty, Kamadhenu, and other celestial kine, inhabitants of Goloka, the heaven of cows:' but this is evidently unauthorized by the text, as celestial cattle could not be grateful for preservation upon earth; and the notion of Goloka, a heaven of cows and Krishna, is a modern piece of mysticism, drawn from such sectarial works as the Brahma Vaivartta P. and Hari Vans'a.

^528:2 The purport of Indra's speech is to explain the meaning of two of Krishna's names, Upendra and Govinda. The commentators on the Amara Kosha agree in [p. 529] explaining the first, the younger brother of Indra, ### conformably to the synonyme that immediately follows in the text of Amara, Indravaraja; a name that occurs also in the Mahabharata: Krishna, as the son of Devaki, who is an incarnation of Aditi, being born of the latter subsequently to Indra. Govinda is he who knows, finds, or tends cattle; Gam vindati. The Pauranik etymology makes the latter the Indra (### quasi ###) of cows; and in this capacity he may well be considered as a minor or inferior Indra, such being the proper sense of the term Upendra (Upa in composition); as, Upa-purana, 'a minor Purana,' &c. The proper import of the word Upendra has, however, been anxiously distorted by the sectarian followers of Krishna. Thus the commentator on our text asserts that Upa is here synonymous with Upari, and that Upendratwa, 'the station of Upendra,' means 'rule in the heaven of heavens, Goloka;' a new creation of this sect, above Satya-loka, which, in the uncorrupt Pauranik system, is the highest of the seven Lokas: see <page 213>. So the Hari Vans'a makes Indra say, 'As thou, Krishna, art appointed, by the cows, Indra superior to me, therefore the deities in heaven shall call thee Upendra.' The Bhagavata does not introduce the name, though it no doubt alludes to it in making the divine cow Surabhi, who is said to have come from Goloka with Indra, address Krishna, and say, 'We, instructed by Brahma, will crown you as our Indra.' Accordingly Krishna has the water of the Ganges thrown over him by the elephant of Indra, and Indra, the gods, and sages praise him, and salute him by the appellation of Govinda. The Hari Vans'a assigns this to Indra alone, who says, 'I am only the Indra of the gods; thou hast attained the rank of Indra of the kine, and they shall for ever celebrate thee on earth as Govinda.' All this is very different from the sober account of our text, and is undoubtedly of comparatively recent origin.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 531]

  

CHAP. XIII.

Krishna praised by the cowherds: his sports with the Gopis: their imitation and love of hire. The Rasa dance.

AFTER S'akra had departed, the cowherds said to Krishna, whom they had seen holding up Govarddhana, "We have been preserved, together with our cattle, from a great peril, by your supporting the mountain above us; but this is very astonishing child's play, unsuitable to the condition of a herdsman, and all thy actions are those of a god. Tell us what is the meaning of all this. Kaliya has been conquered in the lake; Pralamba has been killed; Govarddhana has been lifted up: our minds are filled with amazement. Assuredly we repose at the feet of Hari, O thou of unbounded might! for, having witnessed thy power, we cannot believe thee to be a man. Thy affection, Kes'ava, for our women and children, and for Vraja; the deeds that thou hast wrought, which all the gods would have attempted in vain; thy boyhood, and thy prowess; thy humiliating birth amongst us; are contradictions that fill us with doubt, whenever we think of them. Yet reverence be to thee, whether thou be a god, or a demon, or a Yaksha, or a Gandharba, or whatever we may deem thee; for thou art our friend." When they had ended, Krishna remained silent for some time, as if hurt and offended, and then replied to them, "Herdsmen, if you are not ashamed of my relationship; if I have merited your praise; what occasion is there for you to engage in any discussion concerning me? If you have any regard for me; if I have deserved your praise; then be satisfied to know that I am your kinsman. I am neither god, nor Yaksha, nor Gandharba, nor Danava; I have been born your relative, and you must not think differently of me." Upon receiving this answer, the Gopas held their peace, and went into the woods, leaving Krishna apparently displeased.

But Krishna, observing the clear sky bright with the autumnal moon, and the air perfumed with the fragrance of the wild water-lily, in whose buds the clustering bees were murmuring their songs, felt inclined to join with the Gopis in sport. Accordingly he and Rama commenced

[p. 532]

singing sweet low strains in various measures, such as the women loved; and they, as soon as they heard the melody, quitted their homes, and hastened to meet the foe of Madhu. One damsel gently sang an accompaniment to his song; another attentively listened to his melody: one calling out upon his name, then shrunk abashed; whilst another, more bold, and instigated by affection, pressed close to his side: one, as she sallied forth, beheld some of the seniors of the family, and dared not venture, contenting herself with meditating on Krishna with closed eyes, and entire devotion, by which immediately all acts of merit were effaced by rapture, and all sin was expiated by regret at not beholding him: and others, again, reflecting upon the cause of the world, in the form of the supreme Brahma, obtained by their sighing final emancipation. Thus surrounded by the Gopis, Krishna thought the lovely moonlight night of autumn propitious to the Rasa dance [*1]. Many of the Gopis imitated the different actions of Krishna, and in his absence wandered through Vrindavan, representing his person. "I am Krishna," cries one; "behold the elegance of my movements." "I am Krishna," exclaims another; "listen to my song." "Vile Kaliya, stay! for I am Krishna," is repeated by a third, slapping her arms in defiance. A fourth calls out, "Herdsmen, fear nothing; be steady; the danger of the storm is over, for, lo, I lift up Govarddhana for your shelter." And a fifth proclaims, "Now let the herds graze where they will, for I have destroyed Dhenuka." Thus in various actions of Krishna the Gopis imitated him, whilst away, and beguiled their sorrow by mimicking his sports. Looking down upon the ground, one damsel calls to her friend, as the light down upon her body stands erect with joy, and the lotuses of her eyes expand, "See here are the marks of Krishna's feet, as he has gone alone sportively, and left the impressions of the banner, fife thunderbolt, and the goad [*2]. What lovely maiden has been his companion, inebriate with

[p. 533]

passion, as her irregular footmarks testify? Here Damodara has gathered flowers from on high, for we see alone the impressions of the tips of his feet. Here a nymph has sat down with him, ornamented with flowers, fortunate in having propitiated Vishnu in a prior existence. Having left her in an arrogant mood, because he had offered her flowers, the son of Nanda has gone by this road; for see, unable to follow him with equal steps, his associate has here tripped along upon her toes, and, holding his hand, the damsel has passed, as is evident from the uneven and intermingled footsteps. But the rogue has merely taken her hand, and left her neglected, for here the paces indicate the path of a person in despair. Undoubtedly he promised that he would quickly come again, for here are his own footsteps returning with speed. Here he has entered the thick forest, impervious to the rays of the moon, and his steps can be traced no farther." Hopeless then of beholding Krishna, the Gopis returned, and repaired to the banks of the Yamuna, where they sang his songs; and presently they beheld the preserver of the three worlds, with a smiling aspect, hastening towards them: on which, one exclaimed, "Krishna! Krishna!" unable to articulate any thing else: another affected to contract her forehead with frowns, as drinking with the bees of her eyes the lotus of the face of Hari: another, closing her eyelids, contemplated internally his form, as if engaged in an act of devotion. Then Madhava, coming amongst them, conciliated some with soft speeches, some with gentle looks, and some he took by the hand; and the illustrious deity sported with them in the stations of the dance. As each of the Gopis, however, attempted to keep in one place, close to the side of Krishna, the circle of the dance could not be constructed, and he therefore took each by the hand, and when their eyelids were shut by the effects of such touch, the circle was formed [*3]. Then proceeded the dance

[p. 534]

to the music of their clashing bracelets, and songs that celebrated in suitable strain the charms of the autumnal season. Krishna sang the

[p. 535]

moon of autumn, a mine of gentle radiance; but the nymphs repeated the praises of Krishna alone. At times, one of them, wearied by the revolving dance, threw her arms, ornamented with tinkling bracelets, round the neck of the destroyer of Madhu: another, skilled in the art of singing his praises, embraced him. The drops of perspiration from the arms of Hari were like fertilizing rain, which produced a crop of down upon the temples of the Gopis. Krishna sang the strain that was appropriate to the dance. The Gopis repeatedly exclaimed, "Bravo, Krishna!" to his song. When leading, they followed him; when returning, they encountered him; and, whether he went forwards or backwards, they ever attended on his steps. Whilst frolicking thus with the Gopis, they considered every instant without him a myriad of years; and, prohibited in vain by husbands, fathers, brothers, they went forth at night to sport with Krishna, the object of their affection. Thus the illimitable being, the benevolent remover of all imperfections, assumed the character of a youth amongst the females of the herdsmen of Vraja; pervading their natures, and that of their lords, by his own essence, all diffusive like the wind: for even as in all creatures the elements of ether, fire, earth, water, and air, are comprehended, so also is he every where present, and in all.

Footnotes

^532:1 The Rasa dance is danced by men and women, holding each other's hands, and going round in a circle, singing the airs to which they dance. According to Bharata, the airs are various both in melody and time, and the number of persons should not exceed sixty-four.

^532:2 The soles of the feet of a deity are [p. 533] usually marked by a variety of emblematical figures: this is carried to the greatest extravagance by the Buddhists, the marks on the feet of Gautama being 130: see Trans. R. As. Soc. III. 70. It is a decoration very moderately employed by the Hindus.

^533:3 This is a rather inexplicit statement, but the comment makes it clear. Krishna, it is said, in order to form the circle, takes each damsel by the hand, and leads her to her place: there he quits her; but the effect of the contact is such, that it deprives her of the power of perception, and [p. 534] she contentedly takes the hand of her female neighbour, thinking it to be Krishna's. The Bhagavata is bolder, and asserts that Krishna multiplied himself, and actually stood between each two damsels: 'The Rasa dance, formed of a circle graced by the Gopis, was then led off by the lord of magic, Krishna having placed himself in the midst of every two of the nymphs.' The Hari Vans'a intimates the same, though not very fully: 'Then all the nymphs of the cowherds, placing themselves in couples in a row, engaged in pleasant diversion, singing the deeds of Krishna.' The Pankti, or row, is said by the commentator to mean here, the Mandala, or ring; and the couples' to imply that Krishna was between every two. He quotes a verse to this effect from some other Vaishnava work: 'Between each two damsels was Madhava, and between each two Madhavas was a nymph; and the son of Devaki played on the flute:' for, in fact, Krishna is not only dancing with each, but also by himself in the centre; for this the commentator on the Hari Vans'a cites a passage from the Vedas: ###. Literally, 'The many-formed (being) assumes (various) bodies. One form stood apart, occupying triple observance.' Now if the verse be genuine, it probably refers to something that has little to do with Krishna; but it is explained to apply to the Rasa; the form of Krishna being supposed to be meant, as wholly distinct from the Gopis, and yet being beheld by every one of them, on each side and in front of her. In the meditation upon Krishna, which is enjoined in the Brahma Vaivartta, he is to be contemplated in the centre of the Rasa Mandala, in association with his favourite Radha; but the Mandala described in that work is not a ring of dancers, but a circle of definite space at Vrindavana, within which Krishna, Radha, and the Gopis divert themselves, not very decorously. This work has probably given the tone to the style in which the annual festival, the Rasa Yatra, is celebrated in various parts of India, in the month of Kartika, upon the sun's entrance into Libra, by nocturnal dances, and representations of the sports of Krishna. A circular dance of men and women, however, does not form any prominent feature at these entertainments, and it may be doubted if it is ever performed. Some of the earliest labourers in the field of Hindu mythology have thought this circular dance to typify the dance of the planets round the sun (Maurice, Ancient History of Hindus, I. 108. II. 356); but there is no particular number assigned to the performers by any of the Hindu authorities, beyond its limitation to sixty-four. At the Rasa Mandala of the Brahma Vaivartta, Radha is accompanied by thirty-six of her most particular friends amongst the Gopis, but they are each attended by thousands of inferior personages, and none [p. 535] of the crowd are left without male multiples of Krishna. The only mysticism hinted at in that Purana, is, that these are all one with Krishna: the varied vital conditions of one spirit being represented by the Gopis and the illusory manifestations of Krishna: he himself being supreme unmodified soul.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 536]

  

CHAP. XIV.

Krishna kills the demon Arishta, in the form of a bull.

ONE evening, whilst Krishna and the Gopis were amusing themselves in the dance, the demon Arishta, disguised as a savage bull, came to the spot, after having spread alarm through the station. His colour was that of a cloud charged with rain; he had vast horns, and his eyes were like two fiery suns: as he moved, he ploughed up the ground with his hoofs: his tongue was repeatedly licking his lips; his tail was erect; the sinews of his shoulders were firm, and between them rose a hump of enormous dimensions; his haunches were soiled with ordure, and he was a terror to the herds; his dewlap hung low, and his face was marked with scars from butting against the trees. Terrifying all the kine, the demon who perpetually haunts the forests in the shape of a bull, destroying hermits and ascetics, advanced. Beholding an animal of such a formidable aspect, the herdsmen and their women were exceedingly frightened, and called aloud on Krishna, who came to their succour, shouting and slapping his arm in defiance. When the Daitya heard the noise, he turned upon his challenger, and fixing his eyes and pointing his horns at the belly of Kes'ava, he ran furiously upon the youth. Krishna stirred not from his post, but, smiling in sport and derision, awaited the near approach of the bull, when he seized him as an alligator would have done, and held him firmly by the horns, whilst he pressed his sides with his knees. Having thus humbled his pride, and held him captive by his horns, he wrung his throat, as if it had been a piece of wet cloth; and then tearing off one of the horns, he beat the fierce demon with it until he died, vomiting blood from his mouth. Seeing him slain, the herdsmen glorified Krishna, as the companies of the celestials of old praised Indra, when he triumphed over the Asura Jambha [*1].

Footnotes

^536:1 This exploit is related a little more in detail in the Bhagavata and Hari Vans'a.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 537]

  

CHAP. XV.

Kansa informed by Narada of the existence of Krishna and Balarama: he sends Kes'in to destroy them, and Akrura to bring them to Mathura.

AFTER these things had come to pass, Arishta the bull-demon and Dhenuka and Pralamba had been slain, Govarddhana had been lifted up, the serpent Kaliya had been subdued, the two trees had been broken, the female fiend Putana had been killed, and the waggon had been overturned, Narada went to Kansa, and related to him the whole, beginning with the transference of the child from Devaki to Yas'oda, Hearing this from Narada, Kansa was highly incensed with Vasudeva, and bitterly reproached him, and all the Yadavas, in an assembly of the tribe. Then reflecting what was to be done, he determined to destroy both Krishna and Rama whilst they were yet young, and before they had attained to manly vigour: for which purpose he resolved to invite them from Vraja, under pretext of the solemn rite of the lustration of arms, when he would engage them in a trial of strength with his chief boxers, Chanura and Mushtika, by whom they would assuredly be killed. "I will send," he said, "the noble Yadu, Akrura the son of Swaphalka, to Gokula, to bring them hither: I will order the fierce Kes'in, who haunts the woods of Vrindavan, to attack them, and he is of unequalled might, and will surely kill them; or, if they arrive here, my elephant Kuvalayapida shall trample to death these two cow-boy sons of Vasudeva." Having thus laid his plans to destroy Rama and Janarddana, the impious Kansa sent for the heroic Akrura, and said to him, "Lord of liberal gifts [*1], attend to my words, and, out of friendship for me, perform my orders. Ascend your chariot, and go hence to the station of the herdsman Nanda. Two vile boys, portions of Vishnu, have been born there, for the express object of effecting my destruction. On the fourteenth lunation I have to celebrate the festival of arms [*2], and I wish them to be brought here by

[p. 538]

you, to take part in the games, and that the people may see them engage in a boxing match with my two dexterous athletae, Chanura and Mushtika; or haply my elephant Kuvalayapida, driven against them by his rider, shall kill these two iniquitous youngsters, sons of Vasudeva. When they are out of the way, I will put to death Vasudeva himself, the cowherd Nanda, and my foolish father, Ugrasena, and I will seize upon the herds and flocks, and all the possessions, of the rebellious Gopas, who have ever been my foes. Except thou, lord of liberality, all the Yadavas are hostile to me; but I will devise schemes for their extirpation, and I shall then reign over my kingdom, in concert with thee, without any annoyance. Through regard for me, therefore, do thou go as I direct thee; and thou shalt command the cowherds to bring in with speed their supplies of milk and butter and curds."

Being thus instructed, the illustrious Akrura readily undertook to visit Krishna, and, ascending his stately chariot, he went forth from the city of Mathura.

Footnotes

^537:1 Danapati: the epithet refers to Akrura's possession of the Syamantaka gem (see <page 433>); although, as here used by Kansa, it is an anachronism, the gem not becoming his until after Krishna's maturity.

^537:2 Dhanurmaha: the same phrase [p. 538] occurs in the different authorities. In its ordinary acceptation it would imply any military festival. There is one of great celebrity, which, in the south of India, closes the Dasahara, or festival of Durga, when military exercises are performed, and a field is ravaged, as typical of the opening of a campaign. Worship is paid to military implements. The proper day for this is the Vijaya das'ami, or tenth of the light half of As'win, falling about the end of September or beginning of October. Trans. Bombay Soc. III. 73; also Amara Kosha, under the word ### (Lohabhisara). Both our text and that of the Bhagavata, however, intimate the celebration of the feast in question on the fourteenth day of the fortnight (in what month is not specified), and an occasional 'passage of arms,' therefore is all that is intended. The fourteenth day of the light lunation of any month is commonly held appropriate for a holiday, or religious rite. It will be seen in the sequel, that the leading feature of the ceremonial was intended to have been a trial of archery, spoiled by Krishna's breaking the bow that was to have been used on the occasion.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 539]

  

CHAP. XVI.

Kes'in, in the form of a horse, slain by Krishna: he is praised by Narada.

KES'IN, confiding in his prowess, having received the commands of Kansa, set off to the woods of Vrindavana, with the intention of destroying Krishna. He came in the shape of a steed, spurning the earth with his hoofs, scattering the clouds with his mane, and springing in his paces beyond the orbits of the sun and moon. The cowherds and their females, hearing his neighings, were struck with terror, and fled to Govinda for protection, calling upon him to save them. In a voice deep as the roaring of the thundercloud, Krishna replied to them, "Away with these fears of Kes'in; is the valour of a hero annihilated by your alarms? What is there to apprehend from one of such little might, whose neighings are his only terrors; a galloping and vicious steed, who is ridden by the strength of the Daityas? Come on, wretch--I am Krishna--and I will knock all thy teeth down thy throat, as the wielder of the trident did to Pushan [*1]." Thus defying him to combat, Govinda went to encounter Kes'in. The demon ran upon him, with his mouth opened wide; but Krishna enlarging the bulk of his arm, thrust it into his mouth, and wrenched out the teeth, which fell from his jaws like fragments of white clouds. Still the arm of Krishna, in the throat of the demon, continued to enlarge, like a malady increasing from its commencement till it ends in dissolution. From his torn lips the demon vomited foam and blood; his eyes rolled in agony; his joints gave way; he beat the earth with his feet; his body was covered with perspiration; he became incapable of any effort. The formidable demon, having his mouth rent open by the arm of Krishna, fell down, torn asunder like a tree struck by lightning: he lay separated into two portions, each having two legs, half a back, half a tail, one ear, one eye, and one nostril. Krishna stood, unharmed and smiling, after the destruction of the demon, surrounded by the cowherds, who, together with their women, were filled with astonishment at

[p. 540]

the death of Kes'in, and glorified the amiable god with the lotus eyes. Narada the Brahman, invisible, seated in a cloud, beheld the fall of Kes'in, and delightedly exclaimed, "Well done, lord of the universe, who in thy sports hast destroyed Kes'in, the oppressor of the denizens of heaven! Curious to behold this great combat between a man and a horse--such a one as was never before heard of--I have come from heaven. Wonderful are the works that thou hast done, in thy descent upon the earth! they have excited my astonishment; but this, above all, has given me pleasure. Indra and the gods lived in dread of this horse, who tossed his mane, and neighed, and looked down upon the clouds. For this, that thou hast slain the impious Kes'in, thou shalt be known in the world by the name of Kes'ava [*2]. Farewell: I will now depart. I shall meet thee again, conqueror of Kes'in, in two days more, in conflict with Kansa. When the son of Ugrasena, with his followers, shall have been slain, then, upholder of the earth, will earth's burdens have been lightened by thee. Many are the battles of the kings that I have to see, in which thou shalt be renowned. I will now depart, Govinda. A great deed, and acceptable to the gods, has been done by thee. I have been much delighted with thee, and now take my leave." When Narada had gone, Krishna, not in any way surprised, returned with the Gopas to Gokula; the sole object of the eyes of the women of Vraja [*3].

Footnotes

^539:1 As Virabhadra did to Pusha or Pushan, a form of Surya, at the sacrifice of Daksha: see <page 67>. n. .

^540:2 Or Kes'i and va, 'who kills,' from vadh or badh, 'to kill:' but this is a Pauranik etymology, and less satisfactory than the usual grammatical one of Kes'a, 'hair,' and 'va' possessive affix: Krishna corresponding in this respect to the Apollo Crinitus. It is also derived from the legend of his origin from 'a hair' (see <page 497>. n. ): and again, Kes'a is said to purport 'radiance' or 'rays,' whether of the sun or moon or fire; all which are the light of Krishna: whence he is called Kes'ava, 'the rayed' or 'radiant.' Mahabharata, Moksha Dharma.

^540:3 The legend is told by all the other narrators of Krishna's juvenile exploits.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 541]

  

CHAP. XVII.

Akrura's meditations on Krishna: his arrival at Gokula: his delight at seeing Krishna and his brother.

AKRURA, having set off in his quick travelling car, proceeded to visit Krishna at the pastures of Nanda; and, as he went along, he congratulated himself on his superior good fortune, in having an opportunity of beholding a descended portion of the deity. "Now," thought he, "has my life borne fruit; my night is followed by the dawn of day; since I shall see the countenance of Vishnu, whose eyes are like the expanded leaf of the lotus. I shall behold that lotus-eyed aspect of Vishnu, which, when seen only in imagination, takes away the sins of men. I shall to-day behold that glory of glories, the mouth of Vishnu, whence proceeded the Vedas, and all their dependant sciences. I shall see the sovereign of the world, by whom the world is sustained; who is worshipped as the best of males, as the male of sacrifice in sacrificial rites. I shall see Kes'ava, who is without beginning or end; by worshipping whom with a hundred sacrifices, Indra obtained the sovereignty over the gods. That Hari, whose nature is unknown to Brahma, Indra, Rudra, the As'wins, the Vasus, Adityas, and Maruts, will this day touch my body. The soul of all, the knower of all, he who is all, and is present in all, he who is permanent, undecaying, all-pervading, will converse with me. He, the unborn, who has preserved the world in the various forms of a fish, a tortoise, a boar, a horse [*1], a lion, will this day speak to me. Now the lord of the earth, who assumes shapes at will, has taken upon him the condition of humanity, to accomplish some object cherished in his heart. That Ananta, who holds the earth upon his crest, and who has descended upon earth for its protection, will this day call me by my

[p. 542]

name. Glory to that being, whose deceptive adoption of father, son, brother, friend, mother, and relative, the world is unable to penetrate. Glory to him, who is one with true knowledge, who is inscrutable, and through whom, seated in his heart, the Yogi crosses the wide expanse of worldly ignorance and illusion. I bow to him, who, by the performers of holy rites, is called the male of sacrifice (Yajnapurusha); by pious worshippers is termed Vasudeva; and by the cultivators of philosophy, Vishnu. May he in whom cause and effect, and the world itself, is comprehended, be propitious to me, through his truth; for always do I put my trust in that unborn, eternal Hari; by meditation on whom, man becomes the repository of all good things."

His mind thus animated by devout faith, and meditating in this manner, Akrura proceeded on his road, and arrived at Gokula a little before sunset, at the time of the milking of the cows; and there he saw Krishna amongst the cattle, dark as the leaf of the full blown lotus; his eyes of the same colour, and his breast decorated with the Srivatsa mark; long armed, and broad chested; having a high nose, and a lovely countenance, brightened with mirthful smiles; treading firmly on the ground, with feet whose nails were tinted red; clad in yellow garments, and adorned with a garland of forest flowers; having a fresh-gathered creeper in his hand, and a chaplet of white lotus flowers on his head. Akrura also beheld there Balabhadra, white as a jasmine, a swan, or the moon, and dressed in blue raiment; having large and powerful arms, and a countenance as radiant as a lotus in bloom; like another Kailasa mountain, crested with a wreath of clouds.

When Akrura saw these two youths, his countenance expanded with delight, and the down of his body stood erect with pleasure: for this he thought to be supreme happiness and glory; this, the double manifestation of the divine Vasudeva; this was the twofold gratification of his sight, to behold the creator of the universe: now he hoped that his bodily form would yield fruit, as it would bring him in contact with the person of Krishna; and that the wearer of infinite forms would place his hand on his back; the touch of whose finger alone is sufficient to dispel sin, and to secure imperishable felicity: that hand which launches the fierce

[p. 543]

irresistible discus, blazing with all the flames of fire, lightning, and the sun, and slaughtering the demon host washes the collyrium from the eyes of their brides: that hand into which Bali poured water, and thence obtained ineffable enjoyments below the earth, and immortality and dominion over the gods for a whole Manwantara, without peril from a foe. "Alas! he will despise me, for my connexion with Kansa, an associate with evil, though not contaminated by it. How vain is his birth, who is shunned by the virtuous? and yet what is there in this world unknown to him who resides in the hearts of all men, who is ever existent, exempt from imperfection, the aggregate of the quality of purity, and identical with true knowledge? With a heart wholly devoted to him, then, I will approach the lord of all lords, the descended portion of Purushottama, of Vishnu, who is without beginning, middle, or end."

Footnotes

^541:1 The commentator explains this to mean Hayagriva, or Vishnu with the neck and head of a horse; who, it is said in the second book of the Bhagavata, appeared at the end of a great sacrifice performed by Brahma, and breathed from his nostrils the texts of the Vedas. The fourth Avatara is always elsewhere said to be the Vamana, or dwarf.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 544]

  

CHAP. XVIII.

Grief of the Gopis on the departure of Krishna and Balarama with Akrura: their leaving Gokula. Akrura bathes in the Yamuna; beholds the divine forms of the two youths, and praises Vishnu.

THUS meditating, the Yadava approached Govinda, and addressed him, and said, "I am Akrura," and bowed his head down to the feet of Hari; but Krishna laid upon him his hand, which was marked with the flag, the thunderbolt, and the lotus, and drew him towards him, and affectionately embraced him. Then Kes'ava and Rama entered into conversation with him, and, having heard from him all that had occurred, were much pleased, and led him to their habitation: there they resumed their discourse, and gave him food to eat, and treated him with proper hospitality. Akrura told them how their father Anakadundubhi, the princess Devaki, and even his own father, Ugrasena, had been insulted by the iniquitous demon Kansa: he also related to them the purpose for which he had been dispatched. When he had told them all these things, the destroyer of Kes'in said to him, "I was aware of all that you have told me, lord of liberal gifts: Rama and I will go to-morrow to Mathura along with you. The elders of the cowherds shall accompany us, bearing ample offerings. Rest here to-night, and dismiss all anxiety. Within three nights I will slay Kansa and his adherents."

Having given orders accordingly to the cowherds, Akrura, with Kes'ava and Rama, retired to rest, and slept soundly in the dwelling of Nanda. The next morning was bright, and the youths prepared to depart for Mathura with Akrura. The Gopis, seeing them about to set forth, were much afflicted; they wept bitterly, their bracelets were loose upon their arms, and they thus communed together: "If Govinda depart for Mathura, how will he return to Gokula? his ears will there be regaled with the melodious and polished conversation of the women of the city. Accustomed to the language of the graceful females of Mathura, he will never again endure the rustic expressions of the Gopis. Hari, the pride of the station, is carried off, and a fatal blow is inflicted upon us by inexorable destiny, Expressive smiles, soft language, graceful airs,

[p. 545]

elegant gait, and significant glances, belong to the women of the city. Hari is of rustic breeding, and, captivated by their fascinations, what likelihood is there of his returning to the society of any one amongst us? Kes'ava, who has mounted the car to go to Mathura, has been deceived by the cruel, vile, and desperate Akrura. Does not the unfeeling traitor know the affection that we all here feel for our Hari, the joy of our eyes, that he is taking him away? Unkind that he is, Govinda is departing from us, along with Rama: haste! let us stop him! Why talk of telling our seniors that we cannot bear his loss? What can they do for us, when we are consumed by the fires of separation? The Gopas, with Nanda at their head, are themselves preparing to depart; no one makes any attempt to detain Govinda. Bright is the morning that succeeds to this night for the women of Mathura, for the bees of their eyes will feed upon the lotus face of Achyuta. Happy are they who may go hence without impediment, and behold, enraptured, Krishna on his journey. A great festival will give pleasure to-day to the eyes of the inhabitants of Mathura, when they see the person of Govinda. What a blissful vision will be seen by the happy women, of the city, whose brilliant eyes shall regard, unchecked, the countenance of Krishna! Alas! the eyes of the Gopis have been deprived of sight by the relentless Brahma, after he had shewn them this great treasure. In proportion as the affection of Hari for us decays, so do our limbs wither, and the bracelets slip from our arms: and now the cruel Akrura urges on the horses: all conspire to treat unhappy females with unkindness. Alas! alas! we see now only the dust of his chariot wheels! and now he is far away, for even that dust is no longer to be seen!" Thus lamented by the women, Kes'ava and Rama quitted the district of Vraja [*1]. Travelling in a car drawn by fleet horses, they arrived at noon at the banks of the Yamuna, when Akrura requested them to halt a little, whilst he performed the

[p. 546]

usual daily ceremonial in the river [*2]. Accordingly the intelligent Akrura bathed, and rinsed his mouth, and then entering the stream, he stood meditating upon the supreme being; but he beheld mentally [*3] Balabhadra, having a thousand hooded beads, a garland of Jasmine flowers, and large red eyes, attended by Vasuki, Rambha, and other mighty serpents, praised by the Gandharbas, decorated with wild flowers, wearing dark coloured garments, crowned with a chaplet of lotuses, ornamented with brilliant earrings, inebriate, and standing at the bottom of the river in the water [*4]. On his lap he also beheld, at his ease, Krishna, of the complexion of a cloud [*5], with full and coppery eyes, having an elegant form, and four hands, armed with the discus and other weapons, wearing yellow clothes, decorated with many coloured flowers, and appearing like a cloud embellished with streams of lightning and the bow of Indra; his breast was marked with the celestial sign, his arms were radiant with bracelets, a diadem shone on his brow, and he wore a white lotus for his crest: he was attended by Sanandana and other holy sages, who, fixing their eyes upon the tips of their noses, were absorbed in profound meditation.

When Akrura beheld Balarama and Krishna in this situation, he was much amazed, and wondered how they could so quickly have got there from the chariot. He wished to ask them this, but Janarddana deprived him of the faculty of speech at the moment. Ascending then from the water, he repaired to the car, and there he found them both quietly seated in the same human persons as before. Plunging again into the water, there he again beheld them, hymned as before by the Gandharbas, saints, sages, and serpents. Apprehending, therefore, their real character, he thus eulogized the eternal deity, who consists of true knowledge:--

[p. 547]

"Salutation to thee, who art uniform and manifold, all-pervading, supreme spirit, of inconceivable glory, and who art simple existence. Salutation to thee, O inscrutable, who art truth, and the essence of oblations. Salutation to thee, O lord, whose nature is unknown, who art beyond primeval matter, who existest in five forms, as one with the elements, with the faculties, with matter, with the living soul, with supreme spirit. Shew favour to me, O soul of the universe, essence of all things, perishable or eternal, whether addressed by the designation of Brahma, Vishnu, S'iva, or the like. I adore thee, O god, whose nature is indescribable, whose purposes are inscrutable, whose name even is unknown; for the attributes of kind or appellation are not applicable to thee, who art THAT [*6], the supreme Brahma, eternal, unchangeable, untreated. But as the accomplishment of our objects cannot be attained except through some specific form, thou art termed by us Krishna, Achyuta, Ananta, or Vishnu. Thou, unborn divinity, art all the objects of these impersonations; thou art the gods, and all other beings; thou art the whole world; thou art all. Soul of the universe, thou art exempt from change, and there is nothing except thee in all this existence. Thou art Brahma, Pas'upati, Aryaman, Dhatri, and Vidhatri; thou art Indra, air, fire, the regent of the waters, the god of wealth, and judge of the dead; and thou, although but one, presidest over the world with various energies, addressed to various purposes. Thou, identical with the solar ray, createst the universe; all elementary substance is composed of thy qualities; and thy supreme form is denoted by the imperishable term SAT (existence). To him who is one with true knowledge, who is and is not perceptible, I bow. Glory be to him, the lord Vasudeva, to Sankarshana, to Pradyumna, and to Aniruddha [*7]."

Footnotes

^545:1 In the Bhagavata, Hari Vans'a, &c. several adventures of Krishna, during his residence at Vraja, are recorded, of which our text makes no mention. Of these, the two most popular are Krishna's taking away the clothes of the Gopis whilst bathing, and his liberating the Gopas from the mouth of Aghasura, disguised as a vast serpent, into which they had entered, thinking it a cavern in a mountain. The omission of these two legends, or of any of the rest, is not much to be regretted.

^546:2 The noonday prayer, or Sandhya.

^546:3 By his Dhyana, or force of meditation, in which it is attempted to bring before the mind's eye some definite form of the object of adoration. In this case Akrura is compelled to see a form he did not anticipate. The Hari Vans'a very clumsily sets him to meditate upon the serpent S'esha, which spoils the story, intended as that is to exhibit the identity of Balarama and Krishna with the supreme.

^546:4 Balarama was thus visible in his real character of S'esha, the chief of serpents, the couch of Vishnu, and supporter of the world.

^546:5 Or rather, he beheld Ghanas'yama, an appellation of Krishna, who is so called from being as black (s'yama) as a cloud (ghana).

^547:6 Tad, 'that;' all that is, or that can be conceived.

^547:7 Akrura's piety is here prophetic; the son and grandson of Krishna (see <page 440>) are not yet born: but this is the Vaishnava style of addressing Krishna or Vishnu, as identical with four Vyuhas, 'arrangements' or 'dispositions,' Krishna, Balarama, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha. See As. Res. XVI. 35. In this, as in several other places, the Vishnu P. differs from some of the other narratives of Krishna, by the length and character of the prayers addressed to Vishnu. The Hari Vans'a, for instance, here has no prayer or panegyric at all: the Bhagavata inserts one.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 548]

  

CHAP. XIX.

Akrura conveys Krishna and Rama near to Mathura, and leaves them: they enter the town. Insolence of Kansa's washerman: Krishna kills him. Civility of a flower-seller: Krishna gives him his benediction.

THUS the Yadava Akrura, standing in the river, praised Krishna, and worshipped him with imaginary incense and flowers. Disregarding all other objects, he fixed his whole mind upon the deity; and having continued for a long time in spiritual contemplation, he at last desisted from his abstraction, conceiving he had effected the purposes of soul. Coming up from the water of the Yamuna, he went to the car, and there he beheld Rama and Krishna seated as before. As his looks denoted surprise, Krishna said to him, "Surely, Akrura, you have seen some marvel in the stream of the Yamuna, for your eyes are staring as if with astonishment." Akrura replied, "The marvel that I have seen in the stream of the Yamuna I behold before me, even here, in a bodily shape; for he whom I have encountered in the water, Krishna, is also your wondrous self, of whose illustrious person the whole world is the miraculous developement. But enough of this; let us proceed to Mathura: I am afraid Kansa will be angry at our delay; such is the wretched consequence of eating the bread of another." Thus speaking, he urged on the quick horses, and they arrived after sunset at Mathura. When they came in sight of the city, Akrura said to Krishna and Rama, "You must now journey on foot, whilst I proceed alone in the car; and you must not go to the house of Vasudeva, for the elder has been banished by Kansa on your account."

Akrura having thus spoken, left them, and entered the city; whilst Rama and Krishna continued to walk along the royal road. Regarded with pleasure by men and women, they went along sportively, looking like two young elephants. As they roamed about, they saw a washerman colouring clothes, and with smiling countenances they went and threw down some of his fine linen. The washerman was the servant of Kansa, made insolent by his master's favour; and he provoked the two lads

[p. 549]

with loud and scurrilous abuse, until Krishna struck him down, with his head to the ground, and killed him. Then taking the clothes, they went their way, clad in yellow and blue raiment, until they came to a flower-seller's shop. The flower-seller looked at them with astonishment, and wondered who they could be, or whence they could have come. Seeing two youths so lovely, dressed in yellow and blue garments, he imagined them to be divinities descended upon earth. Being addressed by them with mouths budding like lotuses, and asked for some flowers, he placed his hands upon the ground, and touched it with his head, saying, "My lords have shewn me great kindness in coming to my house, fortunate that I am; I will pay them homage." Having thus spoken, the flower-seller, with a smiling aspect, gave them whatever choice flowers they selected, to conciliate their favour. Repeatedly prostrating himself before them, he presented them with flowers, beautiful, fragrant, and fresh. Krishna then, being much pleased with him, gave him this blessing; "Fortune, good friend, who depends upon me, shall never forsake you: never shall you suffer loss of vigour, or loss of wealth: as long as time shall last your descendants shall not fail. Having long tasted various delights on earth, you shall finally obtain, by calling me to recollection, a heavenly region, the consequence of my favour. Your heart shall ever be intent on righteousness, and fulness of days shall be the portion of your posterity. Your descendants shall not be subject to natural infirmities, as long as the sun shall endure." Having thus spoken, Krishna and Rama, worshipped by the flower-seller, went forth from his dwelling [*1].

Footnotes

^549:1 These incidents are told, with some unimportant differences, in the other accounts of Krishna's youth.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 550]

  

CHAP. XX.

Krishna and Balarama meet Kubja; she is made straight by the former: they proceed to the palace. Krishna breaks a bow intended for a trial of arms. Kansa's orders to his servants. Public games. Krishna and his brother enter the arena: the former wrestles with Chanura, the latter with Mushtika, the king's wrestlers; who are both killed. Krishna attacks and slays Kansa: he and Balarama do homage to Vasudeva and Devaki: the former praises Krishna.

As they proceeded along the high road, they saw coming towards them a young girl, who was crooked, carrying a pot of unguent. Krishna addressed her sportively, and said, "For whom are you carrying that unguent? tell me, lovely maiden; tell me truly." Spoken to as it were through affection, Kubja, well disposed towards Hari, replied to him also mirthfully, being smitten by his appearance; "Know you not, beloved, that I am the servant of Kansa, and appointed, crooked as I am, to prepare his perfumes. Unguent ground by any other he does not approve of: hence I am enriched through his liberal rewards." Then said Krishna, "Fair-faced damsel, give us of this unguent, fragrant and fit for kings, as much as we may rub upon our bodies." "Take it," answered Kubja.; and she gave them as much of the unguent as was sufficient for their persons; and they rubbed it on various parts of their faces and bodies [*1], till they looked like two clouds, one white and one black, decorated by the many-tinted bow of Indra. Then Krishna, skilled in the curative art, took hold of her, under the chin, with the thumb and two fingers, and lifted up her head, whilst with his feet he pressed down her feet; and in this way he made her straight. When she was thus relieved from her deformity, she was a most beautiful woman; and, filled with gratitude and affection, she took Govinda by the garment, and invited him to her house. Promising to come at some

[p. 551]

other time, Krishna smilingly dismissed her, and then laughed aloud on beholding the countenance of Baladeva [*2].

Dressed in blue and yellow garments, and anointed with fragrant unguents, Kes'ava and Rama proceeded to the hall of arms, which was hung round with garlands. Inquiring of the warders which bow he was to try, and being directed to it, he took it, and bent it; but drawing it with violence, he snapped it in two [*3], and all Mathura resounded with the noise which its fracture occasioned. Abused by the warders for breaking the bow, Krishna and Rama retorted, and defied them, and left the hall.

When Kansa knew that Akrura had returned, and heard that the bow had been broken, he thus said to Chanura and Mushtika, his boxers: "Two youths, cowherd boys, have arrived; you must kill them both, in a trial of strength, in my presence; for they practise against my life. I shall be well pleased if you kill them in the match, and will give you whatever you wish; not else. These two foes of mine must be killed by you fairly or unfairly. The kingdom shall be ours in common, when they have perished." Having given them these orders, he sent next for his elephant driver, and desired him to station his great elephant Kuvalayapida, who was as vast as a cloud charged with rain, near the gate of the arena, and drive him upon the two boys when they should attempt to enter. When Kansa had issued these commands, and ascertained that the platforms were all ready for the spectators, he awaited the rising of the sun, unconscious of impending death.

In the morning the citizens assembled on the platforms set apart for them, and the princes, with the ministers and courtiers, occupied the royal seats. Near the centre of the circle judges of the games were stationed by Kansa, whilst he himself sat apart close by upon a lofty throne. Separate platforms were erected for the ladies of the palace, for the courtesans, and for the wives of the citizens [*4]. Nanda and the

[p. 552]

cowherds had places appropriated to them, at the end of which sat Akrura and Vasudeva. Amongst the wives of the citizens appeared

[p. 553]

[paragraph continues] Devaki, mourning for her son, whose lovely face she longed to behold even in the hour of his destruction. When the musical instruments

[p. 554]

sounded, Chanura sprang forth, and the people cried, "Alas!" and Mushtika slapped his arms in defiance. Covered with must and blood

[p. 555]

from the elephant, whom, when goaded upon them by his driver, they had slain, and armed with his tusks, Balabhadra and Janarddana confidently entered the arena, like two lions amidst a herd of deer. Exclamations of pity arose from all the spectators, along with expressions of astonishment. "This then," said the people, "is Krishna! this is Balabhadra! This is he by whom the fierce night-walker Putana was slain; by whom the waggon was overturned, and the two Arjuna trees

[p. 556]

felled! This is the boy who trampled and danced on the serpent Kaliya; who upheld the mountain Govarddhana for seven nights; who killed, as if in play, the iniquitous Arishta, Dhenuka, and Kes'in! This whom we see is Achyuta! This is he who has been foretold by the wise, skilled in the sense of the Puranas, as Gopala, who shall exalt the depressed Yadava race! This is a portion of the all-existing, all-generating Vishnu, descended upon earth, who will assuredly lighten her load!" Thus did the citizens describe Rama and Krishna, as soon as they appeared; whilst the breast of Devaki glowed with maternal affection; and Vasudeva, forgetting his infirmities, felt himself young again, on beholding the countenances of his sons as a season of rejoicing. The women of the palace, and the wives of the citizens, wide opened their eyes, and gazed intently upon Krishna. "Look, friends," said they to their companions; "look at the face of Krishna; his eyes are reddened by his conflict with the elephant, and the drops of perspiration stand upon his cheeks, outvieing a full blown lotus in autumn, studded with glittering dew. Avail yourself now of the faculty of vision. Observe his breast, the seat of splendour, marked with the mystic sign; and his arms, menacing destruction to his foes. Do you not notice Balabhadra, dressed in a blue garment; his countenance as fair as the jasmine, as the moon, as the fibres of the lotus stem? See how he gently smiles at the gestures of Mushtika and Chanura, as they spring up. And now behold Hari advance to encounter Chanura. What! are there no elders, judges of the field? How can the delicate form of Hari, only yet in the dawn of adolescence, be regarded as a match for the vast and adamantine bulk of the great demon? Two youths, of light and elegant persons, are in the arena, to oppose athletic fiends, headed by the cruel Chanura. This is a great sin in the judges of the games, for the umpires to suffer a contest between boys and strong men."

As thus the women of the city conversed with one another, Hari, having tightened his girdle, danced in the ring, shaking the ground on which he trod. Balabhadra also danced, slapping his arms in defiance. Where the ground was firm, the invincible Krishna contended foot to foot with Chanura. The practised demon Mushtika was opposed by

[p. 557]

[paragraph continues] Balabhadra. Mutually entwining, and pushing, and pulling, and beating each other with fists, arms, and elbows, pressing each other with their knees, interlacing their arms, kicking with their feet, pressing with their whole weight upon one another [*5], fought Hari and Chanura. Desperate was the struggle, though without weapons, and one for life and death, to the great gratification of the spectators. In proportion as the contest continued, so Chanura was gradually losing something of his original vigour, and the wreath upon his head trembled from his fury and distress [*6]; whilst the world-comprehending Krishna wrestled with him as if but in sport. Beholding Chanura losing, and Krishna gaining strength, Kansa, furious with rage, commanded the music to cease. As soon as the drums and trumpets were silenced, a numerous band of heavenly instruments was heard in the sky, and the gods invisibly exclaimed, "Victory to Govinda! Kes'ava, kill the demon Chanura!" Madhusudana having for a long time dallied with his adversary, at last lifted him up, and whirled him round, with the intention of putting an end to him. Having whirled Chanura round a hundred times, until his breath was expended in the air, Krishna dashed him on the ground with such violence as to smash his body into a hundred fragments, and strew the earth with a hundred pools of gory mire. Whilst this took place, the mighty Baladeva was engaged in the same manner with the demon bruiser Mushtika. Striking him on the head with his fists, and on the

[p. 558]

breast with his knees, he stretched him on the ground, and pummelled him there till he was dead. Again, Krishna encountered the royal bruiser Tomalaka, and felled him to the earth with a blow of his left hand. When the other athletae saw Chanura, Mushtika, and Tomalaka killed, they fled from the field; and Krishna and Sankarshana danced victorious on the arena, dragging along with them by force the cowherds of their own age. Kansa, his eyes reddening with wrath, called aloud to the surrounding people, "Drive those two cow-boys out of the assembly: seize the villain Nanda, and secure him with chains of iron: put Vasudeva to death with tortures intolerable to his years: and lay hands upon the cattle, and whatever else belongs to those cowherds who are the associates of Krishna."

Upon hearing these orders, the destroyer of Madhu laughed at Kansa, and, springing up to the place where he was seated, laid hold of him by the hair of his head, and struck his tiara to the ground: then casting him down upon the earth, Govinda threw himself upon him. Crushed by the weight of the upholder of the universe, the son of Ugrasena, Kansa the king, gave up the ghost. Krishna then dragged the dead body, by the hair of the head, into the centre of the arena, and a deep furrow was made by the vast and heavy carcass of Kansa, when it was dragged along the ground by Krishna, as if a torrent of water had run through it [*7]. Seeing Kansa thus treated, his brother Sumalin came to his succour; but he was encountered, and easily killed, by Balabhadra. Then arose a general cry of grief from the surrounding circle, as they beheld the king of Mathura thus slain, and treated with such contumely, by Krishna. Krishna, accompanied by Balabhadra, embraced the feet of Vasudeva and of Devaki; but Vasudeva raised him up; and he and Devaki recalling to recollection what he had said to them at his birth, they bowed to Janarddana, and the former thus addressed him: "Have compassion upon mortals, O god, benefactor and lord of deities: it is by thy favour to us two that thou hast become the (present) upholder of the

[p. 559]

world. That, for the punishment of the rebellious, thou hast descended upon earth in my house, having been propitiated by my prayers, sanctifies our race. Thou art the heart of all creatures; thou abidest in all creatures; and all that has been, or will be, emanates from thee, O universal spirit! Thou, Achyuta, who comprehendest all the gods, art eternally worshipped with sacrifices: thou art sacrifice itself, and the offerer of sacrifices. The affection that inspires my heart and the heart of Devaki towards thee, as if thou wast our child, is indeed but error, and a great delusion. How shall the tongue of a mortal such as I am call the creator of all things, who is without beginning or end, son? Is it consistent that the lord of the world, from whom the world proceeds, should be born of me, except through illusion? How should he, in whom all fixed and moveable things are contained, be conceived in the womb and born of a mortal being? Have compassion therefore indeed, O supreme lord, and in thy descended portions protect the universe. Thou art no son of mine. This whole world, from Brahma to a tree, thou art. Wherefore dost thou, who art one with the supreme, beguile us? Blinded by delusion, I thought thee my son; and for thee, who art beyond all fear, I dreaded the anger of Kansa, and therefore did I take thee in my terror to Gokula, where thou hast grown up; but I no longer claim thee as mine own. Thou, Vishnu, the sovereign lord of all, whose actions Rudra, the Maruts, the As'wins, Indra, and the gods, cannot equal, although they behold them; thou who hast come amongst us for the benefit of the world, art recognised, and delusion is no more."

Footnotes

^550:1 They had their bodies smeared in the style called Bhaktichheda; that is, with the separating or distinguishing (chheda) marks of Vaishnava devotion (bhakti): certain streaks on the forehead, nose, cheeks, breast, and arms, which denote a follower of Vishnu. See As. Res. XVI. 33.

^551:2 The story is similarly told in the Bhagavata, &c.

^551:3 The bending or breaking of a bow is a favourite incident in Hindu heroic poetry, borrowed, no doubt, from the Ramayana, where, however, it has an object; here it is quite gratuitous.

^551:4 The Bhagavata enters into even fewer [p. 552] particulars than our text of the place set apart for the games. The Hari Vans'a gives a much more detailed description, which is in some respects curious. The want of any technical glossary, and the general manner in which technical terms are explained in the ordinary dictionaries, render it difficult to understand exactly what is intended, and any translation of the passages must be defective. The French version, however, probably represents a much more splendid and theatrical scene than the text authorizes, and may therefore admit of correction. The general plan is nothing more than an enclosed space, surrounded by temporary structures of timber or bambus, open or enclosed, and decorated with hangings and garlands. It may be doubted if the details described by the compiler of the Hari Vans'a were very familiar even to him; for his description is not always very consistent or precise. Of two commentators, one evidently knows nothing of what he attempts to explain; but with the assistance of the other the passages may be thus, though not always confidently, rendered:--

"The king, Kansa, meditating on these things, went forth from his palace to the place which had been prepared for the sight of the ceremonial (1), to inspect the scaffolds (2) which had been constructed. He found the place close set with the several platforms (3) of the different public bodies (4), strongly put together, and decorated with roofed pavilions of various sizes, supported by columns, and divided into commodious chambers (5). The edifice was extensive, well arranged, secured by strong rafters (6), spacious and lofty, and commodious and secure. Stairs led to the different galleries (7). Chairs of state (8) were placed in various parts of it. The avenues that conducted to it were narrow (9). It was covered with temporary stages and sheds (10), and was capable of sustaining the weight of a multitude.

"Having seen the place of the festival thus adorned, Kansa gave orders, and said, 'To-morrow let the platforms and terraces and pavilions (11) be decorated with pictures and garlands and flags and images (12), and let them be scented with fragrant odours, and covered over with awnings (13). Let there be ample heaps of dry, pounded cow-dung (14) provided on the ground, and suitable refreshment chambers be covered over, and decorated with bells and ornamented arches (15). Let large water jars be securely fixed in order, capable of holding a copious supply, and provided with golden drinking-cups. Let apartments be prepared (16), and various kinds of beverage, in appropriate vessels, be ready. Let judges of the games be invited, and corporations with their chiefs. Let orders be issued to the wrestlers, and notice be given to the spectators; and let platforms for their accommodation be fitted up in the place of assembly.'" (17)

When the meeting takes place, the site of the games is thus described: "Upon the following day the amphitheatre (18) was filled by the citizens, anxious to behold the games. The place of  (19) was supported by octagonal painted pillars (20), [p. 553] fitted up with terraces and doors and bolts, with windows circular or crescent; shaped, and accommodated with seats with cushions (21), and it shone like the ocean whilst large clouds hang upon it, with spacious, substantial pavilions (22), fitted up for the sight of the combat; open to the front (23), but screened with beautiful and fine curtains (24), crowned with festoons of flowers, and glistening with radiance like autumnal clouds. The pavilions of the different companies and corporations, vast as mountains, were decorated with banners, bearing upon them the implements and emblems of the several crafts (25). The chambers of the inhabitants of the inner apartments shone near at hand, bright with gold and painting and net-work of gems: they were richly decorated with precious stones, were enclosed below with costly hangings, and ornamented above with spires and banners, and looked like mountains spreading their wings in the sky; while the rays of light reflected from the valuable jewels were blended with the waving of white chowries, and the musical tinkling of female ornaments. The separate pavilions of the courtesans were graced by lovely women, attired in the most splendid dresses (27), and emulated the radiance of the cars of the gods. In the place of assembly there were excellent seats, couches made of gold, and hangings of various colours, intermixed with bunches of flowers: and there were golden vases of water, and handsome places for refreshment, filled with fruits of various kinds, and cooling juices, and sherbets fit for drinking (28). And there were many other stages and platforms, constructed of strong timber, and hangings by hundreds and thousands were displayed: and upon the tops of the houses, chambers fitted up with delicate jalousies, through which the women might behold the sports, appeared like swans flying through the air.

"In front stood the pavilion of Kansa, surpassing all the rest in splendour, looking like mount Meru in radiance; its sides, its columns, being covered with burnished gold; fastened with coloured cords; and every way worthy the presence of a king."

In justification of the rendering of the above, an explanation of the technical terms, taken either from dictionaries or from the commentators, may be subjoined. (1) Kansa went to the Prekshagara, literally 'house of seeing;' but it is evident, from its interior being visible to spectators on the tops of the houses, as subsequently mentioned, that it was not a theatre, or covered edifice. If a building at all, it was merely a sort of stockade. One commentator calls it, 'a place made for seeing the sacrifice;' (2) Manchanam avalokaka. The Mancha is commonly understood to signify a raised platform, with a floor and a roof, ascended by a ladder: see Dictionary. (3) Mancha-vata. Vata is either 'site' or 'inclosure,' and is used here without much affecting the sense of Mancha. The compound is explained by the commentators, 'prepared places', or 'the sites of the platforms'. (4) The S'renis', associations [p. 554] of artificers practising the same art. One of the commentaries understands the term to be here used to denote, not their station, but their labours: 'The structure was the work of the artificers.' (5) Several words occur here of technical import. The passage is, ###. Valabhi is said by the commentator to mean a structure with a pent roof, supported by six columns. Kuti, a circular one, having seven roofs--something perhaps like a Chinese pagoda--and four columns. The Eka-stambha is a chamber, supported by one column. (6) Saraniryyuham. It is difficult to understand the necessity of rafters in an inclosure in which the platforms and stages seem to have been erected independently of any floor or wall: but the commentary explains Niryyuha, 'strong brackets, projecting from a house:' (7) Aslishta sushshta mancharohanam. The first epithet is explained, 'not contracted'; the second, 'well constructed'; and for the 'ascending' (Arohanam) we have 'where was a line of steps' or 'ladders' There is another reading of the text, however, which may be rendered, 'Having steps well secured in their ascent above'. (8) 'Seats for kings'. (9) Such is the literal purport of Sanchara-patha-sankulam; implying, possibly, the formation of passages by fences on either side. (10) This is doubtful: the phrase is Chhannam-tad-vedikabhi. Chhannam means, literally, 'covered,' and can scarcely be used in the sense of 'overspread or filled with.' Vedika means an elevated floor or terrace, with which a hall or edifice cannot well be 'covered;' and therefore requires the sense here given to Chhanna. The commentators are silent. (11) The Manchavatas and Valabhis, as above: the other term is Vithi, 'a shop,' 'a stall,' 'a terrace,' 'a road.' (12) Let them be Vapushmanta; 'having painted or sculptured figures'. The other commentary renders it merely 'pleasant' or 'agreeable'. (13) 'Covered above with cloths'. The use of the awning or Semiana is very common in India. (14) For the wrestlers to rub over their bodies to absorb the perspiration (15) This is all rather questionable: the passage is most usually, ###. Vali or Bali in one sense means 'the edge of a thatch,' and may be put for some sort of temporary structure, a kind of retiring or refreshment room for the boxers and wrestlers. In some copies it is read, 'beautiful with cloths spread,' on which the performers may sit when disengaged; perhaps a sort of carpet on the ground. (16) The expression is again Vali. Another sense of the word is, offering of viands, or of the remains of a sacrifice, to all beings; but that cannot be its purport here; nor is it ever used in the sense of viands in general. The verb Kalpa or Klrip also usually [p. 555] implies 'making.' (17) Manchavata; 'in the Samaja,' or 'assembly.' (18) Maharanga, 'the great place of the performance.' Ranga is 'acting' or 'representation;' also the place or site of it. (19) All the copies consulted, except one, offer an irregularity of construction, which, although defended by the commentators, is a license scarcely allowable. The epithets of the first verse are all in the plural number; they then occur in the singular, to agree with the only substantive in the description, Samajavata. According to the commentaries, the plural term Manchas understood is the substantive to the epithets of the first stanza, and Samajavata the singular to those of the other verses. This awkwardness is however avoided by the reading of an old and very good copy, which puts it all in the singular; as ### (20) The expression is Charana, literally 'foot;' explained by the commentator, Stambha, 'post' or 'pillar' (21) The reading of most of the copies is S'ayanottama, which may be taken as the sense of Talottama, 'couches or benches with cushions.' (22) Manchagarais, 'temporary houses.' (21) Or 'fronting to the east'. (24) Nirmuktais: explained by the commentator to mean 'fine threads,' 'network,' or 'gauze,' through which persons, females especially, may see without being seen. (25) ### (26) 'With ridges and projections'. The commentator explains this, 'with flags on the top of them.' (27) This appears to be intended for an epithet of the women, although Astarana is not usually applied to dress. (28) Phala, of course, is 'fruit.' Avadans'a is explained in lexicons, what is eaten to excite thirst:' one comment gives it, what may be sucked,' as tamarinds, and the like. Changeri is explained, 'fluids for drinking, made with sorrel, or acid fruits;' that is, sherbets. (29) ### is an epithet of the Prekshagara, or look-out house of the women, situated on the tops of their houses, according to the commentators; an arrangement very compatible with the form of Indian houses, which have flat roofs, commonly enclosed by a trellis work, or jalousie of masonry. It is observable, that in the Vishnu Purana, and in the Mahabharata, on various public occasions, the women take their places on the platforms, or in the pavilions, without curtains or screens.

^557:5 The terms here used are technical, and refer to the established modes of wrestling amongst Hindu athletae. 1. Sannipata is described 'mutual laying hold of.' 2. Avaduta, 'letting go of the adversary.' g. Kshepana, 'pulling to, and casting back.' 4. Mushtinipata, 'striking with fists.' 5. Kilanipata, 'striking with the elbow.' 6. Vajranipata, 'striking with the fore-arm.' 7. Janunirghata, 'pressing or striking with the knees.' 8. Bahuvighattana, 'interlacing the arms.' 9. Padoddhuta, kicking.' 10. Prasrishta, 'intertwining of the whole body.' In some copies another term occurs, As'manirghata, 'striking with stones,' or 'striking blows as hard as with stones;' for stones could scarcely be used in a contest specified as 'one without weapons' 

^557:6 Krishna contended with Chanura, 'who through distress and anger shook the flowers of his crest;' The two last terms are explained, the flower of the wreath on his head.'

^558:7 Et latus mediam sulcus diducit arenam.

'The yielding sand being furrowed into a ditch or a water-course, by the dead bodies being dragged over it. The text is, ###.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 560]

  

CHAP. XXI.

Krishna encourages his parents; places Ugrasena on the throne; becomes the pupil of Sandipani, whose son he recovers from the sea: he kills the marine demon Panchajana, and makes a horn of his shell.

HAVING permitted to Devaki and Vasudeva an interval of true knowledge, through the contemplation of his actions, Hari again spread the delusions of his power over them and the tribe of Yadu. He said to them, "Mother; venerable father; you have both been long observed by Sankarshana and myself with sorrow, and in fear of Kansa. He whose time passes not in respect to his father and mother, is a vile being, who descends in vain from virtuous parents. The lives of those produce good fruit, who reverence their parents, their spiritual guides, the Brahmans, and the gods. Pardon therefore, father, the impropriety of which we may have been culpable, in resenting without your orders, to which we acknowledge that we are subject, the oppression we suffered from the power and violence of Kansa." Thus speaking, they offered homage to the elders of the Yadu tribe in order, and then in a suitable manner paid their respects to the citizens. The wives of Kansa, and those of his father, then surrounded the body of the king, lying on the ground, and bewailed his fate in deep affliction. Hari in various ways expressed his regret for what had chanced, and endeavoured to console them, his own eyes being suffused with tears. The foe of Madhu then liberated Ugrasena from confinement, and placed him on the throne, which the death of his son had left vacant. The chief of the Yadavas, being crowned, performed the funeral rites of Kansa, and of the rest of the slain. When the ceremony was over, and Ugrasena had resumed his royal seat, Krishna addressed him, and said, "Sovereign lord, command boldly what else is to be done. The curse of Yayati has pronounced our race unworthy of dominion [*1]; but with me, for your servant, you may issue your orders to the gods. How should kings disobey them?"

[p. 561]

Thus having spoken, the human Kes'ava summoned mentally the deity of the wind, who came upon the instant, and said to him, "Go, Vayu, to Indra, and desire him to lay aside his pomp, and resign to Ugrasena his splendid hall Sudharman: tell him that Krishna commands him to send the royal hall, the unrivalled gem of princely courts, for the assemblage of the race of Yadu." Accordingly Vayu went, and delivered the message to the husband of S'achi, who immediately gave up to him the hall Sudharman, and Vayu conveyed it to the Yadavas, the chiefs of whom thenceforth possessed this celestial court, emblazoned with jewels, and defended by the arm of Govinda. The two excellent Yadu youths, versed in all knowledge, and possessed of all wisdom, then submitted to instruction, as the disciples of teachers. Accordingly they repaired to Sandipani--who, though born in Kas'i, resided at Avanti--to study the science of arms, and, becoming his pupils, were obedient and attentive to their master, exhibiting an example to all men of the observance of instituted rules. In the course of sixty-four days they had gone through the elements of military science, with the treatises on the use of arms, and directions for the mystic incantations, which secure the aid of supernatural weapons [*2]. Sandipani, astonished at such proficiency, and knowing that it exceeded human faculties, imagined that the sun and moon had become his scholars. When they had acquired all that he could teach, they said to him, "Now say what present shall be given to you, as the preceptor's fee." The prudent Sandipani, perceiving that they were endowed with more than mortal powers, requested them to give him his dead son, drowned in the sea of Prabhasa [*3]. Taking up their arms, they marched against the ocean; but the all-comprehending sea said to them, "I have not killed the son of Sandipani; a demon

[p. 562]

named Panchajana, who lives in the form of a conch shell, seized the boy: he is still under my waters. On hearing this, Krishna plunged into the sea; and having slain the vile Panchajana, he took the conch shell, which was formed of his bones (and bore it as his horn), the sound of which fills the demon hosts with dismay, animates the vigour of the gods, and annihilates unrighteousness. The heroes also recovered the boy from the pains of death, and restored him in his former person to his father. Rama and Janarddana then returned to Mathura, which was well presided over by Ugrasena, and abounded in a happy population both of men and women [*1].

Footnotes

^560:1 The curse pronounced on the elder sons of Yayati, on their refusing to take upon them their father's infirmities. See <page 414>.

^561:2 They read through the Dhanur-veda, which treats of military matters; with the Rahasya, 'the mystical part;' and the Sangraha, 'collection' or 'compendium,' said to be here the Astra-prayoga, the employment of weapons:

^561:3 Prabhasa is a place of pilgrimage in the west of India, on the coast of Guzerat, near the temple of Somanath, and town of Pattan Somanath. It is also known by the name of Soma-tirtha; Soma, or the moon, having been here cured of the consumption brought upon him by the imprecation of Daksha, his father-in-law. Mahabharata, S'alya P., vol. III. p. 249.

^562:1 The incidents of the two last chapters are related in the Bhagavata and Hari Vans'a, often in the words of the text, but with many embellishments and additions, especially in the latter. The Brahma Vaivartta, on the other hand, makes still shorter work of these occurrences than our text.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 563]

  

CHAP. XXII.

Jarasandha besieges Mathura; is defeated, but repeatedly renews the attack.

PARAS'ARA.--The mighty Kansa had married the two daughters of Jarasandha, one named Asti, the other Prapti. Jarasandha was king of Magadha, and a very powerful prince [*1]; who, when he heard that Krishna had killed his son-in-law, was much incensed, and, collecting a large force, marched against Mathura, determined to put the Yadavas and Krishna to the sword. Accordingly he invested the city with three and twenty numerous divisions of his forces [*2]. Rama and Janarddana sallied from the town with a slender, but resolute force, and fought bravely with the armies of Magadha. The two youthful leaders prudently resolved to have recourse to their ancient weapons, and accordingly the bow of Hari, with two quivers filled with exhaustless arrows, and the mace called Kaumodaki, and the ploughshare of Balabhadra, as well as the club Saunanda, descended at a wish from heaven. Armed with these weapons, they speedily discomfited the king of Magadha and his hosts, and reentered the city in triumph.

Although the wicked king of Magadha, Jarasandha, was defeated, yet Krishna knew that whilst he escaped alive he was not subdued; and in fact he soon returned with a mighty force, and was again forced by Rama and Krishna to fly. Eighteen times [*3] did the haughty prince of Magadha renew his attack upon the Yadavas, headed by Krishna; and was as often defeated and put to the rout by them, with very inferior numbers. That the Yadavas were not overpowered by their foes, was owing to the present might of the portion of the discus-armed Vishnu.

[p. 564]

[paragraph continues] It was the pastime of the lord of the universe, in his capacity of man, to launch various weapons against his enemies; for what effort of power to annihilate his foes could be necessary to him, whose fiat creates and destroys the world? but as subjecting himself to human customs, he formed alliances with the brave, and engaged in hostilities with the base. He had recourse to the four devices of policy, or negotiation, presents, sowing dissension, and chastisement; and sometimes even betook himself to flight. Thus imitating the conduct of human beings, the lord of the world pursued at will his sports.

Footnotes

^563:1 See page <page 456>.

^563:2 With twenty-three Akshouhinis, each consisting of 109,300 infantry, 65,610 horse, 22,870 chariots, and as many elephants. The Hari Vans'a enumerates, as the allies or tributaries of Jarasandha, a number of princes from various parts of India, but this is a gratuitous embellishment.

^563:3 The Bhagavata and Hari Vans'a say 'seventeen times.' The latter indulges in a prolix description of the first encounter; nothing of which occurs in the Bhagavata, any more than in our text.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 565]

  

CHAP. XXIII.

Birth of Kalayavana: he advances against Mathura. Krishna builds Dwaraka, and sends thither the Yadava tribe: he leads Kalayavana into the cave of Muchukunda: the latter awakes, consumes the Yavana king, and praises Krishna.

PARAS'ARA.--S'yala having called Gargya the Brahman, whilst at the cow-pens, impotent, in an assembly of the Yadavas, they all laughed; at which he was highly offended, and repaired to the shores of the western sea, where he engaged in arduous penance to obtain a son, who should be a terror to the tribe of Yadu. Propitiating Mahadeva, and living upon iron sand for twelve years, the deity at last was pleased with him, and gave him the desired boon. The king of the Yavanas, who was childless, became the friend of Gargya; and the latter begot a son by his wife, who was as black as a bee, and was thence called Kalayavana [*1]. The Yavana king having placed his son, whose breast was as hard as the point of the thunderbolt, upon the throne, retired to the woods. Inflated with conceit of his prowess, Kalayavana demanded of Narada who were the most mighty heroes on earth. To which the sage answered, "The Yadavas." Accordingly Kalayavana assembled many myriads of Mlechchhas and barbarians [*2], and with a vast armament of

[p. 566]

elephants, cavalry, chariots, and foot, advanced impatiently against Mathura and the Yadavas; wearying every day the animal that carried him, but insensible of fatigue himself.

When Krishna knew of his approach, he reflected that if the Yadavas encountered the Yavana, they would be so much weakened by the conflict, that they would then be overcome by the king of Magadha; that their force was much reduced by the war with Magadha, whilst that of Kalayavana was unbroken; and that the enemy might be therefore victorious. Thus the Yadavas were exposed to a double danger. He resolved therefore to construct a citadel for the Yadu tribe, that should not be easily taken; one that even women might defend, and in which therefore the heroes of the house of Vrishni should be secure; one in which the male combatants of the Yadavas should dread no peril, though he himself should be drunk or careless, asleep or abroad. Thus reflecting, Krishna solicited a space of twelve furlongs from the ocean, and there he built the city of Dwaraka [*3], defended by high ramparts, and beautified with gardens and reservoirs of water, crowded with houses and buildings, and splendid as the capital of Indra, Amaravati. Thither Janarddana conducted the inhabitants of Mathura, and then awaited at that city the approach of Kalayavana.

When the hostile army encamped round Mathura, Krishna unarmed went forth, and beheld the Yavana king. Kalayavana, the strong-armed, recognizing Vasudeva, pursued him; him whom the thoughts of perfect ascetics cannot overtake. Thus pursued, Krishna entered a large cavern, where Muchukunda, the king of men, was asleep. The rash Yavana entering the cave, and beholding a man lying asleep there, concluded it

[p. 567]

must be Krishna, and kicked him; at which Muchukunda awoke, and casting on him an angry glance, the Yavana was instantly consumed, and reduced to ashes. For in a battle between the gods and demons, Muchukunda had formerly contributed to the defeat of the latter; and, being overcome with sleep, he solicited of the gods as a boon that he should enjoy a long repose. "Sleep long and soundly," said the gods; "and whoever disturbs you shall be instantly burnt to ashes by fire emanating from your body [*4]."

Having burnt up the iniquitous Yavana, and beholding the foe of Madhu, Muchukunda asked him who he was. "I am born," he replied, "in the lunar race, in the tribe of Yadu, and am the son of Vasudeva." Muchukunda, recollecting the prophecy of old Garga, fell down before the lord of all, Hari, saying, "Thou art known, supreme lord, to be a portion of Vishnu; for it was said of old by Garga, that at the end of the twenty-eighth Dwapara age Hari would be born in the family of Yadu. Thou art he, without doubt, the benefactor of mankind; for thy glory I am unable to endure. Thy words are of deeper tone than the muttering of the rain cloud; and earth sinks down beneath the pressure of thy feet. As in the battle between the gods and demons the Asuras were unable to sustain my lustre, so even am I incapable of bearing thy radiance. Thou alone art the refuge of every living being who has lighted on the world. Do thou, who art the alleviator of all distress, shew favour upon me, and remove from me all that is evil. Thou art the oceans, the mountains, the rivers, the forests: thou art earth, sky, air, water, and fire: thou art mind, intelligence, the unevolved principle, the vital airs, the lord of life--the soul; all that is beyond the soul; the all-pervading; exempt from the vicissitudes of birth; devoid of sensible

[p. 568]

properties, sound and the like; undecaying, illimitable, imperishable, subject neither to increase nor diminution: thou art that which is Brahma, without beginning or end. From thee the immortals, the progenitors, the Yakshas, Gandharbhas, and Kinnaras, the Siddhas, the nymphs of heaven, men, animals, birds, deer, reptiles, and all the;, vegetable world, proceed; and all that has been, or will be, or is now, moveable or fixed. All that is amorphous or has form, all that is subtile, gross, stable, or moveable, thou art, O creator of the world; and beside thee there is not any thing. O lord, I have been whirled round in the circle of worldly existence for ever, and have suffered the three classes of affliction, and there is no rest whatever. I have mistaken pains for pleasures, like sultry vapours for a pool of water; and their enjoyment has yielded me nothing but sorrow. The earth, dominion, forces, treasures, friends, children, wife, dependants, all the objects of sense, have I possessed, imagining them to be sources of happiness; but I found that in their changeable nature, O lord, they were nothing but vexation. The gods themselves, though high in heaven, were in need of my alliance. Where then is everlasting repose? Who without adoring thee, who art the origin of all worlds, shall attain, O supreme deity, that rest which endures for ever? Beguiled by thy delusions, and ignorant of thy nature, men, after suffering the various penalties of birth, death, and infirmity, behold the countenance of the king of ghosts, and suffer in hell dreadful tortures, the reward of their own deeds. Addicted to sensual objects, through thy delusions I revolve in the whirpool of selfishness and pride; and hence I come to thee, as my final refuge, who art the lord deserving of all homage, than whom there is no other asylum; my mind afflicted with repentance for my trust in the world, and desiring the fulness of felicity, emancipation from all existence."

Footnotes

^565:1 This legend of the origin of Kalayavana is given also by the Hari Vans'a. The Bhagavata, like our text, comes  once to the siege of Mathura by this chief; but the Hari Vans'a suspends the story, for more than thirty chapters, to narrate an origin of the Yadavas, and sundry adventures of Krishna and Rama to the south-west. Most of these have no other authority, and are no doubt inventions of the Dakhini compiler; and the others are misplaced.

^565:2 So the Bhagavata describes him as leading a host of Mlechchhas, or barbarians, against Krishna; but in the Mahabharata, Sabha Parvan, vol. I. p. 330, where Krishna describes the power of Jarasandha, he admits that he and the Yadavas fled from Mathura to the west, through fear of that king, but no account is given of any siege of Mathura by Kalayavana. The only indication of such a person is the mention that Bhagadatta, the Yavana king, who rules over Muru and Naraka in the west and south, is one of his most attached feudatories. This king is in various other places called king of Pragjyotish, as he is in a subsequent passage of the same book, Sabha P., p. 374; and this name is always applied to the [p. 566] the west of Asam. His subjects are, however, still Yavanas and Mlechchhas, and he presents horses, caps set with jewels, and swords with ivory hilts; articles scarcely to be found in Asam, which cannot well be the seat of his sovereignty. It seems most likely therefore that the story may have originated in some knowledge of the power and position of the Greek-Bactrian princes, or their Scythian successors, although in the latter compilations it has been mixed up with allusions to the first Mohammedan aggressions. See As. Res. V. 506 and XV. 100.

^566:3 According to the Mahabharata, he only enlarged and fortified the ancient city of Kus'asthali, founded by Raivata. Sabha P.: see also <page 356> of our text.

^567:4 The name of Muchukunda, as one of the sons of Mandhatri, occurs <page 363>; but no further notice is taken of him. The Bhagavata specifies his being the son of that king, and relates the same story of his long sleep as the text. The same occurs in the Hari Vans'a. The general character of the legends in this chapter is that of reference to something familiar, rather than its narration. In the Hari Vans'a the opposite extreme is observable, and there the legends are as prolix as here they are concise. The Bhagavata follows a middle course; but it seems unlikely that in either of the three we have the original fables.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 569]

  

CHAP. XXIV.

Muchukunda goes to perform penance. Krishna takes the army and treasures of Kalayavana, and repairs with them to Dwaraka. Balarama visits Vraja: inquiries of its inhabitants after Krishna.

THUS praised by the wise Muchukunda, the sovereign of all things, the eternal lord, Hari, said to him, "Go to whatever celestial regions you wish, lord of men, possessed of might irresistible, honoured by my favour. When you have fully enjoyed all heavenly pleasures, you shall be born in a distinguished family, retaining the recollection of your former births; and you shall finally obtain emancipation." Having heard this promise, and prostrated himself before Achyuta, the lord of the world, Muchukunda, went forth from the cave, and beholding men of diminutive stature, now first knew that the Kali age had arrived. The king therefore departed to Gandhamadana, the shrine of Naranarayana, to perform penance.

Krishna having by this stratagem destroyed his enemy, returned to Mathura, and took captive his army, rich in horses, elephants and cars, which he conducted to Dwaraka, and delivered to Ugrasena, and the Yadu race was relieved from all fear of invasion. Baladeva, when hostilities had entirely ceased, being desirous of seeing his kinsmen, went to Nanda's cow-pens, and there again conversed with the herdsmen and their females, with affection and respect. By some, the elders, he was embraced; others, the juniors, he embraced; and with those of his own age, male or female, he talked and laughed. The cowherds made many kind speeches to Halayudha; but some of the Gopis spoke to him with the affectation of anger, or with feelings of jealousy, as they inquired after the loves of Krishna with the women of Mathura. "Is all well with the fickle and inconstant Krishna?" said they: "Does the volatile swain, the friend of an instant, amuse the women of the city by laughing at our rustic efforts (to please him)? Does he ever think of us, singing in chorus to his songs? Will he not come here once again to see his mother? But why talk of these things? it is a different tale to tell for

[p. 570]

him without us, and for us without him. Father, mother, brother, husband, kin, what have we not abandoned for his sake? but he is a monument of ingratitude. Yet tell us, does not Krishna talk of coming here? Falsehood is never, O Krishna, to be uttered by thee. Verily this is Damodara, this is Govinda, who has given up his heart to the damsels of the city, who has no longer any regard for us, but looks upon us with disdain." So saying, the Gopis, whose minds were fixed on Krishna, addressed Rama in his place, calling him Damodara and Govinda, and laughed and were merry; and Rama consoled them by communicating to them agreeable, modest, affectionate, and gentle messages from Krishna. With the cowherds he talked mirthfully, as he had been wont to do, and rambled along with them over the lands of Vraja [*1].

Footnotes

^570:1 This visit of Balarama to Vraja is placed by the Hari Vans'a anterior to the fall of Mathura; by the Bhagavata, long subsequent to the establishment of the Yadus at Dwaraka.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 571]

  

CHAP. XXV.

Balarama finds wine in the hollow of a tree; becomes inebriated; commands the Yamuna to come to him, and on her refusal drags her out of her course: Lakshmi gives him ornaments and a dress: he returns to Dwaraka, and marries Revati.

WHILST the mighty S'esha [*1], the upholder of the globe, was thus engaged in wandering amidst the forests with the herdsmen, in the disguise of a mortal--having rendered great services to earth, and still considering what more was to be achieved--Varuna, in order to provide for his recreation, said to his wife Varuni (the goddess of wine), "Thou, Madira, art ever acceptable to the powerful Ananta; go therefore, auspicious and kind goddess, and promote his enjoyments." Obeying these commands, Varuni went and established herself in the hollow of a Kadamba tree in the woods of Vrindavana. Baladeva, roaming about, came there, and smelling the pleasant fragrance of liquor, resumed his ancient passion for strong drink. The holder of the ploughshare observing the vinous drops distilling from the Kadamba tree, was much delighted, and gathered and quaffed them [*2] along with the herdsmen and the Gopis, whilst those who were skilful with voice and lute celebrated him in their songs. Being inebriated with the wine, and the drops of perspiration standing like pearls upon his limbs, he called out, not knowing what he said, "Come hither, Yamuna river, I want to bathe." The river, disregarding the words of a drunken man, came not at his bidding: on which

[p. 572]

[paragraph continues] Rama in a rage took up his ploughshare, which he plunged into her bank, and dragged her to him, calling out, "Will you not come, you jade? will you not come? Now go where you please (if you can)." Thus saying, he compelled the dark river to quit its ordinary course, and follow him whithersoever he wandered through the wood. Assuming a mortal figure, the Yamuna, with distracted looks, approached Balabhadra, and entreated him to pardon her, and let her go: but he replied, "I will drag you with my ploughshare in a thousand directions, since you contemn my prowess and strength." At last, however, appeased by her reiterated prayers, he let her go, after she had watered all the country [*3]. When he had bathed, the goddess of beauty, Lakshmi, came and gave him a beautiful lotus to place in one ear, and an earring for the other; a fresh necklace of lotus flowers, sent by Varuna; and garments of a dark blue colour, as costly as the wealth of the ocean: and thus decorated with a lotus in one ear, a ring in the other, dressed in blue garments, and wearing a garland, Balarama appeared united with loveliness. Thus decorated, Rama sported two months in Vraja, and then returned to Dwaraka, where the married Revati, the daughter of king Raivata, by whom he had two sons, Nishatha and Ulmuka [*4].

Footnotes

^571:1 The great serpent, of whom Balarama is an incarnation.

^571:2 There is no vinous exudation from the Kadamba tree (Nauclea Kadamba), but its flowers are said to yield a spirit by distillation; whence Kadambari is one of the synonymes of wine, or spiritous . The grammarians, however, also derive the word from some legend, stating it to be so called because it was produced from the hollow of a Kadamba tree on the Gomantha mountain. The Hari Vans'a, which alone makes the Gomantha mountain the scene of an exploit of Krishna and Rama, makes no mention of this origin of wine; and the Bhagavata merely says that Varuni took up her abode in the hollow of a tree. There must be some other authority therefore for this story.

^572:3 The Bhagavata and Hari Vans'a repeat this story; the latter very imperfectly; the former adds, that the Yamuna is still to be seen following the course along which she was dragged by Balarama. The legend probably alludes to the construction of canals from the Jumna, for the purposes of irrigation; and the works of the Mohammedans in this way, which are well known, were no doubt preceded by similar canals dug by order of Hindu princes.

^572:4 See page <page 439>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 573]

  

CHAP. XXVI.

Krishna carries off Rukmini: the princes who come to rescue her repulsed by Balarama. Rukmin overthrown, but spared by Krishna, founds Bhojakata. Pradyumna born of Rukmini.

BHISHMAKA was king of Vidarbha, residing at Kundina [*1]. He had a son named Rukmin, and a beautiful daughter termed Rukmini. Krishna fell in love with the latter, and solicited her in marriage; but her brother who hated Krishna, would not assent to the espousals. At the suggestion of Jarasandha, and with the concurrence of his son, the powerful sovereign Bhishmaka affianced Rukmini to S'is'upala. In order to celebrate the nuptials, Jarasandha and other princes, the friends of S'is'upala, assembled in the capital of Vidarbha; and Krishna, attended by Balabhadra and many other Yadavas, also went to Kundina to witness the wedding. When there, Hari contrived, on the eve of the nuptials, to carry off the princess [*2], leaving Rama and his kinsmen to sustain the weight of his enemies. Paundraka, the illustrious Dantavakra, Viduratha, S'is'upala, Jarasandha, S'alya, and other kings, indignant at the insult, exerted themselves to kill Krishna, but were repelled by Balarama and the Yadavas. Rukmin, vowing that he would never enter Kundina again until he had slain Kes'ava in fight, pursued and overtook him. In the combat that ensued, Krishna destroyed with his discus, as if in sport, the host of Rukmin, with all its horse, and elephants, and foot, and chariots, and overthrew him, and hurled him on the ground, and would have put him to death, but was withheld by the entreaties of Rukmini. "He is my only brother," she exclaimed, "and must not be slain by

[p. 574]

thee: restrain your wrath, O divine lord, and give me my brother in charity." Thus addressed by her, Krishna, whom no acts affect, spared Rukmin [*3]; and he (in pursuance of his vow) founded the city Bhojakata [*4], and ever afterwards dwelt therein. After the defeat of Rukmin, Krishna married Rukmini in due form, having first made her his own by the Rakshasa ritual [*5]. She bore him the gallant Pradyumna, a portion of the deity of love. The demon Sambara carried him off, but he slew the demon.

Footnotes

^573:1 Vidarbha is the country of Berar, and the name remains in the present city of Beder: the capital however, Kundinapur, is commonly identified with a place called Kundapur, about forty miles north-east of Amaravati (in Berar).

^573:2 When she had gone forth from the city to worship Ambika: Bhagavata. Indrani, the wife of Indra: Hari Vans'a. Our text tells the circumstance more concisely than the others.

^574:3 After depriving him of his eyebrows and hair. In the Bhagavata, Balarama also interferes in favour of Rukmin, and reproves Krishna for disfiguring him.

^574:4 Of course this was somewhere in the neighbourhood of Kundina or Vidarbha, and is usually supposed to be situated on the Narmada.

^574:5 That is, by violence: thus Manu; "The seizure of a maiden by force, whilst she weeps and calls for assistance, after her kinsmen and friends have been slain in battle, or wounded, and their houses broken open, is the marriage called Rakshasa." III. 33. According to the Bhagavata, Rukmini sends to invite Krishna to carry her off, and instructs him how to proceed.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 575]

  

CHAP. XXVII.

Pradyumna stolen by Sambara; thrown into the sea, and swallowed by a fish; found by Mayadevi: he kills Sambara, marries Mayadevi, and returns with her to Dwaraka. Joy of Rukmini and Krishna.

MAITREYA.--How, Muni, happened it that the hero Pradyumna was carried away by Sambara? and in what manner was the mighty Sambara killed by Pradyumna?

PARAS'ARA.--When Pradyumna was but six days old, he was stolen from the lying-in chamber by Sambara, terrible as death; for the demon foreknew that Pradyumna, if he lived, would be his destroyer. Taking away the boy, Sambara cast him into the ocean, swarming with monsters, into a whirlpool of roaring waves, the haunt of the huge creatures of the deep. A large fish swallowed the child, but he died not, and was born anew from its belly [*1]: for that fish, with others, was caught by the fishermen, and delivered by them to the great Asura Sambara. His wife Mayadevi, the mistress of his household, superintended the operations of the cooks, and saw, when the fish was cut open, a beautiful child, looking like a new shoot of the blighted tree of love. Whilst wondering who this should be, and how he could have got into the belly of the fish, Narada came to satisfy her curiosity, and said to the graceful dame, "This is the son of him by whom the whole world is created and destroyed, the son of Vishnu, who was stolen by Sambara from the lying-in chamber, and tossed by him into the sea, where he was swallowed by the fish. He is now in thy power; do thou, beautiful woman, tenderly rear this jewel of mankind." Thus counselled by Narada, Mayadevi took charge of the boy, and carefully reared him from childhood, being fascinated by the beauty of his person. Her affection became still more impassioned when he was decorated with the bloom of adolescence. The gracefully-moving Mayavati then, fixing her heart

[p. 576]

and eyes upon the high-minded Pradyumna, gave him, whom she regarded as herself, all her magic (and illusive) powers.

Observing these marks of passionate affection, the son of Krishna said to the lotus-eyed Mayadevi, "Why do you indulge in feelings so unbecoming the character of a mother?" To which she replied, "Thou art not a son of mine; thou art the son of Vishnu, whom Kala Sambara carried away, and threw into the sea: thou vast swallowed by a fish, but wast rescued by me from its belly. Thy fond mother, O beloved, is still weeping for thee." When the valiant Pradyumna heard this, he was filled with wrath, and defied Sambara to battle. In the conflict that ensued, the son of Madhava slew the whole host of Sambara. Seven times he foiled the delusions of the enchanter, and making himself master of the eighth, turned it against Sambara, and killed him. By the same faculty he ascended into the air, and proceeded to his father's house, where he alighted, along with Mayavati, in the inner apartments. When the women beheld Pradyumna, they thought it was Krishna himself. Rukmini, her eyes dimmed with tears, spoke tenderly to him, and said, "Happy is she who has a son like this, in the bloom of youth. Such would be the age of my son Pradyumna, if he was alive. Who is the fortunate mother adorned by thee? and yet from thy appearance, and from the affection I feel for thee, thou art assuredly the son of Hari."

At this moment Krishna, accompanied by Narada, arrived; and the latter said to the delighted Rukmini, "This is thine own son, who has come hither after killing Sambara, by whom, when an infant, he was stolen from the lying-in chamber. This is the virtuous Mayavati, his wife, and not the wife of Sambara. Hear the reason. When Manmatha, the deity of love, had perished [*2], the goddess of beauty, desirous to secure

[p. 577]

his revival, assumed a delusive form, and by her charms fascinated the demon Sambara, and exhibited herself to him in various illusory enjoyments. This thy son is the descended Kama; and this is the goddess Rati, his wife [*3]. There is no occasion for any uncertainty: this is thy daughter-in-law." Then Rukmini was glad, and Kes'ava also; the whole city resounded with exclamations of joy, and all the people of Dwaraka were surprised at Rukmini's recovering a son who had so long been lost.

Footnotes

^575:1 The Bhagavata tells the story in the same manner, but the Hari Vans'a omits the part of the fish.

^576:2 When he was reduced to ashes by a fiery glance from S'iva, in resentment of his inflaming him with passion for Uma. This legend is a favourite with the S'aiva Puranas, and is told in the Linga and Kalika, also in the Padma P. and Kas'i Khanda of the Skanda P. They do not say much about his resuscitation however; S'iva, in pity of Rati's grief, restoring him only to a bodiless existence as Ananga, whose place is to be in the hearts of men. The Linga adds, that when Vishnu, in consequence of the curse of Bhrigu, shall be born as the son of Vasudeva, Kama shall be born as one of his sons.

^577:3 The daughter of Daksha, but not enumerated amongst those formerly specified (<page 54>): she was born from his perspiration, according to the Kalika P.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 578]

  

CHAP. XXVIII.

Wives of Krishna. Pradyumna has Aniruddha: nuptials of the latter. Balarama beat at dice, becomes incensed, and slays Rukmin and others.

RUKMINI bare to Krishna these other sons, Charudeshna, Sudeshna, Charudeha, Sushena, Charugupta, Bhadracharu, Charuvinda, Sucharu, and the very mighty Charu; also one daughter, Charumati. Krishna had seven other beautiful wives, Kalindi, Mitravrinda, the virtuous Nagnajiti, the queen Jambavati; Rohini, of beautiful form; the amiable and excellent daughter of the king of Madra, Madri; Satyabhama, the daughter of S'atrujit; and Lakshmana, of lovely smiles [*1]. Besides these, he had sixteen thousand other wives [*2].

[p. 579]

The heroic Pradyumna was chosen for her lord, at her public choice of a husband, by the daughter of Rukmin; and he had by her the powerful and gallant prince Aniruddha, who was fierce in fight, an ocean of prowess, and the tamer of his foes. Kes'ava demanded in marriage for him the granddaughter of Rukmin; and although the latter was inimical to Krishna, he betrothed the maiden (who was his son's daughter) to the son of his own daughter (her cousin Aniruddha). Upon the occasion of the nuptials Rama and other Yadavas attended Krishna to Bhojakata, the city of Rukmin. After the wedding had been solemnized, several of the kings, headed by him of Kalinga, said to Rukmin, "This wielder of the ploughshare is ignorant of the dice, which may be converted into his misfortune: why may we not contend with him, and beat him, in play?" The potent Rukmin replied to them, and said, "So let it be:" and he engaged Balarama at a game of dice in the palace. Balarama soon lost to Rukmin a thousand Nishkas [*3]: he then staked and lost another thousand; and then pledged ten thousand, which Rukmin, who was well skilled in gambling, also won. At this the king of Kalinga laughed aloud, and the weak and exulting Rukmin grinned, and said, "Baladeva is losing, for he knows nothing of the game; although, blinded by a vain passion for play, he thinks he understands the dice." Halayudha, galled by the broad laughter of the Kalinga prince, and the contemptuous speech of Rukmin, was exceedingly angry, and, overcome with passion, increased his stake to ten millions of Nishkas. Rukmin accepted the challenge, and therefore threw the dice. Baladeva won, and cried aloud, "The stake is mine." But Rukmin called out as loudly, that he was the winner. "Tell no lies, Bala," said he: "the stake is yours; that is true; but I did not agree to it: although this be won by you, yet still I am the winner." A deep voice was then heard in the sky, inflaming still more the anger of the high-spirited Baladeva, saying, "Bala has rightly won the whole sum, and Rukmin speaks falsely: although he did

[p. 580]

not accept the pledge in words, he did so by his acts (having cast the dice)." Balarama thus excited, his eyes red with rage, started up, and struck Rukmin with the board on which the game was played, and killed him [*4]. Taking hold of the trembling king of Kalinga, he knocked out the teeth which he had shewn when he laughed. Laying hold of a golden column, he dragged it from its place, and used it as a weapon to kill those princes who had taken part with his adversaries. Upon which the whole circle, crying out with terror, took to flight, and escaped from the wrath of Baladeva. When Krishna heard that Rukmin had been killed by his brother, he made no remark, being afraid of Rukmini on the one hand, and of Bala on the other; but taking with him the newly wedded Aniruddha, and the Yadava tribe, he returned to Dwaraka.

Footnotes

^578:1 The number specified, however, both in this place and in c. 32, is nine, instead of eight. The commentator endeavours to explain the difference by identifying Rohini with Jambavati; but in the notices of Krishna's posterity, both in this work and in the Bhagavata, she is distinct from Jambavati. She seems, however, to be an addition to the more usually specified eight, of whose several marriages the Bhagavata gives the best account. In addition to the three first, respecting whom particulars are found in all, Kalindi, or the Yamuna, is the daughter of the sun, whom Krishna meets on one of his visits to Indraprastha, and who claims him as the reward of her penance. His next wife, Mitravinda, is the daughter of his maternal aunt, Rajadhidevi (<page 437>), and sister of Vinda and Anuvinda, kings of Avanti: she chooses him at her Swayambara. The Hari Vans'a calls her Saudatta, daughter of S'ivi; and she is subsequently termed S'aivya by our text. Nagnajiti or Satya, the next wife, was the daughter of Nagnajit, king of Kausala, and was the prize of Krishna's overcoming seven fierce bulls, whom no other hero had encountered with success. Bhadra, princess of Kekaya, also Krishna's cousin, the daughter of S'rutakirtti (<page 437>), was his next: and his eighth wife was Madri, the daughter of the king of Madra; named, according to the Bhagavata, Lakshana; and to the Hari V., Saubhima; distinguishing, as does our text, clearly Lakshmana from Madri, and like it having no satisfactory equivalent for Bhadra. The Hari Vans'a does not name Rohini, but specifies other names, as Vrihati, &c. In the life of Krishna, taken from the Bhagavata through a Persian translation, published by Maurice, there is a curious instance of the barbarous distortion of Sanscrit names by the joint labours of the English and Persian translators: the wives of Krishna are written, Rokemenee (Rukmini), Seteebhavani (Satyabhama), Jamoometee (Jambavati), Kalenderee (Kalindi), Lechmeena (Lakshmana), Soeta (Satya?), Bhedravatee (Bhadra), Mihrbenda (Mitravinda).

^578:2 These, according to the Mahabharata, [p. 579] Adi P., were Apsarasas, or nymphs. In the Dana Dharma they become Krishna's wives through a boon given him by Uma.

^579:3 The Nishka is a weight of gold, but according to different authorities of very different amount. The commentator here terms it a weight of four Suvarnas, each about 175 grains troy.

^580:4 The Bhagavata and Hari Vans'a, which both tell this story, agree in the death of Rukmin; but in the Mahabharata he appears in the war, on the side of the Pandavas. The occurrence is a not very favourable picture of courtly manners; but scenes of violence have never been infrequent at the courts of Rajput princes.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 581]

  

CHAP. XXIX.

Indra comes to Dwaraka, and reports to Krishna the tyranny of Naraka. Krishna goes to his city, and puts him to death. Earth gives the earrings of Aditi to Krishna, and praises him. He liberates the princesses made captive by Naraka, sends them to Dwaraka, and goes to Swarga with Satyabhama.

S'AKRA, the lord of the three worlds, came mounted on his fierce elephant Airavata to visit S'auri (Krishna) at Dwaraka. Having entered the city, and been welcomed by Hari, he related to the hero the deeds of the demon Naraka. "By thee, Madhusudana, lord of the gods," said Indra, "in a mortal condition, all sufferings have been soothed. Arishta, Dhenuka, Chanura, Mushtika, Kes'in, who sought to injure helpless man, have all been slain by thee. Kansa, Kuvalayapida, the child-destroying Putana, have been killed by thee; and so have other oppressors of the world. By thy valour and wisdom the three worlds have been preserved, and the gods, obtaining their share of the sacrifices offered by the devout, enjoy satisfaction. But now hear the occasion on which I have come to thee, and which thou art able to remedy. The son of the earth [*1], called Naraka, who rules over the city of Pragjyotisha [*2], inflicts a great injury upon all creatures. Carrying off the maidens of gods, saints, demons, and kings, he shuts them up in his own palace. He has taken away the umbrella of Varuna, impermeable to water, the jewel mountain crest of Mandara, and the celestial nectar-dropping earrings of my mother Aditi; and he now demands my elephant Airavata. I have thus explained to you, Govinda, the tyranny of the Asura; you can best determine how it is to be prevented."

Having heard this account, the divine Hari gently smiled, and, rising from his throne, took Indra by the hand: then wishing for the eater of

[p. 582]

the serpents, Garuda immediately appeared; upon whom his master, having first seated Satyabhama upon his back, ascended, and flew to Pragjyotisha. Indra mounted his elephant, and, in the sight of the inhabitants of Dwaraka, went to the abode of the gods.

The environs of Pragjyotisha were defended by nooses, constructed by the demon Muru, the edges of which were as sharp as razors; but Hari, throwing his discus Sudars'ana amongst them, cut them to pieces. Then Muni started up, but Kes'ava slew him, and burnt his seven thousand sons, like moths, with the flame of the edge of his discus. Having slain Mum, Hayagriva, and Panchajana, the wise Hari rapidly reached the city of Pragjyotisha: there a fierce conflict took place with the troops of Naraka, in which Govinda destroyed thousands of demons; and when Naraka came into the field, showering upon the deity all sorts of weapons, the wielder of the discus, and annihilator of the demon tribe, cut him in two with his celestial missile. Naraka being slain, Earth, bearing the two earrings of Aditi, approached the lord of the world, and said, "When, O lord, I was upheld by thee in the form of a boar, thy contact then engendered this my son. He whom thou gayest me has now been killed by thee: take therefore these two earrings, and cherish his progeny. Thou, lord, whose aspect is ever gracious, hast come to this sphere, in a portion of thyself, to lighten my burden. Thou art the eternal creator, preserver, and destroyer of the universe; the origin of all worlds, and one with the universe: what praise can be worthily offered to thee? Thou art the pervader, and that which is pervaded; the act, the agent, and the effect; the universal spirit of all beings: what praise can be worthily offered to thee? Thou art the abstract soul, the sentient and the living soul of all beings, the imperishable: but since it is not possible to praise thee worthily, then why should the hopeless attempt proceed? Have compassion, O universal soul, and forgive the sins which Naraka has committed. Verily it is for the sanctification of thy son that he has been killed by thee." The lord, who is the substance of all creatures, having replied to the earth, "Even so," proceeded to redeem the various gems from the dwelling of Naraka. In the apartments of the women he found sixteen thousand and one hundred

[p. 583]

damsels [*3]: he also beheld in the palace six thousand large elephants, each having four tusks; twenty-one lakhs of horses of Kamboja and other excellent breeds: these Govinda dispatched to Dwaraka, in charge of the servants of Naraka. The umbrella of Varuna, the jewel mountain, which he also recovered, he placed upon Garuda; and mounting him himself, and taking Satyabhama with him, he set off to the heaven of the gods, to restore the earrings of Aditi [*4].

Footnotes

^581:1 By Vishnu, as the Varaha Avatara; but found and adopted by Janaka. Kalika P.

^581:2 In the centre of the country of Kamarupa, inhabited by Kiratas; the site of the shrines of Devi, as Dikkaravasini and Kamakhya. Kalika P.

^583:3 These were captive princesses, according to the Bhagavata; Apsarasas, or celestial nymphs, according to the Kalika P.; and these upon their rescue by Krishna became his wives.

^583:4 The legend of Naraka is related in more detail in the Bhagavata and Hari Vans'a, but is still more fully narrated in the Kalika Upa-purana. It may be considered as one of the various intimations that occur in the Puranas of hostilities between the worshippers of Vishnu and S'iva; Naraka being in an especial degree favoured by the latter.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 584]

  

CHAP. XXX.

Krishna restores her earrings to Aditi, and is praised by her: he visits the gardens of Indra, and at the desire of  carries off the Parijata tree. S'achi excites Indra to its rescue. Conflict between the gods and Krishna, who defeats them. Satyabhama derides them. They praise Krishna.

GARUDA, laden with the umbrella of Varuna and the jewel mountain, and bearing Hrishikes'a on his back to the court of Indra, went lightly, as if in sport, along. When they arrived at the portals of Swarga, Hari blew his shell; on which the gods advanced to meet him, bearing respectful offerings. Having received the homage of the divinities, Krishna went to the palace of the mother of the gods, whose turrets resembled white clouds; and on beholding Aditi, paid his respects to her, along with S'akra; and, presenting to her her own earrings, informed her of the destruction of the demon Naraka. The mother of the world, well pleased, then fixed her whole thoughts upon Hari, the creator, and thus pronounced his praise: "Glory to thee, O god with the lotus eyes, who removest all fear from those that worship thee. Thou art the eternal, universal, and living soul; the origin of all beings; the instigator of the mental faculty, and faculties of sense; one with the three qualities; beyond the three qualities; exempt from contraries; pure; existing in the hearts of all; void of colour, extension, and every transient modification; unaffected by the vicissitudes of birth or death, sleep or waking. Thou art evening, night, and day; earth, sky, air, water, and fire; mind, intellect, and individuality. Thou art the agent of creation, duration, and dissolution; the master over the agent; in thy forms which are called Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva. Thou art gods, Yakshas, Daityas, Rakshasas, Siddhas, Punnagas, Kushmandas, Pis'achas, Gandharbas, men, animals, deer, elephants, reptiles, trees, shrubs, creepers, climbers, and grasses; all things, large, middling, small, immense, or minute: thou art all bodies whatsoever, composed of aggregated atoms. This thy illusion beguiles all who are ignorant of thy true nature, the fools who imagine soul to be in that which is not spirit. The notions that "I am--this is mine," which influence mankind, are but the delusions of the mother of

[p. 585]

the world, originating in thy active agency. Those men who, attentive to their duties, diligently worship thee, traverse all this illusion, and obtain spiritual freedom. Brahma and all the gods, men and animals, are alike invested by the thick darkness of fascination, in the gulf of the illusions of Vishnu. That men, who having worshipped thee, should seek the gratification of their desires, and their own preservation, this, O lord, is also thy delusion. It is the sport of thy fascinations that induces men to glorify thee, to obtain thereby the continuance of their race, or the annihilation of their enemies, instead of eternal liberation. It is the fault of the impure acts of the unrighteous (to proffer such idle requests to one able to confer such more important benefits), like asking for a rag to cover one's nakedness from the tree that bestows whatever is solicited. Be propitious then, imperishable author of all the error that deceives the world; and dispel, O lord of all creatures, the conceit of knowledge, which proceeds from ignorance. Glory to thee, grasper of the discus, wielder of the bow, brandisher of the mace, holder of the shell; for such do I behold thee in thy perceptible form: nor do I know that form of thine, which is beyond perception! Have compassion on me, supreme god."

Vishnu, thus hymned by Aditi, smiled, and said to the mother of the gods, "Mother goddess, do thou shew favour unto me, and grant me thy blessing." "So be it," replied Aditi, "ever as thou wilt; and whilst thou dwellest amongst mortals, the first of men, thou shalt be invincible by gods or demons." Then Satyabhama, accompanied by the queen of Indra, addressed Aditi respectfully, and solicited her benedictions: and Aditi in reply said to her, "Fair-browed dame, thou shalt never suffer decay, nor loss of beauty: thou shalt be the asylum of all loveliness, dame of faultless shape." With the assent of Aditi, Indra then respectfully saluted Janarddana in all due form, and conducted him and Satyabhama through Nandana and other pleasant gardens of the gods; where Kes'ava, the destroyer of Kes'i, saw the Parijata tree, the favourite of S'achi, which was produced when the ocean was churned for ambrosia: the bark was of gold, and it was embellished with young sprouting leaves of a copper colour, and fruit-stalks bearing numerous clusters of fragrant fruit.

[p. 586]

[paragraph continues] When Satyabhama noticed this tree, she said to her beloved lord, Govinda, "Why should not this divine tree be transported to Dwaraka? If what you say is true, and I am really dear to you, then let this tree be taken away from hence, and planted in the gardens of my dwelling. You have often said to me, 'Neither Jambavati nor Rukmini is so dear to me, Satya, as you are.' If you have spoken the truth, and not mere flattery, then let this Parijata tree be the ornament of my mansion. I long to shine amidst my fellow queens, wearing the flowers of this tree in the braids of my hair."

Thus solicited by Satyabhama, Hari smiled upon her, and taking the Parijata plant, put it upon Garuda. The keepers of the garden remonstrated, and said, "This Parijata tree belongs to S'achi, the queen of the sovereign of the gods: it is not proper, Govinda, for you to remove it. At the time when the ocean was churned for the beverage of immortality, this tree was produced, for the purpose of providing S'achi with flowery ornaments. You cannot be suffered to depart with it. It is through ignorance that this is sought for by any one, as it is the especial property of her on whose countenance the king of the gods delights to look; and who shall go away with impunity, who attempts to carry it off? Assuredly the king of the gods will punish this audacity; for his hand launches the thunderbolt, and the immortals attend upon his steps. Forbear then, Krishna, nor provoke the hostility of all the gods. The wise will not commence actions that can be productive only of unpleasant consequences." Satyabhama, on hearing these words, was exceedingly offended, and said, "What right has S'achi--what has Indra--to the Parijata tree? it was produced at the churning of the ocean as the common property of all worlds. Wherefore, gods, should Indra alone possess it? In the same manner, guardians of the grove, as nectar, as the moon, as the goddess S'ri herself, so the Parijata tree is the common property of all the world: and since S'achi, confiding in the strength of her husband's arm, would keep it to herself, away with submission to her: Satya takes away the tree. Go quickly, and let Paulomi be told what I have said: repeat to her this contemptuous message from Satyabhama; 'If you are the beloved wife of your lord, if your husband is

[p. 587]

obedient to your authority, let him prevent my husband from carrying off this tree. I know your husband S'akra; I know the sovereign of the divinities; and I, who am a mortal, take this Parijata tree away from you.'"

Accordingly the warders of the garden went and reported to S'achi the message of Satyabhama. S'achi appealed to her husband, and excited the king of the gods to resent this affront: and Indra accordingly, attended by the army of the celestials, marched to attack Hari, in defence of the Parijata tree. The gods were armed with clubs, swords, maces, and darts; and Indra wielded the thunderbolt. As soon as Govinda saw the king of the gods advancing against him on his elephant, attended by the immortals, he blew his shell so that the sound filled all the regions, and he showered smilingly myriads of arrows upon his assailants. Beholding the air in all directions overspread with his darts, the celestials in return hurled innumerable missiles; but every one of these the destroyer of Madhu, and lord of all worlds, cut playfully into a thousand pieces with his shafts. The devourer of serpents, Garuda, laid hold of the noose of the sovereign of the waters, and tore it to fragments with his beak, as if it had been a little snake. The son of Devaki threw his mace at the club of Yama, and cast it broken upon the ground: he cut in bits the litter of the lord of wealth with his discus: a glance of his eye eclipsed the radiance of the sun: he severed Agni into a hundred parts with his arrows, and scattered the Vasus through the realms of space: with his discus he cut off the points of the tridents of the Rudras, and cast themselves upon the earth: and with the shafts shot from his bow he dispersed the Sadhyas, Vis'was, Maruts, and Gandharbas, like fleeces of cotton from the pods of the Simel tree, through the sky. Garuda also diligently plied his beak and wings and nails, and bit and bruised and scratched the deities who opposed his lord.

Then the king of the gods and the foe of Madhu encountered and overwhelmed each other with countless shafts, like rain-drops falling from two heavy clouds. Garuda in the conflict engaged with Airavata, and Janarddana was opposed to all the deities. When all the other weapons had been cut to pieces, Indra stood armed with his thunderbolt,

[p. 588]

and Krishna with the discus Sudars'ana. Beholding them thus prepared for fight, all the people of the three spheres exclaimed, "Alas! alas!" Indra launched his bolt, but in vain, for Hari caught and arrested it: he forbore, however, to hurl his discus, and only called out to Indra to stay. Satyabhama seeing Indra disarmed, and his elephant disabled by Garuda, and the deity himself about to retreat, said to him, "King of the triple sphere, it ill becomes the husband of S'achi to run away. Ornamented with Parijata garlands, she will approach you. Of what use is the sovereignty of heaven, embellished with the Parijata tree, no longer beholding S'achi meet you with affection as of yore? Nay, S'akra, fly not; you must not suffer shame: here, take the Parijata tree; let the gods be no longer annoyed. Sachs, inflated with pride of her husband, has not welcomed me to her dwelling with respectful presents. As a woman, I am light of purpose, and am anxious for my husband's fame; therefore have I instigated, S'akra, this contest with you. But I do not want the Parijata tree, nor do I wish to take that which is another's property. S'achi is proud of her beauty. What woman is not proud of her husband?" Thus spoken to by Satyabhama, the king of the gods turned back, and said to her, "Desist, wrathful dame, from afflicting your friend by further reproaches. I am not ashamed of being vanquished by him who is the author of the creation, preservation, and destruction of the world; who is the substance of all things; in whom, without beginning or middle, the universe is comprised; and from whom, and by whom, identical with all things, it proceeds, and will cease to be. What disgrace is it, O goddess, to any one to be discomfited by him who is the cause of creation, continuance, and dissolution? His form is the parent of all worlds, though infinitely subtle, and known to those only by whom all that may be known is known. Who is able to overcome the unborn, unconstituted, eternal lord, who has willed to become a mortal for the good of the world [*1]?"

Footnotes

^588:1 The Bhagavata merely says, "Incited by his wife, Krishna took away the Parijata tree, having subdued the gods, and planted it in the garden of Satyabhama." The Hari V. makes a long story of it, and tells it with some variations, especially in the commencement; Satyabhama's desire for the Parijata tree having been excited by Narada's presenting a flower from it to Krishna's other spouse, Rukmini.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 589]

  

CHAP. XXXI.

Krishna, with Indra's consent, takes the Parijata tree to Dwaraka; marries the princesses rescued from Naraka.

KES'AVA, being thus eulogized by the king of the gods, smiled, and spake gravely to him in reply. "Thou art Indra," said he, "the king of the celestials: we are but mortals, O lord of the world: thou must pardon therefore the offence that I have committed. Let this Parijata tree be taken to its appropriate situation. I removed it in compliance with the words of Satya. Receive back also this your thunderbolt, cast at me; for this is your proper weapon, the destroyer of your foes." Indra answered and said, "Thou beguilest us, O lord, in calling thyself a mortal; but we know thee to be the lord, although not endowed with subtlety of discernment. Thou art that thou art, engaged in the active preservation of the earth; thou extractest the thorns implanted in her bosom, destroyer of the demon race. Let this Parijata tree be transferred to Dwaraka, and it shall remain upon earth as long as thou abidest in the world of mortals." Hari, having assented to the proposal of Indra, returned to earth, hymned by attendant sages, saints, and quiristers of heaven.

When Krishna arrived over Dwaraka, he blew his shell, and delighted all the inhabitants with the sound. Then alighting from Garuda, he proceeded with Satyabhama to her garden, and there planted the great Parijata tree, the smell of which perfumed the earth for three furlongs, and an approach to which enabled every one to recollect the events of a prior existence; so that, on beholding their faces in that tree, all the Yadavas contemplated themselves in their (original) celestial forms. Then Krishna took possession of the wealth, elephants, horses, and women, which he had recovered from Naraka, and which had been brought to Dwaraka by the servants of the demon; and at an auspicious season he espoused all the maidens whom Naraka had carried off from their friends;

[p. 590]

at one and the same moment he received the hands of all of them, according to the ritual, in separate mansions. Sixteen thousand and one hundred was the number of the maidens, and into so many different forms did the foe of Madhu multiply himself; so that every one of the damsels thought that he had wedded her in his single person; and the creator of the world, Hari, the assumer of universal shape, abode severally in the dwelling of each of these his wives.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 591]

  

CHAP. XXXII.

Children of Krishna. Usha, the daughter of Bana, sees Aniruddha in a dream, and becomes enamoured of him.

PARAS'ARA.--I have enumerated to you Pradyumna and the other sons of Rukmini. Satyabhama bore Bhanu and Bhairika. The sons of Rohini were Diptimat, Tamrapakshi, and others. The powerful S'amba and other sons were born of Jambavati. Bhadravinda and other valiant youths were the sons of Nagnajiti. S'aivya (or Mitravinda) had several sons, of whom Sangramajit was the chief. Vrika and others were begotten by Hari on Madri. Lakshmana had Gatravat and others: and S'ruta and others were the sons of Kalindi [*1]. Krishna had sons also by his other wives, in all one hundred and eighty thousand. The eldest of the whole was Pradyumna, the son of Rukmini: his son was Aniruddha, from whom Vraja was born: his mother was Usha, the daughter of Bana, and grand-daughter of Bali, whom Aniruddha won in war. On that occasion a fierce battle took place between Hari and S'ankara, in which the thousand arms of Bana were lopped away by the discus of the former.

MAITREYA.--HOW happened it, venerable Brahman, that a contest on account of Usha arose between S'iva and Krishna? and in what manner did Hari cut off the thousand arms of Bana? This, illustrious sir, thou art able to narrate.

PARAS'ARA.--Usha, the daughter of Bana, having seen Parvati sporting with her lord, S'ambhu, was inspired with a wish for similar dalliance. The beautiful Gauri, who knows the hearts of all, said to Usha, "Do not grieve; you shall have a husband." "But when will this be?" thought Usha to herself, "or who will be my lord?" On which Parvati continued; "He who shall appear to you, princess, in a dream on the twelfth lunation of the light half of Vais'akha, he will be your husband."

[p. 592]

[paragraph continues] Accordingly, as the goddess had foretold, on that lunar day a youth appeared to Usha in a dream, of whose person she became enamoured. When she woke, and no longer perceived him, she was overcome with sorrow, and, unrestrained by modesty, demanded of her companion whither he had gone. The companion and friend of the princess was Chitralekha, the daughter of Kubhanda, the minister of Bana. "Of whom do you speak?" inquired she of Usha. But the princess, recollecting herself, was ashamed, and remained silent. At length, however, Chitralekha conciliated her confidence, and she related to her what had passed, and what the goddess had foretold; and she requested her friend to devise some means of uniting her with the person whom she had beheld in her dream.

Chitralekha then delineated the most eminent gods, demons, spirits, and mortals, and shewed them to Usha. Putting aside the portraits of gods, spirits, snake-gods, and demons, the princess selected those of mortals, and amongst them the heroes of the races of Andhaka and Vrishni. When she came to the likenesses of Krishna and Rama, she was confused with shame; from the portrait of Pradyumna she modestly averted her eyes; but the moment she beheld the picture of his son, the object of her passion, her eyes wide expanded, and all her bashfulness was discarded. "This is he! this is he!" said she to Chitralekha; and her friend, who was endowed with magic power, bade her be of good cheer, and set off through the air to Dwaraka.

Footnotes

^591:1 The Bhagavata says, each of his eight queens had ten sons, and gives the ten names of each set, with one or two exceptions.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 593]

  

CHAP. XXXIII.

Bana solicits S'iva for war: finds Aniruddha in the palace, and makes him prisoner. Krishna, Balarama, and Pradyumna come to his rescue S'iva and Skanda aid Bana: the former is disabled; the latter put to flight. Bana encounters Krishna, who cuts off all his arms, and is about to put him to death. S'iva intercedes, and Krishna a spares his life. Vishnu and S'iva are the same.

BEFORE this took place, Bana had been engaged in the adoration of the three-eyed god, and had thus prayed to him: "I am humiliated, O lord, by the possession of a thousand arms in a state of peace; let some hostilities ensue, in which I may derive some advantage from their possession. Without war, what is the use of these arms? they are but a burden to me." S'ankara replied, "When thy peacock banner shall be broken, thou shalt have war, the delight of the evil spirits that feast on the flesh of man." Bana, pleased by this promise, proffered his thanks to S'ambhu, and returned to his palace, where he found his standard broken; at which his joy was increased.

At that time the nymph Chitralekha returned from Dwaraka, and by the exercise of her magic power brought Aniruddha along with her. The guards of the inner apartments discovering him there with Usha, reported it to the king who immediately sent a body of his followers to seize the prince; but the valiant youth, taking up an iron club, slew his assailants: on which Bana mounted his car, advanced against him, and endeavoured to put him to death. Finding, however, that Aniruddha was not to be subdued by prowess, he followed the counsel of his minister, and brought his magical faculties into the conflict, by which he succeeded in capturing the Yadu prince, and binding him in serpent bonds.

When Aniruddha was missed from Dwaravati, and the Yadavas were inquiring of one another whither he had gone, Narada came to them, and told them that he was the prisoner of Bana, having been conveyed by a female, possessed of magic faculties, to S'onitapura [*1] When they heard

[p. 594]

this, they were satisfied; for they had imagined he had been taken away by the gods (in reprisal for the Parijata tree). Krishna therefore immediately summoned Garuda, who came with a wish; and mounting upon him, along with Bala and Pradyumna, he set off for the city of Bana. On their approach to the city they were opposed by the spirits who attend on Rudra, but these were soon destroyed by Hari, and he and his companions reached the vicinity of the town. Here mighty Fever, an emanation from Mahes'wara, having three feet and three heads [*2], fought desperately with Vishnu in defence of Bana. Baladeva, upon whom his ashes were scattered, was seized with burning heat, and his eyelids trembled: but he obtained relief by clinging to the body of Krishna. Contending thus with the divine holder of the bow, the Fever emanating from S'iva was quickly expelled from the person of Krishna by Fever which he himself engendered. Brahma beholding the impersonated malady bewildered by the beating inflicted by the arms of the deity, entreated the latter to desist; and the foe of Madhu refrained, and absorbed into himself the fever he had created. The rival Fever then departed, saying to Krishna, "Those men who call to memory the combat between us shall be ever exempt from febrile disease."

Next Vishnu overcame and demolished the five fires [*3], and with perfect ease annihilated the army of the Danavas. Then the son of Bali (Bana),

[p. 595]

with the whole of the Daitya host, assisted by S'ankara and Kartikeya, fought with S'auri. A fierce combat took place between Hari and S'ankara; all the regions shook, scorched by their flaming weapons, and the celestials felt assured that the end of the universe was at hand. Govinda, with the weapon of yawning, set S'ankara a-gape; and then the demons and the demigods attendant upon S'iva were destroyed on every side; for Hara, overcome with incessant gaping, sat down in his car, and was unable longer to contend with Krishna, whom no acts affect. The deity of war, Kartikeya, wounded in the arm by Garuda, struck by the weapons of Pradyumna, and disarmed by the shout of Hari, took to flight. Bana, when he saw S'ankara disabled, the Daityas destroyed, Guha fled, and S'iva's followers slain, advanced on his vast car, the horses of which were harnessed by Nandis'a, to encounter Krishna and his associates Bala and Pradyumna. The valiant Balabhadra, attacking the host of Bana, wounded them in many ways with his arrows, and put them to a shameful rout; and their sovereign beheld them dragged about by Rama with his ploughshare, or beaten by him with his club, or pierced by Krishna with his arrows: he therefore attacked Krishna, and a fight took place between them: they cast at each other fiery shafts, that pierced through their armour; but Krishna intercepted with his arrows those of Bana, and cut them to pieces. Bana nevertheless wounded Kes'ava, and the wielder of the discus wounded Bana; and both desirous of victory, and seeking enraged the death of his antagonist, hurled various missiles at each other. When an infinite number of arrows had been cut to pieces, and the weapons began to be exhausted, Krishna resolved to put Bana to death. The destroyer of the demon host therefore took up his discus Sudars'ana, blazing with the radiance of a hundred suns. As he was in the act of casting it, the mystical goddess Kotavi, the magic lore of the demons, stood naked before him [*4]. Seeing her before him, Krishna, with unclosed eyes, cast

[p. 596]

[paragraph continues] Sudars'ana, to cut off the arms of Bana. The discus, dreaded in its flight by the whole of the weapons of the demons, lopped off successively the numerous arms of the Asura. Beholding Krishna with the discus again in his hand, and preparing to launch it once more, for the total demolition of Bana, the foe of Tripura (S'iva) respectfully addressed him. The husband of Uma, seeing the blood streaming from the dissevered arms of Bana, approached Govinda, to solicit a suspension of hostilities, and said to him, "Krishna, Krishna, lord of the world, I know thee, first of spirits, the supreme lord, infinite felicity, without beginning or end, and beyond all things. This sport of universal being, in which thou takest the persons of god, animals, and men, is a subordinate attribute of thy energy. Be propitious therefore, O lord, unto me. I have given Bana assurance of safety; do not thou falsify that which I have spoken. He has grown old in devotion to me; let him not incur thy displeasure. The Daitya has received a boon from me, and therefore I deprecate thy wrath." When he had concluded, Govinda, dismissing his resentment against the Asura, looked graciously on the lord of Uma, the wielder of the trident, and said to him, "Since you, S'ankara, have given a boon unto Bana, let him live: from respect to your promises, my discus is arrested: the assurance of safety granted by you is granted also by me. You are fit to apprehend that you are not distinct from me. That which I am, thou art; and that also is this world, with its gods, demons, and mankind. Men contemplate distinctions, because they are stupified by ignorance." So saying, Krishna went to the place where the son of Pradyumna was confined. The snakes that bound him were destroyed, being blasted by the breath of Garuda: and Krishna, placing him, along with his wife, upon the celestial bird, returned with Pradyumna and Rama to Dwaraka [*4].

Footnotes

^593:1 The synonymes of S'onitapura in the Trikanda S'esha are Devikota, Banapur, Kotivarsham, and Ushavana. The first is usually considered to be the modern Devicotta in the Carnatic, which is commonly believed to be the scene of Bana's defeat. The name, however, occurs in other parts of India; in the Dekhin, on [p. 594] the banks of the Godavari, according to Wilford the capital of Munja (As. Res. IX. 199); and in Asam, near Gwalpara, as the city of the Daityas. As. Res. XIV. 443 Hamilton notices the remains of a city so called in Dinajpur. In the Kalika P., Bana is described as the friend, and apparently neighbour, of Naraka, king of Pragjyotish or Asam.

^594:2 Alluding to the three stages of febrile paroxysms, or to the recurrence of tertian ague. A contest with this enemy, in the course of military operations, is an allegory which the British armies in India too often illustrate.

^594:3 The Ahavaniya, Garhapatya, Dakshina, Sabhya, and Avasathya, are the five fires; of which the three first have a religious, and the other two a secular character. The first is a fire prepared for oblations at an occasional sacrifice: the second is the household fire, to be perpetually maintained: the third is a sacrificial fire, in the centre of the other two, and placed to the south: the Sabhya is a fire lighted to warm a party: and the Avasatthya the common domestic or culinary fire. Manu, III. too, 185, and Kulluka Bhatta's explanation.

^595:4 Kotavi is said to be an eighth portion of Rudrani, and the tutelary goddess of the Daityas, composed of incantations. The Hari V. calls her also Lamba, and intimates her being the mother of Bana, and as identical with Durga. The word in the lexicons designates a naked woman, and is thence applicable to Durga, in some of her forms.

^596:4 There can be little doubt that this legend describes a serious struggle between the S'aivas and Vaishnavas, in which the latter, according to their own report, were victorious; and the S'aivas, although they attempt to make out a sort of compromise between Rudra and Krishna, are obliged to admit his having the worst of the conflict, and his inability to protect his votary. The Bhagavata tells the story much as the text. The Hari V. amplifies even more than usual, the narrative occupying nearly seventy pages of the French translation. The legend is to be found to the same purport, but in various degrees of detail, in the Agni P., Kurma P., Padma P. (Uttara Khanda), Vamana P., and Brahma Vaivartta P. (Krishna Janma Khanda).

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 597]

  

CHAP. XXXIV.

Paundraka, a Vasudeva, assumes the insignia and style of Krishna, supported by the king of Kas'i. Krishna marches against, and destroys them. The son of the king sends a magical being against Krishna: destroyed by his discus, which also sets Benares on fire, and consumes it and its inhabitants.

MAITREYA.--Of a truth the divine S'auri, having assumed a mortal body, performed great achievements in his easy victories over S'akra and S'iva, and all their attendant divinities. I am now desirous to hear from you, illustrious sage, what other mighty exploit the humiliator of the prowess of the celestials performed.

PARAS'ARA.--Hear, excellent Brahman, with reverent attention, an account of the burning of Varanasi by Krishna, in the course of his relieving the burdens of the earth.

There was a Vasudeva who was called Paundraka [*1], and who, though not the Vasudeva, was flattered by ignorant people as the descended deity, until he fancied himself to be the Vasudeva [*2] who had come down upon earth. Losing all recollection of his real character, he assumed the emblems of Vishnu, and sent an ambassador to the magnanimous Krishna with this message; "Relinquish, thou foolish fellow, the discus; lay aside all my insignia, my name, and the character of Vasudeva; and come and do me homage; and I will vouchsafe thee means of subsistence." At which Janarddana laughed, and replied, "Go, messenger, back to Paundraka, and say to him from me, 'I will dispatch to thee my emblem the discus without fail. Thou wilt rightly apprehend my meaning, and consider what is to be done; for I shall come to thy city, bringing the discus with me, and shall undoubtedly consign it to thee. If thou wilt command me to come, I will immediately obey, and be with

[p. 598]

thee to-morrow; there shall be no delay: and, having sought thy asylum, I will so provide, O king, that I shall never more have any thing to dread from thee.'" So saying, he dismissed the, ambassador to report these words to his sovereign; and summoning Garuda, mounted him, and set off for the city of Paundraka [*3].

When the king of Kas'i heard of the preparations of Kes'ava, he sent his army (to the aid of Paundraka), himself bringing up the rear; and with the force of the king of Kas'i, and his own troops, Paundraka, the false Vasudeva, marched to meet Krishna. Hari beheld him afar off, standing in his car, holding a discus, a club, a mace, a scimitar, and a lotus, in his hands; ornamented with a garland of flowers; bearing a bow; and having his standard made of gold: he had also the Srivatsa mark delineated on his breast; he was dressed in yellow garments, and decorated with earrings and a tiara. When the god whose standard is Garuda beheld him, he laughed with a deep laugh, and engaged in conflict with the hostile host of cavalry and elephants, fighting with swords, scimitars, maces, tridents, spears, and bows. Showering upon the enemy the shafts from his S'aranga bow, and hurling at them his mace and discus, he quickly destroyed both the army of Paundraka and that of the king of Kas'i. He then said to the former, who was foolishly wearing his emblems, "Paundraka, you desired me by your envoy to resign to you all my insignia. I now deliver them to you. Here is

[p. 599]

my discus; here I give up my mace; and here is Garuda, let him mount upon thy standard." Thus speaking, he let fly the discus and the mace, by which Paundraka was cut to pieces, and cast on the ground; whilst the Garuda on his banner was demolished by the Garuda of Vishnu. The people, beholding this sight, exclaimed, "Alas! alas!" but the valiant king of Kas'i, adhering to the imposture of his friend, continued the conflict, till S'auri decapitated him with his arrows, shooting his head into the city of Kas'i, to the marvel of all the inhabitants. Having thus slain Paundraka and the king of Kas'i, with all their followers, S'auri returned to Dwaraka, where he lived in the enjoyment of heavenly delights.

When the inhabitants of Kas'i saw the head of their king shot into their city, they were much astonished, and wondered how it could have happened, and by whom the deed could have been done. Having ascertained that the king had been killed by Krishna, the son of the monarch of Kas'i [*4], together with the priest of the family, propitiated S'ankara; and that deity, well pleased to be adored in the sacred place Avimukta, desired the prince to demand a boon: on which he prayed, and said, "O lord, mighty god, through thy favour let thy mystic spirit arise to destroy Krishna, the murderer of my father." "It shall be so," answered S'ankara: and from out of the southern fire upsprang a vast and formidable female [*5], like flame out of fire, blazing with ruddy light, and with fiery radiance streaming amidst her hair. Angrily she called upon Krishna, and departed to Dwaraka; where the people, beholding her, were struck with dismay, and fled for protection to Madhusudana, the refuge of all worlds. The wielder of the discus knowing that the fiend had been produced by the son of the king of Kas'i, through his adoration of the deity whose emblem is a bull, and being engaged in sportive amusements, and playing at dice, said to the discus, "Kill this fierce creature, whose tresses are of plaited flame." Accordingly Sudars'ana, the discus

[p. 600]

of Vishnu, immediately attacked the fiend, fearfully enwreathed with fire, and wearing tresses of plaited flame. Terrified at the might of Sudars'ana, the creation of Mahes'wara awaited not his attack, but fled with speed, pursued by him with equal velocity, until she reached Varanas'i, repelled by the superior might of the discus of Vishnu.

The army of Kas'i, and the host of the demigods attendant upon S'iva, armed with all kinds of weapons, then sallied out to oppose the discus; but, skilled in the use of arms, he consumed the whole of the forces by his radiance, and then set fire to the city, in which the magic power of S'iva had concealed herself [*6]. Thus was Varanas'i burnt, with all its princes and their followers, its inhabitants, elephants, horses, and men, treasures and granaries, houses, palaces, and markets. The whole of a city, that was inaccessible to the gods, was thus wrapped in flames by the discus of Hari, and was totally destroyed. The discus then, with unmitigated wrath, and blazing fiercely, and far from satisfied with the accomplishment of so easy a task, returned to the hand of Vishnu [*7].

Footnotes

^597:1 From being, the commentator says, king of Pundra. The Bhagavata calls him chief of the Karushas; the Padma, king of Kas'i; but the Bhagavata, as well as our text, makes the king of Kas'i his friend and ally.

^597:2 According to the Padma P., he propitiates S'iva, and obtains from him the insignia which constitute a Vasudeva. The different authorities for this legend all use the term Vasudeva in the sense of a title.

^598:3 The Hari V. and Padma P. send Paundraka to Dwaraka. According to the latter, Narada incites Paundraka to the aggression, telling him he cannot be a Vasudeva till he has overcome Krishna: he goes, and is killed. The former work, as usual, enters into particulars of its own invention. Krishna is absent on a visit to S'iva at Kailasa, and during his absence Paundraka, assisted by Ekalavya, king of the Nishadas, makes a night attack upon Dwaraka. They are resisted by the Yadavas under Satyaki and Balarama; by the former of whom Paundraka is repeatedly overthrown, and all but slain: he requires so much killing, however, that he is likely to obtain the victory, when Krishna conies to the aid of his kinsmen, and after a protracted encounter, described in language employed a hundred times before, kills his competitor. The whole of the sections called the Kailasa Yatra, or Krishna's journey to Kailasa, must have been wanting in the copy used by M. Langlois, as they are not included in his translation. The chapters of the Hari V. according to his enumeration of them are 261: my copy has 316. 

^599:4 The Bhagavata names him Sudakshina; the Padma, Dandapani.

^599:5 A personified Kritya, a magical creation. The Padma has the same. The Bhagavata makes the product of the sacrificial fire a male, and sends him to Dwaraka, accompanied by a host of Bhutas, Suva's attendant goblins.

^600:6 According to the Bhagavata, the magical being himself destroys Sudakshina and his priest; but Sudars'ana consumes the people and the city. The Padma ascribes the destruction of the king and all his city to the discus. The Hari V. closes its narrative with the death of Paundraka, and makes no mention of the destruction of Benares. The circumstance is alluded to in a preceding section (s. 159) by Narada, when detailing the exploits of Krishna.

^600:7 In this legend, again, we have a contest between the followers of Vishnu and S'iva intimated, as, besides the assistance given by the latter to Paundraka, Benares--Varanas'i or Atimukta--has been from all time, as it is at present, the high place of the S'aiva worship. There is also an indication of a Vaishnava schism, in the competition between Paundra and Krishna for the title of Vasudeva, and the insignia of his divinity.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 601]

  

CHAP. XXXV.

S'amba carries off the daughter of Duryodhana, but is taken prisoner. Balarama comes to Hastinapur, and demands his liberation: it is refused: in his wrath he drags the city towards him, to throw it into the river. The Kuru chiefs give up S'amba and his wife.

MAITREYA.--I have a great desire to hear, excellent Brahman, some further account of the exploits of Balarama. You have related to me his dragging the Yamuna, and other mighty deeds, but you can tell me, venerable sir, some other of his acts.

PARAS'ARA.--Attend, Maitreya, to the achievements performed by Rama, who is the eternal, illimitable S'esha, the upholder of the earth. At the choice of a husband by the daughter of Duryodhana, the princess was carried off by the hero S'amba, the son of Jambavati. Being pursued by Duryodhana, Karna, Bhishma, Drona, and other celebrated chiefs, who were incensed at his audacity, he was defeated, and taken prisoner. When the Yadavas heard of the occurrence, their wrath was kindled against Duryodhana and his associates, and they prepared to take up arms against them; but Baladeva, in accents interrupted by the effects of ebriety, forbade them, and said, "I will go alone to the sons of Kuru; they will liberate S'amba at my request." Accordingly he went to the elephant-styled city (Hastinapur), but took up his abode in a grove without the town, which he did not enter. When Duryodhana and the rest heard that he had arrived there, they sent him a cow, a present of fruits and flowers, and water. Bala received the offering in the customary form, and said to the Kauravas, "Ugrasena commands you to set S'amba at liberty." When Duryodhana, Karna, Bhishma, Drona, and the others, heard this, they were very angry; and Bahlika and other friends of the Kauravas, who looked upon the Yadu race as not entitled to regal dignity, said to the wielder of the club, "What is this, Balabhadra, that thou hast uttered? What Yadava shall give orders to the chiefs of the family of Kuru? If Ugrasena issues his mandates to

[p. 602]

the Kauravas, then we must take away the white umbrella that he has usurped, and which is fit only for kings. Depart therefore, Balarama; you are entitled to our respect; but S'amba has been guilty of improper conduct, and we will not liberate him either at Ugrasena's commands or yours. The homage that is due to us, their superiors, by the Kukkura and Andhaka tribes, may not be paid by them; but who ever heard of a command issued by a servant to his master? Elevation to an equal seat has rendered you arrogant. We have committed a great mistake in neglecting, through our friendship for you, the policy (that teaches the danger of treating the abject with deference). Our sending you to-day a respectful present was an intimation of (personal) regard, which it was neither fit for our race to have proffered, nor for your's to have expected."

Having thus spoken, the Kuru chiefs, unanimously refusing to set the son of Hari at large, immediately returned into the city. Bala, rolling about with intoxication, and the wrath which their contemptuous language had excited, struck the ground furiously with his heel, so that it burst to pieces with a loud sound that reverberated through the regions of space. His eyes reddened with rage, and his brow was curved with frowns, as he exclaimed, "What arrogance is this, in such vile and pithless creatures! The sovereignty of the Kauravas, as well as our own, is the work of fate, whose decree it also is that they now disrespect or disobey the commands of Ugrasena. Indra may of right give his orders to the gods; and Ugrasena exercises equal authority with the lord of S'achi. Fie upon the pride that boasts a throne, the leavings of a hundred mortals! Is not he the sovereign of the earth, the wives of whose servants adorn themselves with the blossoms of the Parijata tree? Ugrasena shall be the undisputed king of kings; for I will not return to his capital until I have rid the world wholly of the sons of Kuru. I will destroy Karna, Duryodhana, Drona, Bhishma, Bahlika, Duhsas'ana, Bhurisravas, Somadatta, S'alya, Bhima, Arjuna, , the twins, and all the other vile descendants of Kuru, with their horses, elephants, and chariots. I will rescue the hero S'amba from captivity, and carry him, along with his wife, to Dwaraka, where I shall again behold Ugrasena

[p. 603]

and the rest of my kin. Or, authorized by the king of the gods to remove the burdens of the earth, I will take this capital of the Kauravas, with all the sons of Kuru, and cast the city of the elephant into the Bhagirathi."

So saying, the wielder of the club, Baladeva, his eyes red with rage, plunged the blade of his ploughshare downwards, beneath the ramparts of the city, and drew them towards him. When the Kauravas beheld Hastinapura tottering, they were much alarmed, and called loudly on Rama, saying, "Rama, Rama! hold, hold! suppress your wrath! have mercy upon us! Here is S'amba, and his wife also, delivered up to thee. Forgive our sins, committed in ignorance of thy wondrous power." Accordingly, issuing hurriedly from the city, the Kauravas delivered S'amba and his bride to the mighty Balarama, who, bowing to Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa, who addressed him in conciliatory language, said, "I am satisfied;" and so desisted. The city bears the marks of the shock it received, even to the present day--such was the might of Rama--proving both his strength and prowess. The Kauravas then offering homage to S'amba and to Bala, dismissed the former with his wife and a bridal portion [*1].

Footnotes

^603:1 This adventure is related in the Bhagavata, and very briefly noticed in the Hari Vans'a; but I have not found any mention of it in the Mahabharata. It may have been suggested originally by Hastinapura having sustained some injury either from an earthquake or from the encroachments of the river, which, as is recorded, compelled the removal of the capital to Kausambi (<page 461>).

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 604]

  

CHAP. XXXVI.

The Asura Dwivida, in the form of an ape, destroyed by Balarama.

HEAR also, Maitreya, another exploit performed by the mighty Balarama. The great Asura, the foe of the friends of the gods, Naraka, had a friend of exceeding prowess in the monkey named Dwivida, who was animated by implacable hostility against the deities, and vowed to revenge on the whole of them the destruction of Naraka by Krishna, at the instigation of the king of the celestials, by preventing sacrifices, and effecting the annihilation of the mortal sphere. Blinded by ignorance, he accordingly interrupted all religious rites, subverted all righteous observances, and occasioned the death of living beings: he set fire to the forests, to villages, and to towns: sometimes he overwhelmed cities and hamlets with falling rocks; or lifting up mountains in the waters, he cast them into the ocean: then taking his place amidst the deep, he agitated the waves, until the foaming sea rose above its confines, and swept away the villages and cities situated upon its shores. Dwivida also, who could assume what shape he would, enlarged his bulk to an immense size, and rolling and tumbling and trampling amidst the corn fields, he crushed and spoiled the harvests. The whole world, disordered by this iniquitous monkey, was deprived of sacred study and religious rites, and was greatly afflicted.

On one occasion Hala.yudha was drinking in the groves of Raivata, along with the illustrious Revati and other beautiful females; and the distinguished Yadu, in whose praises songs were sung, and who was preeminent amidst graceful and sportive women, resembled Kuvera, the god of riches, in his palace. Whilst thus engaged, the monkey Dwivida came there, and stealing the ploughshare and the club of Baladeva, grinned at and mocked him, and laughed at the women, and threw over and broke the cups filled with wine. Balarama, becoming angry at this, threatened the monkey; but the latter disregarded his menaces, and made a chattering noise: on which Bala, starting up, seized his club in wrath;

[p. 605]

and the monkey laid hold of a large rock, which he burled at the hero. Bala casting his club at it, as it neared him, broke it into a thousand fragments, which, together with the club, fell upon the ground. Beholding the club prostrate, the monkey sprang over it, and struck the Yadava violently on the breast with his paws. Bala replied with a blow of his fist upon the forehead of Dwivida, which felled him, vomiting blood, and lifeless, to the earth. The crest of the mountain on which he fell was splintered into a hundred pieces by the weight of his body, as if the thunderer had shivered it with his thunderbolt. The gods threw down a shower of flowers upon Rama, and approached him, and praised him for the glorious feat he had performed. "Well has the world been freed," said they, "by thy prowess, O hero, of this vile ape, who was the ally of the enemy of the gods." Then they and their attendant spirits returned well pleased to heaven. Many such inimitable deeds were wrought by the illustrious Baladeva, the impersonation of S'esha, the supporter of the earth [*1].

Footnotes

^605:1 This exploit of Balarama is also similarly, but more vulgarly, related in the Bhagavata. It is simply said in the Hari Vans'a, and erroneously, that Menda and Dwivida were conquered by Krishna.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 606]

  

CHAP. XXXVII.

Destruction of the Yadavas. S'amba and others deceive and ridicule the Rishis. The former bears an iron pestle: it is broken, and thrown into the sea. The Yadavas go to Prabhasa by desire of Krishna: they quarrel and fight, and all perish. The great serpent S'esha issues from the mouth of Rama. Krishna is shot by a hunter, and again becomes one with universal spirit.

IN this manner did Krishna, assisted by Baladeva, destroy demons and iniquitous monarchs, for the good of the earth; and along with Phalguna [*1] also did he relieve earth of her load, by the death of innumerable hosts. Having thus lightened the burdens of the earth, and slain many unrighteous princes, he exterminated [*2], by the pretext of an imprecation denounced by Brahmans, his own Yadava race. Then quitting Dwaraka, and relinquishing his mortal being, the self-born reentered, with all his emanations, his own sphere of Vishnu.

MAITREYA.--Tell me how Janarddana effected the destruction of his own race under the plea of Brahmanical imprecation, and in what manner he relinquished his mortal body [*3].

PARAS'ARA.--At the holy place Pindaraka [*4], Viswamitra, Kanwa, and the great sage Narada, were observed by some boys of the Yadu tribe. Giddy with youth, and influenced by predestined results, they dressed and adorned Sumba, the son of Jambavati, as a damsel, and conducting her to the sages, they addressed them with the usual marks of reverence, and said, "What child will this female, the wife of Babhru, who is

[p. 607]

anxious to have a son, give birth to?" The sages, who were possessed of divine wisdom, were very angry to find themselves thus tricked by the boys, and said, "She will bring forth a club, that shall crush the whole of the Yadava race." The boys, thus spoken to by the sages, went and related all that had occurred to Ugrasena; and, as foretold, a club was produced from the belly of S'amba. Ugrasena had the club, which was of iron, ground to dust, and thrown into the sea; but the particles of dust there became rushes [*5]. There was one part of the iron club which was like the blade of a lance, and which the Andhakas could not break: this, when thrown into the sea, was swallowed by a fish; the fish was caught, the iron spike was extracted from its belly, and was taken by a hunter named Jara. The all-wise and glorious Madhusudana did not think fit to counteract what had been predetermined by fate.

Then there came to Kes'ava, when he was private and alone, a messenger from the gods, who addressed him with reverence, and said, "I am sent to you, O lord, by the deities, and do thou hear what Indra, together with the Vis'was, Maruts, Adityas, Sadhyas, and Rudras, respectfully represents. More than a hundred years have elapsed since thou, in favour to the gods, hast descended upon earth, for the purpose of relieving it of its load. The demons have been slain, and the burden of earth has been removed: now let the immortals once again behold their monarch in heaven. A period exceeding a century has passed: now, if

[p. 608]

it be thy pleasure, return to Swarga. This is the solicitation of the celestials. But should such not be thy will, then remain here as long as it may be desirable to thy dependants [*6]." To this Krishna replied, "All that thou hast said I am well aware of. The destruction of the Yadavas by me has commenced. The burdens of the earth are not removed until the Yadavas are extirpated. I will effect this also in my descent, and quickly; for it shall come to pass in seven nights. When I have restored the land of Dwaraka to the ocean, and annihilated the race of Yadu, I will proceed to the mansions of the immortals. Apprise the gods, that, having abandoned my human body, and accompanied by Sankarshana, I will then return to them. The tyrants that oppressed the earth, Jarasandha and the rest, have been killed; and a youth, even of the race of Yadu, is, no less than they, an incumbrance. When therefore I have taken away this great weight upon earth, I will return to protect the sphere of the celestials. Say this to them." The messenger of the gods, having received this reply, bowed, and took his heavenly course to the king of the gods.

The mighty Krishna now beheld signs and portents both in earth and heaven, prognosticating, day and night, the ruin of Dwaraka [*7].

[p. 609]

[paragraph continues] Shewing these to the Yadavas, he said, "See; behold these fearful phenomena: let us hasten to Prabhasa, to avert these omens." When he had thus spoken to the eminent Yadava, the illustrious Uddhava saluted and said to him, "Tell me, O lord, what it is proper that I should do, for it seems to me that thou wilt destroy all this race: the signs that are manifest declare nothing less than the annihilation of the tribe." Then Krishna replied to him, "Do you go by a celestial route, which my favour shall provide you, to the holy place Badarikas'rama, in the Gandhamadana mountain, the shrine of Naranarayana; and on that spot, sanctified by them, thou, by meditating on me, shalt obtain perfection through my favour. When the race of Yadu shall have perished, I shall proceed to heaven; and the ocean shall inundate Dwaraka, when I have quitted it." Accordingly Uddhava, thus instructed by Kes'ava, saluted him with veneration, and departed to the shrine of Naranarayana [*8].

Then the Yadavas ascended their rapid cars, and drove to Prabhasa [*9], along with Krishna, Rama, and the rest of their chiefs [*10]. They bathed there, and, excited by Vasudeva, the Kukkuras and Andhakas indulged in liquor. As they drank, the destructive flame of dissension was kindled amongst them by mutual collision, and fed with the fuel of abuse. Infuriated by the divine influence, they fell upon one another with missile weapons, and when those were expended, they had recourse to the rushes growing nigh. The rushes in their hands became like thunderbolts,

[p. 610]

and they struck one another with them fatal blows. Pradyumna, S'amba, Kritavarman, Satyaki, Aniruddha, Prithu, Viprithu, Charuvarman, Charuka, Akrura, and many others, struck one another with the rushes, which had assumed the hardness of thunderbolts [*11]. Kes'ava interposed to prevent them, but they thought that he was taking part with each severally, and continued the conflict. Krishna then enraged took up a handful of rushes to destroy them, and the rushes became a club of iron, and with this he slew many of the murderous Yadavas; whilst others, fighting fiercely, put an end to one another. The chariot of the holder of the discus, named Jaitra, was quickly carried off by the swift steeds, and swept away by the sea, in the sight of Daruka the charioteer. The discus, the club, the bow, the quiver, the shell, and the sword of Kes'ava, having circumambulated their lord, flew along the path of the sun. In a short time there was not a single Yadava left alive, except the mighty Krishna and Daruka [*12]. Going towards Rama, who

[p. 611]

was sitting at the root of a tree, they beheld a large serpent coming out of his mouth. Having issued from his mouth, the mighty snake proceeded towards the ocean, hymned by saints and by other great serpents. Bringing an offering of respect, Ocean came to meet him; and then the majestic being, adored by attendant snakes, entered into the waters of the deep. Beholding the departure of the spirit of Balabhadra, Kes'ava said to Daruka, "All this is to be related by you to Vasudeva and Ugrasena. Go and inform them of the departure of Balabhadra, and the destruction of the Yadavas; also that I shall engage in religious meditation, and quit this body. Apprise Ahuka and all the inhabitants of Dwaraka [*13], that the sea will inundate the town: be ready therefore in expectation of the coming of Arjuna, and when he quits Dwaraka, no longer abide there, but go whithersoever that descendant of Kuru shall repair. Do you also go to the son of Kunti, and tell him, that it is my request that he will grant what protection he can to all my family. Then depart with Arjuna and all the people of Dwaravati, and let Vajra be installed sovereign over the tribe of Yadu."

Daruka, being thus instructed, prostrated himself again and again before Krishna, and walked round him repeatedly, and then departed as he had been desired; and having conducted Arjuna to Dwaravati, the intelligent servant of Krishna established Vajra as king. The divine Govinda then, having concentrated in himself that supreme spirit which is one with Vasudeva, was identified with all beings [*14]. Respecting the words of the Brahman, the imprecation of Durvasas [*15], the illustrious

[p. 612]

[paragraph continues] Krishna sat engaged in thought, resting his foot upon his knee. Then came there a hunter, named Jara [*16], whose arrow was tipped with a blade made of the piece of iron of the club, which had not been reduced to powder; and beholding from a distance the foot of Krishna, he mistook it for part of a deer, and shooting his arrow, lodged it in the sole [*17]. Approaching his mark, he saw the four-armed king, and, falling at his feet, repeatedly besought his forgiveness, exclaiming, "I have done this deed unwittingly, thinking I was aiming at a deer! Have pity upon me, who am consumed by my crime; for thou art able to consume me!" Bhagavat replied, "Fear not thou in the least. Go, hunter, through my favour, to heaven, the abode of the gods." As soon as he had thus spoken, a celestial car appeared, and the hunter, ascending it, forthwith proceeded to heaven. Then the illustrious Krishna, having united himself with his own pure, spiritual, inexhaustible, inconceivable, unborn, undecaying, imperishable, and universal spirit, which is one with Vasudeva, abandoned his mortal body and the condition of the threefold qualities [*18].

Footnotes

^606:1 A name of Arjuna, the great friend of Krishna, to whom the latter served as charioteer in the war between the Pandus and Kurus.

^606:2 With Balarama, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, and the rest.

^606:3 The legend of the destruction of the Yadava race, and the death of Krishna, appears probably in its earliest extant form in the Maus'ala Parva of the Mahabharata. It forms the narrative portion of the eleventh book of the Bhagavata, having been previously briefly adverted to in the first and third books; and it is summarily told in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma P.

^606:4 The village of Pindaraka, still held in veneration, is situated in Guzerat, about twenty miles from the north-west extremity of the Peninsula. Hamilton, II. 664.

^607:5 The term is Eraka, which is explained in some medical lexicons, 'a kind of grass.' The commentator also calls it a kind of grass: and in the text of the Mahabharata the term subsequently used, and as synonymous with it, is Trina, 'grass.' The Mahabharata, when describing the affray which follows, mentions that the grass or rushes, on being plucked by Krishna and the Yadavas, turn to clubs. The text, and that of the Bhagavata, here say, that the powdered particles, floating on the sea, became rushes; or the latter may imply, that they fastened upon grass or weeds. The commentator, however, explains that the particles of iron being borne to land, they were so transformed. The Mahabharata says nothing of the piece which could not be pounded, and this seems to be an embellishment either of our text or the Bhagavata. The Mahabharata, however, adds another precaution, which the two others have left unnoticed. Ugrasena causes a proclamation to be made, that none of the inhabitants of Dwaraka shall thenceforth drink wine, on pain of being impaled alive: and the people for some time observe the prohibition.

^608:6 Nothing of this kind occurs in the Mahabharata: our text therefore offers an embellishment. The Bhagavata, again, improves upon the text; for, not content with a messenger, it makes Brahma with the Prajapatis, S'iva with the Bhutas, Indra with the other divinities, all come in person; indicating evidently a later date, as plainly as the addition of the text shews it to be subsequent to the date of the legend in the Mahabharata.

^608:7 The Mahabharata, which delights in describing portents and signs, does not fail to detail them here. A dreadful figure, death personified, haunts every house, coming and going no one knows how, and being invulnerable to the weapons by which he is assailed. Strong hurricanes blow; large rats multiply, and infest the roads and houses, and attack persons in their sleep; Sarikas, or starlings, utter inauspicious screams in their cages; storks imitate the hooting of owls, and goats the howling of jackals; cows bring forth foals, and camels mules; food, in the moment of being eaten, is filled with worms; fire burns with discoloured flames; and at sunset and sunrise the air is traversed by headless and hideous spirits. There is more to the same effect, which neither our text nor the Bhagavata has ventured to detail. The whole passage has been published in Maurice's Ancient History of Hindustan, II. 463; translated apparently [p. 609] by the late Sir Charles Wilkins. The names have been much disfigured either by the copyist or compositor.

^609:8 In the Mahabharata it is said merely that Uddhava, who was versed in Yoga, foreseeing the destruction of the Yadavas, went away; that is, according to the commentator, he practised penance, and went to heaven. The Bhagavata, taking the hint, makes much more of it than our text, and expands it into a long course of instruction given by Krishna to Uddhava, occupying 150 leaves.

^609:9 See <page 561>. n. . By sending the Yadavas to Prabhasa, the commentator asserts, Krishna prevented purposely the Yadavas from obtaining Mukti, 'final liberation,' which would have been the consequence of dying at Dwaraka. Death at Prabhasa conferred only Indra's heaven.

^609:10 The Mahabharata describes them as going forth with horses, elephants, and cars, and their women, and abundance of good cheer, and varieties of wine and meat.

^610:11 The Bhagavata, like the text, adverts only in this general manner to the conflict; but the Mahabharata gives the particulars. Yuyudhana reproaches Kritavarman with having aided Aswatthaman in his night attack on the Pandu camp, and killing warriors in their sleep. Pradyumna joins in the abuse. Kritavarman retorts. Krishna looks at him angrily. Satyaki repeats the story of the S'yamantaka gem, by which he accuses Kritavarman of being an accomplice in the murder of Satrajit (<page 428>). Satyabhama, the daughter of the latter, then mixes in the quarrel, and incites Krishna to avenge her; but Satyaki anticipates him, and murders Kritavarman. Saineya and the Bhojas attack Satyaki; the Andhakas defend him; and the affray becomes general. Krishna attempts to part the combatants, until Pradyumna is killed; and then taking up a handful of rushes, which become an iron club, he kills indiscriminately all that come in his way. The conflict continues until the greater part of the combatants have fallen, including all Krishna's sons, and he then in wrath sweeps off all the survivors, except Babhru and Daruka, with his discus.

^610:12 The Mahabharata, as observed at the end of the last note, adds Babhru, but it presently gets rid of him. Krishna sends him to take care of the old people, the women, and children, in Dwaraka, whilst Daruka goes to bring Arjuna to their aid: but as he goes along, overcome with grief for the loss of his kindred, and approaching separation from Krishna, he is killed by a club that is cast from a snare or trap set by a hunter. Krishna then goes to Dwaraka, and desires Vasudeva to await the coming of Arjuna; after which he returns to Rama, and sees the phenomenon described in the text; the serpent being S'esha, of whom Balarama was the incarnation. The Bhagavata does not mention this incident, [p. 611] merely observing that Rama, by the power of Yoga, returned into himself; that is, into Vishnu.

^611:13 The women, the elders, and the children, amongst whom, as we shall presently see, was Vajra, the son of Aniruddha, who was established as chief of the Yadavas at Indraprastha, and who therefore escaped the destruction which overwhelmed their kinsmen, the Vrishnis, Kukkuras, and Andhakas, of Dwaraka. This was a fortunate reservation for the tribes which in various parts of Hindustan, both on the Ganges and in the Dakhin, profess to derive their origin from the Yadavas.

^611:14 The process is explained by the commentator: 'By the force of Dhyana, or abstraction, Krishna satisfies himself that he is Brahma, or universal spirit; and is next convinced that he is therefore all things; by which his individuality ceases.'

^611:15 The story is told in the Mahabharata, Durvasas was on one occasion hospitably [p. 612] entertained by Krishna, but the latter omitted to wipe away the fragments of the meal which had fallen on the foot of the irascible sage, who thereupon foretold that Krishna should be killed as in the text.

^612:16 This is an allegorical personage, however, for Jara signifies 'infirmity,' 'old age,' 'decay.'

^612:17 The Bhagavata explains how this part of the foot became exposed. Krishna had assumed one of the postures in which abstraction is practised: he had laid his left leg across his right thigh, by which the sole of the foot was turned outwards.

^612:18 He became Nirguna, 'devoid of all qualities.'

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 613]

  

CHAP. XXXVIII.

Arjuna comes to Dwaraka, and burns the dead, and takes away the surviving inhabitants. Commencement of the Kali age. Shepherds and thieves attack Arjuna, and carry off the women and wealth. Arjuna regrets the loss of his prowess to Vyasa; who consoles him, and tells him the story of Ashtavakra's cursing the Apsarasas. Arjuna and his brothers place Parikshit on the throne, and go to the forests. End of the fifth book.

ARJUNA having found the bodies of Krishna and of Rama, performed for them, and the rest of the slain, the obsequial rites. The eight queens of Krishna, who have been named, with Rukmini at their head, embraced the body of Hari, and entered the funeral fire [*1]. Revati also, embracing the corpse of Rama, entered the blazing pile, which was cool to her, happy in contact with her lord. Hearing these events, Ugrasena and Anakadundubhi, with Devaki and Rohini, committed themselves to the flames [*2]. The last ceremonies were performed for all these by Arjuna, who then made all the people leave the city, and took Vajra with him. The son of Kunti conducted the thousands of the wives of Krishna, with Vajra, and all the people, from Dwaraka, with tenderness and care, and travelled slowly away. The Sudharman palace and the Parijata tree, which had been brought to earth by Krishna, both proceeded to heaven; and on the same day that Hari departed from the earth the powerful dark-bodied Kali age descended [*3]. The ocean rose, and submerged the whole of Dwaraka, except alone the dwelling of the deity of the race of Yadu. The sea has not yet been able to wash that temple away, and there Kes'ava constantly abides, even in the present day. Whoever visits that holy shrine, the place where Krishna pursued his sports, is liberated from all his sins [*4].

[p. 614]

The son of Pritha, Arjuna, halted the people he had brought from Dwaraka in the Panchanada country [*5], in a rich and fertile spot; but the desires of the robbers (of the neighbourhood) were excited, when they observed so many widowed females, also such great riches, in the possession of Arjuna alone. Inflamed by their cupidity, they assembled the villainous Abhiras [*6], and said to them, "Here is this Arjuna, immensely rich, and having numerous women, whose husbands have been slain, passing confidently amongst us; a disgrace to all brave men. His pride is raised by the death of Bhishma, Drona, Jayadratha, Karna, and others, whom he has slain: he does not know the prowess of simple villagers. Up, up; take your long thick staves: this stupid fellow despises us. Why should we not lift up our arms?" So saying, they rushed, armed with cudgels and clods of earth, upon the people, who were without their lord. Arjuna encountered them, and said to them in derision, "Retire, wretches, ignorant of what is right, unless ye are desirous of dying." But they disregarded his menaces, and seized his treasures and his women, the wives of Viswaksena. Thereupon Arjuna began to brace his heavenly bow Gandiva, irresistible in battle; but it was in vain; for,

[p. 615]

in spite of all his efforts to tighten it, it continued flaccid: neither could he call to recollection the incantations of the superhuman weapons. Losing all patience, he launched, as best he might, his shafts upon the enemy; but those shot from Gandiva merely scratched the skin. The arrows given him by Agni to carry certain destruction now were themselves destroyed, and were fatal to Arjuna in his contest with herdsmen. He endeavoured to recall the might of Krishna; animated by which, his numerous arrows had overthrown mighty kings; but he tried in vain, for now they were put aside by the peasants, or they flew at random, wide of their aim. His arrows being expended, he beat the banditti with the horn of his bow; but they only laughed at his blows: and the barbarians, in the sight of Arjuna, carried off all the women of the Vrishni and Andhaka tribes, and went their way [*7].

Then Jishnu was sorely distressed, and lamented bitterly, exclaiming, Alas! alas! I am deserted by my lord!" and he wept: and in that instant the bow and heavenly arms, his car and steeds, perished entirely, like a donation to an unlearned Brahman. "Resistless," said he, "are the decrees of fate, by whom feebleness has been inflicted upon me, deprived of my illustrious friend, and victory given to the base. These two arms are mine; mine, is this fist; this is my place; I am Arjuna: but without that righteous aid all these are pithless. The valour of Arjuna, the strength of Bhima, was all his work; and without him I am overcome by peasants: it cannot be from any other cause." So saying, Arjuna went to the city of Mathura, and there installed the Yadava prince, Vajra, as its king. There he beheld Vyasa, who was living in a wood, and he approached the sage, and saluted him respectfully. The Muni surveyed him for some time, as he lay prostrate at his feet, and said to him, "How is it that I see you thus shorn of your lustre? Have you been guilty of illicit intercourse with women, or of the death of a Brahman? or have you suffered some grievous disappointment? that you are so dejected. Have your prayers for progeny, or other good gifts, proved fruitless? or

[p. 616]

have you indulged improper passions? that your lustre is so dim. Or are you one that devours the meal he has given to the Brahmans? Say, Arjuna, have you seized upon the substance of the poor? Has the wind of a winnowing basket lighted upon you? or has an evil eye gazed upon you, Arjuna? that you look thus miserable. Have you been touched by the water of a finger-nail? or has the water of a water-jar sprinkled you? or, what is most probably the case, have you been beaten by your inferiors in battle?"

Arjuna, having sighed deeply, related to Vyasa all the circumstances of his discomfiture, and continued; "Hari, who was our strength, our might, our heroism, our prowess, our prosperity, our brightness, has left us, and departed. Deprived of him, our friend, illustrious, and ever kindly speaking, we have become as feeble as if made of straw. Purushottama, who was the living vigour of my weapons, my arrows and my bow, is gone. As long as we looked upon him, fortune, fame, wealth, dignity never abandoned us: but Govinda is gone from amongst us. That Krishna has quitted earth, through whose power Bhishma, Drona, the king of Anga, Duryodhana, and the rest, were consumed. Not I alone, but Earth, has grown old, miserable, and lustreless, in the absence of the holder of the discus. Krishna, through devotion to whom Bhishma and other mighty men perished like moths in the flame of my valour, is gone; and I am now overcome by cowherds. The bow Gandiva, that was famed throughout the three worlds, has been foiled, since he has departed, by the sticks of peasants: the myriads of women over whom I was lord have been carried off from me by thieves, armed but with cudgels: the whole household of Krishna, O Krishna [*8], has been forcibly carried away by peasants, who with their staves have put my strength to shame. That I am shorn of my lustre I do not marvel: it is wonderful that I live. Surely, grandsire, I alone am so shameless as to survive the stain of indignity inflicted by the vile."

Vyasa replied to Arjuna, and said, "Think no more, my son, of your disgrace: it does not become you to grieve. Know that time subjects all beings to similar vicissitude. Time effects the production and dissolution

[p. 617]

of all creatures. All that exists is founded on time. Know this, Arjuna, and retain your fortitude. Rivers, seas, mountains, the whole earth, gods, men, animals, trees, insects, are all created, and all will be destroyed, by time. Knowing that all that is, is the effect of time, be tranquillized. These mighty works of Krishna, whatever they have been, have been performed to relieve earth of its burdens: for this he has come down. Earth, oppressed by her load, has had recourse to the assembly of the immortals; and Janarddana, who is one with time, has descended on that account. This object has been now accomplished: all the kings of the earth are slain; the race of Vrishni and Andhaka is destroyed: no more remained for him to accomplish. Therefore has the lord departed whither he pleased, his ends being all fulfilled. At the period of creation the god of gods creates; in that of duration he preserves; and at the end of all he is mighty to annihilate. Now all is done. Therefore, Arjuna, be not afflicted by thy defeat: the prowess of mortals is the gift of time. Bhishma, Karna, and other kings, have been slain by thee alone; this was the work of time: and why, therefore, should not thy discomfiture, by those less than thou art, occur? In like manner as through thy devotion to Vishnu these were overthrown by thee, so at last has thy defeat by miserable thieves been wrought by time. That divinity, assuming various bodies, preserves the world; and in the end the lord of creatures destroys it. In the birth of thy fortunes Janarddana was thy friend; in their decline, thy enemies have been favoured by Kes'ava. Who would have believed that thou shouldst slay all the descendants of Kuru, and kindred of Ganga? Who would have believed that peasants should triumph over thee? Be assured, son of Pritha, that it is but the sport of the universal Hari that the Kauravas have been destroyed by thee, and that thou hast been defeated by herdsmen. With respect to the women whom thou lamentest, and who have been carried off by the thieves, hear from me an ancient story, which will explain why this has happened.

"In former times a Brahman, named Ashtavakra [*9], was pursuing his

[p. 618]

religious penances, standing in water, and meditating on the eternal spirit, for many years. In consequence of the overthrow of the Asuras, there was a great festival on the summit of Meru: on their way to which, Rambha, Tilottama, and hundreds and thousands of beautiful nymphs, saw the ascetic Ashtavakra, and they praised and hymned him for his devotions. They bowed down before him, and eulogized him, as he was immersed up to his throat in water, his hair twisted in a braid. So they sang in honour of him whatever they thought would be most agreeable to that most eminent of Brahmans. Ashtavakra at last said to them, 'I am well pleased with you, illustrious damsels; whatever you wish for, ask of me, and I will give it you, however difficult it may be of attainment.' Then all those nymphs, Rambha, Tilottama, and others, recorded in the Vedas, replied, 'It is enough for us that thou art pleased; what need we aught else, venerable Brahman?' But some amongst them said, 'If, exalted sir, you are indeed pleased with us, then grant us a husband, the best of men, and sovereign of the Brahmans.' 'So be it,' replied Ashtavakra, and thereupon came up from the waters. When the nymphs beheld him coming out of the water, and saw that he was very ugly, and crooked in eight places, they could not restrain their merriment, but laughed aloud. The Muni was very angry, and cursed them, and said, 'Since you have been so impertinent as to laugh at my deformity, I denounce upon you this imprecation: through the grace I have shewn unto you, you shall obtain the first of males for your husband; but in consequence of my curse, you shall afterwards fall into the hands of thieves.' When the nymphs heard this uttered by the Muni, they endeavoured to appease him; and they so far succeeded, that he announced to them they should finally return to the sphere of the gods. It is in consequence, then, of the curse of the Muni Ashtavakra that these females, who were at first the wives of Kes'ava, have now fallen into the hands of the barbarians; and there is no occasion, Arjuna, for you to regret it in the least. All this destruction has been effected by the lord

[p. 619]

of all; and your end is also nigh at hand, since he has withdrawn from you strength, splendour, valour, and preeminence. Death is the doom of every one who is born: fall is the end of exaltation: union terminates in separation: and growth tends but to decay. Knowing all this, wise men are susceptible of neither grief nor joy; and those who learn their ways are even as they are (equally free from pleasure or pain). Do you therefore, most excellent prince, understand this truth, and, along with your brothers, relinquish every thing, and repair to the holy forest. Go now, and say from me to Yudhishthira, that he to-morrow, with his brethren, tread the path of heroes."

Thus instructed by Vyasa, Arjuna went and related to the other sons of Pritha all that be had seen, had experienced, and had heard. When he had communicated to them the message of Vyasa, the sons of Pandu placed Parikshit on the throne, and went to the forest.

I have thus narrated to you, Maitreya, in detail, the actions of Vasudeva, when he was born in the race of Yadu.

Footnotes

^613:1 The Mahabharata takes the wives of Krishna first to Indraprastha, and there Rukmini and four others burn; but Satyabhama and others become ascetics, going to perform Tapasya in the forest.

^613:2 It is merely said in the Mahabharata that Vasudeva expired; on which four of his wives burnt themselves.

^613:3 The Kali age commenced from the death of Krishna, according to the usual notions; but it is commonly supposed to commence a little later, or with the reign of Parikshit.

^613:4 The Bhagavata agrees with the text in [p. 614] excepting the temple of Dwaraka, and asserting that it still remains, in direct contradiction of the Mahabharata, which declares that the sea did not spare any part whatever. It is clear, therefore, that when the latter was compiled the temple was not standing, and that it was erected between the date of the compilation and that of the two Puranas. The present shrine, which is held in great repute, stands at the extremity of the peninsula of Guzerat. It is still an object of pilgrimage; it was so in the reign of Akbar (Ayin Akbari); and has been so, no doubt, from a remote period. The image formerly worshipped there was carried off 600 years ago, and this was most probably subsequent to the date of both the Puranas; for the idol was a form of Krishna, called Rana chor, a popular divinity, unknown in the Pauranik pantheon. Another image was substituted in place of that which was taken away. Notwithstanding the testimony of our text, and that of the Bhagavata, the originality of the temple is disputed, and a place thirty miles south from Purbandar is said to be the spot where Dwaraka was swallowed up by the ocean. Hamilton, from Macmurdo, &c. I. 662.

^614:5 'The country of the five rivers,' the Panjab: rather an out of the way route from Dwaraka to .

^614:6 Abhiras mean 'herds,' and they are afterwards called by Arjuna, Gopalas, 'herdsmen' The pastoral tribes of the west of India, and particularly those of Afghanistan, almost always combine the character of freebooter with that of shepherd.

^615:7 The principal wives of Krishna, however, according to the Mahabharata, escaped. The occurrence is described there much in the same way, but more briefly. It is not detailed in the Bhagavata.

^616:8 A name of Vyasa.

^617:9 The story of Ashtavakra is related in the Mahabharata. He was the son of Kahora, who neglecting his wife, was rebuked for it by his yet unborn son. The [p. 610] father angrily cursed him, that he should be born bent in every part; and he was accordingly brought forth crooked (vakra) in eight limbs (ashta). He became nevertheless a celebrated sage. See also Hindu Theatre, I. 293, note.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 620] [p. 621]

  

VISHNU PURANA.

  

BOOK VI.

  

CHAP. I.

Of the dissolution of the world: the four ages: the decline of all things, and deterioration of mankind, in the Kali age.

MAITREYA.--You have narrated to me, illustrious sage, the creation of the world, the genealogies of the patriarchs, the duration of the Manwantaras, and the dynasties of princes, in detail. I am now desirous to hear from you an account of the dissolution of the world, the season of total destruction, and that which occurs at the expiration of a Kalpa [*1].

PARAS'ARA.--Hear from me, Maitreya, exactly the circumstances of the end of all things, and the dissolution that occurs either at the expiration of a Kalpa, or that which takes place at the close of the life of Brahma. A month of mortals is a day and night of the progenitors: a year of mortals is a day and night of the gods. Twice a thousand aggregates of the four ages is a day and night of Brahma [*2]. The four ages are the Krita, Treta, Dwapara, and Kali; comprehending together twelve thousand years of the gods. There are infinite successions of these four ages, of a similar description, the first of which is always called the Krita, and the last the Kali. In the first, the Krita, is that age which is created by Brahma; in the last, which is the Kali age, a dissolution of the world occurs.

[p. 622]

MAITREYA.--Venerable sir, you are able to give me a description of the nature of the Kali age, in which four-footed virtue [*3] suffers total extinction.

PARAS'ARA.--Hear, Maitreya, an account of the nature of the Kali age, respecting which you have inquired, and which is now close at hand.

The observance of caste, order, and institutes will not prevail in the Kali age, nor will that of the ceremonial enjoined by the Sama, Rik, and Yajur Vedas. Marriages in this age will not be conformable to the ritual, nor will the rules that connect the spiritual preceptor and his disciple be in force. The laws that regulate the conduct of husband and wife will be disregarded, and oblations to the gods with fire no longer be offered. In whatever family he may be born, a powerful and rich man will be held entitled to espouse maidens of every tribe. A regenerate man will be initiated in any way whatever, and such acts of penance as may be performed will be unattended by any results [*4]. Every text will be scripture that people choose to think so [*5]: all gods will be gods to them that worship them; and all orders of life will be common alike to all persons. In the Kali age, fasting, austerity, liberality, practised according to the pleasure of those by whom they are observed, will constitute righteousness. Pride of wealth will be inspired by very insignificant possessions. Pride of beauty will be prompted by (no other personal charm than fine) hair. Gold, jewels, diamonds, clothes, will all have perished, and then hair will be the only ornament with which women can decorate themselves. Wives will desert their husbands, when they lose their property; and they only who are wealthy will be considered by women as their lords. He who gives away much money will be the master of men; and family descent will no longer be a title

[p. 623]

of supremacy. Accumulated treasures will be expended on (ostentatious) dwellings. The minds of men will be wholly occupied in acquiring wealth; and wealth will be spent solely on selfish gratifications. Women will follow their inclinations, and be ever fond of pleasure. Men will fix their desires upon riches, even though dishonestly acquired. No man will part with the smallest fraction of the smallest coin [*6], though entreated by a friend. Men of all degrees will conceit themselves to be equal with Brahmans. Cows will be held in esteem only as they supply milk [*7]. The people will be almost always in dread of dearth, and apprehensive of scarcity; and will hence ever be watching the appearances of the sky: they will all live, like anchorets, upon leaves and roots and fruit, and put a period to their lives through fear of famine and want. In truth there will never be abundance in the Kali age, and men will never enjoy pleasure and happiness. They will take their food without previous ablution, and without worshipping fire, gods, or guests, or offering obsequial libations to their progenitors. The women will be fickle, short of stature, gluttonous: they will have many children, and little means: scratching their heads with both hands, they will pay no attention to the commands of their husbands or parents: they will be selfish, abject, and slatternly: they will be scolds and liars: they will be indecent and immoral in their conduct, and will ever attach themselves to dissolute men. Youths, although disregarding the rules of studentship, will study the Vedas. Householders will neither sacrifice nor practise becoming liberality. Anchorets will subsist upon food accepted from rustics; and mendicants will be influenced by regard for friends and associates [*8]. Princes, instead of protecting, will plunder their subjects; and, under the pretext of levying customs, will rob merchants of their property. In

[p. 624]

the Kali age every one who has cars and elephants and steeds will be a Raja [*9]: every one who is feeble will be a slave. Vais'yas will abandon agriculture and commerce, and gain a livelihood by servitude or the exercise of mechanical arts. S'udras, seeking a subsistence by begging, and assuming the outward marks of religious mendicants, will become the impure followers of impious and heretical doctrines [*10].

Oppressed by famine and taxation, men will desert their native lands, and go to those countries which are fit for coarser grains [*11]. The path of the Vedas being obliterated, and men having deviated into heresy, iniquity will flourish, and the duration of life will therefore decrease. In consequence of horrible penances not enjoined by scripture, and of the vices of the rulers, children will die in their infancy. Women will bear children at the age of five, six, or seven years; and men beget them when they are eight, nine, or ten. A man will be grey when he is twelve; and no one will exceed twenty years of life [*12]. Men will possess little sense, vigour, or virtue, and will therefore perish in a very brief period. In proportion as heresy extends, so, Maitreya, shall the progress of the Kali age be estimated by the wise. In proportion as the number of the pious, who adhere to the lessons of the Vedas, diminishes--as the efforts of individuals who cultivate virtue relax--as the first of males becomes no longer the object of sacrifices--as respect for the teachers of the Vedas declines--and as regard is acknowledged for the disseminators

[p. 625]

of heresy--so may wise men note the augmented influence of the Kali age [*13].

In the Kali age, Maitreya, men, corrupted by unbelievers, will refrain from adoring Vishnu, the lord of sacrifice, the creator and lord of all; and will say, "Of what authority are the Vedas? what are gods or Brahmans? what need is there of purification with water?" Then will the clouds yield scanty rain: then will the corn be light in ear, and the grain will be poor, and of little sap: garments will be mostly made of the fibres of the San [*14]: the principal of trees will be the Sami [*15]: the prevailing caste will be the S'udra: millet will be the more common grain: the milk in use will be chiefly that of goats: unguents will be made of Usira grass. The mother and father-in-law will be venerated in place of parents; and a man's friends will be his brother-in-law, or one who has a wanton wife. Men will say, "Who has a father? who has a mother? each one is born according to his deeds:" and therefore they will look upon a wife's or husband's parents as their own. Endowed with little sense, men, subject to all the infirmities of mind, speech, and body, will daily commit sins; and every thing that is calculated to afflict beings, vicious, impure, and wretched, will be generated in the Kali age. Then shall some places follow a separate duty [*16], devoid of holy study, oblations to fire, and invocations of the gods [*17]. Then, in the

[p. 626]

[paragraph continues] Kali age, shall a man acquire by a trifling exertion as much eminence in virtue as is the result of arduous penance in the Krita age, or age of purity [*18].

Footnotes

^621:1 Two kinds of great or universal dissolution are here intimated; one occurring at the end of a Kalpa, or day of Brahma, to which the term Upasanhriti is applied in the text, and Atyantika laya by the commentator; and the other taking place at the end of the life of Brahma, which is termed a great or elemental dissolution: Maha pralaya and Prakrita pralaya.

^621:2 These measures of time are more fully detailed in the first book: see <page 22>.

^622:3 This is an allusion to a popular notion, originating probably with Manu: "In the Krita age the genius of truth and right stands firm on his four feet; but in the following ages he is deprived successively of one foot," &c. I. 81, 82.

^622:4 'Such an act is just what it is;' that is, it may be attended by inconvenience to the individual, but is utterly inefficacious for the expiation of sin.

^622:5 Whether it is conformable or contradictory to the Vedas and the law. The passage may be rendered also, 'The doctrine or dogma of any one soever will be scripture.'

^623:6 He will not part with the half of the half of half a Pana; that is, with ten Cowries; a Pana being equal to eighty Cowries, or small shells. Five Panas are equal to one Ana, or the sixteenth of a Rupee; and, at two shillings the Rupee, ten Cowries are equal to about one-seventh of a farthing.

^623:7 They will be valued for their individual use only, not from any notion of their generic sanctity.

^623:8 The Bhagavata has, "Religious students will be regardless of vows and purification; householders will beg, not give alms; anchorets will dwell in villages; and mendicants will be desirous of riches."

^624:9 That is, princes and warriors will be so no longer by virtue of their birth and caste.

^624:10 Most of the mendicant orders admit members without distinction of caste; but probably Buddhists especially are here intended. The Bhagavata repeatedly alludes to the diffusion of heretical doctrines and practices, the substitution of outward signs and marks for devotion, and the abandonment of the worship of Vishnu. The S'aiva mendicant orders are probably those especially in view. The same probably are intended by our text in the subsequent allusion to unauthorized austerities, and sectarial marks.

^624:11 'Gavedhuka (Coix barbata) and other bad sorts of grain;' Another reading is, 'Countries growing wheat, barley, and the like.' But to place wheat and barley amongst inferior grains, and to rank them lower than rice, is a classification that could have occurred to a native of Bengal alone.

^624:12 The Vayu says three and twenty; the Bhagavata, from twenty to thirty.

^625:13 The complaints of the prevalence of heterodox doctrines, and neglect of the practices of the Vedas, which recur in the Bhagavata and our text, indicate a period of change in the condition of the Hindu religion, which it would be important to verify. If reference is made to Buddhism, to which in some respects the allusions especially apply, it would probably denote a period not long subsequent to the Christian era; but it is more likely to be of a later date, or in the eighth and ninth centuries, when S'ankara is said to have reformed a variety of corrupt practices, and given rise to others. See As. Res. vol. XVI. p. la.

^625:14 Crotolaria juncea.

^625:15 The silk cotton, Bombax heptaphylla.

^625:16 The expression Kwachil-loka, 'a certain place,' is explained by the commentator, Kikata, &c.; confirming the inference that Buddhism is especially aimed at in the previous passages; for Kikata, or south Behar, is the scene of S'akya's earliest and most successful labours.

^625:17 Several of the Puranas contain allusions to the degeneracy of the Kali age, [p. 626] but none afford more copious details. The description in the Bhagavata is much shorter; that of the Vayu is much the same, and employs many of the same verses and illustrations.

^626:18 This might be suspected of being said ironically, referring to what had been just observed of places where a religion prevailed that required neither study nor sacrifice. The commentator, however, understands it literally, and asserts that allusion is here made to the Vaishnava faith, in which devotion to Vishnu or Krishna, and the mere repetition of his name, are equally efficacious in the Kali age with the penances and sacrifices of the preceding ages: therefore he concludes the Kali, by this one property, is the best of all the ages. This interpretation is confirmed by the following chapter.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 627]

  

CHAP. II.

Redeeming properties of the Kali age. Devotion to Vishnu sufficient to salvation in that age for all castes and persons.

UPON this subject, Maitreya, you shall hear what the wise Vyasa has related, as it is communicated truly by me.

It was once a matter of dispute amongst the sages, at what season the least moral merit obtained the greatest reward, and by whom it was most easily displayed. In order to terminate the discussion, they went to Veda Vyasa to remove their doubts. They found the illustrious Muni, my son, half immersed in the water of the Ganges; and awaiting the close of his ablutions, the sages remained on the banks of the sacred stream, under shelter of a grove of trees. As my son plunged down into the water, and again rose up from it, the Munis heard him exclaim, "Excellent, excellent, is the Kali age!" Again he dived, and again rising, said in their hearing, "Well done, well done S'udra; thou art happy!" Again he sank down, and as he once more emerged they heard him say, "Well done, well done, women; they are happy! who are more fortunate than they?" After this, my son finished his bathing, and the sages met him as he approached to welcome them. After he had given them seats, and they had proffered their respects, the son of Satyavati said to them, "On what account have you come to me?" They replied, "We came to you to consult you on a subject on which we entertain some doubt; but that may be at present suspended: explain to us something else. We heard you say, 'Excellent is the Kali age! Well done, S'udra! Well done, women!' Now we are desirous to know why this was said, why you called them repeatedly, happy. Tell us the meaning of it, if it be not a mystery. We will then propose to you the question that occupies our thoughts."

Being thus addressed by the Munis, Vyasa smiled, and said to them, "Hear, excellent sages, why I uttered the words 'Well done, well done.' The fruit of penance, of continence, of silent prayer, and the like, practised in the Krita age for ten years, in the Treta for one year, in the Dwapara for a month, is obtained in the Kali age in a day and night: therefore did I exclaim, 'Excellent, excellent, is the Kali age!' That

[p. 628]

reward which a man obtains in the Krita by abstract meditation, in the Treta by sacrifice, in the Dwapara by adoration, he receives in the Kali by merely reciting the name of Kes'ava. In the Kali age a man displays the most exalted virtue by very little exertion; therefore, pious sages, who know what virtue is, I was pleased with the Kali age. Formerly the Vedas were to be acquired by the twice-born through the diligent observance of self-denial; and it was their duty to celebrate sacrifices conformably to the ritual. Then idle prayers, idle feasts, and fruitless ceremonies, were practised but to mislead the twice-born; for although observed by them devoutly, yet, in consequence of some irregularity in their celebration, sin was incurred in all their works, and what they ate, or what they drank, did not effect the fulfilment of their desires. In all their objects the twice-born enjoyed no independence, and they attained their respective spheres only with exceeding pain. The S'udra, on the contrary, more fortunate than they, reaches his assigned station by rendering them service, and performing merely the sacrifice of preparing food, in which no rules determine what may or may not be eaten, what may or may not be drunk. Therefore, most excellent sages, is the S'udra fortunate.

"Riches are accumulated by men in modes not incompatible with their peculiar duties, and they are then to be bestowed upon the worthy, and expended in constant sacrifice. There is great trouble in their acquisition; great care in their preservation; great distress from the want of them; and great grief for their loss. Thus, eminent Brahmans, through these and other sources of anxiety, men attain their allotted spheres of Prajapati and the rest only by exceeding labour and suffering. This is not the case with women: a woman has only to honour her husband, in act, thought, and speech, to reach the same region to which he is elevated; and she thus accomplishes her object without any great exertion. This was the purport of my exclamation, 'Well done!' the third time. I have thus related to you what you asked. Now demand the question you came to put to me, in any way you please, and I will make you a distinct reply."

The Munis then said to Vyasa, "The question we intended to have asked you has been already answered by you in your reply to our

[p. 629]

subsequent inquiry." On hearing which, Krishna Dwaipayana laughed, and said to the holy persons who had come to see him, whose eyes were wide open with astonishment, "I perceived, with the eye of divine knowledge, the question you intended to ask, and in allusion to it I uttered the expressions, 'Well done, well done.' In truth, in the Kali age duty is discharged with very little trouble by mortals, whose faults are all washed away by the water of their individual merits; by S'udras, through diligent attendance only upon the twice-born; and by women, through the slight effort of obedience to their husbands. Therefore, Brahmans, did I thrice express my admiration of their happiness; for in the Krita and other ages great were the toils of the regenerate to perform their duty. I waited not for your inquiry, but replied at once to the question you purposed to ask. Now, ye who know what virtue is, what else do you wish me to tell you?"

The Munis then saluted and praised Vyasa, and, being freed by him from uncertainty, departed as they came. To you also, excellent Maitreya, have I imparted this secret, this one great virtue of the otherwise vicious Kali age. The dissolution of the world, and the aggregation of the elements, I will now describe to you [*1].

Footnotes

^629:1 The illustration of the efficacy of devotion to Vishnu given in this chapter is peculiar to this Purana, but the doctrine is common to it and the Bhagavata. It is repeatedly inculcated in that work. The parallel passage in the twelfth book is the following. "Purushottama, abiding in the hearts of men, takes away all the sins of the Kali age, produced by place or property. Bhagavan, abiding in the heart, and heard, repeated, read of, worshipped, or honoured, dissipates the ills of men for ten thousand births. As fire, entering into the substance of gold, purifies it from the alloy with which it is debased in the mine, so Vishnu, united with the devotee, is the refiner from all that is evil. By learning, penance, suppression of breath, friendship, pilgrimage, ablution, mortification, gifts, prayer, the soul attains not that exceeding purity which it derives from the presence of Vishnu. Therefore, with all your soul, O king, hold Kes'ava ever present in your heart. Let one about to die be most careful in this; for so he goes to supreme felicity. Let the name of the supreme god, Vishnu, be repeated diligently by all in their last moments; for he who desires liberation shall attain it by the frequent repetition of the name of Krishna. Final felicity is derived in the Krita age from holy study; in the Treta, from religious rites. In the Dwapara it is attained by pious services; but in the Kali age it is secured by repeating the name of Hari." Similar doctrines are taught in the Gita, and other Vaishnava works. See As. Res. vol. XVI. p. 116.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 630]

  

CHAP. III.

Three different kinds of dissolution. Duration of a Pararddha. The Clepsydra, or vessel for measuring time. The dissolution that occurs at the end of a day of Brahma.

THE dissolution of existing beings is of three kinds, incidental, elemental, and absolute [*1]. The incidental is that which relates to Brahma, and occurs at the end of a Kalpa: the elemental is that which takes place after two Pararddhas: the absolute is final liberation from existence.

MAITREYA.--Tell me, excellent master, what is the enumeration of a Pararddha, the expiration of two of which is the period of elemental dissolution [*2].

PARAS'ARA.--A Pararddha, Maitreya, is that number which occurs in the eighteenth place of figures, enumerated according to the rule of decimal notation [*3]. At the end of twice that period elemental dissolution

[p. 631]

occurs, when all the discrete products of nature are withdrawn into their indiscrete source. The shortest period of time is a Matra, which is equal to the twinkling of the human eye. Fifteen Matras make a Kashtha; thirty Kashthas, one Kala; fifteen Kalas, one Nadika. A Nadika is ascertained by a measure of water, with a vessel made of twelve Palas and a half of copper, in the bottom of which there is to be a hole made with a tube of gold, of the weight of four Mashas, and four inches long [*4]. According to the Magadha measure, the vessel should hold a Prastha (or sixteen Palas) of water. Two of these Nadis make one Muhurtta; thirty of which are one day and night. Thirty such periods form a month; twelve months make a year, or a day and night of the gods; and three hundred and sixty such days constitute a year of the celestials. An aggregate of four ages contains twelve thousand divine years; and a thousand periods of four ages complete a day of Brahma. That period is also termed a Kalpa, during which fourteen Manus preside; and at the end of it occurs the incidental or Brahma dissolution. The nature of this dissolution is very fearful: hear me describe it, as well as that which takes place at the elemental dissolution, which I will also relate to you.

At the end of a thousand periods of four ages the earth is for the most part exhausted. A total dearth then ensues, which lasts a hundred

[p. 632]

years; and, in consequence of the failure of food, all beings become languid and exanimate, and at last entirely perish. The eternal Vishnu then assumes the character of Rudra, the destroyer, and descends to reunite all his creatures with himself. He enters into the seven rays of the sun [*5], drinks up all the waters of the globe, and causes all moisture whatever, in living bodies or in the soil, to evaporate; thus drying up the whole earth. The seas, the rivers, the mountain torrents, and springs, are all exhaled; and so are all the waters of Patala, the regions below the earth. Thus fed, through his intervention, with abundant moisture, the seven solar rays dilate to seven suns [*6], whose radiance glows above, below, and on every side, and sets the three worlds and Patala on fire. The three worlds, consumed by these suns, become rugged and deformed throughout the whole extent of their mountains, rivers, and seas; and the earth, bare of verdure, and destitute of moisture, alone remains, resembling in appearance the back of a tortoise. The destroyer of all things, Hari, in the form of Rudra, who is the flame of time, becomes the scorching breath of the serpent S'esha, and thereby reduces Patala to ashes. The great fire, when it has burnt all the divisions of Patala, proceeds to the earth, and consumes it also. A vast whirlpool of eddying flame then spreads to the region of the atmosphere, and the sphere of the gods, and wraps them in ruin. The three spheres shew like a frying-pan amidst the surrounding flames, that prey upon all moveable or stationary things. The inhabitants of the two upper spheres, having discharged their functions, and being annoyed by the heat, remove to the sphere above, or Maharloka. When that becomes heated, its tenants, who after the full period of their stay are desirous of ascending to higher regions, depart for the Janaloka [*7].

[p. 633]

Janarddana, in the person of Rudra, having consumed the whole world, breathes forth heavy clouds; and those called Samvartta, resembling vast elephants in bulk, overspread the sky, roaring, and darting lightnings. Some are as black as the blue lotus; some are white as the water-lily; some are dusky, like smoke; and some are yellow; some are of a dun colour, like that of an ass; some like ashes sprinkled on the forehead; some are deep blue, as the lapis lazuli; some azure, like the sapphire; some are white, as the conch or the jasmine; and some are black, as collyrium; some are of bright red, like the ladybird; some are of the fierceness of red arsenic; and some are like the wing of the painted jay. Such are these massy clouds in hue: in form some resemble towns, some mountains, some are like houses and hovels, and some are like columns. Mighty in size, and loud in thunder, they fill all space. Showering down torrents of water, these clouds quench the dreadful fires which involve the three worlds, and then they rain uninterruptedly for a hundred years, and deluge the whole world. Pouring down in drops as large as dice, these rains overspread the earth, and fill the middle region, and inundate heaven. The world is now enveloped in darkness, and all things, animate or inanimate, having perished, the clouds continue to pour down their waters for more than a hundred years.

Footnotes

^630:1 The first is called Naimittaka, 'occasional' or 'incidental,' or Brahmya, as occasioned by the intervals of Brahma's days; the destruction of creatures, though not of the substance of the world, occurring during his night. The general resolution of the elements into their primitive source, or Prakriti, is the Prakritika destruction, and occurs at the end of Brahma's life. The third, the absolute or final, Atyantika, is individual annihilation; Moksha, exemption for ever from future existence. The Bhagavata here notices the fourth kind, of which mention occurred in a preceding passage (<page 56>), Nitya or constant dissolution; explaining it to be the imperceptible change that all things suffer in the various stages of growth and decay, life and death. 'The various conditions of beings subject to change are occasioned by that constant dissolution of life which is rapidly produced by the resistless stream of time, taking every thing perpetually away.' The Vayu describes but three kinds of Pralaya, omitting the Nitya.

^630:2 Maitreya has a rather indifferent memory (see <page 22>); but the periods specified in the two places do not agree. In the first book two Pararddhas, as equal to one hundred years of Brahma, are 311.040.000.000.000 years of mortals.

^630:3 Counting according to this mode of enumeration, a Pararddha is represented by 100.000.000.000.000.000. The Vayu Purana has a term for each of these decimal values. Das'a, 10; S'atam, 100; Sahasram, 1000; Ayutam, 10.000; Niyutam, 100.000; Prayutam, 1.000.000; Arvudam, 10.000.000; Nyurvudam, [p. 631] 100.000.000; Vrindam, 1.000.000.000; Param, 10.000.000.000; Kharvam, 100.000.000.000; Nikharvam, 1000.000.000.000; S'ankham, 10.000.000.000.000; Padmam, 100.000.000.000.000; Samudram, 1.000.000.000.000; Madhyamam, 10.000.000.000.000.000; Pararddham, 100.000.000.000.000.000. In the first book the Pararddham, as the half of Brahma's life, is but 155.520.000.000.000, fifteen instead of eighteen places of figures.

^631:4 The description of the Clepsydra is very brief, and wanting in precision. One of the commentaries is more explicit: 'A vessel made of twelve Palas and a half of copper, and holding a Prastha, Magadha measure, of water, broad at top, and having at bottom a tube of gold of four Mashas weight, four fingers long, is placed in water, and the time in which the vessel is filled by the hole in the bottom is called a Nadika:' The term S'alaka generally means a needle or stake, but it must here denote a pipe. The common measure of the Nadi is a thin shallow brass cup, with a small hole in the bottom. It is placed on the surface of water, in a large vessel, where nothing can disturb it, and where the water gradually fills the cup, and sinks it. As. Res, vol. V. p. 87.

^632:5 See <page 236>. n. .

^632:6 These also have their several appellations: the commentator quotes the Vedas as the authority: Araga, Bhraja, Patala, Patanga, Swamabhak, Jyotishmat, and Savibhasa.

^632:7 The passage may also be understood, 'Those go to Janaloka who are desirous of obtaining Brahma, or final liberation, through the ten stages of perfection--devotion, penance, truth, &c.' In the Vayu Purana more details are specified. Those sainted mortals who have diligently worshipped Vishnu, and are distinguished for piety, abide, at the time of dissolution, in Maharloka, with the Pitris, the Manus, [p. 633] the seven Rishis, the various orders of celestial spirits, and the gods. These, when the heat of the flames that destroy the world reaches to Maharloka, repair to Janaloka in their subtile forms, destined to become reembodied, in similar capacities as their former, when the world is renewed, at the beginning of the succeeding Kalpa. This continues throughout the life of Brahma; at the expiration of his life all are destroyed: but those who have then attained a residence in the Brahmaloka, by having identified themselves in spirit with the supreme, are finally resolved into the sole-existing Brahma.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 634]

  

CHAP. IV.

Continuation of the account of the first kind of dissolution. Of the second kind, or elemental dissolution; of all being resolved into primary spirit.

WHEN the waters have reached the region of the seven Rishis, and the whole of the three worlds is one ocean, they stop. The breath of Vishnu becomes a strong wind, which blows for more than a hundred years, until all the clouds are dispersed. The wind is then reabsorbed, and he of whom all things are made, the lord by whom all things exist, he who is inconceivable, without beginning of the universe, reposes, sleeping upon S'esha, in the midst of the deep. The creator, Hari, sleeps upon the ocean, in the form of Brahma--glorified by Sanaka And the saints who had gone to the Janaloka, and contemplated by the holy inhabitants of Brahmaloka, anxious for final liberation--involved in mystic slumber, the celestial personification of his own illusions, and meditating on his own ineffable spirit, which is called Vasudeva. This, Maitreya, is the dissolution termed incidental, because Hari, in the form of Brahma, sleeps there, as its incidental cause.

When the universal spirit wakes, the world revives; when he closes his eyes, all things fall upon the bed of mystic slumber. In like manner as a thousand great ages constitute a day of Brahma, so his night consists of the same period; during which the world is submerged by a vast ocean. Awaking at the end of his night, the unborn, Vishnu, in the character of Brahma, creates the universe anew, in the manner formerly related to you [*1].

I have thus described to you the intermediate dissolution of the world, occurring at the end of every Kalpa. I will now, Maitreya, describe to you elemental dissolution. When by dearth and fire all the worlds and Patalas are withered up, and the modifications of Mahat and other products of nature are by the will of Krishna destroyed, the progress of

[p. 635]

elemental dissolution is begun. Then, first, the waters swallow up the property of earth, which is the rudiment of smell; and earth, deprived of its property, proceeds to destruction. Devoid of the rudiment of odour, the earth becomes one with water. The waters then being much augmented, roaring, and rushing along, fill up all space, whether agitated or still. When the universe is thus pervaded by the waves of the watery element, its rudimental flavour is licked up by the element of fire, and, in consequence of the destruction of their rudiments, the waters themselves are destroyed. Deprived of the essential rudiment of flavour, they become one with fire, and the universe is therefore entirely filled with flame, which drinks up the water on every side, and gradually overspreads the whole of the world. While space is enveloped in flame, above, below, and all around, the element of wind seizes upon the rudimental property, or form, which is the cause of light; and that being withdrawn, all becomes of the nature of air. The rudiment of form being destroyed, and fire deprived of its rudiment, air extinguishes fire, and spreads resistlessly over space, which is deprived of light when fire merges into air. Air then, accompanied by sound, which is the source of ether, extends every where throughout the ten regions of space, until ether seizes upon contact, its rudimental property; by the loss of which, air is destroyed, and ether remains unmodified: devoid of form, flavour, touch, and smell, it exists unembodied and vast, and pervades the whole of space. Ether, whose characteristic property and rudiment is sound, exists alone, occupying all the vacuity of space. But then the radical element egotism devours sound, and all the elements and faculties are at once merged into their original. This primary element is consciousness, combined with the property of darkness, and is itself swallowed up by Mahat, whose characteristic property is intelligence; and earth and Mahat are the inner and outer boundaries of the universe. In this manner, as in the creation were the seven forms of nature (Prakriti), reckoned from Mahat to earth [*2], so, at the time of elemental dissolution, these seven successively reenter into each other. The egg of Brahma is

[p. 636]

dissolved in the waters that surround it, with its seven zones, seven oceans, seven regions, and their mountains. The investure of water is drunk up by fire: the stratum of fire is absorbed by that of air: air blends itself with ether: the primary element of egotism devours the ether, and is itself taken up by intellect, which, along with all these, is seized upon by nature (Prakriti). Equilibrium of the three properties, without excess or deficiency, is called nature (Prakriti), origin (Hetu), the chief principle (Pradhana), cause (Karana), supreme (Param). This Prakriti is essentially the same, whether discrete or indiscrete; only that which is discrete is finally lost or absorbed in the indiscrete. Spirit also, which is one, pure, imperishable, eternal, all-pervading, is a portion of that supreme spirit which is all things. That spirit which is other than (embodied) spirit, in which there are no attributes of name, species, or the like--which is one with all wisdom, and is to be understood as sole existence--that is Brahma, infinite glory, supreme spirit, supreme power, Vishnu, all that is; from whence the perfect sage returns no more. Nature (Prakriti), which I have described to you as being essentially both discrete and indiscrete, and spirit (which is united with body), both resolve into supreme spirit. Supreme spirit is the upholder of all things, and the ruler of all things, and is glorified in the Vedas and in the Vedanta by the name of Vishnu.

Works, as enjoined by the Vedas, are of two kinds, active (Pravritta) and quiescent (Nivritta); by both of which the universal person is worshipped by mankind. He, the lord of sacrifice, the male of sacrifice, the most excellent male, is worshipped by men in the active mode by rites enjoined in the Rik, Yajur, and Sama Vedas. The soul of wisdom, the person of wisdom, Vishnu, the giver of emancipation, is worshipped by sages in the quiescent form, through meditative devotion. The exhaustless Vishnu is whatever thing that is designated by long, short, or prolated syllables, or that which is without a name. He is that which is discrete, and that which is indiscrete: he is exhaustless spirit, supreme spirit, universal spirit, Hari, the wearer of universal forms. Nature, whether discrete or indiscrete, is absorbed into him, and (detached) spirit also merges into the all-diffusive and unobstructed spirit.

[p. 637]

[paragraph continues] The period of two Pararddhas, as I have described it to you, Maitreya, is called a day of that potent Vishnu; and whilst the products of nature are merged into their source, nature into spirit, and that into the supreme, that period is termed his night, and is of equal duration with his day. But, in fact, to that eternal supreme spirit there is neither day nor night, and these distinctions are only figuratively applied to the almighty. I have thus explained to you the nature of elemental dissolution, and will now expound to you which is final [*3].

Footnotes

^634:1 The Naimittika Pralaya is described in the Vayu, Bhagavata, Kurma, and other Puranas, to the same effect, and very commonly in precisely the same words.

^635:2 See <page 14>.

^637:3 The Bhagavata notices the Prakrita pralaya much more briefly, and it is omitted in the Vayu.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 638]

  

CHAP. V.

The third kind of dissolution, or final liberation from existence. Evils of worldly life. Sufferings in infancy, manhood, old age. Pains of hell. Imperfect felicity of heaven. Exemption from birth desirable by the wise. The nature of spirit or god. Meaning of the terms Bhagavat and Vasudeva.

THE wise man having investigated the three kinds of worldly pain, or mental and bodily affliction and the like [*1], and having acquired true wisdom, and detachment from human objects, obtains final dissolution. The first of the three pains, or Adhyatmika, is of two kinds, bodily and mental. Bodily pain is of many kinds, as you shall hear. Affections of the head, catarrh, fever, cholic, fistula, spleen, hemorrhoids, intumescence, sickness, ophthalmia, dysentery, leprosy, and many other diseases, constitute bodily affliction. Mental sufferings are love, anger, fear, hate, covetousness, stupefaction, despair, sorrow, malice, disdain, jealousy, envy, and many other passions which are engendered in the mind. These and various other afflictions, mental or corporeal, are comprised, under the class of worldly sufferings, which is called Adhyatmika (natural and inseparable). That pain to which, excellent Brahman, the term Adhibhautika (natural, but incidental) is applied, is every kind of evil which is inflicted (from without) upon men by beasts, birds, men, goblins, snakes, fiends, or reptiles; and the pain that is termed Adhidaivika (or superhuman) is the work of cold, heat, wind, rain, lightning, and other (atmospherical phenomena). Affliction, Maitreya, is multiplied in thousands of shapes in the progress of conception, birth, decay, disease, death, and hell. The tender (and subtile) animal exists in the embryo, surrounded by abundant filth, floating in water, and distorted in its back, neck, and bones; enduring severe pain even in the course of its developement, as disordered by the acid, acrid, bitter, pungent, and saline articles of its mother's food; incapable of extending or contracting

[p. 639]

its limbs; reposing amidst the slime of ordure and urine; every way incommoded; unable to breathe; endowed with consciousness, and calling to memory many hundred previous births. Thus exists the embryo in profound affliction, bound to the world by its former works.

When the child is about to be born, its face is besmeared by excrement, urine, blood, mucus, and semen; its attachment to the uterus is ruptured by the Prajapati wind; it is turned head downwards, and violently expelled from the womb by the powerful and painful winds of parturition; and the infant losing for a time all sensation, when brought in contact with the external air, is immediately deprived of its intellectual knowledge. Thus born, the child is tortured in every limb, as if pierced with thorns, or cut to pieces with a saw, and falls from its fetid lodgment, as from a sore, like a crawling thing upon the earth. Unable to feel itself, unable to turn itself, it is dependent upon the will of others for being bathed and nourished. Laid upon a dirty bed, it is bitten by insects and musquitoes, and has not power to drive them away. Many are the pangs attending birth, and many are those which succeed to birth; and many are the sufferings which are inflicted by elemental and superhuman agency in the state of childhood. Enveloped by the gloom of ignorance, and internally bewildered, man knows not whence he is, who he is, whither he goeth, nor what is his nature; by what bonds  is bound; what is cause, and what is not cause; what is to be done, and what is to be left undone; what is to be said, and what is to be kept silent; what is righteousness, what is iniquity; in what it consists, or how; what is right, what is wrong; what is virtue, what is vice. Thus man, like a brute beast, addicted only to animal gratifications, suffers the pain that ignorance occasions. Ignorance, darkness, inactivity, influence those devoid of knowledge, so that pious works are neglected; but hell is the consequence of neglect of religious acts, according to the great sages, and the ignorant therefore suffer affliction both in this world and in the next.

When old age arrives, the body is infirm; the limbs are relaxed; the face is emaciate and shrivelled; the skin is wrinkled, and scantily covers the veins and sinews; the eye discerns not afar off, and the pupil gazes

[p. 640]

on vacuity; the nostrils are stuffed with hair; the trunk trembles as it moves; the bones appear beneath the surface; the back is bowed, and the joints are bent; the digestive fire is extinct, and there is little appetite and little vigour; walking, rising, sleeping, sitting, are all painful efforts; the ear is dull; the eye is dim; the mouth is disgusting with dribbling saliva; the senses no longer are obedient to the will; and as death approaches, the things that are perceived even are immediately forgotten. The utterance of a single sentence is fatiguing, and wakefulness is perpetuated by difficult breathing, coughing, and painful exhaustion. The old man is lifted up by somebody else; he is clothed by somebody else; he is an object of contempt to his servants, his children, and his wife. Incapable of cleanliness, of amusement, or food, or desire, he is laughed at by his dependants, and disregarded by his kin; and dwelling on the exploits of his youth, as on the actions of a past life, he sighs deeply, and is sorely distressed. Such are some of the pains which old age is condemned to suffer. I will now describe to you the agonies of death.

The neck droops; the feet and hands are relaxed; the body trembles; the man is repeatedly exhausted, subdued, and visited with interrupted knowledge; the principle of selfishness afflicts him, and he thinks what will become of my wealth, my lands, my children, my wife, my servants, my house? the joints of his limbs are tortured with severe pains, as if cut by a saw, or as if they were pierced by the sharp arrows of the destroyer; he rolls his eyes, and tosses about his hands and feet; his lips and palate are parched and dry, and his throat, obstructed by foul humours and deranged vital airs, emits a rattling sound; he is afflicted with burning heat, and with thirst, and with hunger; and he at last passes away, tortured by the servants of the judge of the dead, to undergo a renewal of his sufferings in another body. These are the agonies which men have to endure when they die. I will now describe to you the tortures which they suffer in hell.

Men are bound, when they die, by the servants of the king of Tartarus with cords, and beaten with sticks, and have then to encounter the fierce aspect of Yama, and the horrors of their terrible route. In the

[p. 641]

different hells there are various intolerable tortures with burning sand, fire, machines, and weapons; some are severed with saws, some roasted in forges, some are chopped with axes, some buried in the ground, some are mounted on stakes, some cast to wild beasts to be devoured, some are gnawed by vultures, some torn by tigers, some are boiled in oil, some rolled in caustic slime, some are precipitated from great heights, some tossed upwards by engines. The number of punishments inflicted in hell, which are the consequences of sin, is infinite [*2].

But not in hell alone do the souls of the deceased undergo pain: there is no cessation even in heaven; for its temporary inhabitant is ever tormented with the prospect of descending again to earth. Again is he liable to conception and to birth; he is merged again into the embryo, and repairs to it when about to be born; then he dies, as soon as born, or in infancy, or in youth, or in manhood, or in old age. Death, sooner or later, is inevitable. As long as he lives he is immersed in manifold afflictions, like the seed of the cotton amidst the down that is to be spun into thread. In acquiring, losing, and preserving wealth there are many griefs; and so there are in the misfortunes of our friends. Whatever is produced that is most acceptable to man, that, Maitreya, becomes a seed whence springs the tree of sorrow. Wife, children, servants, house, lands, riches, contribute much more to the misery than to the happiness of mankind. Where could man, scorched by the fires of the sun of this world, look for felicity, were it not for the shade afforded by the tree of emancipation? Attainment of the divine being is considered by the wise as the remedy of the threefold class of ills that beset the different stages of life, conception, birth, and decay, as characterized by that only happiness which effaces all other kinds of felicity, however abundant, and as being absolute and final [*3].

It should therefore be the assiduous endeavour of wise men to attain unto god [*4]. The means of such attainment are said, great Muni, to be

[p. 642]

knowledge and works. Knowledge is of two kinds, that which is derived from scripture, and that which is derived from reflection. Brahma that is the word is composed of scripture; Brahma that is supreme is produced of reflection [*5]. Ignorance is utter darkness, in which knowledge, obtained through any sense (as that of hearing), shines like a lamp; but the knowledge that is derived from reflection breaks upon the obscurity like the sun. What has been said by Manu, when appealing to the meaning of the Vedas with respect to this subject, I will repeat to you. There are two (forms of) spirit (or god), the spirit which is the word, and the spirit which is supreme. He who is thoroughly imbued with the word of god obtains supreme spirit [*6]. The Atharva Veda also states that there are two kinds of knowledge; by the one, which is the supreme, god is attained; the other is that which consists of the Rich and other Vedas [*7]. That which is imperceptible, undecaying, inconceivable, unborn, inexhaustible, indescribable; which has neither form, nor hands, nor feet; which is almighty, omnipresent, eternal; the cause of all things, and without cause; permeating all, itself unpenetrated, and from which all things proceed; that is the object which the wise behold, that is Brahma, that is the supreme state, that is the subject of contemplation to those who desire liberation, that is the thing spoken of by the Vedas, the infinitely subtile, supreme condition of Vishnu. That essence of the

[p. 643]

supreme is defined by the term Bhagavat [*8]: the word Bhagavat is the denomination of that primeval and eternal god: and he who fully understands the meaning of that expression, is possessed of holy wisdom, the sum and substance of the three Vedas. The word Bhagavat is a convenient form to be used in the adoration of that supreme being, to whom no term is applicable; and therefore Bhagavat expresses that supreme spirit, which is individual, almighty, and the cause of causes of all things. The letter Bh implies the cherisher and supporter of the universe. By ga is understood the leader, impeller, or creator. The dissyllable Bhaga indicates the six properties, dominion, might, glory, splendour, wisdom, and dispassion. The purport of the letter va is that elemental spirit in which all beings exist, and which exists in all beings [*9]. And thus this great word Bhagavan is the name of Vasudeva, who is one with the supreme Brahma, and of no one else. This word therefore, which is the general denomination of an adorable object, is not used in reference to the supreme in a general, but a special signification. When applied to any other (thing or person) it is used in its customary or general import. In the latter case it may purport one who knows the origin and end and revolutions of beings, and what is wisdom, what ignorance. In the former it denotes wisdom, energy, power, dominion, might, glory, without end, and without defect.

The term Vasudeva means that all beings abide in that supreme being, and that he abides in all beings [*10], as was formerly explained by Kes'idhwaja to Khandikya, called Janaka, when he inquired of him an explanation of the name of the immortal, Vasudeva. He said, "He

[p. 644]

dwelleth internally in all beings, and all things dwell in him; and thence the lord Vasudeva is the creator and preserver of the world. He, though one with all beings, is beyond and separate from material nature (Prakriti), front its products, from properties, from imperfections: he is beyond all investing substance: he is universal soul; all the interstices of the universe are filled up by him: he is one with all good qualities; and all created beings are endowed with but a small portion of his individuality. Assuming at will various forms, he bestows benefits on the whole world, which was his work. Glory, might, dominion, wisdom, energy, power, and other attributes, are collected in him. Supreme of the supreme, in whom no imperfections abide, lord over finite and infinite, god in individuals and universals, visible and invisible, omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient, almighty. The wisdom, perfect, pure, supreme, undefiled, and one only, by which he is conceived, contemplated, and known, that is wisdom; all else is ignorance."

Footnotes

^638:1 The three kinds of affliction, inseparable, incidental, and superhuman, are fully described in the commentary on the first verse of the Sankhya Karika, p. 8, in a similar strain as that which is adopted in the text.

^641:2 Some further particulars of the different hells, and the punishments inflicted in them, have been given before: see <page 207>.

^641:3 All this is conformable to the Sankhya doctrines in particular, although the same spirit pervades all Hindu metaphysics.

^641:4 Tasmat Tat praptaye yatna kartavya [p. 642] panditairnaraih. The expression Tat praptaye, 'for the obtaining of that,' refers to the phrase immediately preceding, Bhagavatprapti, 'obtaining of,' or 'attaining to, Bhagavat,' the lord.

^642:5 Brahma is of two kinds; S'abda-Brahma, spirit or god to be attained through the word, that is, the Vedas and the duties they prescribe; and Para-Brahma, spirit or god to be attained through reflection, by which the difference between soul and matter is ascertained.

^642:6 This seems intended as a quotation from Manu, but it has not been found in the code; it is ###.

^642:7 The commentator quotes other passages from the Vedas of a similar tendency, intimating, however, the necessity of performing acts prior to attaining knowledge; as, 'The decoction (preparatory process) being digested by rites, thereafter knowledge is the supreme resource.' 'Having crossed the gulph of death by ignorance (ceremonial acts), man obtains immortality by (holy) knowledge.'

^643:8 According to the comment, allusion is here made to the twelve syllable Mantra, or mystic formula addressed to Vishnu: 'Om Bhagavate Vasudevaya nama; 'Om! salutation to Bhagavat Vasudeva:' the repetition of which, by those devoted (bhakta) to Vishnu, is the easy mode of securing their liberation." The mysticism is, however, no doubt older than the worship of Vishnu; and the term Bhagavat is defined in the text according to the interpretation of the Vedas.

^643:9 The commentator says these interpretations are from the Nirukta, the glossary of the Vedas. The more etymological derivation of the term is, Bhaga, 'power,' 'authority,' and vat possessive affix.

^643:10 From the root Vas, 'abiding,' 'dwelling' See p. <page 1> and <page 9>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 645]

  

CHAP. VI.

Means of attaining liberation. Anecdotes of Khandikya and Kes'idhwaja. The former instructs the latter how to atone for permitting the death of a cow. Kes'idhwaja offers him a requital, and he desires to be instructed in spiritual knowledge.

HE, Purushottama, is also known by holy study and devout meditation; and either, as the cause of attaining him, is entitled Brahma. From study let a man proceed to meditation, and from meditation to study [*1]; by perfection in both supreme spirit becomes manifest. Study is one eye wherewith to behold it, and meditation is the other: he who is one with Brahma sees not with the eye of flesh.

MAITREYA.--Reverend teacher, I am desirous of being informed what is meant by the term meditation (Yoga), by understanding which I may behold the supreme being, the upholder of the universe.

PARAS'ARA.--I will repeat to you, Maitreya, the explanation formerly given by Kes'idhwaja to the magnanimous Khandikya, also called Janaka.

MAITREYA.--Tell me first, Brahman, who Khandikya was, and who was Kes'idhwaja; and how it happened that a conversation relating to the practice of Yoga occurred between them.

PARAS'ARA.--There was Janaka, named Dharmadhwaja, who had two sons, Amitadhwaja and Kritadhwaja; and the latter was a king ever intent upon existent supreme spirit: his son was the celebrated Kes'idhwaja. The son of Amitadhwaja was Janaka, called Khandikya [*2].

[p. 646]

[paragraph continues] Khandikya was diligent in the way of works, and was renowned on earth for religious rites. Kes'idhwaja, on the other hand, was endowed with spiritual knowledge. These two were engaged in hostilities, and Khandikya was driven from his principality by Kes'idhwaja. Expelled from his dominions, he wandered with a few followers, his priest and his counsellors, amidst woods and mountains, where, destitute of true wisdom, he performed many sacrifices, expecting thereby to obtain divine truth, and to escape from death by ignorance [*3].

Once whilst the best of those who are skilled in devotion, Kes'idhwaja, was engaged in devout exercises, a fierce tiger slew his milch cow [*4] in the lonely forest. When the Raja heard that the cow had been killed, he asked the ministering priests what form of penance would expiate the crime. They replied that they did not know, and referred him to Kas'eru. Kas'eru, when the Raja consulted him, told him that he knew not, but that Sunaka would be able to tell him. Accordingly the Raja went to Sunaka; but he replied, "I am as unable, great king, to answer your question as Kas'eru has been; and there is no one now upon earth who can give you the information except your enemy Khandikya, whom you have conquered."

Upon receiving this answer, Kes'idhwaja said, "I will go, then, and pay a visit to my foe: if he kill me, no matter, for then I shall obtain the reward that attends being killed in a holy cause: if, on the contrary, he tell me what penance to perform, then my sacrifice will be unimpaired in efficacy." Accordingly he ascended his car, having clothed himself in the deer skin (of the religious student), and went to the forest where the wise Khandikya resided. When Khandikya beheld him approach, his eyes reddened with rage, and he took up his bow, and said to him, "You have armed yourself with the deer skin to accomplish my

[p. 647]

destruction, imagining that in such an attire you will be safe from me; but, fool, the deer, upon whose backs this skin is seen, are slain by you and me with sharp arrows: so will I slay you; you shall not go free whilst I am living. You are an unprincipled felon, who have robbed me of my kingdom, and are deserving of death." To this Kes'idhwaja answered, "I have come hither, Khandikya, to ask you to solve my doubts, and not with any hostile intention: lay aside therefore both your arrow and your anger." Thus spoken to, Khandikya retired a while with his counsellors and his priest, and consulted with them what course to pursue. They strongly urged him to slay Kes'idhwaja, who was now in his power, and by whose death he would again become the monarch of the whole earth. Khandikya replied to them, "It is no doubt true that by such an act I should become the monarch of the whole earth: he, however, would thereby conquer the world to come; whilst the earth would be mine. Now if I do not kill him, I shall subdue the next world, and leave him this earth. It seems to me that this world is not of more value than the next; for the subjugation of the next world endures for ever; the conquest over this is but for a brief season. I will therefore not kill him, but tell him what he wishes to know."

Returning then to Kes'idhwaja, Khandikya desired him to propose his question, which he promised to answer; and Kes'idhwaja related to him what had happened, the death of the cow, and demanded to know what penance he should perform. Khandikya, in reply, explained to him fully the expiation that was suited to the occasion; and Kes'idhwaja then, with his permission, returned to the place of sacrifice, and regularly fulfilled every necessary act. Having completed the ceremony, with its supplementary rites, Kes'idhwaja accomplished all his objects: but he then reflected thus: "The priests whom I invited to attend have all been duly honoured; all those who had any request to make have been gratified by compliance with their desires; all that is proper for this world has been effected by me: why then should my mind feel as if my duty had been unfulfilled?" So meditating, he remembered that he had not presented to Khandikya the gift that it is becoming to offer to a spiritual preceptor, and, mounting his chariot, he immediately set off to

[p. 648]

the thick forest where that sage abode. Khandikya, upon his reappearance, assumed his weapons to kill him; but Kes'idhwaja exclaimed, "Forbear, venerable sage. I am not here to injure you, Khandikya: dismiss your wrath, and know that I have come hither to offer you that remuneration which is due to you as my instructor. Through your lessons I have fully completed my sacrifice, and I am therefore desirous to give you a gift. Demand what it shall be."

Khandikya having once more communed with his counsellors, told them the purpose of his rival's visit, and asked them what he should demand. His friends recommended him to require his whole kingdom back again, as kingdoms are obtained by prudent men without conflicting hosts. The reflecting king Khandikya laughed, and replied to them, "Why should a person such as I be desirous of a temporary earthly kingdom? Of a truth you are able counsellors in the concerns of this life, but of those of the life to cone you are assuredly ignorant." So speaking, he went back to Kes'idhwaja, and said to him, "Is it true that you wish to make me a gift, as to your preceptor?" "Indeed I do," answered Kes'idhwaja. "Then," rejoined Khandikya, "as it is known that you are learned in the spiritual learning that teaches the doctrine of the soul, if you will communicate that knowledge to me, you will have discharged your debt to your instructor. Declare to me what acts are efficacious for the alleviation of human affliction."

Footnotes

^645:1 Both study of the Vedas (Swadhyaya) and abstraction (Yoga) are to be practised: when a man is weary of one, he may apply to the other. The Yoga, however, limits the practical part to silent prayer. 'Wearied of meditation, let him pray inaudibly: weary of prayer, let him repeat meditation.' 'By the union of prayer and meditation let him behold soul in himself.'

^645:2 No such names occur amongst the Maithila kings of the Vishnu Purana (see <page 390>); but, as there noticed (note ), the Bhagavata inserts them. Janaka is used as a title. Kritadhwaja, in some of the copies, is read Ritadhwaja.

^646:3 The performance of rites as a means of salvation is called ignorance in the Vedas (see <page 642>, n. ). Works are recommended as introductory to the acquirement of knowledge: it is ignorance to consider them as finite.

^646:4 Tasya-dhenum. One copy has Homa-dhenu, 'cow of sacrifice;' another, Dharma-dhenu, 'cow of righteousness.' The commentator explains the terms as importing the same thing, a cow yielding milk for holy purposes, or for the butter which is poured in oblations upon the sacrificial fire.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 649]

  

CHAP. VII.

Kes'idhwaja describes the nature of ignorance, and the benefits of the Yoga, or contemplative devotion. Of the novice and the adept in the performance of the Yoga. How it is performed. The first stage, proficiency in acts of restraint and moral duty: the second, particular mode of sitting: the third, Pranayama, modes of breathing: the fourth, Pratyahara, restraint of thought: the fifth, apprehension of spirit: the sixth, retention of the idea. Meditation on the individual and universal forms of Vishnu. Acquirement of knowledge. Final liberation.

"BUT," said Kes'idhwaja, "why have you not asked of me my kingdom, now free from all annoyance? what else except dominion is acceptable to the warrior race?" "I will tell you," replied Khandikya, "why I did not make such a demand, nor require that territory which is an object of ignorant ambition. It is the duty of the warrior to protect his subjects in peace, and to kill in fight the enemies of his sway. It is no fault that you should have taken my kingdom from one who was unable to defend it, to whom it was a bondage, and who was thus freed from the incumbrance of ignorance. My desire of dominion originated in my being born to possess it: the ambition of others, which proceeds from human frailties, is not compatible with virtue. To solicit gifts is not the duty of a prince and warrior: and for these reasons I have not asked for your kingdom, nor made a demand which ignorance alone would have suggested. Those only who are destitute of knowledge, whose minds are engrossed by selfishness, who are intoxicated with the inebriating beverage of self-sufficiency, desire kingdoms; not such as I am."

When king Kes'idhwaja heard these words, he was much pleased, and exclaimed, "It is well spoken!" Then addressing Khandikya affectionately, he said, "Listen to my words. Through desire of escaping death by the ignorance of works I exercise the regal power, celebrate various sacrifices, and enjoy pleasures subversive of purity. Fortunate is it for you that your mind has attached itself to the dominion of discrimination. Pride of your race! now listen to the real nature of ignorance. The (erroneous) notion that self consists in what is not self, and the

[p. 650]

opinion that property consists in what is not one's own, constitute the double seed of the tree of ignorance. The ill judging embodied being, bewildered by the darkness of fascination, situated in a body composed of the five elements, loudly asserts, 'This is I:' but who would ascribe spiritual individuality to a body in which soul is distinct from the ether, air, fire, water, and earth (of which that body is composed) [*1]? What man of understanding assigns to disembodied spirit corporeal fruition, or lands, houses, and the like, that it should say, 'These are mine?' What wise man entertains the idea of property in sous or grandsons begotten of the body after the spirit has abandoned it? Man performs all acts for the purpose of bodily fruition, and the consequence of such acts is another body; so that their result is nothing but confinement to bodily existence. In the same manner as a mansion of clay is plastered with clay and water, so the body, which is of earth, is perpetuated by earth and water (or by eating and drinking). The body, consisting of the five elements, is nourished by substances equally composed of those elements: but since this is the case, what is there in this life that man should be proud of? Travelling the path of the world for many thousands of births, man attains only the weariness of bewilderment, and is smothered by the dust of imagination. When that dust is washed away by the bland water of real knowledge, then the weariness of bewilderment sustained by the wayfarer through repeated births is removed. When that weariness is relieved, the internal man is at peace, and he obtains that supreme felicity which is unequalled and undisturbed. This soul is (of its own nature) pure, and composed of happiness and wisdom. The properties of pain, ignorance, and impurity, are those of nature (Prakriti), not of soul. There is no affinity between fire and water, but when the latter is placed over the former in a caldron it bubbles and boils, and

[p. 651]

exhibits the properties of fire. In like manner, when soul is associated with Prakriti it is vitiated by egotism and the rest, and assumes the qualities of grosser nature, although essentially distinct from them, and incorruptible. Such is the seed of ignorance, as I have explained it to you. There is but one cure of worldly sorrows, the practice of devotion; no other is known."

"Then," said Khandikya, "do you, who are the chief of those versed in contemplative devotion, explain to me what that is; for in the race of the descendants of Nimi [*2] you are best acquainted with the sacred writings in which it is taught." "Hear," replied Kes'idhwaja, "the account of, the nature of contemplative devotion [*3], which I impart to you, and by perfection in which the sage attains resolution into Brahma, and never suffers birth again. The mind of man is the cause both of his bondage and his liberation: its addiction to the objects of sense is the means of his bondage; its separation from objects of sense is the means of his freedom. The sage who is capable of discriminative knowledge must therefore restrain his mind from all the objects of sense, and therewith meditate upon the supreme being, who is one with spirit, in order to attain liberation; for that supreme spirit attracts to itself him who meditates upon it, and who is of the same nature, as the loadstone attracts the iron by the virtue which is common to itself and to its products [*4].

[p. 652]

[paragraph continues] Contemplative devotion is the union with Brahma, effected by that condition of mind which has attained perfection through those exercises which complete the control of self [*5]: and he whose contemplative devotion is characterized by the property of such absolute perfection, is in truth a sage, expectant of final liberation from the world.

"The sage, or Yogi, when first applying himself to contemplative devotion is called the novice or practitioner (Yoga yuj); when he has attained spiritual union he is termed the adept, or he whose meditations are accomplished [*6]. Should the thoughts of the former be unvitiated by any obstructing imperfection, he will obtain freedom, after practising devotion through several lives [*7]. The latter speedily obtains liberation in that existence (in which he reaches perfection), all his acts being consumed by the fire of contemplative devotion. The sage who would bring his mind into a fit state for the performance of devout contemplation

[p. 653]

must be devoid of desire, and observe invariably continence, compassion, truth, honesty, and disinterestedness: he must fix his mind intently on the supreme Brahma, practising holy study, purification, contentment, penance, and self-control. These virtues, respectively termed the five acts of restraint (Yana), and five of obligation (Niyama), bestow excellent rewards when practised for the sake of reward, and eternal liberation when they are not prompted by desire (of transient benefits). Endowed with these merits, the sage self restrained should sit in one of the modes termed Bhadrasana, &c., and engage in contemplation [*8]. Bringing his vital airs, called Prana, under subjection, by frequent repetition, is thence called Pranayama, which is as it were a seed with a seed [*9]. In this the breath of expiration and that of inspiration are alternately obstructed, constituting the act twofold; and the suppression of both modes of breathing produces a third [*10]. The exercise of the Yogi, whilst endeavouring to bring before his thoughts the gross form of the eternal, is denominated Alambana [*11]. He is then to perform the Pratyahara, which consists in restraining his organs of sense from susceptibility to outward impressions, and directing them entirely to mental perceptions. By these means the entire subjugation of the unsteady senses is effected; and if they are not controlled, the sage will not accomplish his devotions. When by the Pranayama the vital airs

[p. 654]

are restrained, and the senses are subjugated by the Pratyahara, then the sage will he able to keep his mind steady in its perfect asylum."

Khandikya then said to Kes'idhwaja, "Illustrious sage, inform me what is that perfect asylum of the mind, resting on which it destroys all the products of (human) infirmity." To this, Kes'idhwaja replied, "The asylum of mind is spirit (Brahma), which of its own nature is twofold, as being with or without form; and each of these is supreme and secondary [*12]. Apprehension of spirit [*13], again, is threefold. I will explain the different kinds to you: they are, that which is called Brahma, that which is named from works, and that which comprehends both. That mental apprehension which consists of Brahma is one; that which is formed of works is another; and that which comprehends both is the third: so that mental apprehension (of the object or asylum of the thoughts) is threefold. Sanandana and other (perfect sages) were endowed with apprehension of the nature of Brahma. The gods and others, whether animate or inanimate, are possessed of that which regards acts. The apprehension that comprehends both works and spirit exists in Hiranyagarbha and others, who are possessed of contemplative knowledge of their own nature, and who also exercise certain active functions, as creation and the rest. Until all acts, which are the causes of notions of individuality, are discontinued, spirit is one thing, and the universe is another, to those who contemplate objects as distinct and various; but that is called true knowledge, or knowledge of Brahma, which recognises no distinctions, which contemplates only simple existence, which is

[p. 655]

undefinable by words, and is to be discovered solely in one's own spirit. That is the supreme, unborn, imperishable form of Vishnu, who is without (sensible) form, and is characterised as a condition of the supreme soul, which is variously modified from the condition of universal form. But this condition cannot be contemplated by sages in their (early) devotions, and they must therefore direct their minds to the gross form of Hari, which is of universal perceptibility. They must meditate upon him as Hiranyagarbha, as the glorious Vasava, as Prajapati, as the winds, the Vasus, the Rudras, the suns, stars, planets, Gandharbas, Yakshas, Daityas, all the gods and their progenitors, men, animals, mountains, oceans, rivers, trees, all beings, and all sources of beings, all modifications whatever of nature and its products, whether sentient or unconscious, one-footed, two-footed, or many-footed; all these are the sensible form of Hari, to be apprehended by the three kinds of apprehension. All this universal world, this world of moving and stationary beings, is pervaded by the energy of Vishnu, who is of the nature of the supreme Brahma. This energy is either supreme, or, when it is that of conscious embodied spirit, it is secondary. Ignorance, or that which is denominated from works, is a third energy [*14]; by which the omnipresent energy of embodied spirit is ever excited, and whence it suffers all the pains of repeated worldly existence. Obscured by that energy (of ignorance or illusion), the energy that is denominated from embodied spirit is characterised by different degrees of perfection in all created beings. In things without life it exists in a very small degree: it is more in things that have life, but are (without motion): in insects it is still more abundant, and still more in birds; it is more in wild animals, and in domestic animals the faculty is still greater: men have more of this (spiritual). faculty than animals, and thence arises their authority over

[p. 656]

them: the faculty exists in an ascending degree in Nagas, Gandharbas, Yakshas, gods, S'akra, Prajapati, and Hiranyagarbha: and is above all predominant in that male (Vishnu) of whom all these various creatures are but the diversified forms, penetrated universally by his energy, as all-pervading as the ether.

"The second [*15] state of him who is called Vishnu, and which is to be meditated upon by the (advanced) sage, is that imperceptible, shapeless form of Brahma, which is called by the wise, 'That which is [*16],' and in which all the before described energies reside. Thence proceeds the form of the universal form, the other great form of Hari, which is the origin of those manifested forms (or incarnations) that are endowed with every kind of energy, and which, whether the forms of gods, animals, or men, are assumed by him (Hari) in his sport. This active interposition of the undefinable god, all-comprehending and irresistible, is for the purpose of benefiting the world, and is not the necessary consequence of works. This form of the universal form is to be meditated upon by the sage for the object of purification, as it destroys all sin. In the same manner as fire, blazing in the wind, burns dry grass, so Vishnu, seated in the heart, consumes the sins of the sage; and therefore let him resolutely effect the fixation of his mind upon that receptacle of all the three energies (Vishnu), for that is the operation of the mind which is called perfect Dharana [*17]: and thus the perfect asylum of individual as well as universal spirit, that which is beyond the three modes of apprehension, is attained, for the eternal emancipation of the sage. The minds of other beings, which are not fixed upon that asylum, are altogether impure, and are all the gods and the rest, who spring from acts. The retention or apprehension by the mind of that visible form of Vishnu, without regard to subsidiary forms, is thence called Dharana; and I will describe to you the perceptible form of Hari, which no mental retention

[p. 657]

will manifest, except in a mind that is fit to become the receptacle of the idea [*18]. The meditating sage must think (he beholds internally the figure) of Vishnu, as having a pleased and lovely countenance, with eyes like the leaf of the lotus, smooth cheeks, and a broad and brilliant forehead; ears of equal size, the lobes of which are decorated with splendid pendants; a painted neck, and a broad breast, on which shines the Srivatsa mark; a belly falling in graceful folds, with a deep-seated navel; eight long arms, or else four; and firm and well-knit thighs and legs, with well-formed feet and toes. Let him, with well-governed thoughts, contemplate, as long as he can persevere in unremitting attention, Hari as clad in a yellow robe, wearing a rich diadem on his head, and brilliant armlets and bracelets on his arms, and bearing in his hands the bow, the shell, the mace, the sword, the discus, the rosary, the lotus, and the arrow [*19]. When this image never departs from his mind, whether he be going or standing, or be engaged in any other voluntary act, then he may believe his retention to be perfect. The sage may then meditate upon the form of Vishnu without his arms, as the shell, mace, discus, and bow; and as placid, and bearing only his rosary. When the idea of this image is firmly retained, then he may meditate on Vishnu without his diadem, bracelets, or other ornaments. He may next contemplate him as having but one single limb, and may then fix his whole thoughts upon the body to which the limbs belong. This process of forming a lively image in the mind, exclusive of all other objects, constitutes Dhyana, or meditation, which is perfected by six stages [*20]; and when an accurate knowledge of self, free from all distinction, is attained by this mental meditation, that is termed Samadhi [*21].

[p. 658]

"(When the Yogi has accomplished this stage, he acquires) discriminative knowledge, which is the means of enabling living soul, when all the three kinds of apprehension are destroyed, to attain the attainable supreme Brahma [*22]. Embodied spirit is the user of the instrument, which instrument is true knowledge; and by it that (identification) of the former (with Brahma) is attained [*23]. Liberation, which is the object to be effected, being accomplished, discriminative knowledge ceases. When endowed with the apprehension of the nature of the object of inquiry, then, there is no difference between it (individual and) supreme spirit: difference is the consequence of the absence of (true) knowledge. When that ignorance which is the cause of the difference between individual and universal spirit is destroyed finally and for ever, who shall ever make that distinction between them which does not exist? Thus have I, Khandikya, in reply to your question, explained to you what is meant by contemplative devotion, both fully and summarily. What else do you wish to hear?"

Khandikya replied to Kes'idhwaja, and said, "The explanation which you have given me of the real nature of contemplative devotion has fulfilled all my wishes, and removed all impurity from my mind. The expression 'mine,' which I have been accustomed to use, is untruth, and

[p. 659]

cannot be otherwise declared by those who know what is to be known. The words 'I' and 'mine' constitute ignorance; but practice is influenced by ignorance. Supreme truth cannot be defined, for it is not to be explained by words. Depart therefore, Kes'idhwaja; you have done all that is necessary for my real happiness, in teaching me contemplative devotion, the inexhaustible bestower of liberation from existence."

Accordingly king Kes'idhwaja, after receiving suitable homage from Khandikya, returned to his city. Khandikya, having nominated his son Raja [*24], retired to the woods to accomplish his devotions, his whole mind being intent upon Govinda: there his entire thoughts being engrossed upon one only object, and being purified by practices of restraint, self-control, and the rest, he obtained absorption into the pure and perfect spirit which is termed Vishnu. Kes'idhwaja also, in order to attain liberation, became averse from his own perishable works, and lived amidst objects of sense (without regarding them), and instituted religious rites without expecting therefrom any advantages to himself. Thus by pure and auspicious fruition, being cleansed from all sin, the also obtained that perfection which assuages all affliction for ever.

Footnotes

^650:1 The text is somewhat obscure, but it is in some degree cleared up by the next illustration. No one would think of applying the property of self--the idea of possession or personality--to soul, separated from body: but the objection is equally applicable to soul in the body; for whilst there it is as distinct in its nature from the materials of body as if it was disembodied, and quite as incapable of individual personal fruition.

^651:2 That is, in the race of princes of Mithila.

^651:3 The term Yoga, which is that used in the text, in its literal acceptation signifies 'union,' 'junction,' from ### 'to join:' in a spiritual sense it denotes 'union of separated with universal soul; and with some latitude of expression it comes to signify the means by which such union is affected. In the Bhagavad Gita it is variously applied, but ordinarily denotes the performance of religious ceremonies as a duty, and not for interested purposes. Thus Krishna says to Arjuna, "Engaging in Yoga, perform rites, Dhananjaya, being indifferent to success or failure: such indifference is called Yoga." II. v. 48. It is elsewhere defined, 'exemption from the contact of pain:' VI. v. 23. The word has been accordingly rendered 'devotion' by Wilkins, and 'devotio' by Schlegel, in their translations of the Gita. In this place, however, it is used in a less general sense, and signifies, as is subsequently explained, reunion with spirit through the exercises necessary to perfect abstraction as they are taught and practised by the followers of Patanjali.

^651:4 This illustration is however only to a [p. 652] limited extent, explanatory of the nature of Yoga; for though the loadstone and iron unite, by virtue of a community of kind, yet the union that takes place is only that of contiguity, Samyoga not that of identification or unity, Tadaikyam. Some further explanation therefore is required.

^652:5 The first stage is the Atma prayatna, the practice of moral and religious restraint, Yama, Niyama, &c. When the novice is perfect in these, then he is fit to attain the perfectibility of an adept, through the especial practices which treatises on the Yoga prescribe. When the mind has attained the state which can alone be attained through them, then the union with Brahma, which is the consequence, is called Yoga: ###. The Atma prayatna is defined to be that which has Yama, &c. for its object. The next phrase is explained, 'depending upon, or relating to, such control.' ### is the same as ### condition or state of mind which is ### perfected: of that state of mind, union with Brahma, is Yoga. Union with Brahma is the abstraction that proposes the identity of the living with the supreme spirit of the Jivatma, with Brahma; and Yoga is understanding of the identity of the contemplator and the object contemplated. A text of Yajnyawalkya is quoted to this effect: 'Know holy wisdom to be the same with Yoga, (the practice of) which has eight divisions. That which is termed Yoga is union of the living with the supreme soul.'

^652:6 Vinishpannasamadhi is the expression of the text, which can scarcely be regarded as an appellative. The commentator terms the adept Brahmajnani, 'He who knows Brahma.'

^652:7 After three lives, according to the Vayu Sanhita, as quoted in the comment.

^653:8 There are various postures in which the Yogi is directed to sit when he engages in meditation. In the Bhadrasana he is directed to cross his legs underneath him, and to lay hold of his feet on each side with his hands.

^653:9 It is itself figuratively the seed of the fruit, which is meditation; but it is to be accompanied with what is also technically called Bija, or seed, inaudible repetition of certain prayers, and meditation on the visible form of the deity, termed likewise Alambana, and presently mentioned.

^653:10 Pranayama is performed by three modifications of breathing: the first act is expiration, which is performed through the right nostril, whilst the left is closed with the fingers of the right hand; this is called Rechaka: the thumb is then placed upon the right nostril, and the fingers raised from the left, through which breath is inhaled; this is called Puraka: in the third act both nostrils are closed, and breathing suspended; this is Kumbhaka: and a succession of these operations is the practice of Pranayama.

^653:11 Alambana is the silent repetition of prayer.

^654:12 The Brahma that is without form (Amurtta) may be Para or Apara. Supreme formless spirit is, without attributes of any kind. Secondary formless spirit is invested with the attributes of power, glory, truth, perfection. Spirit embodied, or with form in his highest state, is, according to our text, Vishnu, and his manifestations. Spirit in an inferior or secondary series of bodily forms is Brahma and all other living beings.

^654:13 The term is Bhavana, defined to be, 'function to be engendered by knowledge;' the mental impression or apprehension following upon knowledge.' Here it implies in particular the formation of a fixed idea by the Yogi of the object of his contemplations. It is also termed Bhava-bhavana, 'apprehension of the being, the existence, or substantiality, of the object; the thing contemplated.'

^655:14 The term used throughout is S'akti, power,' 'ability,' 'energy' By the first kind, or Para, is understood knowledge able to appreciate abstract truth, or the nature of universal soul; by the second, ability to understand the nature of embodied soul; and by the third, inability to discern one's own nature, and reliance on moral or ceremonial merit. These different kinds are called energies, because they are the energies or faculties of the supreme spirit, or, according to the Vaishnavas, of Vishnu, accompanying soul in all its various conditions of existence.

^656:15 The first, which has been intended to be described in the foregoing passages, was the universal, visible form of Vishnu; the second is his formless or imperceptible condition.

^656:16 Sat 'what is being.'

^656:17 Retention, or holding of the image or idea formed in the mind by contemplation: from Dhri, 'to hold,' literally or figuratively.

^657:18 The explanation of Dharana given in the text is rendered unnecessarily perplexed by the double doctrine here taught, and the attempt to combine the abstractions of Yoga theism with the sectarian worship of Vishnu.

^657:19 The two last implements are from the comment; the text specifies only six.

^657:20 They are, 1. Yama &c., acts of restraint and obligation; 2. Asana, sitting in particular postures; 3. Pranayama, modes of breathing; 4. Pratyahara, exclusion of all external ideas; 5. Bhavana, apprehension of internal ideas; 6. Dharana, fixation or retention of those ideas.

^657:21 The result of the Dhyana or Samadhi is the absence of all idea of individuality, when the meditator, the meditation, and [p. 658] the thing or object meditated upon, are all considered to be but one. According to the text of Patanjali: 'Restraint of the body, retention of the mind, and meditation, which thence is exclusively confined to one object, is Dhyana: the idea of identification with the object of such meditation, so as if devoid of individual nature, is Samadhi.'

^658:22 The expressions of the text are somewhat obscure, nor does the commentator make them much more intelligible, until he cuts the matter short by stating the meaning to be, that 'discriminative knowledge enables the living spirit to attain Brahma.'

^658:23 The text is very elliptical and obscure. Having stated that embodied spirit (Kshetrajna) is the Karanin, the possessor or user of the Karana, which is knowledge, it adds, ### literally, 'by that, of that, that;' i. e. Tat, 'that which is; and Brahma, or supreme spirit, is the attainment of that spirit which abides in body by that instrument, or discriminative knowledge, of which it has become possessed through perfect meditation.

^659:24 The commentator, in order to explain how Khandikya should have given what he did not possess, states that it is to be understood that Kes'idhwaja relinquished to him the kingdom; or the term Raja may denote merely, master of, or acquainted with, mystic prayers, or Mantras.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 660]

  

CHAP. VIII.

Conclusion of the dialogue between Paras'ara and Maitreya. Recapitulation of the contents of the Vishnu Purana: merit of hearing it: how handed down. Praises of Vishnu. Concluding prayer.

I HAVE now explained to you, Maitreya, the third kind of worldly dissolution, or that which is absolute and final, which is, liberation and resolution into eternal spirit [*1]. I have related to you primary and secondary creation, the families of the patriarchs, the periods of the Manwantaras, and the genealogical histories (of the kings). I have repeated to you, in short, who were desirous of hearing it, the imperishable Vaishnava Purana, which is destructive of all sins, the most excellent of all holy writings, and the means of attaining the great end of man. If there is any thing else you wish to hear, propose your question, and I will answer it.

MAITREYA.--Holy teacher, you have indeed related to me all that I wished to know, and I have listened to it with pious attention. I have nothing further to inquire. The doubts inseparable from the mind of man have all been resolved by you, and through your instructions I am acquainted with the origin, duration, and end of all things; with Vishnu in his collective fourfold form [*2]; his three energies [*3]; and with the three modes of apprehending the object of contemplation [*4]. Of all this have I acquired a knowledge through your favour, and nothing else is worthy to be known, when it is once understood that Vishnu and this world are not mutually distinct. Great Muni, I have obtained through your kindness all I desired, the dissipation of my doubts, since you have instructed me

[p. 661]

in the duties of the several tribes, and in other obligations; the nature of active life, and discontinuance of action; and the derivation of all that exists from works. There is nothing else, venerable Brahman, that I have to inquire of you; and forgive me if your answers to my questions have imposed upon you any fatigue. Pardon me the trouble that I have given you, through that amiable quality of the virtuous -which makes no distinction between a disciple and a child.

PARAS'ARA.--I have related to you this Purana, which is equal to the Vedas in sanctity, and by hearing which all faults and sins whatever are expiated. In this have been described to you the primary and secondary creation, the families of the patriarchs, the Manwantaras, the regal dynasties; the gods, Daityas, Gandharbas, serpents, Rakshasas, Yakshas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas, and heavenly nymphs; Munis endowed with spiritual wisdom, and practisers of devotion; the distinctions of the four castes, and the actions of the most eminent amongst men; holy places on the earth, holy rivers and oceans, sacred mountains, and legends of the truly wise; the duties of the different tribes, and the observances enjoined by the Vedas. By hearing this, all sins are at once obliterated. In this also the glorious Hari has been revealed, the cause of the creation, preservation, and destruction of the world; the soul of all things, and himself all things: by the repetition of whose name man is undoubtedly liberated from all sins, which fly like wolves that are frightened by a lion. The repetition of his name with devout faith is the best remover of all sins, destroying them as fire purifies the metal from the dross. The stain of the Kali age, which ensures to men sharp punishments in hell, is at once effaced by a single invocation of Hari. He who is all that is, the whole egg of Brahma, with Hiranyagarbha, Indra, Rudra, the Adityas, the Aswins, the winds, the Kinnaras, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, Vis'wadevas, the celestial gods, the Yakshas, serpents, Rakshasas, the Siddhas, Daityas, Gandharbas, Danavas, nymphs, the stars, asterisms, planets, the seven Rishis, the regents and superintendants of the quarters, men, Brahmans and the rest, animals tame and wild, insects, birds, ghosts and goblins, trees, mountains, woods, rivers, oceans, the subterrene legions, the divisions of the earth, and all perceptible objects--he who is all things, who

[p. 662]

knoweth all things, who is the form of all things, being without form himself, and of whom whatever is, from mount Meru to an atom, all consists--he, the glorious Vishnu, the destroyer of all sin--is described in this Purana. By hearing this Purana an equal recompense is obtained to that which is derived from the performance of an As'wamedha sacrifice, or from fasting at the holy places Prayaga, Pushkara, Kurukshetra, or Arbuda. Hearing this Purana but once is as efficacious as the offering of oblations in a perpetual fire for a year. The man who with well-governed passions bathes at Mathura on the twelfth day of the month Jyeshtha [*5], and beholds (the image of) Hari, obtains a great recompense; so does he who with mind fixed upon Kes'ava attentively recites this Purana. The man who bathes in the waters of the Yamuna on the twelfth lunation of the light fortnight of the month in which the moon is in the mansion Jyeshtha, and who fasts and worships Achyuta in the city of Mathura, receives the reward of an uninterrupted As'wamedha. Beholding the degree of prosperity enjoyed by others of eminence, through the merits of their descendants, a man's paternal ancestors, his parents and their parents, exclaim, "Whosoever of our descendants, having bathed in the Yamuna and fasted, will worship Govinda in Mathura, in the light fortnight of Jyeshtha, will secure for us eminent exaltation; for we shall be elevated by the merits of our posterity!" A man of good extraction will present obsequial cakes to his fortunate ancestors in the Yamuna, having worshipped Janarddana in the light fortnight of Jyeshtha. But the same degree of merit that a man reaps front adoring Janarddana at that season with a devoted heart, and from bathing in the Yamuna, and effecting the liberation of his progenitors by offering to them on such an occasion obsequial cakes, he derives also from hearing with equal devotion a section of this Purana. This Purana is the best of all preservatives for those who are afraid of worldly existence,

[p. 663]

a certain alleviation of the sufferings of men, and remover of all imperfections.

This Purana, originally composed by the Rishi (Narayana), was communicated by Brahma to Ribhu; he related it to Priyavrata, by whom it was imparted to Bhaguri. Bhaguri recited it to Tamasitra [*6], and he to Dadicha, who gave it to Saraswata. From the last Bhrigu received it, who imparted it to Purukutsa, and he taught it to Narmada. The goddess delivered it to Dhritarashtra the Naga king, and to Purana of the same race, by whom it was repeated to their monarch Vasuki. Vasuki communicated it to Vatsa, and he to Aswatara, from whom it successively proceeded to Kambala and Elapatra. When the Muni Vedas'iras descended to Patala, he there received the whole Purana from these Nagas, and communicated it to Pramati. Pramati consigned it to the wise Jatukarna, and he taught it to many other holy persons. Through the blessing of Vas'ishtha it came to my knowledge, and I have now, Maitreya, faithfully imparted it to you. You will teach it, at the end of the Kali age, to S'amika [*7]. Whoever hears this great mystery, which removes the contamination of the Kali, shall be freed from all his sins. He who hears this every day acquits himself of his daily obligations to ancestors, gods, and men. The great and rarely attainable merit that a man acquires by the gift of a brown cow, he derives from hearing ten chapters of this Purana [*8]. He who hears the entire Purana, contemplating in his mind Achyuta, who is all things, and of whom all things are made; who is the stay of the whole world, the receptacle of spirit; who is knowledge, and that which is to be known; who is without beginning or end, and the benefactor of the gods--obtains assuredly the reward that attends the uninterrupted celebration of the As'wamedha rite. He who reads and retains with faith this Purana,

[p. 664]

in the beginning, middle, and end of which is described the glorious Achyuta, the lord of the universe in every stage, the master of all that is stationary or moveable, composed of spiritual knowledge, acquires such purity as exists not in any world, the eternal state of perfection, which is Hari. The man who fixes his mind on Vishnu goes not to hell: he who meditates upon him regards heavenly enjoyment only as an impediment: and he whose mind and soul are penetrated by him thinks little of the world of Brahma; for when present in the minds of those whose intellects are free from soil, he confers upon them eternal freedom. What marvel therefore is it that the sins of one who repeats the name of Achyuta should be wiped away? Should not that Hari be heard of, whom those devoted to acts worship with sacrifices continually as the god of sacrifice; whom those devoted to meditation contemplate as primary and secondary, composed of spirit; by obtaining whom man is not born, nor nourished, nor subjected to death; who is all that is, and that is not (or both cause and of effect); who, as the progenitors, receives the libations made to them; who, as the gods, accepts the offerings addressed to them; the glorious being who is without beginning or end; whose name is both Swaha and Swadha [*9]; who is the abode of all spiritual power; in whom the limits of finite things cannot be measured [*10]; and who, when he enters the ear, destroys all sin?

I adore him, that first of gods, Purushottama, who is without end and without beginning, without growth, without decay, without death; who is substance that knows not change. I adore that ever inexhaustible spirit; who assumed sensible qualities; who, though one, became many; who, though pure, became as if impure, by appearing in many and various shapes; who is endowed with divine wisdom, and is the author of the preservation of all creatures. I adore him, who is the one conjoined essence and object of both meditative wisdom and active virtue;

[p. 665]

who is watchful in providing for human enjoyments; who is one with the three qualities; who, without undergoing change, is the cause of the evolution of the world; who exists of his own essence, ever exempt from decay. I constantly adore him, who is entitled heaven, air, fire, water, earth, and ether; who is the bestower of all the objects which give gratification to the senses; who benefits mankind with the instruments of fruition; who is perceptible, who is subtile, who is imperceptible. May that unborn, eternal Hari, whose form is manifold, and whose essence is composed of both nature and spirit, bestow upon all mankind that blessed state which knows neither birth nor decay!

Footnotes

^660:1 The term is Brahmani laya, which means, 'a melting away,' 'a dissolution' or 'fusion,' from the root, 'to liquefy,' 'to melt,' 'to dissolve.'

^660:2 Or with Vishnu in the four modifications described in the first section, spirit, matter, form, and time: see <page 9>.

^660:3 Or S'akti, noticed in the last chapter, <page 655>.

^660:4 Or Bhavanas, also described in the preceding section, <page 654>.

^662:5 This month is also called Jyeshthamula, which the commentator explains to mean, the month, of which the root or cause (Mula) of being so called is the moon's being full in the constellation Jyeshtha: but it may be so termed, perhaps, from the lunar asterism Mula, which is next to Jyeshtha, falling also within the moon's passage through the same month.

^663:6 This name is also read Tambamitra. One copy has Tava-mitraya, 'to thy friend,' as if it was an epithet of Dadhicha; but the construction of the verse requires a proper name. 'Bhaguri gave it to Tambamitra, and he to Dadhichi.'

^663:7 A different series of narrators has been specified in the first book, <page 9>.

^663:8 This seems to be an injudicious interpolation; it is not in all the copies.

^664:9 The words or prayers employed in presenting oblations with fire.

^664:10 The text has, ###. Mana commonly means 'pride,' but here it seems most appropriately rendered by its radical import, 'measure' the measures which are for the determination of measurable things are not applicable to Vishnu.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 666] [p. 667]

  

INDEX.

The Roman numerals refer to the Preface, the Arabic figures to the Work.

Abbreviations:--s. for son, d, for daughter, w. for wife, k. for king.

 

ABHAYA, s. of Dharma, p. <page 55>, n. .

Abhijit, a Yadava chief, <page 436>.

Abhimani, an Agni, <page 83>.

Abhimanyu, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>. s. of Arjuna, <page 459>, n. . <page 460>.

Abhinives'a, 'dread of suffering,' <page 34>, n. .

Abhiras, a people, <page 189>. <page 195>. <page 481>. a race of kings, <page 474>. <page 475>, n. .

Abhisaras, a people, <page 191>.

Abhutarajasas, a class of deities, <page 262>.

Abhyutthitas'wa, a prince, <page 386>.

Abiria, country of the Abhiras, <page 195>, n. .

Acharas, observances of caste and order, <page 291>. of a householder, <page 300>.

Achyuta, 'the imperishable,' a name of Vishnu, <page 8>, n. .

Adbhuta, Indra of the ninth Manwantara, <page 268>.

Adharma, a Prajapati, <page 49>, n. , son of Brahma, <page 55>, n. , married to Hinsa, <page 55>. their children, <page 56>. married to Mrisha: their children, <page 55>, n. .

Adhipurusha, 'supreme spirit,' <page 93>, n. .

Adhiratha, a prince, <page 446>.

Adhivajya (Adhirajya), a country, <page 188>.

Adhos'iras, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 208>.

Adhrishya, a river, <page 183>.

Adhwaryu, reader of prayers, <page 276>.

Adi, the Brahma Purana, <page xvi>. a minor Purana, <page lviii>.

Adina, a prince, <page 412>.

Aditi, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, <page 348>. receives the earrings produced at the churning of the ocean, <page 78>, n. . receives them from Krishna, and praises him, <page 534>.

Aditya, 'the sun,' gives the Syamantaka gem to Satrajit, <page 425>.

Adityas, twelve, the sons of Aditi: their names, <page 122>. present in the sun's car in each month, <page 234>, n. .

Adris'yanti, w. of Sakti, mother of Paras'ara, <page 4>, n. .

Adyas, a class of deities, <page 263>.

Affliction, three kinds of, <page 638>. how to be overcome, <page 641>.

Agada, a branch of medicine, <page 407>, n. .

Agastya, s. of Pulastya, <page 83>, n. . an asterism, <page 226>.

Agneya, a Purana, <page 284>.

Agni, deity of fire, s. of Angiras, <page 83>. k. of the Pitris, <page 153>, n. . a star, <page 241>.

Agni Purana, one of the Tamasa class, <page xii>. description of, <page xxxvi>. named, <page 284>.

Agnibahu, son of Priyavrata and Kamya, <page 162>. adopts a religious life, ibid.

Agnidhra, s. of Priyavrata and Kamya, <page 162>. k. of Jambu-dwipa, ibid.

Agnihotra, 'burnt offerings,' <page 275>, n. .

Agnimathara, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

Agnimitra, a Sunga prince, <page 471>.

Agnishtoma, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>. kind of sacrifice produced from Brahma, <page 42>.

Agnishwattas, a class of Pitris, <page 84>, n. . <page 239>, n. . <page 321>, n. .

Agnivarchas, a teacher of the Puranas, <page 283>.

Agnivarna, a prince, <page 384>, n. . <page 387>.

Agrahayana, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Ahalya, d. of Bahwas'wa, w. of Gautama, <page 454>.

Ahamyati, s. of Samyati, <page 447>.

Ahankara, 'egotism,' product of Mahat, <page 15>, meaning of the term, ibid. n. . threefold condition, <page 16>, n. . invested by Intellect: produces Akas or 'ether,' <page 16>.

Ahar, 'day,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>.

Ahikshetra, a city, <page 187>, n. , <page 454>, n. .

Ahinagu, a prince, <page 386>.

Ahinaru, a prince, <page 462>.

Ahirvradhna, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Ahuka, s. of Punarvasu, a Yadava chief, <page 436>.

Ahuki, d. of Punarvasu, <page 436>.

Air or wind, the element, <page 16>. deity of; presides over the skin, <page 17>, n. .

Airavata, elephant produced from the ocean, taken by Indra, <page 78>, n. . k. of elephants, <page 153>.

Airavata, a serpent, <page 149>, n. . k. of serpents, <page 153>.

Airavata, north portion of the planetary sphere, <page 226>, n. .

Airavati, a division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

[p. 668]

Aja, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. . a prince, <page 383>.

Ajagava, the bow of Mahadeva, <page 101>.

Ajaikapad, a Rudra, <page 121>

Ajaka, a prince, <page 399>.

Ajamidha, s. of Hastin, <page 452>.

Ajatasatru, s. of Vidmisara, <page 466>.

Ajavithi, a division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

Ajina, s. of Havirdhana, <page 106>.

Ajita, a form of Vishnu, <page 264>.

Ajitas, a class of deities, <page 122>, n. .

Ajyapas, a class of Pitris, <page 84>, n. . <page 321>, n. .

Akasa or 'ether;' produced from the rudiment of sound; produces that of touch, <page 16>. and n. .

Akhyanani, the Puranas, <page 159>, n. .

Akritavrana, a teacher of Puranas, <page 283>.

Akrodhana, a prince, <page 457>.

Akrura, s. of S'waphalka, <page 435>. receives the Syamantaka jewel, <page 429>. entrusted with it by Krishna, <page 434>. sent by Kansa to Vrindavan, <page 536>. praises Vishnu, <page 547>. takes Krishna and Rama to Mathura, <page 548>.

Akuti, daughter of Swayambhuva Manu, <page 53>. married to Ruchi; their children, <page 54>.

Akuti, w. of Chakshush, <page 99>, n. .

Alakananda, a river, <page 170>. borne by S'iva, <page 229>.

Alambana, 'silent prayer,' <page 653>.

Alarka, s. of Pratarddana, <page 408>.

Alindayas, a people, <page 193>.

Ama, a ray of the sun, <page 237>.

Amara Sinha, his definition of a Purana, <page iv>.

Amaravati, the capital of Indra, <page 71>.

Amarsha, a prince, <page 387>.

Amavasu, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>. s. of Kus'a, <page 399>.

Amavasya, day of conjunction, <page 225>. <page 237>.

Ambarisha, s. of Pulaha, <page 83>, n. . s. of Nabhaga, <page 351>, n. . <page 379>. s. of Mandhatri, <page 363>. s. of Prasus'ruka, <page 384>, n. .

Ambashthas, a people, <page 177>. and n. .

Ambhansi, four classes of beings, <page 39>, n. .

Ambika, w. of a Rudra, <page 59>, n. .

Ambuvahini, a river, <page 183>, n. .

Amitabhas, a class of deities, <page 262>. <page 267>.

Amitadhwaja, s. of Dharmadhwaja, <page 645>.

Amitrajit, a prince, <page 463>.

Ammonius, his doctrines derived front the East, <page viii>.

Amrita, 'ambrosia,' the ocean churned for it, <page 75>. drunk by the gods, <page 77>. preserved in the moon, <page 238>. drunk by the Pitris, <page 239>.

Amurttaraya, a prince, <page 399>.

Anadhrishti, A. of S'ura, <page 436>.

Anaga, a river, <page 184>, n. .

Anagha, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>.

Anakadundubhi, a name of Vasudeva, <page 436>.

Anala, a Vass, <page 120>.

Analavi (Alambi), teacher of the Yajur-veda, <page 279>, n. .

Anamitra, a prince, <page 424>.

Ananta, a name of S'esha, <page 205>.

Anaranya, killed by Ravana, <page 371>.

Anartha, s. of Saryati, <page 354>. a country, <page 355>.

Anarttas, a people, <page 190>.

Anasuya, 'charity,' d. of Daksha, w. of Atri, <page 54>.

Anavaratha, a prince, <page 422>.

Anaximander, his notion of elemental investment, <page 16>, n. . infinity of worlds, <page 215>, n. .

Anayush, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, n. .

Anda-kataha, the shell of the world, <page 202>, n. .

Andhaka, s. of Satwata, <page 424>.

Andhas, a people, <page 190>.

Andhatamisra, 'utter darkness,' kind of ignorance, <page 34>, n. .

Andhra kings, dynasty of, <page 472>. <page 473>, n. . noticed by Pliny, <page 474>, n. . second race of, <page 476>, n. .

Andhras, a people, <page 190>, n. .

Andhrabhrityas, dynasty of, <page 472>.

Andhrajatiyas, same as Andhras, <page 472>.

Anenas, s. of Kakutstha, <page 361>. s. of Kshemari, <page 390>. s. of Ayus, <page 406>. his descendants, <page 412>, n. .

Anga, a minor Dwipa, <page 175>, n. .

Anga, s. of Uru, <page 98>. of the family of Atri, <page 99>, n. . s. of Bali, <page 444>.

Angada, s. of Lakshmana, k. of Angadi, <page 385>.

Angaja, s. of Brahma, <page 50>, n. .

Angaraka, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Angaras, a people, <page 193>.

Angas, supplementary sciences of the Vedas, <page 284>.

Angas, a people, <page 188>.

Angiras, a Prajapati, <page 49>. marries Smriti, <page 54>. marries two daughters of Kas'yapa, <page 119>. their progeny, <page 123>, n. . s. of Uru, <page 98>.

Anila, a Vasu, <page 120>. s. of Tansu, <page 448>.

Angirasas, of the family of Rathinara, <page 359>. warrior-priests, ib. n. . sons of Harita, <page 369>, n. . Animals, creation of; kinds of, <page 35>, n. , born from Brahma, <page 41>.

Aniruddha, s. of Pradyumna, <page 579>.

Anjaka, s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Anjana, a serpent, <page 149>, n. . a prince, <page 390>.

Anquetil du Perron, translated the Upanishads, <page ii>, note .

Anrita 'untruth,' s. of Adharma, married to Nikriti; their progeny, <page 56>.

Ans'a, an Aditya, <page 122>.

Ans'u, a prince, <page 423>.

Ans'umat, grandson of Sagara, <page 377>.

Antacharas, a people, <page 195>.

Antiochus the Great, named in inscriptions, <page 194>, n. . <page 470>, n. .

Antarddhana, 'disappearance,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>, n. . s. of Prithu, <page 106>.

Antarddhi, s, of Prithu, <page 106>.

Antariksha, a Vyasa, <page 273>. s. of Kinnara, <page 463>.

Antassila, a river, <page 184>, n. .

[p. 669]

Antras'ila, a river, <page 184>.

Anu, s. of Yayati, <page 413>. k. of the north, <page 415>. his descendants, <page 444>.

Anu, two Paramanus, <page 22>, n. .

Anugraha, a secondary creation, <page 37>. n. .

Anuha, s. of Vibhraja, <page 452>.

Anuhlada, s. of Hiranyakas'ipu, <page 124>.

Anumati, d. of Angiras, <page 83>. first day of moon's wane, <page 225>.

Anupavrittas, a people, <page 189>.

Anuradha, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Anuratha, a prince, <page 423>.

Anushni, a river, <page 183>.

Anushtubh, metre from Brahma, <page 42>.

Anuvada, 'works,' or 'supplementary rites,' <page 159>, n. .

Anuvatsara, fourth cyclic year, <page 224>.

Anuvinda, s. of Jayasena, <page 437>.

Apa, 'water,' the element; produced from the rudiment of taste, and produces that of smell, <page 16>. and n. . 'waters' called Nara, <page 28>, n. .

Apa, a Vasu, <page 120>.

Apachiti, d. of Paurnamasa, <page 82>, n. .

Aparajita, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Aparakasis, a people, <page 187>.

Aparakuntis, a people, <page 187>.

Aparinamin, a name of Purusha or 'spirit,' <page 13>, n. .

Aparantas, a people, <page 189>.

Aparravallabhas, a people, <page 193>.

Aparitas, a people, <page 189>, n. .

Apaspati, s. of Uttanapada, <page 86>, n. .

Apava, a name of Vas'ishtha, <page 52>, n. . <page 417>, n. .

Apavahas, a people, <page 188>.

Apomurtti, s. of Atri, <page 83>, n. .

Apostates, who, <page 334>. Jains, <page 339>. Buddhists, <page 340>. Varhaspatyas, ib. n. .

Apratiratha, s. of Rantinara, <page 448>.

Apratishtha, a hell, <page 207>.

Apsarasas, 'nymphs,' born from Brahma, <page 42>. produced from the ocean, <page 76>. daughters of Kas'yapa and Muni, <page 150>. children of Vach; two classes and fourteen ganas of, <page 150>, n. . cursed by Ashtavakra, <page 618>.

Aptoryama rite, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Araga, a sun, <page 632>, n. .

Aradwat, a prince, <page 443>.

Aratta, a prince, <page 443> n. . a people, ib.

Arbuda (Abu), a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Arbudas, a people, <page 177>. and n. .

Archish, w. of Krisas'wa, <page 123>, n. ,

Arddhaketu, a Rudra, <page 121>. n. .

Ardra, a prince, <page 361>.

Ardra, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Ardraka, a prince, <page 471>.

Arhat, k. of the south, converted by Rishabha, <page 164>, n. .

Arhats, or Jains, their doctrines, <page 339>.

Arimerddana, s. of S'waphalka, <page 435>.

Aripu, s. of Yadu, <page 416>, n. .

Arishta, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>, n. . a demon killed by Krishna, <page 536>.

Arishta, d. of Daksha, w, of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Arishtakarman, a prince, <page 473>.

Arishtanemi, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. . married to four daughters of Daksha, <page 119>. a name of Kas'yapa, <page 123>, n. . a prince, <page 390>.

Arjjava, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

Arjuna, s. of Kritavirya, <page 417>.

Arjuna, s. of Pandu, <page 437>. <page 459>. takes Krishna's family from Dwaraka, <page 613>. plundered by shepherds, <page 615>. consoled by Vyasa, <page 616>.

Arjuna-trees, overturned by Krishna, <page 509>.

Arshabhi, a division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

Artha, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Artha s'astra, 'science of government,' <page 284>.

Aruna, s. of Kas'yapa and Vinata, <page 149>.

Arundhati, d. of Kardama, w. of Vas'ishtha, <page 55>, n. . d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>.

Aruni, teacher of the Yajur-veda, <page 279>, n. .

Arunoda, a lake, <page 169>.

Arvaks'rotas, creation of mankind, <page 36>, n. .

Arvarivat, s. of Pulaha, <page 83>. a Rishi, <page 261>.

Arvavasu, a solar ray, <page 236>, n. .

Aryaman, an Aditya, <page 122>.

Asamanjas, s. of Sagara, <page 377>.

As'ana, mode of sitting, <page 653>.

Asanga, a prince, <page 435>.

Ashadha, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Ashadha, a constellation: see Purvashadha and Uttarashadha, <page 226>, n. .

Ashtavakra curses the Apsarasas, <page 617>.

Asi, a rivulet, <page 184>.

Asikni, d. of Virana, w. of Daksha, <page 117>. a river, <page 183>.

Asima-krishna, a prince, <page 461>.

Asipatravana, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 209>.

Aslesha, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

As'maka, s. of Saudas'a, <page 382>.

Asmita, 'selfishness,' <page 34>, n. .

As'oka, k. of Megadha, patron of Buddhism, <page 469>, n. .

As'okavarddhana, s. of Vindusara, <page 469>.

Asramas or 'orders,' <page 294>.

Asruta or Asrutavana, s. of Dyutimat, <page 82>, n. .

Asti, w. of Kansa, <page 563>.

Asuras, proceeded from Brahma, <page 40>.

As'wakas (As'makas), a people, <page 188>.

Aswalayana, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

As'wamedha, sacrifice of a horse, <page 275>, n. . celebrated by Sagara, <page 378>.

As'wamedhadatta, a prince, <page 461>.

Aswatara, s. of Kadru, <page 149>.

As'wayus, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>, n. .

As'wina, a month, <page 225>, n. .

[p. 670]

Aswini, a lunar asterism, <page 226>, n. .

Aswins, sons of the sun, <page 266>.

Atala, a division of Patala, <page 204>.

Atavya, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Atharvan (Atharva-veda), proceeds from Brahma, <page 42>. arranged by Vyasa, <page 276>. how composed, ib. Sanhitas of, <page 282>. Kalpas of, <page 283>.

Atharva-veda (personified), s. of Angiras, <page 123>, n. .

Antimara, a prince, <page 447>, n. .

Atiratra sacrifice, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Atiratra, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>.

Atithi, s. of Kus'a, <page 386>.

Ativis'ikharas, a people, <page 189>.

Atma, name of Vishnu, <page 2>, n. .

Atri, a Prajapati, <page 49>. marries Anasuya, <page 54>. father of Soma, <page 392>.

Atreyas, a people, <page 196>.

Audras, a people, <page 192>.

Aurva, a sage, teaches Sagara, <page 290>. his birth, ib. n. . and <page 373>.

Auttama (Auttami), third Manu, <page 261>. his sons, ib.

Avanti, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Avantis, a people, <page 187>.

Avantyas, a branch of the Haihaya tribe, <page 418>, n. . 

Avarana, investment of elements by rudiments successively, <page 16>, n. .

Avarttana, an island, <page 175>, n. .

Avasthanas, divisions of the sun's course, <page 226>, n. . 

Avataras, alluded to in the Vedas, <page ii>. of Vishnu, <page xliii>. of S'iva, ib. of Vishnu as the Varaha, <page 29>. as a tortoise, <page 75>. as Nrisinha, <page 145>. as Rama, <page 384>. as Krishna, <page 492>. as a fish, <page li>.

Avichi, a hell, <page 207>.

Avidya, 'ignorance,' <page 34>, n. .

Avikshit, a prince, <page 352>.

Avyaya, a name of Purusha or 'spirit,' <page 13>, n. .

Ayana, period of six months; day and night of the gods, <page 23>.

Ayatayama, texts of the Yajur-veda, <page 281>.

Ayati, w. of Dhatri, <page 82>. d. of Meru, <page 85>, n. .

Ayati, s. of Nahusha, <page 413>.

Ayomukha, a Danava, <page 147>.

Ayur-veda, medical science, <page 284>.

Ayus, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>. his sons, <page 406>.

Ayushmat, s. of Sanhrada, <page 147>. of Prahlada, ib. n. .

Ayushmanta, s. of Uttanapada, <page 86>, n. .

Ayutajit, s. of Bhajamana, <page 429>.

Ayutas'wa, a prince, <page 379>.

Ayutayus, a prince of the Kuru race, <page 457>. of Magadha, <page 465>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

B.

Babhru, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>. s. of Romapada, <page 422>. s. of Devavriddha, <page 424>. s, of Druhyu, <page 443>.

Babhruvahana, s. of Arjuna, <page 460>.

Badha, imperfection of twenty-eight sorts, <page 35>, n. .

Badhnas, a people, <page 192>.

Bahikas, a people, <page 189>, n. .

Bahkali (Bahkala), see Bashkali, <page 277>, n. .

Bahlika, s. of Pratipa, <page 457>.

Bahlikas, a people, <page 189>. <page 191>.

Bahlika kings, <page 478>.

Bahu (Bahuka), a prince, <page 373>.

Bahubadhas, a people, <page 192>.

Bahuda, a river, <page 181>. and n. .

Bahugava, s. of Sudyumna, <page 447>.

Bahula, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. .

Bahula, a prince, <page 386>, n. .

Bahula, a river, <page 183>.

Bahulas'wa, a prince, <page 391>.

Bahuputra, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. . married two daughters of Daksha, <page 119>. their children (the lightnings), <page 123>, n. .

Bahuvatha, a prince, <page 453>.

Bahurupa, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Bahwas'wa, s. of Mudgala, <page 454>.

Bahyas, a people, <page 185>, n. .

Bajikarana, a branch of medicine, <page 407>, n. .

Balabhadra: see Balarama.

Balahaka, a serpent, <page 149>, n. .

Balakhilyas, pigmy sages, sixty thousand in number, sons of Kratu, <page 83>. attend the sun, <page 234>.

Balarama, s. of Vasudeva, <page 498>. Avatara of S'esha, <page 546>. brought up by Nanda, <page 506>. kills Dhenuka, <page 517>. kills Pralamba, <page 520>. kills Mushtika, <page 558>. goes to Vrindavan, <page 569>. compels the Yamuna to attend him, <page 572>. kills Rukmin, <page 580>. rescues S'amba, <page 585>, kills Dwivida, <page 605>. married to Revati, <page 439>. their sons, ib. offended with Krishna, <page 430>. resumes the form of S'esha, <page 611>.

Bali, s. of Virochana, <page 147>. sovereign of Patala, <page 205>, n. . Indra of the eighth Manwantara, <page 267>. s. of Sutapas, <page 444>.

Bali-dana, offerings of food, <page 304>.

Baluvahini, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Bana, s. of Bali, <page 147>. worships S'iva, <page 593>. confines Aniruddha, ib. fights with Krishna, <page 595>. is defeated, <page 596>.

Bandhumat, a prince, <page 353>.

Banga, s. of Bali, <page 444>.

Banjula, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Barbaras, a people, <page 192>.

Bashkali (Baskala), teacher of a Sanhita of the Rig-veda, <page 277>. a different teacher, ib. n. . ditto, <page 278>.

Bathing, rules of; <page 302>.

Bauddhas, origin of, <page 339>.

Baudhayanas, followers of a branch of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Baudhya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

Benares, burnt by the discus of Krishna, <page 600>.

Bhaga, an Aditya, <page 122>.

[p. 671]

Bhagavat, meaning of, <page 643>.

Bhagavata, a prince, <page 471>.

Bhagavata, a Purana, <page 284>. analysis of, <page xxiv>. authenticity of discussed, <page xxviii>.

Bhagiratha, a prince, brings Ganga from heaven, <page 379>.

Bhagirathi, a name of the Ganges, <page 379>.

Bhadra, w. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Bhadra, a river, <page 170>.

Bhadra, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Bhadrabahu, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>

Bhadrachara, s. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Bhadradeha, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Bhadrakali, sprung from Devi, <page 68>.

Bhadraratha, a prince, <page 445>.

Bhadrasana, mode of sitting, <page 653>.

Bhadrasena, s. of Mahishmat, <page 417>. s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Bhadras'renya, a Yadava prince, <page 407>, n. . <page 417>, n. . his race destroyed, <page 407>, n. . <page 408>.

Bhadras'wa, s. of Agnidhra, <page 162>. k. of the countries east of Meru, <page 163>. s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>

Bhadras'wa, a Varsha or country, <page 169>.

Bhadravinda, s. of Krishna, S<page 91>.

Bharika, s. of Krishna, <page 591>.

Bhajamana, s. of Andhaka, <page 435>. <page 436>, n. . s. of Satwata, <page 424>.

Bhajina, s. of S'atwata, <page 424>.

Bhalandana, s. of Nabhaga, <page 352>.

Bhallada, a prince, <page 453>, n. .

Bhallata, a prince, <page 453>.

Bhanu, s. of Krishna, <page 591>.

Bhanu, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 119>.

Bhanus (suns), sons of Bhanu, <page 120>.

Bhanumat, a prince, <page 390>.

Bhanuratha, s. of Chandragiri, <page 386>, n. . s. of Vrihadas'wa, <page 463>.

Bharadwaja, s. of Vrihaspati, given to Bharata, <page 499>. a Vyasa, <page 273>. a teacher of the Vedas, <page 449>. <page 278>, n. .

Bharadwajas, a people, <page 196>.

Bharadwaja, a river, <page 183>.

Bharani, a lunar asterism, <page 226>, n. .

Bharata, s. of Rishabha, <page 163>. legend of, <page 243>. horn as a deer; as a Brahman, <page 245>. instructs the king of Sauvira in true wisdom, <page 247>. obtains liberation, <page 258>. s. of Dushyanta, <page 449>, adopts Bharadwaja, ib. s. of Das'aratha, <page 384>. conquers the Gandharbas, <page 385>. s. of Vitihotra, <page 418>. a sage, teacher of musical science, <page 284>.

Bharata varsha, or India, divisions of, <page 165>. description of, <page 174>. land of works, <page 178>.

Bharata: see Mahabharata.

Bharga, a prince, <page 409>.

Bhargas, a people, <page 190>. and n. .

Bhargabhumi, a prince, <page 409>.

Bhargavas, a people, <page 190>.

Bhasi, d. of Kas'yapa, parent of kites, <page 148>.

Bhauma, 'Mars,' his car and horses, <page 240>.

Bhautya, tenth Manu, <page 268>, n. . fourteenth Manu, <page 269>. his sons, ib. s. of Kavi, ib. n. .

Bhava, S'iva, the husband of S'ati, <page 54>. of Uma, <page 59>. a Rudra, <page 58>. <page 121>. n. . s. of Pratihartta, <page 165>. s. of Viloman, <page 436>.

Bhava, synonyme of Mahat, <page 14>. n. .

Bhavana, 'apprehension,' threefold, <page 654>.

Bhavanmanya, s. of Vitatha, <page 450>.

Bhavishya, a Purana, <page 284>. analysis of, <page xxxix>.

Bhavishyottara Purana, notice of, <page xl>.

Bhavya, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>. k. of S'aka-dwipa, ib. his sons, <page 199>. s. of Dhruva, <page 98>.

Bhavyas, a class of deities, <page 263>.

Bhaya, 'fear,' s. of Anrita, <page 56>.

Bhayada, a prince, <page 447>.

Bhikshuka, 'mendicant,' duties of; <page 295>.

Bhima, a Rudra, <page 58>. <page 120>, n. . s. of Amavasu, <page 398>. s. of Pandu, <page 437>. <page 459>. his sons, ib.

Bhima, a river, <page 183>.

Bhimaratha, s. of Ketumat, <page 407>. s. of Vikriti, <page 422>.

Bhimarathi, a river, <page 176>. the Beemah, n. .

Bhimasena, s. of Parikshit, <page 457>. <page 461>. see Bhima.

Bhishma, s. of S'antanu, <page 459>.

Bhishmaka, k. of Vidarbha, <page 573>.

Bhiras, a people, <page 177>, n. .

Bhogavati, city of Vasuki in Rasatala, <page 204>, n. .

Bhojakata, founded by Rukmin, <page 574>.

Bhojas, a people, <page 186>. a branch of the Haihayas, <page 418>, n. . descendants of Mahabhoja, <page 424>.

Bhraja, a sun, <page 632>, n. .

Bhrajiras, a class of deities, <page 269>.

Bhrami, d. of S'is'umara, w. of Dhruva, <page 98>, n. .

Bhrigu, a Prajapati, <page 49>. married Khyati, <page 54>. their children, <page 59>. teacher of military science, <page 284>.

Bhurishena, a prince, <page 354>, n. .

Bhumimitra, a Kanwa prince, <page 471>.

Bhuri, s. of Bahlika, <page 459>.

Bhuris'ravas, s. of Bahlika, <page 459>.

Bhur-loka, the earth, its extent, <page 212>.

Bhuta, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Bhutadi, elementary Ahankara, the origin of the elements, <page 16>, n. .

Bhutas, evil spirits, proceed from Brahma, <page 41>. children of Krodha, <page 150>, n. .

Bhutasantapana, s. of Hiranyaksha, <page 147>.

Bhutatma, name of Vishnu, <page 2>, n. .

Bhutavidya, branch of medicine, <page 407>, n. .

Bhutes'a, a name of Vishnu, <page 20>, n. .

Bhuti, a goddess, w. of Kavi, <page 269>, n. . a sage, s. of Angiras, ib.

Bhuvana, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Bhuvar-loka, extent of, <page 212>.

Bodha, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Bodhana, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Bodhas, a people, <page 185>, n. .

[p. 672]

Brahma, the supreme being and the Vedas; typified by Om, <page 1>. one with Vishnu, <page 2>. abstract spirit, <page 2>, n. . possessed of properties and origin of creation, <page 21>. two states of; <page 157>. meaning of, <page 273>. with or without form, <page 654>, n. .

Brahma, same as Vishnu in his character of creator, <page 19>. length of his life, <page 22>. his various creations, <page 34>. four castes proceed from him, <page 44>. his mind-born sons, <page 49>. parent of the Rudras, <page 58>. same as Mahat, <page 14>, n. . first teacher of the Vishnu Purana, <page 3>, n. . praises Vishnu, <page 494>.

Brahma, a Purana, <page 283>. analysis of, <page xvi>.

Brahmabali, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Brahmabhuta, condition of Brahma, <page 155>.

Brahmabodhya, a river, <page 184>.

Brahmachari, religious student, duties of, <page 294>.

Brahmadatta, s. of Anuha, <page 452>.

Brahma-loka, highest heaven, <page 48>, n. . <page 212>, n. .

Brahmamedhya, a river, <page 184>.

Brahman, reader of the Atharva-veda, <page 276>.

Brahmans, from the mouth of Brahma, <page 44>. duties of, <page 291>. Gotras of, <page 405>, n. . early settlement of in India, <page lxv>.

Brahmanda, a Purana, <page 284>. parts of, <page liv>.

Brahmani, a river, <page 184>.

Brahmarshis, Brahman saints, <page 284>, n. .

Brahmas, or Brahmarishis, nine, <page 49>.

Brahma s'avarni, tenth Manu, <page 268>. his sons, ib. s. of Brahma, ib. n. .

Brahma-vaivartta, a Purana, <page 284>. analysis of; <page xli>.

Brahma-yajna, sacred study, <page 294>, n. .

Buddhi, 'understanding,' synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, n. . d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>.

Budha, s. of Mahadeva, <page 59>. s. of Soma, <page 350>. <page 393>. name of Mercury; his car and horses, <page 239>. a prince, s. of Vegavat, <page 353>.

Bull (of S'iva), progeny of Surabhi, <page 150>, n. . liberated at S'raddhas, <page 333>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

C.

Castes, four, created by Brahma, <page 44>. original state, <page 45>. divided by occupations, <page 47>, n. . instituted by different princes, <page 406>. <page 409>. <page 444>. duties of, <page 291>.

Cathaei, Kshatriyas, <page 195>, n. .

Ceremonies, at birth, &c. <page 297>.

Chaidyas, descendants of Chedi, <page 422>.

Chaitra, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Chaitraratha, a forest, <page 169>,

Chakora, a prince, <page 473>.

Chakora, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Chakras, a people, <page 188>.

Chakra-vartti, an emperor, meaning of, <page 101>, n. .

Chakshu, a river, <page 170>.

Chakshu, a prince, <page 453>.

Chakshupa, a prince, <page 352>.

Chakshusha, s. of Ripu, <page 98>.

Chakshusha, a Manu, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>. sixth Manu, <page 263>. his sons, ib. his birth, ib. n. . a prince, s. of Ami, <page 444>.

Chakshushas, a class of deities, <page 269>.

Champa, founder of Champa-puri, <page 445>.

Champa, a city founded by Champa, <page 445>.

Chandana, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Chandanodakadundhubi, a Yadava chief, <page 436>.

Chandragiri, a prince, <page 386>, n. .

Chandrabhaga, a river, <page 175>. the Chinab, <page 176>, n. .

Chandragupta, king of Magadha, <page 468>. Sandrocoptus of the Greeks, ib. n. .

Chandraketu, s. of Lakshmanu, k. of Chandravaktra, <page 385>.

Chandrama, a river, <page 183>.

Chandras'ri, a prince, <page 473>.

Chandras'ukta, an island, <page 175>, n. .

Chandras'wa, s. of Dhundhumara, <page 362>.

Chandravaloka, a prince, <page 386>, n. .

Chanura, killed by Krishna, <page 557>.

Charaka, teacher of the Yajur-veda, <page 280>, n. .

Charakas, pupils of Vais'ampayana, <page 280>. of Charaka, ib. n. .

Chariot, of the sun, <page 257>. of the moon, <page 238>. of Mercury and Venus, <page 239>. of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Rahu, and Ketu, <page 240>.

Charishnu, s. of Kirttimat, <page 83>, n. .

Charmamandalas, a people, <page 189>.

Charmanvati, a river, the Chambal, <page 582>.

Charu, s. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Charugupta, s. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Charudeha, s. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Charudeshna, s. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Charumati, d. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Charuvinda, s. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Chatakas, pupils of Vais'ampayana, <page 280>, n. .

Chaturanga, a prince, <page 445>.

Chaturmasya, four monthly rites, <page 275>, n. .

Chedi, s. of Kais'ika, <page 422>.

Chedyas, a people, <page 186>.

Chhala, a prince, <page 386>.

Chhandajas, the Vasus and similar divinities, <page 123>, n. .

Chhandas, an Anga of the Vedas, <page 284>.

Chhaya, w. of the sun, <page 266>. d. of Vis'wakarman, ib. n. .

Chikitsa, practice of physic, <page 407>, n. .

Chinas, a barbarous race, <page 375>, n. . Chinese, <page 194>, n. .

Chiti, synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, n. .

Chitra, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Chitrabaha, a river, <page 182>.

Chitragupta, registrar of Yama, <page 207>, n. .

Chitraka, a prince, <page 435>.

Chitraketu, s, of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>, n. .

Chitrakuta, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Chitrakuta, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Chitralekha, friend of Uri, <page 592>.

Chitrangada, s. of S'antanu, <page 459>.

[p. 673]

Chitraratha, k. of the Gandharbas, <page 153>, n. . s. of Rushadru, <page 420>, s. of Dharmaratha, <page 445>. s. of Ushna, <page 461>.

Chitraratha, a river, <page 184>.

Chitrasena, a river, <page 182>.

Chitropala, a river, <page 184>.

Cholas, a people, <page 193>.

Chronology, system of; <page 22>, of the kings of the Kali age, <page 484>.

Chulaka or Chuluka, a river, <page 182>.

Chunchu, a prince, <page 373>.

Chyavana, a sage, <page 354>. s. of Mitrayu, <page 454>. s. of Suhotra, <page 455>.

Cleanliness, rules of, <page 300>.

Clepsydra, water clock, described, <page 631>.

Clouds, how formed, <page 230>. classes of, <page 231>, n. . the shell of the universe, ib.

Colebrooke, notices of the Vedas, <page i>. of the Puranas, <page v>. of the Saraswata Brahmans and language, <page lxvii>.

Colonization of India, <page lxv>.

Cosmogony of the Hindus, <page 10>. analogies with ancient, <page 13>, note .

Creation, accounts of; <page 11>. <page 34>. <page 39>. (primary), mode of, <page 13>. course of; <page 14>. various kinds of, <page 36>. (secondary), periods of, <page 27>. kinds of, <page 35>. of mankind, <page 36>. of properties, <page 37>. a property of Brahma, <page 21>. function of Vishnu as Brahma, <page 19>, &c.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

D.

Dadhicha, a sage, reproves Daksha, <page 63>.

Dadhividarbhas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Dahas, a people, <page 192>, n. .

Dahana, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Dahragni, a name of Agastya, <page 83>, n. .

Daityas, eldest sons of Kas'yapa by Diti, <page 124>, n. . defeated by the gods, <page 77>. obtain the sovereignty of the earth, <page 126>. overcome the gods, <page 335>. fall into heresy, and are subdued, <page 338>. oppress the earth, <page 493>.

Daksha, a Prajapati, <page 49>. born from Brahma's thumb, <page 50>, n. . <page 348>. marries Prasuti; their twenty-four daughters, <page 54>. his sacrifice, <page 61>. spoiled by Virabhadra, <page 65>. propitiates S'iva, <page 69>. s. of the Prachetasas, <page 515>. his daughters, ib. <page 117>. chief of the patriarchs, <page 153>.

Daksha-savarni, ninth Mauls, <page 268>. his sons, ib. s. of Daksha, ib. n. .

Dakshina, d. of Ruchi, married to Yajna, <page 54>, n. .

Dala, a prince, <page 386>.

Dalaki, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

Dama, a prince, <page 353>.

Damaliptas, a people, <page 192>, n. .

Dambha, 'hypocrisy,' s. of Adharma, <page 55>, n. .

Danavas, enemies of the gods, <page 72>. children of Danu, <page 147>.

Danda, s. of Dharma, <page 55>. s. of Ikshwaku, <page 359>. killed by Sudyumna, <page 351>, n. .

Danda, a measure of time, sixty Vikalas, <page 23>, n. .

Dandaka, a forest, <page 351>, n. .

Danshtrinas, sharp-toothed animals, progeny of Krodhavasa, <page 149>, n. .

Dantnvaktra, s. of Vriddhasarman, <page 437>.

Danu, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Daradas, a people, <page 195>.

Darpa, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Dars'akas, a people, <page 191>.

Dars'apaurnamasa, half-monthly sacrifice, <page 275>, n. .

Daruka, sent by Krishna to Arjuna, <page 611>.

Daruna, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 208>.

Darvan, s. of Us'inara, <page 444>.

Darvas, a people, <page 192>.

Darvi, a country, <page 191>.

Dasa, name for a S'udra, <page 298>.

Das'amalikas, a people, <page 194>.

Das'apars'was, a people, <page 192>, n. .

Das'aratha, s. of Mulaka, <page 383>. s. of Aja, and father of Rama, ib. s. of Navaratha, <page 422>. s. of Suyas'as, <page 470>.

Das'arha, a prince, <page 422>.

Dasarnas, a people, <page 186>. <page 187>. <page 192>.

Dasarna, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Dasi, a river, <page 184>.

Das'ividarbhas, a people, <page 193>.

Dattatreya, s. of Atri, <page 83>.

Dattoli or Agastya, s. of Pulastya, <page 83>. a Rishi, <page 261>.

Daughters of Daksha, twenty-four, married to Dharma and the patriarchs, <page 24>. fifty, <page 115>. sixty, married to Dharma, Kas'yapa, Soma, &c. <page 119>.

Day (and night) of mortals; of the gods, <page 23>. of Brahma, <page 25>. of a Manu, <page 26>, n. . division and length of, <page 223>.

Days, of the moon, held sacred by the Vaishnavas, <page 145>, n. .

Daya, 'clemency,' w. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Deities, thirty-three, <page 123>, n. .

Devabhaga, s. of Sera, <page 436>.

Devabhuti, a prince, <page 475>.

Devadars'a, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 282>.

Devagiri, or Deogur, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Devahuti, d. of Swayambhuva Manu, <page 54>, n. .

Devaka, s. of Ahuka, <page 436>. s. of Yudhishthira, <page 459>.

Devaki, d. of Devaka, w. of Vasudeva, <page 436>. mother of Krishna, <page 502>.

Devakulya, d. of Paurnamasa, <page 82>, n. .

Devakuta, a range of mountains, <page 171>.

Devaka, s. of the Vasu Pratyusha, <page 120>. a sage, s. of Krisas'wa, <page 123>, n. .

Devakshatra, a prince, <page 422>.

Devamidhusha, s. of Vrishni, <page 425>, n. . s. of Hridika, <page 436>.

Devamitra, teacher of the Rig-Veda, <page 277>, n. .

Devanika, a prince, <page 386>.

[p. 674]

Devapi, s. of Pratipa, <page 457>. becomes an ascetic and an apostate, <page 458>. still living, <page 487>.

Devarakshita, s. of Devaka, <page 436>. another prince, k. of the sea-coast, <page 480>.

Devarakshita, d. of Devaka, <page 436>.

Devarata, s. of Suketu, <page 390>. s. of Viswamitra, <page 404>. s. of Karambhi, <page 422>.

Devarshis, divine sages, <page 284>, n. .

Deva-savarni, thirteenth Manu, <page 268>, n. .

Devas'ravas, s. of S'ura, <page 436>.

Devavat, s. of Akrura, <page 435>. s. of Devaka, <page 436>.

Devavriddha, s. of Satwata, <page 424>.

Devatithi, a prince, <page 457>.

Deva-yajna, 'burnt-offerings,' <page 294>, n. .

Devayani, d. of Usanas, w. of Yayati, <page 413>. story of, ib. n. .

Devi, w. of S'iva, <page 64>.

Devi-bhagavat, said to be the genuine Bhagavata, <page xxx>. notice of, <page lvi>.

Devika, a river, <page 182>. the Deva or Goggra, n. .

Devikota, a city, <page 593>, n. .

Devotion of contemplation, <page 651>.

Dhanaka, a prince, <page 417>.

Dhananjaya, a serpent, s. of Kadru, <page 149>. a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Dhanayus, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>, n. .

Dhaneyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Dhanishtha, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Dhanur-veda, military science, <page 284>.

Dhanwantari, produced from the ocean, <page 76>. s. of Dirghatamas, <page 406>. teacher of medical science, <page 284>. <page 407>.

Dharana, fixation of thought, <page 656>.

Dharani, d. of the Pitris, <page 84>. w. of Meru, ib. n. .

Dharbaka, s. of Ajatas'atru, <page 467>.

Dharma, a Prajapati, and s. of Brahma, <page 49>, n. . marries thirteen daughters of Daksha, <page 54>. their children, <page 55>, n. . marries ten daughters of Daksha, <page 115>. <page 119>. their posterity, <page 120>. s. of Gandhara, <page 443>. s. of Suvrata, <page 465>.

Dharma, 'law,' <page 284>.

Dharmadris, s. of S'waphalka, <page 435>.

Dharmadhwaja, k. of Mithila, <page 645>.

Dharmaketu, a prince, <page 409>.

Dharman, a prince, <page 463>.

Dharmanetra, s. of Haihaya, <page 416>.

Dharmaranya, a city, <page 399>, n. .

Dharmaratha, a prince, <page 445>.

Dharma-s'avarni, eleventh Manu, <page 268>. his sons, ib. s. of Dharma, ib. n. .

Dharshtaka, a race of Kshatriyas, <page 358>.

Dhata (Dhatri), s. of Bhrigu, <page 59>.

Dhataki, s. of Sauna, <page 200>. division of Pushkara-dwipa, ib.

Dhatri, s. of Vishnu and Lakshmi, married to Ayati, <page 82>.

Dhava, a Vasu, <page 120>,

Dhenuka killed by Balarama, <page 517>.

Dhenuka, w. of Kirttimat, <page 83>,<page 11>.<page 3>,

Dhi, w. of Manyu, <page 59>, n. .

Dhimat, s. of Virat, <page 165>. s. of Pururavas, <page 398>.

Dhishana, w. of Havirdhana, <page 106>. w. of Krisas'wa, <page 123>, n. .

Dhridhanemi, a prince, <page 453>.

Dridhas'wa, s. of Dhundhumara, <page 362>.

Dhrishta, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>. his sons, <page 358>.

Dhrishtadyumna, s. of Drupada, <page 455>.

Dhrishtaketu, s. of Satyadhriti, <page 390>. s. of Sukumara, <page 409>. s. of Dhrishtadyumna, <page 455>.

Dhrishtasarman, s. of S'waphalka, <page 435>.

Dhrita, a prince, <page 443>.

Dhritamati, a river, <page 184>.

Dhritarashtra, a serpent, <page 149>, n. . a king, s. of Vichitravirya's widow by Vyasa, <page 459>.

Dhritarashtra, d. of Kas'yapa, <page 149>, n. .

Dhritavati, a river, <page 183>. and n. .

Dhritavrata, a Rudra, <page 59>, n. . a prince, <page 446>.

Dhriti, 'steadiness,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>. w. of a Rudra, <page 59>, n. .

Dhriti, s. of Vitihavya, <page 391>. s. of Babhru, <page 422>. s. of Vijaya, <page 446>.

Dhritimat, s. of Kirttimat, <page 83>, n. . s. of Yavinara, <page 453>.

Dhruva, s. of Uttanapada and Suniti, his story, <page 86>. worships Vishnu, <page 88>. performs penance, <page 90>. Vishnu elevates him to the sphere of the north pole, <page 96>. name of a Vasu, <page 120>. s. of Rantinara, <page 448>.

Dhruva, the polar star, where situated, <page 228>. his revolutions, <page 230>. <page 240>.

Dhruvasandi, a prince, <page 387>.

Dhumaketu, s. of Krisas'wa, <page 123>, n. . s. of Trinavindu, <page 353>, n. .

Dhumrakes'a, s. of Prithu, <page 106>, n. .

Dhumras'wa, k. of Vais'ali, <page 354>.

Dhundhu, a demon, <page 361>.

Dhundumara, name of Kuvalayas'wa, <page 361>.

Dhurundharas, a people, <page 187>.

Dhus'ulya, a river, <page 183>, n. .

Dhutapapa, a river, <page 182>.

Dhuti, an Aditya, <page 122>.

Dhyana, 'meditation,' <page 657>.

Diksha, w. of Ugra, <page 59>. w. of Vamadeva, ib. n. .

Dilipa, s. of Ans'umat, <page 379>. name of Khatwanga, <page 383>. s. of Riksha, <page 457>.

Diptimat, s. of Krishna, <page 591>.

Dirghabahu, a prince, <page 383>.

Dirghatamas, s. of Kas'iraja, <page 406>. s. of Utathya, <page 444>, n. Is.

Dis', 'space,' presides over the ear, <page 17>, n. .

Dis, a river, <page 182>.

Dis'a, w. of Bhima, a Rudra, <page 59>

Dishta, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>, n. .

Dissolution 'pralaya,' of four kinds, <page 50>, <page 630>, <page 634>.

Diti, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>. mother of the Daityas, <page 123>. of the Maruts, <page 151>.

[p. 675]

Divakara, a prince, <page 463>.

Divaratha, a prince, <page 445>.

Divaspati, Indra of the thirteenth Manwantara, <page 269>.

Divijata, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>, n. .

Divinities presiding over the senses, <page 17>, n. . classes of, <page 123>. of the different Manwantaras, <page 260>.

Divodasa, s. of Bhimaratha, k. of Kas'i, <page 407>. expelled from Benares, ib. n. . <page 410>, n. . s. of Bahwas'wa, <page 454>.

Divya, s. of S'atwata, <page 424>.

Dosha, w. of Kalpa, <page 98>, n. .

Dragons, children of Surasa, <page 149>.

Drauni, a Vyasa, <page 293>.

Dravina, s. of Prithu, <page 106>, n. . s. of the Vasu Dhava, <page 120>.

Draviras, a people, <page 192>.

Dridhadhanush, a prince, <page 452>.

Dridhasena, a prince, <page 465>.

Dridhayus, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>, n. .

Drishadwati, a river, the Caggar, <page 181>, and n. . mother of Prasenajit, <page 362>, n. .

Drona, father of Aswatthaman, <page 454>. a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Dronakas, a people, <page 196>.

Druma, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Drupada, s. of Prishata, <page 455>.

Druhyu, s. of Yayati, <page 413>, k. of the west, <page 415>. his descendants, <page 443>.

Duhsas'ana, s. of Dhritarashtra, <page 459>.

Dukha, 'pain,' son of Naraka, <page 56>.

Durdama, s. of Bhadrasrenya, <page 407>. n. . <page 417>.

Durga, a strong hold, <page 46>. n. .

Durga, her exploits alluded to, <page 499>. worshipped at Pithasthanas, ib. n. .

Durga, a river, <page 183>. <page 184>.

Durgalas, a people, <page 190>.

Durga Mahatmya, account of Durga's exploits, <page xxxv>.

Durgama, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Durjana-mukha-chapetika, tracts on the Bhagavata, <page xxix>.

Durjayanta, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Durmada, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Durmitra, a prince, <page 478>, n. .

Durmukha, a serpent, <page 149>, n. .

Durvasas, a sage, s. of Atri, <page 70>, n. . <page 83>.

Duryaman, a prince, <page 443>.

Duryodhana, s. of Dhritarashtra, <page 459>.

Dushyanta, s. of Anila, <page 448>.

Duties of castes and orders, <page 291>.

Dwajinyutsavasanketas, a people, <page 193>.

Dwapara, third Yuga or 'age,' its duration, <page 23>, n. .

Dwaraka, built by Krishna, <page 566>. submerged by the sea, <page 613>.

Dwesha, 'hatred,' one of the five afflictions, <page 34>, n. .

Dwimidha, s. of Hastin, <page 452>.

Dwimurddan, s. of Kas'yapa, <page 147>.

Dwipas, 'insular continents,' seven principal, <page 166>. their kings, divisions, inhabitants, &c.<page 197>; et seq.

Dwivida, a monkey, killed by Balarama, <page 605>.

Dynasties, of the sun, <page 348>. of the moon, <page 198>. of future kings, <page 461>.

Dyumat, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 84>, n. .

Dyutimat, s. of Priyavrata, k, of Krauncha-dwipa, <page 162>. his sons, <page 199>. s. of Prana, <page 82>. s. of Pandu. ib. n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

E.

Earth, the element, <page 16>. the world, raised by the Varaha, <page 30>. subdued by Prithu, <page 103>. milked by various beings, <page 104>. description of, <page 166>. supported by S'esha, <page 206>. destruction of, <page 631>.
 ------- the goddess, dialogue with Vishnu as the Varaha, <page 29>. song of, <page 457>. oppressed by the Daityas, applies to Brahma, <page 493>. mother of Naraka, propitiates Krishna, <page 582>.

Earrings, produced from the ocean, given to Aditi, <page 78>, n. restored by Krishna to her, <page 584>

Egg of the world, how formed, <page 18>. common symbol amongst the ancients, <page 18>, n. . abode of Vishnu as Brahma; how composed; invested by the principles of creation, <page 19>.

Eka, synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, n. .

Ekachakra, a Danava, <page 147>.

Ekapadukas, a people, <page 187>.

Ekavinsa, hymns from Brahma, <page 42>.

Ekoddishta-s'raddha, rules of, <page 316>.

Elapatra, s. of Kadru, <page 149>.

Elements, evolution of from primary matter, <page 14>, subtile rudiments, how produced, <page 16>. gross or sensible; number and production, ib. successive investment and participation of properties, ib. n. . disposition of, <page 214>. successive resolution of into their origin, <page 635>.

Ellis, notice of the Vedas,<page i>.

Ether, the element, <page 16>. see Akas'a.

Expiation, efficacy of, <page 210>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

F.

Fa-hian, travels in India, <page 354>, n. .

Fever, contends with Krishna, <page 594>.

Fire, the element, same as light (see Tejas), <page 16>. the deity: see Agni.

Fires, original, forty-nine in number, <page 84>. made threefold by Pururavas, <page 397>.

Food, rules for taking, distributing, &c. <page 306>. offered at S'raddhas, <page 315>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

G.

Gabhastimat, a division of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>. a division of Patala, <page 204>.

Gachchas, a people, <page 192>, n. .

Gada, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Gadhi, s. of Kus'amba, <page 399>. s. of Kus'ika or Kus'anabha, ib. n. .

Gahvaras, a people, <page 196>, n. .

[p. 676]

Gajavithi, a division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

Galava, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Games, public, celebrated by Kansa, <page 551>. and n. .

Gandaki, a river, <page 182>. the Gandak, ib. n. .

Gandhamadana, a mountain south of Meru, <page 168>. a forest, <page 169>. a mountain ridge from the foot of Meru, ib. name of Ketumala-varsha, <page 171>, n. . one of the seven ranges of Bharata, <page 180>.

Gandhamojavaha, s. of S'waphalka, <page 435>.

Gandhara, a prince, <page 443>. a people, ib. n. .

Gandharas, a people, <page 191>.

Gandharba, a division of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>.

Gandharbas, proceed from Brahma, <page 41>. children of Arishta, <page 150>. of Vach, ib. n. . assail the Nagas, <page 370>.

Gandharba-loka, heaven of S'udras, <page 48>, n. . Gandharba-veda, musical science, <page 284>.

Gandharbi, d. of Surabhi, parent of horses, <page 150>, n. .

Gandini, d. of Kas'iraja, <page 431>.

Gandusha, s. of S'ura, <page 437>.

Ganes'a Upa-purana, notice of, <page lvii>.

Ganga, d. of Himavat, <page 85>, n. . d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>, n. .

Ganga, the river Ganges, her descent from heaven, <page 170>. divides into four rivers, ib. into seven, <page 171>, n. . river of Bharata, <page 180>. proceeds from Vishnu's toe, <page 228>, sanctity of, <page 229>. brought down on earth by Bhagiratha, <page 379>.

Gangadwara, a place, <page 62>.

Gara, s. of Us'inara, <page 444>.

Gardhabas, a race of kings, <page 474>. <page 475>, n. .

Garga, a sage, learnt astronomy from S'esha, <page 206>. performs the initiatory rites of Krishna and Rama, <page 508>. a prince, s. of Bhavanmanyu, <page 450>.

Gargabhumi, a prince, <page 409>, n. .

Gargya, a prince, <page 409>, n. .

Gargya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>. a Brahman, the father of Kalayavana, <page 565>.

Gargyas, descendants of Garga, s. of Bhavanmanyu; become Brahmans, <page 451>.

Garuda, king of birds, s. of Kas'yapa, and Vinata, <page 149>.

Garuda, a Purana; <page 284>. analysis of, <page liii>.

Gati, w. of Pulaha, <page 55>, n. .

Gatra, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>.

Gatravat, s. of Krishna, <page 591>.

Gauri, w. of S'iva, <page 60>. w. of Virajas, <page 82>, n. . w. of Yuvanas'wa, changed to the Bahuda river, <page 362>, n. . d. of Antinara, <page 448>, n. .

Gauri, a river, <page 183>.

Gautama, a Prajapati, <page 49>, is, <page 2>. a Rishi, <page 264>. husband of Ahalya, <page 454>.

Gavya, 'flesh' or 'produce;' of kine offered to the Pitris, <page 332>.

Gaya, s. of Havirdhana, <page 106>. s. of Nakta, <page 165>. s. of Sudyumna, <page 350>.

Gayatri, metre from Brahma, <page 42>. verse of the Vedas, <page 222>, n. .

Ghatasrinjayas, a people, <page 193>.

Ghatotkacha, s. of Bhima, <page 459>, n. . <page 460>.

Ghorata, 'terror,' a property of sensible objects, <page 17>, n. .

Ghosha, s. of Lamba, <page 120>.

Ghoshavasu, a prince, <page 471>.

Ghritachi, a divine nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Ghritaprishtha, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. .

Ghriteyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Ghritsamada, s. of Suhotra, <page 406>.

Giri, a prince, <page 435>.

Girigahvaras, a people, <page 196>.

Girivraja, a city in Magadha, <page 399>, n. ,

Gobhanu, s. of Vahni, <page 442>.

Goghnatas, a people, <page 187>.

Godavari, a river, <page 176>.

Gods, proceeded from Brahma, <page 40>. overcome by the demons, <page 72>. churn the ocean, <page 74>. classes of; children of Dharma, <page 120>. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Gohamuka, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Golaka, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>, n. .

Gold, land of, <page 202>.

Go-loka, heaven of Krishna, <page 48>, n. . <page 214>, n. .

Gomanta, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Gomantas, a people, <page 187>, n. .

Gomati, a river, <page 182>. in Oude, n. .

Gomatiputra, <page 473>.

Gopas, inhabitants of Gokula, <page 506>. go to Vrindavana, <page 509>. associates of Krishna in his sports, <page 511>, &c.

Gopalakakshas, a people, <page 192>.

Goparashtras, a people, <page 187>.

Gopis, wives of the Gopas, their sports with Krishna, <page 531>. their grief at his departure, <page 544>.

Goswalu, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

Gotama, a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Gotras, families of Brahmans, <page 405>, n. .

Gova, a country, <page 188>, n. .

Govarddhana, a mountain, <page 180>, n. . worshipped by the Gopas, <page 525>. lifted up by Krishna, <page 527>.

Govinda, a name of Krishna, <page 528>, n. .

Govithi, a division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

Grains, esculent, <page 46>. sacrificial, <page 47>.

Gramanis, attendants on the sum, <page 234>, n. .

Greeks, called Yavanas or Yonas, <page 194>, n. .

Gridhrika, d. of Kas'yapa, parent of vultures, <page 148>.

Grihashtha, 'householder,' duties of, <page 294>. fixed duties, <page 300>. miscellaneous duties, <page 310>.

Guhas, kings of Kalinga, <page 480>.

Gunas, qualities of goodness, foulness, and darkness, <page 34>, n. .

Gupta, name for a Vais'ya, <page 298>.

Guptas, a race of kings, <page 479>. coins of, <page 480>, n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 677]

H.

Haihaya, a prince of the Yadava race, <page 416>.

Haihayas, a tribe, conquer Bahu, <page 373>. conquered by Sagara, <page 374>. five divisions of, <page 418>, n. . Scythian origin of, ib. invade Kas'i, <page 410>, n. .

Hair, how worn by ancient nations, <page 375>, n. .

Haitukas, a class of heretics, <page 345>.

Hala, a prince, <page 473>.

Hansa, a mountain, <page 169>.

Hara, a Rudra, r<page 21>.

Hari, name of Vishnu, <page 7>, n. , &c. see Vishnu.

Hari or Hari-varsha, a country, <page 168>.

Harikes'a, a solar ray, <page 236>, n. .

Haris, a class of deities, <page 122>, n. . <page 262>.

Haris'chandra, a prince, s. of Tris'anku, <page 372>. raised to heaven, ib. n. .

Haris'rava, a river, <page 183>.

Harita, a prince, s. of Yuvanas'wa, <page 369>. s. of Rohitas'wa, <page 373>. s. of Paravrit, <page 420>. k. of Videha, <page 421>, n. .

Haritas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Haritas, sons of Harita; Brahmans, <page 369>, n. . Haritas'wa, s. of Sudyumna, <page 350>, n. .

Hari-vans'a, notice of, <page lviii>.

Harivarsha, s. of Agnidhra, <page 162>, k. of Nishadha, <page 163>. a country, <page 168>.

Harsha, s. of Rama, <page 55>.

Harshavarddhana, a prince, <page 412>.

Haryyaksha, s. of Prithu, <page 106>, n. .

Haryyanga, a prince, <page 445>.

Haryyas'wa, s. of Dridhas'wa, <page 362>. s. of Prishadas'wa, <page 371>. s. of Drishtaketu, <page 390>. s. of Chakshu, <page 453>.

Haryas'was, son of Daksha, <page 117>.

Haryatma, a Vaasa, <page 273>.

Hasta, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Hastin, s. of Suhotra, <page 451>.

Hastinapur, founded by Hastin, <page 452>. washed away by the Ganges, <page 461>. undermined by Balarama, <page 602>.

Hastisoma, a river, <page 182>.

Havirbhu, w. of Pulastya, <page 55>, n. . <page 83>, n. .

Havirdhana, s. of Antarddhi, <page 106>.

Havishmantas, a class of Pitris, <page 321>, n. .

Havya, s. of Atri, <page 83>, n. .

Havyavahana, s. of Kochi, <page 84>, n. .

Haya, a Yadava prince, <page 416>.

Hayas'iras, d. of Vrishaparvan, <page 147>. d. of Vaiswanara, and w. of Kratu, ib. n. .

Hema, a prince, <page 444>.

Hema, a river, <page 183>.

Hemachandra, k. of Vaisali, <page 354>.

Hemakuta, range of mountains, <page 167>.

Heretics, sects of, <page 47>. Jains, Bauddhas, &c. <page 338>. sin of conversing with, <page 345>.

Hermit, duties of, <page 295>.

Heti, a Rakshas, <page 233>.

Himavat, k. of mountains, <page 153>, n. . snowy range, <page 167>.

Hindus, origin and first settlements of in India, <page lxv>.

Hiranmaya, a country, <page 168>.

Hiranvat, s. of Agnidhra, <page 162>. k. of S'weta-dwipa, <page 163>.

Hiranvati, a river, <page 183>.

Hiranyagarbha, name of Brahma, <page 7>, n. .

Hiranyakas'ipu, s. of Kas'yapa and Diti, <page 123>. k. of the Daityas, <page 124>. his power, <page 126>. enmity to Vishnu, <page 127>. put to death by him as Narasinha, <page 145>, n. .

Hiranyaksha, s. of Kas'yapa and Diti, <page 123>.

Hiranyanabha, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>. a prince, pupil of Jaimini, <page 386>.

Hiranyaretas, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. .

Hiranyaroman, a Lokapala, s. of Marichi, <page 83>. s. of Parjanya, regent of the north, <page 153>. <page 226>.

Hlada, s, of Hiranyakas'ipu, <page 124>.

Hladini, a river, <page 171>, n. .

Horse of Indra and of the sun produced at the churning of the ocean, <page 78>, n. .

Horses of the sun, <page 218>. of the moon, <page 238>. of Mercury and Venus, <page 239>. of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,. Rahu, and Ketu, <page 240>. of Krishna's car, <page 429>.

Hospitality, duties of, <page 305>.

Householder, duties of, <page 294>. <page 300>. <page 310>.

Hotri, reciter of hymns, <page 276>.

Hraswaroman, a prince, <page 390>.

Hri, 'modesty,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Hridika, a Yadava prince, <page 436>.

Hrishikes'a, name of Vishnu, <page 2>. lord of the senses, <page 2>, n. ,

Hunas, a people, <page 177>. and n. . <page 194>.

Hutas'ana, god of fire, <page 72>.

Hylozoism, of Cudworth, <page 32>, n. .

Hymn, to Vishnu, by Earth, <page 29>. by Brahma and the gods, <page 72>. to S'ri, by Indra, <page 78>. to Vishnu, by Dhruva, <page 93>. by the Prachetasas, <page 108>. by Prahlada, <page 141>. by Brahma, <page 494>. to Krishna, by Kaliya, <page 515>. by Akrura, <page 547>. by Aditi, <page 585>.

Hypostases, three of Vishnu; a similar triad known to the ancients, <page 7>, n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

I.

Ignorance, fivefold; origin of beings, <page 34>. nature and cause of, <page 649>.

Ida, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Idhmadhwaja, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. .

Idvatsara, third cyclic year, <page 224>.

Ijikas, a people, <page 191>.

Ijya 'oblation,' from Brahma, <page 42>, n. .

Ikshu, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Ikshula (Ikshuda), a river, <page 182>, n. .

Ikshumalavi (Ikshumalina), a river, <page 182>, n. .

Ikshwaku, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>. his sons, <page 359>.

[p. 678]

Ila, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 349>, n. .

Ilus of the Phoenicians, ib.

Ila, d. of Vaivaswata, <page 349>. changed to a man, <page 350>, mother of Pururavas, ib. w. of a Rudra, <page 59>, n. . w. of Vasudeva, <page 439>, n. ,

Ilavila, s. of Das'aratha, <page 383>.

Ilavila, w. of Vis'ravas, <page 83>, n. . d. of Trinavindu, <page 353>. w. of Pulastya, ib. n. .

Ilavrita, s. of Agnidhra, <page 162>. k. of Ilavrita, 162<page 163>.

Ilavrita, a country, <page 168>.

Ilwala, s. of Hlada, <page 147>, n. . s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Immortals, creation of, <page 36>.

Impurity from death of relations, <page 316>.

India, civilization and colonization of, <page lxv>.

Indra, k. of the gods, <page 153>. presides over the hands, <page 17>, n. . husband of S'achi, <page 70>. cursed by Durvas'a, <page 71>. praises S'ri, <page 78>. divides the embryo of Diti, <page 152>. one of the Vyasas, <page 272>. born as Gadhi, <page 399>. expelled by the sons of Raji, <page 411>. recovers his power, <page 412>. worshipped by the Gopas, <page 523>. rains on Gokula, <page 526>. does homage to Krishna, <page 528>. contends with Krishna for the Parijata tree, <page 585>. is defeated, <page 586>.

Indras of the Manwantaras; of the second, <page 260>. third, <page 261>. fourth and fifth, <page 262>. sixth, <page 263>. seventh, <page 264>. eighth, <page 267>. ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, <page 268>. thirteenth and fourteenth, <page 269>.

Indra-dwipa, a portion of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>.

Indradyumna, s. of Sumati, <page 164>.

Indrakila, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Indra-loka, heaven of Indra and Kshatriyas, <page 48>, n. .

Indrapramati, teacher of a Sanhita of the Rigveda, <page 277>.

Indra-savarni, fourteenth Manu, <page 268>, n. .

Indriyatma, name of Vishnu, <page 2>, n. .

Iravat, s. of Arjuna, <page 460>.

Iravati, w. of a Rudra, <page 59>, n. .

Iravati, a river, <page 181>. the Ravi or Hydraotes, ib. n. .

Is'ana, a Rudra, <page 58>.

Isha, a month, <page 225>.

Is'wara, one with Vishnu, <page 2>. active deity, ib. n. . synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, n. . a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Itihasa, 'historical tradition,' taught by Vyasa, <page 276>.

Itikas, a people, <page 191>, n. .

Ivilaka, a prince, <page 472>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

J.

Jabalas, students of a branch of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Jagati metre, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Jahnu, s. of Suhotra, drinks the Ganges, <page 398>. s. of Kuru, <page 455>.

Jahnavi, a name of Ganga, <page 398>.

Jaimini, pupil of Vyasa, <page 276>. teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Jain faith adopted by the sons of Raji, <page 412>, n. .

Jain mendicant, an illusion of Vishnu, <page 338>.

Jains, noticed in the Bhagavata, <page 164>, n. . origin of, <page 339>.

Jaitra, the chariot of Krishna, <page 610>.

Jajali, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>.

Jaleyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Jamadagni, a sage, <page 264>. s. of Richika, <page 400>. father of Paras'urama, <page 401>. killed by the sons of Karttavirya, <page 403>.

Jambavat, kills the lion that slew Prasena, <page 426>. overcome by Krishna; gives him his daughter, <page 427>.

Jambavati, w. of Krishna, <page 427>.

Jambu, a continent in the centre of all, <page 166>. a tree on Gandhamadana; gives name to Jambu-dwipa; name of a river, <page 168>.

Jambu-dwipa, a continent, <page 166>.

Jambunada, heavenly gold, <page 168>.

Jambunadi, a river, <page 171>, n. . <page 184>.

Janaka, k. of Mithila, <page 389>. second of the name, same as Siradhwaja, <page 390>, n. . k. of Magadha, <page 466>. a general title of Maithila kings, <page 645>, n.

Janakpur, a city, <page 389>, n. .

Jana-loka, heaven of saints, <page 48>, n. . site of, <page 213>. remains during a pralaya, <page 631>.

Janamejaya, k. of Vais'ali, <page 354>. s. of Puranjaya, <page 444>. s. of Puru, <page 447>. s. of Parikshit son of Kuru, <page 457>. s. of Parikshit son of Abhimanyu, <page 461>.

Janarddana, a name of Vishnu, <page 19>, &c.

Jangalas, a people, <page 185>. <page 192>.

Jantu, s. of Somaka, <page 455>. s. of Sudhanwan, ib.

Jara, s. of Mrityu, <page 56>. a hunter who kills Krishna, <page 612>.

Jara, a female fiend, who unites the two parts of Jarasandha, <page 456>.

Jaradgava, s. portion of the planetary sphere, <page 226>, n. .

Jaradgavi, a division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

Jarasandha, s. of Vrihadratha, <page 456>. attacks Mathura, <page 563>.

Jaratkaru, a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Jarudhi, a mountain, <page 169>.

Jatas, a branch of the Haihayas, <page 418>, n. .

Jatayu, s. of Aruna and S'yeni, <page 149>, n. .

Jathara, a range of mountains, <page 171>.

Jatharagni, name of Agastya, <page 83>, n. .

Jatharas, a people, <page 187>.

Jaya, a prince, <page 390>.

Jaya, d. of Daksha, w. of Kris'as'wa, <page 123>, n. .

Jayadratha, s. of Vrihanmanas, <page 445>. s. of Vrihatkarman, <page 452>,

Jayadhwaja, s. of Karttavirya, <page 418>.

Jayanta, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Jayantapur, a city, <page 389>, n. .

Jayas, a class of deities, <page 122>, n. .

[p. 679]

Jayasena, s. of Adina, <page 412>. s. of Sarvabhauma, <page 457>.

Jharjhara, s. of Hiranyaksha, <page 147>.

Jillikas, a people, <page 192>.

Jimuta, a prince, <page 422>.

Jnyana, 'wisdom,' epithets of according to the Yoga, <page 156>, n. .

Jrimbhika, 'yawning,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>, n. .

Jyamagha, a prince, <page 420>. conquers Madhyades'a, <page 421>, n. .

Jyeshtha, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Jyeshtha or Alakshmi, produced from the ocean, <page 78>, n. a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Jyotiratha, a river, <page 183>.

Jvotish, 'astronomy,' an Anga of the Vedas, <page 284>.

Jyotishmat, s. of Priyavrata, k. of Saka-dwipa, <page 162>. his sons, <page 198>. a sun, <page 632>.

Jyotsna, 'dawn,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

K.

Ka (or Prajapati), presides over the generative organs, <page 17>, n. .

Kabandha, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 282>.

Kachchas (Kachchiyas), a people, <page 190>, n. .

Kadamba, a tree on Mandara, <page 168>. yields a spirituous extract, <page 571>.

Kadru, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122> mother of the serpents, <page 149>.

Kaikeya, s. of S'ivi, <page 444>.

Kaikeyas, sons of Dhrishtaketu, <page 437>.

Kailakila Yavanas, a race of kings, <page 477>.

Kailasa, a mountain, <page 172>.

Kais'ika, s. of Viderbha, <page 422>.

Kajinghas, a people, <page 196>, n. .

Kakamukhas, a people, <page 187>, n. .

Kakas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Kakavarna, a prince, <page 466>.

Kakshas, a people, <page 190>.

Kaksheyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Kakubha, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Kakud, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>.

Kakudmin, name of Raivata, <page 355>.

Kakutstha, s, of S'as'ada, <page 361>. s. of Bhagiratha, <page 384>. n. ,

Kala, d. of Kardama, w. of Marichi, <page 55>, n. .

Kala, a period of thirty Kashthas, <page 22>, n. , a digit of the moon, <page 239>, n. .

Kala, 'time,' a form of Vishnu, <page 9>, cause of the world, ib, n. . connecting matter and spirit, <page 12>.

Kala, a Rudra, <page 59>, n. . s. of the Vasu Dhruva, <page 120>.

Kala, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, n. .

Kalanjara, a mountain, <page 169>.

Kalajoshikas, a people, <page 189>.

Kalakas, a class of Danavas, <page 148>, n. .

Kalakanjas, a class of Danavas. <page 148>.

Kalakeyas, a class of Danavas, <page 148>, n. .

Kalanabha, s. of Hiranyaksha, <page 147>, n. . s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Kalanara, a prince, <page 444>.

Kalapa, a village, <page 387>.

Kalasutra, a hell, <page 207>.

Kalatoyakas, a people, <page 189>, n. .

Kalavas, a people, <page 193>.

Kalayani, teacher of the Rib veda, <page 278>.

Kalayavana, s. of Gargya, <page 565>, k. of the Yavanas, ib. invades Mathura, <page 566>. destroyed by Muchukunda, <page 567>.

Kali, last Yuga or 'age;' its duration, <page 23>, n. . kings of, <page 461>. commencement of, <page 486>. vices of, <page 486>. <page 622>. advantages of, <page 627>.

Kalika, d. of Vaiswanara, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 148>.

Kalika, Upa-purana, notice of, <page lvii>.

Kalinga, s. of Bali, <page 444>.

Kalingas, a people, <page 177>. and n. . <page 185>, n. . <page 188>. <page 196>.

Kalindi, w. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Kaliya, a serpent, <page 149>, n. . conquered by Krishna, <page 514>. banished to the sea, <page 516>.

Kalkalas, a people, <page 193>.

Kalki Avatara of Vishnu in the Kali age, <page 484>.

Kalmashapada, a prince; also Saudasa, q. v. <page 380>, n. . <page 382>. s. of Raghu, <page 384>, n. .

Kalpa, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>, n. .

Kalpa, 'period of time,' calculation of, <page 24>, n. , day of Brahma; past or Padma; present or Varaha, <page 25>. Kalpas infinite, <page 25>, n. . life of Brahma, <page 26>, n. . minor Kalpas, ib. duration of, <page 270>. <page 631>.

Kalpa, an Anga of the Vedas, <page 284>.

Kalpas of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>.

Kama, s. of Brahma, <page 50>, n. . s. of Dharma, <page 55>. s. of Sahishnu, <page 83>, n. .

Kamadeva, lord of the Apsarasas, <page 153>, n. .

Kamagamas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Kamakshi, a form of Durga, <page lvii>.

Kamakhya, a form of Durga, <page lvii>.

Kamarupa, a country, <page 176>. <page 177>, n. . seat of pilgrimage, <page lvii>.

Kambala, s, of Kadru, <page 149>.

Kambalavarhish, s. of Andhaka, <page 435>.

Kambojas, a people, <page 194>. conquered by Sagara, <page 374>. Caumogees, ib. n. .

Kampana, a river, <page 183>.

Kampilya, s. of Haryyas'wa, <page 454>.

Kampilya, a city, <page 187>, n. . <page 452>. <page 454>, n. .

Kamya, d. of Kardama, <page 83>, n. . w. of Priyavrata, <page 162>.

Kanakas, a people, <page 481>.

Kanakhala, a village, <page 62>, n. .

Kanchana, s. of Bhima, <page 398>.

Kandu, a sage, his story, <page 110>.

Kanishthas, a class of deities, <page 269>.

Kanka, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Kanki, d. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

[p. 680]

Kansa, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>. warned of his death, <page 493>. destroys the children of Vasudeva, <page 498>. sends demons to find and destroy Krishna, <page 504>. sends Akrura to bring Krishna to Mathura, <page 537>. holds public games, <page 551>. killed by Krishna, <page 558>.

Kansa, d. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Kansavati, d. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Kantikas, a people, <page 193>.

Kanwa, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>. s. of Apratiratha, <page 448>. s. of Ajamidha, <page 452>.

Kanwas, dynasty of, <page 471>.

Kanwayanas, a race of Brahmans, <page 448>.

Kanyakagunas, a people, <page 191>.

Kapalin, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Kaparddin, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Kapi, a prince, became a Brahman, <page 451>.

Kapi, a river, <page 183>.

Kapila, a sage, destroys the sons of Sagara, <page 378>. a Danava, <page 147>. a serpent, <page 149>, n. . a mountain, <page 169>.

Kapila, a river, <page 183>.

Kapilas'rama, hermitage of Kapila, <page 379>.

Kapilas'wa, s. of Dhundhumara, <page 362>.

Kapinjala, a river, <page 183>.

Kapotaroman, s. of Vrishta, <page 435>.

Karabhanjikas, a people, <page 196>.

Karakas, a people, <page 193>.

Karambhi, a prince, <page 422>.

Karandhama, s. of Khaninetra, <page 352>. s. of Traisamba, <page 442>.

Karatas, a people, <page 193>.

Karatoya, a river, <page 184>.

Kardama, a Prajapati, <page 49>, n. . marries Devahuti, <page 54>, n. . their posterity, ib. s. of Pulaha, <page 83>, n. .

Karishakas, a people, <page 192>.

Karishini, a river, <page 182>.

Karitis, a people, <page 188>.

Karkkota, a serpent, s. of Radru, <page 149>.

Karmasa, s. of Pulaha, <page 83>.

Karmas'reshtha, s. of Pulaha, <page 83>, n. .

Karna, s. of Pritha, <page 437>. found by Adhiratha, <page 446>.

Karnapravaranas, a people, <page 187>, n. .

Karnatakas, a people, <page 192>.

Karnikas, a people, <page 192>, n. .

Kartika, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Kartikeya, s. of the Krittikas, <page 120>.

Karttaviryya, s. of Kritavirya, carries off the cow of Jamadagni, <page 402>. takes Ravana prisoner, <page 417>. killed by Paras'urama, <page 403>. <page 417>.

Karundhaka, s. of S'ura, <page 436>.

Karusha or Karusha, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>. his sons, <page 351>.

Karushas, a people, <page 177>. and n. . <page 186>, n. .

Kas'a, s. of Suhotra, <page 406>.

Kaserumat, a division of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>.

Kas'i, kings of, <page 406>.

Kas'ikosalas, a people, <page 186>.

Kas'iraja, s. of Kas'a, <page 406>.

Kas'is, a people, <page 187>.

Kas'miras, a people, <page 191>. <page 195>.

Kashtha, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, n. .

Kashtha, fifteen twinklings of the eye, <page 22>, eighteen, <page 22>, n. . five Kshanas, ib.

Kas'ya, a prince, <page 452>.

Kas'yapa, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. . marries the daughters of Daksha, <page 119>. their progeny, <page 122>. a star, <page 241>.

Kas'yata, s. of Paurnamas'a, <page 82>, n. .

Kathajava, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>.

Kaukundakas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Kaukuttakas, a people, <page 193>.

Kaumara, kind of creation, <page 38>, n. .

Kaumarabhritya, a branch of medicine, <page 407>, n. .

Kaunkanas, a people, <page 193>.

Kauravyas, a people, <page 192>.

Kaurmma, a Purana, <page 284>. see Kurma.

Kaus'amba, a city, <page 399>, n. .

Kaus'alya, a prince, <page 386>, n. .

Kausharavi, a name of Maitreya, <page 3>, n. .

Kaus'ijas, a people, <page 187>.

Kaus'ika, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Kaus'ikas, descendants of Viswamitra, <page 405>. Gotras or 'tribes' of, ib. n. .

Kaus'iki, a river, <page 182>. the Kos'i, ib. n. . formerly Satyavati, <page 400>, n. .

Kaustubha, a gem produced from the ocean; worn by Vishnu, <page 78>, n. 

Kautilya, destroyer of the Nandas, <page 468>.

Kaveri, a river, <page 182>. the Caveri, ib. n. .

Kavi, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>. s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. . s. of Urukshaya, <page 451>, n. .

Kavyas, a class of Pitris, <page 239>, n. . a race of Brahmans, <page 451>, n. .

Kavyavahana, s. of Pavaka, <page 84>, n. .

Kekayas, a people, <page 189>.

Kenava, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

Kerala, a country, <page 188>. Keralas, a people, <page 192>.

Kes'idhwaja, s. of Kritadhwaja, <page 645>. teaches Khandikya the Yoga, <page 649>.

Kes'in, killed by Krishna, <page 539>.

Kes'ini, w. of Vis'ravas, <page 83>, n. . w. of Sagara, <page 377>.

Ketu, s. of Sinhika, <page 148>, n. , his car and horses, <page 240>.

Ketumala, s. of Agnidhra, <page 162>. k. of Gandhamadana, <page 163>.

Ketumala, a Varsha or 'country,' <page 169>.

Ketumat, a Lokapala, s. of Rajas, regent of the west, <page 84>, n. . <page 153>. <page 226>. s. of Dhanwantari, <page 407>.

Kevala, a country, <page 188>, n. . a prince, <page 353>.

Khandas or 'portions' of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>. portions of the Padma Purana, <page xviii>. of the Skanda, <page xlvi>.

Khandapani, a prince, <page 462>.

[p. 681]

Khandikya, s. of Amitadhwaja, <page 645>. teaches Kes'idhwaja the expiation of a sin, <page 647>.

Khaninetra, a prince, <page 352>.

Khanitra, a prince, <page 352>.

Khasa, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Khasikas, a people, <page 195>, n. .

Khasiras, a people, <page 195>.

Khasrima, s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Khatwanga, a prince, <page 383>.

Khetaka, a hamlet, <page 46>, n. .

Khyati, 'celebrity,' d. of Daksha, w. of Bhrigu, <page 54>. synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, n. .

Kilakila, a city, <page 477>, n. .

Kimpurusha, s. of Anidhra, <page 162>. k. of Hemakuta, ib. a country or Varsha, <page 168>.

Kings, of different orders of beings, <page 153>. of the solar race, <page 348>. of Vais'ali, <page 354>. of Mithila, <page 388>. of the lunar race, <page 398>. of Kas'i, <page 406>. of Mahishmati, <page 416>. of Chedi, <page 422>. of Anga, <page 445>. of Magadha, <page 456>. <page 465>. of future periods, <page 461>. of Vidis'a, <page 478>, n. . of Mekala, <page 478>. of Vindhya, ib. n. . of the Mahishas, ib. of the seven Koshalas, <page 479>. of the Naishadhas, ib. of Padmarati, <page 479>. of Magadha, ib. of the seashore, <page 480>. of Kalinga, ib, of the Nishadas, ib. of the Kali age, <page 482>.

Kinnara, a prince, <page 463>.

Kinnaras, with horses' heads, from Brahma, <page 43>.

Kiratas, a people, <page 175>. <page 190>. <page 192>.

Kirtti, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>.<page 119>, n. .

Kirttimat, s. of Angiras, <page 83>. s. of Uttanapada, <page 86>, n. . s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Kles'a, 'affliction of the soul,' <page 34>, n. .

Kokanakhas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Kokarakas, a people, <page 193>.

Konwa, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Kos'a (Koka), a river, <page 184>.

Kos'alas, a people, <page 190>, n. .

Kos'alas (seven), kings of, <page 479>.

Kotavi, a goddess, <page 595>.

Kratha, s. of Viderbha, <page 422>.

Kratu, a Prajapati, <page 49>. marries Sannati, <page 54>. s. of Uru, <page 98>.

Kratusthala, a nymph, <page 233>.

Krauncha, a Dwipa, <page 166>, divisions, mountains, rivers, people of, <page 199>. a Mountain divided by Kartikeya, <page 169>, n. . an Asura, <page 170>, n. . a teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

Krauncha, d. of Kas'yapa, <page 149>, n. .

Krikana, s. of Bhajamana, <page 424>.

Krimi, s. of Bhajamana, <page 424>, n. . s. of Us'inara, <page 444>

Krimibhojana, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 208>.

Krimisa, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 208>.

Kripa, s. of Satyadhriti, <page 454>.

Kripa, d. of S'atyadhriti, <page 454>. w. of Drona, ib. a river, <page 185>, n. .

Kris'as'wa, a sage, married to two of Daksha's daughters, <page 19>. their children, personified weapons, <page 123>, n. . a king, s. of Sahadeva, <page 354>. s. of Sanhatas'wa, <page 362>.

Krishna, s. of Vasudeva and Devaki, <page 440>. <page 502>. an Avatara of Vishnu, <page 492>, n. , <page 3>. of one of Vishnu's hairs, <page 498>. his birth, <page 503>. brought up by Nanda and Yas'oda, <page 453>. kills Putana, <page 506>. overturns a waggon, <page 508>, throws down two trees, <page 509>. subdues and banishes Kaliya, <page 512>. is hymned by him, <page 515>. prohibits the worship of Indra, <page 524>. lifts up Govarddhana, <page 527>. made monarch of kine, <page 529>. younger brother of Indra, ib. n. . sports with the Gopis, <page 531>. kills Arishta, <page 536>. kills Kes'in, <page 539>. hymned by Akrura, <page 547>. accompanies him to Mathura, <page 548>. kills Kansa's washerman, <page 549>. makes Kubja. straight, <page 550>. breaks a bow, <page 551>. kills Kansa's elephant, <page 555>. kills Chanura, <page 557>. kills Kansa, <page 558>. makes Ugrasena king, <page 560>. studies under Sandipani, <page 561>. kills Panchajana, <page 562>. besieged in Mathura, <page 563>. builds Dwaraka, <page 566>. destroys Kalayavana, <page 567>. goes to Dwaraka, <page 569>. accused falsely of purloining the Syamantaka jewel by killing Prasena, <page 426>. recovers the jewel from Jambavat, <page 427>. marries Jambavati, ib. marries Satyabhama, <page 428>. kills S'atadhanwan, <page 430>. discovers the jewel in Akrura's possession, <page 432>. acquitted of the theft, <page 433>. carries off Rukmini, <page 573>. his other wives, <page 578>. slays Mura, <page 582>. kills Naraka, ib. hymned by Aditi, <page 585>. visits Indra, and carries away the Parijata tree, <page 586>. marries sixteen thousand princesses, <page 590>. his sons, <page 591>. rescues Aniruddha from Bana, <page 594>. overpowers S'iva, <page 595>. propitiated by him, <page 596>. kills Paundraka, <page 599>. burns Benares, <page 600>. recalled by the gods to heaven, <page 607>. causes the destruction of the Yadavas, <page 610>, is shot by a hunter, <page 612>. his wives burn, <page 613>.

Krishna, s. of Havirdhana, <page 106>. one of the Andhra princes, <page 472>.

Krishna, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 209>.

Krishna, a river, <page 184>. and n. .

Krishna-dwaipayana, s. of Paras'ara and Satyavati, <page 459>, n. . the last Vyasa, <page 273>. author of the Mahabharata, <page 275>. arranger of the Vedas, &c. <page 276>.

Krishnavena, a river, <page 183>.

Krishnaveni, a river, <page 176>. the Krishna, ib. n. .

Krita, first Yuga or age; its duration, <page 23>, n. .

Krita, s. of Kritaratha, <page 390>. s. of Sannatimat, compiler of Sanhitas of the Vedas, <page 453>.

Kritadhwaja, s. of Dharmadhwaja, <page 645>.

Kritagni, a prince, <page 417>.

Kritaka, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>. s. of Chyavana, <page 455>.

Kritamala, a river, <page 176>. <page 185>, n. .

Kritanjaya, a Vyasa, <page 273>. a prince, <page 463>.

Kritasmara, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

[p. 682]

Kritaratha, a prince, <page 390>.

Kritavarman, s. of Dhanaka, <page 417>. s. of Hridika, <page 436>.

Kritavirya, a prince, <page 417>.

Kritaujas, a prince, <page 417>.

Kriti, s. of Bahulas'wa, <page 391>. s. of Nahusha, <page 413>. a teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Kritirata, a prince, <page 390>.

Krittika, a lunar mansion, <page 224>. <page 226>, n. .

Kritwi, w. of Anuha, <page 452>.

Kritya, a river, <page 182>.

Kriya, 'devotion,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>. w. of Kratu, <page 55>, n. . a magical being, <page 599>.

Krodha, s. of Brahma, <page 50>, n. . s. of Mrityu, <page 56>. s. of Lobha and Nikriti, ib. n. .

Krodhavasa, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Kroshtri, s. of Yadu, <page 416>. his sons, <page 420>.

Kshana, thirty Kalas, <page 22>, n. . three Nimeshas, ib.

Kshama, 'patience,' d. of Daksha, w. of Pulaha, <page 54>.

Kshatradharman, a prince, <page 412>.

Kshatraujas, a prince, <page 466>.

Kshatravriddha, s. of Ayes, <page 406>. his descendants, ib. other descendants, <page 412>.

Kshatriyas, born from the breast of Brahma, <page 44>. duties of, <page 292>. destroyed by Paras'urama, <page 403>. how preserved, <page 404>, n. . races of, become Brahmans, <page 359>, n. .<page 405>, <page 23>. <page 448>. <page 451>. <page 454>.

Kshatropakshatra, a prince, <page 435>.

Kshema, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Kshemadhanwan, a prince, <page 386>.

Kshemadharman, a prince, <page 466>.

Kshemaka, last of the race of Puru, <page 462>.

Kshemari, a prince, <page 390>.

Kshemya, s. of Ugrayudha, <page 453>. s. of S'uchi, <page 465>.

Kshetrajna, 'embodied spirit,' a form of Vishnu, <page 14>, n. .

Kshudraka, s. of Prasenajit, <page 464>.

Kubja made straight by Krishna, <page 550>.

Kuchira, a river, <page 183>.

Kuhu, d. of Angiras, <page 82>. a river, <page 185>, n. . last day of the moon's wane, <page 225>.

Kukkura, s. of Andhaka, <page 435>.

Kukkuras, a people, <page 193>.

Kukkurangaras, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Kukshi, d. of Priyavrata, <page 161>.

Kukuras, a people, <page 187>.

Kuladhya (Kus'adhya), a country, <page 188>.

Kulaparvatas, mountain ranges in central India, <page 174>.

Kulatthas, a people, <page 194>.

Kulindas, a people, <page 193>.

Kulindapatyakas, a people, <page 192>.

Kulutas, a people, <page 191>, n. .

Kumara, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. . <page 8>. of the Vasu Agni, <page 120>.

Kumari, a river, <page 176>.

Kumarika, a division of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>, n. .

Kumbhaka, suspension of breath, <page 653>.

Kumbhakarna, s. of Visravas, <page 83>, n. .

Kumuda, a minor Dwipa, <page 175>, n. . a mountain, <page 168>, n. .

Kumudadi, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>.

Kumudvati, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Kundaka, s. of Kshudraka, <page 464>.

Kundala, a river, <page 183>.

Kundinapur, capital of Vidarbha, <page 473>.

Kuni, a prince, <page 390>.

Kuntalas, a people, <page 185>. <page 190>. <page 192>.

Kunthakas, a people, <page 193>.

Kunti, s. of Dharmanetra, <page 416>. s. of Kratha, <page 422>. Kunti (Pritha), d. of S'ara, <page 437>. adopted by Kuntibhoja, and married to Pandu, ib. her sons, ib. and <page 459>.

Kuntibhoja, adopts Pritha, <page 437>.

Kuntikas, a people, <page 192>, n. .

Kuntis, a people, <page 187>.

Kupathas, a people, <page 194>, n. .

Kurari, a mountain, <page 169>.

Kurma Purana, <page 284>. analysis of, <page xlix>.

Kuru, s. of Agnidhra, <page 162>. k. of the country between the S'weta and S'ringavan mountains, <page 163>. s. of Samvarana, <page 455>.

Kurus, a people of Bharata, <page 176>. <page 177>, n. . <page 185>.

Kuruvarnakas, a people, <page 192>.

Kuruvatsa, a prince, <page 423>.

Kus'a, 'sacrificial' grass, <page 106>, n. . name of a Dwipa, <page 166>. people, mountains, rivers of, <page 199>.

Kus'a, s. of Rama, <page 385>. k. of Kus'asthali, <page 386>, n. . s. of Valakas'wa, <page 399>.

Kus'achira, a river, <page 183>.

Kus'adhara, a river, <page 183>.

Kus'adhwaja, k. of Kas'i, <page 390>. of Sankas'ya, ib. n. .

Kus'agra, s. of Vrihadratha, <page 455>.

Kus'alas, a people, <page 190>.

Kus'amba, a prince, s. of Kus'a, <page 399>. founder of Kaus'ambi, ib. n. .

Kus'anabha, a prince, <page 399>.

Kus'andas (Kus'adhyas), a people, <page 185>, n. .

Kus'asthali, a city, <page 355>. also Dwaraka, <page 356>.

Kus'avindus, a people, <page 192>.

Kushidi, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Kushmandas, a class of divinities, <page 90>.

Kus'ika, a prince, <page 399>, n. .

Kutaka, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Kutas'aila, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Kuthumi, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Kuttaparantas, a people, <page 190>.

Kuvalayas'wa, s. of Vrihadas'wa, <page 361>. a name of Pratarddana, <page 408>.

Kuvera, s. of Visravas, <page 83>, n. . lord of wealth, and k. of the Yakshas, <page 153>, n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

L.

Laghu, a measure of time, fifteen Kashthas, <page 22>, n. .

Lajja, 'modesty,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>.

[p. 683]

Lakshmana, s. of Das'aratha, <page 384>.

Lakshmana, w. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Lakshmi, 'prosperity,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>. <page 119>. n. . d. of Bhrigu, <page 59>. <page 82>. wife and counterpart of Vishnu, <page 60>. born from the ocean, and taken by Vishnu, <page 76>. hymned by Indra, <page 78>.

Lalabhaksha, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 208>.

Lamba, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>.

Lambodara, a prince, <page 472>.

Land, measures of, <page 45>, n. .

Langalas, a people, <page 192>, n. .

Langali, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Langalini, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Langlois, translator of the Hari-vans'a, <page lix>.

Lanka, an island, <page 175>, n. .

Lauhitya, a river, <page 184>. the Brahmaputra, ib. n. .

Lava, s. of Rama, <page 385>. k. of S'ravasti, <page 386>, n. .

Lava, a measure of time, three Vedhas, <page 22>, n. .

Lavana, an Asura, <page 385>. a hell, <page 207>. crimes punished in, <page 208>.

Lekhas, a class of deities, <page 263>.

Les'a, s. of Suhotra, <page 406>.

Libations, how offered, <page 302>.

Liberation, when effected, <page 658>.

Light, or fire, the element, <page 16>. see Tejas.

Linga Purana, <page 284>. analysis of, <page xlii>.

Lobha, s. of Brahma, <page 50>. <page 212>, s. of Dharma, <page 55>. s. of Adharma; married to Nikriti; their progeny, <page 56>, n. .

Lohatarini or Lohacharini, a river, <page 182>.

Lohitas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Lokakshi, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Lokaloka mountain, <page 202>.

Lokapalas, four, <page 153>. <page 226>. eight, <page 169>, n. .

Lokas, 'worlds' or 'spheres,' <page 48>, n. . described, <page 212>.

Lomaharshana, name of Suta, <page 276>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

M.

Macrobius teaches God the limit of the universe, <page 215>, n. .

Mada, s. of Brahma, <page 50>, n. .

Madayanti, w. of Saudasa, <page 381>,

Madhava, a month, <page 225>.

Madhavas, a tribe, descendants of Madhu the son of Vrisha, <page 418>.

Madhu, a month, <page 225>:

Madhu, s. of Karttavirya, <page 417>. s. of Vrisha, <page 418>, s. of Devakshatra, <page 422>. an Asura, killed by S'atrughna, <page 385>.

Madhumattas, a people, <page 191>.

Madhuvana, site of Mathura; <page 90>.

Madhuvahini, a river, <page 183>.

Madhwacharya, date of,<page x>.

Madhyadina, s. of Kalpa, <page 58>, n. .

Madhyandina, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Madira, w. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Madra, s. of S'ivi, <page 444>.

Madra, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Madrabhujingas, a people, <page 187>.

Madras, a people, <page 177>. and n. .

Madreyas, a people, <page 185>.

Madri, w. of Pandu, <page 437>. <page 459>. w. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Magadha, a country; kings of, <page 456>.

Magadha, 'bard,' origin of, <page 102>.

Magadhas, a people, <page 177>. and n. . <page 188>.

Magha, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Magha, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Mahabhadra, a lake, <page 169>.

Mahabharata, a heroic poem, composed by Vyasa, <page 275>. <page lviii>.

Mahabhoja, s, of Satwata, <page 424>.

Mahadeva, a Rudra, <page 58>.

Mahadhriti, a prince, <page 390>.

Mahagauri, a river, <page 184>.

Mahajwala, a hell, <page 207>. crimes punished in, <page 208>.

Mahamanas, a prince, <page 444>.

Mahamani, a prince, <page 444>.

Mahamoha, 'extreme illusion;' kind of ignorance, <page 34>, n. .

Mahan, a Rudra, <page 59>, n. .

Mahanabha, s. of Hiranyaksha, <page 147>.

Mahanada, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Mahanandi, s. of Nandivarddhana, <page 467>.

Mahanila, a serpent, <page 149>, n. .

Mahanta, s. of Dhimat, <page 165>.

Mahapadma, a serpent, s. of Kadru, <page 149>. a king, s. of Mahananda, <page 467>.

Mahapaga, a river, <page 183>, n. .

Mahapurusha, name of Vishnu, <page 2>. 'supreme spirit,' ib. n. .

Maharashtra, a country, <page 188>, n. .

Mahar-loka, heaven of celestials, <page 48>, n. . site of, <page 213>. remains at a Pralaya, <page 632>.

Maharoman, a prince, <page 390>.

Mahaswat, a prince, <page 387>.

Mahat, 'intellect,' first product of Pradhana, <page 14>. synonymes and definitions, <page 14>, n. , threefold: origin of Ahankara, <page 15>.

Mahatala, a division of Patala, <page 204>.

Mahavichi, a hell, <page 207>, n. .

Mahavira, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. . son of Savana, <page 200>.

Mahavira, a division of Pushkara-dwipa, <page 200>.

Mahavirya, s. of Vrihaduktha, <page 390>, s. of Bhavanmanyu, <page 450>.

Mahavishubha, equinoctial period, <page 225>.

Maha-yajnas, five, <page 294>, n. .

Mahayuga, aggregate of four ages, <page 24>, n. .

Mahendra, a range of mountains, <page 174>. a star, <page 241>.

Mahendra, a river, <page 183>.

Mahes'wara produces Virabhadra, <page 65>, sends him to disturb Daksha's sacrifice, <page 66>.

Maheyas, a people, <page 190>.

Mahi, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Mahikas (Mahishas), a people, <page 188>.

[p. 684]

Mahinasa, a Rudra, <page 59>, n. .

Mahishakas, a people, <page 189>, n. . <page 192>.

Mahishmat, a prince of the Yadu race, <page 416>.

Mahishmati, a city, <page 189>, n. .

Mahita, a river, <page 182>.

Mahodaya, a city; same as Kanoj, <page 399>, n. .

Mahopama, a river, <page 183>.

Mahyuttaras, a people, <page 190>.

Mainaka, s. of Himavat, <page 85>, n. . a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Maitreya, disciple of Paras'ara, to whom the Vishnu Purana is related in reply to his inquiries, <page 3>. a Rishi; s. of Kusharava; one of the interlocutors of the Bhagavata, <page 3>, n. . s. of Mitrayu, <page 454>, n. .

Maitreyas, a tribe of Brahmans from Mitrayu, <page 454>, n. .

Maitri, 'friendship,' d. of Daksha, w, of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Makandi, a city, <page 187>, n. . <page 454>, n. .

Makari, a river, <page 183>.

Maladas, a people, <page 190>, n. .

Malajas, a people, <page 190>.

Malas, a people, <page 185>. and n. .

Malavanas, a people, <page 193>.

Malavarttis, a people, <page 185>, n. .

Malavas, a people, <page 177>. and n. . <page 193>.

Malaya, a chain of mountains, <page 174>.

Malayas, a people, <page 188>.

Malina, s. of Tansu, <page 448>, n. .

Mallas, a people, <page 188>.

Mallarashtra, a country, <page 188>.

Mallavas, a people, <page 193>.

Malyavan, a mountain at the base of Meru, <page 169>.

Manas, 'mind,' synonyme of Mahut, <page 14>, n. .

Manasa, a form of Vishnu, <page 265>.

Manasa, a lake, <page 169>.

Manasottara mountain, <page 200>. cities of the gods on, <page 218>.

Manaswini, w. of Mrikanda, <page 82>, n. .

Manasyu, s. of Mahanta, <page 165>. s. of Pravira, <page 447>.

Manavarjjakas, a people, <page 190>,

Mancha, a platform, <page 553>, note .

Mandaga, a river, <page 185>, <page 11>. <page 80>.

Mandahara, an island, <page 175>, n. .

Mandakas, a people, <page 187>, <page 193>, n. .

Mandakini, a river, <page 184>.

Mandavahini, a river, <page 184>.

Mandehas, enemies of the sun, <page 222>.

Mandhatri, a prince, s. of Yuvanas'wa, <page 363>.

Mandukeya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

Mangala, 'Mars,' s. of S'arva, <page 19>.

Mangala-prastha, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Mani, a serpent, <page 149>, n. .

Manidhana, a king, <page 480>.

Maninga, a river, <page 184>.

Manjula, a river, <page 184>.

Manojava, s. of the Rudra Is'ana, <page 59>, s. of the Vasu Anila, <page 120>. Indra of the sixth Manwantara, <page 263>.

Manu, a sage presiding over a Manwantara, <page 23>. computation of time of, <page 26>, note, of the first period, <page 51>. of the second, <page 260>. third, <page 261>, fourth and fifth, <page 262>. sixth, <page 263>. seventh, <page 264>. eighth, <page 267>. ninth to the twelfth, <page 268>. thirteenth and fourteenth, <page 269>. sons of each, <page 261>, &c.

Manu, a Rudra, <page 59>, n. . s. of Krisas'wa, <page 123>, n. .

Manwantara, nature and duration of, <page 24>, n. . Indras, Manus, &c. of, <page 259>.

Marietta, s. of Sunda, <page 147>, n. .

Marichi, a Prajapati, <page 49>. marries Sambhuti, <page 54>. his posterity, <page 82>, n. .

Marichigarbhas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Marisha, d. of Kandu and Pramlocha, <page 113>. her former life, <page 114>. married to the Prachetasas, <page 115>.

Markandeya, s. of Mrikanda, <page 82>.

Markandeya Purana, named, <page 284>. analysis of, <page xxxiii>. Marriage, directions for, <page 298>. modes of, <page 299>.

Marshti, s. of Sarana, <page 439>.

Marshtimat, e. of Sarana, <page 439>.

Marttikavatas, princes of Mrittikavati, <page 424>.

Mara, s. of S'ighra, <page 387>. still living, ib. s. of S'ighraga, <page 384>, n. . s, of Haryaswa, <page 390>.

Marubhaumas, a people, <page 189>, n. .

Marudeva, a prince, <page 463>.

Marut-loka, heaven of the winds and Vais'yas, <page 48>, n. .

Maruts or 'winds,' forty-nine, the children of Diti, <page 152>. sons of Marutwati, <page 120>. give Bharadwaja to Bharata, <page 449>, n. .

Marutta, s. of Avikshit, <page 352>. his magnificence, <page 353>. s. of Karandhama, <page 442>.

Marutwati, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>. Mathura, a holy city, founded by S'atrughna, <page 90>. conquered by him, <page 385>.

Mati, 'understanding,' synonyme of Mahat, <page 14>, n. .

Matinara, s. of Riksha, <page 447>, n. .

Matkuna, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Matsya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>, n. .

Matsya, a minor Dwipa, <page 175>, n. ,

Matsya Purana, notice of, <page 284>. analysis of, <page li>.

Matsyas, a people, <page 185>, n. . <page 186>, n. .

Maudga, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Maudgalyas, a class of Brahmans, <page 454>.

Maunas, a race of kings, <page 475>, n. .

Mauneyas, a tribe of Gandharbas, <page 370>.

Mauryas, kings of Magadha, <page 468>.

Maya, a Danava, <page 148>, n. .

Maya, personified active will of the Creator, <page 21>, n. . d. of Adharma, <page 55>, n. . d. of Anrita, <page 56>.

Mayadevi, finds and marries Pradyumna, <page 576>. formerly Rati, <page 577>.

[p. 685]

Measures, of time, <page 22>. of land, <page 45>, n. .

Medha, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>.

Medha, intelligence,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>.

Medhatithi, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>. k. of Plaksha-dwipa, ib. his sons, <page 197>. s. of Kanwa, <page 448>. <page 452>.

Medhavin, a prince, <page 462>.

Medicine, branches and teachers of, <page 407>, n. .

Meghaswati, a prince, <page 472>.

Mekala, a Rishi, father of Narmada, <page 186>, n. .

Mekala, the Narmada, <page 186>, n. .

Mekalas, a people, <page 186>.

Men proceeded from Brahma, <page 40>.

Mena, d. of the Pitris, <page 84>. d. of Meru, w. of Himavat, <page 85>, n. .

Mena (Sena), a river, <page 183>.

Menaka, a divine nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Mendicant, duties of, <page 295>.

Meru, w. of Nabhi, <page 163>.

Meru, mountain in the centre of Jambu-dwipa, <page 166>. its dimensions and form, <page 167>. and n. . mountain-ridges, cities of the gods, <page 169>. rivers, <page 170>. situation, <page 171>. boundaries, <page 172>. Merubhutas, a people, <page 189>.

Meru-mandara mountain, south of Meru, <page 168>, n. .

Meru-savarnis, the ninth to the twelfth Manu, <page 268>, n. .

Mimansa, 'theology,' <page 284>.

Minaratha, a prince, <page 390>.

Mind, an organ of sense, <page 18>.

Misrakes'i, a nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Mithi, a prince, s. of Nimi, <page 389>. father of Janaka, ib. n. .

Mithila, a country, <page 389>, n. .

Mitra, an Aditya, <page 122>. presides over the organs of excretion, <page 17>, n. . s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>, n. .

Mitrasaha, s. of Sudasa, a prince, <page 380>.

Mitravrinda, w. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Mitrayu, a teacher of the Puranas, <page 283>. s. of Divodasa, <page 454>.

Mlechchas, degraded Kshatriyas, <page 375>. people of the west and south of India, <page 376>, n. . <page 442>, n. . subjects of Turvasu, ib. n. . people of the north, <page 443>. kings of, <page 477>. <page 482>, n. .

Moha, 'stupefaction,' a property of sensible objects, <page 17>, n. . a kind of ignorance, <page 34>, n. .

Moha, s. of Brahma, <page 50>, n. .

Monotheism of the Puranas, <page 19>, n. .

Months, four kinds, <page 223>, n. .

Moon, produced from the ocean, <page 76>. chariot and horses of, &c. <page 237>. source of ambrosia, ib.

Mot, of the Phoenicians; analogy of with Mahat, q. v., <page 13>, n. .

Mountains, boundary; of the earth, <page 167>. of Meru, <page 169>. <page 171>. of Bharata-varsha, <page 174>. of the different Dwipas, <page 197>, et seq.

Mountaineers, tribes of, <page 101>, n. .

Mrigavithi, a division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

Mridu, a prince, <page 462>.

Mridura, a prince, <page 435>.

Mrigas'iras, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Mrigavyadha, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Mrikanda, s. of Vidhatri and Niryati, <page 82>.

Mrittikavati, a city, <page 424>.

Mrityu, 'death,' s. of Brahma, <page 50>, n. . s. of Bhaya; his children, <page 56>. s. of Kali, <page 56>, n. . a Rudra, <page 121>, n. . a Vyasa, <page 272>.

Muchukunda, s. of Mandhatri, <page 363>. destroys Kalayavana, <page 567>. praises Krishna, <page 567>. goes to Gandhamadana, <page 569>.

Muda, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Mudgala, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>. a prince, s. of Haryaswa, <page 454>.

Muhita, a river, <page 182>, n. .

Muhurtta, a measure of time, thirty Kalas, <page 22>. twelve Kshanas; thirty Kalas and one-tenth; two Narikas, <page 22>, n. .

Muhurtta, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>.

Muka, s. of Upasunda, <page 147>, n. .

Mukhyas, a class of deities, <page 267>.

Muktimati, a river, <page 184>.

Mukunda, a mountain, <page 169>.

Mula, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Mulaka, a prince; also Narikavacha, <page 383>.

Mummies, prepared by the Hindus, <page 388>, n. .

Mundas, a race of kings, <page 474>. <page 475>, n. .

Muni, any sage, <page 4>, &c.

Muni, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Munjakes'a, a teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>.

Mura, slain by Krishna, <page 582>.

Murtti, 'form,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Murundas, a race of kings, <page 475>, n. .

Musala, 'a club,' born of S'amba for the destruction of the Yadavas, <page 607>.

Mushakas, a people, <page 192>. <page 193>.

Mushikas, a people, <page 192>.

Mushtika killed by Balarama, <page 557>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

N.

Nabha, s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Nabhaga, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>, <page 15>.<page 4>. <page 358>.

Nabhaga, s. of Nedishta, <page 351>. becomes a Vais'ya, <page 352>. s. of Nabhaga, <page 358>. s, of S'ruta, <page 379>. s, of Yayati, <page 384>, n. .

Nabhaganedishta, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>, n. .

Nabhas, a month, <page 225>.

Nabhas, s. of Nala, <page 386>.

Nabhaswati, w. of Antardhana, <page 106>, n. .

Nabhasya, a month, <page 225>.

Nabhi, s. of Agnidhra, <page 162>. k. of Hima, ib.

Naga, a mountain-branch of Meru, <page 169>. mountains in India, <page 180>, n. .

Naga, a serpent, s. of Kadru, <page 149>.

Naga-dwipa, a division of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>.

[p. 686]

Nagara, a city, <page 46>, n. .

Nagas, 'snake-gods,' children of Kadru, <page 149>. harassed by the Gandharbas, <page 370>.

Nagas, kings of Padmavati, <page 479>.

Nagavithi, d. of Yami, <page 120>.

Nagavithi, division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

Nagna, a naked ascetic, <page 333>.

Nagnas, apostates, <page 334>, n. . Jains, &c. <page 339>. sin of intercourse with, <page 345>.

Nagnajiti, w. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Nahusha, s. of Ambarisha, <page 384>, n. . s. of Ayes, <page 406>. his descendants, <page 413>. legend of, ib. n. .

Nahusha, a serpent, <page 149>, n. .

Naigama, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

Naigameya, s. of Kumara, <page 120>.

Naikaprishthas, a people, <page 187>.

Nairritas, a people, <page 190>.

Naishadha princes, <page 480>, n. .

Nakshatra-yoginis, stars of the twenty-seven lunar mansions; daughters of Daksha; wives of Chandra, <page 123>, n. .

Nakta, s. of Prithu, <page 165>.

Nakula, s. of Pandu, <page 437>. <page 459>.

Nala, a prince, s. of Nishadha, <page 386>. s. of Yadu, <page 416>.

Nala, a river, <page 184>.

Nalakanakas, a people, <page 192>.

Nalini, a river, <page 171>, n. .

Namuchi, s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Nanda, chief of the cowherds, leaves Mathura, <page 505>. goes to Vrindavana, <page 509>. s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>. s. of Mahananda, <page 467>.

Nandana, grove of Indra, <page 169>.

Nandas, dynasty of, <page 467>.

Nandayaniya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

Nandi, 'delight,' w. of Kama, <page 55>.

Nandimukhas, a class of Pitris, <page 297>. <page 315>.

Nandivardhana, s. of Udavasu, <page 390>. s. of Janaka, <page 466>. s. of Udayas'wa, <page 467>.

Nara, a sage, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. . s. of Gaya, <page 165>. s. of Sudhriti, <page 353>. s. of Bhavanmanyu, <page 450>.

Nara, 'waters,' first product of Nara, <page 28>, n. .

Narada, a Prajapati, <page 49>, n. . dissuades the sons of Daksha from multiplying their races, <page 117>. cursed by Daksha; by Brahma; his former birth, &c. <page 118>, n. . apprises Kansa of his danger, <page 498>. praises Krishna, <page 540>.

Narada Purana, analysis of, <page xxxi>.

Naradiya, a Purana, <page 284>. <page xxxi>.

Naraka, 'hell,' <page 48>. divisions of, <page 207>.

Naraka, s. of Anrita, <page 56>. s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>. s. of Earth; his tyranny, <page 581>. killed by Krishna, <page 582>.

Narakas, 'hells' below the earth, <page 207>. punishments inflicted in, ib.

Naras, 'centaurs,' from Brahma, <page 42>.

Narayana, a name of Vishnu, meaning of, <page 27>. a sage, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. . a prince, <page 471>.

Narishyanta, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>. his descendants, <page 391>, n. . s. of Marutta, <page 353>.

Narika, fifteen Laghus, <page 22>, n. .

Narikavacha, a prince, <page 383>.

Narmada, a river, <page 176>, sister of the Nagas, <page 370>. prayer to her, ib. mother of Trasadasyu, <page 471>.

Nature, a habit, <page 33>, n. .

Navala, d. of Vairaja, w, of Chakshusha Manu, <page 98>.

Navaratha, a prince, <page 422>.

Naya, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Nedishta, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>.

Nichakra, a prince, removes the capital, <page 461>.

Nichita, a river, <page 182>.

Nidagha, pupil of Ribhu, legend of, <page 254>.

Nidra, 'sleep,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>, n. . produced from the ocean, <page 78>, n. .

Nighna, s. of Anamitra, <page 425>.

Nikriti, d. of Adharma, <page 56>.

Nikumbha, a prince, <page 362>.

Nila, a range of mountains, <page 167>. mountains in Orissa, <page 180>, n. .

Nila, s. of Yadu, <page 416>, n. . s. of Ajamidha, <page 453>.

Nilalohita, a name of Rudra, <page 58>, n. .

Nilini, w. of Ajamidha, <page 453>.

Nimesha, measure of time, <page 22>, n. . three Lavas, ibid.

Nimi, s. of Ikshwaku, <page 357>. cursed by Vas'ishtha, <page 388>. placed on the eyelids of men, <page 389>. s. of Bhajamana, <page 424>.

Nipa, s. of Para, <page 452>.

Niramitra, s. of Nakula, <page 460>. s. of Khandapani, <page 462>. s. of Ayutayus, <page 465>.

Nirmanaratis, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Nirrita, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Nirukta, an Anga of the Vedas, <page 284>.

Niruktakrit, author of a glossary of the Rig-veda, <page 278>.

Nirvindhya, a river, <page 176>. <page 185>, n. .

Nirvriti, a prince, <page 422>.

Nisatha, s. of Balarama, <page 439>.

Nis'chara, a Rishi, <page 261>.

Nis'chira, a river, <page 182>, n. .

Nis'chita, a river, <page 182>.

Nishida, a barbarian, his origin, too.

Nishadas, barbarians, <page 190>.

Nishadha, a range of mountains, south of Meru, <page 167>. east of Meru, <page 172>.

Nishadha, a prince, <page 386>.

Nishadha, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Nishadhas, a people, <page 190>.

Nisitha, s. of Kalpa, <page 98>, n. .

Nisunda, s. of Hlada, <page 147>, n. .

Nitala, a division of Patala, <page 204>.

Nivara, a river, <page 182>.

Nivata-kavachas, a class of Danavas, <page 148>, n. .

[p. 687]

Niyama, duties so called, <page 288>, n. . <page 653>.

Niyama, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Niyati, w. of Vidhatri, <page 82>. d. of Meru, <page 85>, n. .

Niyut, w. of Mahan, <page 59>, n. .

Nrichakshu, a prince, <page 462>.

Nriga, s. of Vaivaswata, his descendants, <page 391>, n. . changed to a lizard, ib.

Nripanjaya, s. of Suvira, <page 453>. s. of Medhavin, <page 462>.

Nri-yajna, 'hospitality,' <page 294>, n. .

Nyagrodha, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Nyaya, 'logic.' <page 284>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

O.

Oblations, daily, with fire, <page 303>.

Obsequial rites, three kinds of, <page 318>. by whom performed, ib.

Ocean churned, <page 75>.

Odra, a country, <page 192>, n. .

Oghavati, a river, <page 183>.

Om, mystical and initiatory syllable; the monosyllabic Brahma; a type of the three worlds, of Brahma, of the Vedas, <page 1>, n. . <page 273>. type of Vasudeva, <page 274>, n. .

Oshtha-karnakas, a people, <page 187>, n. .

Oxydracae, the S'udra people, <page 195>, n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

P.

Padma, 'past' Kalpa, or day of Brahma, <page 25>.

Padma Purana, named, <page 284>. analysis of, <page xviii>.

Padmavati, a city, <page 480>, n. .

Pahlavas, a people, <page 189>, n. . <page 195>, n. .

Pahnavas, a people, <page 189>. <page 195>. conquered by Sagara, <page 374>.

Paila, pupil of Vyasa, <page 275>. compiler of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

Pakayajna, sort of sacrifice, <page 292>, n. .

Paksha, a fortnight, <page 223>.

Palaka, s. of Pradyota, <page 466>.

Palas'ini, a river, <page 183>.

Palin, s. of Prithu, <page 106>.

Palita, a prince, <page 420>. ruler of Videha, <page 421>.

Pampa, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Panchadas'a hymns, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Panchajana, a demon, killed by Krishna, <page 562>.

Panchajanya, an island, <page 175>, n. .

Panchala, a country, <page 454>, n. .

Pancha-lakshana, epithet of the Puranas, <page iv>.

Panchalas, a people, <page 176>. <page 177>, n. . <page 185>, n. . <page 186>. and n. . sons of Haryyas'wa, <page 454>.

Panchami, a river, <page 183>.

Pandara, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Pandu, s. of Dhatri and Ayati, married to Pundarika, <page 82>, n. . s. of Vyasa, <page 459>. married to Pritha, <page 437>. their sons, ib.

Pannagari, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

Pansurashtras, a people, <page 188>.

Papa, a hell, <page 207>.

Papahara, a river, <page 183>.

Para, s. of Anga, <page 445>. s. of Prithusena, <page 452>. s. of Samara, ib.

Para or Para, a river, <page 182>, and n. .

Para, mystical meanings of, <page 113>, n. .

Paradas, a people, <page 189>, n. . conquered by Sagara, <page 374>.

Paramanu, two equal to one Anu, <page 22>, n. .

Param, the duration of Brahma's life, <page 22>.

Paramatma, name of Vishnu, <page 2>, n. .

Parameshthin, s. of Indradyumna, <page 164>. s. of Anu, <page 444>.

Parantas, a people, <page 189>.

Pararddham, half of Brahma's life, <page 22>. <page 25>. a different period, <page 630>.

Paras, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Parasancharakas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Paras'ara, grandson of Vas'ishtha, <page 3>. s. of S'akti or S'aktri, <page 4>, n. . performs a sacrifice to destroy the Rakshasas, and is stopped by his grandsire, <page 4>. Pulastya teaches him the Vishnu Purana, <page 5>. he relates it to Maitreya, <page 6>. one of the Vyasas, <page 273>. teacher of a branch of the Rig-veda, <page 277>. teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>, n. .

Parasikas, a people, <page 177>. and n. . <page 194>.

Paras'urama, s. of Jamadagni, <page 401>. beheads his mother, <page 402>. kills the Kshatriyas, <page 403>. gives the earth to the Brahmans, ib. retires to Mahendra mountain, <page 404>.

Paratakas, a people, <page 194>, n. .

Paratanganas, a people, <page 193>.

Paravatas, a class of divinities, <page 260>.

Paravrit, a prince, <page 420>.

Parijata tree, produced from the ocean, <page 76>. taken away from heaven by Krishna, <page 586>. returns thither, <page 613>.

Parikshit, s. of Kuru, <page 455>. s. of Abhimanyu, <page 460>. made king, <page 619>. Bhagavata related to him, <page xxv>.

Parinamin, a name of Pradhana, <page 13>, n. .

Paripatra, a range of mountains, <page 174>. northern portion of the Vindhya chain, n. a.

Paripatra, a prince, <page 386>.

Pariplava, a prince, <page 462>.

Pariyatra, a mountain-range, west of Meru, <page 172>. same as Paripatra, q. v.

Parivatsara, 'cyclic year,' <page 224>.

Parjanya, k. of clouds, <page 153>, n. .

Parjanya, w. of Marichi, <page 83>, n. .

Parna, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Parvana S'raddhas, worship of progenitors at lunar periods, &c. <page 322>.

Parvas, periods of impurity, <page 312>.

Parvasa, s. of Paurnamasa, <page 82>, n. .

Parvasi, w. of Parvasa, <page 82>, n. .

Parvatiyas, mountaineers, <page 192>.

Pas'ivatas, a people, <page 193>.

Pas'upati, a Rudra, <page 58>.

Pas'uyajna, 'animal sacrifice,' <page 275>, n. .

Patala, regions below the earth; description of, <page 204>. name of one division of, ib, cities of, <page 205>, n. .

Patala, a sun, <page 632>, n. .

[p. 688]

Patalavati, a river, <page 183>.

Pataliputra, capital of Magadha, <page 474>, n. .

Patanga, a mountain, <page 169>. a sun, <page 632>, n. .

Path, heavenly, of the Pitris, <page 226>. of the gods, <page 227>. of Vishnu, <page 228>.

Pathya, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Pattis, a people, <page 195>.

Patumat, a prince, <page 472>.

Patumitra, a king, <page 478>.

Paulomi, w. of Bhrigu, <page 82>, n. .

Paulomas, a class of Danavas, <page 148>.

Paundraka assumes the title and insignia of Krishna, <page 598>. is killed by him, <page 599>.

Paundras, a people, <page 192>.

Pauras, a race of kings, <page 477>.

Pauravas, descendants of Puru, <page 453>.

Pauravi, w. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Paurnamasa, s. of Marichi and Sambhuti, <page 82>.

Paurnamasi, day of full moon, <page 225>.

Pausha, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Paushyinji (Paushpinji), teacher. of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Pavaka, s. of Agni, <page 84>. s. of Antardhana, <page 106>, n. . chief of the Vasus, <page 153>.

Pavamana, s. of Agni, <page 84>. s. of Antardhana, <page 106>, n. .

Pavani, a river, <page 171>, n. .

Pavitra, a river, <page 183>.

Pavitras, a class of deities, <page 269>.

Payoshni, a river, <page 176>. Payin Ganga, <page 181>, n. .

Phalguna, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Pichchhala, a river, <page 163>.

Pindaraka, a tirtha, <page 606>.

Pindas, offered at S'raddhas, <page 315>.

Pingala, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Pinjala, a river, <page 183>.

Pipal tree, on Vipula mountain, <page 168>.

Pippala, part of Jambu-dwipa, <page 166>, n. .

Pippalada, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>.

Pis'acha, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, n. .

Pis'achas, born from Brahma, <page 42>. children of Pis'acha, <page 150>, n. .

Pis'achika, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Pitha sthanas, where Devi is worshipped, <page 499>, n. . <page lvii>.

Pitri-loka, heaven of the Pitris and Brahmans, <page 47>. <page 48>, n. .

Pitris, proceeded from Brahma, <page 40>. sons of Angiras, <page 123>, n. . path of, <page 226>. classes and kinds of, <page 322>, n. . song of, <page 323>. food grateful to, <page 332>. song of, <page 333>.

Pitriyajna, 'obsequial rites,' <page 294>, n. .

Pivari, w, of Vedas'iras, <page 82>, n. . d. of, <page 83>, n. .

Piyadas'i, inscriptions of, <page 470>, n. .

Plaksha, a Dwipa, <page 166>. divisions, mountains, rivers, people of, <page 197>.

Poison, produced from the ocean, <page 76>. drunk by S'iva, <page 78>, note .

Poley, translation of the Upanishads by, <page ii>. note .

Prabha, d. of Swarbhanu, <page 147>. w. of Namuchi, mother of Nahusha, ib. n. . w. of the sun, <page 266>, n. . w. of Kalpa, <page 98>, n. .

Prabhakara, a Rishi, <page 447>, n. .

Prabhasa, a Vasu, <page 120>.

Prabhasa, a place of pilgrimage, <page 561>.

Prabhata, s. of the sun, <page 266>, n. .

Prachetas, a deity, presides over the tongue, <page 17>, n. .

Prachetas, a prince of the race of Druyu, <page 443>.

Prachetasas, ten sons of Prachinavarhish, <page 107>.

Prachinavarhish, s. of Havirdhana, <page 106>.

Prachinvat, s. of Janamejaya, <page 447>.

Prachyas, a people, <page 192>.

Pradars'anas, a class of deities, <page 261>.

Pradhana, 'primary matter,' a form of Vishnu, <page 9>. properties of, <page 10>. and n. . same as Prakriti, <page 10>. equipoise of the three qualities, <page 12>, n. . <page 636>. one with Brahma, <page 12>. agitated, influenced, or entered into, by Vishnu or Purusha, <page 13>, n. . merges into spirit, <page 636>.

Pradyota, a prince, <page 466>.

Pradhanatma, name of Vishnu, <page 2>, n. .

Pradosha, s. of Kalpa, <page 58>, n. .

Pradyumna, s. of Krishna and Rukmini, <page 574>. carried off by Sambara, <page 575>. brought up by Mayadevi, ib. kills Sambara, <page 576>.

Prahlada, s. of Hiranyakas'ipu, <page 124>. devotion to Vishnu, <page 127>. persecuted by his father, <page 128>. Vishnu appears to him, <page 144>. makes him k. of the Daityas, <page 145>, <page 153>. his descendants, <page 147>.

Prahladas, a people, <page 188>.

Prajani, a prince, <page 352>.

Prajapati, a Vyasa, <page 272>.

Prajapatis, mind-born sons of Brahma, variously enumerated, <page 49>, n. . born from parts of Brahma's body; from the fires of a sacrifice; sons (twenty-one) of Daksha, <page 50>, n. , married to the daughters of Daksha, <page 54>.

Prajapati-yajna, 'begetting offspring,' <page 294>, n. .

Prajna, synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, note .

Prakrita, 'primary creation,' <page 37>, n. . 'elemental dissolution,' <page 12>. <page 630>. <page 635>.

Prakriti: see Pradhana.

Pralaya, dissolution,' fourfold, <page 56>. account of, <page 621>. three kinds of, <page 630>. incidental, ib. elemental, <page 634>. final, <page 638>.

Pramlocha, a nymph; her dwelling with Kandu, <page 110>. a divine nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Pramoda, s. of Brahma, <page 50>, n. .

Prana, a measure of time, <page 23>, n. .

Prana, s. of Dhatri and Ayati, <page 82>. a Rishi, <page 261>.

Pranayama, 'suppression of breath,' &c. <page 653>

Pransu, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>. s. of Vatsapri, <page 352>.

Prapti, w. of Kansa, <page 563>.

Prasada, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Prasena, s. of Nighna, <page 425>. killed by a lion, <page 429>.

[p. 689]

Prasenajit, s, of Kris'as'wa, <page 362>. s. of Ratula, <page 464>

Pras'raya, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Prastara, s. of Udgitha, <page 165>.

Prastutas, a class of deities, <page 263>.

Prasuhmas, a people, <page 188>, n. .

Prasusruka, a prince, <page 384>, n. . <page 387>.

Prasuti, d. of Swayambhuva Manu, <page 53>. married to Daksha; their twenty-four daughters, <page 54>. allegorical, <page 54>, n. .

Pratah, s. of Kalpa, <page 58>, n. .

Pratarddana, s. of Divodasa, <page 407>.

Pratibandhaka, a prince, <page 390>.

Pratibimba, 'reflection,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>, n. .

Pratihara, s. of Parameshthin, <page 164>.

Pratihartta, s. of Pratihara, <page 164>.

Pratikshatra, s. of Kshatravriddha, <page 412>. s. of Samin, <page 436>.

Pratimasyas (Pratimatsyas), a people, <page 190>.

Pratipa, s. of Dilipa, <page 457>.

Pratisarga, 'secondary creation,' <page 27>, n. .

Pratishthana, capital of Sudyumna, <page 350>.

Prativaha, s. of S'waphalka, <page 435>.

Prativindhya, s. of Yudhishthira, <page 459>.

Prativyoman, a prince, <page 463>.

Pratyahara, 'control of the senses,' <page 653>.

Pratyaya, a secondary creation, <page 37>, n. .

Pratyusha, a Vasu, <page 120>.

Prava, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, n. .

Pravaha, a wind, <page 240>.

Pravara, a river, <page 183>.

Pravilasena, a prince, <page 473>.

Pravira, s. of Prachinvat, <page 447>. s. of Puru, ib, n. . s. of Haryaswa, <page 454>.

Pravrisheyas, a people, <page 190>.

Prayas'chitta, 'expiation,' from Brahma, <page 42>, n. .

Prekshagara, a theatre, <page 553>, note .

Prinsep, J., publication of the Mahabharata, <page ix>. inscriptions and coins deciphered by, <page 475>, note . <page lxx>.

Prishadas'wa, a prince, <page 371>. s. of Anaranya, <page 371>.

Prishadhra, s. of Vaivas'wata, <page 348>. becomes a S'udra, <page 351>.

Prishata, s. of Somaka, <page 455>.

Prishtaja, s. of Kumara, <page 120>.

Pris'ni, s. of Anamitra, <page 435>.

Pritha, d. of S'ura, w. of Pandu, <page 437>.

Prithivi, 'earth,' the element, produced from the rudiment of smell, <page 16>. and n. .

Prithivi, 'earth' personified; dialogue with Varaha, <page 29>. takes the form of a cow in fear of Prithu, <page 103>. named from him, <page 104>. milked by all beings, ib. see Earth.

Prithu, s. of Vena, how born, <page 101>. conquers the earth, <page 103>. s. of Prastara, <page 165>. s. of Anenas, <page 361>. s. of Samara, <page 452>. s. of Chitraka, <page 435>.

Prithudana, s. of S'as'avindu, <page 420>.

Prithugas, a class of deities, <page 263>.

Prithujaya, s. of S'as'avindu, <page 420>.

Prithukarman, s. of S'as'avindu, <page 420>.

Prithukirtti, s. of S'as'avindu, <page 420>.

Prithulaksha, a prince, <page 445>.

Prithurukman, a prince, <page 420>.

Prithusena, a prince, <page 452>.

Prithus'ravas, s. of S'as'avindu, <page 420>.

Prithuyas'as, s. of S'as'avindu, <page 420>.

Priti, 'affection,' d. of Daksha, w. of Pulastya, <page 54>.

Priyavrata, s. of Swayambhuva Manu, <page 53>.

Properties of sensible objects, <page 17>, n. .

Proshakas, a people, <page 196>.

Proshtas, a people, <page 193>.

Ptolemy Euergetes, name of in ancient inscription, <page 470>, n. .

Pulaha, a Prajapati, <page 49>. marries Kshama, <page 54>. his posterity, <page 83>.

Pulastya, s. of Brahma, appears to Paras'ara, <page 5>. one of the Prajapatis, <page 49>. marries Priti, <page 54>. their posterity, <page 83>. and n. .

Pulimat, a prince, <page 473>.

Pulindaka, a prince, <page 47>t.

Pulindas, barbarians, <page 186>, n. . <page 193>.

Puloma, d. of Vaiswanara, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 148>.

Puloman, a Danava, s. of Kas'yapa, <page 147>. s. of Viprachitti, father of S'achi, <page 148>, n. .

Pulomarchish, last Andhra prince, <page 473>.

Puman, 'spirit,' <page 2>. 'incorporated spirit,' <page 2>, n. .

Punarvasu, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Punarvasu, a Yadava chief, <page 436>.

Pundarika, a serpent, <page 149>, n. . a prince, s. of Nabhas, <page 386>.

Pundarika, w. of Prana or Pandu, <page 82>, n. . d. of Vas'ishtha, <page 84>, n. .

Pundarikaksha, a name of Vishnu, <page 1>. 'having eyes like a lotus,' <page 2>, n. .

Pundra, s. of Bali, <page 444>.

Pundra, a fabulous city, <page 231>, n. .

Pundras, a people, <page 176>. <page 177>, n. . <page 190>, n. .

Punya, d. of Kratu, <page 83>, n. .

Punya, a river, <page 184>. and n. .

Punyajanas take Kus'asthali, <page 358>.

Pur, synonyme of Mahat, <page 14>, n. .

Puraka, 'inspiration,' <page 653>, n. .

Puramalini, a river, <page 183>.

Puranas, general character of, <page iii>. subjects of,<page v>. classes of, <page xii>. notices and analyses of them severally, <page xiv>. taught by Vyasa, <page 276>. by Suta, <page 283>. Sanhitas of, ib, eighteen named, <page 284>.

Purandara, Indra of the seventh Manwantara, <page 264>.

Puranjaya, s. of Vikukshi, <page 360>. assists the gods; named also Kakutstha, <page 361>. s. of S'rinjaya, <page 444>. s. of Vindhyas'akti, <page 477>.

Puravati, a river, <page 183>.

Purnas'a (Parnas'a), a river, <page 184>.

Purnotsanga, a prince, <page 472>.

Puru, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>. s. of Yayati, <page 413>. k. of the earth, <page 415>. his descendants, <page 447>.

Puruhotra, a prince, <page 423>.

[p. 690]

Purujanu, a prince, <page 453>.

Purukutsa, a king to whom the Vishnu Purana was narrated, <page 9>. s. of Mandhatri, <page 363>. assists the Nagas, at the prayer of Narmada, <page 370>.

Purumidha, s. of Hastin, <page 452>.

Pururavas, s. of Budha, <page 350>. his love for Urvas'i, <page 394>. makes fire threefold, <page 397>. traditions of, ib. n. . his sons, <page 398>.

Purusha, 'spirit,' a form of Vishnu, <page 9>. name of Mahat, <page 15>, n. .

Purushottama, 'supreme spirit,' a name of Vishnu, <page 8>, n. .

Purva-bhadrapada, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Purvabhirama, a river, <page 183>.

Purvachitti, a divine nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Purvaja, name of Vishnu, <page 2>.

Purvashadha, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Purva-phalguni, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Pushan, an Aditya, <page 122>.

Pushkara, s. of Bharata, <page 385>. k. of Pushkaravati, <page 386>, n. .

Pushkara, a Dwipa, <page 166>. description of, <page 200>.

Pushkaravarttakas, a class of clouds, <page 231>, n. .

Pushkarin, a prince, <page 451>.

Pushkarini, d. of Anaranya, <page 98>.

Pushpadanshtra, a serpent, <page 149>, n. .

Pushpajati, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Pushpamitra, first Sunga prince, <page 471>. k. of Mekala, <page 478>.

Pushpavat, a prince, <page 455>.

Pushpaveni, a river, <page 184>.

Pushti, 'thriving,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>. d. of Paurnamasa, <page 82>, n. .

Pushya, a prince, <page 387>.

Pushya, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Putana, d. of Bali, <page 147>, n. . a female Asura, killed by Krishna, <page 506>.

Putisrinjayas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Putra, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>. adopts a religious life, ib.

Puyavaha, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 208>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Q.

Qualities, three, Satya, Rajas, Tamas, q. v., <page 2>. see Gunas.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

R.

Raga, 'love,' <page 34>, n. .

Raghu, a prince, s. of Dirghabahu, <page 383>. s. of Kakutstha, <page 384>, n. . s. of Yadu, <page 416>.

Rahasya, a river, <page 182>.

Rahu, obtains a portion of the Amrita; is beheaded by Vishnu; becomes a constellation; causes eclipses, <page 78>. a Danava, s. of Viprachitti, and Sinhika, <page 140>, n. . <page 148>, n. . k. of meteors, <page 153>, n. . his car and horses, <page 240>.

Rahula, s. of S'akya, <page 463>, n. .

Raibhya, s. of Sumati, <page 448>, n. .

Rain, how formed, <page 230>. kinds of, <page 231>.

Raivata, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. . the fifth Manu, <page 262>. his birth, ib. n. . his sons, <page 263>. a Rudra, <page 121>. a prince, s. of Revata, visits Brahma, <page 355>. gives his daughter to Balarama, <page 357>.

Raivata, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Raja, s. of Viraja, <page 165>.

Raja, meaning of, <page 102>, n. .

Rajadhidevi, d. of S'ura, <page 437>. W. of Jayasena, ib.

Rajani, a river, <page 183>.

Rajarshis, 'royal sages,' <page 284>, n. .

Rajas, quality of foulness, passion, activity, <page 2>, n. .

Rajas, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>.

Rajyavarddhana, a prince, <page 353>.

Rajavat, s. of Dyutimat, <page 82>.

Raji, s. of Ayus, <page 406>. his descendants, <page 411>.

Rajni, w. of Vivaswat, <page 266>, n. .

Raka, d. of Angiras, <page 83>.

Raka, day when the moon is round, <page 225>.

Raksha (Rakhi), an amulet, <page 507>, n. .

Rakshas, s. of Khasa, parent of the Rakshasas, <page 150>, n. .

Rakshasas, descendants of Pulastya, <page 5>, n. . proceed from Brahma, <page 41>. children of Surasa, <page 149>, n. . of Khasa, <page 150>.

Rama, s. of Das'aratha, his exploits, <page 384>.

Ramachandra, a prince, <page 477>.

Ramagiri (Ramtek), a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Ramanas (Ramathas), a people, <page 194>. and n. .

Ramanaka, an island, <page 175>, n. .

Ramanuja, date of,<page x>.

Ramas, a people, <page 177>. and n. .

Ramayana, a heroic poem, <page lviii>. epitome of, <page 384>. translations of, <page 385>, n. .

Rambha, s. of Ayus, <page 406>. his descendants, <page 412>, n. .

Rambha, a nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Rammohun Roy, translations from the Vedas, <page ii>.

Ramya, s. of Agnidhra, <page 162>. k. of the country between mount Meru and mount Nila, <page 163>.

Ramyaka, a country, <page 168>.

Rananjaya, a prince, <page 463>.

Ranastambha, a country, <page 186>, n. .

Rantideva, s. of Sankriti, <page 450>.

Rantinara, s. of Riteyu, <page 447>.

Rasa dance of Krishna and the Gopis, <page 533>.

Rasaloma, w. of Mahinasa, <page 59>, n. .

Rasatala, a division of Patala, <page 204>, n. .

Rasayana, a branch of pharmacy, <page 407>, n. .

Rasollasa, an original property of man, <page 45>, n. .

Rashtrapala, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Rashtrapala, d. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Rathachitra, a river, <page 183>.

Rathakrit, a Yaksha, <page 233>.

Rathantara, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>, n. .

Rathantara, part of the Sama-veda, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Rathinara, a prince, <page 359>.

Ratnagarbha, commentator on the Vishnu Purana, <page lxxiv>.

[p. 691]

Ratri, 'night,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>.

Ratula, s. of Suddhodana, <page 463>.

Rauchya, the thirteenth Manu, <page 269>. his sons, ib. s. of Ruchi, ib. n. . ninth Manu, <page 268>, n. .

Raudras'wa, s. of Ahamyati, <page 447>. s. of Puru, ib n. .

Raurava, a hell; crimes there punished, <page 207>.

Ravana, s. of Visravas, <page 83>, n. . taken prisoner by Karttavirya, <page 417>. killed by Rama, <page 385>.

Raya, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>, n. .

Rayananiya, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>, n. .

Rechaka, 'expiration,' <page 653>, n. .

Religion, Hindu, periods of,<page i>.

Renuka, w. of Jamadagni, <page 400>. mother of Paras'urama, <page 401>.

Revanta, s. of Vivaswat by Chhaya, <page 266>. by ib. n. .

Revata, s. of Anartta, <page 355>.

Revati, d. of Raivata, w. of Balarama, <page 357>. <page 439>.

Revati, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Ribhu, s. of Rudra, <page 38>, n. . s. of Brahma; legend of, <page 254>.

Ribhus, a class of deities, <page 263>, n. . <page 264>, n. .

Rich: see Rig-veda.

Richa prince, <page 462>.

Richas, hymns of the Rig-veda, <page 276>.

Richas, children of Angiras, <page 123>, n. .

Richeyu, s. of Raudras'wa, <page 447>, n. .

Richika, s. of Bhrigu, marries Satyavati, <page 399>.

Rig (Rich) Veda, from Brahma, <page 42>, n. . taught by Vyasa, <page 275>. by Paila, <page 277>. Sanhitas of, ib.

Rijudas'a, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Riksha, a Vyasa, <page 273>. a prince, s. of Ajamidha, <page 455>. s. of Akrodhana, <page 457>.

Riksha, a chain of mountains, <page 174>. in Gondwana, ib. n. .

Rina, a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Ripu, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>.

Ripunjaya, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>. s. of Vis'wajit, <page 465>. Rishabha, a king, s. of Nabhi, <page 163>. adopts a religious life, ib. first Tirthakara or teacher of Jain doctrines, <page 164>, n. . a Rishi, s. of Angiras, <page 260>, n. . a prince, s. of Kus'agra, <page 455>.

Rishabha, a mountain, <page 169>. <page 180>, <page 11>.<page 3>.

Rishis, seven, same as the Prajapatis, <page 49>, n. . attendants on the sun, <page 233>. three classes of, <page 284>. of the Manwantaras; of the first, <page 49>. second, <page 260>. third, <page 261>. fourth and fifth, <page 262>. sixth, <page 263>. seventh, <page 264>. eighth, <page 267>. ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, <page 268>. thirteenth and fourteenth, <page 269>. their office, ib. mocked by the Yadavas, <page 606>.

Rishis, the constellation, revolution of, <page 485>.

Rishika, a river, <page 176>, n. .

Rishikas, a people, <page 189>, n. .

Rishikulya, a river, <page 176>. the Rasikulia, ib. n. .

Rishyamuka, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Rita, 'truth,' s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. . s. of Vijaya, <page 390>.

Ritadhaman, thirteenth Manu, <page 268>, n. .

Ritadhwaja, a Rudra, <page 59>, n. . a name of Pratarddana, <page 408>.

Riteyu, s. of Raudras'wa, <page 447>.

Ritu, twelfth Masts, <page 268>, n. .

Ritudhaman, Indra of the twelfth Manwantara, <page 268>.

Ritujit, a prince, <page 390>. '

Rituparna, a prince, <page 379>.

Rochana, w. of Vasudeva, <page 440>, n. .

Rodha, a hell, <page 207>. crimes there punished, <page 208>.

Rohi, a river, <page 184>.

Rohini, d. of Surabhi, parent of cattle, <page 150>, n. . w. of Mahadeva, a Rudra, <page 59>, w. of Vasudeva, <page 498>. w. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Rohini, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Rohita, ninth Manu, <page 268>, n. .

Rohita, also Rohitas'wa, <page 373>, n. .

Rohitas'wa, s. of Haris'chandra, <page 373>.

Romaharshana, a name of Suta, <page 283>. author of a Sanhita of the Puranas, ib. narrator of the Puranas,<page x>.

Romanas, a people, <page 192>.

Romapada, s. of Viderbha, <page 422>. s. of Chitraratha, <page 445>.

Rosen, translation of the Rig-veda,<page i>.

Ruchaka, a mountain, <page 169>.

Ruchi, a Prajapati, <page 49>, n. . married to Akuti; their children, <page 54>.

Ruchira, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Ruchiradhi, a prince, <page 450>.

Ruchiras'wa, a prince, <page 452>.

Rudhirandha, a hell, <page 207>. crimes punished in, <page 209>.

Rudiment, or element of an element, <page 17>. see Tanmatra.

Rudra, born from the forehead of Brahma; becomes androgynous; divided into eleven male, and as many female forms, <page 51>, n. . why so named, <page 58>.

Rudra, w. of Vasudeva, <page 439>, n. .

Rudrakali, a form of Uma, <page 66>.

Rudra-loka, site of, <page 213>, n. .

Rudrani, w. of a Rudra, <page 59>, n. .

Rudras, eleven, male and female, <page 51>, eight, <page 58>. their stations; wives and progeny, <page 59>. eleven, <page 59>, n. . eleven, sons of Kas'yapa and Surabhi; of Bhuta and Sarupa; of Brahma and Surabhi, <page 121>, n. . their names, ib. very numerous, <page 121>. children of Surabhi, <page 150>, n. .

Rudra-savarni, twelfth Manu, <page 268>. s. of Rudra, ib. n. . his sons, <page 269>.

Rukmakavacha, a Yadava prince, <page 420>.

Rukmeshu, a prince, <page 420>.

Rukmin, s. of Bhishmaka, <page 573>. founds Bhojakata, <page 574>. killed by Balarama, <page 580>.

Rukmini, d. of Bhishmaka, carried off by Krishna, <page 573>.

[p. 692]

mother of Pradyumna, <page 574>. burns with Krishna's body, <page 613>.

Rupa, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Rupavahikas, a people, <page 187>.

Ruruka, a prince, <page 373>.

Rushadru, a prince, <page 420>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

S.

Sabhanara, s. of Anu, <page 444>.

Sacae: see S'akas.

Sadacharas, 'fixed observances,' <page 300>.

Sadakanta, a river, <page 183>.

Sadanira, a river, <page 183>.

Sadas'wa, s. of Samara, <page 452>.

Sadhus, 'pious men,' <page 300>.

Sadhya, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>.

Sadhyas, a class of gods, sons of Sadhya, <page 120>. their number and names, n. . gods of the present period, <page 264>, n. ,

Sadwati, w. of Agni, <page 83>, n. . d. of Pulastya, <page 83>, n. .

Sagara, s. of Bahu, subdues the barbarous tribes, <page 374>. imposes marks upon them, <page 375>. his sons destroyed, <page 378>.

Sagara; bed of the ocean dug by the sons of Sagara, <page 379>.

Sahadeva, s. of S'rinjaya, <page 354>. s. of Harshavardhana, <page 412>. s. of Pandu, <page 437>. <page 459>. s. of Sudasa, <page 455>. s. of Jarasandha, <page 456>. <page 465>. s. of Divakara, <page 463>.

Sahadeva, d. of Devaka, <page 436>.

Sahajanya, a divine nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Sahanji, a prince, <page 416>.

Saharaksha, s. of Pavamana, <page 84>, n. .

Sahas, a month, <page 225>.

Sahasrabala, a prince, <page 386>, n. .

Sahasrajit, s. of Yadu, <page 416>. s. of Bhajamana, <page 424>.

Sahasras'wa, a prince, <page 386>, n. .

Sahasya, a month, <page 225>.

Sahishnu, s. of Pulaha, <page 83>. s. of Vanakapivat, <page 83>, n. .

Sahya, a range of mountains, <page 174>. north part of the western Ghats, ib. n. .

Saulkayani, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>.

Saindhavas, a people, <page 177>. and n. . a school of Brahmans, <page 283>.

Saindhavayana, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>.

S'aineyas, sons of Sini, a branch of the Yadavas, <page 435>.

S'ainyas, descendants of S'ini, <page 451>.

Sainhikeyas, sons of Sinhika, a class of Danavas, <page 148>, n. .

S'ais'ikatas, a people, <page 192>.

S'ais'iri, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

S'ais'ireya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>, n. .

S'ais'unaga dynasty, <page 466>.

S'aiva, a Purana, <page 284>,

S'aivalas, a people, <page 191>.

S'aivya, a river, <page 183>.

S'aivya, w. of S'atadhanu, <page 342>. w. of Jyamagha, <page 421>.

S'aka, a Dwipa, <page 116>. divisions, mountains, rivers, people of, <page 199>.

S'akalya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

S'akapurni, author of a Nirukta, <page 277>. same as Rathantara, ib. n. .

S'akas, a people, <page 188>. and n. . 188<page 190>. <page 193>. conquered by Sagara, <page 374>. kings of their race, <page 474>. <page 475>, n. .

S'akha, s. of Kumara, <page 120>.

S'akra, name of Indra, <page 78>, &c. an Aditya, <page 122>.

Sakridgrahas, a people, <page 194>.

S'akti, father of Paras'ara, killed by Kalmashapada changed to a Rakshasa, <page 4>, n. . one of the Vyasas, <page 273>.

S'akti, 'energy,' of three kinds, <page 655>.

S'aktis, female forms of Rudra, white and black, <page 51>, n. .

S'aktri, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 84>, n. . see S'akti.

S'akuni, s. of Hiranyaksha, <page 147>. s. of Das'aratha, <page 422>. 

S'akuni, d. of Bali, <page 147>, n. .

S'akya, s. of Sanjaya, <page 463>. s. of S'uddhodana, ib. n. . teacher of the Buddhists, ib.

S'ala, s. of Bahlika, <page 459>.

S'alagrama, place of pilgrimage, <page 163>. <page 243>.

S'alaka, a branch of surgery, <page 407>.

S'alavanaka, a people, <page 193>, n. .

S'aligotra, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>, n. .

S'alin, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

S'alis'uka, a prince, <page 470>.

S'aliya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

S'almali (or S'almala), a Dwipa, <page 166>. divisions, mountains, rivers, people of, <page 198>.

S'alwas, a people, <page 177>. and n. . <page 185>.

S'alwasenis, a people, <page 193>.

S'alya, a branch of surgery, <page 407>, n. .

S'alya, s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Samadhi, 'end of meditation,' <page 657>.

Saman: see Sama-veda.

Samangas, a people, <page 193>.

Samanodakas, relations by offerings of water, <page 316>, n. .

Samara, s. of Nipa, <page 452>.

Sama-veda, from Brahma, <page 42>. taught by Vyasa, <page 276>. Sanhitas of, <page 282>. Jyeshtha portions of, <page 325>, n. .

Samavegavasas, a people, <page 193>.

S'amba, s. of Krishna, <page 591>. taken prisoner by the Kurus, <page 601>. recovered by Balarama, <page 605>. cursed by the Rishis, <page 606>.

Sambara carries off Pradyumna, <page 575>. is killed by him, <page 576>.

Sambhala, birthplace of Kalki, <page 484>.

S'ambhu, a Rudra, <page 121>.

S'ambhu, w. of Dhruva, <page 98>.

Sambhuta, a prince, <page 371>.

[p. 693]

Sambhuti, a prince, <page 371>, n. .

Sambhuti, 'fitness,' d. of Daksha, w. of Marichi, <page 54>, their progeny, <page 82>.

'Samika, s. of S'ura, <page 437>.

S'amin, s. of S'ura, <page 436>.

Samiras, a people, <page 191>.

Sampadvasu, a solar ray, <page 236>, n. .

Sampara, s. of Samara, <page 452>.

Samparayana, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Sampati, s. of S'yeni, <page 149>, n. .

Samrat, the Manu of a period, <page 93>, n. .

Samrat, d. of Priyavrata, <page 161>.

Samudra, k. of rivers, <page 153>, n. .

Samudri, d. of Samudra, w. of Prachinavarhish, <page 85>, n. .

Samvara, a Daitya and magician, <page 137>. s. of Danu, <page 147>.

Samvarana, s. of Riksha, <page 455>.

Samvatsara, first year of a cycle, <page 224>. lord of seasons, <page 153>, n. .

Samvit, synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, n. .

Samya, an original property of man, <page 45>, n. .

Samyati, s. of Bahugava, <page 447>, s. of Prachinvat, ib. n. .

Samyoga, 'union of contiguity,' <page 652>.

Sanais'chara, s. of Rudra, <page 59>. s. of the sun, <page 266>. 'Saturn,' his chariot and horses, <page 240>,

Sanaka, s. of Rudra, <page 38>, n. .

Sananda, s. of Rudra, <page 38>, n. .

Sanatana, s. of Rudra, <page 38>, n. .

Sanatkumara, s. of Rudra, <page 38>, n. .

Sandans'a, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 209>.

Sandhya, 'twilight,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>. period preceding a Yuga, <page 23>, n. .

Sandhya, 'twilight,' <page 222>. 'dawn,' ib. prayer to be used at, ib. n. . duration of, <page 223>. 'morning and evening,' <page 308>.

Sandipani, tutor of Krishna and Balarama, <page 561>.

Sandhyansa, period succeeding a Yuga, <page 23>, n. .

Sandrocottus see Chandragupta, <page 468>.

Sangramajit, s. of Krishna, <page 591>.

Sanhatas'wa, a prince, <page 362>.

Sanhitas, of the Rig-veda, <page 277>. of the Yajur-veda, <page 279>. of the Sama-veda, <page 282>. of the Atharva-veda, ib. of the Puranas, <page 283>. <page xi>. of the Skanda, xlvi,

Sanhlada, s. of Hiranyakas'ipu, <page 124>.

S'ani, s. of Atri, <page 83>, n. . (S'anais'chara) s. of the sun, <page 266>. his chariot and horses, <page 240>.

Saniyas, a people, <page 193>.

Sanjaya, s. of Supars'wa, <page 390>. s. of Pratikshatra, <page 412>. s. of Rananjaya, <page 463>.

Sanjna, d. of Vis'wakarman, w. of the sun, <page 266>.

Sankalpa, a Prajapati, <page 49>, n. .

Sankalpa, d. of Daksha, w, of Dharma, <page 119>.

S'ankara, a prince, <page 384>, n. .

S'ankara, a name of S'iva, <page 7>, n. . a Danava, <page 147>.

S'ankara Acharya, date of,<page x>.

Sankarshana, name of Balarama, <page 440>. <page 498>.

Sankas'ya, a kingdom, <page 390>, n. .

S'ankha, s. of Kadru, <page 149>.

S'ankha, a minor Dwipa, <page 175>, n. .

S'ankhakuta, a mountain, <page 169>.

S'ankhanabha, a prince, <page 386>.

S'ankhapada or S'ankhapad, s. of Kardama, <page 83>, n. . regent of the south, <page 153>. <page 226>.

S'ankhyayana, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

S'anku, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

S'ankus'iras, a Danava, <page 147>.

Sankriti, s, of Jayasena, <page 412>. s. of Nara, <page 450>.

Santati, 'humility,' d. of Daksha, w. of Kratu, <page 54>.

Sannatimat, a prince, <page 453>.

S'ans'apayana, a teacher of the Puranas, <page 283>.

Sanskaras, initiatory ceremonies at birth, &c. <page 297>.

S'anti, 'placidity,' a property of sensible objects, <page 17>, n. .

S'anti, 'expiation,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>. w. of Atharvan, <page 55>, n. .

S'anti, Indra of the tenth Manwantara, <page 268>. a Brahman, pupil of Angiras, <page 269>, n. . a prince, s. of Nila, <page 453>.

S'antideva, d. of Devaka, <page 436>.

Santana, s. of Ugra, <page 59>.

S'antanu, s. of Pratipa, <page 457>.

Santarddana, s. of Dhrishtaketu, <page 437>.

Santateyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Santati, s. of Alarka, <page 409>.

Santosha, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Saryati, s. of Vaivaswata, <page 348>. his sons, <page 358>. s. of Nahusha, <page 413>.

Sapindana, ancestral S'raddhas, <page 318>.

Sapindas, relations by offerings of food, <page 316>, n. .

Sapeyin, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Saptadas'a, 'hymns,' from Brahma, <page 42>.

S'aradwat, husband of Ahalya, <page 454>.

Sarana, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Sarama, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, n. .

Saraswata, a sage, narrator of the Vishnu Purana to Paras'ara, <page 9>. a Vyasa, <page 272>. s. of Saraswati, preserver of the Vedas, <page 285>, n. .

Saraswata, a dialect of Sanscrit, <page lxvii>.

Saraswatas, a class of Brahmans, <page 285>, n. .

Saraswati, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>, n. . goddess of literature, <page lxvii>.

Saraswati, a river, <page 180>. the Sarsuti, ib. n. . the Caggar, <page 181>, n. . <page 182>. <page 184>. in the east, <page 185>, n. .

S'arayu, a river, <page 182>. the Sarju, ib. n. .

S'arimejaya, a prince, <page 435>.

Sarman, a name for a Brahman, <page 297>.

S'armishtha, d. of Vrishaparvan, <page 147>. w. of Yayati, n. . story of, <page 413>, n. .

Sarpa, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Sarpi, w. of the Rudra, S'iva, <page 59>, n. .

Saru, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

[p. 694]

Sarva, a Rudra, <page 58>. <page 121>.

Sarvabhauma, a prince, <page 457>.

Sarvaga, s. of Paurnamasa, <page 82>, s. of Bhima, <page 459>, n. .

Sarvakama, a prince, <page 380>.

Sarvasanga, a river, <page 184>.

Sarvatobhadra, a forest, <page 169>.

Sarvatraga, s. of Bhima, <page 460>.

S'aryatas, sons of S'aryati, <page 358>.

S'as'a, part of Jambu-dwipa, <page 166>, n. a.

S'as'ada, s. of Ikshwaku, <page 360>.

S'as'adharman, a prince, <page 470>.

S'as'avindu, a prince, <page 420>.

S'as'ikas, a people, <page 189>.

S'astra-devatas, deified weapons, children of Krisas'wa, <page 123>, n. .

Saswata, a prince, <page 390>.

S'atabala, a river, <page 182>.

S'atabhisha, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

S'atadhanu, a pious king, speaks to a heretic, <page 342>. his repeated births, <page 343>. final liberation, <page 344>. s. of Hridika, <page 436>.

S'atadhanwan, kills S'atrajit, <page 428>. killed by Krishna, <page 430>.

S'atadru, a river, <page 175>. the Setlej, <page 176>, n. .

S'atadyumna, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>. s. of Bhanumat, <page 390>.

S'atajit, s. of Raja, <page 165>. s. of Sahasrajit, <page 416>. s. of Bhajamana, <page 424>.

S'atakarni, name or title of several Andhra princes, <page 472>. <page 473>.

S'atakumbha, a river, <page 182>.

S'atananda, s. of Gautama, <page 454>.

S'atanika, s. of Nakula, <page 459>. s. of Janamejaya, <page 461>. s. of Vasudana, <page 462>.

S'ataratha, s. of Mulaka, <page 384>, n. .

S'atarupa, female portion of Brahma, w. of Swayambhuva Manu, <page 51>, n. , type of many forms; same as Maya, as Savitri, <page 53>, n. .

S'atasankhyas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

S'atavalaka, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>, n. .

S'atayus, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>.

Sati, 'truth,' d. of Daksha, w. of Bhava, <page 54>. <page 59>. burns herself, <page 65>, n. . w. of Angiras, <page 123>, n. .

S'atrughna, s. of Das'aratha, <page 384>. takes Mathura, <page 385>. s. of S'waphalka, <page 435>.

Satrajit, s. of Nighna, friend of Aditya, receives the Syamantaka gem, <page 425>. gives Krishna his daughter Satyabhama, <page 428>. killed by S'atadhanwan, ib. name of Pratarddana, <page 408>.

S'atwata, a prince of the Yadava race, <page 423>. his descendants, <page 424>.

S'atwatas, descendants of Satwata, <page 423>.

Satya, quality of goodness or purity, knowledge, quiescence, <page 2>, n. , a form of Vishnu, <page 264>.

Satyabhama, d. of Satrajit, married to Krishna, <page 428>. <page 578>. desires the Parijata tree, <page 586>. promotes the quarrel of the Yadavas, <page 610>, n. .

Satyadhrita, s. of Pushpavat, <page 455>.

Satyadhriti, s. of Mahavirya, <page 390>. s. of S'arana, <page 439>. s. of Dhritimat, <page 453>. s. of S'atananda, <page 454>.

Satyadhwaja, a prince, <page 390>.

Satyahita, teacher of the Rigveda, <page 277>, n. .

Satyajit, a prince, <page 465>.

Satyaka, s. of S'ini, <page 435>.

Satyakarman, a prince, <page 446>.

Satyaketu, a prince, <page 409>.

Satyaki, s. of Satyaka; also Yuyudhana, <page 435>.

Satya-loka, 'heaven of truth,' <page 48>, n. . site of, <page 213>.

Satyanetra, s. of Atri, <page 83>, n. .

Satyaratha, a prince, <page 390>.

Satyarathi, a prince, <page 390>.

Satyas, a class Of deities, <page 122>, n. . <page 261>. <page 262>.

Satyas'ravas, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>, n. .

Satyas'ri, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>, n. .

Satyavak, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>.

Satyavati, d. of Gadhi, w. of Richika, <page 399>. becomes the Kaus'iki river, <page 400>, n. . mother of Vyasa, <page 459>.

Satyavrata, a prince; also Tris'anku, <page 371>.

Satyayajna, 'observance of truth,' <page 294>, n. .

Saubhari, a sage, <page 363>. marries the daughters of Mandhatri, <page 366>. becomes an ascetic, <page 369>.

Saudasa, s. of Sudasa, a prince, <page 380>. story of, ib. n. . and <page 381>.

Saugata, s. of Das'aratha, <page 470>.

Sauhridas, a people, <page 192>.

S'aunaka, s. of Ghritsamada, <page 406>. s. of S'unaka, ib. n. .

Saumitri, teacher of the Sana-veda, <page 282>, n. .

Saumya, a division of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>.

Saumyas, a class of Pitris, <page 239>, n. .

S'aunaka, teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 283>.

Saurashtras, a people, <page 177>. and n. .

Sauvalyas (Saus'alyas), a people, <page 185>. and n. .

Sauviras, a people, <page 177>. and n. .

Savala (or Savana), s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>. k. of Pushkara, ib. his two sons, <page 200>.

Savalas'was, sons of Daksha, <page 117>.

Savana, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>.

Savarna, d. of Ocean, w. of Prachinavarhis, <page 107>.

Savarni, s. of the sun, <page 266>. eighth Manu, <page 267>. his sons, ib.

Savibhasa, a sun, <page 632>.

Savitri, an Aditya, <page 122>. a Vyasa, <page 272>.

Savitri, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>, n. .

Saya, s. of Kalpa, <page 58>, n. .

Schlegel, translation of the Ramayana by, <page 385>, n. .

Seas, seven, surrounding the seven Dwipas, <page 166>. of salt water, <page 197>. of treacle, <page 198>. of wine, ib. of butter, <page 199>. of curds, ib. of milk, <page 200>. of fresh water, <page 201>.

Selu, a river, <page 183>.

[p. 695]

Senajit, s. of Vis'wajit, <page 452>. s, of Vrihatkarman, <page 465>.

Senanin, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Serpents, proceed from Brahma, <page 41>. children of Kadru, <page 149>.

Sense, organs of; products of Egotism; presided over by divinities, <page 17>. their number, <page 18>.

S'esha, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. .

S'esha, s. of Kadru, <page 149>. k. of the Nagas, <page 153>. the serpent below Patala, description of, <page 205>. teacher of astronomy, <page 206>. supports the world upon his head, <page 206>, incarnate as Balarama, <page 458>. Setu, a prince, <page 443>.

Shandas, a people, <page 187>.

Siddhas, their residence, number, and nature, <page 227>. Siddhas, a people, <page 192>.

Siddhi, 'perfection,' d. of Daksha; w. of Dharma, <page 54>.

Siddhis, attributes of perfection, <page 45>,

S'ighra, a prince, <page 387>.

S'ighra, a river, <page 183>.

S'ighraga, a prince, <page 384>, n. .

Sikhandini, w. of Antardhana, <page 106>.

S'ikhivasas, a mountain, <page 169>.

Siksha, an Anga of the Vedas, <page 284>.

Sindhu, a river, <page 171>, n. . of Bharata-varsha, the Indus, <page 180>. the Kali Sindh, <page 183>, n. .

Sindhuka, <page 472>, n. . see Sipraka.

Sindhudwipa, a prince, <page 379>.

Sindhupulindas, a people, <page 186>.

Sindhusauviras, a people, <page 191>.

Sinhala, an island, <page 175>, n. .

Sinhika, d. of Kas'yapa, w. of Viprachitti, <page 122>, n. . <page 124>. <page 148>.

S'inibahu, a river, <page 185>, n. .

S'inivali, d. of Angiras, <page 82>. day of the moon visible, <page 225>.

S'ipra, a river, <page 185>, n. .

S'ipraka, first Andhra king, <page 472>.

Siradhwaja, a prince of Mithila, father of Sita, <page 390>

S'is'ira, a mountain, <page 169>.

S'is'ira, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

S'is'u, s. of Sarana, <page 439>.

S'is'umara or 'porpoise' (celestial), <page 230>. represents the stellar sphere, <page 240>.

S'is'unaga, a king of Magadha, <page 466>.

S'is'upala, s. of Damaghosha, <page 437>. his previous births and hostility to Krishna, ib. obtains felicity, <page 439>.

S'ita, a river, I<page 70>.

Sita, w. of Rama, <page 384>. d. of Siradhwaja, <page 390>.

S'itanta, a mountain, <page 169>.

S'iteyus, a prince, <page 420>.

S'itoda, a lake, <page 169>.

S'iva, the deity, same as Vishnu in the character of destroyer, <page 19>. born as a Kumara from Brahma in each Kalpa; of different colours, <page 39>, n. . spoils Daksha's sacrifice, <page 62>. bears Alakananda on his head, <page 229>. intercedes for Bana, <page 596>. a Rudra, <page 59>. a prince, s. of Uru, <page 98>.

S'iva, w. of Is'ana, <page 59>.

S'iva, a river, <page 183>.

S'ivas, a class of deities, <page 261>.

S'ivaskandha, a prince, <page 473>.

S'ivas'ri, a prince, <page 473>.

S'ivaswati, a prince, <page 473>.

S'iva-Upapurana, notice of; <page lvi>.

S'ivi, s. of Sanhrada, <page 147>. of Prahlada, ib. n. . Indra of the fourth Manwantara, <page 262>. a prince, s. of Us'inara, <page 444>.

Skanda, s. of Pas'upati, <page 59>.

Skanda Purana, parts of, <page xlv>. notice of, <page 284>.

Sleeping, rules of, <page 309>.

Slishti, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>.

Smaya, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Smriti, 'memory,' synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, n. .

Smriti, d. of Daksha, w, of Angiras, <page 54>. their progeny, <page 82>.

Smriti, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Society, origin and progress of, <page 45>.

Sodhas, a people, <page 187>.

Soka, s. of Mrityu, <page 56>.

Soma, 'the moon,' s. of Atri, <page 83>. king over the constellations, Brahmans, plants, &c. <page 153>. carries off Tara, <page 392>. has Budha by her, the founder of the lunar race, <page 393>. a Vasu, <page 120>. s. of the Rishi Prabhakara, <page 447>, n. .

Somaka, s. of Sahadeva, <page 455>.

Somadatta, k. of Vais'ali, <page 354>.

Somapas, a class of Pitris, <page 84>, n. , <page 321>, n. .

Somapi, s. of Sahadeva, <page 455>. <page 465>.

Somasarman, a prince, <page 470>.

Somas'ushmapana, a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Somatirtha, a place of pilgrimage, <page 561>, n. .

Somayajna, offering of asclepias, <page 275>, n. .

S'ona, a river, the Sone, <page 183>.

S'onitapura, city of Bana, <page 593>.

Spheres of the sun and planets, <page 212>.

Sraddha, 'faith,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>. of Angiras, <page 55>, n. .

S'raddha, 'worship of progenitors;' for prosperity, <page 297>, n. . <page 314>. different kinds of, ib. n. . for kindred newly deceased, <page 316>. monthly, for deceased relatives, <page 317>. annual, <page 318>. occasional, <page 320>. Brahmans to be entertained at, <page 325>. prayers used at, <page 328>. things sacred at, <page 330>. how vitiated, <page 333>.

S'ravana, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Sravana, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

S'ravasta, a prince, <page 361>.

S'ravasti, a city, <page 361>.

S'ri (or Lakshmi), d. of Bhrigu, <page 59>. <page 80>. in all things the counterpart of Vishnu, <page 60>. produced from the ocean, <page 76>. hymned by Indra, <page 78>.

[p. 696]

S'rideva, d. of Devaka, <page 436>.

S'ridhara Swami, commentator on the Bhagavata, <page xxix>. on the Vishnu Purana, <page lxxiv>.

S'rijavana, s, of Dyutimat, <page 82>, n. .

S'ringi, a range of mountains, <page 167>.

S'rinjaya, s. of Dhumras'wa, <page 354>, s. of S'ura, <page 436>. s. of Kalanara, <page 444>. s. of Haryas'wa, <page 454>.

S'rinjayas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

S'ri-saila (or S'ri-parvata), a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

S'ritala, a division of Patala, <page 204>, n. .

S'roni, a river, <page 185>, n. .

S'ruta, s. of Dharma, <page 55>. s. of Bhagiratha, <page 379>. s. of Upagu, <page 390>. s. of Krishna, <page 591>.

S'rutadeva, d. of S'ura, <page 437>. w. of Vriddhas'arman, ib.

S'rutakarman, s. of Sahadeva, <page 459>.

S'rutakirtti, d. of S'ura, <page 437>. w. of Dhrishtaketu, ib, s. of Arjuna, <page 459>.

S'rutanjaya, a prince, <page 465>.

S'rutasena, s. of Parikshit, <page 457>. <page 461>.

S'rutasoma, s. of Bhima, <page 459>.

S'rutas'ravas, a prince, <page 455>.

S'rutas'ravas, d. of S'ura, <page 437>. w. of Damaghosha, ibid.

S'rutavat, s prince, <page 465>.

S'rutayus, s, of Bhanumitra, <page 386>, n. . s. of Arishtanemi, <page 390>. s. of Pururavas, <page 398>.

S'ruti, d. of Atri, w. of Kardama, <page 83>, n. .

Stambha, a Rishi, <page 260>.

Stanabalas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Stanayoshikas, a people, <page 196>.

Sthaleyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Sthandileyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Stoma, 'hymns,' from Brahma, <page 42>, n. .

Student, duties of, <page 294>.

Stuti, 'prayers,' from Brahma, <page 42>, n. .

Subahu, s. of S'atrughna, <page 385>. k. of Mathura, <page 386>, n. .

Subhasa, a prince, <page 390>.

Subhumi, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Substance, imperceptible, how perceptible, <page 32>, n. .

Suchandra, k. of Vais'ali, <page 354>.

Sucharu, s. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Suchchaya, w. of Dhruva, <page 98>.

S'uchi, s. of Agni, <page 84>. s. of Antardhana, <page 106>, n. . s. of Satadyumna, <page 390>. s. of Andhaka, <page 435>. s. of Vipra, <page 465>. Indra of the fourteenth Manwantara, <page 269>.

S'uchi, d. of Kas'yapa, parent of water-fowl, <page 148>.

S'uchi, a month, <page 228>.

S'uchis'ravas, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. .

Sudamas, a people, <page 192>.

Sudars'ana, a prince, <page 384>, n. . <page 387>.

Sudasa, s. of Sarvakama, <page 380>. s. of Chyavana, <page 455>.

Suddhodana, s. of S'akya, <page 463>. father of S'akya, ib. n. .

Sudellas (Sudeshnas, Sudeshtas), a people, <page 188>. <page 190>.

Sudeshna, s. of Krishna, <page 578>.

Sudeva, s. of Chunchu, <page 373>. s. of Devaka, <page 436>.

Sudhama, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Sudhaman, a Lokapala, s. of Virajas and Gauri, <page 82>, n. . <page 153>. s. of Kardama, <page 226>. and n. .

Sudhamas, a class of deities, <page 261>. <page 268>.

Sudhamans, a class of deities, <page 269>.

Sudhanush, s. of Kuru, <page 455>.

Sudhanwan, s. of Saswata, <page 390>. s. of Satyadhrita, <page 455>.

Sudharman, hall of Indra, given to Ugrasena by Krishna, <page 561>. returns to heaven, <page 613>.

Sudharmas, a class of deities, <page 268>. <page 269>.

S'udhis, a class of deities, <page 262>.

Sudhriti, a prince, <page 353>.

Sudraci of Pliny, S'udras, <page 195>, n. .

S'udraka, first Andhra prince, <page 472>, n. .

S'udras, a people, <page 195>, n.  <page 481>.

S'udras, from the feet of Brahma, <page 44>. their duties, <page 292>.

Sudyumna, transformed from Ila; his sons; k. of Pratishthana, <page 350>. s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>. s. of Bhayada, <page 447>.

Sugandha, bondmaid of Vasudeva. <page 439>, n. .

Sugrivi, d. of Kas'yapa, parent of horses, &c. <page 148>.

Suhma, s. of Bali, <page 444>.

Suhmas, a people, <page 188>, n. .

Suhotra, s. of Kanchana, <page 398>. s. of Kshatravriddha, <page 406>. s. of Vrihatkshatra, <page 451>. s. of Bhumanyu, ib, n. . s. of Sudhanush, <page 455>, s. of Sahadeva, <page 460>.

Sujati, s. of Vitihotra, <page 418>.

Sujyeshtha, a prince, <page 471>.

S'ukala, a country, <page 177>. and n. .

Sukalins, a class of Pitris, <page 321>, n. .

Sukandakas, a people, <page 191>.

Sukanya, d. of Saryati, w. of Chyavana, <page 354>.

S'ukara, a hell, <page 207>. crimes there punished, <page 208>.

Sukarman, teacher of the Sama-veda, <page 282>.

Sukarmans, a class of deities, <page 269>.

Sukarmas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Suketu, s. of Nandivardhana, <page 390>. s. of Sunitha, <page 409>.

Sukha, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Sukhibala, a prince, <page 462>.

S'uki, d. of Kas'yapa, mother of parrots, &c. <page 148>.

S'ukra, s. of Bhava, <page 59>. s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>. s. of Havirdhana, <page 106>. (the planet), his car and horses, <page 239>.

S'ukra, a month, <page 225>.

Sukriti, s. of Pritha, <page 452>.

Sukshatra, a prince, <page 465>.

S'uktimat, a mountain chain, the east and north portion of the Vindhya range, <page 174>. <page 176>, n. . <page 421>, n. .

S'uktimati, a river, <page 184>, n. .

Sukumara, a prince, <page 409>.

Sukutyas, a people, <page 185>.

Sulapani, chief of the Bhutas, <page 153>, n. .

Sulomadhi, last Andhra prince, <page 473>, n. .

Sumalya, s, of Mahapadma, <page 468>.

Sumallis, a people, <page 192>.

Sumanas, s. of Uru, <page 98>. s. of Haryas'wa, <page 371>.

Sumanasas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Sumanga, a river, <page 184>, n. .

Sumantu, pupil of Vyasa, <page 276>. teacher of the Atharva-veda, <page 282>. s. and pupil of Jaimini, <page 2>S<page 2>. a prince, s. of Jahnu, <page 399>.

Sumati, s. of Bharata, <page 164>. fifth Tirthakara, ib. n. . s. of Janamejaya, <page 354>. s. of Sagara, <page 377>. s. of Supars'wa, <page 453>. s. of Dridhasena, <page 465>.

Sumati, teacher of the Puranas, <page 283>.

Sumati, d. of Kratu, <page 83>, n. .

Sumedhasas, a class of deities, <page 262>.

Sumitra, s. of Vrishni, <page 424>. last of the race of Ikshwaku, <page 464>.

Sun, presides over the eyes, <page 17>, n. . his car and horses, <page 217>. his diurnal course, <page 219>. northern and southern declination, <page 220>. harassed by the Mandehas, <page 222>. the cause of rain, <page 230>. his attendants in each month, <page 233>. mystical account of, <page 236>. his functions, ib. his rays, ib. n. . his wives and children, <page 266>. ground by Vis'wakarman, <page 267>. s, of Aditi, and origin of the solar dynasty, <page 348>. gives Yajnawalkya the white Yajush, <page 281>. gives the Syamantaka gem to Satrajit, <page 425>. becomes sevenfold at the end of the world, <page 632>.

S'unahs'ephas, s. of Viswamitra, <page 404>. legend of, ib. n. .

[p. 697]

Sunaka, s. of Ghritsamada, <page 406>, n. .

Sunakshatra, a prince, <page 463>.

Sunaman, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Sunasa, a river, <page 184>.

Sunaya, s. of Rita, <page 390>. s. of Pariplava, <page 462>.

Sunayas, a people, <page 193>.

Sunda, s. of Nisunda, <page 147>, n. .

Sundara, a prince, <page 473>.

Sundari, d. of Vaiswanara, <page 147>, n. .

Sungas, dynasty of, <page 470>.

Sunika, minister of Ripunjaya, <page 466>.

Sunita, a prince, <page 465>.

Sunitha, s. of Santati, <page 409>. s. of Sushena, <page 462>.

Sunitha, d. of Mrityu, w. of Anga, <page 99>.

Sunrita, w. of Uttanapada, <page 86>, n. .

Suns, seven, their names, <page 632>.

Sunyabandhu, s. of Trinavindu, <page 353>, n. .

Suparna, a name of Garuda, <page 149>.

Supars'wa, a mountain, north of Meru, <page 168>.

Supars'wa, s. of S'rutayus, <page 390>. s. of Dridhanemi, <page 453>.

Supratitha, a prince, <page 463>.

Suprayoga, a river, <page 183>.

Supreme condition (of Vishnu), <page 156>.

S'ura, s. of Karttavirya, <page 417>. s. of Viduratha, <page 436>. s. of Devamidhusha, ib.

Surabhi (cow), produced from the ocean, <page 76>.

Surabhi, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

S'uras, a people, <page 177>. and n. .

Surasa, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Surasa, a river, <page 176>.

S'urasena, s. of S'atrugna, <page 385>. k. of Mathura, <page 386>, n. . s. of Karttavirya, <page 417>.

S'urasenas, a people, <page 185>. Suraseni, ib. n. .

Suratha, s. of Jahnu, <page 457>. s. of Kundaka, <page 464>.

Sures'wara, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Surgery, branches of, <page 407>, n. u.

Surupas, a class of deities, <page 262>.

Surochish, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>, n. .

Susandhi, a prince, <page 387>.

Sus'anti, a prince, <page 453>.

Sus'anti, Indra of the third Manwantara, <page 261>.

Sus'arman, a prince, <page 471>.

Sushena, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>, s. of Vrishnimat, <page 462>. s, of Krishna, <page 578>.

Sushumna, a ray of the sun, <page 236>, n. .

Sus'ravas, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. .

Sus'ruta, a prince, <page 390>. a teacher of medical science, <page 407>, n. .

Sus'uma, a prince, <page 465>.

Suta, a bard; origin of, <page 102>. pupil of Vyasa, <page 276>. teacher of the Puranas, <page 283>. a generic term for chroniclers and bards, <page xi>.

Sutala, a division of Patala, <page 204>.

Sutanu, d. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Sutapas, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>. a prince, s. of Hema, <page 444>.

Sutapas, a class of deities, <page 267>.

Sutara, d. of S'waphalka, <page 435>.

Suvala, a prince, <page 465>.

Suvama, a river, <page 183>. the Ram-ganga, ib. n. .

Suvarchala, w. of Rudra, <page 59>.

Suvarna, a prince, <page 463>.

Suvarnaroman, a prince, <page 390>.

Suvastu, a river, <page 183>.

Suvela, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Suvibhu, a prince, <page 409>.

Suvira, s. of S'ivi, <page 444>. s. of Kshemya, <page 453>.

Suvrata, a prince, <page 465>.

Suyas'as, s. of As'okavarddhana, <page 470>.

Swabhavas, characteristics or properties of perceptible things, <page 34>, n. .

S'wabhojana, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 209>.

Swadha, 'oblation,' d. of Daksha, w. of the Pitris, <page 54>. w. of Angiras, <page 123>, n. . w. of a Rudra, <page 59>, n. .

Swaha, 'offering,' d. of Daksha, w. of Agni, <page 54>. w. of the Rudra Pas'upati, <page 59>.

Swahi, a prince, <page 420>.

Swakshas, a people, <page 188>.

Swamabhak, a sun, <page 632>.

S'waphalka, marries Gandini, <page 431>. s, of Pris'ni, <page 435>.

Swaraj, a solar ray, <page 236>, n. .

Swarat, the creator, <page 93>, n. .

[p. 698]

Swarashtras, a people, <page 189>.

Swarbhanu, a Danava, s. of Kas'yapa, <page 147>. s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Swarga, on Meru, <page 172>.

Swarga, s. of Bhima, <page 59>.

Swar-loka, site and extent of, <page 212>.

Swarnaprastha, an island, <page 175>, n. .

Swarochisha, s. of Swarochish, second Manu, <page 260>. and n. . his sons, <page 261>.

Swarupas, 'forms of things,' <page 34>, n. .

Swastyatreyas, a race of Brahmans, <page 447>, n. .

Swati, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Swati, s. of Uru, <page 98>.

Swavambhoja, a Yadava chief, <page 436>.

Swayambhu (Brahma), synonyme of Mahat, <page 15>, n. . a Vyasa, <page 272>.

Swayambhuva Manu, born of, and one with, Brahma, <page 51>, n. .

S'weta, s. of Kadru, <page 149>.

S'weta, a range of mountains, <page 167>.

S'weta-dwipa, 'white island,' <page 200>, n. .

Syadvadis, 'Jains,' <page 339>, n. .

S'yala, offends Gargya, <page 565>.

S'yama, s. of S'ura, <page 437>.

Syamantaka jewel, given by the Sun to Satrajit, <page 425>. its properties, ib. taken by Jambavat, <page 426>. recovered by Krishna, <page 427>. carried off by S'atadhanwan, <page 428>. transferred to Akrura, <page 429>. its virtues, <page 431>. remains in Akrura's keeping, <page 434>.

Syamayani, teacher of the Yajur-veda, <page 279>, n. .

S'yeni, d. of Kas'yapa, parent of hawks, <page 148>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

T.

Tadaikyam, 'unity,' <page 652>.

Taittiriya portion of the Yajur-veda, <page 280>.

Taksha, s. of Bharata, <page 385>. k. of Takshas'ila, <page 386>, n. .

Takshaka, s. of Kadru, <page 149>.

Tala, a hell, <page 207>. crimes punished in, <page 208>.

Talajangha, a prince of the Yadava race, <page 418>.

Talajanghas, a tribe, conquer Bahu, <page 373>. conquered by Sagara, <page 374>. sons of Talajangha, <page 418>. a branch of the Haihayas, <page 418>, n. .

Talaka, a prince, <page 473>.

Talatala, a division of Patala, <page 204>, n. .

Tamas, quality of darkness, ignorance, inertia, <page 2>, n. . kind of ignorance, <page 34>, n. . a hell, <page 207>.

Tamas, a prince, <page 420>.

Tamasa Manu, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. . <page 262>. his sons, ib.

Tamasa, a river, <page 184>. the Tonse, ib. n. .

Tamasi, a river, <page 184>.

Tamisra, 'gloom;' kind of ignorance, <page 34>, n. .

Tamra, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>.

Tamra, a river, <page 183>.

Tamraliptas (Tamaliptas), a people, <page 192>.

Tamrapakshi, s. of Krishna, <page 591>.

Tamraparni, a river, <page 176>. in Tinnivelly, ib. n. .

Tamravarna, a division of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>.

Tamrayani, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Tanabalas, a people, <page 193>.

Tanayas, a people, <page 193>.

Tandri, 'sloth,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>, n. .

Tankanas, a people, <page 194>, n. .

Tanmatra, rudiment or type of an element; devoid of qualities, <page 17>. same as the properties of an element, <page 17>, n. .

Tansu, a prince, <page 448>,

Tansurodha or Tansu, <page 448>, n. . <page 13>.

Tapa-loka, sphere of the seven Rishis, <page 48>, n. .

Tapaniyas, Brahmans of a branch of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Tapas, a month, <page 225>.

Tapaswin, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>.

Tapasya, a month, <page 225>.

Tapati, d. of the sun, <page 266>.

Tapi, a river, <page 176>. the Tapti, n. .

Tapo-loka, site of, <page 213>.

Taptakumbha, a hell, <page 207>. crimes punished in, <page 208>.

Taptaloha, a hell, <page 208>.

Tara, w. of Vrihaspati, carried off by Soma, <page 392>. mother of Budha, <page 393>.

Taraka, s. of Hiranyaksha, s. of Kas'yapa by Danu, <page 147>.

Taraka, d. of Sunda, <page 147>, n. .

Tarapida, a prince, <page 386>, n. .

Taru, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>, n. .

Tejas, 'light' or 'fire,' the element; produced from the rudiment of form or colour, and produces that of taste, <page 16>. and n. .

Tigma, a prince, <page 462>.

Tilabharas, a people, <page 191>.

Tilakanijas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Tilottama, a nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Time, a form of Vishnu, <page 9>. (see Kala); divisions of, <page 22>. <page 621>. <page 631>.

Timi, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, n. .

Tiragrahas, a people, <page 190>.

Tiryaksrotas, 'creation of animals,' <page 35>.

Titiksha, 'patience,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>, n. .

Titikshu, a prince, <page 444>.

Tittiri, a pupil of Yaska, teacher of the Taittiriya Yajush, <page 280>, n. .

Tochari, a people, <page 195>, n. .

Tomaras, a people, <page 196>.

Toya, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Trais'amba, a prince, <page 442>.

Transmigration, stages of, <page 210>.

Trasadasyu, name of Mandhatri, <page 362>, n. . s. of Purukutsa, <page 371>.

Trasarenu, three Anus, <page 22>, n. .

Trayyaruna, a prince, and author of hymns, <page 371>, n. . a Vyasu, <page 273>. s. of Urukshaya, <page 451>. 

Treta, second Yuga or age; its duration, <page 23>, n. .

[p. 699]

Tridhaman, a Vyasa, <page 272>.

Tridhanwan, a prince, <page 371>.

Tridiva, a river, <page 182>.

Trigarttas, a people, <page 193>.

Trikuta, a mountain, <page 169>. of Bharata-varsha, <page 180>, n. ,

Trimadhu-Brahmans, <page 325>.

Trina, s. of Us'inara, <page 444>.

Trinachiketa-Brahmans, <page 325>.

Trinavindu, a Vyasa, <page 273>. a prince, s. of Budha, <page 353>.

Tripti, an original property of man, <page 45>, n. .

Trisama, a river, <page 176>.

Tris'anku, a prince, elevated to heaven, <page 371>.

Trishna, s. of Mrityu, <page 56>.

Trishtubh, metre from Brahma, <page 42>.

Trisuparna-Brahmans, <page 325>.

Trivrishan, a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Trivrit, hymns from Brahma, <page 42>.

Truth, obligation of, <page 312>.

Truti, three Trasarenus, <page 22>, n. .

Tryambaka, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Tukharas (Tusharas), a people, <page 195>, n. .

Tulas'i plant, produced from the ocean, <page 78>, note .

Tulyata, an original property of man, <page 45>, n. .

Tumburu, a Gandharba, <page 233>.

Tungaprastha, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Tungavena, a river, <page 183>. the Tambhudra? ib. n. .

Tundikeras, a branch of the Haihaya tribe, <page 418>, n. .

Tuni, a prince, <page 435>.

Turvasu, s. of Yayati, <page 413>. k. of the south-east, <page 415>. his descendants, <page 442>.

Tusharas, a people, <page 195>, n. . a race of princes, <page 474>. <page 475>, n. .

Tushitas, a class of deities, <page 122>. <page 260>. sons of Kratu; of Vedas'iras, ib. n. .

Tushti, 'resignation,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>. d. of Paurnamasa, <page 82>, n. .

Tushtimat, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Twashtri, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Twashtri, s. of Manasyu, <page 165>.

Twashtri, an Aditya, <page 122>.

Twisha, d. of Paurnamasa, <page 82>, n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

U.

Uchchais's'ravas, produced front the ocean, <page 78>, n. chief of horses, <page 153>.

Udaksena, a prince, <page 453>.

Udaradhi, s. of Pushti, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>, n. .

Udavasu, s. of Janaka, <page 389>, n. ,

Udayana, s. of S'atanika, <page 462>.

Udayas'wa, s. of Dharbaka, <page 467>.

Udayin, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Uddalin, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Uddhava, goes to Badarikas'rama, <page 609>.

Udgatri, chaunter of prayers and hymns, <page 276>.

Udgitha, s. of Bhava, <page 165>.

Ugra, a Rudra, <page 58>, <page 121>, n. .

Ugraretas, a Rudra, <page 59>, n. .

Ugrasena, s. of Ahuka, <page 436>. made king by Krishna, <page 560>. burns himself, <page 613>. s. of Parikshit, <page 457>. <page 461>.

Ugrayudha, a, of Krita, <page 453>.

Uktha, part of the Sama-veda, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Uktha, a prince, <page 386>.

Ulmuka, s. of Balarama, <page 439>.

Uluki, parent of owls, <page 148>, n. .

Ulwana, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>, n. .

Uma, d. of Himavan, w. of Bhava, <page 59>. <page 85>, n. . w. of S'iva; her dialogue with him, <page 64>.

Umbrella produced from the ocean, taken by Varuna, <page 78>, note .

Unmada, 'insanity,' a form of Brahma, <page 40>, n. .

Unnati, 'elevation,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Upadanavi, d. of Vrishaparvan, <page 147>. d. of Vaiswanara, and w. of Hiranyaksha, ib. n. .

Upadeva, s. of Akrura, <page 433>. s. of Devaka, <page 436>.

Upadeva, d. of Devaka, <page 436>.

Upagu, a prince, <page 390>.

Upamadgu, a prince, <page 435>.

Upananda, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>,

Upanidhi, s. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Upa-puranas, eighteen, <page xiii>. names of, <page lv>.

Uparichara, a prince, <page 455>. his sons, ib.

Upasunda, s. of Nisunda, <page 147>, n. .

Upavrittas, a people, <page 189>.

Upendra, presides over the feet, <page 17>, n. .

Upendra, a name of Krishna, <page 528>, n. .

Upendra, a river, <page 183>.

Urddhabahu, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>.

Urja, a Rishi, <page 260>.

Urja, a month, <page 225>.

Urjja 'energy,' d. of Daksha, w. of Vas'ishtha, <page 54>.

Urjjaswati, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>, n. . d. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. .

Urjjavaha, a prince, <page 390>.

Uru, s. of Chakshusha, <page 98>.

Urukshaya, a prince, <page 451>.

Urukshepa, a prince, <page 463>.

Urvas'i, a nymph; her love for Pururavas, <page 394>. her children, <page 398>.

Usanas, s. of Vedas'iras; s. of Bhrigu, <page 82>, n. . a Vyasa, <page 272>. a prince, <page 420>.

Usha, name of night, <page 222>.

Usha, w. of Bhava, <page 59>. d. of Bana; in love with Aniruddha, <page 592>.

Ushadratha, a prince, <page 444>.

Ushna, a prince, <page 461>.

Us'inara, a prince, <page 444>.

Utkala, s. of Sudyumna, <page 350>.

Utkalas, a people, <page 186>.

Utpalavati, a river, <page 184>. <page 185>, n. .

Uttama, s. of Uttanapada, <page 86>. s. of Priyavrata. <page 162>, n. . a Manu, <page 261>. a Vyasa, <page 273>.

[p. 700]

Uttamas or Uttamarnas, a people, <page 186>, n. .

Uttanapada, s. of Swayambhuva Manu, <page 53>.

Uttanavarhish, a prince, <page 354>, n. .

Uttara-bhadrapada, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Uttara-kuru, a Varsha or country, <page 168>.

Uttara-phalguni, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Uttarashadha, a lunar mansion, <page 226>, n. .

Utsavnsanketas (Utsavamanketas), a people, <page 193>, n. .

Uttathya, s. of Angiras, <page 83>, n. . husband of , <page 449>.

Utulas, a people, <page 191>.

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

V.

Vach, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>, n. .

Vahni, deity of fire (see Agni), s. of Turvasu, <page 442>.

Vahnijwala, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 209>.

Vaibhraja, a forest, <page 169>.

Vaideha, name of Janaka, <page 389>. a country, ib. n. .

Vaidehas, a people, <page 192>.

Vaidheya, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Vaidurya, a mountain, <page 169>.

Vaikanka, a mountain, <page 169>.

Vaikuntha, heaven of Vishnu, <page 48>, n. . form of Vishnu, <page 265>.

Vaikunthas, a class of deities, <page 122>, n. . <page 262>.

Vaikrita, secondary creation, <page 37>, n. .

Vaimanika, a class of deities, <page 96>, n. .

Vainahotra, a prince, <page 409>.

Vairaja, part of the Sama-veda, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Vairaja, a name of the first Manu, <page 51>, n. .

Vairajas, a class of deities, <page 213>. of Pitris, <page 321>, n. .

Vairaja, portion of the Sama-veda, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Vais'akha, a month, <page 225>, n. .

Vais'akhi, w, of Vasudeva, <page 439>, n. .

Vaisali, w. of Vasudeva, <page 439>.

Vais'ali, a city, <page 353>. kings of, <page 354>.

Vais'ampayana, pupil of Vyasa, <page 275>. teacher of the Yajur-veda, <page 279>.

Vaishnava, a Purana, <page 284>.

Vais'ravana, king of kings, <page 153>.

Vais'wadeva, worship of the Vis'wadevas, <page 327>.

Vais'wanara, a Danava, <page 148>, n. .

Vais'wanara, portion of the planetary sphere, <page 226>, n. .

Vais'wanari, a division of the lunar mansions, <page 226>, n. .

Vais'yas, from the thighs of Brahma, <page 44>. duties of, <page 292>.

Vaitalaki, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>.

Vaitandya, s. of the Vasu Apa, <page 120>.

Vaitarani, a hell, <page 207>. sins punished in, <page 209>.

Vaitarani, a river, <page 184>. in Cuttack, ib. n. .

Vaivas'wata, seventh Manu, <page 264>. his sons, ib. s. of the sun, <page 266>. <page 348>. his sons, ib. a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Vajasaneyi, potion of the Yajur-veda, <page 281>, n. .

Vajins, students of the white Yajush, <page 281>.

Vajra, made chief of the Yadu race, <page 611>.

Vajra, d. of Vaiswanara, <page 147>, n. .

Vajramitra, a prince, <page 471>.

Vajranabha, a prince, <page 386>.

Vakras, a people, <page 188>, n. .

Vakratapas, a people, <page 188>.

Vaktrayodhi, s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Valaka, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 278>.

Valakas'wa, a prince, <page 399>.

Valakrama, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Vallabha, date of,<page x>.

Vallabhas, a people; Vallabhi, a city, <page 193>, n. .

Vallirashtra, a country, <page 188>, n. .

Valmiki, a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Vama, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Vamadeva, a Rudra, <page 51>, m. <page 3>. <page 59>, n. .

Vamana, a form of Vishnu; s. of Kas'yapa, <page 265>. legend of, ib. n. .

Vamana, a Purana, <page 284>. analysis of, <page xlvii>.

Vanakapivat, s. of Pulaha, <page 83>, n. .

Vanaprastha, 'hermit,' duties of, <page 295>.

Vanaraji, bondmaid of Vasudeva, <page 439>, n. .

Vanarasyas, a people, <page 188>, n. .

Vanavas, a people, <page 192>.

Vanavasakas, a people, <page 192>.

Vanayas, a people, <page 192>, n. .

Vanayus, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>, n. .

Vaneyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Vangas (Bangas), people of Bengal, <page 188>.

Vans Kennedy, notices of the Puranas, <page iv>. <page xiii>.

Vansadhara, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Vapra, a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Vapu, 'body,' d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 54>.

Vapushmat, s. of Priyavrata and Kamya, <page 162>. k. of the Dwipa of Salmali, ib. his sons, <page 198>.

Vara, a river, <page 183>.

Varada (Warda), a river, <page 185>, n. .

Varaha, a form of Vishnu, for the recovery of the earth, <page 28>. praised by the earth, <page 29>. raises it up, <page 30>. his form, <page 30>, n. . type of the ritual of the Vedas, <page 31>, n. . renews the world, <page 32>.

Varaha, present Kalpa, or day of Brahma, <page 28>.

Varaha, a Purana, <page 284>.

Varaha, a minor Dwipa, <page 175>, n. .

Varaha Purana, analysis of, <page xliv>.

Varana, a rivulet, <page 184>.

Varapasis (Varayasis), a people, <page 188>.

Varchas, s. of the Vasu Soma, <page 120>.

Varenya, a name of Vishnu, <page 20>, n. .

Varhadrathas, kings of Magadha, <page 465>.

Varhaspatyas, 'heretics,' <page 340>, n. .

Varhis, 'sacrificial grass,' <page 106>, n. .

Varhishads, a class of Pitris, <page 84>, n. . <page 239>, n. . <page 321>, n. .

Varhishmati, w. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. .

Varidhara, a mountain, <page 162>, n. .

Variyas, s. of Pulaha, <page 83>, n. .

Varman, name for a Kshatriya, <page 297>.

[p. 701]

Varnas'a, a river, <page 184>, n. .

Varshas, divisions of Jambu-dwipa, <page 167>.

Varshneyas, a tribe, <page 418>, n. .

Varuna, lord of the waters, <page 153>. gives horses to Richika, <page 399>. an Aditya, <page 122>.

Varuna, a division of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>.

Varuni, the goddess of wine, produced from the ocean, <page 76>. waits on Balarama, <page 571>.

Vasa, a river, <page 184>.

Vasahanu, a prince, <page 452>.

Vashatkara, 'deified oblation,' <page 123>, n. .

Vashkala, s. of Sanhrada, <page 147>. s. of Prahlada, ib. n. .

Vas'ishtha, grandfather of Paras'ara; allays his anger, <page 4>. a Prajapati, <page 49>. marries Urjja, <page 54>. his sons in the first Manwantara, <page 83>. in the third, <page 261>, n. . a Vyasa, <page 272>. rebukes Vikukshi, <page 360>. disputes with Viswamitra, ib. n. . changed to a starling, <page 373>, n. . curses Saudasa, <page 381>. and Nimi, <page 388>. is cursed by him, ib.

Vastu, a river, <page 183>.

Vasu, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>.

Vasu, s. of Kus'a, <page 399>.

Vasubhridyana, s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>, n. .

Vasudana, a prince, <page 462>.

Vasudeva, s. of Sara, <page 436>. marries the daughters of Ahuka, ib. imprisoned by Kansa, <page 498>. father of Krishna, <page 502>. burns himself, <page 613>.

Vasudeva, first Kanwa prince, <page 471>.

Vasudeva, name of Vishnu, <page 1>. s. of Vasudeva, ib. n. . abiding and shining in all things, <page 9>, n. . one with the three Vedas, <page 274>. one with Om, &c. ib. n. . meaning of, <page 643>.

Vasuki, s. of Kadru, <page 149>. k. of the Nagas, <page 153>, n. .

Vasumitra, a Sunga prince, <page 471>.

Vasus, sons of Vasu their names, sons, and grandsons, <page 120>.

Vasava, k. of the winds, <page 153>.

Vata tree, on Supars'wa, <page 168>.

Vatadhanas, a people, <page 189>.

Vatajamarathorajas, a people, <page 192>.

Vatayanas, a people, <page 192>.

Vatapi, s. of Hlada, <page 147>, n. . s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Vatsa, a name of Pratarddana, <page 408>. s. of Urukshepa, <page 463>.

Vatsabalaka, s. of S'ura, <page 436>.

Vatsabhumi, a prince, <page 409>, n. .

Vatsapri, a prince, <page 352>.

Vatsara, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>, n. .

Vatsara, fifth cyclic year, <page 224>.

Vatsas, a people, <page 186>, n. .

Vatsavyuha, a prince, <page 463>.

Vatsya, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>. of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Vavriddhas, a class of deities, <page 269>.

Vayu or 'wind,' produced from the rudiment of touch; produces that of form, <page 16>. and n. , wind, the deity of, k. of the Gandharbas, <page 153>, n. .

Vayu Purana, analysis of, <page xxii>.

Varuna, s. of Kris'as'wa, <page 123>, n. .

Veda, a river, <page 182>, n. .

Vedabahu, s. of Pulastya, <page 83>, n. .

Vedamitra, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

Vedana, 'torture.' d. of Anrita, <page 56>.

Vedas, typified by Om, <page 1>, n. . of particular sciences; also portions of, from Brahma, <page 42>, n. . divisions and teachers of, <page 272>. <page 275>. &c. translations from,<page i>. religion taught in, <page ii>.

Vedasini or Vetasini, a river, <page 182>, n. .

Vedas'iras, s. of Markandeya and Murdhanya, <page 82>. s. of Prana, <page 82>, n. . progenitor of the Bhargava Brahmans, <page 82>, n. . s. of Kris'as'wa, <page 123>, n. .

Vedasmriti, a river, <page 176>. the Beos? ib. n. .

Vedas'wa, a river, <page 183>.

Vedavati, a river, <page 182>,

Vedavainasika, a river, <page 182>, n. .

Veda-vyasas, arrangers of the Vedas, <page 272>.

Vedha, one hundred Trutis, <page 22>, n. .

Vedhaka, a hell, <page 208>.

Vegavat, a prince, <page 353>.

Vegavati (Vyki), a river, <page 185>, n. .

Vegetables, creation of; kinds of, <page 35>, n. .

Vela, d. of Meru, w. of Samudra, <page 85>, n. .

Vena, s. of Anga, <page 98>.

Vena, a Vyasa, <page 273>.

Vena, a river, <page 183>.

Venkata, a mountain, <page 180>, n. .

Venu, a Yadava prince, <page 416>.

Venuhaya, a prince, <page 416>, n. .

Venuhotra, a prince, <page 409>, n. .

Vetravati, a river, the Betwa, <page 181>.

Vibhishana, s. of Visravas, <page 83>, n. .

Vibhraja, s. of Sukriti, <page 452>.

Vibhu, Indra, of the fifth Manwantara, <page 262>.

Vibhu, a prince, <page 409>.

Vibudha, a prince, <page 390>.

Vichitravirya, s. of S'antanu, <page 459>.

Vidagdha, teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Vidarbha, s. of Jyamagha, <page 422>.

Vidarbhas, a people, <page 187>.

Videhas, a people, <page 188>.

Vidhatri, s. of Bhrigu, <page 59>. s. of Vishnu and Lakshmi, married to Niryati, <page 82>.

Vidis'a, a river, <page 183>. the Bess, ib. n. .

Vidmisara, a prince, <page 466>.

Vidura, s. of Vyasa, <page 460>.

Viduratha, s. of Bhajamana, <page 436>. s. of Suratha, <page 457>.

Vihangamas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Vijaya, a prince, s. of Chunchu, <page 373>. s. of Jaya, <page 390>. s. of Sanjaya, <page 412>. s. of Jayadratha, <page 445>, an Andhra prince, <page 473>.

[p. 702]

Vijaya, d. of Daksha, w. of Krisas'wa, <page 123>, n. .

Vijayas, a people, <page 188>.

Vijitas'wa, s. of Prithu, <page 106>, n. .

Vikala, six Pranas, <page 23>, n. .

Vikalyas (Vikalpas), a people, <page 192>.

Vikes'i, <page lv>. of Sarva, <page 59>.

Vikranta, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. .

Vikriti, a prince, <page 422>.

Vikukshi, s. of Ikshwaku, <page 359>. named S'as'ada, <page 360>.

Viloman, a Yadava chief, <page 435>.

Vimala, s of Sudyumna, <page 350>, n. .

Vimohana, a hell, <page 207>. crimes punished in, <page 208>.

Vina, a river, <page 182>.

Vinadi (Vainadi), a river, <page 183>.

Vinata, s. of Sudyumna, <page 350>.

Vinata, d. of Daksha, w. of Kas'yapa, <page 122>. w. of Tarksha, <page 149>, n. .

Vinaya, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Vinda, s. of Jayasena, <page 437>.

Vindhya, a range of mountains, <page 174>. the Sathpura range, ib. n. .

Vindhyachulukas, a people, <page 193>.

Vindhyamulikas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Vindhyas'akti, a king, <page 477>.

Vindumati, w. of Mandhatri, <page 363>.

Vindusara, s. of Chandragupta, <page 469>.

Vinita, s. of Pulastya, <page 83>, n. .

Vins'a, a prince, <page 352>.

Vipapa, a river, <page 181>.

Vipas'a, a river, <page 181>. the Beyah or Hyphasis, ib. n. .

Vipas'chit, Indra of the second Manwantara, <page 260>.

Vipra, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>. s. of S'rutanjaya, <page 465>.

Viprachitti, a Danava, <page 147>. his sons, <page 148>. k. of the Danavas, <page 153>, n. .

Vipritha, s. of Chitraka, <page 435>.

Vipula, a mountain, west of Meru, <page 168>.

Vira, a river, <page 183>.

Virabhadra, produced from S'iva, <page 65>. spoils Daksha's sacrifice, <page 67>.

Viraj (or Vidaj), progeny of Swayambhuva, <page 52>, n. . all male animals; all bodily substance, <page 53>, n. .

Viraja, s. of Twashtri, <page 165>.

Virajas, s. of Paurnamasa, <page 82>. s. of Vas'ishtha, <page 83>, n. .

Virana, a sage, father of Virani, <page 99>, n. . of Asikni, <page 117>. teacher of the white Yajush, <page 281>, n. .

Virani, d. of Virana, mother of Chakshusha, <page 99>, n. s.

Virankara, a river, <page 183>.

Virat, s. of Nara, <page 165>.

Virat, the material universe, <page 93>, n. .

Viravati, a river, <page 183>.

Virochana, s. of Prahlada, <page 147>.

Viruddhas, a class of deities, <page 268>.

Virupa, a prince, <page 359>.

Virupaksha, a Rudra, <page 121>, n. .

Visakha, s. of Kumara, <page 120>.

Vis'akha, a lunar mansion, <page 224>. <page 226>, n. .

Vis'akhayupa, a prince, <page 466>.

Vis'ala, s. of Trinavindu, <page 353>.

Vis'ala, a city, <page 353>, n. .

Vis'asana, a hell, <page 207>. crimes punished in, <page 208>.

Visoka, an original property of man, <page 45>, n. .

Vis'ravas, s. of Pulastya, <page 83>, n. .

Vis'rutavat, a prince, <page 387>.

Vishnu; same with Brahma, Is'wara, spirit; cause of creation, preservation, and destruction; parent of nature, and material of the universe, <page 2>. <page 3>. <page 4>. <page 6>. origin, end, and substance of the world, <page 6>, n. . nature of, <page 8>. four forms of, <page 9>. <page 154>. same with Brahma, Vishnu, S'iva, as creator, preserver, and destroyer, <page 19>. hymned by Earth, <page 29>. combined in all forms with S'ri, <page 60>. praised by the gods, <page 72>. directs them to churn the ocean, <page 74>. deceives the Asuras, <page 75>. praised by Dhruva, <page 93>. by the Prachetasas, <page 108>. worshipped by Prahlada, <page 127>. one of the Adityas, <page 122>. their chief, <page 153>. ornaments and arms of, <page 158>. forms of, worshipped in different Varshas, <page 173>. remembrance of, best expiation, <page 210>, energy of, encompasses the universe, <page 215>. supreme Brahma, <page 216>. his path in the sky, <page 228>. triple energy in the sun, <page 236>. forms in the four ages, <page 270>. worshippers of, how known, <page 287>. prayers of the gods to, <page 335>. deceives the Daityas, <page 337>. praised by the gods, <page 494>. incarnate as Krishna and Balarama, <page 497>. praised by Akrura, <page 547>. sleeps on the ocean, <page 634>. asylum of spirit, <page 656>. all that is, <page 661>. praises of, <page 664>.

Vishnu-loka, site of, <page 213>, n. .

Vishnu Purana, notice of, <page 284>. <page xvi>. analysis of, <page lix>. merit of hearing. <page 662>. how communicated, <page 663>.

Vis'wa, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>.

Vis'wabhavana, name of Vishnu, <page 2>. creator of the universe, ib. n. .

Vis'wachi, a divine nymph, <page 150>, n. .

Vis'wadevas, a class of gods, sons of Vis'wa, <page 120>. their number, ib. n. . worshipped at S'raddhas, <page 321>. <page 326>.

Vis'wagas'wa, a prince, <page 361>.

Vis'wagjyotish, eldest of the hundred sons of S'atajit, <page 165>.

Vis'wajit, s. of Jayadratha, <page 452>. s. of Satyajit, <page 465>.

Vis'wakarma, artist of the gods, <page 76>. s. of the Vasu Prabhasa, <page 121>.

Vis'wakarman, a solar ray, <page 236>, n. . 

Vis'wakarya, a solar ray, <page 236>, n. .

Viswaksena, fourteenth Manu, <page 268>, n. .

Viswaksena, a prince, s. of Brahmadatta, <page 453>.

Viswamitra, a Rishi, <page 264>. raises Tris'anku to heaven, <page 371>. quarrels with Vas'ishtha, <page 373>, n. .

[p. 703]

son of Gadhi, <page 400>. his descendants, <page 404>.

Vis'wamitra, a river, <page 183>.

Vis'warupa, a name of Vishnu, <page 20>, n. . a Rudra, <page 121>.

Vis'wasaha, s. of Ilavila, <page 383>. s. of Abhyutthitas'wa, <page 386>.

Vis'wasphatika, k. of Magadha, <page 479>.

Vis'wasphurtti (Vis'wasphurji), a prince, <page 479>, n. .

Vis'wavasa, s. of Pururavas, <page 398>.

Vis'wes'a, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>, n. .

Vitahavya, a prince, <page 390>.

Vitala, a division of Patala, <page 204>.

Vitasta, a river, <page 181>. the Jhelum or Hydaspes, ib. n. .

Vitatha, a name of Bharadwaja, <page 449>.

Vithi, division of the planetary sphere, <page 226>, n. .

Vitihotra, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. . s. of Talajangha, <page 418>.

Vitihotras, a branch of the Haihaya tribe, <page 418>, n. .

Vivas'wat, a Prajapati, <page 50>, n. . an Aditya, <page 122>. s. of Kas'yapa, <page 266>, n. . the sun, and father of Vaivaswata Manu, <page 348>.

Vivinsati, a prince, <page 352>.

Viyati, s. of Nahusha, <page 413>.

Vraja, s. of Havirdhana, <page 106>.

Vrateyu, a prince, <page 447>.

Vrihabala, killed by Abhimanyu, <page 387>.

Vrihadas'wa, s. of S'ravasta, <page 361>. s. of Sahadeva, <page 463>.

Vrihadbhanu, a prince, <page 445>.

Vrihadishu, s. of Ajamidha, <page 452>. s. of Haryas'wa, <page 454>.

Vrihadraja, a prince, <page 463>.

Vrihadratha, s. of Bhadraratha, <page 445>. s. of Uparichara, <page 455>. s. of Tigma, <page 462>. s. of S'as'adharman, <page 470>.

Vrihadvasu, a prince, <page 452>.

Vrihaduktha, a prince, <page 390>.

Vrihadvati, a river, <page 184>.

Vrihannaradiya Purana, analysis of, xxxiii,

Vrihaspati, s, of Angiras, <page 83>, n. . the planet Jupiter, his car and horses, <page 240>. a Vyasa, <page 272>. teacher of political science, <page 284>. his wife Tara carried off by Soma, <page 393>.

Vrihatkarman, s. of Bhadraratha, <page 445>. s. of Vrihadvasu, <page 452>. s. of Sukshatra, <page 465>.

Vrihatkshana, s. of Vrihadbala, <page 463>.

Vrihatkshatra, s. of Bhavanmanyu, <page 450>.

Vrihat-sama, from Brahma, <page 42>.

Vrijinavat, s. of Kroshtri, <page 420>.

Vrika, s. of Prithu, <page 106>, n. . s. of Vijaya, <page 373>. s. of Krishna, <page 591>.

Vrikadeva, d. of Devaka, <page 436>.

Vrikala, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>.

Vrikas, a people, <page 193>, n. .

Vrikatejas, s. of Dhruva, <page 98>.

Vrisha, Indra of the eleventh Manwantara, <page 268>.

Vrisha, s. of Vitihotra, <page 418>.

Vrishabha, a river, <page 184>.

Vrishadarbha, s. of S'ivi, <page 444>.

Vrishakapi, a Rudra, <page 121>.

Vrishana, s. of Karttavirya, <page 417>.

Vrishaparvan, a Danava, <page 547>.

Vrishasena, s. of Karna, <page 446>.

Vrishni, a prince of the Yadu race, s. of Madhu, <page 418>. s. of Kunti, <page 422>. s. of S'atwata, <page 424>. s. of Bhajamana, ib.

Vrishnimat, a prince, <page 462>.

Vrishnis, a tribe, <page 458>.

Vrishta, s. of Kukkura, <page 435>.

Vritraghni, a river, <page 185>, n. .

Vyadhi, s. of Mrityu, <page 56>.

Vyahritis, mystical words, <page 274>, n. .

Vyakarana, 'grammar,' an Anga of the Vedas, <page 284>.

Vyakta, 'visible substance,' a form of Vishnu, <page 9>.

Vyans'a, s. of Viprachitti, <page 148>.

Vyasas, arrangers of the Vedas in every Dwapara age; twenty-eight; their names, <page 272>.

Vyavasaya, s. of Dharma, <page 55>,

Vyaya, a range of Pradhana, <page 13>, n. .

Vyoman, a prince, <page 422>.

Vyushta, name of day, <page 222>.

Vyushta, s. of Kalpa, <page 98>, n. .

     
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

W.

War, between the gods and demons, <page 335>. <page 360>. of the gods and Daityas, on account of Tara, <page 393>.

Water, the element, <page 16>. see Apa.

Wind or air, the element, <page 16>. see Vayu.

Wine from the Kadamba tree, <page 571>.

Wife, how to be chosen, <page 298>.

World, dimensions of, <page 202>. <page 203>, n. . destruction of, <page 632>.

Wrestling, modes of, <page 557>, n. 

    
The Vishnu Purana, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, [1840], at sacred-texts.com

Y.

Yadavas, a tribe, descendants of Yadu, <page 418>. numerous, <page 441>, go to Prabhasa, <page 609>. destroyed, <page 610>.

Yadu, s. of Yayati, <page 413>. k. of the south, <page 415>. his descendants, <page 416>.

Yajna, s. of Ruchi; marries his sister Dakshina, <page 54>, n. . 'sacrifice personified;' decapitated, <page 67>. becomes the constellation Mrigasiras, <page 68>, n. .

Yajnabahu, s. of Priyavrata, <page 162>, n. .

Yajnakrit, a prince, <page 412>.

Yajnas, principal kinds of, <page 294>, n. .

Yajnas'ri, a prince, <page 473>.

Yajnavama, s. of Parvasa, <page 82>, n. .

Yajur-veda, from Brahma, <page 12>. original Veda, <page 276>. divided into four, ib. how composed, ib. Sanhitas and teachers of, <page 279>. black or Taittiriya portion of, <page 281>, white or Vajasaneyi, <page 281>, note .

Yajush: see Yajur-veda.

[p. 704]

Yajnawalka, teacher of the Rig-veda, <page 277>.

Yajnawalkya, pupil of Vais'ampayana, <page 279>. propitiates the sun, <page 280>. receives the white Yajush, <page 281>.

Yakrillomas, a people, <page 188>.

Yaksha, s. of Khasa, parent of the Yakshas, <page 150>, n. .

Yakshas, proceed from Brahma, <page 41>. children of Khasa, <page 150>.

Yama, a minor Dwipa, <page 175>, n. .

Yama, monarch of the Pitris, <page 153>. judge of the dead, <page 207>, n. . s. of the sun, <page 266>. how to be avoided, <page 286>.

Yama, a watch of the day or night, <page 22>, n. .

Yama-gita, 'song of Yama,' <page 289>, n. .

Yamas, duties so called, <page 288>, n. . acts of restraint, <page 653>.

Yamas, deities, twelve, sons of Yajna and Dakshina, <page 54>, n. .

Yami, d. of Daksha, w. of Dharma, <page 119>. d. of the sun, <page 266>. the Yamuna river, ib.

Yamuna, a river, <page 181>. d. of the sun, <page 266>. compelled by Balarama to come to him, <page 572>.

Yamunas, a people, <page 190>.

Yasas, s. of Dharma, <page 55>.

Yaska, author of a Nirukta, <page 277>, n. .

Yas'oda, bears Yoganidra, <page 503>. who is changed for Krishna, ib.

Yas'odhara, w. of Sahishnu, <page 83>, n. .

Yati, s. of Nahusha, <page 413>.

Yavaksha, a river, <page 184>.

Yavanas, a people, w. of Bharata-varsha, <page 175>. a people, <page 194>. Ionians or Greeks, ib. n. . conquered by Sagara, <page 394>. descendants of Turvasu, <page 442>, n. . kings of, <page 474>. <page 475>, n. . <page 477>, n. .

Yavinara, s, of Dwimidha, <page 453>.

Yaudheya, s. of Yudhishthira, <page 459>, n. .

Yayati, s. of Nahusha, <page 384>, n. . <page 413>.

Year, of mortals; of the gods, <page 23>. of the Rishis; of Dhruva, <page 23>, n. . of Brahma, <page 25>. of Manu, <page 26>, n. . of five kinds, <page 224>.

Yoga, s. of Dharma, <page 55>, n. .

Yoga, 'mystical union,' how effected, <page 157>. mode of practising, and explanation of, <page 651>.

Yoganidra, 'personified delusion,' <page 498>. her exploits as Durga, <page 499>, born of Yas'oda, <page 500>, mocks Kansa, <page 503>.

Yogasiddha, sister of Vrihaspati, w. of the Vasu Prabhasa, <page 120>.

Yogi, how he attains final liberation, <page 155>. two kinds, novice and adept, <page 652>.

Yuddhamushti, s. of Ugrasena, <page 436>.

Yudha.jit, s. of Vrishni, <page 424>.

Yudhishthira, s. of Pandu, <page 437>. <page 459>. his children, ibid.

Yuga, cycle of five years, <page 224>. and n. . an age: see Yugas.

Yugandhara, a prince, <page 435>.

Yugandharas, a people, <page 187>, n. .

Yugas, four, <page 23>. (see Krita, Treta, Dwapara, Kali.) system of, <page 23>, n. . a great Yuga, ib.

Yuvanas'wa, a prince, s. of Ardra, <page 361>. s. of Prasenajit, <page 362>. s. of Ambarisha, <page 369>.

Yuyudhana, s. of Satyaka, <page 435>.

 

    


===== BOOK: vre.txt =====


    
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE VARIETIES OF RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE

  

A Study in Human Nature

  

Being the Gifford Lectures on Natural Religion Delivered at Edinburgh in 1901-1902.

  

BY WILLIAM JAMES

  

[1902]

Proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, April 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

To
 E.P.G.
 IN FILIAL GRATITUDE AND LOVE

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

         

       PAGE

     
      LECTURE I

RELIGION AND NEUROLOGY

       <page 3>

     
      Introduction: the course is not anthropological, but deals with personal   documents--Questions of fact and questions of value--In point of fact, the   religious are often neurotic--Criticism of medical materialism, which condemns   religion on that account--Theory that religion has a sexual origin refuted--All   states of mind are neurally conditioned--Their significance must be tested not   by their origin but by the value of their fruits--Three criteria of value;   origin useless as a criterion--Advantages of the psychopathic temperament when   a superior intellect goes with it--especially for the religious life.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURE II

CIRCUMSCRIPTION OF THE TOPIC

       <page 27>

     
      Futility of simple definitions of religion--No one specific "religious   sentiment"--Institutional and personal religion--We confine ourselves to   the personal branch--Definition of religion for the purpose of these   lectures--Meaning of the term "divine"--The divine is what prompts solemn reactions--Impossible to make   our definitions sharp--We must study the more extreme cases--Two ways of   accepting the universe--Religion is more enthusiastic than philosophy--Its   characteristic is enthusiasm in solemn emotion--Its ability to overcome   unhappiness--Need of such a faculty from the biological point of view.

        

     
      [p. vii]

        

     
      LECTURE III

THE REALITY OF THE UNSEEN

       <page 53>

     
      Percepts versus abstract   concepts--Influence of the latter on belief--Kant's theological Ideas--We have a   sense of reality other than that given by the special senses--Examples of   "sense of presence"--The feeling of unreality--Sense of a divine   presence: examples--Mystical experiences: examples--Other cases of sense of   God's presence--Convincingness of unreasoned experience--Inferiority of   rationalism in establishing belief--Either enthusiasm or solemnity may   preponderate in the religious attitude of individuals.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURES IV AND V

THE RELIGION OF HEALTHY--MINDEDNESS

       <page 77>

     
      Happiness is man's chief concern--"Once-born" and   "twice-born" characters--Walt Whitman--Mixed nature of Greek   feeling--Systematic healthy-mindedness--Its reasonableness--Liberal Christianity   shows it--Optimism as encouraged by Popular Science--The "Mind-cure"   movement--Its creed--Cases--Its doctrine of evil--Its analogy to Lutheran   theology--Salvation by relaxation--Its methods:   suggestion--meditation--"recollection"--verification--Diversity of   possible schemes of adaptation to the universe--APPENDIX: Two mind-cure   cases.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURES VI AND VII

THE SICK SOUL

       <page 125>

     
      Healthy-mindedness and repentance--Essential pluralism of the   healthy-minded philosophy--Morbid-mindedness: its two degrees--The   pain-threshold varies in individuals--Insecurity of natural goods--Failure, or   vain [p. ix] success of every life--Pessimism of all pure   naturalism--Hopelessness of Greek and Roman view--Pathological   unhappiness--"Anhedonia"--Querulous melancholy--Vital zest is a pure   gift--Loss of it makes physical world look   different--Tolstoy--Bunyan--Alline--Morbid fear--Such cases need a supernatural religion   for relief--Antagonism of healthy-mindedness and morbidness--The problem of   evil cannot be escaped.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURE VIII

THE DIVIDED SELF, AND THE PROCESS OF ITS UNIFICATION

       <page 163>

     
      Heterogeneous personality--Character gradually attains unity--Examples of   divided self--The unity attained need not be religious--"Counter   conversion" cases--Other cases--Gradual and sudden unification--Tolstoy's   recovery--Bunyan's.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURE IX

CONVERSION

       <page 186>

     
      Case of Stephen Bradley--The psychology of character-changes--Emotional   excitements make new centres of personal energy--Schematic ways of   representing this--Starbuck likens conversion to normal moral ripening--Leuba's   ideas--Seemingly unconvertible persons--Two types of conversion--Subconscious   incubation of motives--Self-surrender--Its importance in religious   history--Cases.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURE X

CONVERSION--concluded

       <page 213>

     
      Cases of sudden conversion--Is suddenness essential?--No, it depends on   psychological idiosyncrasy--Proved [p. x] existence of transmarginal, or   subliminal, consciousness--"Automatisms"--Instantaneous conversions   seem due to the possession of an active subconscious self by the subject--The   value of conversion depends not on the process, but on the fruits--These are   not superior in sudden conversion--Professor Coe's views--Sanctification as a   result--Our psychological account does not exclude direct presence of the   Deity--Sense of higher control--Relations of the emotional   "faith-state" to intellectual beliefs--Leuba quoted--Characteristics   of the faith-state: sense of truth; the world appears new--Sensory and motor automatisms--Permanency   of conversions.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURES XI, XII, AND XIII

SAINTLINESS

       <page 254>

     
      Sainte-Beuve on the State of Grace--Types of character as due to the   balance of impulses and inhibitions--Sovereign   excitements--Irascibility--Effects of higher excitement in general--The saintly life   is ruled by spiritual excitement--This may annul sensual impulses   permanently--Probable subconscious influences involved--Mechanical scheme for   representing permanent alteration in character--Characteristics of   saintliness--Sense of reality of a higher power--Peace of mind,   charity--Equanimity, fortitude, etc.--Connection of this with relaxation--Purity   of life--Asceticism--Obedience--Poverty--The sentiments of democracy and of   humanity--General effects of higher excitements.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURES XIV AND XV

THE VALUE OF SAINTLINESS

       <page 320>

     
      It must be tested by the human value of its fruits--[p. xi] The reality of   the God must, however, also be judged--"Unfit" religions get   eliminated by "experience"--Empiricism is not skepticism--Individual   and tribal religion--Loneliness of religious originators--Corruption follows   success--Extravagances--Excessive devoutness, as fanaticism--As theopathic   absorption--Excessive purity--Excessive charity--The perfect man is adapted only   to the perfect environment--Saints are leavens--Excesses of   asceticism----Asceticism symbolically stands for the heroic life--Militarism and   voluntary poverty as possible equivalents--Pros   and cons of the saintly   character--Saints versus   "strong" men--Their social function must be considered--Abstractly   the saint is the highest type, but in the present environment it may fail, so   we make ourselves saints at our peril--The question of theological truth.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURES XVI AND XVII

MYSTICISM

       <page 370>

     
      Mysticism defined--Four marks of mystic states--They form a distinct region   of consciousness--Examples of their lower grades--Mysticism and   alcohol--"The anaesthetic revelation"--Religious mysticism--Aspects of   Nature--Consciousness of God--"Cosmic consciousness"--Yoga--Buddhistic   mysticism--Sufism--Christian mystics--Their sense of revelation--Tonic effects of   mystic states--They describe by negatives--Sense of union with the   Absolute--Mysticism and music--Three conclusions--(1) Mystical states carry   authority for him who has them--(2) But for no one else--(3) Nevertheless, they   break down the exclusive authority of rationalistic states--They strengthen   monistic and optimistic hypotheses.

        

     
      [p. xii]

        

     
      LECTURE XVIII

PHILOSOPHY

       <page 421>

     
      Primacy of feeling in religion, philosophy being a secondary   function--Intellectualism professes to escape objective standards in her   theological constructions--"Dogmatic theology"--Criticism of its   account of God's attributes--"Pragmatism" as a test of the value of   conceptions--God's metaphysical attributes have no practical significance--His   moral attributes are proved by bad arguments; collapse of systematic   theology--Does transcendental idealism fare better? Its principles--Quotations   from John Caird--They are good as restatements of religious experience, but   uncoercive as reasoned proof--What philosophy can do for religion by transforming herself into "science of   religions."

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURE XIX

OTHER CHARACTERISTICS

       <page 448>

     
      Aesthetic elements in religion--Contrast of Catholicism and   Protestantism--Sacrifice and Confession--Prayer--Religion holds that spiritual   work is really effected in prayer--Three degrees of opinion as to what is   effected--First degree-- Second degree-- Third degree-- Automatisms, their   frequency among religious leaders--Jewish cases--Mohammed--Joseph Smith--Religion   and the subconscious region in general.

        

     
       

        

     
      LECTURE XX

CONCLUSIONS

       <page 475>

     
      Summary of religious characteristics--Men's religions need not be   identical--"The science of religions" can only suggest, not   proclaims a religious creed--Is religion [p. xiii] a "survival" of   primitive thought?--Modern science rules out the concept of   personality--Anthropomorphism and belief in the personal characterized   pre-scientific thought--Personal forces are real, in spite of this--Scientific   objects are abstractions, only individualized experiences are   concrete--Religion holds by the concrete--Primarily religion is a biological   reaction--Its simplest terms are an uneasiness and a deliverance; description   of the deliverance--Question of the reality of the higher power--The author's   hypotheses: 1. The subconscious self as intermediating between nature and the   higher region--2. The higher region, or "God"--3. He produces real   effects in nature.

        

     
       

        

     
      POSTSCRIPT

       <page 510>

     
      Philosophic position of the present work defined as piecemeal   supernaturalism--Criticism of universalistic supernaturalism--Different   principles must occasion differences in fact--What differences in fact can   God's existence occasion?--The question of immortality--Question of God's   uniqueness and infinity: religious experience does not settle this question   in the affirmative--The pluralistic hypothesis is more conformed to common   sense.

        

     
       

        

     
      INDEX

       <page 519>

     
 
     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xv]

  

PREFACE

This book would never have been written had I not been honored with an appointment as Gifford Lecturer on Natural Religion at the University of Edinburgh. In casting about me for subjects of the two courses of ten lectures each for which I thus became responsible, it seemed to me that the first course might well be a descriptive one on "Man's Religious Appetites," and the second a metaphysical one on "Their Satisfaction through Philosophy." But the unexpected growth of the psychological matter as I came to write it out has resulted in the second subject being postponed entirely, and the description of man's religious constitution now fills the twenty lectures. In Lecture XX I have suggested rather than stated my own philosophic conclusions, and the reader who desires immediately to know them should turn to pages <page 501>-<page 509>, and to the "Postscript" of the book. I hope to be able at some later day to express them in more explicit form.

In my belief that a large acquaintance with particulars often makes us wiser than the possession of abstract formulas, however deep, I have loaded the lectures with concrete examples, and I have chosen these among the extremer expressions of the religious temperament. To some readers I may consequently seem, before they get beyond the middle of the book, to offer a caricature of the subject. Such convulsions of piety, they will say, are not sane. If, however, they will have the patience to read to the end, I believe that this unfavorable impression will disappear;

[p. xvi]

for I there combine the religious impulses with other principles of common sense which serve as correctives of exaggeration, and allow the individual reader to draw as moderate conclusions as he will.

My thanks for help in writing these lectures are due to Edwin D. Starbuck, of Stanford University, who made over to me his large collection of manuscript material; to Henry W. Rankin, of East Northfield, a friend unseen but proved, to whom I owe precious information; to Theodore Flournoy, of Geneva, to Canning Schiller of Oxford, and to my colleague Benjamin Rand, for documents; to my colleague Dickinson S. Miller, and to my friends, Thomas Wren Ward, of New York, and Wincenty Lutoslawski, late of Cracow, for important suggestions and advice. Finally, to conversations with the lamented Thomas Davidson and to the use of his books, at Glenmore, above Keene Valley, I owe more obligations than I can well express.

Harvard University,
     March, 1902.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE VARIETIES OF RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE

[p. 2] [p. 3]

  

Lecture I

  

RELIGION AND NEUROLOGY

It is with no small amount of trepidation that I take my place behind this desk, and face this learned audience. To us Americans, the experience of receiving instruction from the living voice, as well as from the books, of European scholars, is very familiar. At my own University of Harvard, not a winter passes without its harvest, large or small, of lectures from Scottish, English, French, or German representatives of the science or literature of their respective countries whom we have either induced to cross the ocean to address us, or captured on the wing as they were visiting our land. It seems the natural thing for us to listen whilst the Europeans talk. The contrary habit, of talking whilst the Europeans listen, we have not yet acquired; and in him who first makes the adventure it begets a certain sense of apology being due for so presumptuous an act. Particularly must this be the case on a soil as sacred to the American imagination as that of Edinburgh. The glories of the philosophic chair of this university were deeply impressed on my imagination in boyhood. Professor Fraser's Essays in Philosophy, then just published, was the first philosophic book I ever looked into, and I well remember the awestruck feeling I received from the account of Sir William Hamilton's classroom therein contained. Hamilton's own lectures were the first philosophic writings I ever forced myself to study, and after that I was immersed in Dugald Stewart and Thomas Brown. Such juvenile emotions of reverence never get outgrown; and I confess that to find my humble self promoted

[p. 4]

from my native wilderness to be actually for the time an official here, and transmuted into a colleague of these illustrious names, carries with it a sense of dreamland quite as much as of reality.

But since I have received the honor of this appointment I have felt that it would never do to decline. The academic career also has its heroic obligations, so I stand here without further deprecatory words. Let me say only this, that now that the current, here and at Aberdeen, has begun to run from west to east, I hope it may continue to do so. As the years go by, I hope that many of my countrymen may be asked to lecture in the Scottish universities, changing places with Scotsmen lecturing in the United States; I hope that our people may become in all these higher matters even as one people; and that the peculiar philosophic temperament, as well as the peculiar political temperament, that goes with our English speech may more and more pervade and influence the world.

 

As regards the manner in which I shall have to administer this lectureship, I am neither a theologian, nor a scholar learned in the history of religions, nor an anthropologist. Psychology is the only branch of learning in which I am particularly versed. To the psychologist the religious propensities of man must be at least as interesting as any other of the facts pertaining to his mental constitution. It would seem, therefore, that, as a psychologist, the natural thing for me would be to invite you to a descriptive survey of those religious propensities.

If the inquiry be psychological, not religious institutions, but rather religious feelings and religious impulses must be its subject, and I must confine myself to those more developed subjective phenomena recorded in literature produced by articulate and fully self-conscious men, in works of piety and autobiography. Interesting as the origins and

[p. 5]

early stages of a subject always are, yet when one seeks earnestly for its full significance, one must always look to its more completely evolved and perfect forms. It follows from this that the documents that will most concern us will be those of the men who were most accomplished in the religious life and best able to give an intelligible account of their ideas and motives. These men, of course, are either comparatively modern writers, or else such earlier ones as have become religious classics. The documents humains which we shall find most instructive need not then be sought for in the haunts of special erudition--they lie along the beaten highway; and this circumstance, which flows so naturally from the character of our problem, suits admirably also your lecturer's lack of special theological learning. I may take my citations, my sentences and paragraphs of personal confession, from books that most of you at some time will have had already in your hands, and yet this will be no detriment to the value of my conclusions. It is true that some more adventurous reader and investigator, lecturing here in future, may unearth from the shelves of libraries documents that will make a more delectable and curious entertainment to listen to than mine. Yet I doubt whether he will necessarily, by his control of so much more out-of-the-way material, get much closer to the essence of the matter in hand.

The question, What are the religious propensities? and the question, What is their philosophic significance? are two entirely different orders of question from the logical point of view; and, as a failure to recognize this fact distinctly may breed confusion, I wish to insist upon the point a little before we enter into the documents and materials to which I have referred.

In recent books on logic, distinction is made between two orders of inquiry concerning anything. First, what is the nature of it? how did it come about? what is its constitution,

[p. 6]

origin, and history? And second, What is its importance, meaning, or significance, now that it is once here? The answer to the one question is given in an existential judgment or proposition. The answer to the other is a proposition of value, what the Germans call a Werthurtheil, or what we may, if we like, denominate a spiritual judgment. Neither judgment can be deduced immediately from the other. They proceed from diverse intellectual preoccupations, and the mind combines them only by making them first separately, and then adding them together.

In the matter of religions it is particularly easy to distinguish the two orders of question. Every religious phenomenon has its history and its derivation from natural antecedents. What is nowadays called the higher criticism of the Bible is only a study of the Bible from this existential point of view, neglected too much by the earlier church. Under just what biographic conditions did the sacred writers bring forth their various contributions to the holy volume? And what had they exactly in their several individual minds, when they delivered their utterances? These are manifestly questions of historical fact, and one does not see how the answer to them can decide offhand the still further question: of what use should such a volume, with its manner of coming into existence so defined, be to us as a guide to life and a revelation? To answer this other question we must have already in our mind some sort of a general theory as to what the peculiarities in a thing should be which give it value for purposes of revelation; and this theory itself would be what I just called a spiritual judgment. Combining it with our existential judgment, we might indeed deduce another spiritual judgment as to the Bible's worth. Thus if our theory of revelation-value were to affirm that any book, to possess it, must have been composed automatically or not by the free caprice of the writer, or that it must exhibit no scientific and historic errors and express no local or personal passions, the Bible would probably fare ill at our hands. But if, on the other hand, our theory should allow that a book may well be a revelation in spite of errors and

[p. 7]

passions and deliberate human composition, if only it be a true record of the inner experiences of great-souled persons wrestling with the crises of their fate, then the verdict would be much more favorable. You see that the existential facts by themselves are insufficient for determining the value; and the best adepts of the higher criticism accordingly never confound the existential with the spiritual problem. With the same conclusions of fact before them, some take one view, and some another, of the Bible's value as a revelation, according as their spiritual judgment as to the foundation of values differs.

 

I make these general remarks about the two sorts of judgment, because there are many religious persons--some of you now present, possibly, are among them--who do not yet make a working use of the distinction, and who may therefore feel first a little startled at the purely existential point of view from which in the following lectures the phenomena of religious experience must be considered. When I handle them biologically and psychologically as if they were mere curious facts of individual history, some of you may think it a degradation of so sublime a subject, and may even suspect me, until my purpose gets more fully expressed, of deliberately seeking to discredit the religious side of life.

Such a result is of course absolutely alien to my intention; and since such a prejudice on your part would seriously obstruct the due effect of much of what I have to relate, I will devote a few more words to the point.

There can be no doubt that as a matter of fact a religious life, exclusively pursued, does tend to make the person exceptional and eccentric. I speak not now of your ordinary religious believer, who follows the conventional observances

[p. 8]

of his country, whether it be Buddhist, Christian, or Mohammedan. His religion has been made for him by others, communicated to him by tradition, determined to fixed forms by imitation, and retained by habit. It would profit us little to study this second-hand religious life. We must make search rather for the original experiences which were the pattern-setters to all this mass of suggested feeling and imitated conduct. These experiences we can only find in individuals for whom religion exists not as a dull habit, but as an acute fever rather. But such individuals are "geniuses" in the religious line; and like many other geniuses who have brought forth fruits effective enough for commemoration in the pages of biography, such religious geniuses have often shown symptoms of nervous instability. Even more perhaps than other kinds of genius, religious leaders have been subject to abnormal psychical visitations. Invariably they have been creatures of exalted emotional sensibility. Often they have led a discordant inner life, and had melancholy during a part of their career. They have known no measure, been liable to obsessions and fixed ideas; and frequently they have fallen into trances, heard voices, seen visions, and presented all sorts of peculiarities which are ordinarily classed as pathological. Often, moreover, these pathological features in their career have helped to give them their religious authority and influence.

If you ask for a concrete example, there can be no better one than is furnished by the person of George Fox. The Quaker religion which he founded is something which it is impossible to overpraise. In a day of shams, it was a religion of veracity rooted in spiritual inwardness, and a return to something more like the original gospel truth than men had ever known in England. So far as our Christian sects today are evolving into liberality, they are simply reverting in essence to the position which Fox and the early Quakers so long ago assumed. No one can pretend for a moment that

[p. 9]

in point of spiritual sagacity and capacity, Fox's mind was unsound. Everyone who confronted him personally, from Oliver Cromwell down to county magistrates and jailers, seems to have acknowledged his superior power. Yet from the point of view of his nervous constitution, Fox was a psychopath or detraque of the deepest dye. His Journal abounds in entries of this sort:--

"As I was walking with several friends, I lifted up my head and saw three steeple-house spires, and they struck at my life. I asked them what place that was? They said, Lichfield. Immediately the word of the Lord came to me, that I must go thither. Being come to the house we were going to, I wished the friends to walk into the house, saying nothing to them of whither I was to go. As soon as they were gone I stept away, and went by my eye over hedge and ditch till I came within a mile of Lichfield where, in a great field, shepherds were keeping their sheep. Then was I commanded by the Lord to pull off my shoes. I stood still, for it was winter: but the word of the Lord was like a fire in me. So I put off my shoes and left them with the shepherds; and the poor shepherds trembled, and were astonished. Then I walked on about a mile, and as soon as I was got within the city, the word of the Lord came to me again, saying: Cry, 'Wo to the bloody city of Lichfield!' So I went up and down the streets, crying with a loud voice, Wo to the bloody city of Lichfield! It being market day, I went into the market-place, and to and fro in the several parts of it, and made stands, crying as before, Wo to the bloody city of Lichfield! And no one laid hands on me. As I went thus crying through the streets, there seemed to me to be a channel of blood running down the streets, and the market-place appeared like a pool of blood. When I had declared what was upon me, and felt myself clear, I went out of the town in peace; and returning to the shepherds gave them some money, and took my shoes of them again. But the fire of the Lord was so on my feet, and all over me, that I did not matter to put on my shoes again, and was at a stand whether I should or no, till I felt freedom from the Lord so to do: then, after I had washed my feet, I put on my shoes again.

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] After this a deep consideration came upon me, for what reason I should be sent to cry against that city, and call it The bloody city! For though the parliament had the minister one while, and the king another, and much blood had been shed in the town during the wars between them, yet there was no more than had befallen many other places. But afterwards I came to understand, that in the Emperor Diocletian's time a thousand Christians were martyr'd in Lichfield. So I was to go, without my shoes, through the channel of their blood, and into the pool of their blood in the market-place, that I might raise up the memorial of the blood of those martyrs, which had been shed above a thousand years before, and lay cold in their streets. So the sense of this blood was upon me, and I obeyed the word of the Lord."

 

Bent as we are on studying religion's existential conditions, we cannot possibly ignore these pathological aspects of the subject. We must describe and name them just as if they occurred in non-religious men. It is true that we instinctively recoil from seeing an object to which our emotions and affections are committed handled by the intellect as any other object is handled. The first thing the intellect does with an object is to class it along with something else. But any object that is infinitely important to us and awakens our devotion feels to us also as if it must be sui generis and unique. Probably a crab would be filled with a sense of personal outrage if it could hear us class it without ado or apology as a crustacean, and thus dispose of it. "I am no such thing, it would say; I am MYSELF, MYSELF alone.

 

The next thing the intellect does is to lay bare the causes in which the thing originates. Spinoza says: "I will analyze the actions and appetites of men as if it were a question of lines, of planes, and of solids." And elsewhere he remarks that he will consider our passions and their properties with the same eye with which he looks on all other natural things,

[p. 11]

since the consequences of our affections flow from their nature with the same necessity as it results from the nature of a triangle that its three angles should be equal to two right angles. Similarly M. Taine, in the introduction to his history of English literature, has written: "Whether facts be moral or physical, it makes no matter. They always have their causes. There are causes for ambition, courage, veracity, just as there are for digestion, muscular movement, animal heat. Vice and virtue are products like vitriol and sugar." When we read such proclamations of the intellect bent on showing the existential conditions of absolutely everything, we feel--quite apart from our legitimate impatience at the somewhat ridiculous swagger of the program, in view of what the authors are actually able to perform--menaced and negated in the springs of our innermost life. Such cold-blooded assimilations threaten, we think, to undo our soul's vital secrets, as if the same breath which should succeed in explaining their origin would simultaneously explain away their significance, and make them appear of no more preciousness, either, than the useful groceries of which M. Taine speaks.

Perhaps the commonest expression of this assumption that spiritual value is undone if lowly origin be asserted is seen in those comments which unsentimental people so often pass on their more sentimental acquaintances. Alfred believes in immortality so strongly because his temperament is so emotional. Fanny's extraordinary conscientiousness is merely a matter of overinstigated nerves. William's melancholy about the universe is due to bad digestion--probably his liver is torpid. Eliza's delight in her church is a symptom of her hysterical constitution. Peter would be less troubled about his soul if he would take more exercise in the open air, etc. A more fully developed example of the same kind of reasoning is the fashion, quite common nowadays among certain writers, of criticizing the religious emotions by showing

[p. 12]

a connection between them and the sexual life. Conversion is a crisis of puberty and adolescence. The macerations of saints, and the devotion of missionaries, are only instances of the parental instinct of self-sacrifice gone astray. For the hysterical nun, starving for natural life, Christ is but an imaginary substitute for a more earthly object of affection. And the like. [*1]

[p. 13]

We are surely all familiar in a general way with this method of discrediting states of mind for which we have an

[p. 14]

antipathy. We all use it to some degree in criticizing persons whose states of mind we regard as overstrained. But when other people criticize our own more exalted soul-flights by calling them 'nothing but' expressions of our organic disposition, we feel outraged and hurt, for we know that, whatever be our organism's peculiarities, our mental states have their substantive value as revelations of the living truth; and we wish that all this medical materialism could be made to hold its tongue.

Medical materialism seems indeed a good appellation for the too simple-minded system of thought which we are considering. Medical materialism finishes up Saint Paul by calling his vision on the road to Damascus a discharging lesion of the occipital cortex, he being an epileptic. It snuffs out Saint Teresa as an hysteric, Saint Francis of Assisi as an hereditary degenerate. George Fox's discontent with the shams of his age, and his pining for spiritual veracity, it treats as a symptom of a disordered colon. Carlyle's organ-tones of misery it accounts for by a gastro-duodenal catarrh. All such mental overtensions, it says, are, when you come to the bottom of the matter, mere affairs of diathesis (auto-intoxications most probably), due to the perverted

[p. 15]

action of various glands which physiology will yet discover.

And medical materialism then thinks that the spiritual authority of all such personages is successfully undermined. [*1]

Let us ourselves look at the matter in the largest possible way. Modern psychology, finding definite psycho-physical connections to hold good, assumes as a convenient hypothesis that the dependence of mental states upon bodily conditions must be thoroughgoing and complete. If we adopt the assumption, then of course what medical materialism insists on must be true in a general way, if not in every detail: Saint Paul certainly had once an epileptoid, if not an epileptic seizure; George Fox was an hereditary degenerate; Carlyle was undoubtedly auto-intoxicated by some organ or other, no matter which--and the rest. But now, I ask you, how can such an existential account of facts of mental history decide in one way or another upon their spiritual significance? According to the general postulate of psychology just referred to, there is not a single one of our states of mind, high or low, healthy or morbid, that has not some organic process as its condition. Scientific theories are organically conditioned just as much as religious emotions are; and if we only knew the facts intimately enough, we should doubtless see "the liver" determining the dicta of the sturdy atheist as decisively as it does those of the Methodist under conviction anxious about his soul. When it alters in one way the blood that percolates it, we get the methodist, when in another way, we get the atheist form of mind. So of all our raptures and our drynesses, our longings and pantings, our questions and beliefs. They are equally organically founded, be they religious or of non-religious content.

To plead the organic causation of a religious state of

[p. 16]

mind, then, in refutation of its claim to possess superior spiritual value, is quite illogical and arbitrary, unless one has already worked out in advance some psycho-physical theory connecting spiritual values in general with determinate sorts of physiological change. Otherwise none of our thoughts and feelings, not even our scientific doctrines, not even our dis-beliefs, could retain any value as revelations of the truth, for every one of them without exception flows from the state of its possessor's body at the time.

It is needless to say that medical materialism draws in point of fact no such sweeping skeptical conclusion. It is sure, just as every simple man is sure, that some states of mind are inwardly superior to others, and reveal to us more truth, and in this it simply makes use of an ordinary spiritual judgment. It has no physiological theory of the production of these its favorite states, by which it may accredit them; and its attempt to discredit the states which it dislikes, by vaguely associating them with nerves and liver, and connecting them with names connoting bodily affliction, is altogether illogical and inconsistent.

Let us play fair in this whole matter, and be quite candid with ourselves and with the facts. When we think certain states of mind superior to others, is it ever because of what we know concerning their organic antecedents? No! it is always for two entirely different reasons. It is either because we take an immediate delight in them; or else it is because we believe them to bring us good consequential fruits for life. When we speak disparagingly of "feverish fancies," surely the fever-process as such is not the ground of our disesteem--for aught we know to the contrary, 103 degrees or 104 degrees Fahrenheit might be a much more favorable temperature for truths to germinate and sprout in, than the more ordinary blood-heat of 97 or 98 degrees. It is either the disagreeableness itself of the fancies, or their inability to bear the criticisms of the convalescent hour. When we praise the

[p. 17]

thoughts which health brings, health's peculiar chemical metabolisms have nothing to do with determining our judgment. We know in fact almost nothing about these metabolisms. It is the character of inner happiness in the thoughts which stamps them as good, or else their consistency with our other opinions and their serviceability for our needs, which make them pass for true in our esteem.

Now the more intrinsic and the more remote of these criteria do not always hang together. Inner happiness and serviceability do not always agree. What immediately feels most "good" is not always most "true," when measured by the verdict of the rest of experience. The difference between Philip drunk and Philip sober is the classic instance in corroboration. If merely "feeling good" could decide, drunkenness would be the supremely valid human experience. But its revelations, however acutely satisfying at the moment, are inserted into an environment which refuses to bear them out for any length of time. The consequence of this discrepancy of the two criteria is the uncertainty which still prevails over so many of our spiritual judgments. There are moments of sentimental and mystical experience--we shall hereafter hear much of them--that carry an enormous sense of inner authority and illumination with them when they come. But they come seldom, and they do not come to everyone; and the rest of life makes either no connection with them, or tends to contradict them more than it confirms them. Some persons follow more the voice of the moment in these cases, some prefer to be guided by the average results. Hence the sad discordancy of so many of the spiritual judgments of human beings; a discordancy which will be brought home to us acutely enough before these lectures end.

 

It is, however, a discordancy that can never be resolved by any merely medical test. A good example of the impossibility

[p. 18]

of holding strictly to the medical tests is seen in the theory of the pathological causation of genius promulgated by recent authors. "Genius," said Dr. Moreau, "is but one of the many branches of the neuropathic tree." "Genius," says Dr. Lombroso, "is a symptom of hereditary degeneration of the epileptoid variety, and is allied to moral insanity." "Whenever a man's life," writes Mr. Nisbet, "is at once sufficiently illustrious and recorded with sufficient fullness to be a subject of profitable study, he inevitably falls into the morbid category. . . . And it is worthy of remark that, as a rule, the greater the genius, the greater the unsoundness." [*1]

Now do these authors, after having succeeded in establishing to their own satisfaction that the works of genius are fruits of disease, consistently proceed thereupon to impugn the value of the fruits? Do they deduce a new spiritual judgment from their new doctrine of existential conditions? Do they frankly forbid us to admire the productions of genius from now onwards? and say outright that no neuropath can ever be a revealer of new truth?

No! their immediate spiritual instincts are too strong for them here, and hold their own against inferences which, in mere love of logical consistency, medical materialism ought to be only too glad to draw. One disciple of the school, indeed, has striven to impugn the value of works of genius in a wholesale way (such works of contemporary art, namely, as he himself is unable to enjoy, and they are many) by using medical arguments. [*2] But for the most part the masterpieces are left unchallenged; and the medical line of attack either confines itself to such secular productions as everyone admits to be intrinsically eccentric, or else addresses itself exclusively to religious manifestations.

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] And then it is because the religious manifestations have been already condemned because the critic dislikes them on internal or spiritual grounds.

In the natural sciences and industrial arts it never occurs to anyone to try to refute opinions by showing up their author's neurotic constitution. Opinions here are invariably tested by logic and by experiment, no matter what may be their author's neurological type. It should be no otherwise with religious opinions. Their value can only be ascertained by spiritual judgments directly passed upon them, judgments based on our own immediate feeling primarily; and secondarily on what we can ascertain of their experiential relations to our moral needs and to the rest of what we hold as true.

Immediate luminousness, in short, philosophical reasonableness, and moral helpfulness are the only available criteria. Saint Teresa might have had the nervous system of the placidest cow, and it would not now save her theology, if the trial of the theology by these other tests should show it to be contemptible. And conversely if her theology can stand these other tests, it will make no difference how hysterical or nervously off her balance Saint Teresa may have been when she was with us here below.

 

You see that at bottom we are thrown back upon the general principles by which the empirical philosophy has always contended that we must be guided in our search for truth. Dogmatic philosophies have sought for tests for truth which might dispense us from appealing to the future. Some direct mark, by noting which we can be protected immediately and absolutely, now and forever, against all mistake--such has been the darling dream of philosophic dogmatists. It is clear that the origin of the truth would be an admirable criterion of this sort, if only the various origins could be discriminated from one another from this

[p. 20]

point of view, and the history of dogmatic opinion shows that origin has always been a favorite test. Origin in immediate intuition; origin in pontifical authority; origin in supernatural revelation, as by vision, hearing, or unaccountable impression; origin in direct possession by a higher spirit, expressing itself in prophecy and warning; origin in automatic utterance generally--these origins have been stock warrants for the truth of one opinion after another which we find represented in religious history. The medical materialists are therefore only so many belated dogmatists, neatly turning the tables on their predecessors by using the criterion of origin in a destructive instead of an accreditive way.

They are effective with their talk of pathological origin only so long as supernatural origin is pleaded by the other side, and nothing but the argument from origin is under discussion. But the argument from origin has seldom been used alone, for it is too obviously insufficient. Dr. Maudsley is perhaps the cleverest of the rebutters of supernatural religion on grounds of origin. Yet he finds himself forced to write:--

"What right have we to believe Nature under any obligation to do her work by means of complete minds only? She may find an incomplete mind a more suitable instrument for a particular purpose. It is the work that is done, and the quality in the worker by which it was done, that is alone of moment; and it may be no great matter from a cosmical standpoint, if in other qualities of character he was singularly defective--if indeed he were hypocrite, adulterer, eccentric, or lunatic. . . . Home we come again, then, to the old and last resort of certitude--namely the common assent of mankind, or of the competent by instruction and training among mankind." [*1]

[p. 21]

In other words, not its origin, but the way in which it works on the whole, is Dr. Maudsley's final test of a belief. This is our own empiricist criterion; and this criterion the stoutest insisters on supernatural origin have also been forced to use in the end. Among the visions and messages some have always been too patently silly, among the trances and convulsive seizures some have been too fruitless for conduct and character, to pass themselves off as significant, still less as divine. In the history of Christian mysticism the problem how to discriminate between such messages and experiences as were really divine miracles, and such others as the demon in his malice was able to counterfeit, thus making the religious person twofold more the child of hell he was before, has always been a difficult one to solve, needing all the sagacity and experience of the best directors of conscience. In the end it had to come to our empiricist criterion: By their fruits ye shall know them, not by their roots. Jonathan Edwards's Treatise on Religious Affections is an elaborate working out of this thesis. The roots of a man's virtue are inaccessible to us. No appearances whatever are infallible proofs of grace. Our practice is the only sure evidence, even to ourselves, that we are genuinely Christians.

"In forming a judgment of ourselves now," Edwards writes, we should certainly adopt that evidence which our supreme Judge will chiefly make use of when we come to stand before him at the last day. . . . There is not one grace of the Spirit of God, of the existence of which, in any professor of religion, Christian practice is not the most decisive evidence. . . . The degree in which our experience is productive of practice shows the degree in which our experience is spiritual and divine."

Catholic writers are equally emphatic. The good dispositions which a vision, or voice, or other apparent heavenly favor leave behind them are the only marks by which we

[p. 22]

may be sure they are not possible deceptions of the tempter. Says Saint Teresa:--

"Like imperfect sleep which, instead of giving more strength to the head, doth but leave it the more exhausted, the result of mere operations of the imagination is but to weaken the soul. Instead of nourishment and energy she reaps only lassitude and disgust: whereas a genuine heavenly vision yields to her a harvest of ineffable spiritual riches, and an admirable renewal of bodily strength. I alleged these reasons to those who so often accused my visions of being the work of the enemy of mankind and the sport of my imagination. . . . I showed them the jewels which the divine hand had left with me:--they were my actual dispositions. All those who knew me saw that I was changed; my confessor bore witness to the fact; this improvement, palpable in all respects, far from being hidden, was brilliantly evident to all men. As for myself, it was impossible to believe that if the demon were its author, he could have used, in order to lose me and lead me to hell, an expedient so contrary to his own interests as that of uprooting my vices, and filling me with masculine courage and other virtues instead, for I saw clearly that a single one of these visions was enough to enrich me with all that wealth." [*1]

I fear I may have made a longer excursus than was necessary, and that fewer words would have dispelled the uneasiness which may have arisen among some of you as I announced my pathological programme. At any rate you must all be ready now to judge the religious life by its results exclusively, and I shall assume that the bugaboo of morbid origin will scandalize your piety no more.

Still, you may ask me, if its results are to be the ground of our final spiritual estimate of a religious phenomenon, why threaten us at all with so much existential study of its conditions? Why not simply leave pathological questions out?

[p. 23]

To this I reply in two ways. First, I say, irrepressible curiosity imperiously leads one on; and I say, secondly, that it always leads to a better understanding of a thing's significance to consider its exaggerations and perversions its equivalents and substitutes and nearest relatives elsewhere. Not that we may thereby swamp the thing in the wholesale condemnation which we pass on its inferior congeners, but rather that we may by contrast ascertain the more precisely in what its merits consist, by learning at the same time to what particular dangers of corruption it may also be exposed.

Insane conditions have this advantage, that they isolate special factors of the mental life, and enable us to inspect them unmasked by their more usual surroundings. They play the part in mental anatomy which the scalpel and the microscope play in the anatomy of the body. To understand a thing rightly we need to see it both out of its environment and in it, and to have acquaintance with the whole range of its variations. The study of hallucinations has in this way been for psychologists the key to their comprehension of normal sensation, that of illusions has been the key to the right comprehension of perception. Morbid impulses and imperative conceptions, "fixed ideas," so called, have thrown a flood of light on the psychology of the normal will; and obsessions and delusions have performed the same service for that of the normal faculty of belief.

Similarly, the nature of genius has been illuminated by the attempts, of which I already made mention, to class it with psychopathical phenomena. Borderland insanity, crankiness, insane temperament, loss of mental balance, psychopathic degeneration (to use a few of the many synonyms by which it has been called), has certain peculiarities and liabilities which, when combined with a superior quality of intellect in an individual, make it more probable that

[p. 24]

he will make his mark and affect his age, than if his temperament were less neurotic. There is of course no special affinity between crankiness as such and superior intellect, [*1] for most psychopaths have feeble intellects, and superior intellects more commonly have normal nervous systems. But the psychopathic temperament, whatever be the intellect with which it finds itself paired, often brings with it ardor and excitability of character. The cranky person has extraordinary emotional susceptibility. He is liable to fixed ideas and obsessions. His conceptions tend to pass immediately into belief and action; and when he gets a new idea, he has no rest till he proclaims it, or in some way "works it off." "What shall I think of it?" a common person says to himself about a vexed question; but in a "cranky" mind "What must I do about it?" is the form the question tends to take. In the autobiography of that high-souled woman, Mrs. Annie Besant, I read the following passage: "Plenty of people wish well to any good cause, but very few care to exert themselves to help it, and still fewer will risk anything in its support. 'Someone ought to do it, but why should I?' is the ever reechoed phrase of weak-kneed amiability. 'Someone ought to do it, so why not I?' is the cry of some earnest servant of man, eagerly forward springing to face some perilous duty. Between these two sentences lie whole centuries of moral evolution." True enough! and between these two sentences lie also the different destinies of the ordinary sluggard and the psychopathic man. Thus, when a superior intellect and a psychopathic temperament coalesce--as in the endless permutations and combinations of human faculty, they are bound to coalesce often enough--in the same individual, we have the best possible condition for the kind of effective genius that gets into the

[p. 25]

biographical dictionaries. Such men do not remain mere critics and understanders with their intellect. Their ideas possess them, they inflict them, for better or worse, upon their companions or their age. It is they who get counted when Messrs. Lombroso, Nisbet, and others invoke statistics to defend their paradox.

To pass now to religious phenomena, take the melancholy which, as we shall see, constitutes an essential moment in every complete religious evolution. Take the happiness which achieved religious belief confers. Take the trancelike states of insight into truth which all religious mystics report. [*1] These are each and all of them special cases of kinds of human experience of much wider scope. Religious melancholy, whatever peculiarities it may have qua religious, is at any rate melancholy. Religious happiness is happiness. Religious trance is trance. And the moment we renounce the absurd notion that a thing is exploded away as soon as it is classed with others, or its origin is shown; the moment we agree to stand by experimental results and inner quality, in judging of values--who does not see that we are likely to ascertain the distinctive significance of religious melancholy and happiness, or of religious trances, far better by comparing them as conscientiously as we can with other varieties of melancholy, happiness, and trance, than by refusing to consider their place in any more general series, and treating them as if they were outside of nature's order altogether?

I hope that the course of these lectures will confirm us in this supposition. As regards the psychopathic origin of so many religious phenomena, that would not be in the least surprising or disconcerting, even were such phenomena certified from on high to be the most precious of human experiences. No one organism can possibly yield

[p. 26]

to its owner the whole body of truth. Few of us are not in some way infirm, or even diseased; and our very infirmities help us unexpectedly. In the psychopathic temperament we have the emotionality which is the sine qua non of moral perception; we have the intensity and tendency to emphasis which are the essence of practical moral vigor; and we have the love of metaphysics and mysticism which carry one's interests beyond the surface of the sensible world. What, then, is more natural than that this temperament should introduce one to regions of religious truth, to corners of the universe, which your robust Philistine type of nervous system, forever offering its biceps to be felt, thumping its breast, and thanking Heaven that it hasn't a single morbid fiber in its composition, would be sure to hide forever from its self-satisfied possessors?

If there were such a thing as inspiration from a higher realm, it might well be that the neurotic temperament would furnish the chief condition of the requisite receptivity. And having said thus much, I think that I may let the matter of religion and neuroticism drop.

 

The mass of collateral phenomena, morbid or healthy, with which the various religious phenomena must be compared in order to understand them better, forms what in the slang of pedagogics is termed "the apperceiving mass" by which we comprehend them. The only novelty that I can imagine this course of lectures to possess lies in the breadth of the apperceiving mass. I may succeed in discussing religious experiences in a wider context than has been usual in university courses.

Footnotes

^12:1 As with many ideas that float in the air of one's time, this notion shrinks from dogmatic general statement and expresses itself only partially and by innuendo. It seems to me that few conceptions are less instructive than this re-interpretation of religion as perverted sexuality. It reminds one, so crudely is it often employed, of the famous Catholic taunt, that the Reformation may be best understood by remembering that its fons et origo was Luther's wish to marry a nun:--the effects are infinitely wider than the alleged causes, and for the most part opposite in nature. It is true that in the vast collection of religious phenomena, some are undisguisedly amatory--e.g., sex-deities and obscene rites in polytheism, and ecstatic feelings of union with the Savior in a few Christian mystics. But then why not equally call religion an aberration of the digestive function, and prove one's point by the worship of Bacchus and Ceres, or by the ecstatic feelings of some other saints about the Eucharist? Religious language clothes itself in such poor symbols as our life affords, and the whole organism gives overtones of comment whenever the mind is strongly stirred to expression. Language drawn from eating and drinking is probably as common in religious literature as is language drawn from the sexual life. We "hunger and thirst" after righteousness; we "find the Lord a sweet savor;" we "taste and see that he is good." "Spiritual milk for American babes, drawn from the breasts of both testaments," is a sub-title of the once famous New England Primer, and Christian devotional literature indeed quite floats in milk, thought of from the point of view, not of the mother, but of the greedy babe.

Saint Francois de Sales, for instance, thus describes the "orison of quietude": "In this state the soul is like a little child still at the breast, whose mother to caress him whilst he is still in her arms makes her milk distill into his mouth without his even moving his lips. So it is here. . . . Our Lord desires that our will should be satisfied with sucking the milk which His Majesty pours into our [p. 13] mouth, and that we should relish the sweetness without even knowing that it cometh from the Lord." And again: "Consider the little infants, united and joined to the breasts of their nursing mothers you will see that from time to time they press themselves closer by little starts to which the pleasure of sucking prompts them. Even so, during its orison, the heart united to its God oftentimes makes attempts at closer union by movements during which it presses closer upon the divine sweetness." Chemin de la Perfection, ch. xxxi.; Amour de Dieu, vii. ch. i.

In fact, one might almost as well interpret religion as a perversion of the respiratory function. The Bible is full of the language of respiratory oppression: "Hide not thine ear at my breathing; my groaning is not hid from thee; my heart panteth, my strength faileth me; my bones are hot with my roaring all the night long; as the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so my soul panteth after thee, O my God:" God's Breath in Man is the title of the chief work of our best known American mystic (Thomas Lake Harris), and in certain non-Christian countries the foundation of all religious discipline consists in regulation of the inspiration and expiration.

These arguments are as good as much of the reasoning one hears in favor of the sexual theory. But the champions of the latter will then say that their chief argument has no analogue elsewhere. The two main phenomena of religion, namely, melancholy and conversion, they will say, are essentially phenomena of adolescence, and therefore synchronous with the development of sexual life. To which the retort again is easy. Even were the asserted synchrony unrestrictedly true as a fact (which it is not), it is not only the sexual life, but the entire higher mental life which awakens during adolescence. One might then as well set up the thesis that the interest in mechanics, physics, chemistry, logic, philosophy, and sociology, which springs up during adolescent years along with that in poetry and religion, is also a perversion of the sexual instinct:--but that would be too absurd. Moreover, if the argument from synchrony is to decide, what is to be done with the fact that the religious age par excellence would seem to be old age, when the uproar of the sexual life is past?

The plain truth is that to interpret religion one must in the end look at the immediate content of the religious consciousness. The moment one does this, one sees how wholly disconnected it is in [p. 14] the main from the content of the sexual consciousness. Everything about the two things differs, objects, moods, faculties concerned, and acts impelled to. Any general assimilation is simply impossible: what we find most often is complete hostility and contrast. If now the defenders of the sex-theory say that this makes no difference to their thesis; that without the chemical contributions which the sex-organs make to the blood, the brain would not be nourished so as to carry on religious activities, this final proposition may be true or not true; but at any rate it has become profoundly uninstructive: we can deduce no consequences from it which help us to interpret religion's meaning or value. In this sense the religious life depends just as much upon the spleen, the pancreas, and the kidneys as on the sexual apparatus, and the whole theory has lost its point in evaporating into a vague general assertion of the dependence, somehow, of the mind upon the body.

^15:1 For a first-rate example of medical-materialist reasoning, see an article on "les Varietes du Type devot," by Dr. Binet-Sangle, in the Revue de l'Hypnotisme, xiv. 161.

^18:1 J. F. NISBET: The Insanity of Genius, 3d ed., London, 1893, pp. xvi., xxiv.

^18:2 MAX NORDAU, in his bulky book entitled Degeneration.

^20:1 H. MAUDSLEY: Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings, 1886, pp. 256, 257.

^22:1 Autobiography, ch. xxviii.

^24:1 Superior intellect, as Professor Bain has admirably shown, seems to consist in nothing so much as in a large development of the faculty of association by similarity.

^25:1 I may refer to a criticism of the insanity theory of genius in the Psychological Review, ii. 287 (1895).

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

Lecture II

  

CIRCUMSCRIPTION OF THE TOPIC

Most books on the philosophy of religion try to begin with a precise definition of what its essence consists of. Some of these would-be definitions may possibly come before us in later portions of this course, and I shall not be pedantic enough to enumerate any of them to you now. Meanwhile the very fact that they are so many and so different from one another is enough to prove that the word "religion" cannot stand for any single principle or essence, but is rather a collective name. The theorizing mind tends always to the oversimplification of its materials. This is the root of all that absolutism and one-sided dogmatism by which both philosophy and religion have been infested. Let us not fall immediately into a one-sided view of our subject, but let us rather admit freely at the outset that we may very likely find no one essence, but many characters which may alternately be equally important to religion. If we should inquire for the essence of "government," for example, one man might tell us it was authority, another submission, an other police, another an army, another an assembly, an other a system of laws; yet all the while it would be true that no concrete government can exist without all these things, one of which is more important at one moment and others at another. The man who knows governments most completely is he who troubles himself least about a definition which shall give their essence. Enjoying an intimate acquaintance with all their particularities in turn, he would naturally regard an abstract conception in which these were

[p. 28]

unified as a thing more misleading than enlightening. And why may not religion be a conception equally complex? [*1]

 

Consider also the "religious sentiment" which we see referred to in so many books, as if it were a single sort of mental entity.

In the psychologies and in the philosophies of religion, we find the authors attempting to specify just what entity it is. One man allies it to the feeling of dependence; one makes it a derivative from fear; others connect it with the sexual life; others still identify it with the feeling of the infinite; and so on. Such different ways of conceiving it ought of themselves to arouse doubt as to whether it possibly can be one specific thing; and the moment we are willing to treat the term "religious sentiment" as a collective name for the many sentiments which religious objects may arouse in alternation, we see that it probably contains nothing whatever of a psychologically specific nature. There is religious fear, religious love, religious awe, religious joy, and so forth. But religious love is only man's natural emotion of love directed to a religious object; religious fear is only the ordinary fear of commerce, so to speak, the common quaking of the human breast, in so far as the notion of divine retribution may arouse it; religious awe is the same organic thrill which we feel in a forest at twilight, or in a mountain gorge; only this time it comes over us at the thought of our supernatural relations; and similarly of all the various sentiments which may be called into play in the lives of religious persons. As concrete states of mind, made up of a feeling plus a specific sort of object, religious emotions of course are psychic entities distinguishable

[p. 29]

from other concrete emotions; but there is no ground for assuming a simple abstract "religious emotion" to exist as a distinct elementary mental affection by itself, present in every religious experience without exception.

As there thus seems to be no one elementary religious emotion, but only a common storehouse of emotions upon which religious objects may draw, so there might conceivably also prove to he no one specific and essential kind of religious object, and no one specific and essential kind of religious act.

 

The field of religion being as wide as this, it is manifestly impossible that I should pretend to cover it. My lectures must be limited to a fraction of the subject. And, although it would indeed be foolish to set up an abstract definition of religion's essence, and then proceed to defend that definition against all comers, yet this need not prevent me from taking my own narrow view of what religion shall consist in for the purpose of these lectures, or, out of the many meanings of the word, from choosing the one meaning in which I wish to interest you particularly, and proclaiming arbitrarily that when I say "religion" I mean that. This, in fact, is what I must do, and I will now preliminarily seek to mark out the field I choose.

One way to mark it out easily is to say what aspects of the subject we leave out. At the outset we are struck by one great partition which divides the religious field. On the one side of it lies institutional, on the other personal religion. As M. P. Sabatier says, one branch of religion keeps the divinity, another keeps man most in view. Worship and sacrifice, procedures for working on the dispositions of the deity, theology and ceremony and ecclesiastical organization, are the essentials of religion in the institutional branch. Were we to limit our view to it, we should have to define religion as an external art, the art of winning the favor of

[p. 30]

the gods. In the more personal branch of religion it is on the contrary the inner dispositions of man himself which form the center of interest, his conscience, his deserts, his helplessness, his incompleteness. And although the favor of the God, as forfeited or gained, is still an essential feature of the story, and theology plays a vital part therein, yet the acts to which this sort of religion prompts are personal not ritual acts, the individual transacts the business by himself alone, and the ecclesiastical organization, with its priests and sacraments and other go-betweens, sinks to an altogether secondary place. The relation goes direct from heart to heart, from soul to soul, between man and his maker.

Now in these lectures I propose to ignore the institutional branch entirely, to say nothing of the ecclesiastical organization, to consider as little as possible the systematic theology and the ideas about the gods themselves, and to confine myself as far as I can to personal religion pure and simple. To some of you personal religion, thus nakedly considered, will no doubt seem too incomplete a thing to wear the general name. "It is a part of religion," you will say, "but only its unorganized rudiment; if we are to name it by itself, we had better call it man's conscience or morality than his religion. The name 'religion' should be reserved for the fully organized system of feeling, thought, and institution, for the Church, in short, of which this personal religion, so called, is but a fractional element."

But if you say this, it will only show the more plainly how much the question of definition tends to become a dispute about names. Rather than prolong such a dispute, I am willing to accept almost any name for the personal religion of which I propose to treat. Call it conscience or morality, if you yourselves prefer, and not religion--under either name it will be equally worthy of our study. As for myself, I think it will prove to contain some elements which morality pure and simple does not contain, and these elements

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] I shall soon seek to point out; so I will myself continue to apply the word "religion" to it; and in the last lecture of all, I will bring in the theologies and the ecclesiasticisms, and say something of its relation to them.

In one sense at least the personal religion will prove itself more fundamental than either theology or ecclesiasticism. Churches, when once established, live at second-hand upon tradition; but the founders of every church owed their power originally to the fact of their direct personal communion with the divine. Not only the superhuman founders, the Christ, the Buddha, Mahomet, but all the originators of Christian sects have been in this case;--so personal religion should still seem the primordial thing, even to those who continue to esteem it incomplete.

There are, it is true, other things in religion chronologically more primordial than personal devoutness in the moral sense. Fetishism and magic seem to have preceded inward piety historically--at least our records of inward piety do not reach back so far. And if fetishism and magic be regarded as stages of religion, one may say that personal religion in the inward sense and the genuinely spiritual ecclesiasticisms which it founds are phenomena of secondary or even tertiary order. But, quite apart from the fact that many anthropologists--for instance, Jevons and Frazer--expressly oppose "religion" and "magic" to each other, it is certain that the whole system of thought which leads to magic, fetishism, and the lower superstitions may just as well be called primitive science as called primitive religion. The question thus becomes a verbal one again; and our knowledge of all these early stages of thought and feeling is in any case so conjectural and imperfect that farther discussion would not be worth while.

Religion, therefore, as I now ask you arbitrarily to take it, shall mean for us the feelings, acts, and experiences of individual men in their solitude, so far as they apprehend 

[p. 32]

themselves to stand in relation to whatever they may consider the divine. Since the relation may be either moral, physical, or ritual, it is evident that out of religion in the sense in which we take it, theologies, philosophies, and ecclesiastical organizations may secondarily grow. In these lectures, however, as I have already said, the immediate personal experiences will amply fill our time, and we shall hardly consider theology or ecclesiasticism at all.

We escape much controversial matter by this arbitrary definition of our field. But, still, a chance of controversy comes up over the word "divine," if we take the definition in too narrow a sense. There are systems of thought which the world usually calls religious, and yet which do not positively assume a God. Buddhism is in this case. Popularly, of course, the Buddha himself stands in place of a God; but in strictness the Buddhistic system is atheistic. Modern transcendental idealism, Emersonianism, for instance, also seems to let God evaporate into abstract Ideality. Not a deity in concreto, not a superhuman person, but the immanent divinity in things, the essentially spiritual structure of the universe, is the object of the transcendentalist cult. In that address to the graduating class at Divinity College in 1838 which made Emerson famous, the frank expression of this worship of mere abstract laws was what made the scandal of the performance.

"These laws," said the speaker, "execute themselves. They are out of time, out of space, and not subject to circumstance: Thus, in the soul of man there is a justice whose retributions are instant and entire. He who does a good deed is instantly ennobled. He who does a mean deed is by the action itself contracted. He who puts off impurity thereby puts on purity. If a man is at heart just, then in so far is he God; the safety of God, the immortality of God, the majesty of God, do enter into that man with justice. If a man dissemble, deceive, he deceives himself, and goes out of acquaintance with his own being. Character

[p. 33]

is always known. Thefts never enrich; alms never impoverish; murder will speak out of stone walls. The least admixture of a lie--for example, the taint of vanity, any attempt to make a good impression, a favorable appearance--will instantly vitiate the effect. But speak the truth, and all things alive or brute are vouchers, and the very roots of the grass underground there do seem to stir and move to bear your witness. For all things proceed out of the same spirit, which is differently named love, justice, temperance, in its different applications, just as the ocean receives different names on the several shores which it washes. In so far as he roves from these ends, a man bereaves himself of power, of auxiliaries. His being shrinks . . . he becomes less and less, a mote, a point, until absolute badness is absolute death. The perception of this law awakens in the mind a sentiment which we call the religious sentiment, and which makes our highest happiness. Wonderful is its power to charm and to command. It is a mountain air. It is the embalmer of the world.

It makes the sky and the hills sublime, and the silent song of the stars is it. It is the beatitude of man. It makes him illimitable. When he says 'I ought'; when love warns him; when he chooses, warned from on high, the good and great deed; then, deep melodies wander through his soul from supreme wisdom. Then he can worship, and be enlarged by his worship; for he can never go behind this sentiment. All the expressions of this sentiment are sacred and permanent in proportion to their purity. [They] affect us more than all other compositions. The sentences of the olden time, which ejaculate this piety, are still fresh and fragrant. And the unique impression of Jesus upon mankind, whose name is not so much written as ploughed into the history of this world, is proof of the subtle virtue of this infusion." [*1]

Such is the Emersonian religion. The universe has a divine soul of order, which soul is moral, being also the soul within the soul of man. But whether this soul of the universe be a mere quality like the eye's brilliancy or the skin's softness, or whether it be a self-conscious life like the

[p. 34]

eye's seeing or the skin's feeling, is a decision that never unmistakably appears in Emerson's pages. It quivers on the boundary of these things, sometimes leaning one way sometimes the other, to suit the literary rather than the philosophic need. Whatever it is, though, it is active. As much as if it were a God, we can trust it to protect all ideal interests and keep the world's balance straight. The sentences in which Emerson, to the very end, gave utterance to this faith are as fine as anything in literature: "If you love and serve men, you cannot by any hiding or stratagem escape the remuneration. Secret retributions are always restoring the level, when disturbed, of the divine justice. It is impossible to tilt the beam. All the tyrants and proprietors and monopolists of the world in vain set their shoulders to heave the bar. Settles forevermore the ponderous equator to its line, and man and mote, and star and sun, must range to it, or be pulverized by the recoil." [*2]

Now it would be too absurd to say that the inner experiences that underlie such expressions of faith as this and impel the writer to their utterance are quite unworthy to be called religious experiences. The sort of appeal that Emersonian optimism, on the one hand, and Buddhistic pessimism, on the other, make to the individual and the son of response which he makes to them in his life are in fact indistinguishable from, and in many respects identical with, the best Christian appeal and response. We must therefore, from the experiential point of view, call these godless or quasi-godless creeds "religions"; and accordingly when in our definition of religion we speak of the individual's relation to "what he considers the divine," we must interpret the term "divine" very broadly, as denoting any object that is godlike, whether it be a concrete deity or not.

[p. 35]

But the term "godlike," if thus treated as a floating general quality, becomes exceedingly vague, for many gods have flourished in religious history, and their attributes have been discrepant enough. What then is that essentially godlike quality--be it embodied in a concrete deity or not--our relation to which determines our character as religious men? It will repay us to seek some answer to this question before we proceed farther.

For one thing, gods are conceived to be first things in the way of being and power. They overarch and envelop, and from them there is no escape. What relates to them is the first and last word in the way of truth. Whatever then were most primal and enveloping and deeply true might at this rate be treated as godlike, and a man's religion might thus be identified with his attitude, whatever it might be, toward what he felt to be the primal truth.

Such a definition as this would in a way be defensible. Religion, whatever it is, is a man's total reaction upon life, so why not say that any total reaction upon life is a religion? Total reactions are different from casual reactions, and total attitudes are different from usual or professional attitudes. To get at them you must go behind the foreground of existence and reach down to that curious sense of the whole residual cosmos as an everlasting presence, intimate or alien, terrible or amusing, lovable or odious, which in some degree everyone possesses. This sense of the world's presence, appealing as it does to our peculiar individual temperament, makes us either strenuous or careless, devout or blasphemous, gloomy or exultant, about life at large; and our reaction, involuntary and inarticulate and often half unconscious as it is, is the completest of all our answers to the question, "What is the character of this universe in which we dwell?" It expresses our individual sense of it in the most definite way. Why then not call these reactions

[p. 36]

our religion, no matter what specific character they may have? Non-religious as some of these reactions may be, in one sense of the word "religious," they yet belong to the general sphere of the religious life, and so should generically be classed as religious reactions. "He believes in No-God, and he worships him," said a colleague of mine of a student who was manifesting a fine atheistic ardor; and the more fervent opponents of Christian doctrine have often enough shown a temper which, psychologically considered, is indistinguishable from religious zeal.

But so very broad a use of the word "religion" would be inconvenient, however defensible it might remain on logical grounds. There are trifling, sneering attitudes even toward the whole of life; and in some men these attitudes are final and systematic. It would strain the ordinary use of language too much to call such attitudes religious, even though, from the point of view of an unbiased critical philosophy, they might conceivably be perfectly reasonable ways of looking upon life. Voltaire, for example, writes thus to a friend, at the age of seventy-three: "As for myself," he says, "weak as I am, I carry on the war to the last moment, I get a hundred pike-thrusts, I return two hundred, and I laugh. I see near my door Geneva on fire with quarrels over nothing, and I laugh again; and, thank God, I can look upon the world as a farce even when it becomes as tragic as it sometimes does. All comes out even at the end of the day, and all comes out still more even when all the days are over."

Much as we may admire such a robust old gamecock spirit in a valetudinarian, to call it a religious spirit would be odd. Yet it is for the moment Voltaire's reaction on the whole of life. Je  fiche is the vulgar French equivalent for our English ejaculation "Who cares?" And the happy term je me'n fichisme recently has been invented to designate the systematic determination not to take anything in

[p. 37]

life too solemnly. "All is vanity" is the relieving word in all difficult crises for this mode of thought, which that exquisite literary genius Renan took pleasure, in his later days of sweet decay, in putting into coquettishly sacrilegious forms which remain to us as excellent expressions of the "all is vanity" state of mind. Take the following passage, for example--we must hold to duty, even against the evidence, Renan says--but he then goes on:--

"There are many chances that the world may be nothing but a fairy pantomime of which no God has care. We must therefore arrange ourselves so that on neither hypothesis we shall be completely wrong. We must listen to the superior voices, but in such a way that if the second hypothesis were true we should not have been too completely duped. If in effect the world be not a serious thing, it is the dogmatic people who will be the shallow ones, and the worldly minded whom the theologians now call frivolous will be those who are really wise.

"In utrumque paratus, then. Be ready for anything--that perhaps is wisdom. Give ourselves up, according to the hour, to confidence, to skepticism, to optimism, to irony and we may be sure that at certain moments at least we shall be with the truth. . . . Good-humor is a philosophic state of mind; it seems to say to Nature that we take her no more seriously than she takes us. I maintain that one should always talk of philosophy with a smile. We owe it to the Eternal to be virtuous but we have the right to add to this tribute our irony as a sort of personal reprisal. In this way we return to the right quarter jest for jest; we play the trick that has been played on us. Saint Augustine's phrase: Lord, if we arc deceived, it is by thee! remains a fine one, well suited to our modern feeling. Only we wish the Eternal to know that if we accept the fraud, we accept it knowingly and willingly. We are resigned in advance to losing the interest on our investments of virtue, but we wish not to appear ridiculous by having counted on them too securely." [*1]

[p. 38]

Surely all the usual associations of the word "religion" would have to be stripped away if such a systematic parti pris of irony were also to be denoted by the name. For common men "religion," whatever more special meanings it may have, signifies always a serious state of mind. If any one phrase could gather its universal message, that phrase would be, "All is not vanity in this Universe, whatever the appearances may suggest." If it can stop anything, religion as commonly apprehended can stop just such chaffing talk as Renan's. It favors gravity, not pertness; it says "hush" to all vain chatter and smart wit.

But if hostile to light irony, religion is equally hostile to heavy grumbling and complaint. The world appears tragic enough in some religions, but the tragedy is realized as purging, and a way of deliverance is held to exist. We shall see enough of the religious melancholy in a future lecture; but melancholy, according to our ordinary use of language, forfeits all title to be called religious when, in Marcus Aurelius's racy words, the sufferer simply lies kicking and screaming after the fashion of a sacrificed pig. The mood of a Schopenhauer or a Nietzsche--and in a less degree one may sometimes say the same of our own sad Carlyle--though often an ennobling sadness, is almost as often only peevishness running away with the bit between its teeth. The sallies of the two German authors remind one, half the time, of the sick shriekings of two dying rats. They lack the purgatorial note which religious sadness gives forth.

There must be something solemn, serious, and tender about any attitude which we denominate religious. If glad, it must not grin or snicker; if sad, it must not scream or curse. It is precisely as being solemn experiences that I wish to interest you in religious experiences. So I propose--arbitrarily again, if you please--to narrow our definition once more by saying that the word "divine," as employed therein, shall mean for us not merely the primal and enveloping

[p. 39]

and real, for that meaning if taken without restriction might prove too broad. The divine shall mean for us only such a primal reality as the individual feels impelled to respond to solemnly and gravely, and neither by a curse nor a jest.

But solemnity, and gravity, and all such emotional attributes, admit of various shades; and, do what we will with our defining, the truth must at last be confronted that we are dealing with a field of experience where there is not a single conception that can be sharply drawn. The pretension, under such conditions, to be rigorously "scientific" or "exact" in our terms would only stamp us as lacking in understanding of our task. Things are more or less divine, states of mind are more or less religious, reactions are more or less total, but the boundaries are always misty, and it is everywhere a question of amount and degree. Nevertheless, at their extreme of development, there can never be any question as to what experiences are religious. The divinity of the object and the solemnity of the reaction are too well marked for doubt. Hesitation as to whether a state of mind is "religious," or "irreligious," or "moral," or "philosophical," is only likely to arise when the state of mind is weakly characterized, but in that case it will be hardly worthy of our study at all. With states that can only by courtesy be called religious we need have nothing to do, our only profitable business being with what nobody can possibly feel tempted to call anything else. I said in my former lecture that we learn most about a thing when we view it under a microscope, as it were, or in its most exaggerated form. This is as true of religious phenomena as of any other kind of fact. The only cases likely to be profitable enough to repay our attention will therefore be cases where the religious spirit is unmistakable and extreme. Its fainter manifestations we may tranquilly pass by. Here, for example, is the total reaction upon life of Frederick Locker Lampson, whose autobiography,

[p. 40]

entitled "Confidences," proves him to have been a most amiable man.

"I am so far resigned to my lot that I feel small pain at the thought of having to part from what has been called the pleasant habit of existence, the sweet fable of life. I would not care to live my wasted life over again, and so to prolong my span. Strange to say, I have but little wish to be younger. I submit with a chill at my heart. I humbly submit because it is the Divine Will, and my appointed destiny. I dread the increase of infirmities that will make me a burden to those around me, those dear to me. No! let me slip away as quietly and comfortably as I can. Let the end come, if peace come with it.

"I do not know that there is a great deal to be said for this world, or our sojourn here upon it; but it has pleased God so to place us, and it must please me also. I ask you, what is human life? Is not it a maimed happiness--care and weariness, weariness and care, with the baseless expectation, the strange cozenage of a brighter to-morrow? At best it is but a froward child, that must be played with and humored, to keep it quiet till it falls asleep, and then the care is over." [*1]

This is a complex, a tender, a submissive, and a graceful state of mind. For myself, I should have no objection to calling it on the whole a religious state of mind, although I dare say that to many of you it may seem too listless and half-hearted to merit so good a name. But what matters it in the end whether we call such a state of mind religious or not? It is too insignificant for our instruction in any case; and its very possessor wrote it down in terms which he would not have used unless he had been thinking of more energetically religious moods in others, with which he found himself unable to compete.

[p. 41]

It is with these more energetic states that our sole business lies, and we can perfectly well afford to let the minor notes and the uncertain border go. It was the extremer cases that I had in mind a little while ago when I said that personal religion, even without theology or ritual, would prove to embody some elements that morality pure and simple does not contain. You may remember that I promised shortly to point out what those elements were. In a general way I can now say what I had in mind.

 

"I accept the universe" is reported to have been a favorite utterance of our New England transcendentalist, Margaret Fuller; and when some one repeated this phrase to Thomas Carlyle, his sardonic comment is said to have been: "Gad! she'd better!" At bottom the whole concern of both morality and religion is with the manner of our acceptance of the universe. Do we accept it only in part and grudgingly, or heartily and altogether? Shall our protests against certain things in it be radical and unforgiving, or shall we think that, even with evil, there are ways of living that must lead to good? If we accept the whole, shall we do so as if stunned into submission--as Carlyle would have us--"Gad! we'd better!"--or shall we do so with enthusiastic assent? Morality pure and simple accepts the law of the whole which it finds reigning, so far as to acknowledge and obey it, but it may obey it with the heaviest and coldest heart, and never cease to feel it as a yoke. But for religion, in its strong and fully developed manifestations, the service of the highest never is felt as a yoke. Dull submission is left far behind, and a mood of welcome, which may fill any place on the scale between cheerful serenity and enthusiastic gladness, has taken its place.

It makes a tremendous emotional and practical difference to one whether one accept the universe in the drab discolored way of stoic resignation to necessity, or with the passionate happiness of Christian saints. The difference is as great as that between passivity and activity, as that between

[p. 42]

the defensive and the aggressive mood. Gradual as are the steps by which an individual may grow from one state into the other, many as are the intermediate stages which different individuals represent, yet when you place the typical extremes beside each other for comparison, you feel that two discontinuous psychological universes confront you, and that in passing from one to the other a "critical point" has been overcome.

If we compare stoic with Christian ejaculations we see much more than a difference of doctrine; rather is it a difference of emotional mood that parts them. When Marcus Aurelius reflects on the eternal reason that has ordered things, there is a frosty chill about his words which you rarely find in a Jewish, and never in a Christian piece of religious writing. The universe is "accepted" by all these writers; but how devoid of passion or exultation the spirit of the Roman Emperor is! Compare his fine sentence: "If gods care not for me or my children, here is a reason for it," with Job's cry: "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him!" and you immediately see the difference I mean. The anima mundi, to whose disposal of his own personal destiny the Stoic consents, is there to be respected and submitted to, but the Christian God is there to be loved; and the difference of emotional atmosphere is like that between an arctic climate and the tropics, though the outcome in the way of accepting actual conditions uncomplainingly may seem in abstract terms to be much the same.

"It is a man's duty," says Marcus Aurelius, "to comfort himself and wait for the natural dissolution, and not to be vexed, but to find refreshment solely in these thoughts--first that nothing will happen to me which is not conformable to the nature of the universe; and secondly that I need do nothing contrary to the God and deity within me; for there is no man who can compel me to transgress. He is an abscess on the universe who withdraws and separates himself from the reason

[p. 43]

of our common nature, through being displeased with the things which happen. For the same nature produces these, and has produced thee too. And so accept everything which happens, even if it seem disagreeable, because it leads to this, the health of the universe and to the prosperity and felicity of Zeus. For he would not have brought on any man what he has brought if it were not useful for the whole. The integrity of the whole is mutilated if thou cuttest off anything. And thou dost cut off, as far as it is in thy power, when thou art dissatisfied, and in a manner triest to put anything out of the way." [*1]

Compare now this mood with that of the old Christian author of the Theologia Germanica:--

"Where men are enlightened with the true light, they renounce all desire and choice, and commit and commend themselves and all things to the eternal Goodness, so that every enlightened man could say: 'I would fain be to the Eternal Goodness what his own hand is to a man.' Such men are in a state of freedom, because they have lost the fear of pain or hell, and the hope of reward or heaven, and are living in pure submission to the eternal Goodness, in the perfect freedom of fervent love. When a man truly perceiveth and considereth himself, who and what he is, and findeth himself utterly vile and wicked and unworthy, he falleth into such a deep abasement that it seemeth to him reasonable that all creatures in heaven and earth should rise up against him. And therefore he will not and dare not desire any consolation and release; but he is willing to be unconsoled and unreleased; and he doth not grieve over his sufferings, for they are right in his eyes, and he hath nothing to say against them. This is what is meant by true repentance for sin; and he who in this present time entereth into this hell, none may console him. Now God hath not forsaken a man in this hell, but He is laying his hand upon him, that the man may not desire nor regard anything but the eternal Good only. And then, when the man neither careth for nor desireth anything but the eternal Good alone, and seeketh

[p. 44]

not himself nor his own things, but the honour of God only, he is made a partaker of all manner of joy, bliss, peace, rest, and consolation, and so the man is henceforth in the kingdom of heaven. This hell and this heaven are two good safe ways for a man, and happy is he who truly findeth them." [*1]

How much more active and positive the impulse of the Christian writer to accept his place in the universe is! Marcus Aurelius agrees to the scheme--the German theologian agrees with it. He literally abounds in agreement, he runs out to embrace the divine decrees.

Occasionally, it is true, the stoic rises to something like a Christian warmth of sentiment, as in the often quoted passage of Marcus Aurelius:--

"Everything harmonizes with me which is harmonious to thee, O Universe. Nothing for me is too early nor too late, which is in due time for thee. Everything is fruit to me which thy seasons bring, O Nature: from thee are all things, in thee are all things, to thee all things return. The poet says, Dear City of Cecrops; and wilt thou not say, Dear City of Zeus?" [*2]

But compare even as devout a passage as this with a genuine Christian outpouring, and it seems a little cold. Turn, for instance, to the Imitation of Christ:--

"Lord, thou knowest what is best; let this or that be according as thou wilt. Give what thou wilt, so much as thou wilt, when thou wilt. Do with me as thou knowest best, and as shall be most to thine honour. Place me where thou wilt, and freely work thy will with me in all things. . . . When could it be evil when thou wert near? I had rather be poor for thy sake than rich without thee. I choose rather to be a pilgrim upon the earth with thee, than without thee to possess heaven.

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Where thou art, there is heaven; and where thou art not, behold there death and hell." [*17]

It is a good rule in physiology, when we are studying the meaning of an organ, to ask after its most peculiar and characteristic sort of performance, and to seek its office in that one of its functions which no other organ can possibly exert. Surely the same maxim holds good in our present quest. The essence of religious experiences, the thing by which we finally must judge them, must be that element or quality in them which we can meet nowhere else. And such a quality will be of course most prominent and easy to notice in those religious experiences which are most one-sided, exaggerated, and intense.

Now when we compare these intenser experiences with the experiences of tamer minds, so cool and reasonable that we are tempted to call them philosophical rather than religious, we find a character that is perfectly distinct. That character, it seems to me, should be regarded as the practically important differentia of religion for our purpose; and just what it is can easily be brought out by comparing the mind of an abstractly conceived Christian with that of a moralist similarly conceived.

A life is manly, stoical, moral, or philosophical, we say, in proportion as it is less swayed by paltry personal considerations and more by objective ends that call for energy, even though that energy bring personal loss and pain. This is the good side of war, in so far as it calls for "volunteers." And for morality life is a war, and the service of the highest

[p. 46]

is a sort of cosmic patriotism which also calls for volunteers. Even a sick man, unable to be militant outwardly, can carry on the moral warfare. He can willfully turn his attention away from his own future, whether in this world or the next. He can train himself to indifference to his present drawbacks and immerse himself in whatever objective interests still remain accessible. He can follow public news, and sympathize with other people's affairs. He can cultivate cheerful manners, and be silent about his miseries. He can contemplate whatever ideal aspects of existence his philosophy is able to present to him, and practice whatever duties, such as patience, resignation, trust, his ethical system requires. Such a man lives on his loftiest, largest plane. He is a high-hearted freeman and no pining slave. And yet he lacks something which the Christian par excellence, the mystic and ascetic saint, for example, has in abundant measure, and which makes of him a human being of an altogether different denomination.

The Christian also spurns the pinched and mumping sick-room attitude, and the lives of saints are full of a kind of callousness to diseased conditions of body which probably no other human records show. But whereas the merely moralistic spurning takes an effort of volition, the Christian spurning is the result of the excitement of a higher kind of emotion, in the presence of which no exertion of volition is required. The moralist must hold his breath and keep his muscles tense; and so long as this athletic attitude is possible all goes well--morality suffices. But the athletic attitude tends ever to break down, and it inevitably does break down even in the most stalwart when the organism begins to decay, or when morbid fears invade the mind. To suggest personal will and effort to one all sicklied o'er with the sense of irremediable impotence is to suggest the most impossible of things. What he craves is to be consoled in his very powerlessness, to feel that the spirit of the universe

[p. 47]

recognizes and secures him, all decaying and failing as he is. Well, we are all such helpless failures in the last resort. The sanest and best of us are of one clay with lunatics and prison inmates, and death finally runs the robustest of us down. And whenever we feel this, such a sense of the vanity and provisionality of our voluntary career comes over us that all our morality appears but as a plaster hiding a sore it can never cure, and all our well-doing as the hollowest substitute for that well-being that our lives ought to be grounded in, but, alas! are not.

And here religion comes to our rescue and takes our fate into her hands. There is a state of mind, known to religious men, but to no others, in which the will to assert ourselves and hold our own has been displaced by a willingness to close our mouths and be as nothing in the floods and waterspouts of God. In this state of mind, what we most dreaded has become the habitation of our safety, and the hour of our moral death has turned into our spiritual birthday. The time for tension in our soul is over, and that of happy relaxation, of calm deep breathing, of an eternal present, with no discordant future to be anxious about, has arrived. Fear is not held in abeyance as it is by mere morality, it is positively expunged and washed away.

We shall see abundant examples of this happy state of mind in later lectures of this course. We shall see how infinitely passionate a thing religion at its highest flights can be. Like love, like wrath, like hope, ambition, jealousy, like every other instinctive eagerness and impulse, it adds to life an enchantment which is not rationally or logically deducible from anything else. This enchantment, coming as a gift when it does come--a gift of our organism, the physiologists will tell us, a gift of God's grace, the theologians say--is either there or not there for us, and there are persons who can no more become possessed by it than they can fall in love with a given woman by mere word of command.

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] Religious feeling is thus an absolute addition to the Subject's range of life. It gives him a new sphere of power. When the outward battle is lost, and the outer world disowns him, it redeems and vivifies an interior world which otherwise would be an empty waste.

If religion is to mean anything definite for us, it seems to me that we ought to take it as meaning this added dimension of emotion, this enthusiastic temper of espousal, in regions where morality strictly so called can at best but bow its head and acquiesce. It ought to mean nothing short of this new reach of freedom for us, with the struggle over, the keynote of the universe sounding in our ears, and everlasting possession spread before our eyes. [*1]

This sort of happiness in the absolute and everlasting is what we find nowhere but in religion. It is parted off from all mere animal happiness, all mere enjoyment of the present, by that element of solemnity of which I have already made so much account. Solemnity is a hard thing to define abstractly, but certain of its marks are patent enough. A solemn state of mind is never crude or simple--it seems to contain a certain measure of its own opposite in solution. A solemn joy preserves a sort of bitter in its sweetness; a solemn sorrow is one to which we intimately consent. But there are writers who, realizing that happiness of a supreme sort is the prerogative of religion, forget this complication, and call all happiness, as such, religious. Mr. Havelock Ellis, for example, identifies religion with the entire field of the soul's liberation from oppressive moods.

[p. 49]

"The simplest functions of physiological life," he writes may be its ministers. Every one who is at all acquainted with the Persian mystics knows how wine may be regarded as an instrument of religion. Indeed, in all countries and in all ages some form of physical enlargement--singing, dancing, drinking, sexual excitement--has been intimately associated with worship. Even the momentary expansion of the soul in laughter is, to however slight an extent, a religious exercise. . . . Whenever an impulse from the world strikes against the organism, and the resultant is not discomfort or pain, not even the muscular contraction of strenuous manhood, but a joyous expansion or aspiration of the whole soul--there is religion. It is the infinite for which we hunger, and we ride gladly on every little wave that promises to bear us towards it." [*1]

But such a straight identification of religion with any and every form of happiness leaves the essential peculiarity of religious happiness out. The more commonplace happinesses which we get are "reliefs," occasioned by our momentary escapes from evils either experienced or threatened. But in its most characteristic embodiments, religious happiness is no mere feeling of escape. It cares no longer to escape. It consents to the evil outwardly as a form of sacrifice--inwardly it knows it to be permanently overcome. If you ask how religion thus falls on the thorns and faces death, and in the very act annuls annihilation, I cannot explain the matter, for it is religion's secret, and to understand it you must yourself have been a religious man of the extremer type. In our future examples, even of the simplest and healthiest-minded type of religious consciousness, we shall find this complex sacrificial constitution, in which a higher happiness holds a lower unhappiness in check. In the Louvre there is a picture, by Guido Reni, of St. Michael with his foot on Satan's neck. The richness of the picture

[p. 50]

is in large part due to the fiend's figure being there. The richness of its allegorical meaning also is due to his being there--that is, the world is all the richer for having a devil in it, so long as we keep our foot upon his neck. In the religious consciousness, that is just the position in which the fiend, the negative or tragic principle, is found; and for that very reason the religious consciousness is so rich from the emotional point of view. [*1] We shall see how in certain men and women it takes on a monstrously ascetic form. There are saints who have literally fed on the negative principle, on humiliation and privation, and the thought of suffering and death--their souls growing in happiness just in proportion as their outward state grew more intolerable. No other emotion than religious emotion can bring a man to this peculiar pass. And it is for that reason that when we ask our question about the value of religion for human life, I think we ought to look for the answer among these violenter examples rather than among those of a more moderate hue.

Having the phenomenon of our study in its acutest possible form to start with, we can shade down as much as we please later. And if in these cases, repulsive as they are to our ordinary worldly way of judging, we find ourselves compelled to acknowledge religion's value and treat it with respect, it will have proved in some way its value for life at large. By subtracting and toning down extravagances we may thereupon proceed to trace the boundaries of its legitimate sway.

To be sure, it makes our task difficult to have to deal so muck with eccentricities and extremes. "How can religion on the whole be the most important of all human functions," you may ask, "if every several manifestation of it

[p. 51]

in turn have to be corrected and sobered down and pruned away?" Such a thesis seems a paradox impossible to sustain reasonably--yet I believe that something like it will have to be our final contention. That personal attitude which the individual finds himself impelled to take up towards what he apprehends to be the divine--and you will remember that this was our definition--will prove to be both a helpless and a sacrificial attitude. That is, we shall have to confess to at least some amount of dependence on sheer mercy, and to practice some amount of renunciation, great or small, to save our souls alive. The constitution of the world we live in requires it:--

"Entbehren sollst du!
  sollst entbehren!
  Das ist der ewige Gesang
  Der jedem an die Ohren klingt,
  Den, unser ganzes Leben lang
  Uns heiser jede Stunde singt."

For when all is said and done, we are in the end absolutely dependent on the universe; and into sacrifices and surrenders of some sort, deliberately looked at and accepted, we are drawn and pressed as into our only permanent positions of repose. Now in those states of mind which fall short of religion, the surrender is submitted to as an imposition of necessity, and the sacrifice is undergone at the very best without complaint. In the religious life, on the contrary, surrender and sacrifice are positively espoused: even unnecessary givings-up are added in order that the happiness may increase. Religion thus makes easy and felicitous what in any case is necessary; and if it be the only agency that can accomplish this result, its vital importance as a human faculty stands vindicated beyond dispute. It becomes an essential organ of our life, performing a function which no other portion of our nature can so successfully fulfill. From the merely biological point of view, so to call

[p. 52]

it, this is a conclusion to which, so far as I can now see, we shall inevitably be led, and led moreover by following the purely empirical method of demonstration which I sketched to you in the first lecture. Of the farther office of religion as a metaphysical revelation I will say nothing now.

But to foreshadow the terminus of one's investigations is one thing, and to arrive there safely is another. In the next lecture, abandoning the extreme generalities which have engrossed us hitherto, I propose that we begin our actual journey by addressing ourselves directly to the concrete facts.

Footnotes

^28:1 I can do no better here than refer my readers to the extended and admirable remarks on the futility of all these definitions of religion, in an article by Professor Leuba, published in the Monist for January, 1901, after my own text was written.

^33:1 Miscellanies, 1868, p. 120 (abridged).

^34:2 Lectures and Biographical Sketches, 1868, p. 186.

^37:1 Feuilles detachees, pp. 394-398 (abridged).

^40:1 Op. cit., pp. 314, 313.

^43:1 Book V., ch. ix. (abridged).

^44:1 Chaps. x., xi. (abridged): Winkworth's translation.

^44:2 Book IV., 523

^45:17 Benham's translation: Book III., chaps. xv., lix. Compare Mary Moody Emerson: "Let me be a blot on this fair world, the obscurest the loneliest sufferer, with one proviso--that I know it is His agency. I will love Him though He shed frost and darkness on every way of mine." R. W. EMERSON: Lectures and Biographical Sketches, p. 188.

^48:1 Once more, there are plenty of men, constitutionally sombre men, in whose religious life this rapturousness is lacking. They are religious in the wider sense, yet in this acutest of all senses they are not so, and it is religion in the acutest sense that I wish, without disputing about words, to study first, so as to get at its typical differentia.

^49:1 The New Spirit, p. 232.

^50:1 I owe this allegorical illustration to my lamented colleague and Friend, Charles Carroll Everett.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

Lecture III

  

THE REALITY OF THE UNSEEN

Were one asked to characterize the life of religion in the broadest and most general terms possible, one might say that it consists of the belief that there is an unseen order, and that our supreme good lies in harmoniously adjusting ourselves thereto. This belief and this adjustment are the religious attitude in the soul. I wish during this hour to call your attention to some of the psychological peculiarities of such an attitude as this, or belief in an object which we cannot see. All our attitudes, moral, practical, or emotional, as well as religious, are due to the "objects" of our consciousness, the things which we believe to exist, whether really or ideally, along with ourselves. Such objects may be present to our senses, or they may be present only to our thought. In either case they elicit from us a reaction; and the reaction due to things of thought is notoriously in many cases as strong as that due to sensible presences. It may be even stronger. The memory of an insult may make us angrier than the insult did when we received it. We are frequently more ashamed of our blunders afterwards than we were at the moment of making them; and in general our whole higher prudential and moral life is based on the fact that material sensations actually present may have a weaker influence on our action than ideas of remoter facts.

The more concrete objects of most men's religion, the deities whom they worship, are known to them only in idea. It has been vouchsafed, for example, to very few

[p. 54]

[paragraph continues] Christian believers to have had a sensible vision of their Saviour; though enough appearances of this sort are on record, by way of miraculous exception, to merit our attention later. The whole force of the Christian religion, therefore, so far as belief in the divine personages determines the prevalent attitude of the believer, is in general exerted by the instrumentality of pure ideas, of which nothing in the individual's past experience directly serves as a model.

But in addition to these ideas of the more concrete religious objects, religion is full of abstract objects which prove to have an equal power. God's attributes as such, his holiness, his justice, his mercy, his absoluteness, his infinity, his omniscience, his tri-unity, the various mysteries of the redemptive process, the operation of the sacraments, etc., have proved fertile wells of inspiring meditation for Christian believers. [*1] We shall see later that the absence of definite sensible images is positively insisted on by the mystical authorities in all religions as the sine qua non of a successful orison, or contemplation of the higher divine truths. Such contemplations are expected (and abundantly verify the expectation, as we shall also see) to influence the believer's subsequent attitude very powerfully for good.

Immanuel Kant held a curious doctrine about such objects of belief as God, the design of creation, the soul, its freedom, and the life hereafter. These things, he said, are properly not objects of knowledge at all. Our conceptions always require a sense-content to work with, and as the

[p. 55]

words soul," "God," "immortality," cover no distinctive sense-content whatever, it follows that theoretically speaking they are words devoid of any significance. Yet strangely enough they have a definite meaning for our practice. We can act as if there were a God; feel as if we were free; consider Nature as if she were full of special designs; lay plans as if we were to be immortal; and we find then that these words do make a genuine difference in our moral life. Our faith that these unintelligible objects actually exist proves thus to be a full equivalent in praktischer Hinsicht, as Kant calls it, or from the point of view of our action, for a knowledge of what they might be, in case we were permitted positively to conceive them. So we have the strange phenomenon, as Kant assures us, of a mind believing with all its strength in the real presence of a set of things of no one of which it can form any notion whatsoever.

My object in thus recalling Kant's doctrine to your mind is not to express any opinion as to the accuracy of this particularly uncouth part of his philosophy, but only to illustrate the characteristic of human nature which we are considering, by an example so classical in its exaggeration. The sentiment of reality can indeed attach itself so strongly to our object of belief that our whole life is polarized through and through, so to speak, by its sense of the existence of the thing believed in, and yet that thing, for purpose of definite description, can hardly be said to be present to our mind at all. It is as if a bar of iron, without touch or sight, with no representative faculty whatever, might nevertheless be strongly endowed with an inner capacity for magnetic feeling; and as if, through the various arousals of its magnetism by magnets coming and going in its neighborhood, it might be consciously determined to different attitudes and tendencies. Such a bar of iron could never give you an outward description of the agencies that had the power of stirring it so strongly; yet of their presence, and of their significance

[p. 56]

for its life, it would be intensely aware through every fibre of its being.

It is not only the Ideas of pure Reason as Kant styled them, that have this power of making us vitally feel presences that we are impotent articulately to describe. All sorts of higher abstractions bring with them the same kind of impalpable appeal. Remember those passages from Emerson which I read at my last lecture. The whole universe of concrete objects, as we know them, swims, not only for such a transcendentalist writer, but for all of us, in a wider and higher universe of abstract ideas, that lend it its significance. As time, space, and the ether soak through all things so (we feel) do abstract and essential goodness, beauty, strength, significance, justice, soak through all things good, strong, significant, and just.

Such ideas, and others equally abstract, form the background for all our facts, the fountain-head of all the possibilities we conceive of. They give its "nature," as we call it, to every special thing. Everything we know is "what" it is by sharing in the nature of one of these abstractions. We can never look directly at them, for they are bodiless and featureless and footless, but we grasp all other things by their means, and in handling the real world we should be stricken with helplessness in just so far forth as we might lose these mental objects, these adjectives and adverbs and predicates and heads of classification and conception.

This absolute determinability of our mind by abstractions is one of the cardinal facts in our human constitution. Polarizing and magnetizing us as they do, we turn towards them and from them, we seek them, hold them, hate them, bless them, just as if they were so many concrete beings. And beings they are, beings as real in the realm which they inhabit as the changing things of sense are in the realm of space.

Plato gave so brilliant and impressive a defense of this

[p. 57]

common human feeling, that the doctrine of the reality of abstract objects has been known as the platonic theory of ideas ever since. Abstract Beauty, for example, is for Plato a perfectly definite individual being, of which the intellect is aware as of something additional to all the perishing beauties of the earth. "The true order of going," he says, in the often quoted passage in his "Banquet," "is to use the beauties of earth as steps along which one mounts upwards for the sake of that other Beauty, going from one to two, and from two to all fair forms, and from fair forms to fair actions, and from fair actions to fair notions, until from fair notions, he arrives at the notion of absolute Beauty, and at last knows what the essence of Beauty is." [*1] In our last lecture we had a glimpse of the way in which a platonizing writer like Emerson may treat the abstract divineness of things, the moral structure of the universe, as a fact worthy of worship. In those various churches without a God which to-day are spreading through the world under the name of ethical societies, we have a similar worship of the abstract divine, the moral law believed in as an ultimate object. "Science" in many minds is genuinely taking the place of a religion. Where this is so, the scientist treats the "Laws of Nature" as objective facts to be revered. A brilliant school of interpretation of Greek mythology would have it that in their origin the Greek gods were only half-metaphoric personifications of those great spheres of abstract law and order into which the natural world falls apart--the sky-sphere, the ocean-sphere, the earth-sphere, and the like; just as even now we may speak of the smile of the morning, the kiss of the breeze, or the bite of the cold, without really meaning that these phenomena of nature actually wear a human face. [*2]

[p. 58]

As regards the origin of the Greek gods, we need not at present seek an opinion. But the whole array of our instances leads to a conclusion something like this: It is as if there were in the human consciousness a sense of reality, a feeling of objective presence, a perception of what we may call "something there," more deep and more general than any of the special and particular "senses" by which the current psychology supposes existent realities to be originally revealed. If this were so, we might suppose the senses to waken our attitudes and conduct as they so habitually do, by first exciting this sense of reality; but anything else, any idea, for example, that might similarly excite it, would have that same prerogative of appearing real which objects of sense normally possess. So far as religious conceptions were able to touch this reality-feeling, they would be believed in in spite of criticism, even though they might be so vague and remote as to be almost unimaginable, even though they might be such non-entities in point of whatness, as Kant makes the objects of his moral theology to be.

The most curious proofs of the existence of such an undifferentiated sense of reality as this are found in experiences of hallucination. It often happens that an hallucination is imperfectly developed: the person affected will feel a "presence" in the room, definitely localized, facing in one particular way, real in the most emphatic sense of the word, often coming suddenly, and as suddenly gone; and yet neither seen, heard, touched, nor cognized in any of the usual "sensible" ways. Let me give you an example of this, before I pass to the objects with whose presence religion is more peculiarly concerned.

An intimate friend of mine, one of the keenest intellects I know, has had several experiences of this sort. He writes as follows in response to my inquiries:--

[p. 59]

"I have several times within the past few years felt the so-called 'consciousness of a presence.' The experiences which I have in mind are clearly distinguishable from another kind of experience which I have had very frequently, and which I fancy many persons would also call the 'consciousness of a presence.' But the difference for me between the two sets of experience is as great as the difference between feeling a slight warmth originating I know not where, and standing in the midst of a conflagration with all the ordinary senses alert.

"It was about September, 1884, when I had the first experience. On the previous night I had had, after getting into bed at my rooms in College, a vivid tactile hallucination of being grasped by the arm, which made me get up and search the room for an intruder; but the sense of presence properly so called came on the next night. After I had got into bed and blown out the candle, I lay awake awhile thinking on the previous night's experience, when suddenly I felt something come into the room and stay close to my bed. It remained only a minute or two. I did not recognize it by any ordinary sense and yet there was a horribly unpleasant 'sensation' connected with it. It stirred something more at the roots of my being than any ordinary perception. The feeling had something of the quality of a very large tearing vital pain spreading chiefly over the chest, but within the organism--and yet the feeling was not pain so much as abhorrence. At all events, something was present with me, and I knew its presence far more surely than I have ever known the presence of any fleshly living creature. I was conscious of its departure as of its coming: an almost instantaneously swift going through the door, and the 'horrible sensation' disappeared.

"On the third night when I retired my mind was absorbed in some lectures which I was preparing, and I was still absorbed in these when I became aware of the actual presence (though not of the coming) of the thing that was there the night before, and of the 'horrible sensation.' I then mentally concentrated all my effort to charge this 'thing,' if it was evil to depart, if it was not evil, to tell me who or what it was, and if it could not explain itself, to go, and that I would compel it

[p. 60]

to go. It went as on the previous night, and my body quickly recovered its normal state.

"On two other occasions in my life I have had precisely the same 'horrible sensation.' Once it lasted a full quarter of an hour. In all three instances the certainty that there in outward space there stood something was indescribably stronger than the ordinary certainty of companionship when we are in the close presence of ordinary living people. The something seemed close to me, and intensely more real than any ordinary perception. Although I felt it to be like unto myself so to speak, or finite, small, and distressful, as it were, I didn't recognize it as any individual being or person."

Of course such an experience as this does not connect itself with the religious sphere. Yet it may upon occasion do so; and the same correspondent informs me that at more than one other conjuncture he had the sense of presence developed with equal intensity and abruptness, only then it was filled with a quality of joy.

"There was not a mere consciousness of something there, but fused in the central happiness of it, a startling awareness of some ineffable good. Not vague either, not like the emotional effect of some poem, or scene, or blossom, of music, but the sure knowledge of the close presence of a sort of mighty person, and after it went, the memory persisted as the one perception of reality. Everything else might be a dream, but not that."

My friend, as it oddly happens, does not interpret these latter experiences theistically, as signifying the presence of God. But it would clearly not have been unnatural to interpret them as a revelation of the deity's existence. When we reach the subject of mysticism, we shall have much more to say upon this head.

Lest the oddity of these phenomena should disconcert you, I will venture to read you a couple of similar narratives, much shorter, merely to show that we are dealing with a well-marked natural kind of fact. In the first case, which I

[p. 61]

take from the Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, the sense of presence developed in a few moments into a distinctly visualized hallucination--but I leave that part of the story out.

"I had read," the narrator says, "some twenty minutes or so, was thoroughly absorbed in the book, my mind was perfectly quiet, and for the time being my friends were quite forgotten, when suddenly without a moment's warning my whole being seemed roused to the highest state of tension or aliveness, and I was aware, with an intenseness not easily imagined by those who had never experienced it, that another being or presence was not only in the room, but quite close to me. I put my book down, and although my excitement was great, I felt quite collected, and not conscious of any sense of fear. Without changing my position, and looking straight at the fire, I knew somehow that my friend A. H. was standing at my left elbow but so far behind me as to be hidden by the armchair in which I was leaning back. Moving my eyes round slightly without otherwise changing my position, the lower portion of one leg became visible, and I instantly recognized the gray-blue material of trousers he often wore, but the stuff appeared semitransparent, reminding me of tobacco smoke in consistency," [*1]--and hereupon the visual hallucination came.

Another informant writes:--

"Quite early in the night I was awakened. . . . I felt as if I had been aroused intentionally, and at first thought some one was breaking into the house. . . . I then turned on my side to go to sleep again, and immediately felt a consciousness of a presence in the room, and singular to state, it was not the consciousness of a live person, but of a spiritual presence. This may provoke a smile, but I can only tell you the facts as they occurred to me. I do not know how to better describe my sensations than by simply stating that I felt a consciousness of a spiritual presence. . . . I felt also at the same time a strong

[p. 62]

feeling of superstitious dread, as if something strange and fearful were about to happen." [*1]

Professor Flournoy of Geneva gives me the following testimony of a friend of his, a lady, who has the gift of automatic or involuntary writing:--

"Whenever I practice automatic writing, what makes me feel that it is not due to a subconscious self is the feeling I always have of a foreign presence, external to my body. It is sometimes so definitely characterized that I could point to its exact position. This impression of presence is impossible to describe. It varies in intensity and clearness according to the personality from whom the writing professes to come. If it is some one whom I love, I feel it immediately, before any writing has come. My heart seems to recognize it."

In an earlier book of mine I have cited at full length a curious case of presence felt by a blind man. The presence was that of the figure of a gray-bearded man dressed in a pepper and salt suit, squeezing himself under the crack of the door and moving across the floor of the room towards a sofa. The blind subject of this quasi-hallucination is an exceptionally intelligent reporter. He is entirely without internal visual imagery and cannot represent light or colors to himself, and is positive that his other senses, hearing, etc., were not involved in this false perception. It seems to have been an abstract conception rather, with the feelings of reality and spatial outwardness directly attached to it--in other words, a fully objectified and exteriorized idea.

Such cases, taken along with others which would be too tedious for quotation, seem sufficiently to prove the existence in our mental machinery of a sense of present reality more diffused and general than that which our special senses yield. For the psychologists the tracing of the organic seat of

[p. 63]

such a feeling would form a pretty problem--nothing could be more natural than to connect it with the muscular sense, with the feeling that our muscles were innervating themselves for action. Whatsoever thus innervated our activity, or "made our flesh creep"--our senses are what do so oftenest--might then appear real and present, even though it were but an abstract idea. But with such vague conjectures we have no concern at present, for our interest lies with the faculty rather than with its organic seat.

Like all positive affections of consciousness, the sense of reality has its negative counterpart in the shape of a feeling of unreality by which persons may be haunted, and of which one sometimes hears complaint:--

"When I reflect on the fact that I have made my appearance by accident upon a globe itself whirled through space as the sport of the catastrophes of the heavens," says Madame Ackermann; "when I see myself surrounded by beings as ephemeral and incomprehensible as I am myself, and all excitedly pursuing pure chimeras, I experience a strange feeling of being in a dream. It seems to me as if I have loved and suffered and that erelong I shall die, in a dream. My last word will be, 'I have been dreaming.'" [*1]

In another lecture we shall see how in morbid melancholy this sense of the unreality of things may become a carking pain, and even lead to suicide.

We may now lay it down as certain that in the distinctively religious sphere of experience, many persons (how many we cannot tell) possess the objects of their belief, not in the form of mere conceptions which their intellect accepts as true, but rather in the form of quasi-sensible realities directly apprehended. As his sense of the real presence of these objects fluctuates, so the believer alternates between warmth and coldness in his faith. Other examples will bring this

[p. 64]

home to one better than abstract description, so I proceed immediately to cite some. The first example is a negative one, deploring the loss of the sense in question. I have extracted it from an account given me by a scientific man of my acquaintance, of his religious life. It seems to me to show clearly that the feeling of reality may be something more like a sensation than an intellectual operation properly so-called.

"Between twenty and thirty I gradually became more and more agnostic and irreligious, yet I cannot say that I ever lost that 'indefinite consciousness' which Herbert Spencer describes so well, of an Absolute Reality behind phenomena. For me this Reality was not the pure Unknowable of Spencer's philosophy, for although I had ceased my childish prayers to God, and never prayed to It in a formal manner, yet my more recent experience shows me to have been in a relation to It which practically was the same thing as prayer. Whenever I had any trouble, especially when I had conflict with other people, either domestically or in the way of business, or when I was depressed in spirits or anxious about affairs, I now recognize that I used to fall back for support upon this curious relation I felt myself to be in to this fundamental cosmical It. It was on my side, or I was on Its side, however you please to term it, in the particular trouble, and it always strengthened me and seemed to give me endless vitality to feel its underlying and supporting presence. In fact, it was an unfailing fountain of living justice, truth, and strength, to which I instinctively turned at times of weakness, and it always brought me out. I know now that it was a personal relation I was in to it, because of late years the power of communicating with it has left me, and I am conscious of a perfectly definite loss. I used never to fail to find it when I turned to it. Then came a set of years when sometimes I found it, and then again I would be wholly unable to make connection with it. I remember many occasions on which at night in bed, I would be unable to get to sleep on account of worry. I turned this way and that in the darkness, and groped mentally for the familiar sense of that higher mind of my mind

[p. 65]

which had always seemed to be close at hand as it were, closing the passage, and yielding support, but there was no electric current. A blank was there instead of It: I couldn't find anything. Now, at the age of nearly fifty, my power of getting into connection with it has entirely left me; and I have to confess that a great help has gone out of my life. Life has become curiously dead and indifferent; and I can now see that my old experience was probably exactly the same thing as the prayers of the orthodox, only I did not call them by that name. What I have spoken of as 'It' was practically not Spencer's Unknowable, but just my own instinctive and individual God, whom I relied upon for higher sympathy, but whom somehow I have lost."

Nothing is more common in the pages of religious biography than the way in which seasons of lively and of difficult faith are described as alternating. Probably every religious person has the recollection of particular crisis in which a directer vision of the truth, a direct perception, perhaps, of a living God's existence, swept in and overwhelmed the languor of the more ordinary belief. In James Russell Lowell's correspondence there is a brief memorandum of an experience of this kind:--

"I had a revelation last Friday evening. I was at Mary's, and happening to say something of the presence of spirits (of whom, I said, I was often dimly aware), Mr. Putnam entered into an argument with me on spiritual matters. As I was speaking, the whole system rose up before me like a vague destiny looming from the Abyss. I never before so clearly felt the Spirit of God in me and around rue. The whole room seemed to me full of God. The air seemed to waver to and fro with the presence of Something I knew not what. I spoke with the calmness and clearness of a prophet. I cannot tell you what this revelation was. I have not yet studied it enough. But I shall perfect it one day, and then you shall hear it and acknowledge its grandeur." [*1]

[p. 66]

Here is a longer and more developed experience from a manuscript communication by a clergyman--I take it from Starbuck's manuscript collection:--

"I remember the night, and almost the very spot on the hill-top, where my soul opened out, as it were, into the Infinite, and there was a rushing together of the two worlds, the inner and the outer. It was deep calling unto deep--the deep that my own struggle had opened up within being answered by the unfathomable deep without, reaching beyond the stars. I stood alone with Him who had made me, and all the beauty of the world, and love, and sorrow, and even temptation. I did not seek Him, but felt the perfect unison of my spirit with His. The ordinary sense of things around me faded. For the moment nothing but an ineffable joy and exultation remained. It is impossible fully to describe the experience. It was like the effect of some great orchestra when all the separate notes have melted into one swelling harmony that leaves the listener conscious of nothing save that his soul is being wafted upwards, and almost bursting with its own emotion. The perfect stillness of the night was thrilled by a more solemn silence. The darkness held a presence that was all the more felt because it was not seen. I could not any more have doubted that He was there than that I was. Indeed, I felt myself to be, if possible, the less real of the two.

"My highest faith in God and truest idea of him were then born in me. I have stood upon the Mount of Vision since, and felt the Eternal round about me. But never since has there come quite the same stirring of the heart. Then, if ever, I believe, I stood face to face with God, and was born anew of his spirit. There was, as I recall it, no sudden change of thought or of belief, except that my early crude conception, had, as it were burst into flower. There was no destruction of the old, but a rapid, wonderful unfolding. Since that time no discussion that I have heard of the proofs of God's existence has been able to shake my faith. Having once felt the presence of God's spirit, I have never lost it again for long. My most assuring evidence of his existence is deeply rooted in that hour of vision in the memory of that supreme experience, and in the conviction,

[p. 67]

gained from reading and reflection, that something the same has come to all who have found God. I am aware that it may justly be called mystical. I am not enough acquainted with philosophy to defend it from that or any other charge. I feel that in writing of it I have overlaid it with words rather than put it clearly to your thought. But, such as it is, I have described it as carefully as I now am able to do."

Here is another document, even more definite in character, which, the writer being a Swiss, I translate from the French original. [*1]

"I was in perfect health: we were on our sixth day of tramping, and in good training. We had come the day before from Sixt to Trient by Buet. I felt neither fatigue, hunger, nor thirst, and my state of mind was equally healthy. I had had at Forlaz good news from home; I was subject to no anxiety, either near or remote, for we had a good guide, and there was not a shadow of uncertainty about the road we should follow. I can best describe the condition in which I was by calling it a state of equilibrium. When all at once I experienced a feeling of being raised above myself, I felt the presence of God--I tell of the thing just as I was conscious of it--as if his goodness and his power were penetrating me altogether. The throb of emotion was so violent that I could barely tell the boys to pass on and not wait for me. I then sat down on a stone, unable to stand any longer, and my eyes overflowed with tears. I thanked God that in the course of my life he had taught me to know him, that he sustained my life and took pity both on the insignificant creature and on the sinner that I was. I begged him ardently that my life might be consecrated to the doing of his will. I felt his reply, which was that I should do his will from day to day in humility and poverty, leaving him, the Almighty God, to be judge of whether I should some time be called to bear witness more conspicuously. Then, slowly, the ecstasy left my heart; that is, I felt that God had withdrawn the communion which he had granted, and I was able to walk on, but very slowly,

[p. 68]

so strongly was I still possessed by the interior emotion. Besides, I had wept uninterruptedly for several minutes, my eyes were swollen, and I did not wish my companions to see me. The state of ecstasy may have lasted four or five minutes, although it seemed at the time to last much longer. My comrades waited for me ten minutes at the cross of Barine, but I took about twenty-five or thirty minutes to join them, for as well as I can remember, they said that I had kept them back for about half an hour. The impression had been so profound that in climbing slowly the slope I asked myself if it were possible that Moses on Sinai could have had a more intimate communication with God. I think it well to add that in this ecstasy of mine God had neither form, color, odor, nor taste; moreover, that the feeling of his presence was accompanied with no determinate localization. It was rather as if my personality had been transformed by the presence of a spiritual spirit. But the more I seek words to express this intimate intercourse, the more I feel the impossibility of describing the thing by any of our usual images. At bottom the expression most apt to render what I felt is this: God was present, though invisible; he fell under no one of my senses, yet my consciousness perceived him."

The adjective "mystical" is technically applied, most often, to states that are of brief duration. Of course such hours of rapture as the last two persons describe are mystical experiences, of which in a later lecture I shall have much to say. Meanwhile here is the abridged record of another mystical or semi-mystical experience, in a mind evidently framed by nature for ardent piety. I owe it to Starbuck's collection. The lady who gives the account is the daughter of a man well known in his time as a writer against Christianity. The suddenness of her conversion shows well how native the sense of God's presence must be to certain minds. She relates that she was brought up in entire ignorance of Christian doctrine, but, when in Germany, after being talked to by Christian friends, she read the Bible and prayed, and finally the plan of salvation flashed upon her like a stream of light.

[p. 69]

"To this day," she writes, "I cannot understand dallying with religion and the commands of God. The very instant I heard my Father's cry calling unto me, my heart bounded in recognition. I ran, I stretched forth my arms, I cried aloud, 'Here, here I am, my Father.' Oh, happy child, what should I do? 'Love me,' answered my God. 'I do, I do,' I cried passionately. 'Come unto me,' called my Father. 'I will,' my heart panted. Did I stop to ask a single question? Not one. It never occurred to me to ask whether I was good enough, or to hesitate over my unfitness, or to find out what I thought of his church, or . . . to wait until I should be satisfied. Satisfied! I was satisfied. Had I not found my God and my Father? Did he not love me? Had he not called me? Was there not a Church into which I might enter? . . . Since then I have had direct answers to prayer--so significant as to be almost like talking with God and hearing his answer. The idea of God's reality has never left me for one moment."

Here is still another case, the writer being a man aged twenty-seven, in which the experience, probably almost as characteristic, is less vividly described:--

"I have on a number of occasions felt that I had enjoyed a period of intimate communion with the divine. These meetings came unasked and unexpected, and seemed to consist merely in the temporary obliteration of the conventionalities which usually surround and cover my life. . . . Once it was when from the summit of a high mountain I looked over a gashed and corrugated landscape extending to a long convex of ocean that ascended to the horizon, and again from the same point when I could see nothing beneath me but a boundless expanse of white cloud, on the blown surface of which a few high peaks, including the one I was on, seemed plunging about as if they were dragging their anchors. What I felt on these occasions was a temporary loss of my own identity, accompanied by an illumination which revealed to me a deeper significance than I had been wont to attach to life. It is in this that I find my justification for saying that I have enjoyed communication with God. Of course the absence of such a being as this would be chaos. I cannot conceive of life without its presence."

[p. 70]

Of the more habitual and so to speak chronic sense of God's presence the following sample from Professor Starbuck's manuscript collection may serve to give an idea. It is from a man aged forty-nine--probably thousands of unpretending Christians would write an almost identical account.

"God is more real to me than any thought or thing or person. I feel his presence positively, and the more as I live in closer harmony with his laws as written in my body and mind. I feel him in the sunshine or rain; and awe mingled with a delicious restfulness most nearly describes my feelings. I talk to him as to a companion in prayer and praise, and our communion is delightful. He answers me again and again, often in words so clearly spoken that it seems my outer ear must have carried the tone, but generally in strong mental impressions. Usually a text of Scripture, unfolding some new view of him and his love for me, and care for my safety. I could give hundreds of instances, in school matters, social problems, financial difficulties, etc. That he is mine and I am his never leaves me, it is an abiding joy. Without it life would be a blank, a desert, a shoreless, trackless waste."

I subjoin some more examples from writers of different ages and sexes. They are also from Professor Starbuck's collection, and their number might be greatly multiplied. The first is from a man twenty-seven years old:--

"God is quite real to me. I talk to him and often get answers. Thoughts sudden and distinct from any I have been entertaining come to my mind after asking God for his direction. Something over a year ago I was for some weeks in the direst perplexity. When the trouble first appeared before me I was dazed, but before long (two or three hours) I could hear distinctly a passage of Scripture: 'My grace is sufficient for thee.' Every time my thoughts turned to the trouble I could hear this quotation. I don't think I ever doubted the existence of God, or had him drop out of my consciousness. God has frequently stepped into my affairs very perceptibly, and I feel that he directs many

[p. 71]

little details all the time. But on two or three occasions he has ordered ways for me very contrary to my ambitions and plans."

Another statement (none the less valuable psychologically for being so decidedly childish) is that of a boy of seventeen:--

"Sometimes as I go to church, I sit down, join in the service, and before I go out I feel as if God was with me, right side of me, singing and reading the Psalms with me. . . . And then again I feel as if I could sit beside him, and put my arms around him, kiss him, etc. When I am taking Holy Communion at the altar, I try to get with him and generally feel his presence."

I let a few other cases follow at random:--

"God surrounds me like the physical atmosphere. He is closer to me than my own breath. In him literally I live and move and have my being."--

"There are times when I seem to stand in his very presence, to talk with him. Answers to prayer have come, sometimes direct and overwhelming in their revelation of his presence and powers. There are times when God seems far off, but this is always my own fault."--

"I have the sense of a presence, strong, and at the same time soothing, which hovers over me. Sometimes it seems to enwrap me with sustaining arms."

Such is the human ontological imagination, and such is the convincingness of what it brings to birth. Unpicturable beings are realized, and realized with an intensity almost like that of an hallucination. They determine our vital attitude as decisively as the vital attitude of lovers is determined by the habitual sense, by which each is haunted, of the other being in the world. A lover has notoriously this sense of the continuous being of his idol, even when his attention is addressed to other matters and he no longer represents her features. He cannot forget her; she uninterruptedly affects him through and through.

[p. 72]

I spoke of the convincingness of these feelings of reality, and I must dwell a moment longer on that point. They are as convincing to those who have them as any direct sensible experiences can be, and they are, as a rule, much more convincing than results established by mere logic ever are. One may indeed be entirely without them; probably more than one of you here present is without them in any marked degree; but if you do have them, and have them at all strongly, the probability is that you cannot help regarding them as genuine perceptions of truth, as revelations of a kind of reality which no adverse argument, however unanswerable by you in words, can expel from your belief. The opinion opposed to mysticism in philosophy is sometimes spoken of as rationalism. Rationalism insists that all our beliefs ought ultimately to find for themselves articulate grounds. Such grounds, for rationalism, must consist of four things: (1) definitely statable abstract principles; (2) definite facts of sensation; (3) definite hypotheses based on such facts; and (4) definite inferences logically drawn. Vague impressions of something indefinable have no place in the rationalistic system, which on its positive side is surely a splendid intellectual tendency, for not only are all our philosophies fruits of it, but physical science (amongst other good things) is its result.

Nevertheless, if we look on man's whole mental life as it exists, on the life of men that lies in them apart from their learning and science, and that they inwardly and privately follow, we have to confess that the part of it of which rationalism can give an account is relatively superficial. It is the part that has the prestige undoubtedly, for it has the loquacity, it can challenge you for proofs, and chop logic, and put you down with words. But it will fail to convince or convert you all the same, if your dumb intuitions are opposed to its conclusions. If you have intuitions at all, they come from a deeper level of your nature than the loquacious level which

[p. 73]

rationalism inhabits. Your whole subconscious life, your impulses, your faiths, your needs, your divinations, have prepared the premises, of which your consciousness now feels the weight of the result; and something in you absolutely KNOWS that that result must be truer than any logic-chopping rationalistic talk, however clever, that may contradict it. This inferiority of the rationalistic level in founding belief is just as manifest when rationalism argues for religion as when it argues against it. That vast literature of proofs of God's existence drawn from the order of nature, which a century ago seemed so overwhelmingly convincing, to-day does little more than gather dust in libraries, for the simple reason that our generation has ceased to believe in the kind of God it argued for. Whatever sort of a being God may be, we KNOW to-day that he is nevermore that mere external inventor of "contrivances" intended to make manifest his "glory" in which our great-grandfathers took such satisfaction, though just how we know this we cannot possibly make clear by words either to others or to ourselves. I defy any of you here fully to account for your persuasion that if a God exist he must be a more cosmic and tragic personage than that Being.

The truth is that in the metaphysical and religious sphere, articulate reasons are cogent for us only when our inarticulate feelings of reality have already been impressed in favor of the same conclusion. Then, indeed, our intuitions and our reason work together, and great world-ruling systems, like that of the Buddhist or of the Catholic philosophy, may grow up. Our impulsive belief is here always what sets up the original body of truth, and our articulately verbalized philosophy is but its showy translation into formulas. The unreasoned and immediate assurance is the deep thing in us, the reasoned argument is but a surface exhibition. Instinct leads, intelligence does but follow. If a person feels the presence of a living God after the fashion shown by my quotations,

[p. 74]

your critical arguments, be they never so superior, will vainly set themselves to change his faith.

Please observe, however, that I do not yet say that it is better that the subconscious and non-rational should thus hold primacy in the religious realm. I confine myself to simply pointing out that they do so hold it as a matter of fact.

So much for our sense of the reality of the religious objects. Let me now say a brief word more about the attitudes they characteristically awaken.

We have already agreed that they are solemn; and we have seen reason to think that the most distinctive of them is the sort of joy which may result in extreme cases from absolute self-surrender. The sense of the kind of object to which the surrender is made has much to do with determining the precise complexion of the joy; and the whole phenomenon is more complex than any simple formula allows. In the literature of the subject, sadness and gladness have each been emphasized in turn. The ancient saying that the first maker of the Gods was fear receives voluminous corroboration from every age of religious history; but none the less does religious history show the part which joy has evermore tended to play. Sometimes the joy has been primary; sometimes secondary, being the gladness of deliverance from the fear. This latter state of things, being the more complex, is also the more complete; and as we proceed, I think we shall have abundant reason for refusing to leave out either the sadness or the gladness, if we look at religion with the breadth of view which it demands. Stated in the completest possible terms, a man's religion involves both moods of contraction and moods of expansion of his being. But the quantitative mixture and order of these moods vary so much from one age of the world, from one system of thought, and from one individual to another, that you may insist either on the dread and the submission, or on the peace and the freedom as the essence of the matter, and still remain materially

[p. 75]

within the limits of the truth. The constitutionally sombre and the constitutionally sanguine onlooker are bound to emphasize opposite aspects of what lies before their eyes.

The constitutionally sombre religious person makes even of his religious peace a very sober thing. Danger still hovers in the air about it. Flexion and contraction are not wholly checked. It were sparrowlike and childish after our deliverance to explode into twittering laughter and caper-cutting, and utterly to forget the imminent hawk on bough. Lie low, rather, lie low; for you are in the hands of a living God. In the Book of Job, for example, the impotence of man and the omnipotence of God is the exclusive burden of its author's mind. "It is as high as heaven; what canst thou do?--deeper than hell; what canst thou know?" There is an astringent relish about the truth of this conviction which some men can feel, and which for them is as near an approach as can be made to the feeling of religious joy.

"In Job," says that coldly truthful writer, the author of Mark Rutherford, "God reminds us that man is not the measure of his creation. The world is immense, constructed on no plan or theory which the intellect of man can grasp. It is transcendent everywhere. This is the burden of every verse, and is the secret if there be one, of the poem. Sufficient or insufficient, there is nothing more. . . . God is great, we know not his ways. He takes from us all we have, but yet if we possess our souls in patience, we may pass the valley of the shadow, and come out in sunlight again. We may or we may not! . . . What more have we to say now than God said from the whirlwind over two thousand five hundred years ago?" [*1]

If we turn to the sanguine onlooker, on the other hand, we find that deliverance is felt as incomplete unless the burden be altogether overcome and the danger forgotten. Such onlookers give us definitions that seem to the sombre minds

[p. 76]

of whom we have just been speaking to leave out all the solemnity that makes religious peace so different from merely animal joys. In the opinion of some writers an attitude might be called religious, though no touch were left in it of sacrifice or submission, no tendency to flexion, no bowing of the head. Any "habitual and regulated admiration," says Professor J. R. Seeley, [*1] "is worthy to be called a religion"; and accordingly he thinks that our Music, our Science, and our so-called "Civilization," as these things are now organized and admiringly believed in, form the more genuine religions of our time. Certainly the unhesitating and unreasoning way in which we feel that we must inflict our civilization upon "lower" races, by means of Hotchkiss guns, etc., reminds one of nothing so much as of the early spirit of Islam spreading its religion by the sword.

In my last lecture I quoted to you the ultra-radical opinion of Mr. Havelock Ellis, that laughter of any sort may be considered a religious exercise, for it bears witness to the soul's emancipation. I quoted this opinion in order to deny its adequacy. But we must now settle our scores more carefully with this whole optimistic way of thinking. It is far too complex to be decided off-hand. I propose accordingly that we make of religious optimism the theme of the next two lectures.

Footnotes

^54:1 Example: "I have had much comfort lately in meditating on the passages which show the personality of the Holy Ghost, and his distinctness from the Father and the Son. It is a subject that requires searching into to find out, but, when realized, gives one so much more true and lively a sense of the fullness of the Godhead, and its work in us and to us, than when only thinking of the Spirit in its effect on us." AUGUSTUS HARE: Memorials, i. 244, Maria Hare to Lucy H. Hare.

^57:1 Symposium, Jowett, 1871, i. 527.

^57:2 Example: "Nature is always so interesting, under whatever aspect she shows herself, that when it rains, I seem to see a beautiful [p. 58] woman weeping. She appears the more beautiful, the more afflicted she is." B. de St. Pierre.

^61:1 Journal of the S. P. R., February, 1895, p. 26.

^62:1 E. Gurney: Phantasms of the Living, i. 384.

^63:1 Pensees d'un Solitaire, p. 66.

^65:1 Letters of Lowell, i. 75.

^67:1 I borrow it, with Professor Flournoy's permission, from his rich collection of psychological documents.

^75:1 Mark Rutherford's Deliverance, London, 1885, pp. 196, 198.

^76:1 In his book (too little read, I fear), Natural Religion, 3d edition, Boston, 1886, pp. 91, 122.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

  

Lectures IV and V

  

THE RELIGION OF HEALTHY MINDEDNESS

If we were to ask the question: "What is human life's chief concern?" one of the answers we should receive would be: "It is happiness." How to gain, how to keep, how to recover happiness, is in fact for most men at all times the secret motive of all they do, and of all they are willing to endure. The hedonistic school in ethics deduces the moral life wholly from the experiences of happiness and unhappiness which different kinds of conduct bring; and, even more in the religious life than in the moral life, happiness and unhappiness seem to be the poles round which the interest revolves. We need not go so far as to say with the author whom I lately quoted that any persistent enthusiasm is, as such, religion, nor need we call mere laughter a religious exercise; but we must admit that any persistent enjoyment may produce the sort of religion which consists in a grateful admiration of the gift of so happy an existence; and we must also acknowledge that the more complex ways of experiencing religion are new manners of producing happiness, wonderful inner paths to a supernatural kind of happiness, when the first gift of natural existence is unhappy, as it so often proves itself to be.

With such relations between religion and happiness, it is perhaps not surprising that men come to regard the happiness which a religious belief affords as a proof of its truth. If a creed makes a man feel happy, he almost inevitably adopts it. Such a belief ought to be true; therefore it is true--such,

[p. 78]

rightly or wrongly, is one of the "immediate inferences" of the religious logic used by ordinary men.

"The near presence of God's spirit," says a German writer, [*1] "may be experienced in its reality--indeed only experienced. And the mark by which the spirit's existence and nearness are made irrefutably clear to those who have ever had the experience is the utterly incomparable feeling of happiness which is connected with the nearness, and which is therefore not only a possible and altogether proper feeling for us to have here below, but is the best and most indispensable proof of God's reality. No other proof is equally convincing, and therefore happiness is the point from which every efficacious new theology should start."

In the hour immediately before us, I shall invite you to consider the simpler kinds of religious happiness, leaving the more complex sorts to be treated on a later day.

In many persons, happiness is congenital and irreclaimable. "Cosmic emotion" inevitably takes in them the form of enthusiasm and freedom. I speak not only of those who are animally happy. I mean those who, when unhappiness is offered or proposed to them, positively refuse to feel it, as if it were something mean and wrong. We find such persons in every age, passionately flinging themselves upon their sense of the goodness of life, in spite of the hardships of their own condition, and in spite of the sinister theologies into which they may he born. From the outset their religion is one of union with the divine. The heretics who went before the reformation are lavishly accused by the church writers of antinomian practices, just as the first Christians were accused of indulgence in orgies by the Romans. It is probable that there never has been a century in which the deliberate refusal to think ill of life has not been idealized by a sufficient number of persons to form sects, open or secret, who claimed

[p. 79]

all natural things to be permitted. Saint Augustine's maxim, Dilige et quod vis fac--if you but love [God], you may do as you incline--is morally one of the profoundest of observations, yet it is pregnant, for such persons, with passports beyond the bounds of conventional morality. According to their characters they have been refined or gross; but their belief has been at all times systematic enough to constitute a definite religious attitude. God was for them a giver of freedom, and the sting of evil was overcome. Saint Francis and his immediate disciples were, on the whole, of this company of spirits, of which there are of course infinite varieties. Rousseau in the earlier years of his writing, Diderot, B. de Saint Pierre, and many of the leaders of the eighteenth century anti-Christian movement were of this optimistic type. They owed their influence to a certain authoritativeness in their feeling that Nature, if you will only trust her sufficiently, is absolutely good.

It is to be hoped that we all have some friend, perhaps more often feminine than masculine, and young than old, whose soul is of this sky-blue tint, whose affinities are rather with flowers and birds and all enchanting innocencies than with dark human passions, who can think no ill of man or God, and in whom religious gladness, being in possession from the outset, needs no deliverance from any antecedent burden.

"God has two families of children on this earth," says Francis W. Newman, [*1] "the once-born and the twice-born," and the once-born he describes as follows: "They see God, not as a strict Judge, not as a Glorious Potentate; but as the animating Spirit of a beautiful harmonious world, Beneficent and Kind, Merciful as well as Pure. The same characters generally have no metaphysical tendencies: they do not look back into themselves. Hence they are not distressed by their own imperfections:

[p. 80]

yet it would be absurd to call them self-righteous; for they hardly think of themselves at all. This childlike quality of their nature makes the opening of religion very happy to them: for they no more shrink from God, than a child from an emperor, before whom the parent trembles: in fact, they have no vivid conception of any of the qualities in which the severer Majesty of God consists. [*1] He is to them the impersonation of Kindness and Beauty. They read his character, not in the disordered world of man, but in romantic and harmonious nature. Of human sin they know perhaps little in their own hearts and not very much in the world; and human suffering does but melt them to tenderness. Thus, when they approach God, no inward disturbance ensues; and without being as yet spiritual, they have a certain complacency and perhaps romantic sense of excitement in their simple worship."

In the Romish Church such characters find a more congenial soil to grow in than in Protestantism, whose fashions of feeling have been set by minds of a decidedly pessimistic order. But even in Protestantism they have been abundant enough; and in its recent "liberal" developments of Unitarianism and latitudinarianism generally, minds of this order have played and still are playing leading and constructive parts. Emerson himself is an admirable example. Theodore Parker is another--here are a couple of characteristic passages from Parker's correspondence. [*2]

"Orthodox scholars say: 'In the heathen classics you find no consciousness of sin.' It is very true--God be thanked for it. They were conscious of wrath, of cruelty, avarice, drunkenness, lust, sloth, cowardice, and other actual vices, and struggled and got rid of the deformities, but they were not conscious of 'enmity against God,' and didn't sit down and whine and groan against non-existent evil. I have done wrong things enough in my life, and do them now; I miss the mark, draw bow, and

[p. 81]

try again. But I am not conscious of hating God, or man, or right, or love, and I know there is much 'health in me', and in my body, even now, there dwelleth many a good thing, spite of consumption and Saint Paul." In another letter Parker writes: "I have swum in clear sweet waters all my days; and if sometimes they were a little cold, and the stream ran adverse and something rough, it was never too strong to be breasted and swum through. From the days of earliest boyhood, when I went stumbling through the grass, . . . up to the gray-bearded manhood of this time, there is none but has left me honey in the hive of memory that I now feed on for present delight. When I recall the years . . . I am filled with a sense of sweetness and wonder that such little things can make a mortal so exceedingly rich. But I must confess that the chiefest of all my delights is still the religious."

Another good expression of the "once-born" type of consciousness, developing straight and natural, with no element of morbid compunction or crisis, is contained in the answer of Dr. Edward Everett Hale, the eminent Unitarian preacher and writer, to one of Dr. Starbuck's circulars. I quote a part of it:--

"I observe, with profound regret, the religious struggles which come into many biographies, as if almost essential to the formation of the hero. I ought to speak of these, to say that any man has an advantage, not to be estimated, who is born, as I was, into a family where the religion is simple and rational; who is trained in the theory of such a religion, so that he never knows, for an hour, what these religious or irreligious struggles are. I always knew God loved me, and I was always grateful to him for the world he placed me in. I always liked to tell him so, and was always glad to receive his suggestions to me. . . . I can remember perfectly that when I was coming to manhood, the half-philosophical novels of the time had a deal to say about the young men and maidens who were facing the 'problem of life.' I had no idea whatever what the problem of life was. To live with all my might seemed to me easy; to learn where there was so much to learn seemed pleasant and almost of course; to

[p. 82]

lend a hand, if one had a chance, natural; and if one did this, why, he enjoyed life because he could not help it, and without proving to himself that he ought to enjoy it. . . . A child who is early taught that he is God's child, that he may live and move and have his being in God, and that he has, therefore, infinite strength at hand for the conquering of any difficulty, will take life more easily, and probably will make more of it, than one who is told that he is born the child of wrath and wholly incapable of good." [*1]

One can but recognize in such writers as these the presence of a temperament organically weighted on the side of cheer and fatally forbidden to linger, as those of opposite temperament linger, over the darker aspects of the universe. In some individuals optimism may become quasi-pathological. The capacity for even a transient sadness or a momentary humility seems cut off from them as by a kind of congenital anaesthesia. [*2]

[p. 83]

The supreme contemporary example of such an inability to feel evil is of course Walt Whitman.

"His favorite occupation," writes his disciple, Dr. Bucke "seemed to be strolling or sauntering about outdoors by himself, looking at the grass, the trees, the flowers, the vistas of light, the varying aspects of the sky, and listening to the birds, the crickets, the tree frogs, and all the hundreds of natural sounds. It was evident that these things gave him a pleasure far beyond what they give to ordinary people. Until I knew the man," continues Dr. Bucke, "it had not occurred to me that any one could derive so much absolute happiness from these things as he did. He was very fond of flowers, either wild or cultivated; liked all sorts. I think he admired lilacs and sunflowers just as much as roses. Perhaps, indeed, no man who ever lived liked so many things and disliked so few as Walt Whitman. All natural objects seemed to have a charm for him. All sights and sounds seemed to please him. He appeared to like (and I believe he did like) all the men, women, and children he saw (though I never knew him to say that he liked any one), but each who knew him felt that he liked him or her, and that he liked others also. I never knew him to argue or dispute, and he never spoke about money. He always justified, sometimes playfully, sometimes quite seriously, those who spoke harshly of himself or his writings, and I often thought he even took pleasure in the opposition of enemies. When I first knew [him], I used to think that he watched himself, and would not allow his tongue to give expression to fretfulness, antipathy, complaint, and remonstrance. It did not occur to me as possible that these mental states could be absent in him. After long observation, however, I satisfied myself that such absence or unconsciousness was entirely real. He never spoke deprecatingly of any nationality or class of men, or time in the world's history, or against any trades or occupations--not even against any animals, insects, or inanimate things, nor any of the laws of nature, nor any of the results of those laws, such as illness, deformity, and death. He never complained or grumbled either at the weather, pain, illness, or anything else. He never swore. He could not very well, since he never spoke in anger and apparently never

[p. 84]

was angry. He never exhibited fear, and I do not believe he ever felt it." [*1]

Walt Whitman owes his importance in literature to the systematic expulsion from his writings of all contractile elements. The only sentiments he allowed himself to express were of the expansive order; and he expressed these in the first person, not as your mere monstrously conceited individual might so express them, but vicariously for all men, so that a passionate and mystic ontological emotion suffuses his words, and ends by persuading the reader that men and women, life and death, and all things are divinely good.

Thus it has come about that many persons to-day regard Walt Whitman as the restorer of the eternal natural religion. He has infected them with his own love of comrades, with his own gladness that he and they exist. Societies are actually formed for his cult; a periodical organ exists for its propagation, in which the lines of orthodoxy and heterodoxy are already beginning to be drawn; [*2] hymns are written by others in his peculiar prosody; and he is even explicitly compared with the founder of the Christian religion, not altogether to the advantage of the latter.

Whitman is often spoken of as a "pagan." The word nowadays means sometimes the mere natural animal man without a sense of sin; sometimes it means a Greek or Roman with his own peculiar religious consciousness. In neither of these senses does it fitly define this poet. He is more than your mere animal man who has not tasted of the tree of good and evil. He is aware enough of sin for a swagger to be present in his indifference towards it, a conscious pride in his freedom from flexions and contractions, which your genuine pagan in the first sense of the word would never show.

[p. 85]

"I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and self-contained,
  I stand and look at them long and long;
  They do not sweat and whine about their condition.
  They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins.
  Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of owning things,
  Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of years ago,
  Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth." [*1]

No natural pagan could have written these well-known lines. But on the other hand Whitman is less than a Greek or Roman; for their consciousness, even in Homeric times, was full to the brim of the sad mortality of this sunlit world, and such a consciousness Walt Whitman resolutely refuses to adopt. When, for example, Achilles, about to slay Lycaon, Priam's young son, hears him sue for mercy, he stops to say:--

"Ah, friend, thou too must die: why thus lamentest thou? Patroclos too is dead, who was better far than thou. . . . Over me too hang death and forceful fate. There cometh morn or eve or some noonday when my life too some man shall take in battle, whether with spear he smite, or arrow from the string." [*2]

Then Achilles savagely severs the poor boy's neck with his sword, heaves him by the foot into the Scamander, and calls to the fishes of the river to eat the white fat of Lycaon. Just as here the cruelty and the sympathy each ring true, and do not mix or interfere with one another, so did the Greeks and Romans keep all their sadnesses and gladnesses unmingled and entire. Instinctive good they did not reckon sin; nor had they any such desire to save the credit of the universe as to

[p. 86]

make them insist, as so many of us insist, that what immediately appears as evil must be "good in the making," or something equally ingenious. Good was good, and bad just bad, for the earlier Greeks. They neither denied the ills of nature--Walt Whitman's verse, "What is called good is perfect and what is called bad is just as perfect," would have been mere silliness to them--nor did they, in order to escape from those ills, invent "another and a better world" of the imagination, in which, along with the ills, the innocent goods of sense would also find no place. This integrity of the instinctive reactions, this freedom from all moral sophistry and strain, gives a pathetic dignity to ancient pagan feeling. And this quality Whitman's outpourings have not got. His optimism is too voluntary and defiant; his gospel has a touch of bravado and an affected twist, [*1] and this diminishes its effect on many readers who yet are well disposed towards optimism, and on the whole quite willing to admit that in important respects Whitman is of the genuine lineage of the prophets.

 

If, then, we give the name of healthy-mindedness to the tendency which looks on all things and sees that they are good, we find that we must distinguish between a more involuntary and a more voluntary or systematic way of being healthy-minded. In its involuntary variety, healthy-mindedness is a way of feeling happy about things immediately. In its systematical variety, it is an abstract way of conceiving things as good. Every abstract way of conceiving things selects some one aspect of them as their essence for the time being, and disregards the other aspects. Systematic healthy-mindedness, conceiving good as the essential and universal

[p. 87]

aspect of being, deliberately excludes evil from its field of vision; and although, when thus nakedly stated, this might seem a difficult feat to perform for one who is intellectually sincere with himself and honest about facts, a little reflection shows that the situation is too complex to lie open to so simple a criticism.

In the first place, happiness, like every other emotional state, has blindness and insensibility to opposing facts given it as its instinctive weapon for self-protection against disturbance. When happiness is actually in possession, the thought of evil can no more acquire the feeling of reality than the thought of good can gain reality when melancholy rules. To the man actively happy, from whatever cause, evil simply cannot then and there be believed in. He must ignore it; and to the bystander he may then seem perversely to shut his eyes to it and hush it up.

But more than this: the hushing of it up may, in a perfectly candid and honest mind, grow into a deliberate religious policy, or parti pris. Much of what we call evil is due entirely to the way men take the phenomenon. It can so often be converted into a bracing and tonic good by a simple change of the sufferer's inner attitude from one of fear to one of fight; its sting so often departs and turns into a relish when, after vainly seeking to shun it, we agree to face about and bear it cheerfully, that a man is simply bound in honor, with reference to many of the facts that seem at first to disconcert his peace, to adopt this way of escape. Refuse to admit their badness; despise their power; ignore their presence; turn your attention the other way; and so far as you yourself are concerned at any rate, though the facts may still exist, their evil character exists no longer. Since you make them evil or good by your own thoughts about them, it is the ruling of your thoughts which proves to be your principal concern.

The deliberate adoption of an optimistic turn of mind thus makes its entrance into philosophy. And once in, it is

[p. 88]

hard to trace its lawful bounds. Not only does the human instinct for happiness, bent on self-protection by ignoring, keep working in its favor, but higher inner ideals have weighty words to say. The attitude of unhappiness is not only painful, it is mean and ugly. What can be more base and unworthy than the pining, puling, mumping mood, no matter by what outward ills it may have been engendered? What is more injurious to others? What less helpful as a way out of the difficulty? It but fastens and perpetuates the trouble which occasioned it, and increases the total evil of the situation. At all costs, then, we ought to reduce the sway of that mood; we ought to scout it in ourselves and others, and never show it tolerance. But it is impossible to carry on this discipline in the subjective sphere without zealously emphasizing the brighter and minimizing the darker aspects of the objective sphere of things at the same time. And thus our resolution not to indulge in misery, beginning at a comparatively small point within ourselves, may not stop until it has brought the entire frame of reality under a systematic conception optimistic enough to be congenial with its needs.

In all this I say nothing of any mystical insight or persuasion that the total frame of things absolutely must be good. Such mystical persuasion plays an enormous part in the history of the religious consciousness, and we must look at it later with some care. But we need not go so far at present. More ordinary non-mystical conditions of rapture suffice for my immediate contention. All invasive moral states and passionate enthusiasms make one feelingless to evil in some direction. The common penalties cease to deter the patriot, the usual prudences are flung by the lover to the winds. When the passion is extreme, suffering may actually be gloried in, provided it be for the ideal cause, death may lose its sting, the grave its victory. In these states, the ordinary contrast of good and ill seems to be swallowed up in a higher denomination, an omnipotent excitement which engulfs the evil, and

[p. 89]

which the human being welcomes as the crowning experience of his life. This, he says, is truly to live, and I exult in the heroic opportunity and adventure.

The systematic cultivation of healthy-mindedness as a religious attitude is therefore consonant with important currents in human nature, and is anything but absurd. In fact. we all do cultivate it more or less, even when our professed theology should in consistency forbid it. We divert our attention from disease and death as much as we can; and the slaughter-houses and indecencies without end on which our life is founded are huddled out of sight and never mentioned, so that the world we recognize officially in literature and in society is a poetic fiction far handsomer and cleaner and better than the world that really is. [*1]

The advance of liberalism, so-called, in Christianity, during the past fifty years, may fairly be called a victory of healthy-mindedness within the church over the morbidness with which the old hell-fire theology was more harmoniously related. We have now whole congregations whose preachers, far from magnifying our consciousness of sin, seem devoted rather to making little of it. They ignore, or even deny, eternal punishment, and insist on the dignity rather than on the depravity of man. They look at the continual preoccupation of the old-fashioned Christian with the salvation of his soul as something sickly and reprehensible rather than admirable; and a sanguine and "muscular" attitude. which to our forefathers would have seemed purely heathen, has become in their eyes an ideal element of Christian character. I am not asking whether or not they are right, I am only pointing out the change.

[p. 90]

The persons to whom I refer have still retained for the most part their nominal connection with Christianity, in spite of their discarding of its more pessimistic theological elements. But in that "theory of evolution" which, gathering momentum for a century, has within the past twenty-five years swept so rapidly over Europe and America, we see the ground laid for a new sort of religion of Nature, which has entirely displaced Christianity from the thought of a large part of our generation. The idea of a universal evolution lends itself to a doctrine of general meliorism and progress which fits the religious needs of the healthy-minded so well that it seems almost as if it might have been created for their use. Accordingly we find "evolutionism" interpreted thus optimistically and embraced as a substitute for the religion they were born in, by a multitude of our contemporaries who have either been trained scientifically, or been fond of reading popular science, and who had already begun to be inwardly dissatisfied with what seemed to them the harshness and irrationality of the orthodox Christian scheme. As examples are better than descriptions, I will quote a document received in answer to Professor Starbuck's circular of questions.

The writer's state of mind may by courtesy be called a religion, for it is his reaction on the whole nature of things, it is systematic and reflective and it loyally binds him to certain inner ideals. I think you will recognize in him, coarse-meated and incapable of wounded spirit as he is, a sufficiently familiar contemporary type.

Q. What does Religion mean to you?

A. It means nothing; and it seems, so far as I can observe useless to others. I am sixty-seven years of age and have resided in X fifty years, and have been in business forty-five, consequently I have some little experience of life and men, and some women too, and I find that the most religious and pious people are as a rule those most lacking in uprightness and morality.

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] The men who do not go to church or have any religious convictions are the best. Praying, singing of hymns, and sermonizing are pernicious--they teach us to rely on some supernatural power, when we ought to rely on ourselves. I teetotally disbelieve in a God. The God-idea was begotten in ignorance, fear, and a general lack of any knowledge of Nature. If I were to die now, being in a healthy condition for my age, both mentally and physically, I would just as lief, yes, rather, die with a hearty enjoyment of music, sport, or any other rational pastime. As a timepiece stops, we die--there being no immortality in either case.

Q. What comes before your mind corresponding to the words God, Heaven, Angels, etc?

A. Nothing whatever. I am a man without a religion. These words mean so much mythic bosh.

Q. Have you had any experiences which appeared providential?

A. None whatever. There is no agency of the superintending kind. A little judicious observation as well as knowledge of scientific law will convince any one of this fact.

Q. What things work most strongly on your emotions?

A. Lively songs and music; Pinafore instead of an Oratorio. I like Scott, Burns, Byron, Longfellow, especially Shakespeare, etc., etc. Of songs, the Star-Spangled Banner, America, Marseillaise, and all moral and soul-stirring songs, but wishy-washy hymns are my detestation. I greatly enjoy nature, especially fine weather, and until within a few years used to walk Sundays into the country, twelve miles often, with no fatigue, and bicycle forty or fifty. I have dropped the bicycle. I never go to church, but attend lectures when there are any good ones. All of my thoughts and cogitations have been of a healthy and cheerful kind, for instead of doubts and fears I see things as they are, for I endeavor to adjust myself to my environment. This I regard as the deepest law. Mankind is a progressive animal. I am satisfied he will have made a great advance over his present status a thousand years hence.

Q. What is your notion of sin?

A. It seems to me that sin is a condition, a disease, incidental to man's development not being yet advanced enough. Morbidness

[p. 92]

over it increases the disease. We should think that a million of years hence equity, justice, and mental and physical good order will be so fixed and organized that no one will have any idea of evil or sin.

Q. What is your temperament?

A. Nervous, active, wide-awake, mentally and physically. Sorry that Nature compels us to sleep at all.

If we are in search of a broken and a contrite heart, clearly we need not look to this brother. His contentment with the finite incases him like a lobster-shell and shields him from all morbid repining at his distance from the infinite. We have in him an excellent example of the optimism which may be encouraged by popular science.

To my mind a current far more important and interesting religiously than that which sets in from natural science towards healthy-mindedness is that which has recently poured over America and seems to be gathering force every day--I am ignorant what foothold it may yet have acquired in Great Britain--and to which, for the sake of having a brief designation, I will give the title of the "Mind-cure movement." There are various sects of this "New Thought," to use another of the names by which it calls itself; but their agreements are so profound that their differences may be neglected for my present purpose, and I will treat the movement, without apology, as if it were a simple thing.

It is a deliberately optimistic scheme of life, with both a speculative and a practical side. In its gradual development during the last quarter of a century, it has taken up into itself a number of contributory elements, and it must now be reckoned with as a genuine religious power. It has reached the stage, for example, when the demand for its literature is great enough for insincere stuff, mechanically produced for the market, to be to a certain extent supplied by publishers--a phenomenon never observed, I imagine, until a religion has got well past its earliest insecure beginnings.

[p. 93]

One of the doctrinal sources of Mind-cure is the four Gospels; another is Emersonianism or New England transcendentalism; another is Berkeleyan idealism; another is spiritism, with its messages of "law" and "progress" and "development"; another the optimistic popular science evolutionism of which I have recently spoken; and, finally, Hinduism has contributed a strain. But the most characteristic feature of the mind-cure movement is an inspiration much more direct. The leaders in this faith have had an intuitive belief in the all-saving power of healthy-minded attitudes as such, in the conquering efficacy of courage, hope, and trust, and a correlative contempt for doubt, fear, worry, and all nervously precautionary states of mind. [*1] Their belief has in a general way been corroborated by the practical experience of their disciples; and this experience forms to-day a mass imposing in amount.

The blind have been made to see, the halt to walk; life-long invalids have had their health restored. The moral fruits have been no less remarkable. The deliberate adoption of a healthy-minded attitude has proved possible to many who never supposed they had it in them; regeneration of character has gone on on an extensive scale; and cheerfulness has been restored to countless homes. The indirect influence of this has been great. The mind-cure principles are beginning so to pervade the air that one catches their spirit at second-hand. One hears of the "Gospel of Relaxation," of the "Don't Worry Movement," of people who repeat to themselves, "Youth, health, vigor!" when dressing in the morning, as their motto for the day. Complaints

[p. 94]

of the weather are getting to be forbidden in many households; and more and more people are recognizing it to be bad form to speak of disagreeable sensations, or to make much of the ordinary inconveniences and ailments of life. These general tonic effects on public opinion would be good even if the more striking results were non-existent. But the latter abound so that we can afford to overlook the innumerable failures and self-deceptions that are mixed in with them (for in everything human failure is a matter of course), and we can also overlook the verbiage of a good deal of the mind-cure literature, some of which is so moonstruck with optimism and so vaguely expressed that an academically trained intellect finds it almost impossible to read it at all.

The plain fact remains that the spread of the movement has been due to practical fruits, and the extremely practical turn of character of the American people has never been better shown than by the fact that this, their only decidedly original contribution to the systematic philosophy of life, should be so intimately knit up with concrete therapeutics. To the importance of mind-cure the medical and clerical professions in the United States are beginning, though with much recalcitrancy and protesting, to open their eyes. It is evidently bound to develop still farther, both speculatively and practically, and its latest writers are far and away the ablest of the group. [*1] It matters nothing that, just as there are hosts of persons who cannot pray, so there are greater hosts who cannot by any possibility be influenced by the mind-curers' ideas. For our immediate purpose, the important point is that so large a number should exist who can 

[p. 95]

be so influenced. They form a psychic type to be studied with respect. [*1]

[p. 96]

To come now to a little closer quarters with their creed. The fundamental pillar on which it rests is nothing more than the general basis of all religious experience, the fact that man has a dual nature, and is connected with two spheres of thought, a shallower and a profounder sphere, in either of which he may learn to live more habitually. The shallower and lower sphere is that of the fleshly sensations, instincts, and desires, of egotism, doubt, and the lower personal interests. But whereas Christian theology has always considered frowardness to be the essential vice of this part of human nature, the mind-curers say that the mark of the beast in it is fear; and this is what gives such an entirely new religious turn to their persuasion.

"Fear," to quote a writer of the school, "has had its uses in the evolutionary process, and seems to constitute the whole of forethought in most animals; but that it should remain any part of the mental equipment of human civilized life is an absurdity. I find that the fear clement of forethought is not stimulating to those more civilized persons to whom duty and attraction are the natural motives, but is weakening and deterrent. As soon as it becomes unnecessary, fear becomes a positive deterrent, and should be entirely removed, as dead flesh is removed from living tissue. To assist in the analysis of fear and in the denunciation of its expressions, I have coined the word fearthought to stand for the unprofitable element of forethought, and have defined the word 'worry' as fearthought in contradistinction to forethought. I have also defined fearthought as the self-imposed or self-permitted suggestion of inferiority, in order to place it where it really belongs, in the category of harmful, unnecessary, and therefore not respectable things." [*1]

[p. 97]

The "misery-habit," the "martyr-habit," engendered by the prevalent "fearthought," get pungent criticism from the mind-cure writers:--

"Consider for a moment the habits of life into which we are born. There are certain social conventions or customs and alleged requirements, there is a theological bias, a general view of the world. There are conservative ideas in regard to our early training, our education, marriage, and occupation in life. Following close upon this, there is a long series of anticipations, namely, that we shall suffer certain children's diseases, diseases of middle life, and of old age; the thought that we shall grow old, lose our faculties, and again become childlike; while crowning all is the fear of death. Then there is a long line of particular tears and trouble-bearing expectations, such, for example, as ideas associated with certain articles of food, the dread of the east wind, the terrors of hot weather, the aches and pains associated with cold weather, the fear of catching cold if one sits in a draught, the coming of hay-fever upon the 14th of August in the middle of the day, and so on through a long list of fears, dreads, worriments, anxieties, anticipations, expectations, pessimisms, morbidities, and the whole ghostly train of fateful shapes which our fellow-men, and especially physicians, are ready to help us conjure up, an array worthy to rank with Bradley's 'unearthly ballet of bloodless categories.'

"Yet this is not all. This vast array is swelled by innumerable volunteers from daily life--the fear of accident, the possibility of calamity, the loss of property, the chance of robbery, of fire, or the outbreak of war. And it is not deemed sufficient to fear for ourselves. When a friend is taken ill, we must forth with fear the worst and apprehend death. If one meets with sorrow . . . sympathy means to enter into and increase the suffering." [*1]

"Man," to quote another writer, "often has fear stamped upon him before his entrance into the outer world; he is reared in fear; all his life is passed in bondage to fear of disease and death, and thus his whole mentality becomes cramped, limited,

[p. 98]

and depressed, and his body follows its shrunken pattern and specification . . . Think of the millions of sensitive and responsive souls among our ancestors who have been under the dominion of such a perpetual nightmare! Is it not surprising that health exists at all? Nothing but the boundless divine love? exuberance, and vitality, constantly poured in, even though unconsciously to us, could in some degree neutralize such an ocean of morbidity." [*1]

Although the disciples of the mind-cure often use Christian terminology, one sees from such quotations how widely their notion of the fall of man diverges from that of ordinary Christians. [*2]

Their notion of man's higher nature is hardly less divergent, being decidedly pantheistic. The spiritual in man appears

[p. 99]

in the mind-cure philosophy as partly conscious, but chiefly subconscious; and through the subconscious part of it we are already one with the Divine without any miracle of grace, or abrupt creation of a new inner man. As this view is variously expressed by different writers, we find in it traces of Christian mysticism, of transcendental idealism, of vedantism, and of the modern psychology of the subliminal self. A quotation or two will put us at the central point of view:--

"The great central fact of the universe is that spirit of infinite life and power that is back of all, that manifests itself in and through all. This spirit of infinite life and power that is back of all is what I call God. I care not what term you may use, be it Kindly Light, Providence, the Over-Soul, Omnipotence, or whatever term may be most convenient, so long as we are agreed in regard to the great central fact itself. God then fills the universe alone, so that all is from Him and in Him, and there is nothing that is outside. He is the life of our life our very life itself. We are partakers of the life of God; and though we differ from Him in that we are individualized spirits, while He is the Infinite Spirit, including us, as well as all else beside, yet in essence the life of God and the life of man are identically the same, and so are one. They differ not in essence or quality; they differ in degree.

"The great central fact in human life is the coming into a conscious vital realization of our oneness with this Infinite Life and the opening of ourselves fully to this divine inflow. In just the degree that we come into a conscious realization of our oneness with the Infinite Life, and open ourselves to this divine inflow, do we actualize in ourselves the qualities and powers of the Infinite Life, do we make ourselves channels through which the Infinite Intelligence and Power can work. In just the degree in which you realize your oneness with the Infinite Spirit, you will exchange dis-ease for ease, inharmony for harmony, suffering and pain for abounding health and strength. To recognize our own divinity, and our intimate relation to the Universal, is to attach the belts of our machinery to the powerhouse

[p. 100]

of the Universe. One need remain in hell no longer than one chooses to; we can rise to any heaven we ourselves choose; and when we choose so to rise, all the higher powers of the Universe combine to help us heavenward." [*1]

Let me now pass from these abstracter statements to some more concrete accounts of experience with the mind-cure religion. I have many answers from correspondents--the only difficulty is to choose. The first two whom I shall quote are my personal friends. One of them, a woman, writing as follows, expresses well the feeling of continuity with the Infinite Power, by which all mind-cure disciples are inspired.

"The first underlying cause of all sickness, weakness, or depression is the human sense of separateness from that Divine Energy which we call God. The soul which can feel and affirm in serene but jubilant confidence, as did the Nazarene: 'I and my Father are one,' has no further need of healer, or of healing. This is the whole truth in a nutshell, and other foundation for wholeness can no man lay than this fact of impregnable divine union. Disease can no longer attack one whose feet are planted on this rock, who feels hourly, momently, the influx of the Deific Breath. If one with Omnipotence, how can weariness enter the consciousness, how illness assail that indomitable spark?

"This possibility of annulling forever the law of fatigue has been abundantly proven in my own case; for my earlier life bears a record of many, many years of bedridden invalidism, with spine and lower limbs paralyzed. My thoughts were no more impure than they are to-day, although my belief in the necessity of illness was dense and unenlightened; but since my resurrection in the flesh, I have worked as a healer unceasingly for fourteen years without a vacation, and can truthfully assert that I have never known a moment of fatigue or pain, although coming in touch constantly with excessive weakness, illness, and disease of all kinds. For how can a conscious part of Deity be

[p. 101]

sick?--since 'Greater is he that is with us than all that can strive against us.'" My second correspondent, also a woman, sends me the following statement:--

"Life seemed difficult to me at one time. I was always breaking down, and had several attacks of what is called nervous prostration, with terrible insomnia, being on the verge of insanity; besides having many other troubles, especially of the digestive organs. I had been sent away from home in charge of doctors, had taken all the narcotics, stopped all work, been fed up, and in fact knew all the doctors within reach. But I never recovered permanently till this New Thought took possession of me.

"I think that the one thing which impressed me most was learning the fact that we must be in absolutely constant relation or mental touch (this word is to me very expressive) with that essence of life which permeates all and which we call God. This is almost unrecognizable unless we live it into ourselves actually, that is, by a constant turning to the very innermost, deepest consciousness of our real selves or of God in us, for illumination from within, just as we turn to the sun for light, warmth, and invigoration without. When you do this consciously, realizing that to turn inward to the light within you is to live in the presence of God or your divine self, you soon discover the unreality of the objects to which you have hitherto been turning and which have engrossed you without.

"I have come to disregard the meaning of this attitude for bodily health as such, because that comes of itself, as an incidental result, and cannot be found by any special mental act or desire to have it, beyond that general attitude of mind I have referred to above. That which we usually make the object of life, those outer things we are all so wildly seeking, which we so often live and die for, but which then do not give us peace and happiness, they should all come of themselves as accessory, and as the mere outcome or natural result of a far higher life sunk deep in the bosom of the spirit. This life is the real seeking of the kingdom of God, the desire for his supremacy in our

[p. 102]

hearts, so that all else comes as that which shall be 'added unto you'--as quite incidental and as a surprise to us, perhaps; and yet it is the proof of the reality of the perfect poise in the very centre of our being.

"When I say that we commonly make the object of our life that which we should not work for primarily, I mean many things which the world considers praiseworthy and excellent, such as success in business, fame as author or artist, physician or lawyer, or renown in philanthropic undertakings. Such things should be results, not objects. I would also include pleasures of many kinds which seem harmless and good at the time, and are pursued because many accept them--I mean conventionalities, sociabilities, and fashions in their various development, these being mostly approved by the masses, although they may be unreal, and even unhealthy superfluities."

Here is another case, more concrete, also that of a woman. I read you these cases without comment--they express so many varieties of the state of mind we are studying.

"I had been a sufferer from my childhood till my fortieth year. [Details of ill-health are given which I omit.] I had been in Vermont several months hoping for good from the change of air, but steadily growing weaker, when one day during the latter part of October, while resting in the afternoon, I suddenly heard as it were these words: 'You will be healed and do a work you never dreamed of.' These words were impressed upon my mind with such power I said at once that only God could have put them there. I believed them in spite of myself and of my suffering and weakness, which continued until Christmas, when I returned to Boston. Within two days a young friend offered to take me to a mental healer (this was January 7, 1881). The healer said: 'There is nothing but Mind; we are expressions of the One Mind; body is only a mortal belief; as a man thinketh so is he.' I could not accept all she said, but I translated all that was there for me in this way: 'There is nothing but God; I am created by Him, and am absolutely dependent upon Him; mind is given me to use; and by just so much of it as I will put upon the thought of right action in body I

[p. 103]

shall be lifted out of bondage to my ignorance and fear and past experience.' That day I commenced accordingly to take a little of every food provided for the family, constantly saying to myself: 'The Power that created the stomach must take care of what I have eaten.' By holding these suggestions through the evening I went to bed and fell asleep, saying: 'I am soul, spirit, just one with God's Thought of me,' and slept all night without waking, for the first time in several years [the distress-turns had usually recurred about two o'clock in the night]. I felt the next day like an escaped prisoner, and believed I had found the secret that would in time give me perfect health. Within ten days I was able to eat anything provided for others, and after two weeks I began to have my own positive mental suggestions of Truth, which were to me like stepping-stones. I will note a few of them, they came about two weeks apart.

"1st. I am Soul, therefore it is well with me.

"2d. I am Soul, therefore I am well.

"3d. A sort of inner vision of myself as a four-footed beast with a protuberance on every part of my body where I had suffering, with my own face, begging me to acknowledge it as myself. I resolutely fixed my attention on being well, and refused to even look at my old self in this form.

"4th. Again the vision of the beast far in the background, with faint voice. Again refusal to acknowledge.

"5th. Once more the vision, but only of my eyes with the longing look; and again the refusal. Then came the conviction, the inner consciousness, that I was perfectly well and always had been, for I was Soul, an expression of God's Perfect Thought. That was to me the perfect and completed separation between what I was and what I appeared to be. I succeeded in never losing sight after this of my real being, by constantly affirming this truth, and by degrees (though it took me two years of hard work to get there) I expressed health continuously throughout my whole body.

"In my subsequent nineteen years' experience I have never known this Truth to fail when I applied it, though in my ignorance I have often failed to apply it, but through my failures I have learned the simplicity and trustfulness of the little child."

[p. 104]

But I fear that I risk tiring you by so many examples, and I must lead you back to philosophic generalities again. You see already by such records of experience how impossible it is not to class mind-cure as primarily a religious movement. Its doctrine of the oneness of our life with God's life is in fact quite indistinguishable from an interpretation of Christ's message which in these very Gifford lectures has been defended by some of your very ablest Scottish religious philosophers. [*1]

But philosophers usually profess to give a quasi-logical explanation of the existence of evil, whereas of the general fact of evil in the world, the existence of the selfish, suffering,

[p. 105]

timorous finite consciousness, the mind-curers, so far as I am acquainted with them, profess to give no speculative explanation Evil is empirically there for them as it is for everybody, but the practical point of view predominates, and it would ill agree with the spirit of their system to spend time in worrying over it as a "mystery" or "problem," or in "laying to heart" the lesson of its experience, after the manner of the Evangelicals. Don't reason about it, as Dante says, but give a glance and pass beyond! It is Avidhya, ignorance! something merely to be outgrown and left be hind, transcended and forgotten. Christian Science so-called, the sect of Mrs. Eddy, is the most radical branch of mind-cure in its dealings with evil. For it evil is simply a lie, and any one who mentions it is a liar. The optimistic ideal of duty forbids us to pay it the compliment even of explicit attention. Of course, as our next lectures will show us, this is a bad speculative omission, but it is intimately linked with the practical merits of the system we are examining. Why regret a philosophy of evil, a mind-curer would ask us, if I can put you in possession of a life of good?

After all, it is the life that tells; and mind-cure has developed a living system of mental hygiene which may well claim to have thrown all previous literature of the Diatetik der Seele into the shade. This system is wholly and exclusively compacted of optimism: "Pessimism leads to weakness. Optimism leads to power." "Thoughts are things," as one of the most vigorous mind-cure writers prints in bold type at the bottom of each of his pages; and if your thoughts are of health, youth, vigor, and success, before you know it these things will also be your outward portion. No one can fail of the regenerative influence of optimistic thinking, pertinaciously pursued. Every man owns indefeasibly this inlet to the divine. Fear, on the contrary, and all the contracted and egoistic modes of thought, are inlets to destruction. Most mind-curers here bring in a doctrine that thoughts are 

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] "forces," and that, by virtue of a law that like attracts like, one man's thoughts draw to themselves as allies all the thoughts of the same character that exist the world over. Thus one gets, by one's thinking, reinforcements from elsewhere for the realization of one's desires; and the great point in the conduct of life is to get the heavenly forces on one's side by opening one's own mind to their influx.

On the whole, one is struck by a psychological similarity between the mind-cure movement and the Lutheran and Wesleyan movements. To the believer in moralism and works, with his anxious query, "What shall I do to be saved?" Luther and Wesley replied: "You are saved now, if you would but believe it." And the mind-curers come with precisely similar words of emancipation. They speak, it is true, to persons for whom the conception of salvation has lost its ancient theological meaning, but who labor nevertheless with the same eternal human difficulty. Things are wrong with them; and "What shall I do to be clear, right, sound, whole, well?" is the form of their question. And the answer is: "You are well, sound, and clear already, if you did but know it." "The whole matter may be summed up in one sentence," says one of the authors whom I have already quoted, "God is well, and so are you. You must awaken to the knowledge of your real being."

The adequacy of their message to the mental needs of a large fraction of mankind is what gave force to those earlier gospels. Exactly the same adequacy holds in the case of the mind-cure message, foolish as it may sound upon its surface; and seeing its rapid growth in influence, and its therapeutic triumphs, one is tempted to ask whether it may not be destined (probably by very reason of the crudity and extravagance of many of its manifestations [*1]) to play a part almost

[p. 107]

as great in the evolution of the popular religion of the future as did those earlier movements in their day.

 

But I here fear that I may begin to "jar upon the nerves" of some of the members of this academic audience. Such contemporary vagaries, you may think, should hardly take so large a place in dignified Gifford lectures. I can only beseech you to have patience. The whole outcome of these lectures will, I imagine, be the emphasizing to your mind of the enormous diversities which the spiritual lives of different men exhibit. Their wants, their susceptibilities, and their capacities all vary and must be classed under different heads. The result is that we have really different types of religious experience; and, seeking in these lectures closer acquaintance with the healthy-minded type, we must take it where we find it in most radical form. The psychology of individual types of character has hardly begun even to be sketched as yet--our lectures may possibly serve as a crumb-like contribution to the structure. The first thing to bear in mind (especially if we ourselves belong to the clerico-academic-scientific type, the officially and conventionally "correct" type, "the deadly respectable" type, for which to ignore others is a besetting temptation) is that nothing can be more stupid than to bar out phenomena from our notice, merely because we are incapable of taking part in anything like them ourselves.

Now the history of Lutheran salvation by faith, of methodistic conversions, and of what I call the mind-cure movement seems to prove the existence of numerous persons in whom--at any rate at a certain stage in their development--a change of character for the better, so far from being facilitated by the rules laid down by official moralists, will take place all the more successfully if those rules be exactly

[p. 108]

reversed. Official moralists advise us never to relax our strenuousness. "Be vigilant, day and night," they adjure us; "hold your passive tendencies in check; shrink from no effort; keep your will like a bow always bent." But the persons I speak of find that all this conscious effort leads to nothing but failure and vexation in their hands, and only makes them twofold more the children of hell they were before. The tense and voluntary attitude becomes in them an impossible fever and torment. Their machinery refuses to run at all when the bearings are made so hot and the belts so tight.

Under these circumstances the way to success, as vouched for by innumerable authentic personal narrations, is by an anti-moralistic method, by the "surrender" of which I spoke in my second lecture. Passivity, not activity; relaxation, not intentness, should be now the rule. Give up the feeling of responsibility, let go your hold, resign the care of your destiny to higher powers, be genuinely indifferent as to what becomes of it all, and you will find not only that you gain a perfect inward relief, but often also, in addition, the particular goods you sincerely thought you were renouncing. This is the salvation through self-despair, the dying to be truly born, of Lutheran theology, the passage into nothing of which Jacob Behmen writes. To get to it, a critical point must usually be passed, a corner turned within one. Something must give way, a native hardness must break down and liquefy; and this event (as we shall abundantly see hereafter) is frequently sudden and automatic, and leaves on the Subject an impression that he has been wrought on by an external power.

Whatever its ultimate significance may prove to be, this is certainly one fundamental form of human experience. Some say that the capacity or incapacity for it is what divides the religious from the merely moralistic character. With those who undergo it in its fullness, no criticism avails

[p. 109]

to cast doubt on its reality. They know; for they have actually felt the higher powers, in giving up the tension of their personal will.

A story which revivalist preachers often tell is that of a man who found himself at night slipping down the side of a precipice. At last he caught a branch which stopped his fall, and remained clinging to it in misery for hours. But finally his fingers had to loose their hold, and with a despairing farewell to life, he let himself drop. He fell just six inches. If he had given up the struggle earlier, his agony would have been spared. As the mother earth received him, so, the preachers tell us, will the everlasting arms receive us if we confide absolutely in them, and give up the hereditary habit of relying on our personal strength, with its precautions that cannot shelter and safeguards that never save.

The mind-curers have given the widest scope to this sort of experience. They have demonstrated that a form of regeneration by relaxing, by letting go, psychologically indistinguishable from the Lutheran justification by faith and the Wesleyan acceptance of free grace, is within the reach of persons who have no conviction of sin and care nothing for the Lutheran theology. It is but giving your little private convulsive self a rest, and finding that a greater Self is there. The results, slow or sudden, or great or small, of the combined optimism and expectancy, the regenerative phenomena which ensue on the abandonment of effort, remain firm facts of human nature, no matter whether we adopt a theistic, a pantheistic-idealistic, or a medical-materialistic view of their ultimate causal explanation. [*1]

[p. 110]

When we take up the phenomena of revivalistic conversion, we shall learn something more about all this. Meanwhile I will say a brief word about the mind-curer's methods.

They are of course largely suggestive. The suggestive influence of environment plays an enormous part in all spiritual education.

But the word "suggestion," having acquired official status, is unfortunately already beginning to play in many quarters the part of a wet blanket upon investigation, being used to fend off all inquiry into the varying susceptibilities of individual cases. "Suggestion" is only another name for the power of ideas, so far as they prove efficacious over belief and conduct. Ideas efficacious over some people prove inefficacious over others. Ideas efficacious at some times and in some human surroundings are not so at other times and elsewhere. The ideas of Christian churches are not efficacious in the therapeutic direction to-day, whatever they may have been in earlier centuries; and when the whole question is as to why the salt has lost its savor here or gained it there, the mere blank waving of the word "suggestion" as if it were a banner gives no light. Dr. Goddard, whose candid psychological essay on Faith Cures ascribes them to nothing but ordinary suggestion, concludes by saying that "Religion [and by this he seems to mean our popular Christianity] has in it all there is in mental therapeutics, and has it in its best form. Living up to [our religious] ideas will do anything for us that can be done." And this in spite of the actual fact that the popular Christianity

[p. 111]

does absolutely nothing, or did nothing until mind-cure came to the rescue. [*1]

[p. 112]

An idea, to be suggestive, must come to the individual with the force of a revelation. The mind-cure with its gospel of healthy-mindedness has come as a revelation to many whose hearts the church Christianity had left hardened. It has let loose their springs of higher life. In what can the originality of any religious movement consist, save in finding a channel, until then sealed up, through which those springs may be set free in some group of human beings?

The force of personal faith, enthusiasm, and example, and above all the force of novelty, are always the prime suggestive agency in this kind of success. If mind-cure should ever become official, respectable, and intrenched, these elements of suggestive efficacy will be lost. In its acuter stages every religion must be a homeless Arab of the desert. The church knows this well enough, with its everlasting inner struggle of the acute religion of the few against the chronic religion of the many, indurated into an obstructiveness worse than that which irreligion opposes to the movings of the Spirit. "We may pray," says Jonathan Edwards, "concerning all those saints that are not lively Christians, that they may either be enlivened, or taken away; if that be true that is often said by some at this day, that these cold dead saints do more hurt than natural men, and lead more souls to hell, and that it would be well for mankind if they were all dead." [*1]

The next condition of success is the apparent existence, in large numbers, of minds who unite healthy-mindedness with readiness for regeneration by letting go. Protestantism has been too pessimistic as regards the natural man, Catholicism has been too legalistic and moralistic, for either the one or the other to appeal in any generous way to the type

[p. 113]

of character formed of this peculiar mingling of elements. However few of us here present may belong to such a type, it is now evident that it forms a specific moral combination, well represented in the world.

Finally, mind-cure has made what in our protestant countries is an unprecedentedly great use of the subconscious life. To their reasoned advice and dogmatic assertion, its founders have added systematic exercise in passive relaxation, concentration, and meditation, and have even invoked something like hypnotic practice. I quote some passages at random:--

"The value, the potency of ideals is the great practical truth on which the New Thought most strongly insists--the development namely from within outward, from small to great. [*1] Consequently one's thought should be centred on the ideal outcome, even though this trust be literally like a step in the dark. [*2] To attain the ability thus effectively to direct the mind, the New Thought advises the practice of concentration, or in other words, the attainment of self-control. One is to learn to marshal the tendencies of the mind, so that they may be held together as a unit by the chosen ideal. To this end, one should set apart times for silent meditation, by one's self, preferably in a room where the surroundings are favorable to spiritual thought. In New Thought terms, this is called 'entering the silence.'" [*3]

"The time will come when in the busy office or on the noisy street you can enter into the silence by simply drawing the mantle of your own thoughts about you and realizing that there and everywhere the Spirit of Infinite Life, Love, Wisdom, Peace, Power, and Plenty is guiding, keeping, protecting, leading you. This is the spirit of continual prayer. [*4] One of the most intuitive men we ever met had a desk at a city office where several other gentlemen were doing business constantly, and often talking

[p. 114]

loudly. Entirely undisturbed by the many various sounds about him, this self-centred faithful man would, in any moment of perplexity, draw the curtains of privacy so completely about him that he would be as fully inclosed in his own psychic aura, and thereby as effectually removed from all distractions, as though he were alone in some primeval wood. Taking his difficulty with him into the mystic silence in the form of a direct question, to which he expected a certain answer, he would remain utterly passive until the reply came, and never once through many years' experience did he find himself disappointed or misled." [*1]

Wherein, I should like to know, does this intrinsically differ from the practice of "recollection" which plays so great a part in Catholic discipline? Otherwise called the practice of the presence of God (and so known among ourselves, as for instance in Jeremy Taylor), it is thus defined by the eminent teacher Alvarez de Paz in his work on Contemplation.

"It is the recollection of God, the thought of God, which in all places and circumstances makes us see him present, lets us commune respectfully and lovingly with him, and fills us with desire and affection for him. . . . Would you escape from every ill? Never lose this recollection of God, neither in prosperity nor in adversity, nor on any occasion whichsoever it be. Invoke not, to excuse yourself from this duty, either the difficulty or the importance of your business, for you can always remember that God sees you, that you are under his eye. If a thousand times an hour you forget him, reanimate a thousand times the recollection. If you cannot practice this exercise continuously, at least make yourself as familiar with it as possible; and, like unto those who in a rigorous winter draw near the fire as often as they can, go as often as you can to that ardent fire which will warm your soul." [*2]

[p. 115]

All the external associations of the Catholic discipline are of course unlike anything in mind-cure thought, but the purely spiritual part of the exercise is identical in both communions, and in both communions those who urge it write with authority, for they have evidently experienced in their own persons that whereof they tell. Compare again some mind-cure utterances:--

"High, healthful, pure thinking can be encouraged, promoted, and strengthened. Its current can be turned upon grand ideals until it forms a habit and wears a channel. By means of such discipline the mental horizon can be flooded with the sunshine of beauty, wholeness, and harmony. To inaugurate pure and lofty thinking may at first seem difficult, even almost mechanical, but perseverance will at length render it easy, then pleasant, and finally delightful.

"The soul's real world is that which it has built of its thoughts, mental states, and imaginations. If we WILL, we can turn our backs upon the lower and sensuous plane, and lift ourselves into the realm of the spiritual and Real, and there gain a residence. The assumption of states of expectancy and receptivity will attract spiritual sunshine, and it will flow in as naturally as air inclines to a vacuum. . . . Whenever the though; is not occupied with one's daily duty or profession, it should he sent aloft into the spiritual atmosphere. There are quiet leisure moments by day, and wakeful hours at night, when this wholesome and delightful exercise may be engaged in to great advantage. If one who has never made any systematic effort to lift and control the thought-forces will, for a single month, earnestly pursue the course here suggested, he will be surprised and delighted at the result, and nothing will induce him to go back to careless, aimless, and superficial thinking. At such favorable seasons the outside world, with all its current of daily events, is barred out, and one goes into the silent sanctuary of the inner temple of soul to commune and aspire. The spiritual hearing becomes delicately sensitive, so that the 'still, small voice' is audible, the tumultuous waves of external sense are

[p. 116]

hushed, and there is a great calm. The ego gradually becomes conscious that it is face to face with the Divine Presence; that mighty, healing, loving, Fatherly life which is nearer to us than we are to ourselves. There is soul contact with the Parent-Soul, and an influx of life, love, virtue, health, and happiness from the Inexhaustible Fountain." [*1]

When we reach the subject of mysticism, you will undergo so deep an immersion into these exalted states of consciousness as to be wet all over, if I may so express myself; and the cold shiver of doubt with which this little sprinkling may affect you will have long since passed away--doubt, I mean, as to whether all such writing be not mere abstract talk and rhetoric set down pour encourager les autres. You will then be convinced, I trust, that these states of consciousness of "union" form a perfectly definite class of experiences, of which the soul may occasionally partake, and which certain persons may live by in a deeper sense than they live by anything else with which they have acquaintance. This brings me to a general philosophical reflection with which I should like to pass from the subject of healthy-mindedness, and close a topic which I fear is already only too long drawn out. It concerns the relation of all this systematized healthy-mindedness and mind-cure religion to scientific method and the scientific life.

 

In a later lecture I shall have to treat explicitly of the relation of religion to science on the one hand, and to primeval savage thought on the other. There are plenty of persons to-day--"scientists" or "positivists," they are fond of calling themselves--who will tell you that religious thought is a mere survival, an atavistic reversion to a type of consciousness which humanity in its more enlightened

[p. 117]

examples has long since left behind and out-grown. If you ask them to explain themselves more fully, they will probably say that for primitive thought everything is conceived of under the form of personality. The savage thinks that things operate by personal forces, and for the sake of individual ends. For him, even external nature obeys individual needs and claims, just as if these were so many elementary powers. Now science, on the other hand, these positivists say, has proved that personality, so far from being an elementary force in nature, is but a passive resultant of the really elementary forces, physical, chemical, physiological, and psycho-physical, which are all impersonal and general in character. Nothing individual accomplishes anything in the universe save in so far as it obeys and exemplifies some universal law. Should you then inquire of them by what means science has thus supplanted primitive thought, and discredited its personal way of looking at things, they would undoubtedly say it has been by the strict use of the method of experimental verification. Follow out science's conceptions practically, they will say, the conceptions that ignore personality altogether, and you will always be corroborated. The world is so made that all your expectations will be experientially verified so long, and only so long, as you keep the terms from which you infer them impersonal and universal.

But here we have mind-cure, with her diametrically opposite philosophy, setting up an exactly identical claim. Live as if I were true, she says, and every day will practically prove you right. That the controlling energies of nature are personal, that your own personal thoughts are forces, that the powers of the universe will directly respond to your individual appeals and needs, are propositions which your whole bodily and mental experience will verify. And that experience does largely verify these primeval religious ideas is proved by the fact that the mind-cure movement spreads

[p. 118]

as it does, not by proclamation and assertion simply, but by palpable experiential results. Here, in the very heyday of science's authority, it carries on an aggressive warfare against the scientific philosophy, and succeeds by using science's own peculiar methods and weapons. Believing that a higher power will take care of us in certain ways better than we can take care of ourselves, if we only genuinely throw ourselves upon it and consent to use it, it finds the belief, not only not impugned, but corroborated by its observation.

How conversions are thus made, and converts confirmed, is evident enough from the narratives which I have quoted. I will quote yet another couple of shorter ones to give the matter a perfectly concrete turn. Here is one:--

"One of my first experiences in applying my teaching was two months after I first saw the healer. I fell, spraining my right ankle, which I had done once four years before, having then had to use a crutch and elastic anklet for some months, and carefully guarding it ever since. As soon as I was on my feet I made the positive suggestion (and felt it through all my being): 'There is nothing but God, and all life comes from him perfectly. I cannot be sprained or hurt, I will let him take care of it.' Well, I never had a sensation in it, and I walked two miles that day."

The next case not only illustrates experiment and verification, but also the element of passivity and surrender of which awhile ago I made such account.

"I went into town to do some shopping one morning, and I had not been gone long before I began to feel ill. The ill feeling increased rapidly, until I had pains in all my bones, nausea and faintness, headache, all the symptoms in short that precede an attack of influenza. I thought that I was going to have the grippe, epidemic then in Boston, or something worse. The mind-cure teachings that I had been listening to all the winter

[p. 119]

thereupon came into my mind, and I thought that here was an opportunity to test myself. On my way home I met a friend, I refrained with some effort from telling her how I felt. That was the first step gained. I went to bed immediately, and my husband wished to send for the doctor. But I told him that I would rather wait until morning and see how I felt. Then followed one of the most beautiful experiences of my life.

"I cannot express it in any other way than to say that I did 'lie down in the stream of life and let it flow over me.' I gave up all fear of any impending disease; I was perfectly willing and obedient. There was no intellectual effort, or train of thought. My dominant idea was: 'Behold the handmaid of the Lord: be it unto me even as thou wilt,' and a perfect confidence that all would be well, that all was well. The creative life was flowing into me every instant, and I felt myself allied with the Infinite, in harmony, and full of the peace that passeth understanding. There was no place in my mind for a jarring body. I had no consciousness of time or space or persons; but only of love and happiness and faith.

"I do not know how long this state lasted, nor when I fell asleep; but when I woke up in the morning, I was well."

These are exceedingly trivial instances, [*1] but in them, if we have anything at all, we have the method of experiment and verification. For the point I am driving at now, it makes no difference whether you consider the patients to be deluded victims of their imagination or not. That they seemed to themselves to have been cured by the experiments tried was enough to make them converts to the system. And although it is evident that one must be of a certain mental mould to get such results (for not every one can get thus cured to his own satisfaction any more than every one can be cured by the first regular practitioner whom he calls in), yet it would surely be pedantic and over-scrupulous for those who can get their savage and primitive philosophy

[p. 120]

of mental healing verified in such experimental ways as this, to give them up at word of command for more scientific therapeutics.

What are we to think of all this? Has science made too wide a claim?

I believe that the claims of the sectarian scientist are, to say the least, premature. The experiences which we have been studying during this hour (and a great many other kinds of religious experiences are like them) plainly show the universe to be a more many-sided affair than any sect, even the scientific sect, allows for. What, in the end, are all our verifications but experiences that agree with more or less isolated systems of ideas (conceptual systems) that our minds have framed? But why in the name of common sense need we assume that only one such system of ideas can be true? The obvious outcome of our total experience is that the world can be handled according to many systems of ideas, and is so handled by different men, and will each time give some characteristic kind of profit, for which he cares, to the handler, while at the same time some other kind of profit has to be omitted or postponed. Science gives to all of us telegraphy, electric lighting, and diagnosis, and succeeds in preventing and curing a certain amount of disease. Religion in the shape of mind-cure gives to some of us serenity, moral poise, and happiness, and prevents certain forms of disease as well as science does, or even better in a certain class of persons. Evidently, then, the science and the religion are both of them genuine keys for unlocking the world's treasure-house to him who can use either of them practically. Just as evidently neither is exhaustive or exclusive of the other's simultaneous use. And why, after all, may not the world be so complex as to consist of many interpenetrating spheres of reality, which we can thus approach in alternation by using different conceptions and assuming different attitudes, just as mathematicians handle the same numerical and spatial facts by geometry, by analytical

[p. 121]

geometry, by algebra, by the calculus, or by quaternions, and each time come out right? On this view religion and science, each verified in its own way from hour to hour and from life to life, would be co-eternal. Primitive thought, with its belief in individualized personal forces, seems at any rate as far as ever from being driven by science from the field to-day. Numbers of educated people still find it the directest experimental channel by which to carry on their intercourse with reality. [*1]

The case of mind-cure lay so ready to my hand that I could not resist the temptation of using it to bring these last truths home to your attention, but I must content myself to-day with this very brief indication. In a later lecture the relations of religion both to science and to primitive thought will have to receive much more explicit attention.

  

APPENDIX

(See note [*1] to <page 119>.)

CASE I. "My own experience is this: I had long been ill, and one of the first results of my illness, a dozen years before, had been a diplopia which deprived me of the use of my eyes for reading and writing almost entirely, while a later one had been to shut me out from exercise of any kind under penalty of immediate and great exhaustion. I had been under the care of doctors of the highest standing both in Europe and America, men in whose power to help me I had had great faith, with no

[p. 122]

or ill result. Then, at a time when I seemed to be rather rapidly losing ground, I heard some things that gave me interest enough in mental healing to make me try it; I had no great hope of getting any good from it--it was a chance I tried, partly because my thought was interested by the new possibility it seemed to open, partly because it was the only chance I then could see. I went to X in Boston, from whom some friends of mine had got, or thought they had got, great help; the treatment was a silent one; little was said, and that little carried no conviction to my mind, whatever influence was exerted was that of another person's thought or feeling silently projected on to my unconscious mind, into my nervous system as it were, as we sat still together. I believed from the start in the possibility of such action, for I knew the power of the mind to shape, helping or hindering, the body's nerve-activities, and I thought telepathy probable, although unproved, but I had no belief in it as more than a possibility, and no strong conviction nor any mystic or religious faith connected with my thought of it that might have brought imagination strongly into play.

"I sat quietly with the healer for half an hour each day, at first with no result; then, after ten days or so, I became quite suddenly and swiftly conscious of a tide of new energy rising within me, a sense of power to pass beyond old halting-places, of power to break the bounds that, though often tried before, had long been veritable walls about my life, too high to climb. I began to read and walk as I had not done for years, and the change was sudden, marked, and unmistakable. This tide seemed to mount for some weeks, three or four perhaps, when, summer having come, I came away, taking the treatment up again a few months later. The lift I got proved permanent, and left me slowly gaining ground instead of losing, it but with this lift the influence seemed in a way to have spent itself, and, though my confidence in the reality of the power had gained immensely from this first experience, and should have helped me to make further gain in health and strength if my belief in it had been the potent factor there, I never after this got any result at all as striking or as clearly marked as this which came when I made trial of it first, with little faith and doubtful expectation. It is difficult to put all the evidence in such a matter

[p. 123]

into words, to gather up into a distinct statement all that one bases one's conclusions on, but I have always felt that I had abundant evidence to justify (to myself, at least) the conclusion that I came to then, and since have held to, that the physical change which came at that time was, first, the result of a change wrought within me by a change of mental state; and secondly, that that change of mental state was not, save in a very secondary way, brought about through the influence of an excited imagination, or a consciously received suggestion of an hypnotic sort. Lastly, I believe that this change was the result of my receiving telephathically, and upon a mental stratum quite below the level of immediate consciousness, a healthier and more energetic attitude, receiving it from another person whose thought was directed upon me with the intention of impressing the idea of this attitude upon me. In my case the disease was distinctly what would be classed as nervous, not organic; but from such opportunities as I have had of observing, I have come to the conclusion that the dividing line that has been drawn is an arbitrary one, the nerves controlling the internal activities and the nutrition of the body throughout; and I believe that the central nervous system, by starting and inhibiting local centres, can exercise a vast influence upon disease of any kind, if it can be brought to bear. In my judgment the question is simply how to bring it to bear, and I think that the uncertainty and remarkable differences in the results obtained through mental healing do but show how ignorant we are as yet of the forces at work and of the means we should take to make them effective. That these results are not due to chance coincidences my observation of myself and others makes me sure; that the conscious mind, the imagination, enters into them as a factor in many cases is doubtless true, but in many others, and sometimes very extraordinary ones, it hardly seems to enter in at all. On the whole I am inclined to think that as the healing action, like the morbid one, springs from the plane of the normally unconscious mind, so the strongest and most effective impressions are those which it receives, in some as yet unknown subtle way, directly from a healthier mind whose state, through a hidden law of sympathy, it reproduces."

[p. 124]

CASE II. "At the urgent request of friends, and with no faith and hardly any hope (possibly owing to a previous unsuccessful experience with a Christian Scientist), our little daughter was placed under the care of a healer, and cured of a trouble about which the physician had been very discouraging in his diagnosis. This interested me, and I began studying earnestly the method and philosophy of this method of healing. Gradually an inner peace and tranquillity came to me in so positive a way that my manner changed greatly. My children and friends noticed the change and commented upon it. All feelings of irritability disappeared. Even the expression of my face changed noticeably.

"I had been bigoted, aggressive, and intolerant in discussion, both in public and private. I grew broadly tolerant and receptive toward the views of others. I had been nervous and irritable, coming home two or three times a week with a sick headache induced, as I then supposed, by dyspepsia and catarrh. I grew serene and gentle, and the physical troubles entirely disappeared. I had been in the habit of approaching every business interview with an almost morbid dread. I now meet every one with confidence and inner calm.

"I may say that the growth has all been toward the elimination of selfishness. I do not mean simply the grosser, more sensual forms, but those subtler and generally unrecognized kinds, such as express themselves in sorrow, grief, regret, envy, etc. It has been in the direction of a practical, working realization of the immanence of God and the Divinity of man's true, inner self.

Footnotes

^78:1 C. HILTY: Gluck, dritter Theil, 1900, p. 18.

^79:1 The Soul; its Sorrows and its Aspirations, 3d edition, 1852, pp. 89, 91.

^80:1 I once heard a lady describe the pleasure it gave her to think that she "could always cuddle up to God."

^80:2 John Weiss: Life of Theodore Parker, i. 152, 32.

^82:1 STARBUCK: Psychology of Religion, pp. 305, 306.

^82:2 "I know not to what physical laws philosophers will some day refer the feelings of melancholy. For myself, I find that they are the most voluptuous of all sensations," writes Saint Pierre, and accordingly he devotes a series of sections of his work on Nature to the Plaisirs de la Ruine, Plaisirs des Tombeaux, Ruines de la Nature, Plaisirs de la Solitude--each of them more optimistic than the last.

This finding of a luxury in woe is very common during adolescence. The truth-telling Marie Bashkirtseff expresses it well:--

"In this depression and dreadful uninterrupted suffering, I don't condemn life. On the contrary, I like it and find it good. Can you believe it? I find everything good and pleasant, even my tears, my grief. I enjoy weeping, I enjoy my despair. I enjoy being exasperated and sad. I feel as if these were so many diversions, and I love life in spite of them all. I want to live on. It would be cruel to have me die when I am so accommodating. I cry, I grieve, and at the same time I am pleased--no, not exactly that--I know not how to express it. But everything in life pleases me. I find everything agreeable, and in the very midst of my prayers for happiness, I find myself happy at being miserable. It is not I who undergo all this--my body weeps and cries; but something inside of me which is above me is glad of it all." Journal de Marie Bashkirtseff, i. 67.

^84:1 R. M. BUCKE: Cosmic Consciousness, pp. 182-186, abridged.

^84:2 I refer to The Conservator, edited by Horace Traubel, and published monthly at Philadelphia.

^85:1 Song of Myself, 32.

^85:2 Iliad, XXI., E. Myers's translation.

^86:1 "God is afraid of me!" remarked such a titanic-optimistic friend in my presence one morning when he was feeling particularly hearty and cannibalistic. The defiance of the phrase showed that a Christian education in humility still rankled in his breast.

^89:1 "As I go on in this life, day by day, I become more of a bewildered child; I cannot get used to this world, to procreation, to heredity, to sight, to hearing, the commonest things are a burthen. The prim, obliterated, polite surface of life, and the broad, bawdy and orgiastic--or maenadic--foundations, form a spectacle to which no habit reconciles me." R. L. STEVENSON: Letters, ii. 355.

^93:1 "Cautionary Verses for Children": this title of a much used work, published early in the nineteenth century, shows how far the muse of evangelical protestantism in England, with her mind fixed on the idea of danger, had at last drifted away from the original gospel freedom. Mind-cure might be briefly called a reaction against all that religion of chronic anxiety which marked the earlier part of our century in the evangelical circles of England and America.

^94:1 I refer to Mr. Horatio W. Dresser and Mr. Henry Wood, especially the former. Mr. Dresser's works are published by G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York and London; Mr. Wood's by Lee & Shepard, Boston.

^95:1 Lest my own testimony be suspected, I will quote another reporter, Dr. H. H. Goddard, of Clark University, whose thesis on "the Effects of Mind on Body as evidenced by Faith Cures" is published in the American Journal of Psychology for 1899 (vol. x.). This critic, after a wide study of the facts, concludes that the cures by mind-cure exist, but are in no respect different from those now officially recognized in medicine as cures by suggestion; and the end of his essay contains an interesting physiological speculation as to the way in which the suggestive ideas may work (p. 67 of the reprint). As regards the general phenomenon of mental cure itself, Dr. Goddard writes: "In spite of the severe criticism we have made of reports of cure, there still remains a vast amount of material, showing a powerful influence of the mind in disease. Many cases are of diseases that have been diagnosed and treated by the best physicians of the country, or which prominent hospitals have tried their hand at curing, but without success. People of culture and education have been treated by this method with satisfactory results. Diseases of long standing have been ameliorated, and even cured. . . . We have traced the mental element through primitive medicine and folk-medicine of to-day, patent medicine, and witchcraft. We are convinced that it is impossible to account for the existence of these practices, if they did not cure disease, and that if they cured disease, it must have been the mental element that was effective. The same argument applies to those modern schools of mental therapeutics--Divine Healing and Christian Science. It is hardly conceivable that the large body of intelligent people who comprise the body known distinctively as Mental Scientists should continue to exist if the whole thing were a delusion. It is not a thing of a day; it is not confined to a few; it is not local. It is true that many failures are recorded, but that only adds to the argument. There must be many and striking successes to counterbalance the failures, otherwise the failures would have ended the delusion. . . . Christian Science, Divine Healing, or Mental Science do not, and never can in the very nature of things, cure all diseases; nevertheless, the practical applications of the general principles of the broadest mental science will tend to prevent disease. . . . We do find sufficient evidence to convince us that the proper reform in mental attitude would relieve many a sufferer of ills that the ordinary physician cannot touch; would even delay the approach of death to many a [p. 96] victim beyond the power of absolute cure, and the faithful adherence to a truer philosophy of life will keep many a man well, and give the doctor time to devote to alleviating ills that are unpreventable" (pp. 33, 34 of reprint).

^96:1 HORACE FLETCHER: Happiness as found in Forethought minus Fearthought, Menticulture Series, ii. Chicago and New York, Stone. 1897, pp. 21-25, abridged.

^97:1 H. W. DRESSER: Voices of Freedom, New York, 1899, p. 38.

^98:1 HENRY WOOD: Ideal Suggestion through Mental Photography. Boston, 1899, p. 54.

^98:2 Whether it differs so much from Christ's own notion is for the exegetists to decide. According to Harnack, Jesus felt about evil and disease much as our mind-curers do. "What is the answer which Jesus sends to John the Baptist?" asks Harnack, and says it is this: "'The blind see, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead rise up, and the gospel is preached to the poor.' That is the 'coming of the kingdom,' or rather in these saving works the kingdom is already there. By the overcoming and removal of misery, of need, of sickness, by these actual effects John is to see that the new time has arrived. The casting out of devils is only a part of this work of redemption, but Jesus points to that as the sense and seal of his mission. Thus to the wretched, sick, and poor did he address himself, but not as a moralist, and without a trace of sentimentalism. He never makes groups and departments of the ills, he never spends time in asking whether the sick one 'deserves' to be cured; and it never occurs to him to sympathize with the pain or the death. He nowhere says that sickness is a beneficent infliction, and that evil has a healthy use. No, he calls sickness sickness and health health. All evil, all wretchedness, is for him something dreadful; it is of the great kingdom of Satan; but he feels the power of the saviour within him. He knows that advance is possible only when weakness is overcome, when sickness is made well." Das Wesen des Christenthums, 1900, p. 39.

^100:1 R. W. TRINE: In Tune with the Infinite, 26th thousand, N.Y. 1899. I have strung scattered passages together.

^104:1 The Cairds, for example. In EDWARD CAIRD'S Glasgow Lectures of 1890-92 passages like this abound:--

"The declaration made in the beginning of the ministry of Jesus that 'the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of heaven is at hand,' passes with scarce a break into the announcement that 'the kingdom of God is among you'; and the importance of this announcement is asserted to be such that it makes, so to speak, a difference in kind between the greatest saints and prophets who lived under the previous reign of division, and 'the least in the kingdom of heaven.' The highest ideal is brought close to men and declared to be within their reach, they are called on to be 'perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect.' The sense of alienation and distance from God which had grown upon the pious in Israel just in proportion as they had learned to look upon Him as no mere national divinity, but as a God of justice who would punish Israel for its sin as certainly as Edom or Moab, is declared to be no longer in place; and the typical form of Christian prayer points to the abolition of the contrast between this world and the next which through all the history of the Jews had continually been growing wider: 'As in heaven, so on earth.' The sense of the division of man from God, as a finite being from the Infinite, as weak and sinful from the Omnipotent Goodness, is not indeed lost; but it can no longer overpower the consciousness of oneness. The terms 'Son' and 'Father' at once state the opposition and mark its limit. They show that it is not an absolute opposition, but one which presupposes an indestructible principle of unity, that can and must become a principle of reconciliation." The Evolution of Religion, ii. pp. 146, 147.

^106:1 It remains to be seen whether the school of Mr. Dresser, which assumes more and more the form of mind-cure experience and [p. 107] academic philosophy mutually impregnating each other, will score the practical triumphs of the less critical and rational sects.

^109:1 The theistic explanation is by divine grace, which creates a new nature within one the moment the old nature is sincerely given up. The pantheistic explanation (which is that of most mind-curers) is by the merging of the narrower private self into the wider or greater self, the spirit of the universe (which is your own "subconscious" self), the moment the isolating barriers of mistrust and [p. 110] anxiety are removed. The medico-materialistic explanation is that simpler cerebral processes act more freely where they are left to act automatically by the shunting-out of physiologically (though in this instance not spiritually) "higher" ones which, seeking to regulate, only succeed in inhibiting results.--Whether this third explanation might, in a psycho-physical account of the universe, be combined with either of the others may be left an open question here.

^111:1 Within the churches a disposition has always prevailed to regard sickness as a visitation; something sent by God for our good, either as chastisement, as warning, or as opportunity for exercising virtue, and, in the Catholic Church, of earning "merit." "Illness," says a good Catholic writer P. LEJEUNE: (Introd. a la Vie Mystique, 1899, p. 218), "is the most excellent corporeal mortifications, the mortification which one has not one's self chosen, which is imposed directly by God, and is the direct expression of his will. 'If other mortifications are of silver,' Mgr. Gay says, 'this one is of gold; since although it comes of ourselves, coming as it does of original sin, still on its greater side, as coming (like all that happens) from the providence of God, it is of divine manufacture. And how just are its blows! And how efficacious it is! . . . I do not hesitate to say that patience in a long illness is mortification's very masterpiece, and consequently the triumph of mortified souls.'" According to this view, disease should in any case be submissively accepted, and it might under certain circumstances even be blasphemous to wish it away.

Of course there have been exceptions to this, and cures by special miracle have at all times been recognized within the church's pale, almost all the great saints having more or less performed them. It was one of the heresies of Edward Irving, to maintain them still to be possible. An extremely pure faculty of healing after confession and conversion on the patient's part, and prayer on the priest's, was quite spontaneously developed in the German pastor, Joh. Christoph Blumhardt, in the early forties and exerted during nearly thirty years. Blumhardt's Life by Zundel (5th edition, Zurich, 1887) gives in chapters ix., x., xi., and xvii. a pretty full account of his healing activity, which he invariably ascribed to direct divine interposition. Blumhardt was a singularly pure, simple, and non-fanatical character, and in this part of his work followed no previous model. In Chicago to-day we have the case of Dr. J. A. Dowie, a Scottish Baptist preacher, whose weekly "Leaves of Healing" were in the year of grace 1900 in their sixth volume, and who, although he denounces the cures wrought in other sects as "diabolical counterfeits" of his own exclusively "Divine Healing," must on the whole be counted into the mind-cure movement. In mind-cure circles the fundamental article of faith is that disease should never be accepted. It is wholly of the pit. God wants us to be absolutely healthy, and we should not tolerate ourselves on any lower terms.

^112:1 Edwards, from whose book on the Revival in New England I quote these words, dissuades from such a use of prayer, but it is easy to see that he enjoys making his thrust at the cold dead church members.

^113:1 H. W. DRESSER: Voices of Freedom, 46.

^113:2 DRESSER: Living by the spirit, 58.

^113:3 DRESSER: Voices of Freedom, 33.

^113:4 TRINE: In Tune with the Infinite, p. 214.

^114:1 Trine: p. 117.

^114:2 Quoted by LEJEUNE: Introd. a la vie Mystique, 1899, p. 66.

^116:1 HENRY WOOD: Ideal suggestion through Mental Photography, pp. 51, 70 (abridged).

^119:1 See Appendix to this lecture for two other cases furnished me by friends.

^121:1 Whether the various spheres or systems are ever to fuse integrally into one absolute conception, as most philosophers assume that they must, and how, if so, that conception may best be reached, are questions that only the future can answer. What is certain now is the fact of lines of disparate conception, each corresponding to some part of the world's truth, each verified in some degree, each leaving out some part of real experience.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

  

Lectures VI and VII

  

THE SICK SOUL

At our last meeting, we considered the healthy-minded temperament, the temperament which has a constitutional incapacity for prolonged suffering, and in which the tendency to see things optimistically is like a water of crystallization in which the individual's character is set. We saw how this temperament may become the basis for a peculiar type of religion, a religion in which good, even the good of this world's life, is regarded as the essential thing for a rational being to attend to. This religion directs him to settle his scores with the more evil aspects of the universe by systematically declining to lay them to heart or make much of them, by ignoring them in his reflective calculations, or even, on occasion, by denying outright that they exist. Evil is a disease; and worry over disease is itself an additional form of disease, which only adds to the original complaint. Even repentance and remorse, affections which come in the character of ministers of good, may be but sickly and relaxing impulses. The best repentance is to up and act for righteousness, and forget that you ever had relations with sin.

Spinoza's philosophy has this sort of healthy-mindedness woven into the heart of it, and this has been one secret of its fascination. He whom Reason leads, according to Spinoza, is led altogether by the influence over his mind of good. Knowledge of evil is an "inadequate" knowledge, fit only for slavish minds. So Spinoza categorically condemns repentance. When men make mistakes, he says--

[p. 126]

"One might perhaps expect gnawings of conscience and repentance to help to bring them on the right path, and might thereupon conclude (as every one does conclude) that these affections are good things. Yet when we look at the matter closely, we shall find that not only are they not good, but on the contrary deleterious and evil passions. For it is manifest that we can always get along better by reason and love of truth than by worry of conscience and remorse. Harmful are these and evil, inasmuch as they form a particular kind of sadness; and the disadvantages of sadness," he continues, "I have already proved, and shown that we should strive to keep it from our life. Just so we should endeavor, since uneasiness of conscience and remorse are of this kind of complexion, to flee and shun these states of mind." [*1]

Within the Christian body, for which repentance of sins has from the beginning been the critical religious act, healthy-mindedness has always come forward with its milder interpretation. Repentance according to such healthy-minded Christians means getting away from the sin, not groaning and writhing over its commission. The Catholic practice of confession and absolution is in one of its aspects little more than a systematic method of keeping healthy-mindedness on top. By it a man's accounts with evil are periodically squared and audited, so that he may start the clean page with no old debts inscribed. Any Catholic will tell us how clean and fresh and free he feels after the purging operation. Martin Luther by no means belonged to the healthy-minded type in the radical sense in which we have discussed it, and he repudiated priestly absolution for sin. Yet in this matter of repentance he had some very healthy-minded ideas, due in the main to the largeness of his conception of God.

"When I was a monk," he says "I thought that I was utterly cast away, if at any time I felt the lust of the flesh: that is to say,

[p. 127]

if I felt any evil motion, fleshly lust, wrath, hatred, or envy against any brother. I assayed many ways to help to quiet my conscience, but It would not be; for the concupiscence and lust of my flesh did always return, so that I could not rest, but was continually vexed with these thoughts: This or that sin thou hast committed: thou art infected with envy, with impatiency, and such other sins: therefore thou art entered into this holy order in vain, and all thy good works are unprofitable. But if then I had rightly understood these sentences of Paul: 'The flesh lusteth contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit contrary to the flesh; and these two are one against another, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would do,' I should not have so miserably tormented myself, but should have thought and said to myself, as now commonly I do, 'Martin, thou shalt not utterly be without sin, for thou hast flesh; thou shalt therefore feel the battle thereof.' I remember that Staupitz was wont to say, 'I have vowed unto God above a thousand times that I would become a better man: but I never performed that which I vowed. Hereafter I will make no such vow: for I have now learned by experience that I am not able to perform it. Unless, therefore, God be favorable and merciful unto me for Christ's sake, I shall not be able, with all my vows and all my good deeds, to stand before him.' This (of Staupitz's) was not only a true, but also a godly and a holy desperation; and this must they all confess, both with mouth and heart, who will be saved. For the godly trust not to their own righteousness. They look unto Christ their reconciler who gave his life for their sins. Moreover, they know that the remnant of sin which is in their flesh is not laid to their charge, but freely pardoned. Notwithstanding, in the mean while they fight in spirit against the flesh, lest they should fulfill the lusts thereof; and although they feel the flesh to rage and rebel, and themselves also do fall sometimes into sin through infirmity, yet are they not discouraged, nor think therefore that their state and kind of life, and the works which are done according to their calling, displease God; but they raise up themselves by faith." [*1]

[p. 128]

One of the heresies for which the Jesuits got that spiritual genius, Molinos, the founder of Quietism, so abominably condemned was his healthy-minded opinion of repentance:--

"When thou fallest into a fault, in what matter soever it be do not trouble nor afflict thyself for it. For they are effects of our frail Nature, stained by Original Sin. The common enemy will make thee believe, as soon as thou fallest into any fault, that thou walkest in error, and therefore art out of God and his favor, and herewith would he make thee distrust of the divine Grace, telling thee of thy misery, and making a giant of it; and putting it into thy head that every day thy soul grows worse instead of better, whilst it so often repeats these failings. O blessed Soul, open thine eyes; and shut the gate against these diabolical suggestions, knowing thy misery, and trusting in the mercy divine. Would not he be a mere fool who, running at tournament with others, and falling in the best of the career, should lie weeping on the ground and afflicting himself with discourses upon his fall? Man (they would tell him), lose no time, get up and take the course again, for he that rises again quickly and continues his race is as if he had never fallen. If thou seest thyself fallen once and a thousand times, thou oughtest to make use of the remedy which I have given thee, that is, a loving confidence in the divine mercy. These are the weapons with which thou must fight and conquer cowardice and vain thoughts. This is the means thou oughtest to use--not to lose time, not to disturb thyself, and reap no good." [*2]

Now in contrast with such healthy-minded views as these, if we treat them as a way of deliberately minimizing evil, stands a radically opposite view, a way of maximizing evil, if you please so to call it, based on the persuasion that the evil aspects of our life are of its very essence, and that the world's meaning most comes home to us when we lay them most to heart. We have now to address ourselves to this

[p. 129]

more morbid way of looking at the situation. But as I closed our last hour with a general philosophical reflection on the healthy-minded way of taking life, I should like at this point to make another philosophical reflection upon it before turning to that heavier task. You will excuse the brief delay.

If we admit that evil is an essential part of our being and the key to the interpretation of our life, we load ourselves down with a difficulty that has always proved burdensome in philosophies of religion. Theism, whenever it has erected itself into a systematic philosophy of the universe, has shown a reluctance to let God be anything less than All-in-All. In other words, philosophic theism has always shown a tendency to become pantheistic and monistic, and to consider the world as one unit of absolute fact; and this has been at variance with popular or practical theism, which latter has ever been more or less frankly pluralistic, not to say polytheistic, and shown itself perfectly well satisfied with a universe composed of many original principles, provided we be only allowed to believe that the divine principle remains supreme, and that the others are subordinate. In this latter case God is not necessarily responsible for the existence of evil; he would only be responsible if it were not finally overcome. But on the monistic or pantheistic view, evil, like everything else, must have its foundation in God; and the difficulty is to see how this can possibly be the case if God be absolutely good. This difficulty faces us in every form of philosophy in which the world appears as one flawless unit of fact. Such a unit is an Individual, and in it the worst parts must be as essential as the best, must be as necessary to make the individual what he is; since if any part whatever in an individual were to vanish or alter, it would no longer be that individual at all. The philosophy of absolute idealism, so vigorously represented both in Scotland and America to-day, has to struggle with this difficulty quite as

[p. 130]

much as scholastic theism struggled in its time; and although it would be premature to say that there is no speculative issue whatever from the puzzle, it is perfectly fair to say that there is no clear or easy issue, and that the only obvious escape from paradox here is to cut loose from the monistic assumption altogether, and to allow the world to have existed from its origin in pluralistic form, as an aggregate or collection of higher and lower things and principles, rather than an absolutely unitary fact. For then evil would not need to be essential; it might be, and may always have been, an independent portion that had no rational or absolute right to live with the rest, and which we might conceivably hope to see got rid of at last.

Now the gospel of healthy-mindedness, as we have described it, casts its vote distinctly for this pluralistic view. Whereas the monistic philosopher finds himself more or less bound to say, as Hegel said, that everything actual is rational, and that evil, as an element dialectically required, must be pinned in and kept and consecrated and have a function awarded to it in the final system of truth, healthy-mindedness refuses to say anything of the sort. [*1] Evil, it says, is emphatically irrational, and not to be pinned in, or preserved, or consecrated in any final system of truth. It is a pure abomination to the Lord, an alien unreality, a waste element, to be sloughed off and negated, and the very memory of it, if possible, wiped out and forgotten. The ideal, so far from being co-extensive with the whole actual, is a mere extract from the actual, marked by its deliverance

[p. 131]

from all contact with this diseased, inferior, and excrementitious stuff.

Here we have the interesting notion fairly and squarely presented to us, of there being elements of the universe which may make no rational whole in conjunction with the other elements, and which, from the point of view of any system which those other elements make up, can only be considered so much irrelevance and accident--so much "dirt," as it were, and matter out of place. I ask you now not to forget this notion; for although most philosophers seem either to forget it or to disdain it too much ever to mention it, I believe that we shall have to admit it ourselves in the end as containing an element of truth. The mind-cure gospel thus once more appears to us as having dignity and importance. We have seen it to be a genuine religion, and no mere silly appeal to imagination to cure disease; we have seen its method of experimental verification to be not unlike the method of all science; and now here we find mind-cure as the champion of a perfectly definite conception of the metaphysical structure of the world. I hope that, in view of all this, you will not regret my having pressed it upon your attention at such length.

 

Let us now say good-by for a while to all this way of thinking, and turn towards those persons who cannot so swiftly throw off the burden of the consciousness of evil, but are congenitally fated to suffer from its presence. Just as we saw that in healthy-mindedness there are shallower and profounder levels, happiness like that of the mere animal, and more regenerate sorts of happiness, so also are there different levels of the morbid mind, and the one is much more formidable than the other. There are people for whom evil means only a mal-adjustment with things, a wrong correspondence of one's life with the environment. Such evil as this is curable, in principle at least, upon the

[p. 132]

natural plane, for merely by modifying either the self or the things, or both at once, the two terms may be made to fit, and all go merry as a marriage bell again. But there are others for whom evil is no mere relation of the subject to particular outer things, but something more radical and general, a wrongness or vice in his essential nature, which no alteration of the environment, or any superficial rearrangement of the inner self, can cure, and which requires a supernatural remedy. On the whole, the Latin races have leaned more towards the former way of looking upon evil, as made up of ills and sins in the plural, removable in detail; while the Germanic races have tended rather to think of Sin in the singular, and with a capital S, as of something ineradicably ingrained in our natural subjectivity, and never to be removed by any superficial piecemeal operations. [*1] These comparisons of races are always open to exception, but undoubtedly the northern tone in religion has inclined to the more intimately pessimistic persuasion, and this way of feeling, being the more extreme, we shall find by far the more instructive for our study.

Recent psychology has found great use for the word "threshold" as a symbolic designation for the point at which one state of mind passes into another. Thus we speak of the threshold of a man's consciousness in general, to indicate the amount of noise, pressure, or other outer stimulus which it takes to arouse his attention at all. One with a high threshold will doze through an amount of racket by which one with a low threshold would be immediately waked. Similarly, when one is sensitive to small differences in any order of sensation, we say he has a low "difference-threshold"--his mind easily steps over it into the consciousness of the differences in question. And just so we might speak of a "pain-threshold," a "fear-threshold," a "misery-threshold,"

[p. 133]

and find it quickly overpassed by the consciousness of some individuals, but lying too high in others to be often reached by their consciousness. The sanguine and healthy-minded live habitually on the sunny side of their misery-line, the depressed and melancholy live beyond it, in darkness and apprehension. There are men who seem to have started in life with a bottle or two of champagne inscribed to their credit; whilst others seem to have been born close to the pain-threshold, which the slightest irritants fatally send them over.

Does it not appear as if one who lived more habitually on one side of the pain-threshold might need a different sort of religion from one who habitually lived on the other? This question, of the relativity of different types of religion to different types of need, arises naturally at this point, and will became a serious problem ere we have done. But before we confront it in general terms, we must address ourselves to the unpleasant task of hearing what the sick souls, as we may call them in contrast to the healthy-minded, have to say of the secrets of their prison-house, their own peculiar form of consciousness. Let us then resolutely turn our backs on the once-born and their sky-blue optimistic gospel; let us not simply cry out, in spite of all appearances, "Hurrah for the Universe!--God's in his Heaven, all's right with the world." Let us see rather whether pity, pain, and fear, and the sentiment of human helplessness may not open a profounder view and put into our hands a more complicated key to the meaning of the situation.

 

To begin with, how can things so insecure as the successful experiences of this world afford a stable anchorage? A chain is no stronger than its weakest link, and life is after all a chain. In the healthiest and most prosperous existence, how many links of illness, danger, and disaster are always interposed? Unsuspectedly from the bottom of every fountain

[p. 134]

of pleasure, as the old poet said, something bitter rises up: a touch of nausea, a falling dead of the delight, a whiff of melancholy, things that sound a knell, for fugitive as they may be, they bring a feeling of coming from a deeper region and often have an appalling convincingness. The buzz of life ceases at their touch as a piano-string stops sounding when the damper falls upon it.

Of course the music can commence again;--and again and again--at intervals. But with this the healthy-minded consciousness is left with an irremediable sense of precariousness. It is a bell with a crack; it draws its breath on sufferance and by an accident.

Even if we suppose a man so packed with healthy-mindedness as never to have experienced in his own person any of these sobering intervals, still, if he is a reflecting being, he must generalize and class his own lot with that of others; and, doing so, he must see that his escape is just a lucky chance and no essential difference. He might just as well have been born to an entirely different fortune. And then indeed the hollow security! What kind of a frame of things is it of which the best you can say is, "Thank God, it has let me off clear this time!" Is not its blessedness a fragile fiction? Is not your joy in it a very vulgar glee, not much unlike the snicker of any rogue at his success? If indeed it were all success, even on such terms as that! But take the happiest man, the one most envied by the world, and in nine cases out of ten his inmost consciousness is one of failure. Either his ideals in the line of his achievements are pitched far higher than the achievements themselves, or else he has secret ideals of which the world knows nothing, and in regard to which he inwardly knows himself to be found wanting.

When such a conquering optimist as Goethe can express himself in this wise, how must it be with less successful men?

[p. 135]

"I will say nothing," writes Goethe in 1824, "against the course of my existence. But at bottom it has been nothing but pain and burden, and I can affirm that during the whole of my 75 years, I have not had four weeks of genuine well-being. It is but the perpetual rolling of a rock that must be raised up again forever."

What single-handed man was ever on the whole as successful as Luther? Yet when he had grown old, he looked back on his life as if it were an absolute failure.

"I am utterly weary of life. I pray the Lord will come forthwith and carry me hence. Let him come, above all, with his last Judgment: I will stretch out my neck, the thunder will burst forth, and I shall be at rest."--And having a necklace of white agates in his hand at the time he added: "O God, grant that it may come without delay. I would readily eat up this necklace to-day, for the Judgment to come to-morrow."--The Electress Dowager, one day when Luther was dining with her, said to him: "Doctor, I wish you may live forty years to come." "Madam," replied he, "rather than live forty years more, I would give up my chance of Paradise."

Failure, then, failure! so the world stamps us at every turn. We strew it with our blunders, our misdeeds, our lost opportunities, with all the memorials of our inadequacy to our vocation. And with what a damning emphasis does it then blot us out! No easy fine, no mere apology or formal expiation, will satisfy the world's demands, but every pound of flesh exacted is soaked with all its blood. The subtlest forms of suffering known to man are connected with the poisonous humiliations incidental to these results.

And they are pivotal human experiences. A process so ubiquitous and everlasting is evidently an integral part of life. "There is indeed one element in human destiny," Robert Louis Stevenson writes, "that not blindness itself can controvert. Whatever else we are intended to do, we are not

[p. 136]

intended to succeed; failure is the fate allotted." [*1] And our nature being thus rooted in failure, is it any wonder that theologians should have held it to be essential, and thought that only through the personal experience of humiliation which it engenders the deeper sense of life's significance is reached? [*2]

But this is only the first stage of the world-sickness. Make the human being's sensitiveness a little greater, carry him a little farther over the misery-threshold, and the good quality of the successful moments themselves when they occur is spoiled and vitiated. All natural goods perish. Riches take wings; fame is a breath; love is a cheat; youth and health and pleasure vanish. Can things whose end is always dust and disappointment be the real goods which our souls require? Back of everything is the great spectre of universal death, the all-encompassing blackness:--

"What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the Sun? I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit. For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; as the one dieth, so dieth the other, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again. . . . The dead know not anything, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten.

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] Also their love and their hatred and their envy is now perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in anything that is done under the Sun. . . . Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun: but if a man live many years and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many."

In short, life and its negation are beaten up inextricably together. But if the life be good, the negation of it must be bad. Yet the two are equally essential facts of existence; and all natural happiness thus seems infected with a contradiction. The breath of the sepulchre surrounds it.

To a mind attentive to this state of things and rightly subject to the joy-destroying chill which such a contemplation engenders, the only relief that healthy-mindedness can give is by saying: "Stuff and nonsense, get out into the open air!" or "Cheer up, old fellow, you'll be all right erelong, if you will only drop your morbidness!" But in all seriousness, can such bald animal talk as that be treated as a rational answer? To ascribe religious value to mere happy-go-lucky contentment with one's brief chance at natural good is but the very consecration of forgetfulness and superficiality. Our troubles lie indeed too deep for that cure. The fact that we can die, that we can be ill at all, is what perplexes us; the fact that we now for a moment live and are well is irrelevant to that perplexity. We need a life not correlated with death, a health not liable to illness, a kind of good that will not perish, a good in fact that flies beyond the Goods of nature.

It all depends on how sensitive the soul may become to discords. "The trouble with me is that I believe too much in common happiness and goodness," said a friend of mine whose consciousness was of this sort, "and nothing can console me for their transiency. I am appalled and disconcerted at its being possible." And so with most of us: a little cooling down of animal excitability and instinct, a little loss of

[p. 138]

animal toughness, a little irritable weakness and descent of the pain-threshold, will bring the worm at the core of all our usual springs of delight into full view, and turn us into melancholy metaphysicians. The pride of life and glory of the world will shrivel. It is after all but the standing quarrel of hot youth and hoary eld. Old age has the last word: the purely naturalistic look at life, however enthusiastically it may begin, is sure to end in sadness.

This sadness lies at the heart of every merely positivistic, agnostic, or naturalistic scheme of philosophy. Let sanguine healthy-mindedness do its best with its strange power of living in the moment and ignoring and forgetting, still the evil background is really there to be thought of, and the skull will grin in at the banquet. In the practical life of the individual, we know how his whole gloom or glee about any present fact depends on the remoter schemes and hopes with which it stands related. Its significance and framing give it the chief part of its value. Let it be known to lead nowhere, and however agreeable it may be in its immediacy, its glow and gilding vanish. The old man, sick with an insidious internal disease, may laugh and quaff his wine at first as well as ever, but he knows his fate now, for the doctors have revealed it; and the knowledge knocks the satisfaction out of all these functions. They are partners of death and the worm is their brother, and they turn to a mere flatness.

The lustre of the present hour is always borrowed from the background of possibilities it goes with. Let our common experiences be enveloped in an eternal moral order; let our suffering have an immortal significance; let Heaven smile upon the earth, and deities pay their visits; let faith and hope be the atmosphere which man breathes in;--and his days pass by with zest; they stir with prospects, they thrill with remoter values. Place round them on the contrary the curdling cold and gloom and absence of all

[p. 139]

permanent meaning which for pure naturalism and the popular science evolutionism of our time are all that is visible ultimately, and the thrill stops short, or turns rather to an anxious trembling.

For naturalism, fed on recent cosmological speculations, mankind is in a position similar to that of a set of people living on a frozen lake, surrounded by cliffs over which there is no escape, yet knowing that little by little the ice is melting, and the inevitable day drawing near when the last film of it will disappear, and to be drowned ignominiously will be the human creature's portion. The merrier the skating, the warmer and more sparkling the sun by day, and the ruddier the bonfires at night, the more poignant the sadness with which one must take in the meaning of the total situation.

The early Greeks are continually held up to us in literary works as models of the healthy-minded joyousness which the religion of nature may engender. There was indeed much joyousness among the Greeks--Homer's flow of enthusiasm for most things that the sun shines upon is steady. But even in Homer the reflective passages are cheerless, [*1] and the moment the Greeks grew systematically pensive and thought of ultimates, they became unmitigated pessimists. [*2] The jealousy of the gods, the nemesis that follows

[p. 140]

too much happiness, the all-encompassing death, fate's dark opacity, the ultimate and unintelligible cruelty, were the fixed background of their imagination. The beautiful joyousness of their polytheism is only a poetic modern fiction. They knew no joys comparable in quality of preciousness to those which we shall erelong see that Brahmans, Buddhists, Christians, Mohammedans, twice-born people whose religion is non-naturalistic, get from their several creeds of mysticism and renunciation.

Stoic insensibility and Epicurean resignation were the farthest advance which the Greek mind made in that direction. The Epicurean said: "Seek not to be happy, but rather to escape unhappiness; strong happiness is always linked with pain; therefore hug the safe shore, and do not tempt the deeper raptures. Avoid disappointment by expecting little, and by aiming low; and above all do not fret." The Stoic said: "The only genuine good that life can yield a man is the free possession of his own soul; all other goods are lies." Each of these philosophies is in its degree a philosophy of despair in nature's boons. Trustful self-abandonment to the joys that freely offer has entirely departed from both Epicurean and Stoic; and what each proposes is a way of rescue from the resultant dust-and-ashes state of mind. The

[p. 141]

[paragraph continues] Epicurean still awaits results from economy of indulgence and damping of desire. The Stoic hopes for no results, and gives up natural good altogether. There is dignity in both these forms of resignation. They represent distinct stages in the sobering process which man's primitive intoxication with sense-happiness is sure to undergo. In the one the hot blood has grown cool, in the other it has become quite cold; and although I have spoken of them in the past tense, as if they were merely historic, yet Stoicism and Epicureanism will probably be to all time typical attitudes, marking a certain definite stage accomplished in the evolution of the world-sick soul. [*1] They mark the conclusion of what we call the once-born period, and represent the highest flights of what twice-born religion would call the purely natural man--Epicureanism, which can only by great courtesy be called a religion, showing his refinement, and Stoicism exhibiting his moral will. They leave the world in the shape of an unreconciled contradiction, and seek no higher unity. Compared with the complex ecstasies which the supernaturally regenerated Christian may enjoy, or the oriental pantheist indulge in, their receipts for equanimity are expedients which seem almost crude in their simplicity.

Please observe, however, that I am not yet pretending finally to judge any of these attitudes. I am only describing their variety.

[p. 142]

The securest way to the rapturous sorts of happiness of which the twice-born make report has as an historic matter of fact been through a more radical pessimism than anything that we have yet considered. We have seen how the lustre and enchantment may be rubbed off from the goods of nature. But there is a pitch of unhappiness so great that the goods of nature may be entirely forgotten, and all sentiment of their existence vanish from the mental field. For this extremity of pessimism to be reached, something more is needed than observation of life and reflection upon death. The individual must in his own person become the prey of a pathological melancholy. As the healthy-minded enthusiast succeeds in ignoring evil's very existence, so the subject of melancholy is forced in spite of himself to ignore that of all good whatever: for him it may no longer have the least reality. Such sensitiveness and susceptibility to mental pain is a rare occurrence where the nervous constitution is entirely normal; one seldom finds it in a healthy subject even where he is the victim of the most atrocious cruelties of outward fortune. So we note here the neurotic constitution, of which I said so much in my first lecture, making its active entrance on our scene, and destined to play a part in much that follows. Since these experiences of melancholy are in the first instance absolutely private and individual, I can now help myself out with personal documents. Painful indeed they will be to listen to, and there is almost an indecency in handling them in public. Yet they lie right in the middle of our path; and if we are to touch the psychology of religion at all seriously, we must be willing to forget conventionalities, and dive below the smooth and lying official conversational surface.

One can distinguish many kinds of pathological depression. Sometimes it is mere passive joylessness and dreariness. discouragement, dejection, lack of taste and zest and spring.

[p. 143]

[paragraph continues] Professor Ribot has proposed the name anhedonia to designate this condition.

"The state of anhedonia, if I may coin a new word to pair off with analgesia," he writes, "has been very little studied, but it exists. A young girl was smitten with a liver disease which for some time altered her constitution. She felt no longer any affection for her father and mother. She would have played with her doll, but it was impossible to find the least pleasure in the act. The same things which formerly convulsed her with laughter entirely failed to interest her now. Esquirol observed the case of a very intelligent magistrate who was also a prey to hepatic disease. Every emotion appeared dead within him. He manifested neither perversion nor violence, but complete absence of emotional reaction. If he went to the theatre, which he did out of habit, he could find no pleasure there. The thought of his house of his home, of his wife, and of his absent children moved him as little, he said, as a theorem of Euclid." [*1]

Prolonged seasickness will in most persons produce a temporary condition of anhedonia. Every good, terrestrial or celestial, is imagined only to be turned from with disgust. A temporary condition of this sort, connected with the religious evolution of a singularly lofty character, both intellectual and moral, is well described by the Catholic philosopher, Father Gratry, in his autobiographical recollections. In consequence of mental isolation and excessive study at the Polytechnic school, young Gratry fell into a state of nervous exhaustion with symptoms which he thus describes:--

"I had such a universal terror that I woke at night with a start, thinking that the Pantheon was tumbling on the Polytechnic school, or that the school was in flames, or that the Seine was pouring into the Catacombs, and that Paris was being swallowed

[p. 144]

up. And when these impressions were past, all day long without respite I suffered an incurable and intolerable desolation, verging on despair. I thought myself, in fact, rejected by God, lost, damned! I felt something like the suffering of hell. Before that I had never even thought of hell. My mind had never turned in that direction. Neither discourses nor reflections had impressed me in that way. I took no account of hell. Now, and all at once, I suffered in a measure what is suffered there.

"But what was perhaps still more dreadful is that every idea of heaven was taken away from me: I could no longer conceive of anything of the sort. Heaven did not seem to me worth going to. It was like a vacuum; a mythological elysium, an abode of shadows less real than the earth. I could conceive no joy, no pleasure in inhabiting it. Happiness, joy, light, affection, love--all these words were now devoid of sense. Without doubt I could still have talked of all these things, but I had become incapable of feeling anything in them, of understanding anything about them, of hoping anything from them, or of believing them to exist. There was my great and inconsolable grief! I neither perceived nor conceived any longer the existence of happiness or perfection. An abstract heaven over a naked rock. Such was my present abode for eternity." [*1]

[p. 145]

So much for melancholy in the sense of incapacity for joyous feeling. A much worse form of it is positive and active anguish, a sort of psychical neuralgia wholly unknown to healthy life. Such anguish may partake of various characters, having sometimes more the quality of loathing; sometimes that of irritation and exasperation; or again of self-mistrust and self-despair; or of suspicion, anxiety, trepidation, fear. The patient may rebel or submit; may accuse himself, or accuse outside powers; and he may or he may not be tormented by the theoretical mystery of why he should so have to suffer. Most cases are mixed cases, and we should not treat our classifications with too much respect. Moreover, it is only a relatively small proportion of cases that connect themselves with the religious sphere of experience at all. Exasperated cases, for instance, as a rule do not. I quote now literally from the first case of melancholy on which I lay my hand. It is a letter from a patient in a French asylum.

"I suffer too much in this hospital, both physically and morally. Besides the burnings and the sleeplessness (for I no longer sleep since I am shut up here, and the little rest I get is broken by bad dreams, and I am waked with a jump by night mares dreadful visions, lightning, thunder, and the rest), fear, atrocious fear, presses me down, holds me without respite, never lets me go. Where is the justice in it all! What have I done to deserve this excess of severity? Under what form will this fear crush me? What would I not owe to any one who would rid me of my life! Eat, drink, lie awake all night, suffer without interruption--such is the fine legacy I have received from my mother! What I fail to understand is this abuse of power. There are limits to everything, there is a middle way. But God knows neither middle way nor limits. I say God, but why? All I have

[p. 146]

known so far has been the devil. After all, I am afraid of God as much as of the devil, so I drift along, thinking of nothing but suicide, but with neither courage nor means here to execute the act. As you read this, it will easily prove to you my insanity. The style and the ideas are incoherent enough--I can see that myself. But I cannot keep myself from being either crazy or an idiot; and, as things are, from whom should I ask pity? I am defenseless against the invisible enemy who is tightening his coils around me. I should be no better armed against him even if I saw him, or had seen him. Oh, if he would but kill me, devil take him! Death, death, once for all! But I stop. I have raved to you long enough. I say raved, for I can write no otherwise, having neither brain nor thoughts left. O God! what a misfortune to be born! Born like a mushroom, doubtless between an evening and a morning; and how true and right I was when in our philosophy-year in college I chewed the cud of bitterness with the pessimists. Yes, indeed, there is more pain in life than gladness--it is one long agony until the grave. Think how gay it makes me to remember that this horrible misery of mine, coupled with this unspeakable fear, may last fifty, one hundred, who knows how many more years!" [*1]

This letter shows two things. First, you see how the entire consciousness of the poor man is so choked with the feeling of evil that the sense of there being any good in the world is lost for him altogether. His attention excludes it, cannot admit it: the sun has left his heaven. And secondly you see how the querulous temper of his misery keeps his mind from taking a religious direction. Querulousness of mind tends in fact rather towards irreligion; and it has played, so far as I know, no part whatever in the construction of religious systems.

 

Religious melancholy must be cast in a more melting mood. Tolstoy has left us, in his book called My Confession,

[p. 147]

a wonderful account of the attack of melancholy which led him to his own religious conclusions. The latter in some respects are peculiar; but the melancholy presents two characters which make it a typical document for our present purpose. First it is a well-marked case of anhedonia, of passive loss of appetite for all life's values; and second, it shows how the altered and estranged aspect which the world assumed in consequence of this stimulated Tolstoy's intellect to a gnawing, carking questioning and effort for philosophic relief. I mean to quote Tolstoy at some length; but before doing so, I will make a general remark on each of these two points.

First on our spiritual judgments and the sense of value in general.

It is notorious that facts are compatible with opposite emotional comments, since the same fact will inspire entirely different feelings in different persons, and at different times in the same person; and there is no rationally deducible connection between any outer fact and the sentiments it may happen to provoke. These have their source in another sphere of existence altogether, in the animal and spiritual region of the subject's being. Conceive yourself, if possible, suddenly stripped of all the emotion with which your world now inspires you, and try to imagine it as it exists, purely by itself, without your favorable or unfavorable, hopeful or apprehensive comment. It will be almost impossible for you to realize such a condition of negativity and deadness. No one portion of the universe would then have importance beyond another; and the whole collection of its things and series of its events would be without significance, character, expression, or perspective. Whatever of value, interest, or meaning our respective worlds may appear endued with are thus pure gifts of the spectator's mind. The passion of love is the most familiar and extreme example of this fact. If it comes, it comes; if it does not

[p. 148]

come, no process of reasoning can force it. Yet it transforms the value of the creature loved as utterly as the sunrise transforms Mont Blanc from a corpse-like gray to a rosy enchantment; and it sets the whole world to a new tune for the lover and gives a new issue to his life. So with fear, with indignation, jealousy, ambition, worship. If they are there, life changes. And whether they shall be there or not depends almost always upon non-logical, often on organic conditions. And as the excited interest which these passions put into the world is our gift to the world, just so are the passions themselves gifts--gifts to us, from sources sometimes low and sometimes high; but almost always non-logical and beyond our control. How can the moribund old man reason back to himself the romance, the mystery, the imminence of great things with which our old earth tingled for him in the days when he was young and well? Gifts, either of the flesh or of the spirit; and the spirit bloweth where it listeth; and the world's materials lend their surface passively to all the gifts alike, as the stage-setting receives indifferently whatever alternating colored lights may be shed upon it from the optical apparatus in the gallery.

Meanwhile the practically real world for each one of us, the effective world of the individual, is the compound world, the physical facts and emotional values in indistinguishable combination. Withdraw or pervert either factor of this complex resultant, and the kind of experience we call pathological ensues.

In Tolstoy's case the sense that life had any meaning whatever was for a time wholly withdrawn. The result was a transformation in the whole expression of reality. When we come to study the phenomenon of conversion or religious regeneration, we shall see that a not infrequent consequence of the change operated in the subject is a transfiguration of the face of nature in his eyes. A new heaven seems to shine upon a new earth. In melancholiacs there is

[p. 149]

usually a similar change, only it is in the reverse direction. The world now looks remote, strange, sinister, uncanny. Its color is gone, its breath is cold, there is no speculation in the eyes it glares with. "It is as if I lived in another century," says one asylum patient.--"I see everything through a cloud," says another, "things are not as they were, and I am changed."--"I see," says a third, "I touch, but the things do not come near me, a thick veil alters the hue and look of everything."--"Persons move like shadows, and sounds seem to come from a distant world."--"There is no longer any past for me; people appear so strange; it is as if I could not see any reality, as if I were in a theatre; as if people were actors, and everything were scenery; I can no longer find myself; I walk, but why? Everything floats before my eyes, but leaves no impression."--"I weep false tears, I have unreal hands: the things I see are not real things."--Such are expressions that naturally rise to the lips of melancholy subjects describing their changed state. [*1]

Now there are some subjects whom all this leaves a prey to the profoundest astonishment. The strangeness is wrong. The unreality cannot be. A mystery is concealed, and a metaphysical solution must exist. If the natural world is so double-faced and unhomelike, what world, what thing is real? An urgent wondering and questioning is set up, a poring theoretic activity, and in the desperate effort to get into right relations with the matter, the sufferer is often led to what becomes for him a satisfying religious solution.

At about the age of fifty, Tolstoy relates that he began to have moments of perplexity, of what he calls arrest, as if he knew not "how to live," or what to do. It is obvious that these were moments in which the excitement and interest which our functions naturally bring had ceased. Life had been enchanting, it was now flat sober, more than

[p. 150]

sober, dead. Things were meaningless whose meaning had always been self-evident. The questions "Why?" and "What next?" began to beset him more and more frequently. At first it seemed as if such questions must be answerable, and as if he could easily find the answers if he would take the time; but as they ever became more urgent, he perceived that it was like those first discomforts of a sick man, to which he pays but little attention till they run into one continuous suffering, and then he realizes that what he took for a passing disorder means the most momentous thing in the world for him, means his death.

These questions "Why?" "Wherefore?" "What for?" found no response.

"I felt," says Tolstoy, "that something had broken within me on which my life had always rested, that I had nothing left to hold on to, and that morally my life had stopped. An invincible force impelled me to get rid of my existence, in one way or another. It cannot be said exactly that I wished to kill myself, for the force which drew me away from life was fuller, more powerful, more general than any mere desire. It was a force like my old aspiration to live, only it impelled me in the opposite direction. It was an aspiration of my whole being to get out of life.

"Behold me then, a man happy and in good health, hiding the rope in order not to hang myself to the rafters of the room where every night I went to sleep alone; behold me no longer going shooting, lest I should yield to the too easy temptation of putting an end to myself with my gun.

"I did not know what I wanted. I was afraid of life; I was driven to leave it; and in spite of that I still hoped something from it.

"All this took place at a time when so far as all my outer circumstances went, I ought to have been completely happy. I had a good wife who loved me and whom I loved; good children and a large property which was increasing with no pains taken on my part. I was more respected by my kinsfolk and acquaintance than I had ever been; I was loaded with praise by strangers; and

[p. 151]

without exaggeration I could believe my name already famous. Moreover I was neither insane nor ill. On the contrary, I possessed a physical and mental strength which I have rarely met in persons of my age. I could mow as well as the peasants, I could work with my brain eight hours uninterruptedly and feel no bad effects.

"And yet I could give no reasonable meaning to any actions of my life. And I was surprised that I had not understood this from the very beginning. My state of mind was as if some wicked and stupid jest was being played upon me by some one. One can live only so long as one is intoxicated, drunk with life; but when one grows sober one cannot fail to see that it is all a stupid cheat. What is truest about it is that there is nothing even funny or silly in it; it is cruel and stupid, purely and simply.

"The oriental fable of the traveler surprised in the desert by a wild beast is very old.

"Seeking to save himself from the fierce animal, the traveler jumps into a well with no water in it; but at the bottom of this well he sees a dragon waiting with open mouth to devour him. And the unhappy man, not daring to go out lest he should be the prey of the beast, not daring to jump to the bottom lest he should be devoured by the dragon, clings to the branches of a wild bush which grows out of one of the cracks of the well. His hands weaken, and he feels that he must soon give way to certain fate; but still he clings, and see two mice, one white, the other black, evenly moving round the bush to which he hangs, and gnawing off its roots.

"The traveler sees this and knows that he must inevitably perish; but while thus hanging he looks about him and finds on the leaves of the bush some drops of honey. These he reaches with his tongue and licks them off with rapture.

"Thus I hang upon the boughs of life, knowing that the inevitable dragon of death is waiting ready to tear me, and I cannot comprehend why I am thus made a martyr. I try to suck the honey which formerly consoled me; but the honey pleases me no longer, and day and night the white mouse and the black mouse gnaw the branch to which I cling. I can see but one thing: the inevitable dragon and the mice--I cannot turn my gaze away from them.

[p. 152]

"This is no fable, but the literal incontestable truth which every one may understand. What will be the outcome of what I do to-day? Of what I shall do to-morrow? What will be the outcome of all my life? Why should I live? Why should I do anything? Is there in life any purpose which the inevitable death which awaits me does not undo and destroy?

"These questions are the simplest in the world. From the stupid child to the wisest old man, they are in the soul of every human being. Without an answer to them, it is impossible, as I experienced, for life to go on.

"'But perhaps,' I often said to myself, 'there may be something I have failed to notice or to comprehend. It is not possible that this condition of despair should be natural to mankind.' And I sought for an explanation in all the branches of knowledge acquired by men. I questioned painfully and protractedly and with no idle curiosity. I sought, not with indolence, but laboriously and obstinately for days and nights together. I sought like a man who is lost and seeks to save himself--and I found nothing. I became convinced, moreover, that all those who before me had sought for an answer in the sciences have also found nothing. And not only this, but that they have recognized that the very thing which was leading me to despair--the meaningless absurdity of life--is the only incontestable knowledge accessible to man."

To prove this point, Tolstoy quotes the Buddha, Solomon, and Schopenhauer. And he finds only four ways in which men of his own class and society are accustomed to meet the situation. Either mere animal blindness, sucking the honey without seeing the dragon or the mice--"and from such a way," he says, "I can learn nothing, after what I now know;" or reflective epicureanism, snatching what it can while the day lasts--which is only a more deliberate sort of stupefaction than the first; or manly suicide; or seeing the mice and dragon and yet weakly and plaintively clinging to the bush of life.

[p. 153]

Suicide was naturally the consistent course dictated by the logical intellect.

"Yet," says Tolstoy, "whilst my intellect was working, something else in me was working too, and kept me from the deed--a consciousness of life, as I may call it, which was like a force that obliged my mind to fix itself in another direction and draw me out of my situation of despair. . . . During the whole course of this year, when I almost unceasingly kept asking myself how to end the business, whether by the rope or by the bullet, during all that time, alongside of all those movements of my ideas and observations, my heart kept languishing with another pining emotion. I can call this by no other name than that of a thirst for God. This craving for God had nothing to do with the movement of my ideas--in fact, it was the direct contrary of that movement--but it came from my heart. It was like a feeling of dread that made me seem like an orphan and isolated in the midst of all these things that were so foreign. And this feeling of dread was mitigated by the hope of finding the assistance of some one." [*1]

Of the process, intellectual as well as emotional, which, starting from this idea of God, led to Tolstoy's recovery, I will say nothing in this lecture, reserving it for a later hour. The only thing that need interest us now is the phenomenon of his absolute disenchantment with ordinary life, and the fact that the whole range of habitual values may, to a man as powerful and full of faculty as he was, come to appear so ghastly a mockery.

When disillusionment has gone as far as this, there is seldom a restitutio ad integrum. One has tasted of the fruit of the tree, and the happiness of Eden never comes again. The happiness that comes, when any does come--and often enough it fails to return in an acute form, though its form

[p. 154]

is sometimes very acute--is not the simple, ignorance of ill, but something vastly more complex, including natural evil as one of its elements, but finding natural evil no such stumbling-block and terror because it now sees it swallowed up in supernatural good. The process is one of redemption, not of mere reversion to natural health, and the sufferer, when saved, is saved by what seems to him a second birth, a deeper kind of conscious being than he could enjoy before.

We find a somewhat different type of religious melancholy enshrined in literature in John Bunyan's autobiography. Tolstoy's preoccupations were largely objective, for the purpose and meaning of life in general was what so troubled him; but poor Bunyan's troubles were over the condition of his own personal self. He was a typical case of the psychopathic temperament, sensitive of conscience to a diseased degree, beset by doubts, fears and insistent ideas, and a victim of verbal automatisms, both motor and sensory. These were usually texts of Scripture which, sometimes damnatory and sometimes favorable, would come in a half-hallucinatory form as if they were voices, and fasten on his mind and buffet it between them like a shuttlecock. Added to this were a fearful melancholy self-contempt and despair.

 

"Nay, thought I, now I grow worse and worse, now I am farther from conversion than ever I was before. If now I should have burned at the stake, I could not believe that Christ had love for me; alas, I could neither hear him, nor see him, nor feel him, nor savor any of his things. Sometimes I would tell my condition to the people of God, which, when they heard, they would pity me, and would tell of the Promises. But they had as good have told me that I must reach the Sun with my finger as have bidden me receive or rely upon the Promise. [Yet] all this while as to the act of sinning, I never was more tender than now; I durst not take a pin or stick, though but so big as a straw, for

[p. 155]

my conscience now was sore, and would smart at every touch; I could not tell how to speak my words, for fear I should misplace them. Oh, how gingerly did I then go, in all I did or said! I found myself as on a miry bog that shook if I did but stir; and was as there left both by God and Christ, and the spirit, and all good things.

"But my original and inward pollution, that was my plague and my affliction. By reason of that, I was more loathsome in my own eyes than was a toad; and I thought I was so in God's eyes too. Sin and corruption, I said, would as naturally bubble out of my heart as water would bubble out of a fountain. I could have changed heart with anybody. I thought none but the Devil himself could equal me for inward wickedness and pollution of mind. Sure, thought I, I am forsaken of God; and thus I continued a long while, even for some years together.

"And now I was sorry that God had made me a man. The beasts, birds, fishes, etc., I blessed their condition, for they had not a sinful nature; they were not obnoxious to the wrath of God; they were not to go to hell-fire after death. I could therefore have rejoiced, had my condition been as any of theirs. Now I blessed the condition of the dog and toad, yea, gladly would I have been in the condition of the dog or horse, for I knew they had no soul to perish under the everlasting weight of Hell or Sin, as mine was like to do. Nay, and though I saw this, felt this, and was broken to pieces with it, yet that which added to my sorrow was, that I could not find with all my soul that I did desire deliverance. My heart was at times exceedingly hard. If I would have given a thousand pounds for a tear, I could not shed one; no, nor sometimes scarce desire to shed one.

"I was both a burthen and a terror to myself; nor did I ever so know, as now, what it was to be weary of my life, and yet afraid to die. How gladly would I have been anything but myself! Anything but a man! and in any condition but my own." [*1]

Poor patient Bunyan, like Tolstoy, saw the light again, but we must also postpone that part of his story to another

[p. 156]

hour. In a later lecture I will also give the end of the experience of Henry Alline, a devoted evangelist who worked in Nova Scotia a hundred years ago, and who thus vividly describes the high-water mark of the religious melancholy which formed its beginning. The type was not unlike Bunyan's.

"Everything I saw seemed to be a burden to me; the earth seemed accursed for my sake: all trees, plants, rocks, hills, and vales seemed to be dressed in mourning and groaning, under the weight of the curse, and everything around me seemed to be conspiring my ruin. My sins seemed to be laid open; so that I thought that every one I saw knew them, and sometimes I was almost ready to acknowledge many things, which I thought they knew: yea sometimes it seemed to me as if every one was pointing me out as the most guilty wretch upon earth. I had now so great a sense of the vanity and emptiness of all things here below, that I knew the whole world could not possibly make me happy, no, nor the whole system of creation. When I waked in the morning, the first thought would be, Oh, my wretched soul, what shall I do, where shall I go? And when I laid down, would say, I shall be perhaps in hell before morning. I would many times look on the beasts with envy, wishing with all my heart I was in their place, that I might have no soul to lose; and when I have seen birds flying over my head, have often thought within myself, Oh, that I could fly away from my danger and distress! Oh, how happy should I be, if I were in their place!" [*1]

Envy of the placid beasts seems to be a very widespread affection in this type of sadness.

The worst kind of melancholy is that which takes the form of panic fear. Here is an excellent example, for permission to print which I have to thank the sufferer. The

[p. 157]

original is in French, and though the subject was evidently in a bad nervous condition at the time of which he writes, his case has otherwise the merit of extreme simplicity. I translate freely.

"Whilst in this state of philosophic pessimism and general depression of spirits about my prospects, I went one evening into a dressing-room in the twilight to procure some article that was there; when suddenly there fell upon me without any warning, just as if it came out of the darkness, a horrible fear of my own existence. Simultaneously there arose in my mind the image of an epileptic patient whom I had seen in the asylum, a black-haired youth with greenish skin, entirely idiotic, who used to sit all day on one of the benches, or rather shelves against the wall, with his knees drawn up against his chin, and the coarse gray undershirt, which was his only garment, drawn over them inclosing his entire figure. He sat there like a sort of sculptured Egyptian cat or Peruvian mummy, moving nothing but his black eyes and looking absolutely non-human. This image and my fear entered into a species of combination with each other That shape am I, I felt, potentially. Nothing that I possess can defend me against that fate, if the hour for it should strike for me as it struck for him. There was such a horror of him, and such a perception of my own merely momentary discrepancy from him, that it was as if something hitherto solid within my breast gave way entirely, and I became a mass of quivering fear. After this the universe was changed for me altogether. I awoke morning after morning with a horrible dread at the pit of my stomach, and with a sense of the insecurity of life that I never knew before, and that I have never felt since. [*1] It was like a

[p. 158]

revelation; and although the immediate feelings passed away, the experience has made me sympathetic with the morbid feelings of others ever since. It gradually faded, but for months I was unable to go out into the dark alone.

"In general I dreaded to be left alone. I remember wondering how other people could live, how I myself had ever lived, so unconscious of that pit of insecurity beneath the surface of life. My mother in particular, a very cheerful person, seemed to me a perfect paradox in her unconsciousness of danger, which you may well believe I was very careful not to disturb by revelations of my own state of mind (I have always thought that this experience of melancholia of mine had a religious bearing."

On asking this correspondent to explain more fully what he meant by these last words, the answer he wrote was this:--

"I mean that the fear was so invasive and powerful that if I had not clung to scripture-texts like 'The eternal God is my refuge,' etc., 'Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden,' etc., 'I am the resurrection and the life,' etc., I think I should have grown really insane." [*1]

There is no need of more examples. The cases we have looked at are enough. One of them gives us the vanity of mortal things; another the sense of sin; and the remaining one describes the fear of the universe;--and in one or other of these three ways it always is that man's original optimism and self-satisfaction get leveled with the dust.

In none of these cases was there any intellectual insanity or delusion about matters of fact; but were we disposed to open the chapter of really insane melancholia, with its

[p. 159]

hallucinations and delusions, it would be a worse story still--desperation absolute and complete, the whole universe coagulating about the sufferer into a material of overwhelming horror, surrounding him without opening or end. Not the conception or intellectual perception of evil, but the grisly blood-freezing heart-palsying sensation of it close upon one, and no other conception or sensation able to live for a moment in its presence. How irrelevantly remote seem all our usual refined optimisms and intellectual and moral consolations in presence of a need of help like this! Here is the real core of the religious problem: Help! help! No prophet can claim to bring a final message unless he says things that will have a sound of reality in the ears of victims such as these. But the deliverance must come in as strong a form as the complaint, if it is to take effect; and that seems a reason why the coarser religions, revivalistic, orgiastic, with blood and miracles and supernatural operations, may possibly never be displaced. Some constitutions need them too much.

 

Arrived at this point, we can see how great an antagonism may naturally arise between the healthy-minded way of viewing life and the way that takes all this experience of evil as something essential. To this latter way, the morbid-minded way, as we might call it, healthy-mindedness pure and simple seems unspeakably blind and shallow. To the healthy-minded way, on the other hand, the way of the sick soul seems unmanly and diseased. With their grubbing in rat-holes instead of living in the light; with their manufacture of fears, and preoccupation with every unwholesome kind of misery, there is something almost obscene about these children of wrath and cravers of a second birth. If religious intolerance and hanging and burning could again become the order of the day, there is little doubt that, however it may have been in the past, the healthy-minded would

[p. 160]

at present show themselves the less indulgent party of the two.

In our own attitude, not yet abandoned, of impartial onlookers, what are we to say of this quarrel? It seems to me that we are bound to say that morbid-mindedness ranges over the wider scale of experience, and that its survey is the one that overlaps. The method of averting one's attention from evil, and living simply in the light of good is splendid as long as it will work. It will work with many persons; it will work far more generally than most of us are ready to suppose; and within the sphere of its successful operation there is nothing to be said against it as a religious solution. But it breaks down impotently as soon as melancholy comes; and even though one be quite free from melancholy one's self, there is no doubt that healthy-mindedness is inadequate as a philosophical doctrine, because the evil facts which it refuses positively to account for are a genuine portion of reality; and they may after all be the best key to life's significance, and possibly the only openers of our eyes to the deepest levels of truth.

The normal process of life contains moments as bad as any of those which insane melancholy is filled with, moments in which radical evil gets its innings and takes its solid turn. The lunatic's visions of horror are all drawn from the material of daily fact. Our civilization is founded on the shambles, and every individual existence goes out in a lonely spasm of helpless agony. If you protest, my friend, wait till you arrive there yourself! To believe in the carnivorous reptiles of geologic times is hard for our imagination--they seem too much like mere museum specimens. Yet there is no tooth in any one of those museum-skulls that did not daily through long years of the foretime hold fast to the body struggling in despair of some fated living victim. Forms of horror just as dreadful to the victims, if on a smaller spatial scale, fill the world about us to-day. Here on our very

[p. 161]

hearths and in our gardens the infernal cat plays with the panting mouse, or holds the hot bird fluttering in her jaws. Crocodiles and rattlesnakes and pythons are at this moment vessels of life as real as we are; their loathsome existence fills every minute of every day that drags its length along; and whenever they or other wild beasts clutch their living prey, the deadly horror which an agitated melancholiac feels is the literally right reaction on the situation. [*1]

It may indeed be that no religious reconciliation with the absolute totality of things is possible. Some evils, indeed, are ministerial to higher forms of good; but it may be that there are forms of evil so extreme as to enter into no good system whatsoever, and that, in respect of such evil, dumb submission or neglect to notice is the only practical resource. This question must confront us on a later day. But provisionally, and as a mere matter of program and method, since the evil facts are as genuine parts of nature as the good ones, the

[p. 162]

philosophic presumption should be that they have some rational significance, and that systematic healthy-mindedness, failing as it does to accord to sorrow, pain, and death any positive and active attention whatever, is formally less complete than systems that try at least to include these elements in their scope.

The completest religions would therefore seem to be those in which the pessimistic elements are best developed. Buddhism, of course, and Christianity are the best known to us of these. They are essentially religions of deliverance: the man must die to an unreal life before he can be born into the real life. In my next lecture, I will try to discuss some of the psychological conditions of this second birth. Fortunately from now onward we shall have to deal with more cheerful subjects than those which we have recently been dwelling on.

Footnotes

^126:1 Tract on God, Man, and Happiness, Book ii. ch. x.

^127:1 Commentary on Galatians, Philadelphia, 1891, pp. 510-514 (abridged).

^128:2 Molinos: Spiritual Guide, Book II., chaps. xvii., xviii. abridged.

^130:1 I say this in spite of the monistic utterances of many mind-cure writers; for these utterances are really inconsistent with their attitude towards disease, and can easily be shown not to be logically involved in the experiences of union with a higher Presence with which they connect themselves. The higher Presence, namely, need not be the absolute whole of things, it is quite sufficient for the life of religious experience to regard it as a part, if only it be the most ideal part.

^132:1 Cf. J. MILSAND: Luther et le Serf-Arbitre, 1884, passim.

^136:1 He adds with characteristic healthy-mindedness: "Our business is to continue to fail in good spirits."

^136:2 The God of many men is little more than their court of appeal against the damnatory judgment passed on their failures by the opinion of this world. To our own consciousness there is usually a residuum of worth left over after our sins and errors have been told off--our capacity of acknowledging and regretting them is the germ of a better self in posse at least. But the world deals with us in actu and not in posse: and of this hidden germ, not to be guessed at from without, it never takes account. Then we turn to the All-knower, who knows our bad, but knows this good in us also, and who is just. We cast ourselves with our repentance on his mercy only by an All-knower can we finally be judged. So the need of a God very definitely emerges from this sort of experience of life.

^139:1 E.g., Iliad XVII. 446: "Nothing then is more wretched anywhere than man of all that breathes and creeps upon this earth."

^139:2 E.g., Theognis, 425-428: "Best of all for all things upon earth is it not to be born nor to behold the splendors of the sun; next best to traverse as soon as possible the gates of Hades." See also the almost identical passage in Oedipus in Colonus, 1225.--The Anthology is full of pessimistic utterances: "Naked came I upon the earth, naked I go below the ground--why then do I vainly toil when I see the end naked before me?"--"How did I come to be? Whence am l? Wherefore did I come? To pass away. How can I learn aught when naught I know? Being naught I came to life: once more shall I be what I was. Nothing and nothingness is the [p. 140] whole race of mortals."--"For death we are all cherished and fattened like a herd of hogs that is wantonly butchered."

The difference between Greek pessimism and the oriental and modern variety is that the Greeks had not made the discovery that the pathetic mood may be idealized, and figure as a higher form of sensibility. Their spirit was still too essentially masculine for pessimism to be elaborated or lengthily dwelt on in their classic literature. They would have despised a life set wholly in a minor key, and summoned it to keep within the proper bounds of lachrymosity. The discovery that the enduring emphasis, so far as this world goes, may be laid on its pain and failure, was reserved for races more complex, and (so to speak) more feminine than the Hellenes had attained to being in the classic period. But all the same was the outlook of those Hellenes blackly pessimistic.

^141:1 For instance, on the very day on which I write this page, the post brings me some aphorisms from a worldly-wise old friend in Heidelberg which may serve as a good contemporaneous expression of Epicureanism: "By the word 'happiness' every human being understands something different. It is a phantom pursued only by weaker minds. The wise man is satisfied with the more modest but much more definite term contentment. What education should chiefly aim at is to save us from a discontented life. Health is one favoring condition, but by no means an indispensable one, of contentment. Woman's heart and love are a shrewd device of Nature, a trap which she sets for the average man, to force him into working. But the wise man will always prefer work chosen by himself."

^143:1 RIBOT: Psychologie des sentiments, p. 54.

^144:1 A. Gratry: Souvenirs de ma jeunesse, 1880, pp. 119-121, abridged. Some persons are affected with anhedonia permanently, or at any rate with a loss of the usual appetite for life. The annals of suicide supply such examples as the following:--

An uneducated domestic servant, aged nineteen, poisons herself, and leaves two letters expressing her motive for the act. To her parents she writes:--

"Life is sweet perhaps to some, but I prefer what is sweeter than life, and that is death. So good-by forever, my dear parents. It is nobody's fault, but a strong desire of my own which I have longed to fulfill for three or four years. I have always had a hope that some day I might have an opportunity of fulfilling it, and now it has come. . . . It is a wonder I have put this off so long, but I thought perhaps I should cheer up a bit and put all thought out of my head." To her brother she writes: "Good-by forever, my own dearest brother. By the time you get this I shall be gone forever. I know, dear love, there is no forgiveness for what I am going to do. [p. 145] . . . I am tired of living, so am willing to die. . . . Life may be sweet to some, but death to me is sweeter." S. A. K. STRAHAN: Suicide and Insanity, 2d edition, London, 1894, p. 131.

^146:1 ROUBINOVITCH ET TOULOUSE: La Melancolie, 1897, p. 170, abridged.

^149:1 I cull these examples from the work of G. DUMAS: La Tristesse et la Joie, 1900.

^153:1 My extracts are from the French translation by "ZONIA." In abridging I have taken the liberty of transposing one passage.

^155:1 Grace abounding to the Chief of Sinners: I have printed a number of detached passages continuously.

^156:1 The Life and Journal of the Rev. Mr. Henry Alline, Boston 1806, pp. 25, 26. I owe my acquaintance with this book to my colleague, Dr. Benjamin Rand.

^157:1 Compare Bunyan. "There was I struck into a very great trembling, insomuch that at some times I could, for days together, feel my very body, as well as my mind, to shake and totter under the sense of the dreadful judgment of God, that should fall on those that have sinned that most fearful and unpardonable sin. I felt also such clogging and heat at my stomach, by reason of this my terror, that I was, especially at some times, as if my breast-bone would have split asunder. . . . Thus did I wind, and twine, and shrink, under the burden that was upon me; which burden also did so oppress me that I could neither stand, nor go, nor lie, either at rest or quiet."

^158:1 For another case of fear equally sudden, see Henry James: Society the Redeemed Form of Man, Boston, 1879, pp. 43 ff.

^161:1 Example: "It was about eleven o'clock at night . . . but I strolled on still with the people. . . . Suddenly upon the left side of our road, a crackling was heard among the bushes; all of us were alarmed, and in an instant a tiger, rushing out of the jungle, pounced upon the one of the party that was foremost, and carried him off in the twinkling of an eye. The rush of the animal, and the crush of the poor victim's bones in his mouth, and his last cry of distress, 'Ho hai!' involuntarily reechoed by all of us, was over in three seconds; and then I know not what happened till I returned to my senses, when I found myself and companions lying down on the ground as if prepared to be devoured by our enemy the sovereign of the forest. I find my pen incapable of describing the terror of that dreadful moment. Our limbs stiffened, our power of speech ceased, and our hearts beat violently, and only a whisper of the same 'Ho hai!' was heard from us. In this state we crept on all fours for some distance back, and then ran for life with the speed of an Arab horse for about half an hour, and fortunately happened to come to a small village. . . . After this every one of us was attacked with fever, attended with shivering, in which deplorable state we remained till morning."--Autobiography of Lutfullah, a Mohammedan Gentleman, Leipzig, 1857, p. 112.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

  

Lecture VIII

  

THE DIVIDED SELF, AND THE PROCESS OF ITS UNIFICATION

The last lecture was a painful one, dealing as it did with evil as a pervasive element of the world we live in. At the close of it we were brought into full view of the contrast between the two ways of looking at life which are characteristic respectively of what we called the healthy-minded, who need to be born only once, and of the sick souls, who must be twice-born in order to be happy. The result is two different conceptions of the universe of our experience. In the religion of the once-born the world is a sort of rectilinear or one-storied affair, whose accounts are kept in one denomination, whose parts have just the values which naturally they appear to have, and of which a simple algebraic sum of pluses and minuses will give the total worth. Happiness and religious peace consist in living on the plus side of the account. In the religion of the twice-born, on the other hand, the world is a double-storied mystery. Peace cannot be reached by the simple addition of pluses and elimination of minuses from life. Natural good is not simply insufficient in amount and transient, there lurks a falsity in its very being. Cancelled as it all is by death if not by earlier enemies, it gives no final balance, and can never be the thing intended for our lasting worship. It keeps us from our real good, rather; and renunciation and despair of it are our first step in the direction of the truth. There are two lives, the natural and the spiritual, and we must lose the one before we can participate in the other.

[p. 164]

In their extreme forms, of pure naturalism and pure salvationism, the two types are violently contrasted; though here as in most other current classifications, the radical extremes are somewhat ideal abstractions, and the concrete human beings whom we oftenest meet are intermediate varieties and mixtures. Practically, however, you all recognize the difference: you understand, for example, the disdain of the methodist convert for the mere sky-blue healthy-minded moralist; and you likewise enter into the aversion of the latter to what seems to him the diseased subjectivism of the Methodist, dying to live, as he calls it, and making of paradox and the inversion of natural appearances the essence of God's truth. [*1]

 

The psychological basis of the twice-born character seems to be a certain discordancy or heterogeneity in the native temperament of the subject, an incompletely unified moral and intellectual constitution.

"Homo duplex, homo duplex!" writes Alphonse Daudet. "The first time that I perceived that I was two was at the death of my brother Henri, when my father cried out so dramatically, 'He is dead, he is dead!' While my first self wept, my second self thought, 'How truly given was that cry, how fine it would be at the theatre.' I was then fourteen years old.

"This horrible duality has often given me matter for reflection. Oh, this terrible second me, always seated whilst the other is on foot, acting, living, suffering, bestirring itself. This second me that I have never been able to intoxicate, to make shed tears,

[p. 165]

or put to sleep. And how it sees into things, and how it mocks!" [*1]

Recent works on the psychology of character have had much to say upon this point. [*2] Some persons are born with an inner constitution which is harmonious and well balanced from the outset. Their impulses are consistent with one another, their will follows without trouble the guidance of their intellect, their passions are not excessive, and their lives are little haunted by regrets. Others are oppositely constituted; and are so in degrees which may vary from something so slight as to result in a merely odd or whimsical inconsistency, to a discordancy of which the consequences may be inconvenient in the extreme. Of the more innocent kinds of heterogeneity I find a good example in Mrs. Annie Besant's autobiography.

"I have ever been the queerest mixture of weakness and strength, and have paid heavily for the weakness. As a child I used to suffer tortures of shyness, and if my shoe-lace was untied would feel shamefacedly that every eye was fixed on the unlucky string; as a girl I would shrink away from strangers and think myself unwanted and unliked, so that I was full of eager gratitude to any one who noticed me kindly, as the young mistress of a house I was afraid of my servants, and would let careless work pass rather than bear the pain of reproving the ill-doer; when I have been lecturing and debating with no lack of spirit on the platform, I have preferred to go without what I wanted at the hotel rather than to ring and make the waiter fetch it. Combative on the platform in defense of any cause I cared for, I shrink from quarrel or disapproval in the house,

[p. 166]

and am a coward at heart in private while a good fighter in public. How often have I passed unhappy quarters of an hour screwing up my courage to find fault with some subordinate whom my duty compelled me to reprove, and how often have I jeered myself for a fraud as the doughty platform combatant, when shrinking from blaming some lad or lass for doing their work badly. An unkind look or word has availed to make me shrink into myself as a snail into its shell, while, on the platform, opposition makes me speak my best." [*1]

This amount of inconsistency will only count as amiable weakness; but a stronger degree of heterogeneity may make havoc of the subject's life. There are persons whose existence is little more than a series of zig-zags, as now one tendency and now another gets the upper hand. Their spirit wars with their flesh, they wish for incompatibles, wayward impulses interrupt their most deliberate plans, and their lives are one long drama of repentance and of effort to repair misdemeanors and mistakes.

Heterogeneous personality has been explained as the result of inheritance--the traits of character of incompatible and antagonistic ancestors are supposed to be preserved alongside of each other. [*2] This explanation may pass for what it is worth--it certainly needs corroboration. But whatever the cause of heterogeneous personality may be, we find the extreme examples of it in the psychopathic temperament, of which I spoke in my first lecture. All writers about that temperament make the inner heterogeneity prominent in their descriptions. Frequently, indeed, it is only this trait that leads us to ascribe that temperament to a man at all. A "degenere superieur" is simply a man of sensibility in many directions, who finds more difficulty than is common in keeping

[p. 167]

his spiritual house in order and running his furrow straight, because his feelings and impulses are too keen and too discrepant mutually. In the haunting and insistent ideas, in the irrational impulses, the morbid scruples, dreads, and inhibitions which beset the psychopathic temperament when it is thoroughly pronounced, we have exquisite examples of heterogeneous personality. Bunyan had an obsession of the words, "Sell Christ for this, sell him for that, sell him, sell him!" which would run through his mind a hundred times together, until one day out of breath with retorting, "I will not, I will not," he impulsively said, "Let him go if he will," and this loss of the battle kept him in despair for over a year. The lives of the saints are full of such blasphemous obsessions, ascribed invariably to the direct agency of Satan. The phenomenon connects itself with the life of the subconscious self, so-called, of which we must erelong speak more directly.

Now in all of us, however constituted, but to a degree the greater in proportion as we are intense and sensitive and subject to diversified temptations, and to the greatest possible degree if we are decidedly psychopathic, does the normal evolution of character chiefly consist in the straightening out and unifying of the inner self. The higher and the lower feelings, the useful and the erring impulses, begin by being a comparative chaos within us--they must end by forming a stable system of functions in right subordination. Unhappiness is apt to characterize the period of order-making and struggle. If the individual be of tender conscience and religiously quickened, the unhappiness will take the form of moral remorse and compunction, of feeling inwardly vile and wrong, and of standing in false relations to the author of one's being and appointer of one's spiritual fate. This is the religious melancholy and "conviction of sin" that have played so large a part in the history of Protestant Christianity.

[p. 168]

[paragraph continues] The man's interior is a battle-ground for what he feels to be two deadly hostile selves, one actual, the other ideal. As Victor Hugo makes his Mahomet say:--

"Je suis le champ vil des sublimes combats:
  Tantot l'homme d'en haut, et tantot l'homme d'en bas;
  Et le mal dans ma bouche avec le bien alterne,
  Comme dans le desert le sable et la citerne."

[paragraph continues] Wrong living, impotent aspirations; "What I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I," as Saint Paul says; self-loathing, self-despair; an unintelligible and intolerable burden to which one is mysteriously the heir.

Let me quote from some typical cases of discordant personality, with melancholy in the form of self-condemnation and sense of sin. Saint Augustine's case is a classic example. You all remember his half-pagan, half-Christian bringing up at Carthage, his emigration to Rome and Milan, his adoption of Manicheism and subsequent skepticism, and his restless search for truth and purity of life; and finally how, distracted by the struggle between the two souls in his breast and ashamed of his own weakness of will, when so many others whom he knew and knew of had thrown off the shackles of sensuality and dedicated themselves to chastity and the higher life, he heard a voice in the garden say, "Sume, lege" (take and read), and opening the Bible at random, saw the text, "not in chambering and wantonness," etc., which seemed directly sent to his address, and laid the inner storm to rest forever. [*1] Augustine's psychological genius

[p. 169]

has given an account of the trouble of having a divided self which has never been surpassed.

"The new will which I began to have was not yet strong enough to overcome that other will, strengthened by long indulgence. So these two wills, one old, one new, one carnal, the other spiritual, contended with each other and disturbed my soul. I understood by my own experience what I had read, 'flesh lusteth against spirit, and spirit against flesh.' It was myself indeed in both the wills, yet more myself in that which I approved in myself than in that which I disapproved in myself. Yet it was through myself that habit had attained so fierce a mastery over me, because I had willingly come whither I willed not. Still bound to earth, I refused, O God, to fight on thy side, as much afraid to be freed from all bonds, as I ought to have feared being trammeled by them.

"Thus the thoughts by which I meditated upon thee were like the efforts of one who would awake, but being overpowered with sleepiness is soon asleep again. Often does a man when heavy sleepiness is on his limbs defer to shake it off, and though not approving it, encourage it; even so I was sure it was better to surrender to thy love than to yield to my own lusts, yet though the former course convinced me, the latter pleased and held me bound. There was naught in me to answer thy call 'Awake, thou sleeper,' but only drawling, drowsy words, 'Presently; yes, presently; wait a little while.' But the 'presently' had no 'present,' and the 'little while' grew long. . . . For I was afraid thou wouldst hear me too soon, and heal me at once of my disease of lust, which I wished to satiate rather than to see extinguished. With what lashes of words did I not scourge my own soul. Yet it shrank back; it refused, though it had no excuse to offer. . . . I said within myself: 'Come, let it be done now,' and as I said it, I was on the point of the resolve. I all but did it, yet I did not do it. And I made another effort, and almost succeeded, yet I did not reach it, and did not grasp it, hesitating to die to death, and live to life, and the evil to which I was so wonted held me more than the better life I had not tried." [*1]

[p. 170]

There could be no more perfect description of the divided will, when the higher wishes lack just that last acuteness, that touch of explosive intensity, of dynamogenic quality (to use the slang of the psychologists), that enables them to burst their shell, and make irruption efficaciously into life and quell the lower tendencies forever. In a later lecture we shall have much to say about this higher excitability.

I find another good description of the divided will in the autobiography of Henry Alline, the Nova Scotian evangelist, of whose melancholy I read a brief account in my last lecture. The poor youth's sins were, as you will see, of the most harmless order, yet they interfered with what proved to be his truest vocation, so they gave him great distress.

"I was now very moral in my life, but found no rest of conscience. I now began to be esteemed in young company, who knew nothing of my mind all this while, and their esteem began to be a snare to my soul, for I soon began to be fond of carnal mirth, though I still flattered myself that if I did not get drunk, nor curse, nor swear, there would be no sin in frolicking and carnal mirth, and I thought God would indulge young people with some (what I called simple or civil) recreation. I still kept a round of duties, and would not suffer myself to run into any open vices, and so got along very well in time of health and prosperity, but when I was distressed or threatened by sickness, death, or heavy storms of thunder, my religion would not do, and I found there was something wanting, and would begin to repent my going so much to frolics, but when the distress was over, the devil and my own wicked heart, with the solicitations of my associates, and my fondness for young company, were such strong allurements, I would again give way, and thus I got to be very wild and rude, at the same time kept up my rounds of secret prayer and reading; but God, not willing I should destroy myself, still followed me with his calls, and moved with such power upon my conscience, that I could not satisfy myself with my diversions, and in the midst of my mirth sometimes would have such a sense of my lost and undone condition, that I would

[p. 171]

wish myself from the company, and after it was over, when I went home, would make many promises that I would attend no more on these frolics, and would beg forgiveness for hours and hours; but when I came to have the temptation again, I would give way: no sooner would I hear the music and drink a glass of wine, but I would find my mind elevated and soon proceed to any sort of merriment or diversion, that I thought was not debauched or openly vicious; but when I returned from my carnal mirth I felt as guilty as ever, and could sometimes not close my eyes for some hours after I had gone to my bed. I was one of the most unhappy creatures on earth.

"Sometimes I would leave the company (often speaking to the fiddler to cease from playing, as if I was tired), and go out and walk about crying and praying, as if my very heart would break, and beseeching God that he would not cut me off, nor give me up to hardness of heart. Oh, what unhappy hours and nights I thus wore away! When I met sometimes with merry companions, and my heart was ready to sink, I would labor to put on as cheerful a countenance as possible, that they might not distrust anything, and sometimes would begin some discourse with young men or young women on purpose, or propose a merry song, lest the distress of my soul would be discovered, or mistrusted, when at the same time I would then rather have been in a wilderness in exile, than with them or any of their pleasures or enjoyments. Thus for many months when I was in company? I would act the hypocrite and feign a merry heart but at the same time would endeavor as much as I could to shun their company, oh wretched and unhappy mortal that I was! Everything I did, and wherever I went, I was still in a storm and yet I continued to be the chief contriver and ringleader of the frolics for many months after; though it was a toil and torment to attend them; but the devil and my own wicked heart drove me about like a slave, telling me that I must do this and do that, and bear this and bear that, and turn here and turn there, to keep my credit up, and retain the esteem of my associates: and all this while I continued as strict as possible in my duties, and left no stone unturned to pacify my conscience, watching even against my thoughts, and praying continually

[p. 172]

wherever I went: for I did not think there was any sin in my conduct, when I was among carnal company, because I did not take any satisfaction there, but only followed it, I thought, for sufficient reasons.

"But still, all that I did or could do, conscience would roar night and day."

Saint Augustine and Alline both emerged into the smooth waters of inner unity and peace, and I shall next ask you to consider more closely some of the peculiarities of the process of unification, when it occurs. It may come gradually, or it may occur abruptly; it may come through altered feelings, or through altered powers of action; or it may come through new intellectual insights, or through experiences which we shall later have to designate as 'mystical.' However it come, it brings a characteristic sort of relief; and never such extreme relief as when it is cast into the religious mould. Happiness! happiness! religion is only one of the ways in which men gain that gift. Easily, permanently, and successfully, it often transforms the most intolerable misery into the profoundest and most enduring happiness.

But to find religion is only one out of many ways of reaching unity; and the process of remedying inner incompleteness and reducing inner discord is a general psychological process, which may take place with any sort of mental material, and need not necessarily assume the religious form. In judging of the religious types of regeneration which we are about to study, it is important to recognize that they are only one species of a genus that contains other types as well. For example, the new birth may be away from religion into incredulity; or it may be from moral scrupulosity into freedom and license; or it may be produced by the irruption into the individual's life of some new stimulus or passion, such as love, ambition, cupidity, revenge, or patriotic devotion. In all these instances we have precisely the same psychological form of event,--a firmness, stability, and equilibrium

[p. 173]

succeeding a period of storm and stress and inconsistency. In these non-religious cases the new man may also be born either gradually or suddenly.

The French philosopher Jouffroy has left an eloquent memorial of his own "counter-conversion," as the transition from orthodoxy to infidelity has been well styled by Mr. Starbuck. Jouffroy's doubts had long harassed him; but he dates his final crisis from a certain night when his disbelief grew fixed and stable, and where the immediate result was sadness at the illusions he had lost.

"I shall never forget that night of December," writes Jouffroy, "in which the veil that concealed from me my own incredulity was torn. I hear again my steps in that narrow naked chamber where long after the hour of sleep had come I had the habit of walking up and down. I see again that moon, half-veiled by clouds, which now and again illuminated the frigid window-panes. The hours of the night flowed on and I did not note their passage. Anxiously I followed my thoughts, as from layer to layer they descended towards the foundation of my consciousness, and, scattering one by one all the illusions which until then had screened its windings from my view, made them every moment more clearly visible.

"Vainly I clung to these last beliefs as a shipwrecked sailor clings to the fragments of his vessel; vainly, frightened at the unknown void in which I was about to float, I turned with them towards my childhood, my family, my country, all that was dear and sacred to me: the inflexible current of my thought was too strong--parents, family, memory, beliefs, it forced me to let go of everything. The investigation went on more obstinate and more severe as it drew near its term, and did not stop until the end was reached. I knew then that in the depth of my mind nothing was left that stood erect.

"This moment was a frightful one; and when towards morning I threw myself exhausted on my bed, I seemed to feel my earlier life, so smiling and so full, go out like a fire, and before me another life opened, sombre and unpeopled, where in future I must live alone, alone with my fatal thought which had exiled

[p. 174]

me thither, and which I was tempted to curse. The days which followed this discovery were the saddest of my life." [*93]

[p. 175]

In John Foster's Essay on Decision of Character, there is an account of a case of sudden conversion to avarice, which is illustrative enough to quote:--

A young man, it appears, "wasted, in two or three years, a large patrimony in profligate revels with a number of worthless associates who called themselves his friends, and who, when his last means were exhausted, treated him of course with neglect or contempt. Reduced to absolute want, he one day went out of the house with an intention to put an end to his life, but wandering awhile almost unconsciously, he came to the brow of an eminence which overlooked what were lately his estates. Here he sat down, and remained fixed in thought a number of hours, at the end of which he sprang from the ground with a vehement, exulting emotion. He had formed his resolution, which was, that all these estates should be his again; he had formed his plan, too, which he instantly began to execute. He walked hastily forward, determined to seize the first opportunity, of however humble a kind, to gain any money, though it were ever so despicable a trifle, and resolved absolutely not to spend, if he could help it, a farthing of whatever he might obtain. The first thing that drew his attention was a heap of coals shot out of carts on the pavement before a house. He offered himself to shovel or wheel them into the place where they were to be laid, and was employed.

He received a few pence for the labor; and then, in pursuance of the saving part of his plan requested some small gratuity of meat and drink, which was given

[p. 176]

him. He then looked out for the next thing that might chance; and went, with indefatigable industry, through a succession of servile employments in different places, of longer and shorter duration, still scrupulous in avoiding, as far as possible, the expense of a penny. He promptly seized every opportunity which could advance his design, without regarding the meanness of occupation or appearance. By this method he had gained, after a considerable time, money enough to purchase in order to sell again a few cattle, of which he had taken pains to understand the value. He speedily but cautiously turned his first gains into second advantages; retained without a single deviation his extreme parsimony; and thus advanced by degrees into larger transactions and incipient wealth. I did not hear, or have forgotten, the continued course of his life, but the final result was, that he more than recovered his lost possessions, and died an inveterate miser, worth L60,000." [*1]

[p. 177]

Let me turn now to the kind of case, the religious case, namely, that immediately concerns us. Here is one of the

[p. 178]

simplest possible type, an account of the conversion to the systematic religion of healthy-mindedness of a man who must already have been naturally of the healthy-minded type. It shows how, when the fruit is ripe, a touch will make it fall.

Mr. Horace Fletcher, in his little book called Menticulture, relates that a friend with whom he was talking of the self-control attained by the Japanese through their practice of the Buddhist discipline said:--

"'You must first get rid of anger and worry.' 'But,' said I, 'is that possible?' 'Yes,' replied he; 'it is possible to the Japanese, and ought to be possible to us.'

"On my way back I could think of nothing else but the words get rid, get rid'; and the idea must have continued to possess me during my sleeping hours, for the first consciousness in the morning brought back the same thought, with the revelation of a discovery, which framed itself into the reasoning, 'If it is possible to get rid of anger and worry, why is it necessary to have them at all?' I felt the strength of the argument, and at once accepted the reasoning. The baby had discovered that it could walk. It would scorn to creep any longer.

"From the instant I realized that these cancer spots of worry and anger were removable, they left me. With the discovery of their weakness they were exorcised. From that time life has had an entirely different aspect.

"Although from that moment the possibility and desirability of freedom from the depressing passions has been a reality to me, it took me some months to feel absolute security in my new position; but, as the usual occasions for worry and anger have presented themselves over and over again, and I have been unable to feel them in the slightest degree, I no longer dread or guard against them, and I am amazed at my increased energy and vigor of mind, at my strength to meet situations of all kinds and at my disposition to love and appreciate everything.

"I have had occasion to travel more than ten thousand miles by rail since that morning. The same Pullman porter, conductor, hotel-waiter, peddler, book-agent, cabman, and others who were

[p. 179]

formerly a source of annoyance and irritation have been met, but I am not conscious of a single incivility. All at once the whole world has turned good to me. I have become, as it were, sensitive only to the rays of good.

"I could recount many experiences which prove a brand-new condition of mind, but one will be sufficient. Without the slightest feeling of annoyance or impatience, I have seen a train that I had planned to take with a good deal of interested and pleasurable anticipation move out of the station without me, because my baggage did not arrive. The porter from the hotel came running and panting into the station just as the train pulled out of sight. When he saw me, he looked as if he feared a scolding. and began to tell of being blocked in a crowded street and unable to get out. When he had finished, I said to him: 'It doesn't matter at all, you couldn't help it, so we will try again to-morrow. Here is your fee, I am sorry you had all this trouble in earning it.' The look of surprise that came over his face was so filled with pleasure that I was repaid on the spot for the delay in my departure. Next day he would not accept a cent for the service, and he and I are friends for life.

"During the first weeks of my experience I was on guard only against worry and anger; but, in the mean time, having noticed the absence of the other depressing and dwarfing passions, I began to trace a relationship, until I was convinced that they are all growths from the two roots I have specified. I have felt the freedom now for so long a time that I am sure of my relation toward it; and I could no more harbor any of the thieving and depressing influences that once I nursed as a heritage of humanity than a fop would voluntarily wallow in a filthy gutter. "There is no doubt in my mind that pure Christianity and pure Buddhism, and the Mental Sciences and all Religions fundamentally teach what has been a discovery to me; but none of them have presented it in the light of a simple and easy process of elimination. At one time I wondered if the elimination would not yield to indifference and sloth. In my experience, the contrary is the result. I feel such an increased desire to do something useful that it seems as if I were a boy again and the energy for play had returned. I could fight as readily as (and

[p. 180]

better than) ever, if there were occasion for it. It does not make one a coward. It can't, since fear is one of the things eliminated. I notice the absence of timidity in the presence of any audience. When a boy, I was standing under a tree which was struck by lightning, and received a shock from the effects of which I never knew exemption until I had dissolved partnership with worry. Since then, lightning and thunder have been encountered under conditions which would formerly have caused great depression and discomfort, without [my] experiencing a trace of either. Surprise is also greatly modified, and one is less liable to become startled by unexpected sights or noises.

"As far as I am individually concerned, I am not bothering myself at present as to what the results of this emancipated condition may be. I have no doubt that the perfect health aimed at by Christian Science may be one of the possibilities, for I note a marked improvement in the way my stomach does its duty in assimilating the food I give it to handle, and I am sure it works better to the sound of a song than under the friction of a frown. Neither am I wasting any of this precious time formulating an idea of a future existence or a future Heaven. The Heaven that I have within myself is as attractive as any that has been promised or that I can imagine; and I am willing to let the growth lead where it will, as long as the anger and their brood have no part in misguiding it." [*1]

The older medicine used to speak of two ways, lysis and crisis, one gradual, the other abrupt, in which one might recover from a bodily disease. In the spiritual realm there are also two ways, one gradual, the other sudden, in which inner unification may occur. Tolstoy and Bunyan may again serve us as examples, examples, as it happens, of the gradual way, though it must be confessed at the outset that it is hard to follow these windings of the hearts of others, and one feels that their words do not reveal their total secret.

Howe'er this be, Tolstoy, pursuing his unending questioning,

[p. 181]

seemed to come to one insight after another. First he perceived that his conviction that life was meaningless took only this finite life into account. He was looking for the value of one finite term in that of another, and the whole result could only be one of those indeterminate equations in mathematics which end with 0 = 0. Yet this is as far as the reasoning intellect by itself can go, unless irrational sentiment or faith brings in the infinite. Believe in the infinite as common people do, and life grows possible again.

"Since mankind has existed, wherever life has been, there also has been the faith that gave the possibility of living. Faith is the sense of life, that sense by virtue of which man does not destroy himself, but continues to live on. It is the force whereby we live. If Man did not believe that he must live for something, he would not live at all. The idea of an infinite God, of the divinity of the soul, of the union of men's actions with God--these are ideas elaborated in the infinite secret depths of human thought. They are ideas without which there would be no life, without which I myself," said Tolstoy, "would not exist. I began to see that I had no right to rely on my individual reasoning and neglect these answers given by faith, for they are the only answers to the question."

Yet how believe as the common people believe, steeped as they are in grossest superstition? It is impossible--but yet their life! their life! It is normal. It is happy! It is an answer to the question!

Little by little, Tolstoy came to the settled conviction--he says it took him two years to arrive there--that his trouble had not been with life in general, not with the common life of common men, but with the life of the upper, intellectual, artistic classes, the life which he had personally always led, the cerebral life, the life of conventionality, artificiality, and personal ambition. He had been living wrongly and must change. To work for animal needs, to abjure lies and vanities,

[p. 182]

to relieve common wants, to be simple, to believe in God, therein lay happiness again.

"I remember," he says, "one day in early spring, I was alone in the forest, lending my ear to its mysterious noises. I listened, and my thought went back to what for these three years it always was busy with--the quest of God. But the idea of him, I said, how did I ever come by the idea?

"And again there arose in me, with this thought, glad aspirations towards life. Everything in me awoke and received a meaning. . . .Why do I look farther? a voice within me asked. He is there:

he, without whom one cannot live. To acknowledge God and to live are one and the same thing. God is what life is. Well, then! live, seek God, and there will be no life without him. . . .

"After this, things cleared up within me and about me better than ever, and the light has never wholly died away. I was saved from suicide. Just how or when the change took place I cannot tell. But as insensibly and gradually as the force of life had been annulled within me, and I had reached my moral death-bed, just as gradually and imperceptibly did the energy of life come back. And what was strange was that this energy that came back was nothing new. It was my ancient juvenile force of faith, the belief that the sole purpose of my life was to be better. I gave up the life of the conventional world, recognizing it to be no life, but a parody on life, which its superfluities simply keep us from comprehending,"--and Tolstoy thereupon embraced the life of the peasants, and has felt right and happy, or at least relatively so, ever since. [*1]

As I interpret his melancholy, then, it was not merely an accidental vitiation of his humors, though it was doubtless also that. It was logically called for by the clash between his inner character and his outer activities and aims. Although a literary artist, Tolstoy was one of those primitive oaks of men to whom the superfluities and insincerities, the cupidities,

[p. 183]

complications, and cruelties of our polite civilization are profoundly unsatisfying, and for whom the eternal veracities lie with more natural and animal things. His crisis was the getting of his soul in order, the discovery of its genuine habitat and vocation, the escape from falsehoods into what for him were ways of truth. It was a case of heterogeneous personality tardily and slowly finding its unity and level. And though not many of us can imitate Tolstoy, not having enough, perhaps, of the aboriginal human marrow in our bones, most of us may at least feel as if it might be better for us if we could.

Bunyan's recovery seems to have been even slower. For years together he was alternately haunted with texts of Scripture, now up and now down, but at last with an ever growing relief in his salvation through the blood of Christ.

"My peace would be in and out twenty times a day; comfort now and trouble presently; peace now and before I could go a furlong as full of guilt and fear as ever heart could hold." When a good text comes home to him, "This," he writes, "gave me good encouragement for the space of two or three hours"; or "This was a good day to me, I hope I shall not forget it", or "The glory of these words was then so weighty on me that I was ready to swoon as I sat; yet, not with grief and trouble, but with solid joy and peace"; or "This made a strange seizure on my spirit; it brought light with it, and commanded a silence in my heart of all those tumultuous thoughts that before did use, like masterless hell-hounds, to roar and bellow and make a hideous noise within me. It showed me that Jesus Christ had not quite forsaken and cast off my Soul."

Such periods accumulate until he can write: "And now remained only the hinder part of the tempest, for the thunder was gone beyond me, only some drops would still remain, that now and then would fall upon me";--and at last: "Now did my chains fall off my legs indeed; I was loosed from my afflictions and irons; my temptations also fled away; so that from that time, those dreadful Scriptures of God left off to trouble me;

[p. 184]

now went I also home rejoicing, for the grace and love of God. . . . Now could I see myself in Heaven and Earth at once; in Heaven by my Christ, by my Head, by my Righteousness and Life, though on Earth by my body or person. . . . Christ was a precious Christ to my soul that night; I could scarce lie in my bed for joy and peace and triumph through Christ."

Bunyan became a minister of the gospel, and in spite of his neurotic constitution, and of the twelve years he lay in prison for his non-conformity, his life was turned to active use. He was a peacemaker and doer of good, and the immortal Allegory which he wrote has brought the very spirit of religious patience home to English hearts.

But neither Bunyan nor Tolstoy could become what we have called healthy-minded. They had drunk too deeply of the cup of bitterness ever to forget its taste, and their redemption is into a universe two stories deep. Each of them realized a good which broke the effective edge of his sadness; yet the sadness was preserved as a minor ingredient in the heart of the faith by which it was overcome. The fact of interest for us is that as a matter of fact they could and did find something welling up in the inner reaches of their consciousness, by which such extreme sadness could be overcome. Tolstoy does well to talk of it as that by which men live; for that is exactly what it is, a stimulus, an excitement, a faith, a force that re-infuses the positive willingness to live, even in full presence of the evil perceptions that erewhile made life seem unbearable. For Tolstoy's perceptions of evil appear within their sphere to have remained unmodified. His later works show him implacable to the whole system of official values: the ignobility of fashionable life; the infamies of empire; the spuriousness of the church, the vain conceit of the professions; the meannesses and cruelties that go with great success; and every other pompous crime and lying institution of this world. To all patience with such things his experience has been for him a permanent ministry of death.

[p. 185]

Bunyan also leaves this world to the enemy.

"I must first pass a sentence of death," he says, "upon everything that can properly be called a thing of this life, even to reckon myself, my wife, my children, my health, my enjoyments, and all, as dead to me, and myself as dead to them; to trust in God through Christ, as touching the world to come, and as touching this world, to count the grave my house, to make my bed in darkness, and to say to corruption, Thou art my father and to the worm, Thou art my mother and sister. . . . The parting with my wife and my poor children hath often been to me as the pulling of my flesh from my bones, especially my poor blind child who lay nearer my heart than all I had besides. Poor child, thought I, what sorrow art thou like to have for thy portion in this world! Thou must be beaten, must beg, suffer hunger, cold, nakedness, and a thousand calamities, though I cannot now endure that the wind should blow upon thee. But yet I must venture you all with God, though it goeth to the quick to leave you." [*1]

The "hue of resolution" is there, but the full flood of ecstatic liberation seems never to have poured over poor John Bunyan's soul.

These examples may suffice to acquaint us in a general way with the phenomenon technically called "Conversion." In the next lecture I shall invite you to study its peculiarities and concomitants in some detail.

Footnotes

^164:1 E.g., "Our young people are diseased with the theological problems of original sin, origin of evil, predestination, and the like. These never presented a practical difficulty to any man--never darkened across any man's road, who did not go out of his way to seek them. These are the soul's mumps, and measles, and whooping-coughs, etc. EMERSON: Spiritual Laws.

^165:1 Notes sur la Vie, p. 1.

^165:2 See, for example, F. Paulhan, in his book Les Caracteres, 1894, who contrasts les Equilibres, les Unifies, with les Inquiets, les Contrariants, les Incoherents, les Emiettes, as so many diverse psychic types.

^166:1 ANNIE BESANT: an Autobiography, p. 82.

^166:2 SMITH BAKER, in Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, September, 1893.

^168:1 LOUIS GOURDON (Essai sur la Conversion de Saint Augustine, Paris, Fischbacher, 1900) has shown by an analysis of Augustine's writings immediately after the date of his conversion (A.D. 386) that the account he gives in the Confessions is premature. The crisis in the garden marked a definitive conversion from his former life, but it was to the neo-platonic spiritualism and only a halfway stage toward Christianity. The latter he appears not fully and radically to have embraced until four years more had passed.

^169:1 Confessions, Book VIII., Chaps. v., vii., xi., abridged.

^174:93 TH. JOUFFROY: Nouveaux Melanges philosophiques, 2me edition, p. 83. I add two other cases of counter-conversion dating from a certain moment. The first is from Professor Starbuck's manuscript collection, and the narrator is a woman.

"Away down in the bottom of my heart, I believe I was always more or less skeptical about 'God;' skepticism grew as an undercurrent, all through my early youth, but it was controlled and covered by the emotional elements in my religious growth. When I was sixteen I joined the church and was asked if I loved God. I replied 'Yes,' as was customary and expected. But instantly with a flash something spoke within me, 'No, you do not.' I was haunted for a long time with shame and remorse for my falsehood and for my wickedness in not loving God, mingled with fear that there might be an avenging God who would punish me in some terrible way. . . . At nineteen, I had an attack of tonsilitis. Before I had quite recovered, I heard told a story of a brute who had kicked his wife down-stairs, and then continued the operation until she became insensible. I felt the horror of the thing keenly. Instantly this thought flashed through my mind: 'I have no use for a God who permits such things.' This experience was followed by months of stoical indifference to the God of my previous life, mingled with feelings of positive dislike and a somewhat proud defiance of him. I still thought there might be a God. If so he would probably damn me, but I should have to stand it. I felt very little fear and no desire to propitiate him. I have never had any personal relations with him since this painful experience."

The second case exemplifies how small an additional stimulus will overthrow the mind into a new state of equilibrium when the process of preparation and incubation has proceeded far enough. It is like the proverbial last straw added to the camel's burden, or that touch of a needle which makes the salt in a supersaturated fluid suddenly begin to crystallize out.

Tolstoy writes: "S., a frank and intelligent man, told me as follows how he ceased to believe:--

"He was twenty-six years old when one day on a hunting expedition, the time for sleep having come, he set himself to pray according to the custom he had held from childhood.

"His brother, who was hunting with him, lay upon the hay and looked at him. When S. had finished his prayer and was turning to sleep, the brother said, 'Do you still keep up that thing?' Nothing [p. 175] more was said. But since that day, now more than thirty years ago, S. has never prayed again; he never takes communion, and does not go to church. All this, not because he became acquainted with convictions of his brother which he then and there adopted; not because he made any new resolution in his soul, but merely because the words spoken by his brother were like the light push of a finger against a leaning wall already about to tumble by its own weight. These words but showed him that the place wherein he supposed religion dwelt in him had long been empty, and that the sentences he uttered, the crosses and bows which he made during his prayer, were actions with no inner sense. Having once seized their absurdity, he could no longer keep them up." Ma Confession, p. 8. [p. 175]

I subjoin an additional document which has come into my possession, and which represents in a vivid way what is probably a very frequent sort of conversion, if the opposite of 'falling in love,' falling out of love, may be so termed. Falling in love also conforms frequently to this type, a latent process of unconscious preparation often preceding a sudden awakening to the fact that the mischief is irretrievably done. The free and easy tone in this narrative gives it a sincerity that speaks for itself.

"For two years of this time I went through a very bad experience, which almost drove me mad. I had fallen violently in love with a girl who, young as she was, had a spirit of coquetry like a cat. As I look back on her now, I hate her, and wonder how I could ever have fallen so low as to be worked upon to such an extent by her attractions. Nevertheless, I fell into a regular fever, could think of nothing else; whenever I was alone, I pictured her attractions, and spent most of the time when I should have been working, in recalling our previous interviews, and imagining future conversations. She was very pretty, good humored, and jolly to the last degree, and intensely pleased with my admiration. Would give me no decided answer yes or no and the queer thing about it was that whilst pursuing her for her hand, I secretly knew all along that she was unfit to be a wife for me, and that she never would say yes. Although for a year we took our meals at the same boarding-house, so that I saw her continually and [p. 177] familiarly, our closer relations had to be largely on the sly, and this fact, together with my jealousy of another one of her male admirers and my own conscience despising me for my uncontrollable weakness, made me so nervous and sleepless that I really thought I should become insane. I understand well those young men murdering their sweethearts, which appear so often in the papers. Nevertheless I did love her passionately, and in some ways she did deserve it.

"The queer thing was the sudden and unexpected way in which it all stopped. I was going to my work after breakfast one morning, thinking as usual of her and of my misery, when, just as if some outside power laid hold of me, I found myself turning round and almost running to my room, where I immediately got out all the relics of her which I possessed, including some hair, all her notes and letters and ambrotypes on glass. The former I made a fire of, the latter I actually crushed beneath my heel, in a sort of fierce joy of revenge and punishment. I now loathed and despised her altogether, and as for myself I felt as if a load of disease had suddenly been removed from me. That was the end. I never spoke to her or wrote to her again in all the subsequent years, and I have never had a single moment of loving thought towards one for so many months entirely filled my heart. In fact, I have always rather hated her memory, though now I can see that I had gone unnecessarily far in that direction. At any rate, from that happy morning onward I regained possession of my own proper soul, and have never since fallen into any similar trap."

This seems to me an unusually clear example of two different levels of personality, inconsistent in their dictates, yet so well balanced against each other as for a long time to fill the life with discord and dissatisfaction. At last, not gradually, but in a sudden crisis, the unstable equilibrium is resolved, and this happens so unexpectedly that it is as if, to use the writer's words, "some outside power laid hold."

Professor Starbuck gives an analogous case, and a converse case of hatred suddenly turning into love, in his Psychology of Religion, p. 141. Compare the other highly curious instances which he gives on pp. 137-144, of sudden non-religious alterations of habit or character. He seems right in conceiving all such sudden changes as results of special cerebral functions unconsciously developing until they are ready to play a controlling part when they make irruption into the conscious life. When we treat of sudden 'conversion,' I shall make as much use as I can of this hypothesis of subconscious incubation.

^176:1 Op. cit., Letter III., abridged.

^180:1 H. FLETCHER: Menticulture, or the A-B-C of True Living, New York and Chicago, 1899, pp. 26, 36, abridged.

^182:1 I have considerably abridged Tolstoy's words in my translation.

^185:1 In my quotations from Bunyan I have omitted certain intervening portions of the text.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 186]

  

Lecture IX

  

CONVERSION

To be converted, to be regenerated, to receive grace, to experience religion, to gain an assurance, are so many phrases which denote the process, gradual or sudden, by which a self hitherto divided, and consciously wrong inferior and unhappy, becomes unified and consciously right superior and happy, in consequence of its firmer hold upon religious realities. This at least is what conversion signifies in general terms, whether or not we believe that a direct divine operation is needed to bring such a moral change about.

Before entering upon a minuter study of the process, let me enliven our understanding of the definition by a concrete example. I choose the quaint case of an unlettered man, Stephen H. Bradley, whose experience is related in a scarce American pamphlet. [*1]

I select this case because it shows how in these inner alterations one may find one unsuspected depth below another, as if the possibilities of character lay disposed in a series of layers or shells, of whose existence we have no premonitory knowledge.

Bradley thought that he had been already fully converted at the age of fourteen.

"I thought I saw the Saviour, by faith, in human shape, for about one second in the room, with arms extended, appearing to

[p. 187]

say to me, Come. The next day I rejoiced with trembling; soon after, my happiness was so great that I said that I wanted to die; this world had no place in my affections, as I knew of, and every day appeared as solemn to me as the Sabbath. I had an ardent desire that all mankind might feel as I did; I wanted to have them all love God supremely. Previous to this time I was very selfish and self-righteous; but now I desired the welfare of all mankind, and could with a feeling heart forgive my worst enemies, and I felt as if I should be willing to bear the scoffs and sneers of any person, and suffer anything for His sake, if I could be the means in the hands of God, of the conversion of one soul."

Nine years later, in 1829, Mr. Bradley heard of a revival of religion that had begun in his neighborhood. "Many of the young converts," he says, "would come to me when in meeting and ask me if I had religion, and my reply generally was, I hope I have. This did not appear to satisfy them; they said they knew they had it. I requested them to pray for me, thinking with myself, that if I had not got religion now, after so long a time professing to be a Christian, that it was time I had, and hoped their prayers would be answered in my behalf.

"One Sabbath, I went to hear the Methodist at the Academy. He spoke of the ushering in of the day of general judgment; and he set it forth in such a solemn and terrible manner as I never heard before. The scene of that day appeared to be taking place, and so awakened were all the powers of my mind that, like Felix, I trembled involuntarily on the bench where I was sitting, though I felt nothing at heart. The next day evening I went to hear him again. He took his text from Revelation: 'And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.' And he represented the terrors of that day in such a manner that it appeared as if it would melt the heart of stone. When he finished his discourse, an old gentleman turned to me and said 'This is what I call preaching.' I thought the same, but my feelings were still unmoved by what he said, and I did not enjoy religion, but I believe he did.

"I will now relate my experience of the power of the Holy Spirit which took place on the same night. Had any person told

[p. 188]

me previous to this that I could have experienced the power of the Holy Spirit in the manner which I did, I could not have believed it, and should have thought the person deluded that told me so. I went directly home after the meeting, and when I got home I wondered what made me feel so stupid. I retired to rest soon after I got home, and felt indifferent to the things of religion until I began to be exercised by the Holy Spirit, which began in about five minutes after, in the following manner:--

"At first, I began to feel my heart beat very quick all on a sudden, which made me at first think that perhaps something is going to ail me, though I was not alarmed, for I felt no pain. My heart increased in its beating, which soon convinced me that it was the Holy Spirit from the effect it had on me. I began to feel exceedingly happy and humble, and such a sense of unworthiness as I never felt before. I could not very well help speaking out, which I did, and said, Lord, I do not deserve this happiness, or words to that effect, while there was a stream (resembling air in feeling) came into my mouth and heart in a more sensible manner than that of drinking anything, which continued, as near as I could judge, five minutes or more, which appeared to be the cause of such a palpitation of my heart. It took complete possession of my soul, and I am certain that I desired the Lord, while in the midst of it, not to give me any more happiness, for it seemed as if I could not contain what I had got. My heart seemed as if it would burst, but it did not stop until I felt as if I was unutterably full of the love and grace of God. In the mean time while thus exercised, a thought arose in my mind, what can it mean? and all at once, as if to answer it, my memory became exceedingly clear, and it appeared to me just as if the New Testament was placed open before me, eighth chapter of Romans, and as light as if some candle lighted was held for me to read the 26th and 27th verses of that chapter, and I read these words: 'The Spirit helpeth our infirmities with groanings which cannot be uttered.' And all the time that my heart was a-beating, it made me groan like a person in distress, which was not very easy to stop, though I was in no pain at all, and my brother being in bed in another room came and opened the door, and asked me if I had got the toothache. I told him no,

[p. 189]

and that he might get to sleep. I tried to stop. I felt unwilling to go to sleep myself, I was so happy, fearing I should lose it--thinking within myself

'My willing soul would stay
    In such a frame as this.'

And while I lay reflecting, after my heart stopped beating, feeling as if my soul was full of the Holy Spirit, I thought that perhaps there might be angels hovering round my bed. I felt just as if I wanted to converse with them, and finally I spoke, saying 'O ye affectionate angels! how is it that ye can take so much interest in our welfare, and we take so little interest in our own.' After this, with difficulty I got to sleep; and when I awoke in the morning my first thoughts were: What has become of my happiness? and, feeling a degree of it in my heart, I asked for more, which was given to me as quick as thought. I then got up to dress myself, and found to my surprise that I could but just stand. It appeared to me as if it was a little heaven upon earth. My soul felt as completely raised above the fears of death as of going to sleep; and like a bird in a cage, I had a desire, if it was the will of God, to get released from my body and to dwell with Christ, though willing to live to do good to others, and to warn sinners to repent. I went downstairs feeling as solemn as if I had lost all my friends, and thinking with myself, that I would not let my parents know it until I had first looked into the Testament. I went directly to the shelf and looked into it, at the eighth of Romans, and every verse seemed to almost speak and to confirm it to be truly the Word of God, and as if my feelings corresponded with the meaning of the word. I then told my parents of it, and told them that I thought that they must see that when I spoke, that it was not my own voice, for it appeared so to me. My speech seemed entirely under the control of the Spirit within me; I do not mean that the words which I spoke were not my own, for they were. I thought that I was influenced similar to the Apostles on the day of Pentecost (with the exception of having power to give it to others, and doing what they did). After breakfast I went round to converse with my neighbors on religion, which I could not have been

[p. 190]

hired to have done before this, and at their request I prayed with them, though I had never prayed in public before.

"I now feel as if I had discharged my duty by telling the truth, and hope by the blessing of God, it may do some good to all who shall read it. He has fulfilled his promise in sending the Holy Spirit down into our hearts, or mine at least, and I now defy all the Deists and Atheists in the world to shake my faith in Christ."

So much for Mr. Bradley and his conversion, of the effect of which upon his later life we gain no information. Now for a minuter survey of the constituent elements of the conversion process.

 

If you open the chapter on Association, of any treatise on Psychology, you will read that a man's ideas, aims, and objects form diverse internal groups and systems, relatively independent of one another. Each 'aim' which he follows awakens a certain specific kind of interested excitement, and gathers a certain group of ideas together in subordination to it as its associates; and if the aims and excitements are distinct in kind, their groups of ideas may have little in common. When one group is present and engrosses the interest, all the ideas connected with other groups may be excluded from the mental field. The President of the United States when, with paddle, gun, and fishing-rod, he goes camping in the wilderness for a vacation, changes his system of ideas from top to bottom. The presidential anxieties have lapsed into the background entirely; the official habits are replaced by the habits of a son of nature, and those who knew the man only as the strenuous magistrate would not "know him for the same person" if they saw him as the camper.

If now he should never go back, and never again suffer political interests to gain dominion over him, he would be for practical intents and purposes a permanently transformed being. Our ordinary alterations of character, as we

[p. 191]

pass from one of our aims to another, are not commonly called transformations, because each of them is so rapidly succeeded by another in the reverse direction; but whenever one aim grows so stable as to expel definitively its previous rivals from the individual's life, we tend to speak of the phenomenon, and perhaps to wonder at it, as a "transformation."

These alternations are the completest of the ways in which a self may be divided. A less complete way is the simultaneous coexistence of two or more different groups of aims, of which one practically holds the right of way and instigates activity, whilst the others are only pious wishes, and never practically come to anything. Saint Augustine's aspirations to a purer life, in our last lecture, were for a while an example. Another would be the President in his full pride of office, wondering whether it were not all vanity, and whether the life of a wood-chopper were not the wholesomer destiny. Such fleeting aspirations are mere velleitates, whimsies. They exist on the remoter outskirts of the mind, and the real self of the man, the centre of his energies, is occupied with an entirely different system. As life goes on, there is a constant change of our interests, and a consequent change of place in our systems of ideas, from more central to more peripheral, and from more peripheral to more central parts of consciousness. I remember, for instance, that one evening when I was a youth, my father read aloud from a Boston newspaper that part of Lord Gifford's will which founded these four lectureships. At that time I did not think of being a teacher of philosophy, and what I listened to was as remote from my own life as if it related to the planet Mars. Yet here I am, with the Gifford system part and parcel of my very self, and all my energies, for the time being, devoted to successfully identifying myself with it. My soul stands now planted in what once was for it a practically unreal object, and speaks from it as from its proper habitat and centre.

[p. 192]

When I say "Soul," you need not take me in the ontological sense unless you prefer to; for although ontological language is instinctive in such matters, yet Buddhists or Humians can perfectly well describe the facts in the phenomenal terms which are their favorites. For them the soul is only a succession of fields of consciousness: yet there is found in each field a part, or sub-field, which figures as focal and contains the excitement, and from which, as from a centre, the aim seems to be taken. Talking of this part, we involuntarily apply words of perspective to distinguish it from the rest, words like "here," "this," "now," "mine," or "me"; and we ascribe to the other parts the positions "there," "then," "that," "his" or "thine," "it," "not me." But a "here" can change to a "there," and a "there" become a "here," and what was "mine" and what was "not mine" change their places.

What brings such changes about is the way in which emotional excitement alters. Things hot and vital to us to-day are cold to-morrow. It is as if seen from the hot parts of the field that the other parts appear to us, and from these hot parts personal desire and volition make their sallies. They are in short the centres of our dynamic energy, whereas the cold parts leave us indifferent and passive in proportion to their coldness.

Whether such language be rigorously exact is for the present of no importance. It is exact enough, if you recognize from your own experience the facts which I seek to designate by it.

Now there may be great oscillation in the emotional interest, and the hot places may shift before one almost as rapidly as the sparks that run through burnt-up paper. Then we have the wavering and divided self we heard so much of in the previous lecture. Or the focus of excitement and heat, the point of view from which the aim is taken, may come to lie permanently within a certain system; and then, if the

[p. 193]

change be a religious one, we call it a conversion, especially if it be by crisis, or sudden.

Let us hereafter, in speaking of the hot place in a man's consciousness, the group of ideas to which he devotes himself, and from which he works, call it the habitual centre of his personal energy. It makes a great difference to a man whether one set of his ideas, or another, be the centre of his energy; and it makes a great difference, as regards any set of ideas which he may possess, whether they become central or remain peripheral in him. To say that a man is "converted" means, in these terms, that religious ideas, previously peripheral in his consciousness, now take a central place, and that religious aims form the habitual centre of his energy.

Now if you ask of psychology just how the excitement shifts in a man's mental system, and why aims that were peripheral become at a certain moment central, psychology has to reply that although she can give a general description of what happens, she is unable in a given case to account accurately for all the single forces at work. Neither an outside observer nor the Subject who undergoes the process can explain fully how particular experiences are able to change one's centre of energy so decisively, or why they so often have to bide their hour to do so. We have a thought, or we perform an act, repeatedly, but on a certain day the real meaning of the thought peals through us for the first time, or the act has suddenly turned into a moral impossibility. All we know is that there are dead feelings, dead ideas, and cold beliefs, and there are hot and live ones; and when one grows hot and alive within us, everything has to re-crystallize about it. We may say that the heat and liveliness mean only the "motor efficacy," long deferred but now operative, of the idea; but such talk itself is only circumlocution, for whence the sudden motor efficacy? And our explanations then get so vague and general that one realizes all the more the intense individuality of the whole phenomenon.

[p. 194]

In the end we fall back on the hackneyed symbolism of a mechanical equilibrium. A mind is a system of ideas, each with the excitement it arouses, and with tendencies impulsive and inhibitive, which mutually check or reinforce one another. The collection of ideas alters by subtraction or by addition in the course of experience, and the tendencies alter as the organism gets more aged. A mental system may be undermined or weakened by this interstitial alteration just as a building is, and yet for a time keep upright by dead habit. But a new perception, a sudden emotional shock, or an occasion which lays bare the organic alteration, will make the whole fabric fall together; and then the centre of gravity sinks into an attitude more stable, for the new ideas that reach the centre in the rearrangement seem now to be locked there, and the new structure remains permanent.

Formed associations of ideas and habits are usually factors of retardation in such changes of equilibrium. New information, however acquired, plays an accelerating part in the changes; and the slow mutation of our instincts and propensities, under the "unimaginable touch of time" has an enormous influence. Moreover, all these influences may work subconsciously or half unconsciously. [*1] And when you get a Subject in whom the subconscious life--of which I must speak more fully soon--is largely developed, and in whom

[p. 195]

motives habitually ripen in silence, you get a case of which you can never give a full account, and in which, both to the Subject and the onlookers, there may appear an element of marvel. Emotional occasions, especially violent ones, are extremely potent in precipitating mental rearrangements. The sudden and explosive ways in which love, jealousy, guilt, fear, remorse, or anger can seize upon one are known to everybody. [*1] Hope, happiness, security, resolve, emotions characteristic of conversion, can be equally explosive. And emotions that come in this explosive way seldom leave things as they found them.

In his recent work on the Psychology of Religion, Professor Starbuck of California has shown by a statistical inquiry how closely parallel in its manifestations the ordinary "conversion" which occurs in young people brought up in evangelical circles is to that growth into a larger spiritual life which is a normal phase of adolescence in every class of human beings. The age is the same, falling usually between fourteen and seventeen. The symptoms are the same,--sense of incompleteness and imperfection; brooding, depression, morbid introspection, and sense of sin; anxiety about the hereafter; distress over doubts, and the like. And the result is the same--a happy relief and objectivity, as the confidence in self gets greater through the adjustment of the faculties

[p. 196]

to the wider outlook. In spontaneous religious awakening, apart from revivalistic examples, and in the ordinary storm and stress and moulting-time of adolescence, we also may meet with mystical experiences, astonishing the subjects by their suddenness, just as in revivalistic conversion. The analogy, in fact, is complete; and Starbuck's conclusion as to these ordinary youthful conversions would seem to be the only sound one: Conversion is in its essence a normal adolescent phenomenon, incidental to the passage from the child's small universe to the wider intellectual and spiritual life of maturity.

"Theology," says Dr. Starbuck, "takes the adolescent tendencies and builds upon them; it sees that the essential thing in adolescent growth is bringing the person out of childhood into the new life of maturity and personal insight. It accordingly brings those means to bear which will intensify the normal tendencies. It shortens up the period of duration of storm and stress." The conversion phenomena of "conviction of sin" last, by this investigator's statistics, about one fifth as long as the periods of adolescent storm and stress phenomena of which he also got statistics, but they are very much more intense. Bodily accompaniments, loss of sleep and appetite, for example, are much more frequent in them. "The essential distinction appears to be that conversion intensifies but shortens the period by bringing the person to a definite crisis." [*1]

The conversions which Dr. Starbuck here has in mind are of course mainly those of very commonplace persons, kept true to a pre-appointed type by instruction, appeal, and example. The particular form which they affect is the result of suggestion and imitation. [*2] If they went through their

[p. 197]

growth-crisis in other faiths and other countries, although the essence of the change would be the same (since it is one in the main so inevitable), its accidents would be different. In Catholic lands, for example, and in our own Episcopalian sects, no such anxiety and conviction of sin is usual as in sects that encourage revivals. The sacraments being more relied on in these more strictly ecclesiastical bodies, the individual's personal acceptance of salvation needs less to be accentuated and led up to.

But every imitative phenomenon must once have had its original, and I propose that for the future we keep as close as may be to the more first-hand and original forms of experience. These are more likely to be found in sporadic adult cases.

Professor Leuba, in a valuable article on the psychology of conversion, [*1] subordinates the theological aspect of the religious life almost entirely to its moral aspect. The religious sense he defines as "the feeling of unwholeness, of moral imperfection, of sin, to use the technical word, accompanied by

[p. 198]

the yearning after the peace of unity." "The word 'religion,'" he says, "is getting more and more to signify the conglomerate of desires and emotions springing from the sense of sin and its release"; and he gives a large number of examples, in which the sin ranges from drunkenness to spiritual pride, to show that the sense of it may beset one and crave relief as urgently as does the anguish of the sickened flesh or any form of physical misery.

Undoubtedly this conception covers an immense number of cases. A good one to use as an example is that of Mr. S. H. Hadley, who after his conversion became an active and useful rescuer of drunkards in New York. His experience runs as follows:--

"One Tuesday evening I sat in a saloon in Harlem, a homeless, friendless, dying drunkard. I had pawned or sold everything that would bring a drink. I could not sleep unless I was dead drunk. I had not eaten for days, and for four nights preceding I had suffered with delirium tremens, or the horrors, from midnight till morning. I had often said, 'I will never be a tramp. I will never be cornered, for when that time comes, if ever it comes, I will find a home in the bottom of the river.' But the Lord so ordered it that when that time did come I was not able to walk one quarter of the way to the river. As I sat there thinking, I seemed to feel some great and mighty presence. I did not know then what it was. I did learn afterwards that it was Jesus, the sinner's friend. I walked up to the bar and pounded it with my fist till I made the glasses rattle. Those who stood by drinking looked on with scornful curiosity. I said I would never take another drink, if I died on the street, and really I felt as though that would happen before morning. Something said, 'If you want to keep this promise, go and have yourself locked up.' I went to the nearest station-house and had myself locked up.

"I was placed in a narrow cell, and it seemed as though all the demons that could find room came in that place with me. This was not all the company I had, either. No, praise the Lord:

[p. 199]

that dear Spirit that came to me in the saloon was present, and said, Pray. I did pray, and though I did not feel any great help, I kept on praying. As soon as I was able to leave my cell I was taken to the police court and remanded back to the cell. I was finally released, and found my way to my brother's house, where every care was given me. While lying in bed the admonishing Spirit never left me, and when I arose the following Sabbath morning I felt that day would decide my fate, and toward evening it came into my head to go to Jerry M'Auley's Mission. I went. The house was packed, and with great difficulty I made my way to the space near the platform. There I saw the apostle to the drunkard and the outcast--that man of God, Jerry M'Auley. He rose, and amid deep silence told his experience. There was a sincerity about this man that carried conviction with it, and I found myself saying, 'I wonder if God can save me?' I listened to the testimony of twenty-five or thirty persons, every one of whom had been saved from rum, and I made up my mind that I would be saved or die right there. When the invitation was given, I knelt down with a crowd of drunkards. Jerry made the first prayer. Then Mrs. M'Auley prayed fervently for us. Oh, what a conflict was going on for my poor soul! A blessed whisper said, 'Come'; the devil said, 'Be careful.' I halted but a moment, and then, with a breaking heart, I said, 'Dear Jesus, can you help me?' Never with mortal tongue can I describe that moment. Although up to that moment my soul had been filled with indescribable gloom, I felt the glorious brightness of the noonday sun shine into my heart. I felt I was a free man. Oh, the precious feeling of safety, of freedom, of resting on Jesus! I felt that Christ with all his brightness and power had come into my life; that, indeed, old things had passed away and all things had become new.

"From that moment till now I have never wanted a drink of whiskey, and I have never seen money enough to make me take one. I promised God that night that if he would take away the appetite for strong drink, I would work for him all my life. He has done his part, and I have been trying to do mine." [*1]

[p. 200]

Dr. Leuba rightly remarks that there is little doctrinal theology in such an experience, which starts with the absolute need of a higher helper, and ends with the sense that he has helped us. He gives other cases of drunkards' conversions which are purely ethical, containing, as recorded, no theological beliefs whatever. John B. Gough's case, for instance, is practically, says Dr. Leuba, the conversion of an atheist--neither God nor Jesus being mentioned. [*1] But in spite of the importance of this type of regeneration, with little or no intellectual readjustment, this writer surely makes it too exclusive. It corresponds to the subjectively centered form of morbid melancholy, of which Bunyan and Alline were examples. But we saw in our seventh lecture that there are objective forms of melancholy also, in which the lack of rational meaning of the universe, and of life anyhow, is the burden that weighs upon one--you remember Tolstoy's case. [*2] So there are distinct elements in conversion, and their relations to individual lives deserve to be discriminated. [*3]

Some persons, for instance, never are, and possibly never under any circumstances could be, converted. Religious ideas

[p. 201]

cannot become the centre of their spiritual energy. They may be excellent persons, servants of God in practical ways, but they are not children of his kingdom. They are either incapable of imagining the invisible; or else, in the language of devotion, they are life-long subjects of "barrenness" and "dryness." Such inaptitude for religious faith may in some cases be intellectual in its origin. Their religious faculties may be checked in their natural tendency to expand, by beliefs about the world that are inhibitive, the pessimistic and materialistic beliefs, for example, within which so many good souls, who in former times would have freely indulged their religious propensities, find themselves nowadays, as it were, frozen; or the agnostic vetoes upon faith as something weak and shameful, under which so many of us today lie cowering, afraid to use our instincts. In many persons such inhibitions are never overcome. To the end of their days they refuse to believe, their personal energy never gets to its religious centre, and the latter remains inactive in perpetuity.

In other persons the trouble is profounder. There are men anaesthetic on the religious side, deficient in that category of sensibility. Just as a bloodless organism can never, in spite of all its goodwill, attain to the reckless "animal spirits" enjoyed by those of sanguine temperament; so the nature which is spiritually barren may admire and envy faith in others, but can never compass the enthusiasm and peace which those who are temperamentally qualified for faith enjoy. All this may, however, turn out eventually to have been a matter of temporary inhibition. Even late in life some thaw, some release may take place, some bolt be shot back in the barrenest breast, and the man's hard heart may soften and break into religious feeling. Such cases more than any others suggest the idea that sudden conversion is by miracle. So long as they exist, we must not imagine ourselves to deal with irretrievably fixed classes.

[p. 202]

Now there are two forms of mental occurrence in human beings, which lead to a striking difference in the conversion process, a difference to which Professor Starbuck has called attention. You know how it is when you try to recollect a forgotten name. Usually you help the recall by working for it, by mentally running over the places, persons, and things with which the word was connected. But sometimes this effort fails: you feel then as if the harder you tried the less hope there would be, as though the name were jammed, and pressure in its direction only kept it all the more from rising. And then the opposite expedient often succeeds. Give up the effort entirely; think of something altogether different, and in half an hour the lost name comes sauntering into your mind, as Emerson says, as carelessly as if it had never been invited. Some hidden process was started in you by the effort, which went on after the effort ceased, and made the result come as if it came spontaneously. A certain music teacher, says Dr. Starbuck, says to her pupils after the thing to be done has been clearly pointed out, and unsuccessfully attempted: "Stop trying and it will do itself!" [*1]

There is thus a conscious and voluntary way and an involuntary and unconscious way in which mental results may get accomplished; and we find both ways exemplified in the history of conversion, giving us two types, which Starbuck calls the volitional type and the type by self-surrender respectively.

In the volitional type the regenerative change is usually gradual, and consists in the building up, piece by piece, of a new set of moral and spiritual habits. But there are always critical points here at which the movement forward seems much more rapid. This psychological fact is abundantly illustrated by Dr. Starbuck. Our education in any practical accomplishment proceeds apparently by jerks and starts just as the growth of our physical bodies does.

[p. 203]

"An athlete . . . sometimes awakens suddenly to an understanding of the fine points of the game and to a real enjoyment of it, just as the convert awakens to an appreciation of religion. If he keeps on engaging in the sport, there may come a day when all at once the game plays itself through him--when he loses himself in some great contest. In the same way, a musician may suddenly reach a point at which pleasure in the technique of the art entirely falls away, and in some moment of inspiration he becomes the instrument through which music flows. The writer has chanced to hear two different married persons, both of whose wedded lives had been beautiful from the beginning, relate that not until a year or more after marriage did they awake to the full blessedness of married life. So it is with the religious experience of these persons we are studying." [*1]

We shall erelong hear still more remarkable illustrations of subconsciously maturing processes eventuating in results of which we suddenly grow conscious. Sir William Hamilton and Professor Laycock of Edinburgh were among the first to call attention to this class of effects; but Dr. Carpenter first, unless I am mistaken, introduced the term "unconscious cerebration," which has since then been a popular phrase of explanation. The facts are now known to us far more extensively than he could know them, and the adjective "unconscious," being for many of them almost certainly a misnomer, is better replaced by the vaguer term "subconscious" or "subliminal."

Of the volitional type of conversion it would be easy to give examples, [*2] but they are as a rule less interesting than

[p. 204]

those of the self-surrender type, in which the subconscious effects are more abundant and often startling. I will therefore hurry to the latter, the more so because the difference between the two types is after all not radical. Even in the most voluntarily built-up sort of regeneration there are passages of partial self-surrender interposed; and in the great majority of all cases, when the will had done its uttermost towards bringing one close to the complete unification aspired after, it seems that the very last step must be left to other forces and performed without the help of its activity. In other words, self-surrender becomes then indispensable. "The personal will," says Dr. Starbuck, "must be given up.

[p. 205]

[paragraph continues] In many cases relief persistently refuses to come until the person ceases to resist, or to make an effort in the direction he desires to go."

"I had said I would not give up; but when my will was broken, it was all over," writes one of Starbuck's correspondents.--Another says: "I simply said: 'Lord, I have done all I can; I leave the whole matter with Thee,' and immediately there came to me a great peace."--Another: "All at once it occurred to me that I might be saved, too, if I would stop trying to do it all myself, and follow Jesus: somehow I lost my load."--Another: "I finally ceased to resist, and gave myself up, though it was a hard struggle. Gradually the feeling came over me that I had done my part, and God was willing to do his." [*1]--"Lord Thy will be done; damn or save!" cries John Nelson, [*2] exhausted with the anxious struggle to escape damnation; and at that moment his soul was filled with peace.

Dr. Starbuck gives an interesting, and it seems to me a true, account--so far as conceptions so schematic can claim truth at all--of the reasons why self-surrender at the last moment should be so indispensable. To begin with, there are two things in the mind of the candidate for conversion: first, the present incompleteness or wrongness, the "sin" which he is eager to escape from; and, second, the positive ideal which he longs to compass. Now with most of us the sense of our present wrongness is a far more distinct piece of our consciousness than is the imagination of any positive ideal we can aim at. In a majority of cases, indeed, the "sin" almost exclusively engrosses the attention, so that conversion is "a process of struggling away from sin rather than of striving towards righteousness." [*3] A man's conscious wit and will, so far as they strain towards the ideal, are

[p. 206]

aiming at something only dimly and inaccurately imagined. Yet all the while the forces of mere organic ripening within him are going on towards their own prefigured result, and his conscious strainings are letting loose subconscious allies behind the scenes, which in their way work towards rearrangement; and the rearrangement towards which all these deeper forces tend is pretty surely definite, and definitely different from what he consciously conceives and determines. It may consequently be actually interfered with (jammed, as it were, like the lost word when we seek too energetically to recall it), by his voluntary efforts slanting from the true direction.

Starbuck seems to put his finger on the root of the matter when he says that to exercise the personal will is still to live in the region where the imperfect self is the thing most emphasized. Where, on the contrary, the subconscious forces take the lead, it is more probably the better self in posse which directs the operation. Instead of being clumsily and vaguely aimed at from without, it is then itself the organizing centre. What then must the person do? "He must relax," says Dr. Starbuck--"that is, he must fall back on the larger Power that makes for righteousness, which has been welling up in his own being, and let it finish in its own way the work it has begun. . . . The act of yielding, in this point of view, is giving one's self over to the new life, making it the centre of a new personality, and living, from within, the truth of it which had before been viewed objectively." [*1]

"Man's extremity is God's opportunity" is the theological way of putting this fact of the need of self-surrender; whilst the physiological way of stating it would be, "Let one do all in one's power, and one's nervous system will do the rest." Both statements acknowledge the same fact. [*2]

[p. 207]

To state it in terms of our own symbolism: When the new centre of personal energy has been subconsciously incubated so long as to be just ready to open into flower, "hands off" is the only word for us, it must burst forth unaided!

We have used the vague and abstract language of psychology. But since, in any terms, the crisis described is the throwing of our conscious selves upon the mercy of powers which, whatever they may be, are more ideal than we are actually, and make for our redemption, you see why self-surrender has been and always must be regarded as the vital turning-point of the religious life, so far as the religious life is spiritual and no affair of outer works and ritual and sacraments. One may say that the whole development of Christianity in inwardness has consisted in little more than the greater and greater emphasis attached to this crisis of self-surrender. From Catholicism to Lutheranism, and then to Calvinism; from that to Wesleyanism; and from this, outside of technical Christianity altogether, to pure "liberalism" or transcendental idealism, whether or not of the mind-cure type, taking in the mediaeval mystics, the quietists, the pietists, and quakers by the way, we can trace the stages of progress towards the idea of an immediate spiritual help, experienced by the individual in his forlornness and standing in no essential need of doctrinal apparatus or propitiatory machinery.

Psychology and religion are thus in perfect harmony up to this point, since both admit that there are forces seemingly outside of the conscious individual that bring redemption to his life. Nevertheless psychology, defining these forces as "subconscious," and speaking of their effects, as due to "incubation," or "cerebration," implies that they do not transcend the individual's personality; and herein she diverges from Christian theology, which insists that they are direct supernatural operations of the Deity. I propose to you

[p. 208]

that we do not yet consider this divergence final, but leave the question for a while in abeyance--continued inquiry may enable us to get rid of some of the apparent discord.

 

Revert, then, for a moment more to the psychology of self-surrender.

When you find a man living on the ragged edge of his consciousness, pent in to his sin and want and incompleteness, and consequently inconsolable, and then simply tell him that all is well with him, that he must stop his worry, break with his discontent, and give up his anxiety, you seem to him to come with pure absurdities. The only positive consciousness he has tells him that all is not well, and the better way you offer sounds simply as if you proposed to him to assert cold-blooded falsehoods. "The will to believe" cannot be stretched as far as that. We can make ourselves more faithful to a belief of which we have the rudiments, but we cannot create a belief out of whole cloth when our perception actively assures us of its opposite. The better mind proposed to us comes in that case in the form of a pure negation of the only mind we have, and we cannot actively will a pure negation.

There are only two ways in which it is possible to get rid of anger, worry, fear, despair, or other undesirable affections. One is that an opposite affection should overpoweringly break over us, and the other is by getting so exhausted with the struggle that we have to stop--so we drop down, give up, and don't care any longer. Our emotional brain-centres strike work, and we lapse into a temporary apathy. Now there is documentary proof that this state of temporary exhaustion not infrequently forms part of the conversion crisis. So long as the egoistic worry of the sick soul guards the door, the expansive confidence of the soul of faith gains no presence. But let the former faint away, even but for a moment, and the latter can profit by the opportunity, and,

[p. 209]

having once acquired possession, may retain it.

Carlyle's Teufelsdrockh passes from the everlasting No to the everlasting Yes through a "Centre of Indifference."

Let me give you a good illustration of this feature in the conversion process. That genuine saint, David Brainerd, describes his own crisis in the following words:--

"One morning, while I was walking in a solitary place as usual, I at once saw that all my contrivances and projects to effect or procure deliverance and salvation for myself were utterly in vain; I was brought quite to a stand, as finding myself totally lost. I saw that it was forever impossible for me to do anything towards helping or delivering myself, that I had made all the pleas I ever could have made to all eternity; and that all my pleas were vain, for I saw that self-interest had led me to pray, and that I had never once prayed from any respect to the glory of God. I saw that there was no necessary connection between my prayers and the bestowment of divine mercy, that they laid not the least obligation upon God to bestow his grace upon me; and that there was no more virtue or goodness in them than there would be in my paddling with my hand in the water. I saw that I had been heaping up my devotions before God, fasting, praying, etc., pretending, and indeed really thinking sometimes that I was aiming at the glory of God; whereas I never once truly intended it, but only my own happiness. I saw that as I had never done anything for God, I had no claim on anything from him but perdition, on account of my hypocrisy and mockery. When I saw evidently that I had regard to nothing but self-interest, then my duties appeared a vile mockery and a continual course of lies, for the whole was nothing but self-worship, and an horrid abuse of God.

"I continued, as I remember, in this state of mind, from Friday morning till the Sabbath evening following (July 12, 1739), when I was walking again in the same solitary place. Here, in a mournful melancholy state I was attempting to pray; but found no heart to engage in that or any other duty; my former concern, exercise, and religious affections were now gone. I thought that the Spirit of God had quite left me; but still was 

[p. 210]

not distressed; yet disconsolate, as if there was nothing in heaven or earth could make me happy. Having been thus endeavoring to pray--though, as I thought, very stupid and senseless--for near half an hour; then, as I was walking in a thick grove, unspeakable glory seemed to open to the apprehension of my soul. I do not mean any external brightness, nor any imagination of a body of light, but it was a new inward apprehension or view that I had of God, such as I never had before, nor anything which had the least resemblance to it. I had no particular apprehension of any one person in the Trinity, either the Father, the Son, or the Holy Ghost; but it appeared to be Divine glory. My soul rejoiced with joy unspeakable, to see such a God, such a glorious Divine Being; and I was inwardly pleased and satisfied that he should be God over all for ever and ever. My soul was so captivated and delighted with the excellency of God that I was even swallowed up in him, at least to that degree that I had no thought about my own salvation, and scarce reflected that there was such a creature as myself. I continued in this state of inward joy, peace, and astonishing, till near dark without any sensible abatement; and then began to think and examine what I had seen; and felt sweetly composed in my mind all the evening following. I felt myself in a new world, and everything about me appeared with a different aspect from what it was wont to do. At this time, the way of salvation opened to me with such infinite wisdom, suitableness, and excellency, that I wondered I should ever think of any other way of salvation; was amazed that I had not dropped my own contrivances, and complied with this lovely, blessed, and excellent way before. If I could have been saved by my own duties or any other way that I had formerly contrived, my whole soul would now have refused it. I wondered that all the world did not see and comply with this way of salvation, entirely by the righteousness of Christ." [*1]

I have italicized the passage which records the exhaustion of the anxious emotion hitherto habitual. In a large proportion,

[p. 211]

perhaps the majority, of reports, the writers speak as if the exhaustion of the lower and the entrance of the higher emotion were simultaneous, [*1] yet often again they speak as if the higher actively drove the lower out. This is undoubtedly true in a great many instances, as we shall presently see. But often there seems little doubt that both conditions--subconscious ripening of the one affection and exhaustion of the other--must simultaneously have conspired, in order to produce the result.

T. W. B., a convert of Nettleton's, being brought to an acute paroxysm of conviction of sin, ate nothing all day, locked himself in his room in the evening in complete despair, crying aloud, "How long, O Lord, how long?" "After repeating this and similar language," he says, "several times, I seemed to sink away into a state of insensibility. When I came to myself again I was on my knees, praying not for myself but for others. I felt submission to the will of God, willing that he should do with me as should seem good in his sight. My concern seemed all lost in concern for others." [*2]

Our great American revivalist Finney writes: "I said to myself: 'What is this? I must have grieved the Holy Ghost entirely away. I have lost all my conviction. I have not a particle of concern about my soul; and it must be that the Spirit has left me.' 'Why!' thought I, 'I never was so far from being concerned about my own salvation in my life.' . . . I tried to recall my convictions, to get back again the load of sin under which I

[p. 212]

had been laboring. I tried in vain to make myself anxious. I was so quiet and peaceful that I tried to feel concerned about that, lest it should be the result of my having grieved the Spirit away." [*1]

But beyond all question there are persons in whom, quite independently of any exhaustion in the Subject's capacity for feeling, or even in the absence of any acute previous feeling, the higher condition, having reached the due degree of energy, bursts through all barriers and sweeps in like a sudden flood. These are the most striking and memorable cases, the cases of instantaneous conversion to which the conception of divine grace has been most peculiarly attached. I have given one of them at length--the case of Mr. Bradley. But I had better reserve the other cases and my comments on the rest of the subject for the following lecture.

Footnotes

^186:1 A sketch of the life of Stephen H. Bradley, from the age of five to twenty four years, including his remarkable experience of the power of the Holy Spirit on the second evening of November, 1829. Madison, Connecticut, 1830.

^194:1 Jouffroy is an example: "Down this slope it was that my intelligence had glided, and little by little it had got far from its first faith. But this melancholy revolution had not taken place in the broad daylight of my consciousness; too many scruples, too many guides and sacred affections had made it dreadful to me, so that I was far from avowing to myself the progress it had made. It had gone on in silence, by an involuntary elaboration of which I was not the accomplice; and although I had in reality long ceased to be a Christian, yet, in the innocence of my intention, I should have shuddered to suspect it, and thought it calumny had I been accused of such a falling away." Then follows Jouffroy's account of his counter-conversion, quoted above on p. 173.

^195:1 One hardly needs examples; but for love, see <page 176>, note, for fear, <page 161>; for remorse, see Othello after the murder; for anger see Lear after Cordelia's first speech to him; for resolve, see <page 175> (J. Foster case). Here is a pathological case in which guilt was the feeling that suddenly exploded: "One night I was seized on entering bed with a rigor, such as Swedenborg describes as coming over him with a sense of holiness, but over me with a sense of guilt. During that whole night I lay under the influence of the rigor, and from its inception I felt that I was under the curse of God. I have never done one act of duty in my life--sins against God and man beginning as far as my memory goes back--a wildcat in human shape."

^196:1 E. D. STARBUCK: The Psychology of Religion, pp. 224, 262.

^196:2 No one understands this better than Jonathan Edwards understood it already. Conversion narratives of the more commonplace sort must always be taken with the allowances which he suggests: [p. 197] "A rule received and established by common consent has a very great, though to many persons an insensible influence in forming their notions of the process of their own experience. I know very well how they proceed as to this matter, for I have had frequent opportunities of observing their conduct. Very often their experience at first appears like a confused chaos, but then those parts are selected which bear the nearest resemblance to such particular steps as are insisted on; and these are dwelt upon in their thoughts, and spoken of from time to time, till they grow more and more conspicuous in their view, and other parts which are neglected grow more and more obscure. Thus what they have experienced is insensibly strained, so as to bring it to an exact conformity to the scheme already established in their minds. And it becomes natural also for ministers, who have to deal with those who insist upon distinctness and clearness of method, to do so too." Treatise on Religious Affections.

^197:1 Studies in the Psychology of Religious Phenomena, American Journal of Psychology, vii. 309 (1896).

^199:1 I have abridged Mr. Hadley's account. For other conversions of drunkards, see his pamphlet, Rescue Mission Work, published at the [p. 200] Old Jerry M'Auley Water Street Mission, New York City. A striking collection of cases also appears in the appendix to Professor Leuba's article.

^200:1 A restaurant waiter served provisionally as Gough's 'Saviour.' General Booth, the founder of the Salvation Army, considers that the first vital step in saving outcasts consists in making them feel that some decent human being cares enough for them to take an interest in the question whether they are to rise or sink.

^200:2 The crisis of apathetic melancholy--no use in life--into which J. S. Mill records that he fell, from which he emerged by the reading of Marmontel's Memoirs (Heaven save the mark!) and Wordsworth's poetry, is another intellectual and general metaphysical case. See Mill's Autobiography, New York, 1873, pp. 141, 148.

^200:3 Starbuck, in addition to "escape from sin," discriminates "spiritual illumination" as a distinct type of conversion experience. Psychology of Religion, p. 85.

^202:1 Psychology of Religion, p. 117.

^203:1 Psychology of Religion, p. 385. Compare, also, pp. 137-144 and 262.

^203:2 For instance, C. G. Finney italicizes the volitional element: "Just at this point the whole question of Gospel salvation opened to my mind in a manner most marvelous to me at the time. I think I then saw, as clearly as I ever have in my life, the reality and fullness of the atonement of Christ. Gospel salvation seemed to me to be an offer of something to be accepted, and all that was necessary on my part to [p. 204] get my own consent to give up my sins and accept Christ. After this distinct revelation had stood for some little time before my mind, the question seemed to be put, 'will you accept it now, to-day?' I replied, 'Yes; I will accept it to-day, or I will die in the attempt!'" He then went into the woods, where he describes his struggles. He could not pray, his heart was hardened in its pride. "I then reproached myself for having promised to give my heart to God before I left the woods. When I came to try, I found I could not. . . . My inward soul hung back, and there was no going out of my heart to God. The thought was pressing me, of the rashness of my promise that I would give my heart to God that day, or die in the attempt. It seemed to me as if that was binding on my soul; and yet I was going to break my vow. A great sinking and discouragement came over me, and I felt almost too weak to stand upon my knees. Just at this moment I again thought I heard some one approach me, and I opened my eyes to see whether it were so. But right there the revelation of my pride of heart, as the great difficulty that stood in the way, was distinctly shown to me. An overwhelming sense of my wickedness in being ashamed to have a human being see me on my knees before God took such powerful possession of me, that I cried at the top of my voice, and exclaimed that I would not leave that place if all the men on earth and all the devils in hell surrounded me. 'What!' I said, 'such a degraded sinner as I am, on my knees confessing my sins to the great and holy God; and ashamed to have any human being, and a sinner like myself, find me on my knees endeavoring to make my peace with my offended God!' The sin appeared awful, infinite. It broke me down before the Lord." Memoirs, pp. 14-16, abridged.

^205:1 STARBUCK: Op. cit., pp. 91, 114.

^205:2 Extracts from the Journal of Mr. John Nelson, London, no date, p. 24.

^205:3 STARBUCK, p. 64.

^206:1 STARBUCK, p. 115.

^206:2 STARBUCK, p. 113.

^210:1 Edward's and Dwight's Life of Brainerd, New Haven, 1822, pp. 45-47, abridged.

^211:1 Describing the whole phenomenon as a change of equilibrium, we might say that the movement of new psychic energies towards the personal centre and the recession of old ones towards the margin (or the rising of some objects above, and the sinking of others below the conscious threshold) were only two ways of describing an indivisible event. Doubtless this is often absolutely true, and Starbuck is right when he says that "self-surrender" and "new determination," though seeming at first sight to be such different experiences, are "really the same thing. Self-surrender sees the change in terms of the old self, determination sees it in terms of the new." Op. cit., p. 160.

^211:2 A. A. Bonar: Nettleton and his Labors, Edinburgh, 1854, p. 261.

^212:1 CHARLES G. FINNEY: Memoirs written by Himself, 1876, pp. 17, 18.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 213]

  

Lecture X

  

CONVERSION--Concluded

In this lecture we have to finish the subject of Conversion, considering at first those striking instantaneous instances of which Saint Paul's is the most eminent, and in which, often amid tremendous emotional excitement or perturbation of the senses, a complete division is established in the twinkling of an eye between the old life and the new. Conversion of this type is an important phase of religious experience, owing to the part which it has played in Protestant theology, and it behooves us to study it conscientiously on that account.

I think I had better cite two or three of these cases before proceeding to a more generalized account. One must know concrete instances first; for, as Professor Agassiz used to say, one can see no farther into a generalization than just so far as one's previous acquaintance with particulars enables one to take it in.

I will go back, then, to the case of our friend Henry Alline, and quote his report of the 26th of March, 1775, on which his poor divided mind became unified for good.

"As I was about sunset wandering in the fields lamenting my miserable lost and undone condition, and almost ready to sink under my burden, I thought I was in such a miserable case as never any man was before. I returned to the house, and when I got to the door, just as I was stepping off the threshold, the following impressions came into my mind like a powerful but small still voice. You have been seeking, praying, reforming,

[p. 214]

laboring, reading, hearing, and meditating, and what have you done by it towards your salvation? Are you any nearer to conversion now than when you first began? Are you any more prepared for heaven, or fitter to appear before the impartial bar of God, than when you first began to seek?

"It brought such conviction on me that I was obliged to say that I did not think I was one step nearer than at first, but as much condemned, as much exposed, and as miserable as before. I cried out within myself, O Lord God, I am lost, and if thou, O Lord, dost not find out some new way, I know nothing of, I shall never be saved, for the ways and methods I have prescribed to myself have all failed me, and I am willing they should fail. O Lord, have mercy! O Lord, have mercy!

"These discoveries continued until I went into the house and sat down. After I sat down, being all in confusion, like a drowning man that was just giving up to sink, and almost in an agony, I turned very suddenly round in my chair, and seeing part of an old Bible lying in one of the chairs, I caught hold of it in great haste; and opening it without any premeditation, cast my eyes on the 38th Psalm, which was the first time I ever saw the word of God: it took hold of me with such power that it seemed to go through my whole soul, so that it seemed as if God was praying in, with, and for me. About this time my father called the family to attend prayers; I attended, but paid no regard to what he said in his prayer, but continued praying in those words of the Psalm. Oh, help me, help me! cried I, thou Redeemer of souls, and save me, or I am gone forever; thou canst this night, if thou pleasest, with one drop of thy blood atone for my sins, and appease the wrath of an angry God. At that instant of time when I gave all up to him to do with me as he pleased, and was willing that God should rule over me at his pleasure, redeeming love broke into my soul with repeated scriptures, with such power that my whole soul seemed to be melted down with love, the burden of guilt and condemnation was gone, darkness was expelled, my heart humbled and filled with gratitude, and my whole soul, that was a few minutes ago groaning under mountains of death, and crying to an unknown God for help, was now filled with immortal love, soaring on the wings of faith,

[p. 215]

freed from the chains of death and darkness, and crying out, My Lord and my God; thou art my rock and my fortress, my shield and my high tower, my life, my joy, my present and my everlasting portion. Looking up, I thought I saw that same light [he had on more than one previous occasion seen subjectively a bright blaze of light], though it appeared different; and as soon as I saw it, the design was opened to me, according to his promise, and I was obliged to cry out: Enough, enough, O blessed God! The work of conversion, the change, and the manifestations of it are no more disputable than that light which I see, or anything that ever I saw.

"In the midst of all my joys, in less than half an hour after my soul was set at liberty, the Lord discovered to me my labor in the ministry and call to preach the gospel. I cried out, Amen, Lord, I'll go; send me, send me. I spent the greatest part of the night in ecstasies of joy, praising and adoring the Ancient of Days for his free and unbounded grace. After I had been so long in this transport and heavenly frame that my nature seemed to require sleep, I thought to close my eyes for a few moments; then the devil stepped in, and told me that if I went to sleep, I should lose it all, and when I should awake in the morning I would find it to be nothing but a fancy and delusion. I immediately cried out, O Lord God, if I am deceived, undeceive me.

"I then closed my eyes for a few minutes, and seemed to be refreshed with sleep; and when I awoke, the first inquiry was, Where is my God? And in an instant of time, my soul seemed awake in and with God, and surrounded by the arms of everlasting love. About sunrise I arose with joy to relate to my parents what God had done for my soul, and declared to them the miracle of God's unbounded grace. I took a Bible to show them the words that were impressed by God on my soul the evening before; but when I came to open the Bible, it appeared all new to me.

"I so longed to be useful in the cause of Christ, in preaching the gospel, that it seemed as if I could not rest any longer, but go I must and tell the wonders of redeeming love. I lost all

[p. 216]

taste for carnal pleasures, and carnal company, and was enabled to forsake them." [*1]

Young Mr. Alline, after the briefest of delays, and with no book-learning but his Bible, and no teaching save that of his own experience, became a Christian minister, and thenceforward his life was fit to rank, for its austerity and single-mindedness, with that of the most devoted saints. But happy as he became in his strenuous way, he never got his taste for even the most innocent carnal pleasures back. We must class him, like Bunyan and Tolstoy, amongst those upon whose soul the iron of melancholy left a permanent imprint. His redemption was into another universe than this mere natural world, and life remained for him a sad and patient trial. Years later we can find him making such an entry as this in his diary: "On Wednesday the 12th I preached at a wedding, and had the happiness thereby to be the means of excluding carnal mirth."

The next case I will give is that of a correspondent of Professor Leuba, printed in the latter's article, already cited, in vol. vi. of the American Journal of Psychology. This subject was an Oxford graduate, the son of a clergyman, and the story resembles in many points the classic case of Colonel Gardiner, which everybody may be supposed to know. Here it is, somewhat abridged:--

"Between the period of leaving Oxford and my conversion I never darkened the door of my father's church, although I lived with him for eight years, making what money I wanted by journalism, and spending it in high carousal with any one who would sit with me and drink it away. So I lived, sometimes drunk for a week together, and then a terrible repentance, and would not touch a drop for a whole month.

"In all this period, that is, up to thirty-three years of age, I never had a desire to reform on religious grounds. But all my

[p. 217]

pangs were due to some terrible remorse I used to feel after a heavy carousal, the remorse taking the shape of regret after my folly in wasting my life in such a way--a man of superior talents and education. This terrible remorse turned me gray in one night, and whenever it came upon me I was perceptibly grayer the next morning. What I suffered in this way is beyond the expression of words. It was hell-fire in all its most dreadful tortures. Often did I vow that if I got over 'this time' I would reform. Alas, in about three days I fully recovered, and was as happy as ever. So it went on for years, but, with a physique like a rhinoceros, I always recovered, and as long as I let drink alone, no man was as capable of enjoying life as I was.

"I was converted in my own bedroom in my father's rectory house at precisely three o'clock in the afternoon of a hot July day (July 13, 1886). I was in perfect health, having been off from the drink for nearly a month. I was in no way troubled about my soul. In fact, God was not in my thoughts that day. A young lady friend sent me a copy of Professor Drummond's Natural Law in the Spiritual World, asking me my opinion of it as a literary work only. Being proud of my critical talents and wishing to enhance myself in my new friend's esteem, I took the book to my bedroom for quiet, intending to give it a thorough study, and then write her what I thought of it. It was here that God met me face to face, and I shall never forget the meeting. 'He that hath the Son hath life eternal, he that hath not the Son hath not life.' I had read this scores of times before, but this made all the difference. I was now in God's presence and my attention was absolutely 'soldered' on to this verse, and I was not allowed to proceed with the book till I had fairly considered what these words really involved. Only then was I allowed to proceed, feeling all the while that there was another being in my bedroom, though not seen by me. The stillness was very marvelous, and I felt supremely happy. It was most unquestionably shown me, in one second of time, that I had never touched the Eternal: and that if I died then, I must inevitably be lost. I was undone. I knew it as well as I now know I am saved. The Spirit of God showed it me in ineffable love; there was no terror in it; I felt God's love so powerfully upon me that only a mighty

[p. 218]

sorrow crept over me that I had lost all through my own folly; and what was I to do? What could I do? I did not repent even; God never asked me to repent. All I felt was 'I am undone,' and God cannot help it, although he loves me. No fault on the part of the Almighty. All the time I was supremely happy: I felt like a little child before his father. I had done wrong, but my Father did not scold me, but loved me most wondrously. Still my doom was sealed. I was lost to a certainty, and being naturally of a brave disposition I did not quail under it, but deep sorrow for the past, mixed with regret for what I had lost, took hold upon me, and my soul thrilled within me to think it was all over. Then there crept in upon me so gently, so lovingly, so unmistakably, a way of escape, and what was it after all? The old, old story over again, told in the simplest way: 'There is no name under heaven whereby ye can be saved except that of the Lord Jesus Christ.' No words were spoken to me; my soul seemed to see my Saviour in the spirit, and from that hour to this, nearly nine years now, there has never been in my life one doubt that the Lord Jesus Christ and God the Father both worked upon me that afternoon in July, both differently, and both in the most perfect love conceivable, and I rejoiced there and then in a conversion so astounding that the whole village heard of it in less than twenty-four hours.

"But a time of trouble was yet to come. The day after my conversion I went into the hay-field to lend a hand with the harvest, and not having made any promise to God to abstain or drink in moderation only, I took too much and came home drunk. My poor sister was heart-broken; and I felt ashamed of myself and got to my bedroom at once, where she followed me weeping copiously. She said I had been converted and fallen away instantly. But although I was quite full of drink (not muddled, however), I knew that God's work begun in me was not going to be wasted. About midday I made on my knees the first prayer before God for twenty years. I did not ask to be forgiven; I felt that was no good, for I would be sure to fall again. Well, what did I do? I committed myself to him in the profoundest belief that my individuality was going to be destroyed, that he would take all from me, and I was willing. In such a

[p. 219]

surrender lies the secret of a holy life. From that hour drink has had no terrors for me: I never touch it, never want it. The same thing occurred with my pipe: after being a regular smoker from my twelfth year the desire for it went at once, and has never returned. So with every known sin, the deliverance in each case being permanent and complete. I have had no temptation since conversion, God seemingly having shut out Satan from that course with me. He gets a free hand in other ways, but never on sins of the flesh. Since I gave up to God all ownership in my own life, he has guided me in a thousand ways, and has opened my path in a way almost incredible to those who do not enjoy the blessing of a truly surrendered life."

So much for our graduate of Oxford, in whom you notice the complete abolition of an ancient appetite as one of the conversion's fruits.

The most curious record of sudden conversion with which I am acquainted is that of M. Alphonse Ratisbonne, a free-thinking French Jew, to Catholicism, at Rome in 1842. In a letter to a clerical friend, written a few months later, the convert gives a palpitating account of the circumstances. [*1] The predisposing conditions appear to have been slight. He had an elder brother who had been converted and was a Catholic priest. He was himself irreligious, and nourished an antipathy to the apostate brother and generally to his "cloth." Finding himself at Rome in his twenty-ninth year, he fell in with a French gentleman who tried to make a proselyte of him, but who succeeded no farther after two or three conversations than to get him to hang (half jocosely) a religious medal round his neck, and to accept and read a copy of a short prayer to the Virgin. M. Ratisbonne represents his own part in the conversations as having been of a

[p. 220]

light and chaffing order; but he notes the fact that for some days he was unable to banish the words of the prayer from his mind, and that the night before the crisis he had a sort of nightmare, in the imagery of which a black cross with no Christ upon it figured. Nevertheless, until noon of the next day he was free in mind and spent the time in trivial conversations. I now give his own words.

"If at this time any one had accosted me, saying: 'Alphonse, in a quarter of an hour you shall be adoring Jesus Christ as your God and Saviour; you shall lie prostrate with your face upon the ground in a humble church; you shall be smiting your breast at the foot of a priest; you shall pass the carnival in a college of Jesuits to prepare yourself to receive baptism, ready to give your life for the Catholic faith; you shall renounce the world and its pomps and pleasures; renounce your fortune, your hopes, and if need be, your betrothed; the affections of your family, the esteem of your friends, and your attachment to the Jewish people; you shall have no other aspiration than to follow Christ and bear his cross till death;'--if, I say, a prophet had come to me with such a prediction, I should have judged that only one person could be more mad than he--whosoever, namely, might believe in the possibility of such senseless folly becoming true. And yet that folly is at present my only wisdom, my sole happiness.

"Coming out of the cafe I met the carriage of Monsieur B. [the proselyting friend]. He stopped and invited me in for a drive, but first asked me to wait for a few minutes whilst he attended to some duty at the church of San Andrea delle Fratte. Instead of waiting in the carriage, I entered the church myself to look at it. The church of San Andrea was poor, small, and empty; I believe that I found myself there almost alone. No work of art attracted my attention; and I passed my eyes mechanically over its interior without being arrested by any particular thought. I can only remember an entirely black dog which went trotting and turning before me as I mused. In an instant the dog had disappeared, the whole church had vanished, I no longer saw anything, . . . or more truly I saw, O my God, one thing alone.

[p. 221]

"Heavens, how can I speak of it? Oh no! human words cannot attain to expressing the inexpressible. Any description, however sublime it might be, could be but a profanation of the unspeakable truth.

"I was there prostrate on the ground, bathed in my tears, with my heart beside itself, when M. B. called me back to life. I could not reply to the questions which followed from him one upon the other. But finally I took the medal which I had on my breast, and with all the effusion of my soul I kissed the image of the Virgin, radiant with grace, which it bore. Oh, indeed, it was She! It was indeed She! [What he had seen had been a vision of the Virgin.]

"I did not know where I was: I did not know whether I was Alphonse or another. I only felt myself changed and believed myself another me; I looked for myself in myself and did not find myself. In the bottom of my soul I felt an explosion of the most ardent joy; I could not speak; I had no wish to reveal what had happened. But I felt something solemn and sacred within me which made me ask for a priest. I was led to one; and there alone, after he had given me the positive order, I spoke as best I could, kneeling, and with my heart still trembling. I could give no account to myself of the truth of which I had acquired a knowledge and a faith. All that I can say is that in an instant the bandage had fallen from my eyes, and not one bandage only, but the whole manifold of bandages in which I had been brought up. One after another they rapidly disappeared, even as the mud and ice disappear under the rays of the burning sun.

"I came out as from a sepulchre, from an abyss of darkness; and I was living, perfectly living. But I wept, for at the bottom of that gulf I saw the extreme of misery from which I had been saved by an infinite mercy; and I shuddered at the sight of my iniquities, stupefied, melted, overwhelmed with wonder and with gratitude. You may ask me how I came to this new insight, for truly I had never opened a book of religion nor even read a single page of the Bible, and the dogma of original sin is either entirely denied or forgotten by the Hebrews of to-day, so that I had thought so little about it that I doubt whether I ever knew its name. But how came I, then, to this perception of it? I can

[p. 222]

answer nothing save this, that on entering that church I was in darkness altogether, and on coming out of it I saw the fullness of the light. I can explain the change no better than by the simile of a profound sleep or the analogy of one born blind who should suddenly open his eyes to the day. He sees, but cannot define the light which bathes him and by means of which he sees the objects which excite his wonder. If we cannot explain physical light, how can we explain the light which is the truth itself? And I think I remain within the limits of veracity when I say that without having any knowledge of the letter of religious doctrine, I now intuitively perceived its sense and spirit. Better than if I saw them, I felt those hidden things; I felt them by the inexplicable effects they produced in me. It all happened in my interior mind, and those impressions, more rapid than thought shook my soul, revolved and turned it, as it were, in another direction, towards other aims, by other paths. I express myself badly. But do you wish, Lord, that I should inclose in poor and barren words sentiments which the heart alone can understand?"

I might multiply cases almost indefinitely, but these will suffice to show you how real, definite, and memorable an event a sudden conversion may be to him who has the experience. Throughout the height of it he undoubtedly seems to himself a passive spectator or undergoer of an astounding process performed upon him from above. There is too much evidence of this for any doubt of it to be possible. Theology, combining this fact with the doctrines of election and grace, has concluded that the spirit of God is with us at these dramatic moments in a peculiarly miraculous way, unlike what happens at any other juncture of our lives. At that moment, it believes, an absolutely new nature is breathed into us, and we become partakers of the very substance of the Deity.

That the conversion should be instantaneous seems called for on this view, and the Moravian Protestants appear to have been the first to see this logical consequence. The Methodists soon followed suit, practically if not dogmatically,

[p. 223]

and a short time ere his death, John Wesley wrote:--

"In London alone I found 652 members of our Society who were exceeding clear in their experience, and whose testimony I could see no reason to doubt. And every one of these (without a single exception) has declared that his deliverance from sin was instantaneous; that the change was wrought in a moment. Had half of these, or one third, or one in twenty, declared it was gradually wrought in them, I should have believed this, with regard to them, and thought that some were gradually sanctified and some instantaneously. But as I have not found, in so long a space of time, a single person speaking thus, I cannot but believe that sanctification is commonly, if not always, an instantaneous work." Tyerman's Life of Wesley, i. 463.

All this while the more usual sects of Protestantism have set no such store by instantaneous conversion. For them as for the Catholic Church, Christ's blood, the sacraments, and the individual's ordinary religious duties are practically supposed to suffice to his salvation, even though no acute crisis of self-despair and surrender followed by relief should be experienced. For Methodism, on the contrary, unless there have been a crisis of this sort, salvation is only offered, not effectively received, and Christ's sacrifice in so far forth is incomplete. Methodism surely here follows, if not the healthier-minded, yet on the whole the profounder spiritual instinct. The individual models which it has set up as typical and worthy of imitation are not only the more interesting dramatically, but psychologically they have been the more complete.

In the fully evolved Revivalism of Great Britain and America we have, so to speak, the codified and stereotyped procedure to which this way of thinking has led. In spite of the unquestionable fact that saints of the once-born type exist, that there may be a gradual growth in holiness without a cataclysm; in spite of the obvious leakage (as one may

[p. 224]

say) of much mere natural goodness into the scheme of salvation; revivalism has always assumed that only its own type of religious experience can be perfect; you must first be nailed on the cross of natural despair and agony, and then in the twinkling of an eye be miraculously released.

It is natural that those who personally have traversed such an experience should carry away a feeling of its being a miracle rather than a natural process. Voices are often heard, lights seen, or visions witnessed; automatic motor phenomena occur; and it always seems, after the surrender of the personal will, as if an extraneous higher power had flooded in and taken possession. Moreover the sense of renovation, safety, cleanness, rightness, can be so marvelous and jubilant as well to warrant one's belief in a radically new substantial nature.

"Conversion," writes the New England Puritan, Joseph Alleine, "is not the putting in a patch of holiness; but with the true convert holiness is woven into all his powers, principles, and practice. The sincere Christian is quite a new fabric, from the foundation to the top-stone. He is a new man, a new creature."

And Jonathan Edwards says in the same strain: "Those gracious influences which are the effects of the Spirit of God are altogether supernatural--are quite different from anything that unregenerate men experience. They are what no improvement, or composition of natural qualifications or principles will ever produce; because they not only differ from what is natural, and from everything that natural men experience in degree and circumstances, but also in kind, and are of a nature far more excellent. From hence it follows that in gracious affections there are [also] new perceptions and sensations entirely different in their nature and kind from anything experienced by the [same] saints before they were sanctified. . . . The conceptions which the saints have of the loveliness of God, and that kind of delight which they experience in it, are quite peculiar, and entirely different from anything which a natural man can possess, or of which he can form any proper notion."

[p. 225]

And that such a glorious transformation as this ought of necessity to be preceded by despair is shown by Edwards in another passage.

"Surely it cannot be unreasonable," he says, "that before God delivers us from a state of sin and liability to everlasting woe, he should give us some considerable sense of the evil from which he delivers us, in order that we may know and feel the importance of salvation, and be enabled to appreciate the value of what God is pleased to do for us. As those who are saved are successively in two extremely different states--first in a state of condemnation and then in a state of justification and blessedness--and as God, in the salvation of men, deals with them as rational and intelligent creatures, it appears agreeable to this wisdom, that those who are saved should be made sensible of their Being, in those two different states. In the first place, that they should be made sensible of their state of condemnation; and afterwards, of their state of deliverance and happiness."

Such quotations express sufficiently well for our purpose the doctrinal interpretation of these changes. Whatever part suggestion and imitation may have played in producing them in men and women in excited assemblies, they have at any rate been in countless individual instances an original and unborrowed experience. Were we writing the story of the mind from the purely natural-history point of view, with no religious interest whatever, we should still have to write down man's liability to sudden and complete conversion as one of his most curious peculiarities.

 

What, now, must we ourselves think of this question? Is an instantaneous conversion a miracle in which God is present as he is present in no change of heart less strikingly abrupt? Are there two classes of human beings, even among the apparently regenerate, of which the one class really partakes of Christ's nature while the other merely seems to do so? Or, on the contrary, may the whole phenomenon of regeneration,

[p. 226]

even in these startling instantaneous examples, possibly be a strictly natural process, divine in its fruits, of course, but in one case more and in another less so, and neither more nor less divine in its mere causation and mechanism than any other process, high or low, of man's interior life?

Before proceeding to answer this question, I must ask you to listen to some more psychological remarks. At our last lecture, I explained the shifting of men's centres of personal energy within them and the lighting up of new crises of emotion. I explained the phenomena as partly due to explicitly conscious processes of thought and will, but as due largely also to the subconscious incubation and maturing of motives deposited by the experiences of life. When ripe, the results hatch out, or burst into flower. I have now to speak of the subconscious region, in which such processes of flowering may occur, in a somewhat less vague way. I only regret that my limits of time here force me to be so short.

The expression "field of consciousness" has but recently come into vogue in the psychology books. Until quite lately the unit of mental life which figured most was the single "idea," supposed to be a definitely outlined thing. But at present psychologists are tending, first, to admit that the actual unit is more probably the total mental state, the entire wave of consciousness or field of objects present to the thought at any time; and, second, to see that it is impossible to outline this wave, this field, with any definiteness.

As our mental fields succeed one another, each has its centre of interest, around which the objects of which we are less and less attentively conscious fade to a margin so faint that its limits are unassignable. Some fields are narrow fields and some are wide fields. Usually when we have a wide field we rejoice, for we then see masses of truth together, and often get glimpses of relations which we divine rather than see, for they shoot beyond the field into still remoter regions of

[p. 227]

objectivity, regions which we seem rather to be about to perceive than to perceive actually. At other times, of drowsiness, illness, or fatigue, our fields may narrow almost to a point, and we find ourselves correspondingly oppressed and contracted.

Different individuals present constitutional differences in this matter of width of field. Your great organizing geniuses are men with habitually vast fields of mental vision, in which a whole programme of future operations will appear dotted out at once, the rays shooting far ahead into definite directions of advance. In common people there is never this magnificent inclusive view of a topic. They stumble along, feeling their way, as it were, from point to point, and often stop entirely. In certain diseased conditions consciousness is a mere spark, without memory of the past or thought of the future, and with the present narrowed down to some one simple emotion or sensation of the body.

The important fact which this "field" formula commemorates is the indetermination of the margin. Inattentively realized as is the matter which the margin contains, it is nevertheless there, and helps both to guide our behavior and to determine the next movement of our attention. It lies around us like a "magnetic field," inside of which our centre of energy turns like a compass-needle, as the present phase of consciousness alters into its successor. Our whole past store of memories floats beyond this margin, ready at a touch to come in; and the entire mass of residual powers, impulses, and knowledges that constitute our empirical self stretches continuously beyond it. So vaguely drawn are the outlines between what is actual and what is only potential at any moment of our conscious life, that it is always hard to say of certain mental elements whether we are conscious of them or not.

The ordinary psychology, admitting fully the difficulty of tracing the marginal outline, has nevertheless taken for

[p. 228]

granted, first, that all the consciousness the person now has, be the same focal or marginal, inattentive or attentive, is there in the "field" of the moment, all dim and impossible to assign as the latter's outline may be; and, second, that what is absolutely extra-marginal is absolutely non-existent. and cannot be a fact of consciousness at all.

And having reached this point, I must now ask you to recall what I said in my last lecture about the subconscious life. I said, as you may recollect, that those who first laid stress upon these phenomena could not know the facts as we now know them. My first duty now is to tell you what I meant by such a statement.

I cannot but think that the most important step forward that has occurred in psychology since I have been a student of that science is the discovery, first made in 1886, that, in certain subjects at least, there is not only the consciousness of the ordinary field, with its usual centre and margin, but an addition thereto in the shape of a set of memories, thoughts, and feelings which are extra-marginal and outside of the primary consciousness altogether, but yet must be classed as conscious facts of some sort, able to reveal their presence by unmistakable signs. I call this the most important step forward because, unlike the other advances which psychology has made, this discovery has revealed to us an entirely unsuspected peculiarity in the constitution of human nature. No other step forward which psychology has made can proffer any such claim as this.

In particular this discovery of a consciousness existing beyond the field, or subliminally as Mr. Myers terms it, casts light on many phenomena of religious biography. That is why I have to advert to it now, although it is naturally impossible for me in this place to give you any account of the evidence on which the admission of such a consciousness is based. You will find it set forth in many recent books,

[p. 229]

[paragraph continues] Binet's Alterations of Personality [*1] being perhaps as good a one as any to recommend.

The human material on which the demonstration has been made has so far been rather limited and, in part at least, eccentric, consisting of unusually suggestible hypnotic subjects, and of hysteric patients. Yet the elementary mechanisms of our life are presumably so uniform that what is shown to be true in a marked degree of some persons is probably true in some degree of all, and may in a few be true in an extraordinarily high degree.

The most important consequence of having a strongly developed ultra-marginal life of this sort is that one's ordinary fields of consciousness are liable to incursions from it of which the subject does not guess the source, and which, therefore, take for him the form of unaccountable impulses to act, or inhibitions of action, of obsessive ideas, or even of hallucinations of sight or hearing. The impulses may take the direction of automatic speech or writing, the meaning of which the subject himself may not understand even while he utters it; and generalizing this phenomenon, Mr. Myers has given the name of automatism, sensory or motor, emotional or intellectual, to this whole sphere of effects, due to "up-rushes" into the ordinary consciousness of energies originating in the subliminal parts of the mind.

The simplest instance of an automatism is the phenomenon of post-hypnotic suggestion, so-called. You give to a hypnotized subject, adequately susceptible, an order to perform some designated act--usual or eccentric, it makes no difference--after he wakes from his hypnotic sleep. Punctually, when the signal comes or the time elapses upon which you have told him that the act must ensue, he performs it;--but in so doing he has no recollection of your suggestion, and he always trumps up an improvised pretext for his behavior if

[p. 230]

the act be of an eccentric kind. It may even be suggested to a subject to have a vision or to hear a voice at a certain interval after waking, and when the time comes the vision is seen or the voice heard, with no inkling on the subject's part of its source. In the wonderful explorations by Binet, Janet, Breuer, Freud, Mason, Prince, and others, of the subliminal consciousness of patients with hysteria, we have revealed to us whole systems of underground life, in the shape of memories of a painful sort which lead a parasitic existence, buried outside of the primary fields of consciousness, and making irruptions thereinto with hallucinations, pains, convulsions, paralyses of feeling and of motion, and the whole procession of symptoms of hysteric disease of body and of mind. Alter or abolish by suggestion these subconscious memories, and the patient immediately gets well. His symptoms were automatisms, in Mr. Myers's sense of the word. These clinical records sound like fairy-tales when one first reads them, yet it is impossible to doubt their accuracy; and, the path having been once opened by these first observers, similar observations have been made elsewhere. They throw, as I said, a wholly new light upon our natural constitution.

And it seems to me that they make a farther step inevitable. Interpreting the unknown after the analogy of the known, it seems to me that hereafter, wherever we meet with a phenomenon of automatism, be it motor impulses, or obsessive idea, or unaccountable caprice, or delusion, or hallucination, we are bound first of all to make search whether it be not an explosion, into the fields of ordinary consciousness, of ideas elaborated outside of those fields in subliminal regions of the mind. We should look, therefore, for its source in the Subject's subconscious life. In the hypnotic cases, we ourselves create the source by our suggestion, so we know it directly. In the hysteric cases, the lost memories which are the source have to be extracted from the patient's Subliminal by a number of ingenious methods,

[p. 231]

for an account of which you must consult the books. In other pathological cases, insane delusions, for example, or psychopathic obsessions, the source is yet to seek, but by analogy it also should be in subliminal regions which improvements in our methods may yet conceivably put on tap. There lies the mechanism logically to be assumed--but the assumption involves a vast program of work to be done in the way of verification, in which the religious experiences of man must play their part. [*1]

[p. 232]

And thus I return to our own specific subject of instantaneous conversions. You remember the cases of Alline, Bradley, Brainerd, and the graduate of Oxford converted at three in the afternoon. Similar occurrences abound, some with and some without luminous visions, all with a sense of astonished happiness, and of being wrought on by a higher control. If, abstracting altogether from the question of their value for the future spiritual life of the individual, we take them on their psychological side exclusively, so many peculiarities in them remind us of what we find outside of conversion that we are tempted to class them along with other automatisms, and to suspect that what makes the difference between a sudden and a gradual convert is not necessarily the presence of divine miracle in the case of one and of something less divine in that of the other, but rather a simple psychological peculiarity, the fact, namely, that in the recipient of the more instantaneous grace we have one of those Subjects who are in possession of a large region in which mental work can go on subliminally, and from which invasive experiences, abruptly upsetting the equilibrium of the primary consciousness, may come.

I do not see why Methodists need object to such a view. Pray go back and recollect one of the conclusions to which I sought to lead you in my very first lecture. You may remember how I there argued against the notion that the worth of a thing can be decided by its origin. Our spiritual judgment, I said, our opinion of the significance and value of a human event or condition, must be decided on empirical grounds exclusively. If the fruits for life of the state of conversion are good, we ought to idealize and venerate it, even though it be a piece of natural psychology; if not, we ought to make short work with it, no matter what supernatural being may have infused it.

Well, how is it with these fruits? If we except the class of preeminent saints of whom the names illumine history, and

[p. 233]

consider only the usual run of "saints," the shopkeeping church-members and ordinary youthful or middle-aged recipients of instantaneous conversion, whether at revivals or in the spontaneous course of methodistic growth, you will probably agree that no splendor worthy of a wholly supernatural creature fulgurates from them, or sets them apart from the mortals who have never experienced that favor. Were it true that a suddenly converted man as such is, as Edwards says, [*1] of an entirely different kind from a natural man, partaking as he does directly of Christ's substance, there surely ought to be some exquisite class-mark, some distinctive radiance attaching even to the lowliest specimen of this genus, to which no one of us could remain insensible, and which, so far as it went, would prove him more excellent than ever the most highly gifted among mere natural men. But notoriously there is no such radiance. Converted men as a class are indistinguishable from natural men; some natural men even excel some converted men in their fruits; and no one ignorant of doctrinal theology could guess by mere every-day inspection of the "accidents" of the two groups of persons before him, that their substance differed as much as divine differs from human substance.

The believers in the non-natural character of sudden conversion have had practically to admit that there is no unmistakable class-mark distinctive of all true converts. The super-normal incidents, such as voices and visions and overpowering impressions of the meaning of suddenly presented scripture texts, the melting emotions and tumultuous affections connected with the crisis of change, may all come by way of nature, or worse still, be counterfeited by Satan. The

[p. 234]

real witness of the spirit to the second birth is to be found only in the disposition of the genuine child of God, the permanently patient heart, the love of self eradicated. And this, it has to be admitted, is also found in those who pass no crisis, and may even be found outside of Christianity altogether.

Throughout Jonathan Edwards's admirably rich and delicate description of the supernaturally infused condition, in his Treatise on Religious Affections, there is not one decisive trait, not one mark, that unmistakably parts it off from what may possibly be only an exceptionally high degree of natural goodness. In fact, one could hardly read a clearer argument than this book unwittingly offers in favor of the thesis that no chasm exists between the orders of human excellence, but that here as elsewhere, nature shows continuous differences, and generation and regeneration are matters of degree.

All which denial of two objective classes of human beings separated by a chasm must not leave us blind to the extraordinary momentousness of the fact of his conversion to the individual himself who gets converted. There are higher and lower limits of possibility set to each personal life. If a flood but goes above one's head, its absolute elevation becomes a matter of small importance; and when we touch our own upper limit and live in our own highest centre of energy, we may call ourselves saved, no matter how much higher some one else's centre may be. A small man's salvation will always be a great salvation and the greatest of all facts for him, and we should remember this when the fruits of our ordinary evangelicism look discouraging. Who knows how much less ideal still the lives of these spiritual grubs and earthworms, these Crumps and Stigginses, might have been, if such poor grace as they have received had never touched them at all? [*1]

[p. 235]

If we roughly arrange human beings in classes, each class standing for a grade of spiritual excellence, I believe we shall find natural men and converts both sudden and gradual in all the classes. The forms which regenerative change effects have, then, no general spiritual significance, but only a psychological significance. We have seen how Starbuck's laborious statistical studies tend to assimilate conversion to ordinary spiritual growth. Another American psychologist, Prof. George A. Coe, [*1] has analyzed the cases of seventy-seven converts or ex-candidates for conversion, known to him, and the results strikingly confirm the view that sudden conversion is connected with the possession of an active subliminal self. Examining his subjects with reference to their hypnotic sensibility and to such automatisms as hypnagogic hallucinations, odd impulses, religious dreams about the time of their conversion, etc., he found these relatively much more frequent in the group of converts whose transformation had been "striking," "striking" transformation being defined as a change which, though not necessarily instantaneous, seems to the subject of it to be distinctly different from a process of growth, however rapid." [*2] Candidates for conversion at revivals are, as you know, often disappointed: they experience nothing striking. Professor Coe had a number of persons of this class among his seventy-seven subjects, and they almost all, when tested by hypnotism,

[p. 236]

proved to belong to a subclass which he calls "spontaneous," that is, fertile in self-suggestions, as distinguished from a "passive" subclass, to which most of the subjects of striking transformation belonged. His inference is that self-suggestion of impossibility had prevented the influence upon these persons of an environment which, on the more "passive" subjects, had easily brought forth the effects they looked for. Sharp distinctions are difficult in these regions, and Professor Coe's numbers are small. But his methods were careful, and the results tally with what one might expect; and they seem, on the whole, to justify his practical conclusion, which is that if you should expose to a converting influence a subject in whom three factors unite: first, pronounced emotional sensibility; second, tendency to automatisms; and third, suggestibility of the passive type; you might then safely predict the result: there would be a sudden conversion, a transformation of the striking kind.

Does this temperamental origin diminish the significance of the sudden conversion when it has occurred? Not in the least, as Professor Coe well says; for "the ultimate test of religious values is nothing psychological, nothing definable in terms of how it happens, but something ethical, definable only in terms of what is attained." [*1]

As we proceed farther in our inquiry we shall see that what is attained is often an altogether new level of spiritual vitality, a relatively heroic level, in which impossible things have become possible, and new energies and endurances are shown. The personality is changed, the man is born anew, whether or not his psychological idiosyncrasies are what give the particular shape to his metamorphosis. "Sanctification" is the technical name of this result; and erelong examples of it shall be brought before you. In this lecture I have still only to add a few remarks on the assurance and peace which fill the hour of change itself.

[p. 237]

One word more, though, before proceeding to that point, lest the final purpose of my explanation of suddenness by subliminal activity be misunderstood. I do indeed believe that if the Subject have no liability to such subconscious activity, or if his conscious fields have a hard rind of a margin that resists incursions from beyond it, his conversion must he gradual if it occur, and must resemble any simple growth into new habits. His possession of a developed subliminal self, and of a leaky or pervious margin, is thus a conditio sine qua non of the Subject's becoming converted in the instantaneous way. But if you, being orthodox Christians, ask me as a psychologist whether the reference of a phenomenon to a subliminal self does not exclude the notion of the direct presence of the Deity altogether, I have to say frankly that as a psychologist I do not see why it necessarily should. The lower manifestations of the Subliminal, indeed, fall within the resources of the personal subject: his ordinary sense-material, inattentively taken in and subconsciously remembered and combined, will account for all his usual automatisms. But just as our primary wide-awake consciousness throws open our senses to the touch of things material so it is logically conceivable that if there be higher spiritual agencies that can directly touch us, the psychological condition of their doing so might be our possession of a subconscious region which alone should yield access to them. The hubbub of the waking life might close a door which in the dreamy Subliminal might remain ajar or open.

Thus that perception of external control which is so essential a feature in conversion might, in some cases at any rate, be interpreted as the orthodox interpret it: forces transcending the finite individual might impress him, on condition of his being what we may call a subliminal human specimen. But in any case the value of these forces would have to be determined by their effects, and the mere fact of

[p. 238]

their transcendency would of itself establish no presumption that they were more divine than diabolical.

I confess that this is the way in which I should rather see the topic left lying in your minds until I come to a much later lecture, when I hope once more to gather these dropped threads together into more definitive conclusions. The notion of a subconscious self certainly ought not at this point of our inquiry to be held to exclude all notion of a higher penetration.

If there be higher powers able to impress us, they may get access to us only through the subliminal door. (See below, <page 506> ff.)

 

Let us turn now to the feelings which immediately fill the hour of the conversion experience. The first one to be noted is just this sense of higher control. It is not always, but it is very often present. We saw examples of it in Alline, Bradley, Brainerd, and elsewhere. The need of such a higher controlling agency is well expressed in the short reference which the eminent French Protestant Adolphe Monod makes to the crisis of his own conversion. It was at Naples in his early manhood, in the summer of 1827.

"My sadness," he says, "was without limit, and having got entire possession of me, it filled my life from the most indifferent external acts to the most secret thoughts, and corrupted at their source my feelings, my judgment, and my happiness. It was then that I saw that to expect to put a stop to this disorder by my reason and my will, which were themselves diseased, would be to act like a blind man who should pretend to correct one of his eyes by the aid of the other equally blind one. I had then no resource save in some influence from without. I remembered the promise of the Holy Ghost; and what the positive declarations of the Gospel had never succeeded in bringing home to me, I learned at last from necessity, and believed, for the first time in my life, in this promise, in the only sense in which it answered the needs of my soul, in that, namely, of a

[p. 239]

real external supernatural action, capable of giving me thoughts, and taking them away from me, and exerted on me by a God as truly master of my heart as he is of the rest of nature. Renouncing then all merit, all strength, abandoning all my personal resources, and acknowledging no other title to his mercy than my own utter misery, I went home and threw myself on my knees and prayed as I never yet prayed in my life. From this day onwards a new interior life began for me: not that my melancholy had disappeared, but it had lost its sting. Hope had entered into my heart, and once entered on the path, the God of Jesus Christ, to whom I then had learned to give myself up, little by little did the rest." [*1]

It is needless to remind you once more of the admirable congruity of Protestant theology with the structure of the mind as shown in such experiences. In the extreme of melancholy the self that consciously is can do absolutely nothing. It is completely bankrupt and without resource, and no works it can accomplish will avail. Redemption from such subjective conditions must be a free gift or nothing, and grace through Christ's accomplished sacrifice is such a gift.

"God," says Luther, "is the God of the humble, the miserable, the oppressed, and the desperate, and of those that are brought even to nothing; and his nature is to give sight to the blind, to comfort the broken-hearted, to justify sinners, to save the very desperate and damned. Now that pernicious and pestilent opinion of man's own righteousness, which will not be a sinner, unclean, miserable, and damnable, but righteous and holy, suffereth not God to come to his own natural and proper work. Therefore God must take this maul in hand (the law, I mean) to beat in pieces and bring to nothing this beast with her vain confidence, that she may so learn at length by her own misery that she is utterly forlorn and damned. But here lieth the difficulty, that when a man is terrified and cast down, he is so

[p. 240]

little able to raise himself up again and say, 'Now I am bruised and afflicted enough; now is the time of grace; now is the time to hear Christ.' The foolishness of man's heart is so great that then he rather seeketh to himself more laws to satisfy his conscience. 'If I live,' saith he, 'I will amend my life: I will do this, I will do that.' But here, except thou do the quite contrary, except thou send Moses away with his law, and in these terrors and this anguish lay hold upon Christ who died for thy sins, look for no salvation. Thy cowl, thy shaven crown, thy chastity, thy obedience, thy poverty, thy works, thy merits? what shall all these do? what shall the law of Moses avail? If I, wretched and damnable sinner, through works or merits could have loved the Son of God, and so come to him, what needed he to deliver himself for me? If I, being a wretch and damned sinner, could be redeemed by any other price, what needed the Son of God to be given? But because there was no other price, therefore he delivered neither sheep, ox, gold, nor silver, but even God himself, entirely and wholly 'for me,' even 'for me,' I say, a miserable, wretched sinner. Now, therefore, I take comfort and apply this to myself. And this manner of applying is the very true force and power of faith. For he died not to justify the righteous, but the un-righteous, and to make them the children of God." [*1]

That is, the more literally lost you are, the more literally you are the very being whom Christ's sacrifice has already saved. Nothing in Catholic theology, I imagine, has ever spoken to sick souls as straight as this message from Luther's personal experience. As Protestants are not all sick souls, of course reliance on what Luther exults in calling the dung of one's merits, the filthy puddle of one's own righteousness, has come to the front again in their religion; but the adequacy of his view of Christianity to the deeper parts of our human mental structure is shown by its wildfire contagiousness when it was a new and quickening thing.

Faith that Christ has genuinely done his work was part of

[p. 241]

what Luther meant by faith, which so far is faith in a fact intellectually conceived of. But this is only one part of Luther's faith, the other part being far more vital. This other part is something not intellectual but immediate and intuitive, the assurance, namely, that I, this individual I, just as I stand, without one plea, etc., am saved now and forever.  [*1] Professor Leuba is undoubtedly right in contending that the conceptual belief about Christ's work, although so often efficacious and antecedent, is really accessory and non-essential, and that the "joyous conviction" can also come by far other channels than this conception. It is to the joyous conviction itself, the assurance that all is well with one, that he would give the name of faith par excellence.

"When the sense of estrangement," he writes, "fencing man about in a narrowly limited ego, breaks down, the individual finds himself 'at one with all creation.' He lives in the universal life; he and man, he and nature, he and God, are one. That state of confidence, trust, union with all things, following upon the achievement of moral unity, is the Faith-state. Various dogmatic

[p. 242]

beliefs suddenly, on the advent of the faith-state, acquire a character of certainty, assume a new reality, become an object of faith. As the ground of assurance here is not rational, argumentation is irrelevant. But such conviction being a mere casual offshoot of the faith-state, it is a gross error to imagine that the chief practical value of the faith-state is its power to stamp with the seal of reality certain particular theological conceptions. [*1] On the contrary, its value lies solely in the fact that it is the psychic correlate of a biological growth reducing contending desires to one direction; a growth which expresses itself in new affective states and new reactions; in larger, nobler, more Christ-like activities. The ground of the specific assurance in religious dogmas is then an affective experience. The objects of faith may even be preposterous; the affective stream will float them along, and invest them with unshakable certitude. The more startling the affective experience, the less explicable it seems, the easier it is to make it the carrier of unsubstantiated notions." [*2]

The characteristics of the affective experience which, to avoid ambiguity, should, I think, be called the state of assurance rather than the faith-state, can be easily enumerated, though it is probably difficult to realize their intensity, unless one has been through the experience one's self.

The central one is the loss of all the worry, the sense that all is ultimately well with one, the peace, the harmony, the willingness to be, even though the outer conditions should remain the same. The certainty of God's "grace," of "justification," "salvation," is an objective belief that usually accompanies the change in Christians; but this may be entirely lacking and yet the affective peace remain the same--you will recollect the case of the Oxford graduate: and many might be given where the assurance of personal salvation

[p. 243]

was only a later result. A passion of willingness, of acquiescence, of admiration, is the glowing centre of this state of mind.

The second feature is the sense of perceiving truths not known before. The mysteries of life become lucid, as Professor Leuba says; and often, nay usually, the solution is more or less unutterable in words. But these more intellectual phenomena may be postponed until we treat of mysticism.

A third peculiarity of the assurance state is the objective change which the world often appears to undergo. "An appearance of newness beautifies every object," the precise opposite of that other sort of newness, that dreadful unreality and strangeness in the appearance of the world, which is experienced by melancholy patients, and of which you may recall my relating some examples. [*1] This sense of clean and beautiful newness within and without is one of the commonest entries in conversion records. Jonathan Edwards thus describes it in himself:--

"After this my sense of divine things gradually increased, and became more and more lively, and had more of that inward sweetness. The appearance of everything was altered; there seemed to be, as it were, a calm, sweet cast, or appearance of divine glory, in almost everything. God's excellency, his wisdom, his purity and love, seemed to appear in everything; in the sun, moon, and stars; in the clouds and blue sky; in the grass, flowers, and trees; in the water and all nature; which used greatly to fix my mind. And scarce anything, among all the works of nature, was so sweet to me as thunder and lightning; formerly nothing had been so terrible to me. Before, I used to be uncommonly terrified with thunder, and to be struck with terror when I saw a thunderstorm rising; but now, on the contrary, it rejoices me." [*2]

[p. 244]

Billy Bray, an excellent little illiterate English evangelist, records his sense of newness thus:--

"I said to the Lord: 'Thou hast said, they that ask shall receive, they that seek shall find, and to them that knock the door shall be opened, and I have faith to believe it.' In an instant the Lord made me so happy that I cannot express what I felt. I shouted for joy. I praised God with my whole heart. . . . I think this was in November, 1823, but what day of the month I do not know. I remember this, that everything looked new to me, the people, the fields, the cattle, the trees. I was like a new man in a new world. I spent the greater part of my time in praising the Lord." [*1]

Starbuck and Leuba both illustrate this sense of newness by quotations. I take the two following from Starbuck's manuscript collection. One, a woman, says:--

"I was taken to a camp-meeting, mother and religious friends seeking and praying for my conversion. My emotional nature was stirred to its depths; confessions of depravity and pleading with God for salvation from sin made me oblivious of all surroundings. I plead for mercy, and had a vivid realization of forgiveness and renewal of my nature. When rising from my knees I exclaimed, 'Old things have passed away, all things have become new.' It was like entering another world, a new state of existence. Natural objects were glorified, my spiritual vision was so clarified that I saw beauty in every material object in the universe, the woods were vocal with heavenly music; my soul exulted in the love of God, and I wanted everybody to share in my joy."

The next case is that of a man:--

"I know not how I got back into the encampment, but found myself staggering up to Rev. ----'s Holiness tent--and as it was

[p. 245]

full of seekers and a terrible noise inside, some groaning, some laughing, and some shouting, and by a large oak, ten feet from the tent, I fell on my face by a bench, and tried to pray, and every time I would call on God, something like a man's hand would strangle me by choking. I don't know whether there were any one around or near me or not. I thought I should surely die if I did not get help, but just as often as I would pray, that unseen hand was felt on my throat and my breath squeezed off. Finally something said: 'Venture on the atonement, for you will die anyway if you don't.' So I made one final struggle to call on God for mercy, with the same choking and strangling, determined to finish the sentence of prayer for Mercy, if I did strangle and die, and the last I remember that time was falling back on the ground with the same unseen hand on my throat. I don't know how long I lay there or what was going on. None of my folks were present. When I came to myself, there were a crowd around me praising God. The very heavens seemed to open and pour down rays of light and glory. Not for a moment only, but all day and night, floods of light and glory seemed to pour through my soul, and oh, how I was changed, and everything became new. My horses and hogs and even everybody seemed changed."

This man's case introduces the feature of automatisms, which in suggestible subjects have been so startling a feature at revivals since, in Edwards's, Wesley's and Whitfield's time, these became a regular means of gospel-propagation. They were at first supposed to be semi-miraculous proofs of "power" on the part of the Holy Ghost; but great divergence of opinion quickly arose concerning them. Edwards, in his Thoughts on the Revival of Religion in New England, has to defend them against their critics; and their value has long been matter of debate even within the revivalistic denominations. [*1] They undoubtedly have no essential spiritual

[p. 246]

significance, and although their presence makes his conversion more memorable to the convert, it has never been proved that converts who show them are more persevering or fertile in good fruits than those whose change of heart has had less violent accompaniments. On the whole, unconsciousness, convulsions, visions, involuntary vocal utterances, and suffocation, must be simply ascribed to the subject's having a large subliminal region, involving nervous instability. This is often the subject's own view of the matter afterwards. One of Starbuck's correspondents writes, for instance:--

"I have been through the experience which is known as conversion. My explanation of it is this: the subject works his emotions up to the breaking point, at the same time resisting their physical manifestations, such as quickened pulse, etc., and then suddenly lets them have their full sway over his body. The relief is something wonderful, and the pleasurable effects of the emotions are experienced to the highest degree."

There is one form of sensory automatism which possibly deserves special notice on account of its frequency. I refer to hallucinatory or pseudo-hallucinatory luminous phenomena, photisms, to use the term of the psychologists. Saint Paul's blinding heavenly vision seems to have been a phenomenon of this sort; so does Constantine's cross in the sky. The last case but one which I quoted mentions floods of light and glory. Henry Alline mentions a light, about whose externality he seems uncertain. Colonel Gardiner sees a blazing light. President Finney writes:--

"All at once the glory of God shone upon and round about me in a manner almost marvelous. . . . A light perfectly ineffable shone in my soul, that almost prostrated me on the ground. . . . This light seemed like the brightness of the sun in every direction. It was too intense for the eyes. . . . I think I knew something then, by actual experience, of that light that prostrated

[p. 247]

[paragraph continues] Paul on the way to Damascus. It was surely a light such as I could not have endured long." [*1]

Such reports of photisms are indeed far from uncommon. Here is another from Starbuck's collection, where the light appeared evidently external:--

"I had attended a series of revival services for about two weeks off and on. Had been invited to the altar several times, all the time becoming more deeply impressed, when finally I decided I must do this, or I should be lost. Realization of conversion was very vivid, like a ton's weight being lifted from my heart; a strange light which seemed to light up the whole room (for it was dark); a conscious supreme bliss which caused me to repeat 'Glory to God' for a long time. Decided to be God's child for life, and to give up my pet ambition, wealth and social position. My former habits of life hindered my growth somewhat, but I set about overcoming these systematically, and in one year my whole nature was changed, i. e., my ambitions were of a different order."

Here is another one of Starbuck's cases, involving a luminous element:--

"I had been clearly converted twenty-three years before, or rather reclaimed. My experience in regeneration was then clear and spiritual, and I had not backslidden. But I experienced entire sanctification on the 15th day of March, 1893, about eleven o'clock in the morning. The particular accompaniments of the experience were entirely unexpected. I was quietly sitting at home singing selections out of Pentecostal Hymns. Suddenly there seemed to be a something sweeping into me and inflating my entire being--such a sensation as I had never experienced before. When this experience came, I seemed to be conducted around a large, capacious, well-lighted room. As I walked with my invisible conductor and looked around, a clear thought was coined in my mind, 'They are not here, they are gone.' As soon

[p. 248]

as the thought was definitely formed in my mind, though no word was spoken, the Holy Spirit impressed me that I was surveying my own soul. Then, for the first time in all my life, did I know that I was cleansed from all sin, and filled with the fullness of God."

Leuba quotes the case of a Mr. Peek, where the luminous affection reminds one of the chromatic hallucinations produced by the intoxicant cactus buds called mescal by the Mexicans:--

"When I went in the morning into the fields to work, the glory of God appeared in all his visible creation. I well remember we reaped oats, and how every straw and head of the oats seemed, as it were, arrayed in a kind of rainbow glory, or to glow, if I may so express it, in the glory of God." [*1]

[p. 249]

The most characteristic of all the elements of the conversion crisis, and the last one of which I shall speak, is the ecstasy of happiness produced. We have already heard several accounts of it, but I will add a couple more. President Finney's is so vivid that I give it at length:--

"All my feelings seemed to rise and flow out; and the utterance of my heart was, 'I want to pour my whole soul out to God.' The rising of my soul was so great that I rushed into the back room of the front office, to pray. There was no fire and no light in the room; nevertheless it appeared to me as if it were perfectly light. As I went in and shut the door after me, it seemed as if I met the Lord Jesus Christ face to face. It did not occur to me then, nor did it for some time afterwards, that it was wholly a mental state. On the contrary, it seemed to me that I saw him as I would see any other man. He said nothing but looked at me in such a manner as to break me right down at his feet. I have always since regarded this as a most remarkable state of mind; for it seemed to me a reality that he stood

[p. 250]

before me, and I fell down at his feet and poured out my soul to him. I wept aloud like a child, and made such confessions as I could with my choked utterance. It seemed to me that I bathed his feet with my tears; and yet I had no distinct impression that I touched him, that I recollect. I must have continued in this state for a good while, but my mind was too absorbed with the interview to recollect anything that I said. But I know, as soon as my mind became calm enough to break off from the interview, I returned to the front office, and found that the fire that I had made of large wood was nearly burned out. But as I turned and was about to take a seat by the fire, I received a mighty baptism of the Holy Ghost. Without any expectation of it, without ever having the thought in my mind that there was any such thing for me, without any recollection that I had ever heard the thing mentioned by any person in the world, the Holy Spirit descended upon me in a manner that seemed to go through me, body and soul. I could feel the impression, like a wave of electricity, going through and through me. Indeed, it seemed to come in waves and waves of liquid love; for I could not express it in any other way. It seemed like the very breath of God. I can recollect distinctly that it seemed to fan me, like immense wings.

"No words can express the wonderful love that was shed abroad in my heart. I wept aloud with joy and love; and I do not know but I should say I literally bellowed out the unutterable gushings of my heart. These waves came over me, and over me, and over me, one after the other, until I recollect I cried out, 'I shall die if these waves continue to pass over me.' I said, 'Lord, I cannot bear any more;' yet I had no fear of death.

"How long I continued in this state, with this baptism continuing to roll over me and go through me, I do not know. But I know it was late in the evening when a member of my choir--for I was the leader of the choir--came into the office to see me. He was a member of the church. He found me in this state of loud weeping, and said to me, 'Mr. Finney, what ails you?' I could make him no answer for some time. He then said, 'Are you in pain?' I gathered myself up as best I could, and replied, 'No, but so happy that I cannot live.'"

[p. 251]

I just now quoted Billy Bray; I cannot do better than give his own brief account of his post-conversion feelings:--

"I can't help praising the Lord. As I go along the street, I lift up one foot, and it seems to say 'Glory'; and I lift up the other, and it seems to say 'Amen'; and so they keep up like that all the time I am walking." [*1]

One word, before I close this lecture, on the question of the transiency or permanence of these abrupt conversions. Some of you, I feel sure, knowing that numerous backslidings and relapses take place, make of these their apperceiving mass for interpreting the whole subject, and dismiss it

[p. 252]

with a pitying smile at so much "hysterics." Psychologically, as well as religiously, however, this is shallow. It misses the point of serious interest, which is not so much the duration as the nature and quality of these shiftings of character to higher levels. Men lapse from every level--we need no statistics to tell us that. Love is, for instance, well known not to be irrevocable, yet, constant or inconstant, it reveals new flights and reaches of ideality while it lasts. These revelations form its significance to men and women, whatever be its duration. So with the conversion experience: that it should for even a short time show a human being what the high-water mark of his spiritual capacity is, this is what constitutes its importance--an importance which backsliding cannot diminish, although persistence might increase it. As a matter of fact, all the more striking instances of conversion, all those, for instance, which I have quoted, have been permanent. The case of which there might be most doubt, on account of its suggesting so strongly an epileptoid seizure, was the case of M. Ratisbonne. Yet I am informed that Ratisbonne's whole future was shaped by those few minutes. He gave up his project of marriage, became a priest, founded at Jerusalem, where he went to dwell, a mission of nuns for the conversion of the Jews, showed no tendency to use for egotistic purposes the notoriety given him by the peculiar circumstances of his conversion--which, for the rest, he could seldom refer to without tears--and in short remained an exemplary son of the Church until he died, late in the 80's, if I remember rightly.

The only statistics I know of, on the subject of the duration of conversions, are those collected for Professor Starbuck by Miss Johnston. They embrace only a hundred persons, evangelical church-members, more than half being Methodists. According to the statement of the subjects themselves, there had been backsliding of some sort in nearly all the cases, 93 per cent. of the women, 77 per cent. of the men.

[p. 253]

[paragraph continues] Discussing the returns more minutely, Starbuck finds that only 6 per cent. are relapses from the religious faith which the conversion confirmed, and that the backsliding complained of is in most only a fluctuation in the ardor of sentiment. Only six of the hundred cases report a change of faith. Starbuck's conclusion is that the effect of conversion is to bring with it "a changed attitude towards life, which is fairly constant and permanent, although the feelings fluctuate. . . . In other words, the persons who have passed through conversion, having once taken a stand for the religious life, tend to feel themselves identified with it, no matter how much their religious enthusiasm declines." [*1]

Footnotes

^216:1 Life and Journals, Boston, 1806, pp. 31-40, abridged.

^219:1 My quotations are made from an Italian translation of this letter in the Biografia del sig. M. A. Ratisbonne, Ferrara, 1843, which I have to thank Monsignore D. O'Connell of Rome for bringing to my notice. I abridge the original.

^229:1 Published in the International Scientific Series.

^231:1 The reader will here please notice that in my exclusive reliance in the last lecture on the subconscious "incubation" of motives deposited by a growing experience, I followed the method of employing accepted principles of explanation as far as one can. The subliminal region, whatever else it may be, is at any rate a place now admitted by psychologists to exist for the accumulation of vestiges of sensible experience (whether inattentively or attentively registered), and for their elaboration according to ordinary psychological or logical laws into results that end by attaining such a "tension" that they may at times enter consciousness with something like a burst. It thus is "scientific" to interpret all otherwise unaccountable invasive alterations of consciousness as results of the tension of subliminal memories reaching the bursting-point. But candor obliges me to confess that there are occasional bursts into consciousness of results of which it is not easy to demonstrate any prolonged subconscious incubation. Some of the cases I used to illustrate the sense of presence of the unseen in Lecture III were of this order (compare pages <page 59>, <page 60>, <page 61>, <page 66>); and we shall see other experiences of the kind when we come to the subject of mysticism. The case of Mr. Bradley, that of M. Ratisbonne, possibly that of Colonel Gardiner, possibly that of saint Paul, might not be so easily explained in this simple way. The result, then, would have to be ascribed either to a merely physiological nerve storm, a "discharging lesion" like that of epilepsy; or, in case it were useful and rational, as in the two latter cases named, to some more mystical or theological hypothesis. I make this remark in order that the reader may realize that the subject is really complex. But I shall keep myself as far as possible at present to the more "scientific" view; and only as the plot thickens in subsequent lectures shall I consider the question of its absolute sufficiency as an explanation of all the facts. That subconscious incubation explains a great number of them, there can be no doubt.

^233:1 Edwards says elsewhere: "I am bold to say that the work of God in the conversion of one soul, considered together with the source foundation, and purchase of it, and also the benefit, end, and eternal issue of it, is a more glorious work of God than the creation of the whole material universe."

^234:1 Emerson writes: "When we see a soul whose acts are regal, graceful [p. 235] and pleasant as roses, we must thank God that such things can be and are, and not turn sourly on the angel and say: Crump is a better man, with his grunting resistance to all his native devils." True enough. Yet Crump may really be the better crump, for his inner discords and second birth; and your once-born "regal" character though indeed always better than poor Crump, may fall far short of what he individually might be had he only some Crump-like capacity for compunction over his own peculiar diabolisms, graceful and pleasant and invariably gentlemanly as these may be.

^235:1 In his book, The Spiritual Life, New York, 1900.

^235:2 Op. cit., p. 112.

^236:1 Op. cit., p. 144.

^239:1 I piece together a quotation made by W. Monod, in his book la Vie, and a letter printed in the work: Adolphe Monod: I,. Souvenirs de sa Vie, 1885, p. 433.

^240:1 Commentary on Galatians, ch. iii. verse 19, and ch. ii. verse 20, abridged.

^241:1 In some conversions, both steps are distinct; in this one, for example:--

"Whilst I was reading the evangelical treatise, I was soon struck by an expression: 'the finished work of Christ.' 'Why,' I asked of myself, 'does the author use these terms? Why does he not say "the atoning work"?' Then these words, 'It is finished,' presented themselves to my mind. 'What is it that is finished?' I asked, and in an instant my mind replied: 'A perfect expiation for sin; entire satisfaction has been given; the debt has been paid by the Substitute. Christ has died for our sins; not for ours only, but for those of all men. If, then, the entire work is finished, all the debt paid, what remains for me to do?' In another instant the light was shed through my mind by the Holy Ghost, and the joyous conviction was given me that nothing more was to be done, save to fall on my knees, to accept this Saviour and his love, to praise God forever." Autobiography of Hudson Taylor. I translate back into English from the French translation of Challand (Geneva, no date), the original not being accessible.

^242:1 Tolstoy's case was a good comment on those words. There was almost no theology in his conversion. His faith-state was the sense come back that life was infinite in its moral significance.

^242:2 American Journal of Psychology, vii. 345-347, abridged.

^243:1 Above, <page 150>.

^243:2 DWIGHT: Life of Edwards, New York, 1830, p. 61, abridged.

^244:1 W. F. BOURNE: The King's Son, a Memoir of Billy Bray, London, Hamilton, Adams & Co., 1887, p. 9.

^245:1 Consult WILLIAM B. SPRAGUE: Lectures on Revivals of Religion, New York, 1832, in the long Appendix to which the opinions of a large number of ministers are given.

^247:1 Memoirs, p. 34.

^248:1 These reports of sensorial photism shade off into what are evidently only metaphorical accounts of the sense of new spiritual illumination, as, for instance, in Brainerd's statement: "As I was walking in a thick grove, unspeakable glory seemed to open to the apprehension of my soul. I do not mean any external brightness, for I saw no such thing, nor any imagination of a body of light in the third heavens, or anything of that nature, but it was a new inward apprehension or view that I had of God."

In a case like this next one from Starbuck's manuscript collection the lighting up of the darkness is probably also metaphorical:--

"One Sunday night, I resolved that when I got home to the ranch where I was working, I would offer myself with my faculties and all to God to be used only by and for him. . . . It was raining and the roads were muddy; but this desire grew so strong that I kneeled down by the side of the road and told God all about it, intending then to get up and go on. Such a thing as any special answer to my prayer never entered my mind, having been converted by faith, but still being most undoubtedly saved. Well, while I was praying, I remember holding out my hands to God and telling him they should work for him, my feet walk for him, my tongue speak for him, etc., etc., if he would only use me as his instrument and give me a satisfying experience--when suddenly the darkness of the night seemed lit up--I felt, realized, knew, that God heard and answered my prayer. [p. 249] Deep happiness came over me; I felt I was accepted into the inner circle of God's loved ones."

In the following case also the flash of light is metaphorical:--

"A prayer meeting had been called for at close of evening service. The minister supposed me impressed by his discourse (a mistake--he was dull). He came and, placing his hand upon my shoulder, said: 'Do you not want to give your heart to God?' I replied in the affirmative. Then said he, 'Come to the front seat.' They sang and prayed and talked with me. I experienced nothing but unaccountable wretchedness. They declared that the reason why I did not 'obtain peace' was because I was not willing to give up all to God. After about two hours the minister said we would go home. As usual, on retiring, I prayed. In great distress, I at this time simply said, 'Lord, I have done all I can, I leave the whole matter with thee.' Immediately, like a flash of light, there came to me a great peace, and I arose and went into my parents' bedroom and said, 'I do feel so wonderfully happy.' This I regard as the hour of conversion. It was the hour in which I became assured of divine acceptance and favor. So far as my life was concerned, it made little immediate change."

^251:1 I add in a note a few more records:--

"One morning, being in deep distress, fearing every moment I should drop into hell, I was constrained to cry in earnest for mercy, and the Lord came to my relief, and delivered my soul from the burden and guilt of sin. My whole frame was in a tremor from head to foot, and my soul enjoyed sweet peace. The pleasure I then felt was indescribable. The happiness lasted about three days, during which time I never spoke to any person about my feelings." Autobiography of DAN YOUNG, edited by W. P. STRICKLAND, New York, 1860.

"In an instant there rose up in me such a sense of God's taking care of those who put their trust in him that for an hour all the world was crystalline, the heavens were lucid, and I sprang to my feet and began to cry and laugh." H. W. BEECHER, quoted by LEUBA.

"My tears of sorrow changed to joy, and I lay there praising God in such ecstasy of joy as only the soul who experiences it can realize."--"I cannot express how I felt. It was as if I had been in a dark dungeon and lifted into the light of the sun. I shouted and I sang praise unto him who loved me and washed me from my sins. I was forced to retire into a secret place, for the tears did flow, and I did not wish my shopmates to see me, and yet I could not keep it a secret."--"I experienced joy almost to weeping."--"I felt my face must have shone like that of Moses.

I had a general feeling of buoyancy. It was the greatest joy it was ever my lot to experience."--"I wept and laughed alternately.

I was as light as if walking on air. I felt as if I had gained greater peace and happiness than I had ever expected to experience." STARBUCK'S correspondents.

^253:1 Psychology of Religion, pp. 360, 357.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

Lectures XI, XII, and XIII

  

SAINTLINESS

The last lecture left us in a state of expectancy. What may the practical fruits for life have been, of such movingly happy conversions as those we heard of? With this question the really important part of our task opens, for you remember that we began all this empirical inquiry not merely to open a curious chapter in the natural history of human consciousness, but rather to attain a spiritual judgment as to the total value and positive meaning of all the religious trouble and happiness which we have seen. We must, therefore, first describe the fruits of the religious life, and then we must judge them. This divides our inquiry into two distinct parts. Let us without further preamble proceed to the descriptive task.

It ought to be the pleasantest portion of our business in these lectures. Some small pieces of it, it is true, may be painful, or may show human nature in a pathetic light, but it will be mainly pleasant, because the best fruits of religious experience are the best things that history has to show. They have always been esteemed so; here if anywhere is the genuinely strenuous life; and to call to mind a succession of such examples as I have lately had to wander through, though it has been only in the reading of them, is to feel encouraged and uplifted and washed in better moral air.

The highest flights of charity, devotion, trust, patience, bravery to which the wings of human nature have spread themselves have been flown for religious ideals. I can do no better than quote, as to this, some remarks which Sainte-Beuve

[p. 255]

in his History of Port-Royal makes on the results of conversion or the state of grace.

"Even from the purely human point of view," Sainte-Beuve says, "the phenomenon of grace must still appear sufficiently extraordinary, eminent, and rare, both in its nature and in its effects, to deserve a closer study. For the soul arrives thereby at a certain fixed and invincible state, a state which is genuinely heroic, and from out of which the greatest deeds which it ever performs are executed. Through all the different forms of communion, and all the diversity of the means which help to produce this state, whether it be reached by a jubilee, by a general confession, by a solitary prayer and effusion, whatever in short to be the place and the occasion, it is easy to recognize that it is fundamentally one state in spirit and fruits. Penetrate a little beneath the diversity of circumstances, and it becomes evident that in Christians of different epochs it is always one and the same modification by which they are affected: there is veritably a single fundamental and identical spirit of piety and charity, common to those who have received grace; an inner state which before all things is one of love and humility, of infinite confidence in God, and of severity for one's self, accompanied with tenderness for others. The fruits peculiar to this condition of the soul have the same savor in all, under distant suns and in different surroundings, in Saint Teresa of Avila just as in any Moravian brother of Herrnhut." [*1]

Sainte-Beuve has here only the more eminent instances of regeneration in mind, and these are of course the instructive ones for us also to consider. These devotees have often laid their course so differently from other men that, judging them by worldly law, we might be tempted to call them monstrous aberrations from the path of nature. I begin therefore by asking a general psychological question as to

[p. 256]

what the inner conditions are which may make one human character differ so extremely from another.

I reply at once that where the character, as something distinguished from the intellect, is concerned, the causes of human diversity lie chiefly in our differing susceptibilities of emotional excitement, and in the different impulses and inhibitions which these bring in their train. Let me make this more clear.

Speaking generally, our moral and practical attitude, at any given time, is always a resultant of two sets of forces within us, impulses pushing us one way and obstructions and inhibitions holding us back. "Yes! yes!" say the impulses; "No! no!" say the inhibitions. Few people who have not expressly reflected on the matter realize how constantly this factor of inhibition is upon us, how it contains and moulds us by its restrictive pressure almost as if we were fluids pent within the cavity of a jar. The influence is so incessant that it becomes subconscious. All of you, for example, sit here with a certain constraint at this moment, and entirely without express consciousness of the fact, because of the influence of the occasion. If left alone in the room, each of you would probably involuntarily rearrange himself, and make his attitude more "free and easy." But proprieties and their inhibitions snap like cobwebs if any great emotional excitement supervenes. I have seen a dandy appear in the street with his face covered with shaving-lather because a house across the way was on fire; and a woman will run among strangers in her nightgown if it be a question of saving her baby's life or her own. Take a self-indulgent woman's life in general. She will yield to every inhibition set by her disagreeable sensations, lie late in bed, live upon tea or bromides, keep indoors from the cold. Every difficulty finds her obedient to its "no." But make a mother of her, and what have you? Possessed by maternal excitement, she now confronts wakefulness, weariness, and toil

[p. 257]

without an instant of hesitation or a word of complaint. The inhibitive power of pain over her is extinguished wherever the baby's interests are at stake. The inconveniences which this creature occasions have become, as James Hinton says, the glowing heart of a great joy, and indeed are now the very conditions whereby the joy becomes most deep.

This is an example of what you have already heard of as the "expulsive power of a higher affection." But be the affection high or low, it makes no difference, so long as the excitement it brings be strong enough. In one of Henry Drummond's discourses he tells of an inundation in India where an eminence with a bungalow upon it remained unsubmerged, and became the refuge of a number of wild animals and reptiles in addition to the human beings who were there. At a certain moment a royal Bengal tiger appeared swimming towards it, reached it, and lay panting like a dog upon the ground in the midst of the people, still possessed by such an agony of terror that one of the Englishmen could calmly step up with a rifle and blow out its brains. The tiger's habitual ferocity was temporarily quelled by the emotion of fear, which became sovereign, and formed a new centre for his character.

Sometimes no emotional state is sovereign, but many contrary ones are mixed together. In that case one hears both "yeses" and "noes," and the "will" is called on then to solve the conflict. Take a soldier, for example, with his dread of cowardice impelling him to advance, his fears impelling him to run, and his propensities to imitation pushing him towards various courses if his comrades offer various examples. His person becomes the seat of a mass of interferences; and he may for a time simply waver, because no one emotion prevails. There is a pitch of intensity, though, which, if any emotion reach it, enthrones that one as alone effective and sweeps its antagonists and all their inhibitions away. The

[p. 258]

fury of his comrades' charge, once entered on, will give this pitch of courage to the soldier; the panic of their rout will give this pitch of fear. In these sovereign excitements, things ordinarily impossible grow natural because the inhibitions are annulled. Their "no! no!" not only is not heard, it does not exist. Obstacles are then like tissue-paper hoops to the circus rider--no impediment; the flood is higher than the dam they make. "Lass sie betteln gehn wenn sie hungrig sind!" cries the grenadier, frantic over his Emperor's capture, when his wife and babes are suggested; and men pent into a burning theatre have been known to cut their way through the crowd with knives. [*1]

One mode of emotional excitability is exceedingly important in the composition of the energetic character, from its peculiarly destructive power over inhibitions. I mean what in its lower form is mere irascibility, susceptibility to wrath, the fighting temper; and what in subtler ways manifests itself as impatience, grimness, earnestness, severity of character. Earnestness means willingness to live with energy, though energy bring pain. The pain may be pain to other

[p. 259]

people or pain to one's self--it makes little difference; for when the strenuous mood is on one, the aim is to break something, no matter whose or what. Nothing annihilates an inhibition as irresistibly as anger does it; for, as Moltke says of war, destruction pure and simple is its essence. This is what makes it so invaluable an ally of every other passion. The sweetest delights are trampled on with a ferocious pleasure the moment they offer themselves as checks to a cause by which our higher indignations are elicited. It costs then nothing to drop friendships, to renounce long-rooted privileges and possessions, to break with social ties. Rather do we take a stern joy in the astringency and desolation; and what is called weakness of character seems in most cases to consist in the inaptitude for these sacrificial moods, of which one's own inferior self and its pet softnesses must often be the targets and the victims. [*1]

So far I have spoken of temporary alterations produced by shifting excitements in the same person. But the relatively fixed differences of character of different persons are explained in a precisely similar way. In a man with a liability to a special sort of emotion, whole ranges of inhibition habitually vanish, which in other men remain effective, and other sorts of inhibition take their place. When a person has an inborn genius for certain emotions, his life differs strangely from that of ordinary people, for none of their usual deterrents check him. Your mere aspirant to a type of character, on the contrary, only shows, when your natural lover, fighter, or reformer, with whom the passion is a gift

[p. 260]

of nature, comes along, the hopeless inferiority of voluntary to instinctive action. He has deliberately to overcome his inhibitions; the genius with the inborn passion seems not to feel them at all; he is free of all that inner friction and nervous waste. To a Fox, a Garibaldi, a General Booth, a John Brown, a Louise Michel, a Bradlaugh, the obstacles omnipotent over those around them are as if non-existent. Should the rest of us so disregard them, there might be many such heroes, for many have the wish to live for similar ideals, and only the adequate degree of inhibition-quenching fury is lacking. [*1]

The difference between willing and merely wishing, between having ideals that are creative and ideals that are but

[p. 261]

pinings and regrets, thus depends solely either on the amount of steam-pressure chronically driving the character in the ideal direction, or on the amount of ideal excitement transiently acquired. Given a certain amount of love, indignation, generosity, magnanimity, admiration, loyalty, or enthusiasm of self-surrender, the result is always the same. That whole raft of cowardly obstructions, which in tame persons and dull moods are sovereign impediments to action, sinks away at once. Our conventionality, [*1] our shyness, laziness, and stinginess, our demands for precedent and permission, for guarantee and surety, our small suspicions, timidities, despairs, where are they now? Severed like cobwebs, broken like bubbles in the sun--

"Wo sind die Sorge nun und Noth
  Die mich noch gestern wollt' erschlaffen?
  Ich scham' mich dess' im Morgenroth."

[paragraph continues] The flood we are borne on rolls them so lightly under that their very contact is unfelt. Set free of them, we float and soar and sing. This auroral openness and uplift gives to all creative ideal levels a bright and caroling quality, which is nowhere more marked than where the controlling emotion is religious. "The true monk," writes an Italian mystic, "takes nothing with him but his lyre."

 

We may now turn from these psychological generalities to those fruits of the religious state which form the special subject of our present lecture. The man who lives in his religious centre of personal energy, and is actuated by spiritual enthusiasms, differs from his previous carnal self in perfectly definite ways. The new ardor which burns in his breast

[p. 262]

consumes in its glow the lower "noes" which formerly beset him, and keeps him immune against infection from the entire groveling portion of his nature. Magnanimities once impossible are now easy; paltry conventionalities and mean incentives once tyrannical hold no sway. The stone wall inside of him has fallen, the hardness in his heart has broken down. The rest of us can, I think, imagine this by recalling our state of feeling in those temporary "melting moods" into which either the trials of real life, or the theatre, or a novel sometimes throws us. Especially if we weep! For it is then as if our tears broke through an inveterate inner dam, and let all sorts of ancient peccancies and moral stagnancies drain away, leaving us now washed and soft of heart and open to every nobler leading. With most of us the customary hardness quickly returns, but not so with saintly persons. Many saints, even as energetic ones as Teresa and Loyola, have possessed what the church traditionally reveres as a special grace, the so-called gift of tears. In these persons the melting mood seems to have held almost uninterrupted control. And as it is with tears and melting moods, so it is with other exalted affections. Their reign may come by gradual growth or by a crisis; but in either case it may have "come to stay."

At the end of the last lecture we saw this permanence to be true of the general paramountcy of the higher insight, even though in the ebbs of emotional excitement meaner motives might temporarily prevail and backsliding might occur. But that lower temptations may remain completely annulled, apart from transient emotion and as if by alteration of the man's habitual nature, is also proved by documentary evidence in certain cases. Before embarking on the general natural history of the regenerate character, let me convince you of this curious fact by one or two examples. The most numerous are those of reformed drunkards. You recollect the case of Mr. Hadley in the last lecture; the Jerry

[p. 263]

[paragraph continues] McAuley Water Street Mission abounds in similar instances. [*1] You also remember the graduate of Oxford, converted at three in the afternoon, and getting drunk in the hay-field the next day, but after that permanently cured of his appetite. "From that hour drink has had no terrors for me: I never touch it, never want it. The same thing occurred with my pipe. . . . the desire for it went at once and has never returned. So with every known sin, the deliverance in each case being permanent and complete. I have had no temptations since conversion."

Here is an analogous case from Starbuck's manuscript collection:--

"I went into the old Adelphi Theatre, where there was a Holiness meeting, . . . and I began saying, 'Lord, Lord, I must have this blessing.' Then what was to me an audible voice said: 'Are you willing to give up everything to the Lord?' and question after question kept coming up, to all of which I said: 'Yes, Lord; yes, Lord!' until this came: 'Why do you not accept it now?' and I said: 'I do, Lord.'--I felt no particular joy, only a trust. Just then the meeting closed, and, as I went out on the street, I met a gentleman smoking a fine cigar, and a cloud of smoke came into my face, and I took a long, deep breath of it, and praise the Lord, all my appetite for it was gone. Then as I walked along the street, passing saloons where the fumes of liquor came out, I found that all my taste and longing for that accursed stuff was gone. Glory to God! . . . [But] for ten or eleven long years [after that] I was in the wilderness with its ups and downs. My appetite for liquor never came back."

The classic case of Colonel Gardiner is that of a man cured of sexual temptation in a single hour. To Mr. Spears the colonel said, "I was effectually cured of all inclination to that sin I was so strongly addicted to that I thought nothing

[p. 264]

but shooting me through the head could have cured me of it; and all desire and inclination to it was removed, as entirely as if I had been a sucking child; nor did the temptation return to this day." Mr. Webster's words on the same subject are these: "One thing I have heard the colonel frequently say, that he was much addicted to impurity before his acquaintance with religion; but that, so soon as he was enlightened from above, he felt the power of the Holy Ghost changing his nature so wonderfully that his sanctification in this respect seemed more remarkable than in any other." [*1]

Such rapid abolition of ancient impulses and propensities reminds us so strongly of what has been observed as the result of hypnotic suggestion that it is difficult not to believe that subliminal influences play the decisive part in these abrupt changes of heart, just as they do in hypnotism. [*2] Suggestive therapeutics abound in records of cure, after a few sittings, of inveterate bad habits with which the patient, left to ordinary moral and physical influences, had struggled in

[p. 265]

vain. Both drunkenness and sexual vice have been cured in this way, action through the subliminal seeming thus in many individuals to have the prerogative of inducing relatively stable change. If the grace of God miraculously operates, it probably operates through the subliminal door, then. But just how anything operates in this region is still unexplained, and we shall do well now to say good-by to the process of transformation altogether--leaving it, if you like, a good deal of a psychological or theological mystery--and to turn our attention to the fruits of the religious condition, no matter in what way they may have been produced. [*1]

[p. 266]

The collective name for the ripe fruits of religion in a character is Saintliness. [*1] The saintly character is the character for which spiritual emotions are the habitual centre of the personal energy; and there is a certain composite photograph of universal saintliness, the same in all religions, of which the features can easily be traced. [*2]

They are these:--

1. A feeling of being in a wider life than that of this world's selfish little interests; and a conviction, not merely intellectual, but as it were sensible, of the existence of an Ideal Power. In Christian saintliness this power is always

[p. 267]

personified as God; but abstract moral ideals, civic or patriotic utopias, or inner versions of holiness or right may also be felt as the true lords and enlargers of our life, in ways which I described in the lecture on the Reality of the Unseen. [*1]

2. A sense of the friendly continuity of the ideal power with our own life, and a willing self-surrender to its control.

3. An immense elation and freedom, as the outlines of the confining selfhood melt down.

4. A shifting of the emotional centre towards loving and harmonious affections, towards "yes, yes," and away from "no," where the claims of the non-ego are concerned. These fundamental inner conditions have characteristic practical consequences, as follows:--

[p. 268]

a. Asceticism.--The self-surrender may become so passionate as to turn into self-immolation. It may then so over-rule the ordinary inhibitions of the flesh that the saint finds positive pleasure in sacrifice and asceticism, measuring and expressing as they do the degree of his loyalty to the higher power.

b. Strength of Soul.--The sense of enlargement of life may be so uplifting that personal motives and inhibitions, commonly omnipotent, become too insignificant for notice, and new reaches of patience and fortitude open out. Fears and anxieties go, and blissful equanimity takes their place. Come heaven, come hell, it makes no difference now!

"We forbid ourselves all seeking after popularity, all ambition to appear important. We pledge ourselves to abstain from falsehood, in all its degrees. We promise not to create or encourage illusions as to what is possible, by what we say or write. We promise to one another active sincerity, which strives to see truth clearly, and which never fears to declare what it sees.

"We promise deliberate resistance to the tidal waves of fashion, to the 'booms' and panics of the public mind, to all the forms of weakness and of fear.

"We forbid ourselves the use of sarcasm. Of serious things we will speak seriously and unsmilingly, without banter and without the appearance of banter;--and even so of all things, for there are serious ways of being light of heart.

"We will put ourselves forward always for what we are, simply and without false humility, as well as without pedantry, affectation, or pride."

c. Purity.--The shifting of the emotional centre brings with it, first, increase of purity. The sensitiveness to spiritual discords is enhanced, and the cleansing of existence from brutal and sensual elements becomes imperative. Occasions of contact with such elements are avoided: the saintly life

[p. 269]

must deepen its spiritual consistency and keep unspotted from the world. In some temperaments this need of purity of spirit takes an ascetic turn, and weaknesses of the flesh are treated with relentless severity.

d. Charity.--The shifting of the emotional centre brings, secondly, increase of charity, tenderness for fellow-creatures. The ordinary motives to antipathy, which usually set such close bounds to tenderness among human beings, are inhibited. The saint loves his enemies, and treats loathsome beggars as his brothers.

 

I now have to give some concrete illustrations of these fruits of the spiritual tree. The only difficulty is to choose, for they are so abundant.

Since the sense of Presence of a higher and friendly power seems to be the fundamental feature in the spiritual life, I will begin with that.

In our narratives of conversion we saw how the world might look shining and transfigured to the convert, [*1] and, apart from anything acutely religious, we all have moments when the universal life seems to wrap us round with friendliness. In youth and health, in summer, in the woods or on the mountains, there come days when the weather seems all whispering with peace, hours when the goodness and beauty of existence enfold us like a dry warm climate, or chime through us as if our inner ears were subtly ringing with the world's security. Thoreau writes:--

"Once, a few weeks after I came to the woods, for an hour I doubted whether the near neighborhood of man was not essential to a serene and healthy life. To be alone was somewhat unpleasant. But, in the midst of a gentle rain, while these thoughts prevailed, I was suddenly sensible of such sweet and beneficent society in Nature, in the very pattering of the drops, and in

[p. 270]

every sight and sound around my house, an infinite and unaccountable friendliness all at once, like an atmosphere, sustaining me, as made the fancied advantages of human neighborhood insignificant, and I have never thought of them since. Every little pine-needle expanded and swelled with sympathy and befriended me. I was so distinctly made aware of the presence of something kindred to me, that I thought no place could ever be strange to me again." [*1]

In the Christian consciousness this sense of the enveloping friendliness becomes most personal and definite. "The compensation," writes a German author,--"for the loss of that sense of personal independence which man so unwillingly gives up, is the disappearance of all fear from one's life, the quite indescribable and inexplicable feeling of an inner security, which one can only experience, but which, once it has been experienced, one can never forget." [*2]

I find an excellent description of this state of mind in a sermon by Mr. Voysey:--

"It is the experience of myriads of trustful souls, that this sense of God's unfailing presence with them in their going out and in their coming in, and by night and day, is a source of absolute repose and confident calmness. It drives away all fear of what may befall them. That nearness of God is a constant security against terror and anxiety. It is not that they are at all assured of physical safety, or deem themselves protected by a love which is denied to others, but that they are in a state of mind equally ready to be safe or to meet with injury. If injury befall them, they will be content to bear it because the Lord is their keeper, and nothing can befall them without his will. If it be his will, then injury is for them a blessing and no calamity at all. Thus and thus only is the trustful man protected and shielded from harm. And I for one--by no means a thick-skinned or

[p. 271]

hard-nerved man-am absolutely satisfied with this arrangement, and do not wish for any other kind of immunity from danger and catastrophe. Quite as sensitive to pain as the most highly strung organism, I yet feel that the worst of it is conquered, and the sting taken out of it altogether, by the thought that God is our loving and sleepless keeper, and that nothing can hurt us without his will." [*1]

More excited expressions of this condition are abundant in religious literature. I could easily weary you with their monotony. Here is an account from Mrs. Jonathan Edwards:--

"Last night," Mrs. Edwards writes, "was the sweetest night I ever had in my life. I never before, for so long a time together, enjoyed so much of the light and rest and sweetness of heaven in my soul, but without the least agitation of body during the whole time. Part of the night I lay awake, sometimes asleep, and sometimes between sleeping and waking. But all night I continued in a constant, clear, and lively sense of the heavenly sweetness of Christ's excellent love, of his nearness to me, and of my dearness to him; with an inexpressibly sweet calmness of soul in an entire rest in him. I seemed to myself to perceive a glow of divine love come down from the heart of Christ in heaven into my heart in a constant stream, like a stream or pencil of sweet light. At the same time my heart and soul all flowed out in love to Christ, so that there seemed to be a constant flowing and reflowing of heavenly love, and I appeared to myself to float or swim, in these bright, sweet beams, like the motes swimming in the beams of the sun, or the streams of his light which come in at the window. I think that what I felt each minute was worth more than all the outward comfort and pleasure which I had enjoyed in my whole life put together. It was pleasure, without the least sting, or any interruption. It was a sweetness, which my soul was lost in; it seemed to be all that my feeble frame could sustain. There was but little difference, whether I was asleep or awake, but if there was any difference,

[p. 272]

the sweetness was greatest while I was asleep. [*1] As I awoke early the next morning, it seemed to me that I had entirely done with myself. I felt that the opinions of the world concerning me were nothing, and that I had no more to do with any outward interest of my own than with that of a person whom I never saw. The glory of God seemed to swallow up every wish and desire of my heart. . . . After retiring to rest and sleeping a little while, I awoke, and was led to reflect on God's mercy to me, in giving me, for many years, a willingness to die; and after that, in making me willing to live, that I might do and suffer whatever he called me to here. I also thought how God had graciously given me an entire resignation to his will, with respect to the kind and manner of death that I should die; having been made willing to die on the rack, or at the stake, and if it were God's will, to die in darkness. But now it occurred to me, I used to think of living no longer than to the ordinary age of man. Upon this I was led to ask myself, whether I was not willing to be kept out of heaven even longer; and my whole heart seemed immediately to reply: Yes, a thousand years, and a thousand in horror, if it be most for the honor of God, the torment of my body being so great, awful, and overwhelming that none could bear to live in the country where the spectacle was seen, and the torment of my mind being vastly greater. And it seemed to me that I found a perfect willingness, quietness, and alacrity of soul in consenting that it should be so, if it were most for the glory of God, so that there was no hesitation, doubt, or darkness in my mind. The glory of God seemed to overcome me and

[p. 273]

swallow me up, and every conceivable suffering, and everything that was terrible to my nature, seemed to shrink to nothing before it. This resignation continued in its clearness and brightness the rest of the night, and all the next day, and the night following, and on Monday in the forenoon, without interruption or abatement." [*1]

The annals of Catholic saintship abound in records as ecstatic or more ecstatic than this. "Often the assaults of the divine love," it is said of the Sister Seraphique de la Martiniere, "reduced her almost to the point of death. She used tenderly to complain of this to God. 'I cannot support it,' she used to say. 'Bear gently with my weakness, or I shall expire under the violence of your love.'" [*2]

Let me pass next to the Charity and Brotherly Love which are a usual fruit of saintliness, and have always been reckoned essential theological virtues, however limited may have been the kinds of service which the particular theology enjoined. Brotherly love would follow logically from the assurance of God's friendly presence, the notion of our brotherhood as men being an immediate inference from that of God's fatherhood of us all. When Christ utters the precepts: "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you," he gives for a reason: "That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." One might therefore be tempted to explain both the humility as to one's self and the charity towards others which characterize spiritual excitement, as results of the all-leveling character of theistic belief. But these affections are certainly not

[p. 274]

mere derivatives of theism. We find them in Stoicism, in Hinduism, and in Buddhism in the highest possible degree. They harmonize with paternal theism beautifully; but they harmonize with all reflection whatever upon the dependence of mankind on general causes; and we must, I think, consider them not subordinate but coordinate parts of that great complex excitement in the study of which we are engaged. Religious rapture, moral enthusiasm, ontological wonder, cosmic emotion, are all unifying states of mind, in which the sand and grit of the selfhood incline to disappear, and tenderness to rule. The best thing is to describe the condition integrally as a characteristic affection to which our nature is liable, a region in which we find ourselves at home, a sea in which we swim; but not to pretend to explain its parts by deriving them too cleverly from one another. Like love or fear, the faith-state is a natural psychic complex, and carries charity with it by organic consequence. Jubilation is an expansive affection, and all expansive affections are self-forgetful and kindly so long as they endure.

We find this the case even when they are pathological in origin. In his instructive work, la Tristesse et la Joie, [*1] M. Georges Dumas compares together the melancholy and the joyous phase of circular insanity, and shows that, while selfishness characterizes the one, the other is marked by altruistic impulses. No human being so stingy and useless as was Marie in her melancholy period! But the moment the happy period begins, "sympathy and kindness become her characteristic sentiments. She displays a universal goodwill, not only of intention, but in act. . . . She becomes solicitous of the health of other patients, interested in getting them out, desirous to procure wool to knit socks for some of them. Never since she has been under my observation have I heard her in

[p. 275]

her joyous period utter any but charitable opinions." [*1] And later, Dr. Dumas says of all such joyous conditions that "unselfish sentiments and tender emotions are the only affective states to be found in them. The subject's mind is closed against envy, hatred, and vindictiveness, and wholly transformed into benevolence, indulgence, and mercy." [*2]

There is thus an organic affinity between joyousness and tenderness, and their companionship in the saintly life need in no way occasion surprise. Along with the happiness, this increase of tenderness is often noted in narratives of conversion. "I began to work for others";--"I had more tender feeling for my family and friends";--"I spoke at once to a person with whom I had been angry";--"I felt for every one, and loved my friends better";--"I felt every one to be my friend";--these are so many expressions from the records collected by Professor Starbuck. [*3]

"When," says Mrs. Edwards, continuing the narrative from which I made quotation a moment ago, "I arose on the morning of the Sabbath, I felt a love to all mankind, wholly peculiar in its strength and sweetness, far beyond all that I had ever felt before. The power of that love seemed inexpressible. I thought, if I were surrounded by enemies, who were venting their malice and cruelty upon me, in tormenting me, it would still be impossible that I should cherish any feelings towards them but those of love, and pity, and ardent desires for their happiness. I never before felt so far from a disposition to judge and censure others, as I did that morning. I realized also, in an unusual and very lively manner, how great a part of Christianity lies in the performance of our social and relative duties to one another. The same joyful sense continued throughout the day--a sweet love to God and all mankind."

[p. 276]

Whatever be the explanation of the charity, it may efface all usual human barriers. [*1]

Here, for instance, is an example of Christian non-resistance from Richard Weaver's autobiography. Weaver was a collier, a semi-professional pugilist in his younger days, who became a much beloved evangelist. Fighting, after drinking, seems to have been the sin to which he originally felt his flesh most perversely inclined. After his first conversion he had a backsliding, which consisted in pounding a man who had insulted a girl. Feeling that, having once fallen, he might as well be hanged for a sheep as for a lamb, he got drunk and went and broke the jaw of another man who had lately challenged him to fight and taunted him with cowardice for refusing as a Christian man;--I mention these incidents to show how genuine a change of heart is implied in the later conduct which he describes as follows:--

"I went down the drift and found the boy crying because a

[p. 277]

fellow-workman was trying to take the wagon from him by force. I said to him:--

"'Tom, you mustn't take that wagon.'

"He swore at me, and called me a Methodist devil. I told him that God did not tell me to let him rob me. He cursed again, and said he would push the wagon over me.

"'Well,' I said, 'let us see whether the devil and thee are stronger than the Lord and me.'

"And the Lord and I proving stronger than the devil and he, he had to get out of the way, or the wagon would have gone over him.

So I gave the wagon to the boy. Then said Tom:--

"'I've a good mind to smack thee on the face.'

"'Well,' I said, 'if that will do thee any good, thou canst do it.' So he struck me on the face.

"I turned the other cheek to him, and said, 'Strike again.'

"He struck again and again, till he had struck me five times. I turned my cheek for the sixth stroke; but he turned away cursing.

I shouted after him: 'The Lord forgive thee, for I do, and the Lord save thee.'

"This was on a Saturday; and when I went home from the coal-pit my wife saw my face was swollen, and asked what was the matter with it. I said: 'I've been fighting, and I've given a man a good thrashing.'

"She burst out weeping, and said, 'O Richard, what made you fight?' Then I told her all about it; and she thanked the Lord I had not struck back.

"But the Lord had struck, and his blows have more effect than man's. Monday came. The devil began to tempt me, saying: 'The other men will laugh at thee for allowing Tom to treat thee as he did on Saturday.' I cried, 'Get thee behind me, Satan;'--and went on my way to the coal-pit.

"Tom was the first man I saw. I said 'Good-morning,' but got no reply.

"He went down first. When I got down, I was surprised to see him sitting on the wagon-road waiting for me. When I came to him he burst into tears and said: 'Richard, will you forgive me for striking you?'

"'I have forgiven thee,' said I; 'ask God to forgive thee.

[p. 278]

[paragraph continues] The Lord bless thee.' I gave him my hand, and we went each to his work." [*1]

"Love your enemies!" Mark you, not simply those who happen not to be your friends, but your enemies, your positive and active enemies. Either this is a mere Oriental hyperbole, a bit of verbal extravagance, meaning only that we should, as far as we can, abate our animosities, or else it is sincere and literal. Outside of certain cases of intimate individual relation, it seldom has been taken literally. Yet it makes one ask the question: Can there in general be a level of emotion so unifying, so obliterative of differences between man and man, that even enmity may come to be an irrelevant circumstance and fail to inhibit the friendlier interests aroused? If positive well-wishing could attain so supreme a degree of excitement, those who were swayed by it might well seem superhuman beings. Their life would be morally discrete from the life of other men, and there is no saying, in the absence of positive experience of an authentic kind--for there are few active examples in our scriptures, and the Buddhistic examples are legendary, [*2]--what the effects might be: they might conceivably transform the world.

Psychologically and in principle, the precept "Love your enemies" is not self-contradictory. It is merely the extreme limit of a kind of magnanimity with which, in the shape of pitying tolerance of our oppressors, we are fairly familiar. Yet if radically followed, it would involve such a breach with our instinctive springs of action as a whole, and with the present world's arrangements, that a critical point would practically be passed, and we should be born into another

[p. 279]

kingdom of being. Religious emotion makes us feel that other kingdom to be close at hand, within our reach.

The inhibition of instinctive repugnance is proved not only by the showing of love to enemies, but by the showing of it to any one who is personally loathsome. In the annals of saintliness we find a curious mixture of motives impelling in this direction. Asceticism plays its part; and along with charity pure and simple, we find humility or the desire to disclaim distinction and to grovel on the common level before God. Certainly all three principles were at work when Francis of Assisi and Ignatius Loyola exchanged their garments with those of filthy beggars. All three are at work when religious persons consecrate their lives to the care of leprosy or other peculiarly unpleasant diseases. The nursing of the sick is a function to which the religious seem strongly drawn, even apart from the fact that church traditions set that way. But in the annals of this sort of charity we find fantastic excesses of devotion recorded which are only explicable by the frenzy of self-immolation simultaneously aroused. Francis of Assisi kisses his lepers; Margaret Mary Alacoque, Francis Xavier, St. John of God, and others are said to have cleansed the sores and ulcers of their patients with their respective tongues; and the lives of such saints as Elizabeth of Hungary and Madame de Chantal are full of a sort of reveling in hospital purulence, disagreeable to read of, and which makes us admire and shudder at the same time.

So much for the human love aroused by the faith-state. Let me next speak of the Equanimity, Resignation, Fortitude, and Patience which it brings.

"A paradise of inward tranquillity" seems to be faith's usual result; and it is easy, even without being religious one's self, to understand this. A moment back, in treating of the sense of God's presence, I spoke of the unaccountable

[p. 280]

feeling of safety which one may then have. And, indeed, how can it possibly fail to steady the nerves, to cool the fever, and appease the fret, if one be sensibly conscious that, no matter what one's difficulties for the moment may appear to be, one's life as a whole is in the keeping of a power whom one can absolutely trust? In deeply religious men the abandonment of self to this power is passionate. Whoever not only says, but feels, "God's will be done," is mailed against every weakness; and the whole historic array of martyrs, missionaries, and religious reformers is there to prove the tranquil-mindedness, under naturally agitating or distressing circumstances, which self-surrender brings.

The temper of the tranquil-mindedness differs, of course, according as the person is of a constitutionally sombre or of a constitutionally cheerful cast of mind. In the sombre it partakes more of resignation and submission; in the cheerful it is a joyous consent. As an example of the former temper, I quote part of a letter from Professor Lagneau, a venerated teacher of philosophy who lately died, a great invalid, at Paris:--

"My life, for the success of which you send good wishes, will be what it is able to be. I ask nothing from it, I expect nothing from it. For long years now I exist, think, and act, and am worth what I am worth, only through the despair which is my sole strength and my sole foundation. May it preserve for me, even in these last trials to which I am coming, the courage to do without the desire of deliverance. I ask nothing more from the Source whence all strength cometh, and if that is granted, your wishes will have been accomplished." [*1]

There is something pathetic and fatalistic about this, but the power of such a tone as a protection against outward shocks is manifest. Pascal is another Frenchman of pessimistic

[p. 281]

natural temperament. He expresses still more amply the temper of self-surrendering submissiveness:--

"Deliver me, Lord," he writes in his prayers, "from the sadness at my proper suffering which self-love might give, but put into me a sadness like your own. Let my sufferings appease your choler. Make them an occasion for my conversion and salvation. I ask you neither for health nor for sickness, for life nor for death; but that you may dispose of my health and my sickness, my life and my death, for your glory, for my salvation, and for the use of the Church and of your saints, of whom I would by your grace be one. You alone know what is expedient for me; you are the sovereign master; do with me according to your will. Give to me, or take away from me, only conform my will to yours. I know but one thing, Lord, that it is good to follow you, and bad to offend you. Apart from that, I know not what is good or bad in anything. I know not which is most profitable to me, health or sickness, wealth or poverty, nor anything else in the world. That discernment is beyond the power of men or angels, and is hidden among the secrets of your Providence, which I adore, but do not seek to fathom." [*1]

When we reach more optimistic temperaments, the resignation grows less passive. Examples are sown so broadcast throughout history that I might well pass on without citation. As it is, I snatch at the first that occurs to my mind. Madame Guyon, a frail creature physically, was yet of a happy native disposition. She went through many perils with admirable serenity of soul. After being sent to prison for heresy--

"Some of my friends," she writes, "wept bitterly at the hearing of it, but such was my state of acquiescence and resignation that it failed to draw any tears from me. . . . There appeared to be in me then, as I find it to be in me now, such an entire loss of what regards myself, that any of my own interests gave

[p. 282]

me little pain or pleasure; ever wanting to will or wish for myself only the very thing which God does." In another place she writes: "We all of us came near perishing in a river which we found it necessary to pass. The carriage sank in the quicksand. Others who were with us threw themselves out in excessive fright. But I found my thoughts so much taken up with God that I had no distinct sense of danger. It is true that the thought of being drowned passed across my mind, but it cost no other sensation or reflection in me than this--that I felt quite contented and willing it were so, if it were my heavenly Father's choice." Sailing from Nice to Genoa, a storm keeps her eleven days at sea. "As the irritated waves dashed round us," she writes, "I could not help experiencing a certain degree of satisfaction in my mind. I pleased myself with thinking that those mutinous billows, under the command of Him who does all things rightly, might probably furnish me with a watery grave. Perhaps I carried the point too far, in the pleasure which I took in thus seeing myself beaten and bandied by the swelling waters. Those who were with me took notice of my intrepidity." [*1]

The contempt of danger which religious enthusiasm produces may be even more buoyant still. I take an example from that charming recent autobiography, "With Christ at Sea," by Frank Bullen. A couple of days after he went through the conversion on shipboard of which he there gives an account--

"It was blowing stiffly," he writes, "and we were carrying a press of canvas to get north out of the bad weather. Shortly after four bells we hauled down the flying-jib, and I sprang out astride the boom to furl it. I was sitting astride the boom when suddenly it gave way with me. The sail slipped through my fingers, and I fell backwards, hanging head downwards over the seething tumult of shining foam under the ship's bows, suspended by one foot. But I felt only high exultation in my certainty

[p. 283]

of eternal life. Although death was divided from me by a hair's breadth, and I was acutely conscious of the fact, it gave me no sensation but joy. I suppose I could have hung there no longer than five seconds, but in that time I lived a whole age of delight. But my body asserted itself, and with a desperate gymnastic effort I regained the boom. How I furled the sail I don't know, but I sang at the utmost pitch of my voice praises to God that went pealing out over the dark waste of waters." [*1]

The annals of martyrdom are of course the signal field of triumph for religious imperturbability. Let me cite as an example the statement of a humble sufferer, persecuted as a Huguenot under Louis XIV:--

"They shut all the doors," Blanche Gamond writes, "and I saw six women, each with a bunch of willow rods as thick as the hand could hold, and a yard long. He gave me the order, 'Undress yourself,' which I did. He said, 'You are leaving on your shift; you must take it off.' They had so little patience that they took it off themselves, and I was naked from the waist up. They brought a cord with which they tied me to a beam in the kitchen. They drew the cord tight with all their strength and asked me, 'Does it hurt you?' and then they discharged their fury upon me, exclaiming as they struck me, 'Pray now to your God.' It was the Roulette woman who held this language. But at this moment I received the greatest consolation that I can ever receive in my life, since I had the honor of being whipped for the name of Christ, and in addition of being crowned with his mercy and his consolations. Why can I not write down the inconceivable influences, consolations, and peace which I felt interiorly? To understand them one must have passed by the same trial; they were so great that I was ravished, for there where afflictions abound grace is given superabundantly. In vain the women cried, 'We must double our blows; she does not feel them, for she neither speaks nor cries.' And how should I have cried, since I was swooning with happiness within?" [*2]

[p. 284]

The transition from tenseness, self-responsibility, and worry, to equanimity, receptivity, and peace, is the most wonderful of all those shiftings of inner equilibrium, those changes of the personal centre of energy, which I have analyzed so often; and the chief wonder of it is that it so often comes about, not by doing, but by simply relaxing and throwing the burden down. This abandonment of self-responsibility seems to be the fundamental act in specifically religious, as distinguished from moral practice. It antedates theologies and is independent of philosophies. Mind-cure, theosophy, stoicism, ordinary neurological hygiene, insist on it as emphatically as Christianity does, and it is capable of entering into closest marriage with every speculative creed. [*1] Christians who have it strongly live in what is called "recollection," and are never anxious about the future, nor worry over the outcome of the day. Of Saint Catharine of Genoa it is said that "she took cognizance of things, only as they were presented to her in succession, moment by moment." To her holy soul, "the divine moment was the present moment, . . . and when the present moment was estimated in itself and in its relations, and when the duty that was involved in it was accomplished, it was permitted to pass away as if it had never been, and to give way to the facts and duties of the moment which came after." [*2] Hinduism, mind-cure, and theosophy all lay great emphasis upon this concentration of the consciousness upon the moment at hand.

[p. 285]

The next religious symptom which I will note is what have called Purity of Life. The saintly person becomes exceedingly sensitive to inner inconsistency or discord, and mixture and confusion grow intolerable. All the mind's objects and occupations must be ordered with reference to the special spiritual excitement which is now its keynote. Whatever is unspiritual taints the pure water of the soul and is repugnant. Mixed with this exaltation of the moral sensibilities there is also an ardor of sacrifice, for the beloved deity's sake, of everything unworthy of him. Sometimes the spiritual ardor is so sovereign that purity is achieved at a stroke--we have seen examples. Usually it is a more gradual conquest. Billy Bray's account of his abandonment of tobacco is a good example of the latter form of achievement.

"I had been a smoker as well as a drunkard, and I used to love my tobacco as much as I loved my meat, and I would rather go down into the mine without my dinner than without my pipe. In the days of old, the Lord spoke by the mouths of his servants, the prophets; now he speaks to us by the spirit of his Son. I had not only the feeling part of religion, but I could hear the small, still voice within speaking to me. When I took the pipe to smoke, it would be applied within, 'It is an idol, a lust; worship the Lord with clean lips.' So, I felt it was not right to smoke. The Lord also sent a woman to convince me. I was one day in a house, and I took out my pipe to light it at the fire, and Mary Hawke--for that was the woman's name--said, 'Do you not feel it is wrong to smoke?' I said that I felt something inside telling me that it was an idol, a lust, and she said that was the Lord. Then I said, 'Now, I must give it up, for the Lord is telling me of it inside, and the woman outside, so the tobacco must go, love it as I may.' There and then I took the tobacco out of my pocket, and threw it into the fire, and put the pipe under my foot, 'ashes to ashes, dust to dust.' And I have not smoked since. I found it hard to break off old habits, but I cried to the Lord for help, and he gave me strength, for he has said,

[p. 286]

[paragraph continues] 'Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee.' The day after I gave up smoking I had the toothache so bad that I did not know what to do. I thought this was owing to giving up the pipe, but I said I would never smoke again, if I lost every tooth in my head. I said, 'Lord, thou hast told us My yoke is easy and my burden is light,' and when I said that, all the pain left me. Sometimes the thought of the pipe would come back to me very strong; but the Lord strengthened me against the habit, and, bless his name, I have not smoked since."

Bray's biographer writes that after he had given up smoking, he thought that he would chew a little, but he conquered this dirty habit, too. "On one occasion," Bray said, "when at a prayer-meeting at Hicks Mill, I heard the Lord say to me, 'Worship me with clean lips.' So, when we got up from our knees, I took the quid out of my mouth and 'whipped 'en' [threw it] under the form. But, when we got on our knees again, I put another quid into my mouth. Then the Lord said to me again, 'Worship me with clean lips.' So I took the quid out of my mouth, and whipped 'en under the form again, and said, 'Yes, Lord, I will.' From that time I gave up chewing as well as smoking, and have been a free man."

The ascetic forms which the impulse for veracity and purity of life may take are often pathetic enough. The early Quakers, for example, had hard battles to wage against the worldliness and insincerity of the ecclesiastical Christianity of their time. Yet the battle that cost them most wounds was probably that which they fought in defense of their own right to social veracity and sincerity in their thee-ing and thou-ing, in not doffing the hat or giving titles of respect. It was laid on George Fox that these conventional customs were a lie and a sham, and the whole body of his followers thereupon renounced them, as a sacrifice to truth, and so that their acts and the spirit they professed might be more in accord.

"When the Lord sent me into the world," says Fox in his Journal, "he forbade me to put off my hat to any, high or low: 

[p. 287]

and I was required to 'thee' and 'thou' all men and women, without any respect to rich or poor, great or small. And as I traveled up and down, I was not to bid people Good-morning or Good-evening, neither might I bow or scrape with my leg to any one. This made the sects and professions rage. Oh! the rage that was in the priests, magistrates, professors, and people of all sorts: and especially in priests and professors: for though 'thou' to a single person was according to their accidence and grammar rules, and according to the Bible, yet they could not bear to hear it: and because I could not put off my hat to them, it set them all into a rage. . . . Oh! the scorn, heat, and fury that arose! Oh! the blows, punchings, beatings, and imprisonments that we underwent for not putting off our hats to men! Some had their hats violently plucked off and thrown away, so that they quite lost them. The bad language and evil usage we received on this account is hard to be expressed, besides the danger we were sometimes in of losing our lives for this matter, and that by the great professors of Christianity, who thereby discovered they were not true believers. And though it was but a small thing in the eye of man, yet a wonderful confusion it brought among all professors and priests: but, blessed be the Lord, many came to see the vanity of that custom of putting off hats to men, and felt the weight of Truth's testimony against it."

In the autobiography of Thomas Elwood, an early Quaker, who at one time was secretary to John Milton, we find an exquisitely quaint and candid account of the trials he underwent both at home and abroad, in following Fox's canons of sincerity. The anecdotes are too lengthy for citation; but Elwood sets down his manner of feeling about these things in a shorter passage, which I will quote as a characteristic utterance of spiritual sensibility:--

"By this divine light, then," says Elwood, "I saw that though I had not the evil of the common uncleanliness, debauchery, profaneness, and pollutions of the world to put away, because I had, through the great goodness of God and a civil education, been preserved out of those grosser evils, yet I had many other

[p. 288]

evils to put away and to cease from; some of which were not by the world, which lies in wickedness (I John v. 19), accounted evils, but by the light of Christ were made manifest to me to be evils, and as such condemned in me.

"As particularly those fruits and effects of pride that discover themselves in the vanity and superfluity of apparel; which I took too much delight in. This evil of my doings I was required to put away and cease from; and judgment lay upon me till I did so.

"I took off from my apparel those unnecessary trimmings of lace, ribbons, and useless buttons, which had no real service, but were set on only for that which was by mistake called ornament; and I ceased to wear rings.

"Again, the giving of flattering titles to men between whom and me there was not any relation to which such titles could be pretended to belong. This was an evil I had been much addicted to, and was accounted a ready artist in; therefore this evil also was I required to put away and cease from. So that thenceforward I durst not say, Sir, Master, My Lord, Madam (or My Dame); or say Your Servant to any one to whom I did not stand in the real relation of a servant, which I had never done to any.

"Again, respect of persons, in uncovering the head and bowing the knee or body in salutation, was a practice I had been much in the use of; and this, being one of the vain customs of the world, introduced by the spirit of the world, instead of the true honor which this is a false representation of, and used in deceit as a token of respect by persons one to another, who bear no real respect one to another; and besides this, being a type and a proper emblem of that divine honor which all ought to pay to Almighty God, and which all of all sorts, who take upon them the Christian name, appear in when they offer their prayers to him, and therefore should not be given to men;--I found this to be one of those evils which I had been too long doing; therefore I was now required to put it away and cease from it.

"Again, the corrupt and unsound form of speaking in the plural number to a single person, you to one, instead of thou, contrary to the pure, plain, and single language of truth, thou 

[p. 289]

to one, and you to more than one, which had always been used by God to men, and men to God, as well as one to another, from the oldest record of time till corrupt men, for corrupt ends, in later and corrupt times, to flatter, fawn, and work upon the corrupt nature in men, brought in that false and senseless way of speaking you to one, which has since corrupted the modern languages, and hath greatly debased the spirits and depraved the manners of men;--this evil custom I had been as forward in as others, and this I was now called out of and required to cease from.

"These and many more evil customs which had sprung up in the night of darkness and general apostasy from the truth and true religion were now, by the inshining of this pure ray of divine light in my conscience, gradually discovered to me to be what I ought to cease from, shun, and stand a witness against." [*1]

These early Quakers were Puritans indeed. The slightest inconsistency between profession and deed jarred some of them to active protest. John Woolman writes in his diary:--

"In these journeys I have been where much cloth hath been dyed; and have at sundry times walked over ground where much of their dyestuffs has drained away. This hath produced a longing in my mind that people might come into cleanness of spirit, cleanness of person, and cleanness about their houses and garments. Dyes being invented partly to please the eye, and partly to hide dirt, I have felt in this weak state, when traveling in dirtiness, and affected with unwholesome scents, a strong desire that the nature of dyeing cloth to hide dirt may be more fully considered.

"Washing our garments to keep them sweet is cleanly, but it is the opposite to real cleanliness to hide dirt in them. Through giving way to hiding dirt in our garments a spirit which would conceal that which is disagreeable is strengthened. Real cleanliness becometh a holy people; but hiding that which is not clean by coloring our garments seems contrary to the sweetness of

[p. 290]

sincerity. Through some sorts of dyes cloth is rendered less useful. And if the value of dyestuffs, and expense of dyeing, and the damage done to cloth, were all added together, and that cost applied to keeping all sweet and clean, how much more would real cleanliness prevail.

"Thinking often on these things, the use of hats and garments dyed with a dye hurtful to them, and wearing more clothes in summer than are useful, grew more uneasy to me; believing them to be customs which have not their foundation in pure wisdom. The apprehension of being singular from my beloved friends was a strait upon me; and thus I continued in the use of some things, contrary to my judgment, about nine months. Then I thought of getting a hat the natural color of the fur, but the apprehension of being looked upon as one affecting singularity felt uneasy to me. On this account I was under close exercise of mind in the time of our general spring meeting in 1762, greatly desiring to be rightly directed; when, being deeply bowed in spirit before the Lord, I was made willing to submit to what I apprehended was required of me; and when I returned home, got a hat of the natural color of the fur.

"In attending meetings, this singularity was a trial to me, and more especially at this time, as white hats were used by some who were fond of following the changeable modes of dress, and as some friends, who knew not from what motives I wore it, grew shy of me, I felt my way for a time shut up in the exercise of the ministry. Some friends were apprehensive that my wearing such a hat savored of an affected singularity: those who spoke with me in a friendly way, I generally informed in a few words, that I believed my wearing it was not in my own will."

When the craving for moral consistency and purity is developed to this degree, the subject may well find the outer world too full of shocks to dwell in, and can unify his life and keep his soul unspotted only by withdrawing from it. That law which impels the artist to achieve harmony in his composition by simply dropping out whatever jars, or suggests a discord, rules also in the spiritual life. To omit, says Stevenson, is the one art in literature: "If I knew how to

[p. 291]

omit, I should ask no other knowledge." And life, when full of disorder and slackness and vague superfluity, can no more have what we call character than literature can have it under similar conditions. So monasteries and communities of sympathetic devotees open their doors, and in their changeless order, characterized by omissions quite as much as constituted of actions, the holy-minded person finds that inner smoothness and cleanness which it is torture to him to feel violated at every turn by the discordancy and brutality of secular existence.

 

That the scrupulosity of purity may be carried to a fantastic extreme must be admitted. In this it resembles Asceticism, to which further symptom of saintliness we had better turn next. The adjective "ascetic" is applied to conduct originating on diverse psychological levels, which I might as well begin by distinguishing from one another.

1. Asceticism may be a mere expression of organic hardihood, disgusted with too much ease.

2. Temperance in meat and drink, simplicity of apparel, chastity, and non-pampering of the body generally, may be fruits of the love of purity, shocked by whatever savors of the sensual.

3. They may also be fruits of love, that is, they may appeal to the subject in the light of sacrifices which he is happy in making to the Deity whom he acknowledges.

4. Again, ascetic mortifications and torments may be due to pessimistic feelings about the self, combined with theological beliefs concerning expiation. The devotee may feel that he is buying himself free, or escaping worse sufferings hereafter, by doing penance now.

5. In psychopathic persons, mortifications may be entered on irrationally, by a sort of obsession or fixed idea which comes as a challenge and must be worked off, because only

[p. 292]

thus does the subject get his interior consciousness feeling right again.

6. Finally, ascetic exercises may in rarer instances be prompted by genuine perversions of the bodily sensibility, in consequence of which normally pain-giving stimuli are actually felt as pleasures.

I will try to give an instance under each of these heads in turn; but it is not easy to get them pure, for in cases pronounced enough to be immediately classed as ascetic, several of the assigned motives usually work together. Moreover, before citing any examples at all, I must invite you to some general psychological considerations which apply to all of them alike.

A strange moral transformation has within the past century swept over our Western world. We no longer think that we are called on to face physical pain with equanimity. It is not expected of a man that he should either endure it or inflict much of it, and to listen to the recital of cases of it makes our flesh creep morally as well as physically. The way in which our ancestors looked upon pain as an eternal ingredient of the world's order, and both caused and suffered it as a matter-of-course portion of their day's work, fills us with amazement. We wonder that any human beings could have been so callous. The result of this historic alteration is that even in the Mother Church herself, where ascetic discipline has such a fixed traditional prestige as a factor of merit, it has largely come into desuetude, if not discredit. A believer who flagellates or "macerates" himself today arouses more wonder and fear than emulation. Many Catholic writers who admit that the times have changed in this respect do so resignedly; and even add that perhaps it is as well not to waste feelings in regretting the matter, for to return to the heroic corporeal discipline of ancient days might be an extravagance.

Where to seek the easy and the pleasant seems instinctive

[p. 293]

[paragraph continues] --and instinctive it appears to be in man; any deliberate tendency to pursue the hard and painful as such and for their own sakes might well strike one as purely abnormal. Nevertheless, in moderate degrees it is natural and even usual to human nature to court the arduous. It is only the extreme manifestations of the tendency that can be regarded as a paradox.

The psychological reasons for this lie near the surface. When we drop abstractions and take what we call our will in the act, we see that it is a very complex function. It involves both stimulations and inhibitions; it follows generalized habits; it is escorted by reflective criticisms; and it leaves a good or a bad taste of itself behind, according to the manner of the performance. The result is that, quite apart from the immediate pleasure which any sensible experience may give us, our own general moral attitude in procuring or undergoing the experience brings with it a secondary satisfaction or distaste. Some men and women, indeed, there are who can live on smiles and the word "yes" forever. But for others (indeed for most), this is too tepid and relaxed a moral climate. Passive happiness is slack and insipid, and soon grows mawkish and intolerable. Some austerity and wintry negativity, some roughness, danger, stringency, and effort, some "no! no!" must be mixed in, to produce the sense of an existence with character and texture and power. The range of individual differences in this respect is enormous; but whatever the mixture of yeses and noes may be, the person is infallibly aware when he has struck it in the right proportion for him. This, he feels, is my proper vocation, this is the optimum, the law, the life for me to live. Here I find the degree of equilibrium, safety, calm, and leisure which I need, or here I find the challenge, passion, fight, and hardship without which my soul's energy expires.

Every individual soul, in short, like every individual machine

[p. 294]

or organism, has its own best conditions of efficiency. A given machine will run best under a certain steam-pressure, a certain amperage; an organism under a certain diet, weight, or exercise. You seem to do best, I heard a doctor say to a patient, at about 140 millimeters of arterial tension. And it is just so with our sundry souls: some are happiest in calm weather; some need the sense of tension, of strong volition, to make them feel alive and well. For these latter souls, whatever is gained from day to day must be paid for by sacrifice and inhibition, or else it comes too cheap and has no zest.

Now when characters of this latter sort become religious, they are apt to turn the edge of their need of effort and negativity against their natural self; and the ascetic life gets evolved as a consequence.

When Professor Tyndall in one of his lectures tells us that Thomas Carlyle put him into his bath-tub every morning of a freezing Berlin winter, he proclaimed one of the lowest grades of asceticism. Even without Carlyle, most of us find it necessary to our soul's health to start the day with a rather cool immersion. A little farther along the scale we get such statements as this, from one of my correspondents, an agnostic:--

"Often at night in my warm bed I would feel ashamed to depend so on the warmth, and whenever the thought would come over me I would have to get up, no matter what time of night it was, and stand for a minute in the cold, just so as to prove my manhood."

Such cases as these belong simply to our head 1. In the next case we probably have a mixture of heads 2 and 3--the asceticism becomes far more systematic and pronounced. The writer is a Protestant, whose sense of moral energy could doubtless be gratified on no lower terms, and I take his case from Starbuck's manuscript collection.

[p. 295]

"I practiced fasting and mortification of the flesh. I secretly made burlap shirts, and put the burrs next the skin, and wore pebbles in my shoes. I would spend nights flat on my back on the floor without any covering."

The Roman Church has organized and codified all this sort of thing, and given it a market-value in the shape of "merit." But we see the cultivation of hardship cropping out under every sky and in every faith, as a spontaneous need of character. Thus we read of Channing, when first settled as a Unitarian minister, that--

"He was now more simple than ever, and seemed to have become incapable of any form of self-indulgence. He took the smallest room in the house for his study, though he might easily have commanded one more light, airy, and in every way more suitable; and chose for his sleeping chamber an attic which he shared with a younger brother. The furniture of the latter might have answered for the cell of an anchorite, and consisted of a hard mattress on a cot-bedstead, plain wooden chairs and table, with matting on the floor. It was without fire, and to cold he was throughout life extremely sensitive; but he never complained or appeared in any way to be conscious of inconvenience. 'I recollect,' says his brother, 'after one most severe night, that in the morning he sportively thus alluded to his suffering: "If my bed were my country, I should be somewhat like Bonaparte: I have no control except over the part which I occupy, the instant I move, frost takes possession."' In sickness only would he change for the time his apartment and accept a few comforts. The dress too that he habitually adopted was of most inferior quality; and garments were constantly worn which the world would call mean, though an almost feminine neatness preserved him from the least appearance of neglect." [*1]

Channing's asceticism, such as it was, was evidently a compound of hardihood and love of purity. The democracy which is an offshoot of the enthusiasm of humanity, and of

[p. 296]

which I will speak later under the head of the cult of poverty, doubtless bore also a share. Certainly there was no pessimistic element in his case.

In the next case we have a strongly pessimistic element, so that it belongs under head 4. John Cennick was Methodism's first lay preacher. In 1735 he was convicted of sin, while walking in Cheapside--

"And at once left off sing-singing, card-playing, and attending theatres. Sometimes he wished to go to a popish monastery, to spend his life in devout retirement. At other times he longed to live in a cave, sleeping on fallen leaves, and feeding on forest fruits. He fasted long and often, and prayed nine times a day. . . . Fancying dry bread too great an indulgence for so great a sinner as himself, he began to feed on potatoes, acorns, crabs, and grass; and often wished that he could live on roots and herbs. At length, in 1737, he found peace with God, and went on his way rejoicing." [*1]

In this poor man we have morbid melancholy and fear, and the sacrifices made are to purge out sin, and to buy safety. The hopelessness of Christian theology in respect of the flesh and the natural man generally has, in systematizing fear, made of it one tremendous incentive to self-mortification. It would be quite unfair, however, in spite of the fact that this incentive has often been worked in a mercenary way for hortatory purposes, to call it a mercenary incentive. The impulse to expiate and do penance is, in its first intention, far too immediate and spontaneous an expression of self-despair and anxiety to be obnoxious to any such reproach. In the form of loving sacrifice, of spending all we have to show our devotion, ascetic discipline of the severest sort may be the fruit of highly optimistic religious feeling.

M. Vianney, the cure of Ars, was a French country priest, whose holiness was exemplary. We read in his life the following account of his inner need of sacrifice:--

[p. 297]

"'On this path,' M. Vianney said, "it is only the first step that costs. There is in mortification a balm and a savor without which one cannot live when once one has made their acquaintance. There is but one way in which to give one's self to God--that is, to give one's self entirely, and to keep nothing for one's self. The little that one keeps is only good to trouble one and make one suffer.' Accordingly he imposed it on himself that he should never smell a flower, never drink when parched with thirst, never drive away a fly, never show disgust before a repugnant object, never complain of anything that had to do with his personal comfort, never sit down, never lean upon his elbows when he was kneeling. The Cure of Ars was very sensitive to cold, but he would never take means to protect himself against it. During a very severe winter, one of his missionaries contrived a false floor to his confessional and placed a metal case of hot water beneath. The trick succeeded, and the Saint was deceived: 'God is very good,' he said with emotion. 'This year, through all the cold, my feet have always been warm.' " [*1]

In this case the spontaneous impulse to make sacrifices for the pure love of God was probably the uppermost conscious motive. We may class it, then, under our head 3. Some authors think that the impulse to sacrifice is the main religious phenomenon. It is a prominent, a universal phenomenon certainly, and lies deeper than any special creed. Here, for instance, is what seems to be a spontaneous example of it, simply expressing what seemed right at the time between the individual and his Maker. Cotton Mather, the New England Puritan divine, is generally reputed a rather grotesque pedant; yet what is more touchingly simple than his relation of what happened when his wife came to die?

"When I saw to what a point of resignation I was now called of the Lord," he says, "I resolved, with his help, therein to glorify him. So, two hours before my lovely consort expired, I

[p. 298]

kneeled by her bedside, and I took into my two hands a dear hand, the dearest in the world. With her thus in my hands, I solemnly and sincerely gave her up unto the Lord: and in token of my real resignation, I gently put her out of my hands, and laid away a most lovely hand, resolving that I would never touch it more. This was the hardest, and perhaps the bravest action that ever I did. She . . . told me that she signed and sealed my act of resignation. And though before that she called for me continually, she after this never asked for me any more." [*1]

Father Vianney's asceticism taken in its totality was simply the result of a permanent flood of high spiritual enthusiasm, longing to make proof of itself. The Roman Church has, in its incomparable fashion, collected all the motives towards asceticism together, and so codified them that any one wishing to pursue Christian perfection may find a practical system mapped out for him in any one of a number of ready-made manuals. [*2] The dominant Church notion of perfection is of course the negative one of avoidance of sin. Sin proceeds from concupiscence, and concupiscence from our carnal passions and temptations, chief of which are pride, sensuality in all its forms, and the loves of worldly excitement and possession. All these sources of sin must be resisted; and discipline and austerities are a most efficacious mode of meeting them. Hence there are always in these books chapters on self-mortification. But whenever a procedure is codified, the more delicate spirit of it evaporates, and if we wish the undiluted ascetic spirit--the passion of self-contempt wreaking itself on the poor flesh, the divine irrationality

[p. 299]

of devotion making a sacrificial gift of all it has (its sensibilities, namely) to the object of its adoration--we must go to autobiographies, or other individual documents.

Saint John of the Cross, a Spanish mystic who flourished--or rather who existed, for there was little that suggested flourishing about him--in the sixteenth century, will supply a passage suitable for our purpose.

"First of all, carefully excite in yourself an habitual affectionate will in all things to imitate Jesus Christ. If anything agreeable offers itself to your senses, yet does not at the same time tend purely to the honor and glory of God, renounce it and separate yourself from it for the love of Christ, who all his life long had no other taste or wish than to do the will of his Father whom he called his meat and nourishment. For example, you take satisfaction in hearing of things in which the glory of God bears no part. Deny yourself this satisfaction, mortify your wish to listen. You take pleasure in seeing objects which do not raise your mind to God: refuse yourself this pleasure, and turn away your eyes. The same with conversations and all other things. Act similarly, so far as you are able, with all the operations of the senses, striving to make yourself free from their yokes.

"The radical remedy lies in the mortification of the four great natural passions, joy, hope, fear, and grief. You must seek to deprive these of every satisfaction and leave them as it were in darkness and the void. Let your soul therefore turn always:

"Not to what is most easy, but to what is hardest;

"Not to what tastes best, but to what is most distasteful;

"Not to what most pleases, but to what disgusts;

"Not to matter of consolation, but to matter for desolation rather;

"Not to rest, but to labor;

"Not to desire the more, but the less;

"Not to aspire to what is highest and most precious, but to what is lowest and most contemptible;

"Not to will anything, but to will nothing;

"Not to seek the best in everything, but to seek the worst, so

[p. 300]

that you may enter for the love of Christ into a complete destitution, a perfect poverty of spirit, and an absolute renunciation of everything in this world.

"Embrace these practices with all the energy of your soul and you will find in a short time great delights and unspeakable consolations.

"Despise yourself, and wish that others should despise you;

"Speak to your own disadvantage, and desire others to do the same;

"Conceive a low opinion of yourself, and find it good when others hold the same;

"To enjoy the taste of all things, have no taste for anything.

"To know all things, learn to know nothing.

"To possess all things, resolve to possess nothing.

"To be all things, be willing to be nothing.

"To get to where you have no taste for anything, go through whatever experiences you have no taste for.

"To learn to know nothing, go whither you are ignorant.

"To reach what you possess not, go whithersoever you own nothing.

"To be what you are not, experience what you are not."

These later verses play with that vertigo of self-contradiction which is so dear to mysticism. Those that come next are completely mystical, for in them Saint John passes from God to the more metaphysical notion of the All.

"When you stop at one thing, you cease to open yourself to the All.

"For to come to the All you must give up the All.

"And if you should attain to owning the All, you must own it, desiring Nothing.

"In this spoliation, the soul finds its tranquillity and rest. Profoundly established in the centre of its own nothingness, it can be assailed by naught that comes from below; and since it no longer desires anything, what comes from above cannot depress it; for its desires alone are the causes of its woes." [*1]

[p. 301]

And now, as a more concrete example of heads 4 and 5, in fact of all our heads together, and of the irrational extreme to which a psychopathic individual may go in the line of bodily austerity, I will quote the sincere Suso's account of his own self-tortures. Suso, you will remember, was one of the fourteenth century German mystics; his autobiography, written in the third person, is a classic religious document.

"He was in his youth of a temperament full of fire and life; and when this began to make itself felt, it was very grievous to him; and he sought by many devices how he might bring his body into subjection. He wore for a long time a hair shirt and an iron chain, until the blood ran from him, so that he was obliged to leave them off. He secretly caused an undergarment to be made for him; and in the undergarment he had strips of leather fixed, into which a hundred and fifty brass nails, pointed and filed sharp, were driven, and the points of the nails were always turned towards the flesh. He had this garment made very tight, and so arranged as to go round him and fasten in front in order that it might fit the closer to his body, and the pointed nails might be driven into his flesh; and it was high enough to reach upwards to his navel. In this he used to sleep at night. Now in summer, when it was hot, and he was very tired and ill from his journeyings, or when he held the office of lecturer, he would sometimes, as he lay thus in bonds, and oppressed with toil, and tormented also by noxious insects, cry aloud and give way to fretfulness, and twist round and round in agony, as a worm does when run through with a pointed needle. It often seemed to him as if he were lying upon an ant-hill, from the torture caused by the insects; for if he wished to sleep, or when he had fallen asleep, they vied with one another. [*1] Sometimes he

[p. 302]

cried to Almighty God in the fullness of his heart: Alas! Gentle God, what a dying is this! When a man is killed by murderers or strong beasts of prey it is soon over; but I lie dying here under the cruel insects, and yet cannot die. The nights in winter were never so long, nor was the summer so hot, as to make him leave off this exercise. On the contrary, he devised something farther--two leathern loops into which he put his hands, and fastened one on each side his throat, and made the fastenings so secure that even if his cell had been on fire about him, he could not have helped himself. This he continued until his hands and arms had become almost tremulous with the strain, and then he devised something else: two leather gloves; and he caused a brazier to fit them all over with sharp-pointed brass tacks, and he used to put them on at night, in order that if he should try while asleep to throw off the hair undergarment, or relieve himself from the gnawings of the vile insects, the tacks might then stick into his body. And so it came to pass. If ever he sought to help himself with his hands in his sleep, he drove the sharp tacks into his breast, and tore himself, so that his flesh festered. When after many weeks the wounds had healed, he tore himself again and made fresh wounds.

"He continued this tormenting exercise for about sixteen years. At the end of this time, when his blood was now chilled, and the fire of his temperament destroyed, there appeared to him in a vision on Whitsunday, a messenger from heaven, who told him that God required this of him no longer. Whereupon he discontinued it, and threw all these things away into a running stream."

Suso then tells how, to emulate the sorrows of his crucified Lord, he made himself a cross with thirty protruding iron needles and nails. This he bore on his bare back between his shoulders day and night. "The first time that he stretched out this cross upon his back his tender frame was struck with terror at it, and blunted the sharp nails slightly against a stone. But soon, repenting of this womanly cowardice, he pointed them all again with a file, and placed once more the cross upon him. It

[p. 303]

made his back, where the bones are, bloody and seared. Whenever he sat down or stood up, it was as if a hedgehog-skin were on him. If any one touched him unawares, or pushed against his clothes, it tore him."

Suso next tells of his penitences by means of striking this cross and forcing the nails deeper into the flesh, and likewise of his self-scourgings--a dreadful story--and then goes on as follows: "At this same period the Servitor procured an old castaway door, and he used to lie upon it at night without any bedclothes to make him comfortable, except that he took off his shoes and wrapped a thick cloak round him. He thus secured for himself a most miserable bed; for hard pea-stalks lay in humps under his head, the cross with the sharp nails stuck into his back, his arms were locked fast in bonds, the horsehair undergarment was round his loins, and the cloak too was heavy and the door hard. Thus he lay in wretchedness, afraid to stir, just like a log, and he would send up many a sigh to God.

"In winter he suffered very much from the frost. If he stretched out his feet they lay bare on the floor and froze, if he gathered them up the blood became all on fire in his legs, and this was great pain. His feet were full of sores, his legs dropsical, his knees bloody and seared, his loins covered with scars from the horsehair, his body wasted, his mouth parched with intense thirst, and his hands tremulous from weakness. Amid these torments he spent his nights and days; and he endured them all out of the greatness of the love which he bore in his heart to the Divine and Eternal Wisdom, our Lord Jesus Christ, whose agonizing sufferings he sought to imitate. After a time he gave up this penitential exercise of the door, and instead of it he took up his abode in a very small cell, and used the bench, which was so narrow and short that he could not stretch himself upon it, as his bed. In this hole, or upon the door, he lay at night in his usual bonds, for about eight years. It was also his custom, during the space of twenty-five years, provided he was staying in the convent, never to go after compline in winter into any warm room, or to the convent stove to warm himself, no matter how cold it might be, unless he was obliged to do so for other reasons. Throughout all these years he never took a bath, either a water or a sweating bath; and this he did in order to mortify

[p. 304]

his comfort-seeking body. He practiced during a long time such rigid poverty that he would neither receive nor touch a penny, either with leave or without it. For a considerable time he strove to attain such a high degree of purity that he would neither scratch nor touch any part of his body, save only his hands and feet." [*1]

I spare you the recital of poor Suso's self-inflicted tortures from thirst. It is pleasant to know that after his fortieth year, God showed him by a series of visions that he had sufficiently broken down the natural man, and that he might leave these exercises off. His case is distinctly pathological, but he does not seem to have had the alleviation, which some ascetics have enjoyed, of an alteration of sensibility capable of actually turning torment into a perverse kind of pleasure. Of the founder of the Sacred Heart order, for example, we read that

"Her love of pain and suffering was insatiable. . . . She said that she could cheerfully live till the day of judgment, provided she might always have matter for suffering for God; but that to live a single day without suffering would be intolerable. She said again that she was devoured with two unassuageable fevers, one for the holy communion, the other for suffering, humiliation, and annihilation. 'Nothing but pain,' she continually said in her letters, 'makes my life supportable.'" [*2]

So much for the phenomena to which the ascetic impulse will in certain persons give rise. In the ecclesiastically consecrated character three minor branches of self-mortification have been recognized as indispensable pathways to perfection. I refer to the chastity, obedience, and poverty which the monk vows to observe; and upon the heads of obedience and poverty I will make a few remarks.

[p. 305]

First, of Obedience. The secular life of our twentieth century opens with this virtue held in no high esteem. The duty of the individual to determine his own conduct and profit or suffer by the consequences seems, on the contrary, to be one of our best rooted contemporary Protestant social ideals. So much so that it is difficult even imaginatively to comprehend how men possessed of an inner life of their own could ever have come to think the subjection of its will to that of other finite creatures recommendable. I confess that to myself it seems something of a mystery. Yet it evidently corresponds to a profound interior need of many persons, and we must do our best to understand it.

On the lowest possible plane, one sees how the expediency of obedience in a firm ecclesiastical organization must have led to its being viewed as meritorious. Next, experience shows that there are times in every one's life when one can be better counseled by others than by one's self. Inability to decide is one of the commonest symptoms of fatigued nerves; friends who see our troubles more broadly, often see them more wisely than we do; so it is frequently an act of excellent virtue to consult and obey a doctor, a partner, or a wife. But, leaving these lower prudential regions, we find, in the nature of some of the spiritual excitements which we have been studying, good reasons for idealizing obedience. Obedience may spring from the general religious phenomenon of inner softening and self-surrender and throwing one's self on higher powers. So saving are these attitudes felt to be that in themselves, apart from utility, they become ideally consecrated; and in obeying a man whose fallibility we see through thoroughly, we, nevertheless, may feel much as we do when we resign our will to that of infinite wisdom. Add self-despair and the passion of self-crucifixion to this, and obedience becomes an ascetic sacrifice, agreeable quite irrespective of whatever prudential uses it might have.

It is as a sacrifice, a mode of "mortification," that obedience

[p. 306]

is primarily conceived by Catholic writers, a "sacrifice which man offers to God, and of which he is himself both the priest and the victim. By poverty he immolates his exterior possessions; by chastity he immolates his body; by obedience he completes the sacrifice, and gives to God all that he yet holds as his own, his two most precious goods, his intellect and his will. The sacrifice is then complete and unreserved, a genuine holocaust, for the entire victim is now consumed for the honor of God." [*1] Accordingly, in Catholic discipline, we obey our superior not as mere man, but as the representative of Christ. Obeying God in him by our intention, obedience is easy. But when the text-book theologians marshal collectively all their reasons for recommending it, the mixture sounds to our ears rather odd.

"One of the great consolations of the monastic life," says a Jesuit authority, "is the assurance we have that in obeying we can commit no fault. The Superior may commit a fault in commanding you to do this thing or that, but you are certain that you commit no fault so long as you obey, because God will only ask you if you have duly performed what orders you received, and if you can furnish a clear account in that respect, you are absolved entirely. Whether the things you did were opportune, or whether there were not something better that might have been done, these are questions not asked of you, but rather of your Superior. The moment what you did was done obediently, God wipes it out of your account, and charges it to the Superior. So that Saint Jerome well exclaimed, in celebrating the advantages of obedience, 'Oh, sovereign liberty! Oh, holy and blessed security by which one become almost impeccable!'

"Saint John Climachus is of the same sentiment when he calls obedience an excuse before God. In fact, when God asks why you have done this or that, and you reply, it is because I was so ordered by my Superiors, God will ask for no other excuse. As a passenger in a good vessel with a good pilot need give himself

[p. 307]

no farther concern, but may go to sleep in peace, because the pilot has charge over all, and 'watches for him'; so a religious person who lives under the yoke of obedience goes to heaven as if while sleeping, that is, while leaning entirely on the conduct of his Superiors, who are the pilots of his vessel, and keep watch for him continually. It is no small thing, of a truth, to be able to cross the stormy sea of life on the shoulders and in the arms of another, yet that is just the grace which God accords to those who live under the yoke of obedience. Their Superior bears all their burdens. . . . A certain grave doctor said that he would rather spend his life in picking up straws by obedience, than by his own responsible choice busy himself with the loftiest works of charity, because one is certain of following the will of God in whatever one may do from obedience, but never certain in the same degree of anything which we may do of our own proper movement." [*1]

One should read the letters in which Ignatius Loyola recommends obedience as the backbone of his order, if one would gain insight into the full spirit of its cult. [*2] They are too long to quote; but Ignatius's belief is so vividly expressed in a couple of sayings reported by companions that, though they have been so often cited, I will ask your permission to copy them once more:--

"I ought," an early biographer reports him as saying, "on entering religion, and thereafter, to place myself entirely in the hands of God, and of him who takes His place by His authority. I ought to desire that my Superior should oblige me to give up my own judgment, and conquer my own mind. I ought to set up no difference between one Superior and another, . . . but recognize them all as equal before God, whose place they fill. For if I distinguish persons, I weaken the spirit of obedience. In the hands of my Superior, I must be a soft wax, a thing, from

[p. 308]

which he is to require whatever pleases him, be it to write or receive letters, to speak or not to speak to such a person, or the like; and I must put all my fervor in executing zealously and exactly what I am ordered. I must consider myself as a corpse which has neither intelligence nor will; be like a mass of matter which without resistance lets itself be placed wherever it may please any one; like a stick in the hand of an old man, who uses it according to his needs and places it where it suits him. So must I be under the hands of the Order, to serve it in the way it judges most useful.

"I must never ask of the Superior to be sent to a particular place, to be employed in a particular duty. . . . I must consider nothing as belonging to me personally, and as regards the things I use, be like a statue which lets itself be stripped and never opposes resistance." [*1]

The other saying is reported by Rodriguez in the chapter from which I a moment ago made quotations. When speaking of the Pope's authority, Rodriguez writes:--

"Saint Ignatius said, when general of his company, that if the Holy Father were to order him to set sail in the first bark which he might find in the port of Ostia, near Rome, and to abandon himself to the sea, without a mast, without sails, without oars or rudder or any of the things that are needful for navigation or subsistence, he would obey not only with alacrity, but without anxiety or repugnance, and even with a great internal satisfaction." [*2]

With a solitary concrete example of the extravagance to which the virtue we are considering has been carried, I will pass to the topic next in order.

"Sister Marie Claire [of Port Royal] had been greatly imbued with the holiness and excellence of M. de Langres. This prelate, soon after he came to Port Royal, said to her one day, seeing her

[p. 309]

so tenderly attached to Mother Angelique, that it would perhaps be better not to speak to her again. Marie Claire, greedy of obedience, took this inconsiderate word for an oracle of God, and from that day forward remained for several years without once speaking to her sister." [*1]

Our next topic shall be Poverty, felt at all times and under all creeds as one adornment of a saintly life. Since the instinct of ownership is fundamental in man's nature, this is one more example of the ascetic paradox. Yet it appears no paradox at all, but perfectly reasonable, the moment one recollects how easily higher excitements hold lower cupidities in check. Having just quoted the Jesuit Rodriguez on the subject of obedience, I will, to give immediately a concrete turn to our discussion of poverty, also read you a page from his chapter on this latter virtue. You must remember that he is writing instructions for monks of his own order, and bases them all on the text, "Blessed are the poor in spirit."

"If any one of you," he says, "will know whether or not he is really poor in spirit, let him consider whether he loves the ordinary consequences and effects of poverty, which are hunger, thirst, cold, fatigue, and the denudation of all conveniences. See if you are glad to wear a worn-out habit full of patches. See if you are glad when something is lacking to your meal, when you are passed by in serving it, when what you receive is distasteful to you, when your cell is out of repair. If you are not glad of these things, if instead of loving them you avoid them, then there is proof that you have not attained the perfection of poverty of spirit." Rodriguez then goes on to describe the practice of poverty in more detail. "The first point is that which Saint Ignatius proposes in his constitutions, when he says, 'Let no one use anything as if it were his private possession.' 'A religious person,' he says, 'ought in respect to all the things that he uses, to be like a statue which one may drape with clothing, but which feels no grief and makes no resistance when one strips

[p. 310]

it again. It is in this way that you should feel towards your clothes, your books, your cell, and everything else that you make use of; if ordered to quit them, or to exchange them for others, have no more sorrow than if you were a statue being uncovered. In this way you will avoid using them as if they were your private possession. But if, when you give up your cell, or yield possession of this or that object or exchange it for another, you feel repugnance and are not like a statue, that shows that you view these things as if they were your private property.'

"And this is why our holy founder wished the superiors to test their monks somewhat as God tested Abraham, and to put their poverty and their obedience to trial, that by this means they may become acquainted with the degree of their virtue, and gain a chance to make ever farther progress in perfection, . . . making the one move out of his room when he finds it comfortable and is attached to it; taking away from another a book of which he is fond; or obliging a third to exchange his garment for a worse one. Otherwise we should end by acquiring a species of property in all these several objects, and little by little the wall of poverty that surrounds us and constitutes our principal defense would be thrown down. The ancient fathers of the desert used often thus to treat their companions. . . . Saint Dositheus, being sick-nurse, desired a certain knife, and asked Saint Dorotheus for it, not for his private use, but for employment in the infirmary of which he had charge. Whereupon Saint Dorotheus answered him: 'Ha! Dositheus, so that knife pleases you so much! Will you be the slave of a knife or the slave of Jesus Christ! Do you not blush with shame at wishing that a knife should be your master? I will not let you touch it.' Which reproach and refusal had such an effect upon the holy disciple that since that time he never touched the knife again.' . . .

"Therefore, in our rooms," Father Rodriguez continues, "there must be no other furniture than a bed, a table, a bench, and a candlestick, things purely necessary, and nothing more. It is not allowed among us that our cells should be ornamented with pictures or aught else, neither armchairs, carpets, curtains, nor any sort of cabinet or bureau of any elegance. Neither is it allowed us to keep anything to eat, either for ourselves or for

[p. 311]

those who may come to visit us. We must ask permission to go to the refectory even for a glass of water; and finally we may not keep a book in which we can write a line, or which we may take away with us. One cannot deny that thus we are in great poverty. But this poverty is at the same time a great repose and a great perfection. For it would be inevitable, in case a religious person were allowed to own superfluous possessions, that these things would greatly occupy his mind, be it to acquire them, to preserve them, or to increase them; so that in not permitting us at all to own them, all these inconveniences are remedied. Among the various good reasons why the company forbids secular persons to enter our cells, the principal one is that thus we may the easier be kept in poverty. After all, we are all men, and if we were to receive people of the world into our rooms, we should not have the strength to remain within the bounds prescribed, but should at least wish to adorn them with some books to give the visitors a better opinion of our scholarship." [*1]

Since Hindu fakirs, Buddhist monks, and Mohammedan dervishes unite with Jesuits and Franciscans in idealizing poverty as the loftiest individual state, it is worth while to examine into the spiritual grounds for such a seemingly unnatural opinion. And first, of those which lie closest to common human nature.

The opposition between the men who have and the men who are is immemorial. Though the gentleman, in the old-fashioned sense of the man who is well born, has usually in point of fact been predaceous and reveled in lands and goods, yet he has never identified his essence with these possessions, but rather with the personal superiorities, the courage, generosity, and pride supposed to be his birthright. To certain huckstering kinds of consideration he thanked God he was forever inaccessible, and if in life's vicissitudes he should become destitute through their lack, he was glad to think that with his sheer valor he was all the freer to work

[p. 312]

out his salvation. "Wer nur selbst was hatte," says Lessing's Tempelherr, in Nathan the Wise, "mein Gott, mein Gott, ich habe nichts!" This ideal of the well-born man without possessions was embodied in knight-errantry and templardom; and, hideously corrupted as it has always been, it still dominates sentimentally, if not practically, the military and aristocratic view of life. We glorify the soldier as the man absolutely unincumbered. Owning nothing but his bare life, and willing to toss that up at any moment when the cause commands him, he is the representative of unhampered freedom in ideal directions. The laborer who pays with his person day by day, and has no rights invested in the future, offers also much of this ideal detachment. Like the savage, he may make his bed wherever his right arm can support him, and from his simple and athletic attitude of observation, the property-owner seems buried and smothered in ignoble externalities and trammels, "wading in straw and rubbish to his knees." The claims which things make are corrupters of manhood, mortgages on the soul, and a drag anchor on our progress towards the empyrean.

"Everything I meet with," writes Whitefield, "seems to carry this voice with it--'Go thou and preach the Gospel; be a pilgrim on earth; have no party or certain dwelling place.' My heart echoes back, 'Lord Jesus, help me to do or suffer thy will. When thou seest me in danger of nestling--in pity--in tender pity--put a thorn in my nest to prevent me from it.'" [*1]

The loathing of "capital" with which our laboring classes today are growing more and more infected seems largely composed of this sound sentiment of antipathy for lives based on mere having. As an anarchist poet writes:--

"Not by accumulating riches, but by giving away that which you have,

[p. 313]

"Shall you become beautiful;

"You must undo the wrappings, not case yourself in fresh ones;

"Not by multiplying clothes shall you make your body sound and healthy, but rather by discarding them . . .

"For a soldier who is going on a campaign does not seek what fresh furniture he can carry on his back, but rather what he can leave behind;

"Knowing well that every additional thing which he cannot freely use and handle is an impediment." [*1]

In short, lives based on having are less free than lives based either on doing or on being, and in the interest of action people subject to spiritual excitement throw away possessions as so many clogs. Only those who have no private interests can follow an ideal straight away. Sloth and cowardice creep in with every dollar or guinea we have to guard. When a brother novice came to Saint Francis, saying: "Father, it would be a great consolation to me to own a psalter, but even supposing that our general should concede to me this indulgence, still I should like also to have your consent," Francis put him off with the examples of Charlemagne, Roland, and Oliver, pursuing the infidels in sweat and labor, and finally dying on the field of battle. "So care not," he said, "for owning books and knowledge, but care rather for works of goodness." And when some weeks later the novice came again to talk of his craving for the psalter, Francis said: "After you have got your psalter you will crave a breviary; and after you have got your breviary you will sit in your stall like a grand prelate, and will say to your brother: "Hand me my breviary.". . . And thenceforward he denied all such requests, saying: A man possesses of learning only so much as comes out of him in action, and a monk is a good preacher only so far as

[p. 314]

his deeds proclaim him such, for every tree is known by its fruits." [*1]

But beyond this more worthily athletic attitude involved in doing and being, there is, in the desire of not having, something profounder still, something related to that fundamental mystery of religious experience, the satisfaction found in absolute surrender to the larger power. So long as any secular safeguard is retained, so long as any residual prudential guarantee is clung to, so long the surrender is incomplete, the vital crisis is not passed, fear still stands sentinel, and mistrust of the divine obtains: we hold by two anchors, looking to God, it is true, after a fashion, but also holding by our proper machinations. In certain medical experiences we have the same critical point to overcome. A drunkard, or a morphine or cocaine maniac, offers himself to be cured. He appeals to the doctor to wean him from his enemy, but he dares not face blank abstinence. The tyrannical drug is still an anchor to windward: he hides supplies of it among his clothing; arranges secretly to have it smuggled in in case of need. Even so an incompletely regenerate man still trusts in his own expedients. His money is like the sleeping potion which the chronically wakeful patient keeps beside his bed; he throws himself on God, but if he should need the other help, there it will be also. Every one knows cases of this incomplete and ineffective desire for reform-drunkards whom, with all their self-reproaches and resolves, one perceives to be quite unwilling seriously to contemplate never being drunk again! Really to give up anything on which we have relied, to give it up definitely, "for good and all" and forever, signifies one of those radical alterations of character which came under our notice in the lectures on conversion. In it the inner man rolls over into an entirely different position of equilibrium, lives in a new centre of energy from

[p. 315]

this time on, and the turning-point and hinge of all such operations seems usually to involve the sincere acceptance of certain nakednesses and destitutions.

Accordingly, throughout the annals of the saintly life, we find this ever-recurring note: Fling yourself upon God's providence without making any reserve whatever--take no thought for the morrow--sell all you have and give it to the poor--only when the sacrifice is ruthless and reckless will the higher safety really arrive. As a concrete example let me read a page from the biography of Antoinette Bourignon, a good woman, much persecuted in her day by both Protestants and Catholics, because she would not take her religion at second hand. When a young girl, in her father's house--

"She spent whole nights in prayer, oft repeating: Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And being one night in a most profound penitence, she said from the bottom of her heart: 'O my Lord! What must I do to please thee? For I have nobody to teach me. Speak to my soul and it will hear thee.' At that instant she heard, as if another had spoke within her: Forsake all earthly things. Separate thyself from the love of the creatures. Deny thyself. She was quite astonished, not understanding this language, and mused long on these three points, thinking how she could fulfill them. She thought she could not live without earthly things, nor without loving the creatures, nor without loving herself. Yet she said, 'By thy Grace I will do it, Lord!' But when she would perform her promise, she knew not where to begin. Having thought on the religious in monasteries, that they forsook all earthly things by being shut up in a cloister, and the love of themselves by subjecting of their wills, she asked leave of her father to enter into a cloister of the barefoot Carmelites, but he would not permit it, saying he would rather see her laid in her grave. This seemed to her a great cruelty, for she thought to find in the cloister the true Christians she had been seeking, but she found afterwards that he knew the cloisters better than she, for after he had forbidden her, and told her he would never permit her to be a religious, nor give her any

[p. 316]

money to enter there, yet she went to Father Laurens, the Director, and offered to serve in the monastery and work hard for her bread, and be content with little, if he would receive her. At which he smiled and said: That cannot be. We must have money to build; we take no maids without money; you must find the way to get it, else there is no entry here.

"This astonished her greatly, and she was thereby undeceived as to the cloisters, resolving to forsake all company and live alone till it should please God to show her what she ought to do and whither to go. She asked always earnestly, 'When shall I be perfectly thine, O my God?' And she thought he still answered her, When thou shalt no longer possess anything, and shalt die to thyself. 'And where shall I do that, Lord?' He answered her, In the desert. This made so strong an impression on her soul that she aspired after this; but being a maid of eighteen years only, she was afraid of unlucky chances, and was never used to travel, and knew no way. She laid aside all these doubts and said, 'Lord, thou wilt guide me how and where it shall please thee. It is for thee that I do it. I will lay aside my habit of a maid, and will take that of a hermit that I may pass unknown.' Having then secretly made ready this habit, while her parents thought to have married her, her father having promised her to a rich French merchant, she prevented the time, and on Easter evening, having cut her hair, put on the habit, and slept a little, she went out of her chamber about four in the morning, taking nothing but one penny to buy bread for that day. And it being said to her in going out, Where is thy faith? in a penny? she threw it away, begging pardon of God for her fault, and saying, 'No, Lord, my faith is not in a penny, but in thee alone.' Thus she went away wholly delivered from the heavy burthen of the cares and good things of this world, and found her soul so satisfied that she no longer wished for anything upon earth, resting entirely upon God, with this only fear lest she should be discovered and be obliged to return home; for she felt already more content in this poverty than she had done for all her life in all the delights of the world." [*1]

[p. 317]

The penny was a small financial safeguard, but an effective spiritual obstacle. Not till it was thrown away could the character settle into the new equilibrium completely.

 

Over and above the mystery of self-surrender, there are in the cult of poverty other religious mysteries. There is the mystery of veracity: "Naked came I into the world," etc.--whoever first said that, possessed this mystery. My own bare entity must fight the battle--shams cannot save me. There is also the mystery of democracy, or sentiment of the equality before God of all his creatures. This sentiment (which seems in general to have been more widespread in Mohammedan than in Christian lands) tends to nullify man's usual acquisitiveness. Those who have it spurn dignities and honors, privileges and advantages, preferring, as I said in a former lecture, to grovel on the common level before the face of God. It is not exactly the sentiment of humility, though it comes so close to it in practice. It is humanity,

[p. 318]

rather, refusing to enjoy anything that others do not share. A profound moralist, writing of Christ's saying, "Sell all thou hast and follow me," proceeds as follows:--

"Christ may have meant: If you love mankind absolutely you will as a result not care for any possessions whatever, and this seems a very likely proposition. But it is one thing to believe that a proposition is probably true; it is another thing to see it as a fact. If you loved mankind as Christ loved them, you would see his conclusion as a fact. It would be obvious. You would sell your goods, and they would be no loss to you. These truths, while literal to Christ, and to any mind that has Christ's love for mankind, become parables to lesser natures. There are in every generation people who, beginning innocently, with no predetermined intention of becoming saints, find themselves drawn into the vortex by their interest in helping mankind, and by the understanding that comes from actually doing it. The abandonment of their old mode of life is like dust in the balance. It is done gradually, incidentally, imperceptibly. Thus the whole question of the abandonment of luxury is no question at all, but a mere incident to another question, namely, the degree to which we abandon ourselves to the remorseless logic of our love for others." [*1]

But in all these matters of sentiment one must have "been there" one's self in order to understand them. No American can ever attain to understanding the loyalty of a Briton towards his king, of a German towards his emperor; nor can a Briton or German ever understand the peace of heart of an American in having no king, no Kaiser, no spurious nonsense, between him and the common God of all. If sentiments as simple as these are mysteries which one must receive as gifts of birth, how much more is this the case with those subtler religious sentiments which we have been considering! One can never fathom an emotion or divine

[p. 319]

its dictates by standing outside of it. In the glowing hour of excitement, however, all incomprehensibilities are solved, and what was so enigmatical from without becomes transparently obvious. Each emotion obeys a logic of its own, and makes deductions which no other logic can draw. Piety and charity live in a different universe from worldly lusts and fears, and form another centre of energy altogether. As in a supreme sorrow lesser vexations may become a consolation; as a supreme love may turn minor sacrifices into gain; so a supreme trust may render common safeguards odious, and in certain glows of generous excitement it may appear unspeakably mean to retain one's hold of personal possessions. The only sound plan, if we are ourselves outside the pale of such emotions, is to observe as well as we are able those who feel them, and to record faithfully what we observe; and this, I need hardly say, is what I have striven to do in these last two descriptive lectures, which I now hope will have covered the ground sufficiently for our present needs.

Footnotes

^255:1 SAINTE-BEUVE: Port-Royal, vol. i. pp. 95 and 106, abridged.

^258:1 "'Love would not be love,' says Bourget, 'unless it could carry one to crime.' And so one may say that no passion would be a veritable passion unless it could carry one to crime." (SIGHELE: Psychollogie des Sectes, p. 136.) In other words, great passions annul the ordinary inhibitions set by "conscience." And conversely, of all the criminal human beings, the false, cowardly, sensual, or cruel persons who actually live, there is perhaps not one whose criminal impulse may not be at some moment overpowered by the presence of some other emotion to which his character is also potentially liable, provided that other emotion be only made intense enough. Fear is usually the most available emotion for this result in this particular class of persons. It stands for conscience, and may here be classed appropriately as a "higher affection." If we are soon to die, or if we believe a day of judgment to be near at hand, how quickly do we put our moral house in order--we do not see how sin can evermore exert temptation over us! Old-fashioned hell-fire Christianity well knew how to extract from fear its full equivalent in the way of fruits for repentance, and its full conversion value.

^259:1 Example: Benjamin Constant was often marveled at as an extraordinary instance of superior intelligence with inferior character. He writes (Journal, Paris, 1895, p. 56), "I am tossed and dragged about by my miserable weakness. Never was anything so ridiculous as my indecision. Now marriage, now solitude; now Germany, now France hesitation upon hesitation, and all because at bottom I am unable to give up anything." He can't "get mad" at any of his alternatives; and the career of a man beset by such an all-round amiability is hopeless.

^260:1 The great thing which the higher excitabilities give is courage; and the addition or subtraction of a certain amount of this quality makes a different man, a different life. Various excitements let the courage loose. Trustful hope will do it; inspiring example will do it; love will do it, wrath will do it. In some people it is natively so high that the mere touch of danger does it, though danger is for most men the great inhibitor of action. "Love of adventure" becomes in such persons a ruling passion. "I believe," says General Skobeleff, "that my bravery is simply the passion and at the same time the contempt of danger. The risk of life fills me with an exaggerated rapture. The fewer there are to share it, the more I like it. The participation of my body in the event is required to furnish me an adequate excitement. Everything intellectual appears to me to be reflex; but a meeting of man to man, a duel, a danger into which I can throw myself headforemost, attracts me, moves me, intoxicates me. I am crazy for it, I love it, I adore it. I run after danger as one runs after women; I wish it never to stop. Were it always the same, it would always bring me a new pleasure. When I throw myself into an adventure in which I hope to find it, my heart palpitates with the uncertainty; I could wish at once to have it appear and yet to delay. A sort of painful and delicious shiver shakes me; my entire nature runs to meet the peril with an impetus that my will would in vain try to resist. (JULIETTE ADAM: Le General Skobeleff, Nouvelle Revue, 1886, abridged.) Skobeleff seems to have been a cruel egoist; but the disinterested Garibaldi, if one may judge by his "Memorie," lived in an unflagging emotion of similar danger-seeking excitement.

^261:1 See the case on <page 69>, above, where the writer describes his experiences of communion with the Divine as consisting "merely in the temporary obliteration of the conventionalities which usually cover my life."

^263:1 Above, <page 200>. "The only radical remedy I know for dipsomania is religiomania," is a saying I have heard quoted from some medical man.

^264:1 Doddridge's Life of Colonel James Gardiner, London Religious Tract Society, pp. 23-32.

^264:2 Here, for example, is a case, from Starbuck's book, in which a "sensory automatism" brought about quickly what prayers and resolves had been unable to effect. The subject is a woman. She writes:--

"When I was about forty I tried to quit smoking, but the desire was on me, and had me in its power. I cried and prayed and promised God to quit, but could not. I had smoked for fifteen years. When I was fifty-three, as I sat by the fire one day smoking, a voice came to me. I did not hear it with my ears, but more as a dream or sort of double think. It said, 'Louisa, lay down smoking.' At once I replied. 'Will you take the desire away?' But it only kept saying: 'Louisa, lay down smoking.' Then I got up, laid my pipe on the mantel-shelf, and never smoked again or had any desire to. The desire was gone as though I had never known it or touched tobacco. The sight of others smoking and the smell of smoke never gave me the least wish to touch it again." The Psychology of Religion, p. 142.

^265:1 Professor Starbuck expresses the radical destruction of old influences physiologically, as a cutting off of the connection between higher and lower cerebral centres. "This condition," he says, "in which the association-centres connected with the spiritual life are cut off from the lower, is often reflected in the way correspondents describe their experiences. . . . For example: 'Temptations from without still assail me, but there is nothing within to respond to them.' The ego [here] is wholly identified with the higher centres whose quality of feeling is that of withinness. Another of the respondents says: 'Since then, although Satan tempts me, there is as it were a wall of brass around me, so that his darts cannot touch me.'"--Unquestionably, functional exclusions of this sort must occur in the cerebral organ. But on the side accessible to introspection, their causal condition is nothing but the degree of spiritual excitement, getting at last so high and strong as to be sovereign, and it must be frankly confessed that we do not know just why or how such sovereignty comes about in one person and not in another. We can only give our imagination a certain delusive help by mechanical analogies.

If we should conceive, for example, that the human mind, with its different possibilities of equilibrium, might be like a many-sided solid with different surfaces on which it could lie flat, we might liken mental revolutions to the spatial revolutions of such a body. As it is pried up, say by a lever, from a position in which it lies on surface A, for instance, it will linger for a time unstably halfway up, and if the lever cease to urge it, it will tumble back or "relapse" under the continued pull of gravity. But if at last it rotate far enough for its centre of gravity to pass beyond surface A altogether, the body will fall over, on surface B, say, and abide there permanently. The pulls [p. 266] of gravity towards A have vanished, and may now be disregarded. The polyhedron has become immune against farther attraction from their direction.

In this figure of speech the lever may correspond to the emotional influences making for a new life, and the initial pull of gravity to the ancient drawbacks and inhibitions. So long as the emotional influence fails to reach a certain pitch of efficacy, the changes it produces are unstable, and the man relapses into his original attitude. But when a certain intensity is attained by the new emotion, a critical point is passed, and there then ensues an irreversible revolution, equivalent to the production of a new nature.

^266:1 I use this word in spite of a certain flavor of "sanctimoniousness" which sometimes clings to it, because no other word suggests as well the exact combination of affections which the text goes on to describe.

^266:2 "It will be found," says Dr. W. R. INGE (in his lectures on Christian Mysticism, London, 1899, p. 326), "that men of preeminent saintliness agree very closely in what they tell us. They tell us that they have arrived at an unshakable conviction, not based on inference but on immediate experience, that God is a spirit with whom the human spirit can hold intercourse; that in him meet all that they can imagine of goodness, truth, and beauty; that they can see his footprints everywhere in nature, and feel his presence within them as the very life of their life, so that in proportion as they come to themselves they come to him. They tell us what separates us from him and from happiness is, first, self-seeking in all its forms; and secondly, sensuality in all its forms; that these are the ways of darkness and death, which hide from us the face of God; while the path of the just is like a shining light, which shineth more and more unto the perfect day."

^267:1 The "enthusiasm of humanity" may lead to a life which coalesces in many respects with that of Christian saintliness. Take the following rules proposed to members of the Union pour l'Action morale, in the Bulletin de l'Union, April 1-15, 1894. See, also, Revue Bleue, August 13, 1892.

"We would make known in our own persons the usefulness of rule, of discipline, of resignation and renunciation; we would teach the necessary perpetuity of suffering, and explain the creative part which it plays. We would wage war upon false optimism; on the base hope of happiness coming to us ready made; on the notion of a salvation by knowledge alone, or by material civilization alone, vain symbol as this is of civilization, precarious external arrangement ill-fitted to replace the intimate union and consent of souls. We would wage war also on bad morals, whether in public or in private life; on luxury, fastidiousness, and over-refinement, on all that tends to increase the painful, immoral, and anti-social multiplications of our wants; on all that excites envy and dislike in the soul of the common people, and confirms the notion that the chief end of life is freedom to enjoy. We would preach by our example the respect of superiors and equals, the respect of all men; affectionate simplicity in our relations with inferiors and insignificant persons; indulgence where our own claims only are concerned, but firmness in our demands where they relate to duties towards others or towards the public.

"For the common people are what we help them to become; their vices are our vices, gazed upon, envied, and imitated; and if they come back with all their weight upon us, it is but just.

^269:1 Above, pp. <page 243> ff.

^270:1 H. THOREAU: Walden, Riverside edition, p. 206, abridged.

^270:2 C. H. HILTY: Gluck, vol. i. p. 85.

^271:1 The Mystery of Pain and Death, London, 1892, p. 258.

^272:1 Compare Madame Guyon: "It was my practice to arise at midnight for purposes of devotion. . . . It seemed to me that God came at the precise time and woke me from sleep in order that I might enjoy him. When I was out of health or greatly fatigued, he did not awake me, but at such times I felt, even in my sleep, a singular possession of God. He loved me so much that he seemed to pervade my being, at a time when I could be only imperfectly conscious of his presence. My sleep is sometimes broken--a sort of half sleep; but my soul seems to be awake enough to know God, when it is hardly capable of knowing anything else." T. C. UPHAM: The Life and Religious Experiences of Madame de la Mothe Guyon, New York, 1877, vol. i. p. 260.

^273:1 I have considerably abridged the words of the original, which is given in EDWARDS'S Narrative of the Revival in New England.

^273:2 BOUGAUD: Hist. de la Bienheureuse Marguerite Marie, 1894, p. 125.

^274:1 Paris, 1900.

^275:1 Page 130.

^275:2 Page 167.

^275:3 Op. cit., p. 127.

^276:1 The barrier between men and animals also. We read of Towianski, an eminent Polish patriot and mystic, that "one day one of his friends met him in the rain, caressing a big dog which was jumping upon him and covering him horribly with mud. On being asked why he permitted the animal thus to dirty his clothes, Towianski replied: 'This dog, whom I am now meeting for the first time, has shown a great fellow-feeling for me, and a great joy in my recognition and acceptance of his greetings. Were I to drive him off, I should wound his feelings and do him a moral injury. It would be an offense not only to him, but to all the spirits of the other world who are on the same level with him. The damage which he does to my coat is as nothing in comparison with the wrong which I should inflict upon him, in case I were to remain indifferent to the manifestations of his friendship. We ought,' he added, 'both to lighten the condition of animals, whenever we can, and at the same time to facilitate in ourselves that union of the world of all spirits, which the sacrifice of Christ has made possible.'" Andre Towianski, Traduction de l'Italien, Turin, 1897 (privately printed). I owe my knowledge of this book and of Towianski to my friend Professor W. Lutoslawski, author of "Plato's Logic."

^278:1 J. PATTERSON'S Life of Richard Weaver, pp. 66-68, abridged.

^278:2 As where the future Buddha, incarnated as a hare, jumps into the fire to cook himself for a meal for a beggar--having previously shaken himself three times, so that none of the insects in his fur should perish with him.

^280:1 Bulletin de l'Union pour l'Action Morale, September, 1894.

^281:1 B. PASCAL: Prieres pour les Maladies,  section section xiii., xiv., abridged.

^282:1 From THOMAS C. UPHAM'S Life and Religious Opinions and Experiences of Madame de la Mothe Guyon, New York, 1877, ii. 48, i. 141, 413, abridged.

^283:1 Op. cit., London, 1901, p. 230.

^283:2 CLAPAReDE et Goty: Deux Heroines de la Foi, Paris, 1880, p. 112.

^284:1 Compare these three different statements of it: A. P. CALL: As a Matter of Course, Boston, 1894; H. W. DRESSER: Living by the Spirit, New York and London, 1900; H. W. SMITH: The Christian's Secret of a Happy Life, published by the Willard Tract Repository, and now in thousands of hands.

^284:2 T. C. UPHAM: Life of Madame Catharine Adorna, 3d ed., New York, 1864, pp. 158, 172-74.

^289:1 The History of THOMAS ELWOOD, written by Himself, London, 1885, pp. 32-34.

^295:1 Memoirs of W. E. Channing, Boston, 1840, i. 196.

^296:1 L. TYERMAN: The Life and Times of the Rev. John Wesley, i. 274.

^297:1 A. MOUNIN: Le Cure d'Ars, Vie de M. J. B. M. Vianney, 1864, p. 545, abridged.

^298:1 B. WENDELL: Cotton Mather, New York, no date, p. 198.

^298:2 That of the earlier Jesuit, Rodriguez, which has been translated into all languages, is one of the best known. A convenient modern manual, very well put together, is L'Ascetique Chretienne, by M. J. RIBET, Paris, Poussielgue, nouvelle edition, 1898.

^300:1 SAINT JEAN DE LA CROIX, Vie et Oeuvres, Paris, 1893, ii. 94, 99, abridged.

^301:1 "Insects," i.e. lice, were an unfailing token of mediaeval sainthood. We read of Francis of Assisi's sheepskin that "often a companion of the saint would take it to the fire to clean and dispediculate it, doing so, as he said, because the seraphic father himself was no enemy of pedocchi, but on the contrary kept them on him (le portava adosso) and held it for an honor and a glory to wear these celestial pearls in [p. 302] his habit. Quoted by P. SABATIER: Speculum Perfectionis, etc., Paris, 1898, p. 231, note.

^304:1 The Life of the Blessed HENRY SUSO, by Himself, translated by T. F. KNOX, London, 1865, pp. 56-80, abridged.

^304:2 BOUGAUD: Hist. de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie, Paris, 1894, pp. 265, 171. Compare, also, pp. <page 386>, <page 387>.

^306:1 LEJUENE: Introduction a la Vie Mystique, 1899, p. 277. The holocaust simile goes back at least as far as Ignatius Loyola.

^307:1 ALFONSO RODRIGUEZ, S. J.: Pratique de la Perfection Chretienne, Part iii., Treatise v., ch. x.

^307:2 Letters li. and cxx. of the collection translated into French by BOUIX, Paris, 1870.

^308:1 BARTOLI-MICHEL, ii. 13.

^308:2 RODRIGUEZ: Op. cit., Part iii., Treatise v., ch. vi.

^309:1 SAINTE-BEUVE: Histoire de Port Royal, i. 346.

^311:1 RODRIGUEZ: Op. cit., Part iii, Treatise iii., chaps. vi., vii.

^312:1 R. PHILIP: The Life and Times of George Whitefield, London, 1842, p. 366.

^313:1 EDWARD CARPENTER: Towards Democracy, p. 362, abridged.

^314:1 Speculum Perfectionis, ed. P. SABATIER, Paris, 1898, pp. 10, 13.

^316:1 An Apology for M. Antonia Bourignon, London, 1699, pp. 269, 270, abridged.

Another example from Starbuck's MS. collection:--

"At a meeting held at six the next morning, I heard a man relate his experience. He said: The Lord asked him if he would confess Christ among the quarrymen with whom he worked, and he said he would. Then he asked him if he would give up to be used of the Lord the four hundred dollars he had laid up, and he said he would and thus the Lord saved him. The thought came to me at once that I had never made a real consecration either of myself or of my property to the Lord, but had always tried to serve the Lord in my way. Now the Lord asked me if I would serve him in his way, and go out alone and penniless if he so ordered. The question was pressed home, and I must decide: To forsake all and have him, or have all and lose him! I soon decided to take him; and the blessed assurance came, that he had taken me for his own, and my joy was full. I returned home from the meeting with feelings as simple as a child. I thought all would be glad to hear of the joy of the Lord that possessed me, and so I began to tell the simple story. But to my great surprise, the pastors (for I attended meetings in three churches) opposed the experience and said it was fanaticism, and one told the members of his church to shun those that professed it, and I soon found that my foes were those of my own household."

^318:1 J. J. CHAPMAN, in the Political Nursery, vol. iv. p. 4, April, 1900, abridged.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 320]

  

Lectures XIV and XV

  

THE VALUE OF SAINTLINESS

We have now passed in review the more important of the phenomena which are regarded as fruits of genuine religion and characteristics of men who are devout. Today we have to change our attitude from that of description to that of appreciation; we have to ask whether the fruits in question can help us to judge the absolute value of what religion adds to human life. Were I to parody Kant, I should say that a "Critique of pure Saintliness" must be our theme.

If, in turning to this theme, we could descend upon our subject from above like Catholic theologians, with our fixed definitions of man and man's perfection and our positive dogmas about God, we should have an easy time of it. Man's perfection would be the fulfillment of his end; and his end would be union with his Maker. That union could be pursued by him along three paths, active, purgative, and contemplative, respectively; and progress along either path would be a simple matter to measure by the application of a limited number of theological and moral conceptions and definitions. The absolute significance and value of any bit of religious experience we might hear of would thus be given almost mathematically into our hands.

If convenience were everything, we ought now to grieve at finding ourselves cut off from so admirably convenient a method as this. But we did cut ourselves off from it deliberately in those remarks which you remember we made, in our first lecture, about the empirical method; and it must be

[p. 321]

confessed that after that act of renunciation we can never hope for clean-cut and scholastic results. We cannot divide man sharply into an animal and a rational part. We cannot distinguish natural from supernatural effects; nor among the latter know which are favors of God, and which are counterfeit operations of the demon. We have merely to collect things together without any special a priori theological system, and out of an aggregate of piecemeal judgments as to the value of this and that experience--judgments in which our general philosophic prejudices, our instincts, and our common sense are our only guides--decide that on the whole one type of religion is approved by its fruits, and another type condemned. "On the whole"--I fear we shall never escape complicity with that qualification, so dear to your practical man, so repugnant to your systematizer!

I also fear that as I make this frank confession, I may seem to some of you to throw our compass overboard, and to adopt caprice as our pilot. Skepticism or wayward choice, you may think, can be the only results of such a formless method as I have taken up. A few remarks in deprecation of such an opinion, and in farther explanation of the empiricist principles which I profess, may therefore appear at this point to be in place.

 

Abstractly, it would seem illogical to try to measure the worth of a religion's fruits in merely human terms of value. How can you measure their worth without considering whether the God really exists who is supposed to inspire them? If he really exists, then all the conduct instituted by men to meet his wants must necessarily be a reasonable fruit of his religion--it would be unreasonable only in case he did not exist. If, for instance, you were to condemn a religion of human or animal sacrifices by virtue of your subjective sentiments, and if all the while a deity were really there demanding such sacrifices, you would be making a theoretical

[p. 322]

mistake by tacitly assuming that the deity must be non-existent; you would be setting up a theology of your own as much as if you were a scholastic philosopher.

To this extent, to the extent of disbelieving peremptorily in certain types of deity, I frankly confess that we must be theologians. If disbeliefs can be said to constitute a theology, then the prejudices, instincts, and common sense which I chose as our guides make theological partisans of us whenever they make certain beliefs abhorrent. But such common-sense prejudices and instincts are themselves the fruit of an empirical evolution. Nothing is more striking than the secular alteration that goes on in the moral and religious tone of men, as their insight into nature and their social arrangements progressively develop. After an interval of a few generations the mental climate proves unfavorable to notions of the deity which at an earlier date were perfectly satisfactory: the older gods have fallen below the common secular level, and can no longer be believed in. Today a deity who should require bleeding sacrifices to placate him would be too sanguinary to be taken seriously. Even if powerful historical credentials were put forward in his favor, we would not look at them. Once, on the contrary, his cruel appetites were of themselves credentials. They positively recommended him to men's imaginations in ages when such coarse signs of power were respected and no others could be understood. Such deities then were worshiped because such fruits were relished.

Doubtless historic accidents always played some later part, but the original factor in fixing the figure of the gods must always have been psychological. The deity to whom the prophets, seers, and devotees who founded the particular cult bore witness was worth something to them personally. They could use him. He guided their imagination, warranted their hopes, and controlled their will--or else they required him as a safeguard against the demon and a curber

[p. 323]

of other people's crimes. In any case, they chose him for the value of the fruits he seemed to them to yield. So soon as the fruits began to seem quite worthless; so soon as they conflicted with indispensable human ideals, or thwarted too extensively other values; so soon as they appeared childish, contemptible, or immoral when reflected on, the deity grew discredited, and was erelong neglected and forgotten. It was in this way that the Greek and Roman gods ceased to be believed in by educated pagans; it is thus that we ourselves judge of the Hindu, Buddhist, and Mohammedan theologies; Protestants have so dealt with the Catholic notions of deity, and liberal Protestants with older Protestant notions; it is thus that Chinamen judge of us, and that all of us now living will be judged by our descendants. When we cease to admire or approve what the definition of a deity implies, we end by deeming that deity incredible.

Few historic changes are more curious than these mutations of theological opinion. The monarchical type of sovereignty was, for example, so ineradicably planted in the mind of our own forefathers that a dose of cruelty and arbitrariness in their deity seems positively to have been required by their imagination. They called the cruelty "retributive justice," and a God without it would certainly have struck them as not "sovereign" enough. But today we abhor the very notion of eternal suffering inflicted; and that arbitrary dealing-out of salvation and damnation to selected individuals, of which Jonathan Edwards could persuade himself that he had not only a conviction, but a "delightful conviction," as of a doctrine "exceeding pleasant, bright, and sweet," appears to us, if sovereignly anything, sovereignly irrational and mean. Not only the cruelty, but the paltriness of character of the gods believed in by earlier centuries also strikes later centuries with surprise. We shall see examples of it from the annals of Catholic saintship which makes us rub our Protestant eyes. Ritual worship in general appears

[p. 324]

to the modern transcendentalist, as well as to the ultra-puritanic type of mind, as if addressed to a deity of an almost absurdly childish character, taking delight in toy-shop furniture, tapers and tinsel, costume and mumbling and mummery, and finding his "glory" incomprehensibly enhanced thereby:--just as on the other hand the formless spaciousness of pantheism appears quite empty to ritualistic natures, and the gaunt theism of evangelical sects seems intolerably bald and chalky and bleak. Luther, says Emerson, would have cut off his right hand rather than nail his theses to the door at Wittenberg, if he had supposed that they were destined to lead to the pale negations of Boston Unitarianism.

So far, then, although we are compelled, whatever may be our pretensions to empiricism, to employ some sort of a standard of theological probability of our own whenever we assume to estimate the fruits of other men's religion, yet this very standard has been begotten out of the drift of common life. It is the voice of human experience within us, judging and condemning all gods that stand athwart the pathway along which it feels itself to be advancing. Experience, if we take it in the largest sense, is thus the parent of those disbeliefs which, it was charged, were inconsistent with the experiential method. The inconsistency, you see, is immaterial, and the charge may be neglected.

If we pass from disbeliefs to positive beliefs, it seems to me that there is not even a formal inconsistency to be laid against our method. The gods we stand by are the gods we need and can use, the gods whose demands on us are reinforcements of our demands on ourselves and on one another. What I then propose to do is, briefly stated, to test saintliness by common sense, to use human standards to help us decide how far the religious life commends itself as an ideal kind of human activity. If it commends itself, then any theological beliefs that may inspire it, in so far forth will stand accredited. If not, then they will be discredited, and all without

[p. 325]

reference to anything but human working principles. It is but the elimination of the humanly unfit, and the survival of the humanly fittest, applied to religious beliefs; and if we look at history candidly and without prejudice, we have to admit that no religion has ever in the long run established or proved itself in any other way. Religions have approved themselves; they have ministered to sundry vital needs which they found reigning. When they violated other needs too strongly, or when other faiths came which served the same needs better, the first religions were supplanted.

The needs were always many, and the tests were never sharp. So the reproach of vagueness and subjectivity and "on the whole"-ness, which can with perfect legitimacy be addressed to the empirical method as we are forced to use it, is after all a reproach to which the entire life of man in dealing with these matters is obnoxious. No religion has ever yet owed its prevalence to "apodictic certainty."  In a later lecture I will ask whether objective certainty can ever be added by theological reasoning to a religion that already empirically prevails.

 

One word, also, about the reproach that in following this sort of an empirical method we are handing ourselves over to systematic skepticism.

Since it is impossible to deny secular alterations in our sentiments and needs, it would be absurd to affirm that one's own age of the world can be beyond correction by the next age. Skepticism cannot, therefore, be ruled out by any set of thinkers as a possibility against which their conclusions are secure; and no empiricist ought to claim exemption from this universal liability. But to admit one's liability to correction is one thing, and to embark upon a sea of wanton doubt is another. Of willfully playing into the hands of skepticism we cannot be accused. He who acknowledges the imperfectness of his instrument, and makes allowance

[p. 326]

for it in discussing his observations, is in a much better position for gaining truth than if he claimed his instrument to be infallible. Or is dogmatic or scholastic theology less doubted in point of fact for claiming, as it does, to be in point of right undoubtable? And if not, what command over truth would this kind of theology really lose if, instead of absolute certainty, she only claimed reasonable probability for her conclusions? If we claim only reasonable probability, it will be as much as men who love the truth can ever at any given moment hope to have within their grasp. Pretty surely it will be more than we could have had, if we were unconscious of our liability to err.

Nevertheless, dogmatism will doubtless continue to condemn us for this confession. The mere outward form of inalterable certainty is so precious to some minds that to renounce it explicitly is for them out of the question. They will claim it even where the facts most patently pronounce its folly. But the safe thing is surely to recognize that all the insights of creatures of a day like ourselves must be provisional. The wisest of critics is an altering being, subject to the better insight of the morrow, and right at any moment, only "up to date" and "on the whole."  When larger ranges of truth open, it is surely best to be able to open ourselves to their reception, unfettered by our previous pretensions. "Heartily know, when half-gods go, the gods arrive."

The fact of diverse judgments about religious phenomena is therefore entirely unescapable, whatever may be one's own desire to attain the irreversible. But apart from that fact, a more fundamental question awaits us, the question whether men's opinions ought to be expected to be absolutely uniform in this field. Ought all men to have the same religion? Ought they to approve the same fruits and follow the same leadings? Are they so like in their inner needs that, for hard and soft, for proud and humble, for strenuous and lazy, for healthy-minded and despairing, exactly the same

[p. 327]

religious incentives are required? Or are different functions in the organism of humanity allotted to different types of man, so that some may really be the better for a religion of consolation and reassurance, whilst others are better for one of terror and reproof? It might conceivably be so; and we shall, I think, more and more suspect it to be so as we go on. And if it be so, how can any possible judge or critic help being biased in favor of the religion by which his own needs are best met? He aspires to impartiality; but he is too close to the struggle not to be to some degree a participant, and he is sure to approve most warmly those fruits of piety in others which taste most good and prove most nourishing to him.

I am well aware of how anarchic much of what I say may sound. Expressing myself thus abstractly and briefly, I may seem to despair of the very notion of truth. But I beseech you to reserve your judgment until we see it applied to the details which lie before us. I do indeed disbelieve that we or any other mortal men can attain on a given day to absolutely incorrigible and unimprovable truth about such matters of fact as those with which religions deal. But I reject this dogmatic ideal not out of a perverse delight in intellectual instability. I am no lover of disorder and doubt as such. Rather do I fear to lose truth by this pretension to possess it already wholly. That we can gain more and more of it by moving always in the right direction, I believe as much as any one, and I hope to bring you all to my way of thinking before the termination of these lectures. Till then, do not, I pray you, harden your minds irrevocably against the empiricism which I profess.

I will waste no more words, then, in abstract justification of my method, but seek immediately to use it upon the facts.

 

In critically judging of the value of religious phenomena, it is very important to insist on the distinction between religion

[p. 328]

as an individual personal function, and religion as an institutional, corporate, or tribal product. I drew this distinction, you may remember, in my second lecture. The word "religion," as ordinarily used, is equivocal. A survey of history shows us that, as a rule, religious geniuses attract disciples, and produce groups of sympathizers. When these groups get strong enough to "organize" themselves, they become ecclesiastical institutions with corporate ambitions of their own. The spirit of politics and the lust of dogmatic rule are then apt to enter and to contaminate the originally innocent thing; so that when we hear the word "religion" nowadays, we think inevitably of some "church" or other; and to some persons the word "church" suggests so much hypocrisy and tyranny and meanness and tenacity of superstition that in a wholesale undiscerning way they glory in saying that they are "down" on religion altogether. Even we who belong to churches do not exempt other churches than our own from the general condemnation.

But in this course of lectures ecclesiastical institutions hardly concern us at all. The religious experience which we are studying is that which lives itself out within the private breast. First-hand individual experience of this kind has always appeared as a heretical sort of innovation to those who witnessed its birth. Naked comes it into the world and lonely; and it has always, for a time at least, driven him who had it into the wilderness, often into the literal wilderness out of doors, where the Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed, St. Francis, George Fox, and so many others had to go. George Fox expresses well this isolation; and I can do no better at this point than read to you a page from his Journal, referring to the period of his youth when religion began to ferment within him seriously.

"I fasted much," Fox says, "walked abroad in solitary places many days, and often took my Bible, and sat in hollow trees

[p. 329]

and lonesome places until night came on; and frequently in the night walked mournfully about by myself; for I was a man of sorrows in the time of the first workings of the Lord in me.

"During all this time I was never joined in profession of religion with any, but gave up myself to the Lord, having forsaken all evil company, taking leave of father and mother, and all other relations, and traveled up and down as a stranger on the earth, which way the Lord inclined my heart; taking a chamber to myself in the town where I came, and tarrying sometimes more, sometimes less in a place: for I durst not stay long in a place, being afraid both of professor and profane, lest, being a tender young man, I should be hurt by conversing much with either. For which reason I kept much as a stranger, seeking heavenly wisdom and getting knowledge from the Lord; and was brought off from outward things, to rely on the Lord alone. As I had forsaken the priests, so I left the separate preachers also, and those called the most experienced people; for I saw there was none among them all that could speak to my condition. And when all my hopes in them and in all men were gone so that I had nothing outwardly to help me, nor could tell what to do; then, oh then, I heard a voice which said, 'There is one, even Jesus Christ, that can speak to thy condition.' When I heard it, my heart did leap for joy. Then the Lord let me see why there was none upon the earth that could speak to my condition. I had not fellowship with any people, priests, nor professors, nor any sort of separated people. I was afraid of all carnal talk and talkers, for I could see nothing but corruptions. When I was in the deep, under all shut up, I could not believe that I should ever overcome; my troubles, my sorrows, and my temptations were so great that I often thought I should have despaired, I was so tempted. But when Christ opened to me how he was tempted by the same devil, and had overcome him, and had bruised his head; and that through him and his power, life, grace, and spirit, I should overcome also, I had confidence in him. If I had had a king's diet, palace, and attendance, all would have been as nothing, for nothing gave me comfort but the Lord by his power. I saw professors, priests, and people were whole and at ease in that condition which was my misery, and they loved that which I would have been rid of. But the Lord

[p. 330]

did stay my desires upon himself, and my care was cast upon him alone." [*1]

A genuine first-hand religious experience like this is bound to be a heterodoxy to its witnesses, the prophet appearing as a mere lonely madman. If his doctrine prove contagious enough to spread to any others, it becomes a definite and labeled heresy. But if it then still prove contagious enough to triumph over persecution, it becomes itself an orthodoxy; and when a religion has become an orthodoxy, its day of inwardness is over: the spring is dry; the faithful live at second hand exclusively and stone the prophets in their turn. The new church, in spite of whatever human goodness it may foster, can be henceforth counted on as a staunch ally in every attempt to stifle the spontaneous religious spirit, and to stop all later bubblings of the fountain from which in purer days it drew its own supply of inspiration. Unless, indeed, by adopting new movements of the spirit it can make capital out of them and use them for its selfish corporate designs! Of protective action of this politic sort, promptly or tardily decided on, the dealings of the Roman ecclesiasticism with many individual saints and prophets yield examples enough for our instruction.

The plain fact is that men's minds are built, as has been often said, in water-tight compartments. Religious after a fashion, they yet have many other things in them beside their religion, and unholy entanglements and associations inevitably obtain. The basenesses so commonly charged to religion's account are thus, almost all of them, not chargeable at all to religion proper, but rather to religion's wicked practical partner, the spirit of corporate dominion. And the bigotries are most of them in their turn chargeable to religion's wicked intellectual partner, the spirit of dogmatic dominion, the passion for laying down the law in the form

[p. 331]

of an absolutely closed-in theoretic system. The ecclesiastical spirit in general is the sum of these two spirits of dominion; and I beseech you never to confound the phenomena of mere tribal or corporate psychology which it presents with those manifestations of the purely interior life which are the exclusive object of our study. The baiting of Jews, the hunting of Albigenses and Waldenses, the stoning of Quakers and ducking of Methodists, the murdering of Mormons and the massacring of Armenians, express much rather that aboriginal human neophobia, that pugnacity of which we all share the vestiges, and that inborn hatred of the alien and of eccentric and non-conforming men as aliens, than they express the positive piety of the various perpetrators. Piety is the mask, the inner force is tribal instinct. You believe as little as I do, in spite of the Christian unction with which the German emperor addressed his troops upon their way to China, that the conduct which he suggested, and in which other Christian armies went beyond them, had anything whatever to do with the interior religious life of those concerned in the performance.

Well, no more for past atrocities than for this atrocity should we make piety responsible. At most we may blame piety for not availing to check our natural passions, and sometimes for supplying them with hypocritical pretexts. But hypocrisy also imposes obligations, and with the pretext usually couples some restriction; and when the passion gust is over, the piety may bring a reaction of repentance which the irreligious natural man would not have shown.

For many of the historic aberrations which have been laid to her charge, religion as such, then, is not to blame. Yet of the charge that over-zealousness or fanaticism is one of her liabilities we cannot wholly acquit her, so I will next make a remark upon that point. But I will preface it by a preliminary remark which connects itself with much that follows.

[p. 332]

Our survey of the phenomena of saintliness has unquestionably produced in your minds an impression of extravagance. Is it necessary, some of you have asked, as one example after another came before us, to be quite so fantastically good as that? We who have no vocation for the extremer ranges of sanctity will surely be let off at the last day if our humility, asceticism, and devoutness prove of a less convulsive sort. This practically amounts to saying that much that it is legitimate to admire in this field need nevertheless not be imitated, and that religious phenomena, like all other human phenomena, are subject to the law of the golden mean. Political reformers accomplish their successive tasks in the history of nations by being blind for the time to other causes. Great schools of art work out the effects which it is their mission to reveal, at the cost of a one-sidedness for which other schools must make amends. We accept a John Howard, a Mazzini, a Botticelli, a Michael Angelo, with a kind of indulgence. We are glad they existed to show us that way, but we are glad there are also other ways of seeing and taking life. So of many of the saints whom we have looked at. We are proud of a human nature that could be so passionately extreme, but we shrink from advising others to follow the example. The conduct we blame ourselves for not following lies nearer to the middle line of human effort. It is less dependent on particular beliefs and doctrines. It is such as wears well in different ages, such as under different skies all judges are able to commend.

The fruits of religion, in other words, are, like all human products, liable to corruption by excess. Common sense must judge them. It need not blame the votary; but it may be able to praise him only conditionally, as one who acts faithfully according to his lights. He shows us heroism in one way, but the unconditionally good way is that for which no indulgence need be asked.

[p. 333]

We find that error by excess is exemplified by every saintly virtue. Excess, in human faculties, means usually one-sidedness or want of balance; for it is hard to imagine an essential faculty too strong, if only other faculties equally strong be there to cooperate with it in action. Strong affections need a strong will; strong active powers need a strong intellect; strong intellect needs strong sympathies, to keep life steady. If the balance exist, no one faculty can possibly be too strong--we only get the stronger all-round character. In the life of saints, technically so called, the spiritual faculties are strong, but what gives the impression of extravagance proves usually on examination to be a relative deficiency of intellect. Spiritual excitement takes pathological forms whenever other interests are too few and the intellect too narrow. We find this exemplified by all the saintly attributes in turn--devout love of God, purity, charity, asceticism, all may lead astray. I will run over these virtues in succession.

 

First of all let us take Devoutness. When unbalanced, one of its vices is called Fanaticism. Fanaticism (when not a mere expression of ecclesiastical ambition) is only loyalty carried to a convulsive extreme. When an intensely loyal and narrow mind is once grasped by the feeling that a certain superhuman person is worthy of its exclusive devotion, one of the first things that happens is that it idealizes the devotion itself. To adequately realize the merits of the idol gets to be considered the one great merit of the worshiper; and the sacrifices and servilities by which savage tribesmen have from time immemorial exhibited their faithfulness to chieftains are now outbid in favor of the deity. Vocabularies are exhausted and languages altered in the attempt to praise him enough; death is looked on as gain if it attract his grateful notice; and the personal attitude of being his devotee

[p. 334]

becomes what one might almost call a new and exalted kind of professional specialty within the tribe. [*1] The legends that gather round the lives of holy persons are fruits of this impulse to celebrate and glorify. The Buddha [*2] and Mohammed [*3] and their companions and many Christian saints are incrusted with a heavy jewelry of anecdotes which are meant to be honorific, but are simply abgeschmackt and silly, and form a touching expression of man's misguided propensity to praise.

An immediate consequence of this condition of mind is jealousy for the deity's honor. How can the devotee show

[p. 335]

his loyalty better than by sensitiveness in this regard? The slightest affront or neglect must be resented, the deity's enemies must be put to shame. In exceedingly narrow minds and active wills, such a care may become an engrossing preoccupation; and crusades have been preached and massacres instigated for no other reason than to remove a fancied slight upon the God. Theologies representing the gods as mindful of their glory, and churches with imperialistic policies, have conspired to fan this temper to a glow, so that intolerance and persecution have come to be vices associated by some of us inseparably with the saintly mind. They are unquestionably its besetting sins. The saintly temper is a moral temper, and a moral temper has often to be cruel. It is a partisan temper, and that is cruel. Between his own and Jehovah's enemies a David knows no difference; a Catherine of Siena, panting to stop the warfare among Christians which was the scandal of her epoch, can think of no better method of union among them than a crusade to massacre the Turks; Luther finds no word of protest or regret over the atrocious tortures with which the Anabaptist leaders were put to death; and a Cromwell praises the Lord for delivering his enemies into his hands for "execution." Politics come in in all such cases; but piety finds the partnership not quite unnatural. So, when "freethinkers" tell us that religion and fanaticism are twins, we cannot make an unqualified denial of the charge.

Fanaticism must then be inscribed on the wrong side of religion's account, so long as the religious person's intellect is on the stage which the despotic kind of God satisfies. But as soon as the God is represented as less intent on his own honor and glory, it ceases to be a danger.

Fanaticism is found only where the character is masterful and aggressive. In gentle characters, where devoutness is intense and the intellect feeble, we have an imaginative absorption in the love of God to the exclusion of all practical

[p. 336]

human interests, which, though innocent enough, is too one-sided to be admirable. A mind too narrow has room but for one kind of affection. When the love of God takes possession of such a mind, it expels all human loves and human uses. There is no English name for such a sweet excess of devotion, so I will refer to it as a theopathic condition.

The blessed Margaret Mary Alacoque may serve as an example.

"To be loved here upon the earth," her recent biographer exclaims: "to be loved by a noble, elevated, distinguished being; to be loved with fidelity, with devotion--what enchantment! But to be loved by God! and loved by him to distraction [aime jusqu'a la folie]!--Margaret melted away with love at the thought of such a thing. Like Saint Philip of Neri in former times, or like Saint Francis Xavier, she said to God: 'Hold back, O my God, these torrents which overwhelm me, or else enlarge my capacity for their reception." [*1]

The most signal proofs of God's love which Margaret Mary received were her hallucinations of sight, touch, and hearing, and the most signal in turn of these were the revelations of Christ's sacred heart, "surrounded with rays more brilliant than the Sun, and transparent like a crystal. The wound which he received on the cross visibly appeared upon it. There was a crown of thorns round about this divine Heart, and a cross above it." At the same time Christ's voice told her that, unable longer to contain the flames of his love for mankind, he had chosen her by a miracle to spread the knowledge of them. He thereupon took out her mortal heart, placed it inside of his own and inflamed it, and then replaced it in her breast, adding: "Hitherto thou hast taken the name of my slave, hereafter thou shalt be called the well-beloved disciple of my Sacred Heart."

In a later vision the Saviour revealed to her in detail the "great design" which he wished to establish through her instrumentality.

[p. 337]

[paragraph continues] "I ask of thee to bring it about that every first Friday after the week of holy Sacrament shall be made into a special holy day for honoring my Heart by a general communion and by services intended to make honorable amends for the indignities which it has received. And I promise thee that my Heart will dilate to shed with abundance the influences of its love upon all those who pay to it these honors, or who bring it about that others do the same."

"This revelation," says Mgr. Bougaud, "is unquestionably the most important of all the revelations which have illumined the Church since that of the Incarnation and of the Lord's Supper. . . . After the Eucharist, the supreme effort of the Sacred Heart." [*1] Well, what were its good fruits for Margaret Mary's life? Apparently little else but sufferings and prayers and absences of mind and swoons and ecstasies. She became increasingly useless about the convent, her absorption in Christ's love--

"which grew upon her daily, rendering her more and more incapable of attending to external duties. They tried her in the infirmary, but without much success, although her kindness, zeal, and devotion were without bounds, and her charity rose to acts of such a heroism that our readers would not bear the recital of them. They tried her in the kitchen, but were forced to give it up as hopeless--everything dropped out of her hands. The admirable humility with which she made amends for her clumsiness could not prevent this from being prejudicial to the order and regularity which must always reign in a community. They put her in the school, where the little girls cherished her, and cut pieces out of her clothes [for relics] as if she were already a saint, but where she was too absorbed inwardly to pay the necessary attention. Poor dear sister, even less after her visions than before them was she a denizen of earth, and they had to leave her in her heaven." [*2]

[p. 338]

Poor dear sister, indeed! Amiable and good, but so feeble of intellectual outlook that it would be too much to ask of us, with our Protestant and modern education, to feel anything but indulgent pity for the kind of saintship which she embodies. A lower example still of theopathic saintliness is that of Saint Gertrude, a Benedictine nun of the thirteenth century, whose "Revelations," a well-known mystical authority, consist mainly of proofs of Christ's partiality for her undeserving person. Assurances of his love, intimacies and caresses and compliments of the most absurd and puerile sort, addressed by Christ to Gertrude as an individual, form the tissue of this paltry-minded recital. [*1] In reading such a narrative, we realize the gap between the thirteenth and the twentieth century, and we feel that saintliness of character may yield almost absolutely worthless

[p. 339]

fruits if it be associated with such inferior intellectual sympathies. What with science, idealism, and democracy, our own imagination has grown to need a God of an entirely different temperament from that Being interested exclusively in dealing out personal favors, with whom our ancestors were so contented. Smitten as we are with the vision of social righteousness, a God indifferent to everything but adulation, and full of partiality for his individual favorites, lacks an essential element of largeness; and even the best professional sainthood of former centuries, pent in as it is to such a conception, seems to us curiously shallow and unedifying.

Take Saint Teresa, for example, one of the ablest women, in many respects, of whose life we have the record. She had a powerful intellect of the practical order. She wrote admirable descriptive psychology, possessed a will equal to any emergency, great talent for politics and business, a buoyant disposition, and a first-rate literary style. She was tenaciously aspiring, and put her whole life at the service of her religious ideals. Yet so paltry were these, according to our present way of thinking, that (although I know that others have been moved differently) I confess that my only feeling in reading her has been pity that so much vitality of soul should have found such poor employment.

In spite of the sufferings which she endured, there is a curious flavor of superficiality about her genius. A Birmingham anthropologist, Dr. Jordan, has divided the human race into two types, whom he calls "shrews" and "nonshrews" respectively. [*1] The shrew-type is defined as possessing an "active unimpassioned temperament." In other words, shrews are the "motors," rather than the "sensories," [*2] and their expressions are as a rule more energetic

[p. 340]

than the feelings which appear to prompt them. Saint Teresa, paradoxical as such a judgment may sound, was a typical shrew, in this sense of the term. The bustle of her style, as well as of her life, proves it. Not only must she receive unheard-of personal favors and spiritual graces from her Saviour, but she must immediately write about them and exploiter them professionally, and use her expertness to give instruction to those less privileged. Her voluble egotism; her sense, not of radical bad being, as the really contrite have it, but of her "faults" and "imperfections" in the plural; her stereotyped humility and return upon herself, as covered with "confusion" at each new manifestation of God's singular partiality for a person so unworthy, are typical of shrewdom: a paramountly feeling nature would be objectively lost in gratitude, and silent. She had some public instincts, it is true; she hated the Lutherans, and longed for the church's triumph over them; but in the main her idea of religion seems to have been that of an endless amatory flirtation--if one may say so without irreverence--between the devotee and the deity; and apart from helping younger nuns to go in this direction by the inspiration of her example and instruction, there is absolutely no human use in her, or sign of any general human interest. Yet the spirit of her age, far from rebuking her, exalted her as superhuman.

We have to pass a similar judgment on the whole notion of saintship based on merits. Any God who, on the one hand, can care to keep a pedantically minute account of individual shortcomings, and on the other can feel such partialities, and load particular creatures with such insipid marks of favor, is too small-minded a God for our credence. When Luther, in his immense manly way, swept off by a stroke of his hand the very notion of a debit and credit account kept with individuals by the Almighty, he stretched the soul's imagination and saved theology from puerility.

[p. 341]

So much for mere devotion, divorced from the intellectual conceptions which might guide it towards bearing useful human fruit.

 

The next saintly virtue in which we find excess is Purity. In theopathic characters, like those whom we have just considered, the love of God must not be mixed with any other love. Father and mother, sisters, brothers, and friends are felt as interfering distractions; for sensitiveness and narrowness, when they occur together, as they often do, require above all things a simplified world to dwell in. Variety and confusion are too much for their powers of comfortable adaptation. But whereas your aggressive pietist reaches his unity objectively, by forcibly stamping disorder and divergence out, your retiring pietist reaches his subjectively, leaving disorder in the world at large, but making a smaller world in which he dwells himself and from which he eliminates it altogether. Thus, alongside of the church militant with its prisons, dragonnades, and inquisition methods, we have the church fugient, as one might call it, with its hermitages, monasteries, and sectarian organizations, both churches pursuing the same object--to unify the life, [*1] and simplify the spectacle presented to the soul. A mind extremely sensitive to inner discords will drop one external relation after another, as interfering with the absorption of

[p. 342]

consciousness in spiritual things. Amusements must go first, then conventional "society," then business, then family duties, until at last seclusion, with a subdivision of the day into hours for stated religious acts, is the only thing that can be borne. The lives of saints are a history of successive renunciations of complication, one form of contact with the outer life being dropped after another, to save the purity of inner tone. [*1] "Is it not better," a young sister asks her Superior, "that I should not speak at all during the hour of recreation, so as not to run the risk, by speaking, of falling into some sin of which I might not be conscious?" [*2] If the life remains a social one at all, those who take part in it must follow one identical rule.

Embosomed in this monotony, the zealot for purity feels clean and free once more. The minuteness of uniformity maintained in certain sectarian communities, whether monastic or not, is something almost inconceivable to a man of the world. Costume, phraseology, hours, and habits are absolutely stereotyped, and there is no doubt that some persons are so made as to find in this stability an incomparable kind of mental rest.

We have no time to multiply examples, so I will let

[p. 343]

the case of Saint Louis of Gonzaga serve as a type of excess in purification. I think you will agree that this youth carried the elimination of the external and discordant to a point which we cannot unreservedly admire. At the age of ten, his biographer says:--

"The inspiration came to him to consecrate to the Mother of God his own virginity--that being to her the most agreeable of possible presents. Without delay, then, and with all the fervor there was in him, joyous of heart, and burning with love, he made his vow of perpetual chastity. Mary accepted the offering of his innocent heart, and obtained for him from God, as a recompense, the extraordinary grace of never feeling during his entire life the slightest touch of temptation against the virtue of purity. This was an altogether exceptional favor, rarely accorded even to Saints themselves, and all the more marvelous in that Louis dwelt always in courts and among great folks, where danger and opportunity are so unusually frequent. It is true that Louis from his earliest childhood had shown a natural repugnance for whatever might be impure or unvirginal, and even for relations of any sort whatever between persons of opposite sex. But this made it all the more surprising that he should, especially since this vow, feel it necessary to have recourse to such a number of expedients for protecting against even the shadow of danger the virginity which he had thus consecrated. One might suppose that if any one could have contented himself with the ordinary precautions, prescribed for all Christians, it would assuredly have been he. But no! In the use of preservatives and means of defense, in flight from the most insignificant occasions, from every possibility of peril, just as in the mortification of his flesh, he went farther than the majority of saints. He, who by an extraordinary protection of God's grace was never tempted, measured all his steps as if he were threatened on every side by particular dangers. Thenceforward he never raised his eyes, either when walking in the streets, or when in society. Not only did he avoid all business with females even more scrupulously than before, but he renounced all conversation and

[p. 344]

every kind of social recreation with them, although his father tried to make him take part; and he commenced only too early to deliver his innocent body to austerities of every kind." [*1]

At the age of twelve, we read of this young man that "if by chance his mother sent one of her maids of honor to him with a message, he never allowed her to come in, but listened to her through the barely opened door, and dismissed her immediately. He did not like to be alone with his own mother, whether at table or in conversation; and when the rest of the company withdrew, he sought also a pretext for retiring. . . . Several great ladies, relatives of his, he avoided learning to know even by sight; and he made a sort of treaty with his father, engaging promptly and readily to accede to all his wishes, if he might only be excused from all visits to ladies." (Ibid., p. 71.)

When he was seventeen years old Louis joined the Jesuit order, [*2] against his father's passionate entreaties, for he was heir of a princely house; and when a year later the father died, he took the loss as a "particular attention" to himself on God's part, and wrote letters of stilted good advice, as from a spiritual superior, to his grieving mother. He soon became so good a monk that if any one asked him the number of his brothers and sisters, he had to reflect and count them over before replying. A Father asked him one day if he were never troubled by the thought of his family, to which, "I never think of them except when praying for them," was his only answer. Never was he seen to hold in his hand a flower or anything perfumed, that he might take pleasure in it. On the contrary, in the hospital, he used to

[p. 345]

seek for whatever was most disgusting, and eagerly snatch the bandages of ulcers, etc., from the hands of his companions. He avoided worldly talk, and immediately tried to turn every conversation on to pious subjects, or else he remained silent. He systematically refused to notice his surroundings. Being ordered one day to bring a book from the rector's seat in the refectory, he had to ask where the rector sat, for in the three months he had eaten bread there, so carefully did he guard his eyes that he had not noticed the place. One day, during recess, having looked by chance on one of his companions, he reproached himself as for a grave sin against modesty. He cultivated silence, as preserving from sins of the tongue; and his greatest penance was the limit which his superiors set to his bodily penances. He sought after false accusations and unjust reprimands as opportunities of humility; and such was his obedience that, when a room-mate, having no more paper, asked him for a sheet, he did not feel free to give it to him without first obtaining the permission of the superior, who, as such, stood in the place of God, and transmitted his orders.

I can find no other sorts of fruit than these of Louis's saintship. He died in 1591, in his twenty-ninth year, and is known in the Church as the patron of all young people. On his festival, the altar in the chapel devoted to him in a certain church in Rome "is embosomed in flowers, arranged with exquisite taste; and a pile of letters may be seen at its foot, written to the Saint by young men and women, and directed to 'Paradiso.' They are supposed to be burnt unread except by San Luigi, who must find singular petitions in these pretty little missives, tied up now with a green ribbon, expressive of hope, now with a red one, emblematic of love," etc. [*1]

[p. 346]

Our final judgment of the worth of such a life as this will depend largely on our conception of God, and of the sort of conduct he is best pleased with in his creatures. The Catholicism of the sixteenth century paid little heed to social righteousness; and to leave the world to the devil whilst saving one's own soul was then accounted no discreditable scheme. To-day, rightly or wrongly, helpfulness in general

[p. 347]

human affairs is, in consequence of one of those secular mutations in moral sentiment of which I spoke, deemed an essential element of worth in character; and to be of some public or private use is also reckoned as a species of divine service. Other early Jesuits, especially the missionaries among them, the Xaviers, Brebeufs, Jogues, were objective minds, and fought in their way for the world's welfare; so their lives to-day inspire us. But when the intellect, as in this Louis, is originally no larger than a pin's head, and cherishes ideas of God of corresponding smallness, the result, notwithstanding the heroism put forth, is on the whole repulsive. Purity, we see in the object-lesson, is not the one thing needful; and it is better that a life should contract many a dirt-mark, than forfeit usefulness in its efforts to remain unspotted.

Proceeding onwards in our search of religious extravagance, we next come upon excesses of Tenderness and Charity. Here saintliness has to face the charge of preserving the unfit, and breeding parasites and beggars. "Resist not evil," "Love your enemies," these are saintly maxims of which men of this world find it hard to speak without impatience. Are the men of this world right, or are the saints in possession of the deeper range of truth?

No simple answer is possible. Here, if anywhere, one feels the complexity of the moral life, and the mysteriousness of the way in which facts and ideals are interwoven.

Perfect conduct is a relation between three terms: the actor, the objects for which he acts, and the recipients of the action. In order that conduct should be abstractly perfect, all three terms, intention, execution, and reception, should be suited to one another. The best intention will fail if it either work by false means or address itself to the wrong recipient. Thus no critic or estimator of the value of conduct can confine himself to the actor's animus alone, apart from the other elements of the performance. As there is no

[p. 348]

worse lie than a truth misunderstood by those who hear it, so reasonable arguments, challenges to magnanimity, and appeals to sympathy or justice, are folly when we are dealing with human crocodiles and boa-constrictors. The saint may simply give the universe into the hands of the enemy by his trustfulness. He may by non-resistance cut off his own survival.

Herbert Spencer tells us that the perfect man's conduct will appear perfect only when the environment is perfect: to no inferior environment is it suitably adapted. We may paraphrase this by cordially admitting that saintly conduct would be the most perfect conduct conceivable in an environment where all were saints already; but by adding that in an environment where few are saints, and many the exact reverse of saints, it must be ill adapted. We must frankly confess, then, using our empirical common sense and ordinary practical prejudices, that in the world that actually is, the virtues of sympathy, charity, and non-resistance may be, and often have been, manifested in excess. The powers of darkness have systematically taken advantage of them. The whole modern scientific organization of charity is a consequence of the failure of simply giving alms. The whole history of constitutional government is a commentary on the excellence of resisting evil, and when one cheek is smitten, of smiting back and not turning the other cheek also.

You will agree to this in general, for in spite of the Gospel, in spite of Quakerism, in spite of Tolstoi, you believe in fighting fire with fire, in shooting down usurpers, locking up thieves, and freezing out vagabonds and swindlers.

And yet you are sure, as I am sure, that were the world confined to these hard-headed, hard-hearted, and hard-fisted methods exclusively, were there no one prompt to help a brother first, and find out afterwards whether he were worthy; no one willing to drown his private wrongs in pity for the wronger's person; no one ready to be duped many

[p. 349]

a time rather than live always on suspicion; no one glad to treat individuals passionately and impulsively rather than by general rules of prudence; the world would be an infinitely worse place than it is now to live in. The tender grace, not of a day that is dead, but of a day yet to be born somehow, with the golden rule grown natural, would be cut out from the perspective of our imaginations.

The saints, existing in this way, may, with their extravagances of human tenderness, be prophetic. Nay, innumerable times they have proved themselves prophetic. Treating those whom they met, in spite of the past, in spite of all appearances, as worthy, they have stimulated them to be worthy, miraculously transformed them by their radiant example and by the challenge of their expectation.

From this point of view we may admit the human charity which we find in all saints, and the great excess of it which we find in some saints, to be a genuinely creative social force, tending to make real a degree of virtue which it alone is ready to assume as possible. The saints are authors, auctores, increasers, of goodness. The potentialities of development in human souls are unfathomable. So many who seemed irretrievably hardened have in point of fact been softened, converted, regenerated, in ways that amazed the subjects even more than they surprised the spectators, that we never can be sure in advance of any man that his salvation by the way of love is hopeless. We have no right to speak of human crocodiles and boa-constrictors as of fixedly incurable beings. We know not the complexities of personality, the smouldering emotional fires, the other facets of the character-polyhedron, the resources of the subliminal region. St. Paul long ago made our ancestors familiar with the idea that every soul is virtually sacred. Since Christ died for us all without exception, St. Paul said, we must despair of no one. This belief in the essential sacredness of every one expresses itself to-day in all sorts of humane customs

[p. 350]

and reformatory institutions, and in a growing aversion to the death penalty and to brutality in punishment. The saints, with their extravagance of human tenderness, are the great torch-bearers of this belief, the tip of the wedge, the clearers of the darkness. Like the single drops which sparkle in the sun as they are flung far ahead of the advancing edge of a wave-crest or of a flood, they show the way and are forerunners. The world is not yet with them, so they often seem in the midst of the world's affairs to be preposterous. Yet they are impregnators of the world, vivifiers and animaters of potentialities of goodness which but for them would lie forever dormant. It is not possible to be quite as mean as we naturally are, when they have passed before us. One fire kindles another; and without that over-trust in human worth which they show, the rest of us would lie in spiritual stagnancy.

Momentarily considered, then, the saint may waste his tenderness and be the dupe and victim of his charitable fever, but the general function of his charity in social evolution is vital and essential. If things are ever to move upward, some one must be ready to take the first step, and assume the risk of it. No one who is not willing to try charity, to try non-resistance as the saint is always willing, can tell whether these methods will or will not succeed. When they do succeed, they are far more powerfully successful than force or worldly prudence. Force destroys enemies; and the best that can be said of prudence is that it keeps what we already have in safety. But non-resistance, when successful, turns enemies into friends; and charity regenerates its objects. These saintly methods are, as I said, creative energies; and genuine saints find in the elevated excitement with which their faith endows them an authority and impressiveness which makes them irresistible in situations where men of shallower nature cannot get on at all without the use of worldly prudence. This practical proof that

[p. 351]

worldly wisdom may be safely transcended is the saint's magic gift to mankind. [*1] Not only does his vision of a better

[p. 352]

world console us for the generally prevailing prose and barrenness; but even when on the whole we have to confess him ill adapted, he makes some converts, and the environment gets better for his ministry. He is an effective ferment of goodness, a slow transmuter of the earthly into a more heavenly order.

In this respect the Utopian dreams of social justice in which many contemporary socialists and anarchists indulge are, in spite of their impracticability and non-adaptation to present environmental conditions, analogous to the saint's belief in an existent kingdom of heaven. They help to break the edge of the general reign of hardness and are slow leavens of a better order.

 

The next topic in order is Asceticism, which I fancy you are all ready to consider without argument a virtue liable to extravagance and excess. The optimism and refinement of the modern imagination has, as I have already said elsewhere, changed the attitude of the church towards corporeal mortification, and a Suso or a Saint Peter of Alcantara [*1]

[p. 353]

appear to us to-day rather in the light of tragic mountebanks than of sane men inspiring us with respect. If the inner dispositions are right, we ask, what need of all this torment, this violation of the outer nature? It keeps the outer nature too important. Any one who is genuinely emancipated from the flesh will look on pleasures and pains, abundance and privation, as alike irrelevant and indifferent. He can engage in actions and experience enjoyments without fear of corruption or enslavement. As the Bhagavad-Gita says, only those need renounce worldly actions who are still inwardly attached thereto. If one be really unattached to the fruits of action, one may mix in the world with equanimity. I quoted in a former lecture Saint Augustine's antinomian saying: If you only love God enough, you may safely follow all your inclinations. "He needs no devotional practices," is one of Ramakrishna's maxims, "whose heart is moved to tears at the mere mention of the name of

[p. 354]

[paragraph continues] Hari." [*1] And the Buddha, in pointing out what he called "the middle way" to his disciples, told them to abstain from both extremes, excessive mortification being as unreal and unworthy as mere desire and pleasure. The only perfect life, he said, is that of inner wisdom, which makes one thing as indifferent to us as another, and thus leads to rest, to peace, and to Nirvana. [*2]

We find accordingly that as ascetic saints have grown older, and directors of conscience more experienced, they usually have shown a tendency to lay less stress on special bodily mortifications. Catholic teachers have always professed the rule that, since health is needed for efficiency in God's service, health must not be sacrificed to mortification. The general optimism and healthy-mindedness of liberal Protestant circles to-day makes mortification for mortification's sake repugnant to us. We can no longer sympathize with cruel deities, and the notion that God can take delight in the spectacle of sufferings self-inflicted in his honor is abhorrent. In consequence of all these motives you probably are disposed, unless some special utility can be shown in some individual's discipline, to treat the general tendency to asceticism as pathological.

Yet I believe that a more careful consideration of the whole matter, distinguishing between the general good intention of asceticism and the uselessness of some of the particular acts of which it may be guilty, ought to rehabilitate it in our esteem. For in its spiritual meaning asceticism stands for nothing less than for the essence of the twice-born philosophy. It symbolizes, lamely enough no doubt, but sincerely, the belief that there is an element of real wrongness in this world, which is neither to be ignored nor evaded, but which must be squarely met and overcome by an appeal

[p. 355]

to the soul's heroic resources, and neutralized and cleansed away by suffering. As against this view, the ultra-optimistic form of the once-born philosophy thinks we may treat evil by the method of ignoring. Let a man who, by fortunate health and circumstances, escapes the suffering of any great amount of evil in his own person, also close his eyes to it as it exists in the wider universe outside his private experience, and he will be quit of it altogether, and can sail through life happily on a healthy-minded basis. But we saw in our lectures on melancholy how precarious this attempt necessarily is. Moreover it is but for the individual; and leaves the evil outside of him, unredeemed and unprovided for in his philosophy.

No such attempt can be a general solution of the problem; and to minds of sombre tinge, who naturally feel life as a tragic mystery, such optimism is a shallow dodge or mean evasion. It accepts, in lieu of a real deliverance, what is a lucky personal accident merely, a cranny to escape by. It leaves the general world unhelped and still in the clutch of Satan. The real deliverance, the twice-born folk insist, must be of universal application. Pain and wrong and death must be fairly met and overcome in higher excitement, or else their sting remains essentially unbroken. If one has ever taken the fact of the prevalence of tragic death in this world's history fairly into his mind--freezing, drowning entombment alive, wild beasts, worse men, and hideous diseases--he can with difficulty, it seems to me, continue his own career of worldly prosperity without suspecting that he may all the while not be really inside the game, that he may lack the great initiation.

Well, this is exactly what asceticism thinks; and it voluntarily takes the initiation. Life is neither farce nor genteel comedy, it says, but something we must sit at in mourning garments, hoping its bitter taste will purge us of our folly. The wild and the heroic are indeed such rooted parts of it

[p. 356]

that healthy-mindedness pure and simple, with its sentimental optimism, can hardly be regarded by any thinking man as a serious solution. Phrases of neatness, cosiness, and comfort can never be an answer to the sphinx's riddle.

In these remarks I am leaning only upon mankind's common instinct for reality, which in point of fact has always held the world to be essentially a theatre for heroism. In heroism, we feel, life's supreme mystery is hidden. We tolerate no one who has no capacity whatever for it in any direction. On the other hand, no matter what a man's frailties otherwise may be, if he be willing to risk death, and still more if he suffer it heroically, in the service he has chosen, the fact consecrates him forever. Inferior to ourselves in this or that way, if yet we cling to life, and he is able "to fling it away like a flower" as caring nothing for it, we account him in the deepest way our born superior. Each of us in his own person feels that a high-hearted indifference to life would expiate all his shortcomings.

The metaphysical mystery, thus recognized by common sense, that he who feeds on death that feeds on men possesses life supereminently and excellently, and meets best the secret demands of the universe, is the truth of which asceticism has been the faithful champion. The folly of the cross, so inexplicable by the intellect, has yet its indestructible vital meaning.

Representatively, then, and symbolically, and apart from the vagaries into which the unenlightened intellect of former times may have let it wander, asceticism must, I believe, be acknowledged to go with the profounder way of handling the gift of existence. Naturalistic optimism is mere syllabub and flattery and sponge-cake in comparison. The practical course of action for us, as religious men, would therefore, it seems to me, not be simply to turn our backs upon the ascetic impulse, as most of us to-day turn them, but rather to discover some outlet for it of which the

[p. 357]

fruits in the way of privation and hardship might be objectively useful. The older monastic asceticism occupied itself with pathetic futilities, or terminated in the mere egotism of the individual, increasing his own perfection. [*1] But is it not possible for us to discard most of these older forms of mortification, and yet find saner channels for the heroism which inspired them?

Does not, for example, the worship of material luxury and wealth, which constitutes so large a portion of the "spirit" of our age, make somewhat for effeminacy and unmanliness? Is not the exclusively sympathetic and facetious way in which most children are brought up to-day--so different from the education of a hundred years ago, especially in evangelical circles--in danger, in spite of its many advantages, of developing a certain trashiness of fibre? Are there not hereabouts some points of application for a renovated and revised ascetic discipline?

Many of you would recognize such dangers, but would point to athletics, militarism, and individual and national enterprise and adventure as the remedies. These contemporary ideals are quite as remarkable for the energy with which they make for heroic standards of life, as contemporary religion is remarkable for the way in which it neglects them. [*2] War and adventure assuredly keep all who engage in them from treating themselves too tenderly. They demand such incredible efforts, depth beyond depth of exertion, both in degree and in duration, that the whole scale of motivation alters. Discomfort and annoyance, hunger and wet, pain and cold, squalor and filth, cease to have any

[p. 358]

deterrent operation whatever. Death turns into a commonplace matter, and its usual power to check our action vanishes. With the annulling of these customary inhibitions, ranges of new energy are set free, and life seems cast upon a higher plane of power.

The beauty of war in this respect is that it is so congruous with ordinary human nature. Ancestral evolution has made us all potential warriors; so the most insignificant individual, when thrown into an army in the field, is weaned from whatever excess of tenderness toward his precious person he may bring with him, and may easily develop into a monster of insensibility.

But when we compare the military type of self-severity with that of the ascetic saint, we find a world-wide difference in all their spiritual concomitants.

"'Live and let live,'" writes a clear-headed Austrian officer, "is no device for an army. Contempt for one's own comrades, for the troops of the enemy, and, above all, fierce contempt for one's own person, are what war demands of every one. Far better is it for an army to be too savage, too cruel, too barbarous, than to possess too much sentimentality and human reasonableness.

If the soldier is to be good for anything as a soldier, he must be exactly the opposite of a reasoning and thinking man. The measure of goodness in him is his possible use in war. War, and even peace, require of the soldier absolutely peculiar standards of morality. The recruit brings with him common moral notions, of which he must seek immediately to get rid. For him victory, success, must be everything. The most barbaric tendencies in men come to life again in war, and for war's uses they are incommensurably good." [*1]

These words are of course literally true. The immediate aim of the soldier's life is, as Moltke said, destruction, and

[p. 359]

nothing but destruction; and whatever constructions wars result in are remote and non-military. Consequently the soldier cannot train himself to be too feelingless to all those usual sympathies and respects, whether for persons or for things, that make for conservation. Yet the fact remains that war is a school of strenuous life and heroism; and, being in the line of aboriginal instinct, is the only school that as yet is universally available. But when we gravely ask ourselves whether this wholesale organization of irrationality and crime be our only bulwark against effeminacy, we stand aghast at the thought, and think more kindly of ascetic religion. One hears of the mechanical equivalent of heat. What we now need to discover in the social realm is the moral equivalent of war: something heroic that will speak to men as universally as war does, and yet will be as compatible with their spiritual selves as war has proved itself to be incompatible. I have often thought that in the old monkish poverty-worship, in spite of the pedantry which infested it, there might be something like that moral equivalent of war which we are seeking. May not voluntarily accepted poverty be "the strenuous life," without the need of crushing weaker peoples?

Poverty indeed is the strenuous life--without brass bands or uniforms or hysteric popular applause or lies or circumlocutions; and when one sees the way in which wealth-getting enters as an ideal into the very bone and marrow of our generation, one wonders whether a revival of the belief that poverty is a worthy religious vocation may not be "the transformation of military courage," and the spiritual reform which our time stands most in need of.

Among us English-speaking peoples especially do the praises of poverty need once more to be boldly sung. We have grown literally afraid to be poor. We despise any one who elects to be poor in order to simplify and save his inner life. If he does not join the general scramble and pant with

[p. 360]

the money-making street, we deem him spiritless and lacking in ambition. We have lost the power even of imagining what the ancient idealization of poverty could have meant: the liberation from material attachments, the unbribed soul, the manlier indifference, the paying our way by what we are or do and not by what we have, the right to fling away our life at any moment irresponsibly--the more athletic trim, in short, the moral fighting shape. When we of the so-called better classes are scared as men were never scared in history at material ugliness and hardship; when we put off marriage until our house can be artistic, and quake at the thought of having a child without a bank-account and doomed to manual labor, it is time for thinking men to protest against so unmanly and irreligious a state of opinion.

It is true that so far as wealth gives time for ideal ends and exercise to ideal energies, wealth is better than poverty and ought to be chosen. But wealth does this in only a portion of the actual cases. Elsewhere the desire to gain wealth and the fear to lose it are our chief breeders of cowardice and propagators of corruption. There are thousands of conjunctures in which a wealth-bound man must be a slave, whilst a man for whom poverty has no terrors becomes a freeman. Think of the strength which personal indifference to poverty would give us if we were devoted to unpopular causes. We need no longer hold our tongues or fear to vote the revolutionary or reformatory ticket. Our stocks might fall, our hopes of promotion vanish, our salaries stop, our club doors close in our faces; yet, while we lived, we would imperturbably bear witness to the spirit, and our example would help to set free our generation. The cause would need its funds, but we its servants would be potent in proportion as we personally were contented with our poverty.

I recommend this matter to your serious pondering, for it is certain that the prevalent fear of poverty among the

[p. 361]

educated classes is the worst moral disease from which our civilization suffers.

 

I have now said all that I can usefully say about the several fruits of religion as they are manifested in saintly lives, so I will make a brief review and pass to my more general conclusions.

Our question, you will remember, is as to whether religion stands approved by its fruits, as these are exhibited in the saintly type of character. Single attributes of saintliness may, it is true, be temperamental endowments, found in non-religious individuals. But the whole group of them forms a combination which, as such, is religious, for it seems to flow from the sense of the divine as from its psychological centre. Whoever possesses strongly this sense comes naturally to think that the smallest details of this world derive infinite significance from their relation to an unseen divine order. The thought of this order yields him a superior denomination of happiness, and a steadfastness of soul with which no other can compare. In social relations his serviceability is exemplary; he abounds in impulses to help. His help is inward as well as outward, for his sympathy reaches souls as well as bodies, and kindles unsuspected faculties therein. Instead of placing happiness where common men place it, in comfort, he places it in a higher kind of inner excitement, which converts discomforts into sources of cheer and annuls unhappiness. So he turns his back upon no duty, however thankless; and when we are in need of assistance, we can count upon the saint lending his hand with more certainty than we can count upon any other person. Finally, his humble-mindedness and his ascetic tendencies save him from the petty personal pretensions which so obstruct our ordinary social intercourse, and his purity gives us in him a clean man for a companion. Felicity, purity, charity, patience, self-severity--these are splendid excellencies, and the

[p. 362]

saint of all men shows them in the completest possible measure.

But, as we saw, all these things together do not make saints infallible. When their intellectual outlook is narrow, they fall into all sorts of holy excesses, fanaticism or theopathic absorption, self-torment, prudery, scrupulosity, gullibility, and morbid inability to meet the world. By the very intensity of his fidelity to the paltry ideals with which an inferior intellect may inspire him, a saint can be even more objectionable and damnable than a superficial carnal man would be in the same situation. We must judge him not sentimentally only, and not in isolation, but using our own intellectual standards, placing him in his environment, and estimating his total function.

Now in the matter of intellectual standards, we must bear in mind that it is unfair, where we find narrowness of mind, always to impute it as a vice to the individual, for in religious and theological matters he probably absorbs his narrowness from his generation. Moreover, we must not confound the essentials of saintliness, which are those general passions of which I have spoken, with its accidents, which are the special determinations of these passions at any historical moment. In these determinations the saints will usually be loyal to the temporary idols of their tribe. Taking refuge in monasteries was as much an idol of the tribe in the middle ages, as bearing a hand in the world's work is to-day. Saint Francis or Saint Bernard, were they living to-day, would undoubtedly be leading consecrated lives of some sort, but quite as undoubtedly they would not lead them in retirement. Our animosity to special historic manifestations must not lead us to give away the saintly impulses in their essential nature to the tender mercies of inimical critics.

The most inimical critic of the saintly impulses whom I know is Nietzsche. He contrasts them with the worldly passions

[p. 363]

as we find these embodied in the predaceous military character, altogether to the advantage of the latter. Your born saint, it must be confessed, has something about him which often makes the gorge of a carnal man rise, so it will be worth while to consider the contrast in question more fully.

Dislike of the saintly nature seems to be a negative result of the biologically useful instinct of welcoming leadership, and glorifying the chief of the tribe. The chief is the potential, if not the actual tyrant, the masterful, overpowering man of prey. We confess our inferiority and grovel before him. We quail under his glance, and are at the same time proud of owning so dangerous a lord. Such instinctive and submissive hero-worship must have been indispensable in primeval tribal life. In the endless wars of those times, leaders were absolutely needed for the tribe's survival. If there were any tribes who owned no leaders, they can have left no issue to narrate their doom. The leaders always had good consciences, for conscience in them coalesced with will, and those who looked on their face were as much smitten with wonder at their freedom from inner restraint as with awe at the energy of their outward performances.

Compared with these beaked and taloned graspers of the world, saints are herbivorous animals, tame and harmless barn-yard poultry. There are saints whose beard you may, if you ever care to, pull with impunity. Such a man excites no thrills of wonder veiled in terror; his conscience is full of scruples and returns; he stuns us neither by his inward freedom nor his outward power; and unless he found within us an altogether different faculty of admiration to appeal to, we should pass him by with contempt.

In point of fact, he does appeal to a different faculty. Reenacted in human nature is the fable of the wind, the sun, and the traveler. The sexes embody the discrepancy. The woman loves the man the more admiringly the stormier

[p. 364]

he shows himself, and the world deifies its rulers the more for being willful and unaccountable. But the woman in turn subjugates the man by the mystery of gentleness in beauty, and the saint has always charmed the world by something similar. Mankind is susceptible and suggestible in opposite directions, and the rivalry of influences is unsleeping. The saintly and the worldly ideal pursue their feud in literature as much as in real life.

For Nietzsche the saint represents little but sneakingness and slavishness. He is the sophisticated invalid, the degenerate par excellence, the man of insufficient vitality. His prevalence would put the human type in danger.

"The sick are the greatest danger for the well. The weaker, not the stronger, are the strong's undoing. It is not fear of our fellow-man, which we should wish to see diminished; for fear rouses those who are strong to become terrible in turn themselves, and preserves the hard-earned and successful type of humanity. What is to be dreaded by us more than any other doom is not fear, but rather the great disgust, not fear, but rather the great pity--disgust and pity for our human fellows. . . . The morbid are our greatest peril--not the 'bad' men, not the predatory beings. Those born wrong, the miscarried, the broken--they it is, the weakest who are undermining the vitality of the race, poisoning our trust in life, and putting humanity in question. Every look of them is a sigh--'Would I were something other! I am sick and tired of what I am.' In this swamp-soil of self-contempt, every poisonous weed flourishes, and all so small, so secret, so dishonest, and so sweetly rotten. Here swarm the worms of sensitiveness and resentment, here the air smells odious with secrecy, with what is not to be acknowledged; here is woven endlessly the net of the meanest of conspiracies, the conspiracy of those who suffer against those who succeed and are victorious; here the very aspect of the victorious is hated--as if health, success, strength, pride, and the sense of power were in themselves things vicious, for which one ought eventually to make bitter expiation. Oh, how these people would themselves like to inflict the expiation, how they thirst to be the hangmen!

[p. 365]

[paragraph continues] And all the while their duplicity never confesses their hatred to be hatred." [*1]

Poor Nietzsche's antipathy is itself sickly enough, but we all know what he means, and he expresses well the clash between the two Ideals. The carnivorous-minded "strong man," the adult male and cannibal, can see nothing but mouldiness and morbidness in the saint's gentleness and self-severity, and regards him with pure loathing. The whole feud revolves essentially upon two pivots: Shall the seen world or the unseen world be our chief sphere of adaptation? and must our means of adaptation in this seen world be aggressiveness or non-resistance?

The debate is serious. In some sense and to some degree both worlds must be acknowledged and taken account of; and in the seen world both aggressiveness and non-resistance are needful. It is a question of emphasis, of more or less. Is the saint's type or the strong-man's type the more ideal?

It has often been supposed, and even now, I think, it is supposed by most persons, that there can be one intrinsically ideal type of human character. A certain kind of man, it is imagined, must be the best man absolutely and apart from the utility of his function, apart from economical considerations. The saint's type, and the knight's or gentleman's type, have always been rival claimants of this absolute ideality; and in the ideal of military religious orders both types were in a manner blended. According to the empirical philosophy, however, all ideals are matters of relation. It would be absurd, for example, to ask for a definition of "the ideal horse," so long as dragging drays and running races, bearing children, and jogging about with tradesmen's packages all remain as indispensable differentiations of equine function.

[p. 366]

[paragraph continues] You may take what you call a general all-round animal as a compromise, but he will be inferior to any horse of a more specialized type, in some one particular direction. We must not forget this now when, in discussing saintliness, we ask if it be an ideal type of manhood. We must test it by its economical relations.

I think that the method which Mr. Spencer uses in his Data of Ethics will help to fix our opinion. Ideality in conduct is altogether a matter of adaptation. A society where all were invariably aggressive would destroy itself by inner friction, and in a society where some are aggressive, others must be non-resistant, if there is to be any kind of order. This is the present constitution of society, and to the mixture we owe many of our blessings. But the aggressive members of society are always tending to become bullies, robbers, and swindlers; and no one believes that such a state of things as we now live in is the millennium. It is meanwhile quite possible to conceive an imaginary society in which there should be no aggressiveness, but only sympathy and fairness--any small community of true friends now realizes such a society. Abstractly considered, such a society on a large scale would be the millennium, for every good thing might be realized there with no expense of friction. To such a millennial society the saint would be entirely adapted. His peaceful modes of appeal would be efficacious over his companions, and there would be no one extant to take advantage of his non-resistance. The saint is therefore abstractly a higher type of man than the "strong man," because he is adapted to the highest society conceivable, whether that society ever be concretely possible or not. The strong man would immediately tend by his presence to make that society deteriorate. It would become inferior in everything save in a certain kind of bellicose excitement, dear to men as they now are.

But if we turn from the abstract question to the actual

[p. 367]

situation, we find that the individual saint may be well or ill adapted, according to particular circumstances. There is, in short, no absoluteness in the excellence of sainthood. It must be confessed that as far as this world goes, anyone who makes an out-and-out saint of himself does so at his peril. If he is not a large enough man, he may appear more insignificant and contemptible, for all his saintship, than if he had remained a worldling. [*1] Accordingly religion has seldom been so radically taken in our Western world that the devotee could not mix it with some worldly temper. It has always found good men who could follow most of its impulses, but who stopped short when it came to non-resistance. Christ himself was fierce upon occasion. Cromwells, Stonewall Jacksons, Gordons, show that Christians can be strong men also.

How is success to be absolutely measured when there are so many environments and so many ways of looking at the adaptation? It cannot be measured absolutely; the verdict will vary according to the point of view adopted. From the biological point of view Saint Paul was a failure, because he was beheaded. Yet he was magnificently adapted to the larger environment of history; and so far as any saint's example is a leaven of righteousness in the world, and draws it in the direction of more prevalent habits of saintliness, he is a success, no matter what his immediate bad fortune may be. The greatest saints, the spiritual heroes whom every one acknowledges, the Francises, Bernards, Luthers, Loyolas, Wesleys, Channings, Moodys, Gratrys, the Phillips Brookses, the Agnes Joneses, Margaret Hallahans, and Dora Pattisons,

[p. 368]

are successes from the outset. They show themselves, and there is no question; every one perceives their strength and stature. Their sense of mystery in things, their passion, their goodness, irradiate about them and enlarge their outlines while they soften them. They are like pictures with an atmosphere and background; and, placed alongside of them, the strong men of this world and no other seem as dry as sticks, as hard and crude as blocks of stone or brick-bats.

In a general way, then, and "on the whole," [*1] our abandonment of theological criteria, and our testing of religion by practical common sense and the empirical method, leave it in possession of its towering place in history. Economically, the saintly group of qualities is indispensable to the world's welfare. The great saints are immediate successes; the smaller ones are at least heralds and harbingers, and they may be leavens also, of a better mundane order. Let us be saints, then, if we can, whether or not we succeed visibly and temporally. But in our Father's house are many mansions, and each of us must discover for himself the kind of religion and the amount of saintship which best comports with what he believes to be his powers and feels to be his truest mission and vocation. There are no successes to be guaranteed and no set orders to be given to individuals, so long as we follow the methods of empirical philosophy.

 

This is my conclusion so far. I know that on some of your minds it leaves a feeling of wonder that such a method should have been applied to such a subject, and this in spite of all those remarks about empiricism which I made at the beginning of Lecture XIII. [*2] How, you say, can religion, which believes in two worlds and an invisible order, be estimated by the adaptation of its fruits to this world's order

[p. 369]

alone? It is its truth, not its utility, you insist, upon which our verdict ought to depend. If religion is true, its fruits are good fruits, even though in this world they should prove uniformly ill adapted and full of naught but pathos. It goes back, then, after all, to the question of the truth of theology. The plot inevitably thickens upon us; we cannot escape theoretical considerations. I propose, then, that to some degree we face the responsibility. Religious persons have often, though not uniformly, professed to see truth in a special manner. That manner is known as mysticism. I will consequently now proceed to treat at some length of mystical phenomena, and after that, though more briefly, I will consider religious philosophy.

Footnotes

^330:1 GEORGE FOX: Journal, Philadelphia, 1800, pp. 59-61, abridged.

^334:1 Christian saints have had their specialties of devotion, Saint Francis to Christ's wounds; Saint Anthony of Padua to Christ's childhood; Saint Bernard to his humanity; Saint Teresa to Saint Joseph, etc. The Shi-ite Mohammedans venerate Ali, the Prophet's son-in-law, instead of Abu-bekr, his brother-in-law. Vambery describes a dervish whom he met in Persia, "who had solemnly vowed, thirty years before, that he would never employ his organs of speech otherwise but in uttering, everlastingly, the name of his favorite, Ali, Ali. He thus wished to signify to the world that he was the most devoted partisan of that Ali who had been dead a thousand years. In his own home, speaking with his wife, children, and friends, no other word but 'Ali!' ever passed his lips. If he wanted food or drink or anything else, he expressed his wants still by repeating 'Ali!' Begging or buying at the bazaar, it was always 'Ali!' Treated ill or generously, he would still harp on his monotonous 'Ali!' Latterly his zeal assumed such tremendous proportions that, like a madman, he would race, the whole day, up and down the streets of the town, throwing his stick high up into the air, and shriek our, all the while, at the top of his voice, 'Ali!' This dervish was venerated by everybody as a saint, and received everywhere with the greatest distinction." ARMINIUS VAMBeRY, his Life and Adventures, written by Himself, London, 1889, p. 69. On the anniversary of the death of Hussein, Ali's son, the Shi-ite Moslems still make the air resound with cries of his name and Ali's.

^334:2 Compare H. C. WARREN: Buddhism in Translation, Cambridge, U.S., 1898, passim.

^334:3 Compare J. L. MERRICK: The Life and Religion of Mohammed, as contained in the Sheeah traditions of the Hyat-ul-Kuloob, Boston. 1850, passim.

^336:1 BOUGAUD: Hist. de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie, Paris, 1894, p. 145.

^337:1 BOUGAUD: Hist. de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie, Paris, 1894, pp. 365, 241.

^337:2 BOUGAUD: Op. cit., p. 267.

^338:1 Examples: "Suffering from a headache, she sought, for the glory of God, to relieve herself by holding certain odoriferous substances in her mouth, when the Lord appeared to her to lean over towards her lovingly, and to find comfort Himself in these odors. After having gently breathed them in, He arose, and said with a gratified air to the Saints, as if contented with what He had done: 'see the new present which my betrothed has given Me!'

"One day, at chapel, she heard supernaturally sung the words 'Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus.' The son of God leaning towards her like a sweet lover, and giving to her soul the softest kiss, said to her at the second Sanctus: 'In this Sanctus addressed to my person, receive with this kiss all the sanctity of my divinity and of my humanity, and let it be to thee a sufficient preparation for approaching the communion table.' And the next following Sunday, while she was thanking God for this favor, behold the Son of God, more beauteous than thousands of angels, takes her in His arms as if He were proud of her and presents her to God the Father, in that perfection of sanctity with which He had dowered her. And the Father took such delight in this soul thus presented by His only son, that, as if unable longer to restrain Himself, He gave her, and the Holy Ghost gave her also, the sanctity attributed to each by His own Sanctus--and thus she remained endowed with the plenary fullness of the blessing of Sanctity, bestowed on her by Omnipotence, by Wisdom, and by Love." Revelations de Sainte Gertrude, Paris, 1898, i. 44, 186.

^339:1 FURNEAUX JORDAN: Character in Birth and Parentage, first edition. Later editions change the nomenclature.

^339:2 As to this distinction, see the admirably practical account in J. M. Baldwin's little book, THE STORY OF THE MIND, 1898.

^341:1 On this subject I refer to the work of M. MURISIER (Les Maladies du sentiment Religieux, Paris, 1901), who makes inner unification the mainspring of the whole religious life. But all strongly ideal interests, religious or irreligious, unify the mind and tend to subordinate everything to themselves. One would infer from M. Murisier's pages that this formal condition was peculiarly characteristic of religion, and that one might in comparison almost neglect material content, in studying the latter. I trust that the present work will convince the reader that religion has plenty of material content which is characteristic and which is more important by far than any general psychological form. In spite of this criticism, I find M. Murisier's book highly instructive.

^342:1 Example: "At the first beginning of the Servitor's [Suso's] interior life, after he had purified his soul properly by confession, he marked out for himself, in thought, three circles, within which he shut himself up, as in a spiritual intrenchment. The first circle was his cell, his chapel, and the choir. When he was within this circle, he seemed to himself in complete security. The second circle was the whole monastery as far as the outer gate. The third and outermost circle was the gate itself, and here it was necessary for him to stand well upon his guard. When he went outside these circles, it seemed to him that he was in the plight of some wild animal which is outside its hole, and surrounded by the hunt, and therefore in need of all its cunning and watchfulness." The Life of the Blessed Henry Suso, by Himself, translated by KNOX, London, 1865, p. 168.

^342:2 Vie des premieres Religieuses Dominicaines de la Congregation de St. Dominique, a Nancy; Nancy, 1896, p. 129.

^344:1 MESCHLER'S Life of Saint Louis of Gonzaga, French translation by LEBReQUIER, 1891, p. 40.

^344:2 In his boyish note-book he praises the monastic life for its freedom from sin, and for the imperishable treasures, which it enables us to store up, "of merit in God's eyes which makes of Him our debtor for all Eternity." Loc. cit., p. 62.

^345:1 Mademoiselle Mori, a novel quoted in HARE'S Walks in Rome, 1900, i. 55.

I cannot resist the temptation to quote from Starbuck's book, p. 388, [p. 346] another case of purification by elimination. It runs as follows:--

"The signs of abnormality which sanctified persons show are of frequent occurrence. They get out of tune with other people; often they will have nothing to do with churches, which they regard as worldly; they become hypercritical towards others; they grow careless of their social, political, and financial obligations. As an instance of this type may be mentioned a woman of sixty-eight of whom the writer made a special study. She had been a member of one of the most active and progressive churches in a busy part of a large city. Her pastor described her as having reached the censorious stage. She had grown more and more out of sympathy with the church; her connection with it finally consisted simply in attendance at prayer-meeting, at which her only message was that of reproof and condemnation of the others for living on a low plane. At last she withdrew from fellowship with any church. The writer found her living alone in a little room on the top story of a cheap boarding-house quite out of touch with all human relations, but apparently happy in the enjoyment of her own spiritual blessings. Her time was occupied in writing booklets on sanctification--page after page of dreamy rhapsody. She proved to be one of a small group of persons who claim that entire salvation involves three steps instead of two; not only must there be conversion and sanctification, but a third, which they call 'crucifixion' or 'perfect redemption,' and which seems to bear the same relation to sanctification that this bears to conversion. She related how the Spirit had said to her, 'Stop going to church. Stop going to holiness meetings. Go to your own room and I will teach you.' She professes to care nothing for colleges, or preachers, or churches, but only cares to listen to what God says to her. Her description of her experience seemed entirely consistent; she is happy and contented, and her life is entirely satisfactory to herself. While listening to her own story, one was tempted to forget that it was from the life of a person who could not live by it in conjunction with her fellows."

^351:1 The best missionary lives abound in the victorious combination of non-resistance with personal authority. John G. Paton, for example, in the New Hebrides, among brutish Melanesian cannibals, preserves a charmed life by dint of it. When it comes to the point, no one ever dares actually to strike him. Native converts, inspired by him, showed analogous virtue. "One of our chiefs, full of the Christ-kindled desire to seek and to save, sent a message to an inland chief, that he and four attendants would come on Sabbath and tell them the gospel of Jehovah God. The reply came back sternly forbidding their visit, and threatening with death any Christian that approached their village. Our chief sent in response a loving message, telling them that Jehovah had taught the Christians to return good for evil, and that they would come unarmed to tell them the story of how the Son of God came into the world and died in order to bless and save his enemies. The heathen chief sent back a stern and prompt reply once more: 'If you come, you will be killed.' On Sabbath morn the Christian chief and his four companions were met outside the village by the heathen chief, who implored and threatened them once more. But the former said:--

"'We come to you without weapons of war! We come only to tell you about Jesus. We believe that He will protect us to-day.'

"As they pressed steadily forward towards the village, spears began to be thrown at them. Some they evaded, being all except one dexterous warriors; and others they literally received with their bare hands, and turned them aside in an incredible manner. The heathen, apparently thunderstruck at these men thus approaching them without weapons of war, and not even flinging back their own spears which they had caught, after having thrown what the old chief called 'a shower of spears,' desisted from mere surprise. Our Christian chief called out, as he and his companions drew up in the midst of them on the village public ground:--

"'Jehovah thus protects us. He has given us all your spears! Once we would have thrown them back at you and killed you. But now we come, not to fight but to tell you about Jesus. He has changed our dark hearts. He asks you now to lay down all these your other weapons of war, and to hear what we can tell you about the love of God, our great Father, the only living God.'

"The heathen were perfectly overawed. They manifestly looked on these Christians as protected by some Invisible One. They listened for the first time to the story of the Gospel and of the Cross. We lived to [p. 352] see that chief and all his tribe sitting in the school of Christ. And there is perhaps not an island in these southern seas, amongst all those won for Christ, where similar acts of heroism on the part of converts cannot be recited." JOHN G. PATON, Missionary to the New Hebrides, An Autobiography, second part, London, 1890, p. 243.

^352:1 Saint Peter, Saint Teresa tells us in her autobiography (French translation, p. 333), "had passed forty years without ever sleeping more than an hour and a half a day. Of all his mortifications, this was the one that had cost him the most. To compass it, he kept always on his knees or on his feet. The little sleep he allowed nature to take was snatched in a sitting posture, his head leaning against a piece of wood fixed in the wall. Even had he wished to lie down, it would have been impossible, because his cell was only four feet and a half long. In the course of all these years he never raised his hood, no matter what the ardor of the sun or the rain's strength. He never put on a shoe. He wore a garment of coarse sackcloth, with nothing else upon his skin. This garment was as scant as possible, and over it a little [p. 353] cloak of the same stuff. When the cold was great he took off the cloak and opened for a while the door and little window of his cell. Then he closed them and resumed the mantle--his way, as he told us, of warming himself, and making his body feel a better temperature. It was a frequent thing with him to eat once only in three days; and when I expressed my surprise, he said that it was very easy if one once had acquired the habit. One of his companions has assured me that he has gone sometimes eight days without food. . . . His poverty was extreme; and his mortification, even in his youth, was such that he told me he had passed three years in a house of his order without knowing any of the monks otherwise than by the sound of their voice, for he never raised his eyes, and only found his way about by following the others. He showed this same modesty on public highways. He spent many years without ever laying eyes upon a woman; but he confessed to me that at the age he had reached it was indifferent to him whether he laid eyes on them or not. He was very old when I first came to know him, and his body so attenuated that it seemed formed of nothing so much as of so many roots of trees. With all this sanctity he was very affable. He never spoke unless he was questioned, but his intellectual right-mindedness and grace gave to all his words an irresistible charm."

^354:1 F. MAX MuLLER: Ramakrishna, his Life and sayings, 1899, p. 180.

^354:2 OLDENBERG: Buddha; translated by W. HOEY, London, 1882, p. 127.

^357:1 "The vanities of all others may die out, but the vanity of a saint as regards his sainthood is hard indeed to wear away." Ramakrishna his Life and Sayings, 1899, p. 172.

^357:2 "When a church has to be run by oysters, ice-cream, and fun," I read in an American religious paper, "you may be sure that it is running away from Christ." Such, if one may judge by appearances, is the present plight of many of our churches.

^358:1 C. V. B. K.: Friedens-und Kriegs-moral der Heere. Quoted by HAMON: Psychologie du Militaire professional, 1895, p. xli.

^365:1 Zur Genealogie der Moral, Dritte Abhandlung,  section 14. I have abridged, and in one place transposed, a sentence.

^367:1 We all know daft saints, and they inspire a queer kind of aversion. But in comparing saints with strong men we must choose individuals on the same intellectual level. The under-witted strong man homologous in his sphere with the under-witted saint, is the bully of the slums, the hooligan or rowdy. Surely on this level also the saint preserves a certain superiority.

^368:1 See above, <page 321>.

^368:2 Above, pp. <page 321>-<page 327>.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 370]

  

Lectures XVI and XVII

  

MYSTICISM

Over and over again in these lectures I have raised points and left them open and unfinished until we should have come to the subject of Mysticism. Some of you, I fear, may have smiled as you noted my reiterated postponements. But now the hour has come when mysticism must be faced in good earnest, and those broken threads wound up together. One may say truly, I think, that personal religious experience has its root and centre in mystical states of consciousness; so for us, who in these lectures are treating personal experience as the exclusive subject of our study, such states of consciousness ought to form the vital chapter from which the other chapters get their light. Whether my treatment of mystical states will shed more light or darkness, I do not know, for my own constitution shuts me out from their enjoyment almost entirely, and I can speak of them only at second hand. But though forced to look upon the subject so externally, I will be as objective and receptive as I can; and I think I shall at least succeed in convincing you of the reality of the states in question, and of the paramount importance of their function.

First of all, then, I ask, What does the expression "mystical states of consciousness" mean? How do we part off mystical states from other states?

The words "mysticism" and "mystical" are often used as terms of mere reproach, to throw at any opinion which we regard as vague and vast and sentimental, and without a base in either facts or logic. For some writers a "mystic" is

[p. 371]

any person who believes in thought-transference, or spirit-return. Employed in this way the word has little value: there are too many less ambiguous synonyms. So, to keep it useful by restricting it, I will do what I did in the case of the word "religion," and simply propose to you four marks which, when an experience has them, may justify us in calling it mystical for the purpose of the present lectures. In this way we shall save verbal disputation, and the recriminations that generally go therewith.

1. Ineffability.--The handiest of the marks by which I classify a state of mind as mystical is negative. The subject of it immediately says that it defies expression, that no adequate report of its contents can be given in words. It follows from this that its quality must be directly experienced; it cannot be imparted or transferred to others. In this peculiarity mystical states are more like states of feeling than like states of intellect. No one can make clear to another who has never had a certain feeling, in what the quality or worth of it consists. One must have musical ears to know the value of a symphony; one must have been in love one's self to understand a lover's state of mind. Lacking the heart or ear, we cannot interpret the musician or the lover justly, and are even likely to consider him weak-minded or absurd. The mystic finds that most of us accord to his experiences an equally incompetent treatment.

2. Noetic quality.--Although so similar to states of feeling, mystical states seem to those who experience them to be also states of knowledge. They are states of insight into depths of truth unplumbed by the discursive intellect. They are illuminations, revelations, full of significance and importance, all inarticulate though they remain; and as a rule they carry with them a curious sense of authority for after-time.

These two characters will entitle any state to be called mystical, in the sense in which I use the word. Two other

[p. 372]

qualities are less sharply marked, but are usually found. These are:--

3. Transiency.--Mystical states cannot be sustained for long. Except in rare instances, half an hour, or at most an hour or two, seems to be the limit beyond which they fade into the light of common day. Often, when faded, their quality can but imperfectly be reproduced in memory; but when they recur it is recognized; and from one recurrence to another it is susceptible of continuous development in what is felt as inner richness and importance.

4. Passivity.--Although the oncoming of mystical states may be facilitated by preliminary voluntary operations, as by fixing the attention, or going through certain bodily performances, or in other ways which manuals of mysticism prescribe; yet when the characteristic sort of consciousness once has set in, the mystic feels as if his own will were in abeyance, and indeed sometimes as if he were grasped and held by a superior power. This latter peculiarity connects mystical states with certain definite phenomena of secondary or alternative personality, such as prophetic speech, automatic writing, or the mediumistic trance. When these latter conditions are well pronounced, however, there may be no recollection whatever of the phenomenon, and it may have no significance for the subject's usual inner life, to which, as it were, it makes a mere interruption. Mystical states, strictly so-called, are never merely interruptive. Some memory of their content always remains, and a profound sense of their importance. They modify the inner life of the subject between the times of their recurrence. Sharp divisions in this region are, however, difficult to make, and we find all sorts of gradations and mixtures.

These four characteristics are sufficient to mark out a group of states of consciousness peculiar enough to deserve a special name and to call for careful study. Let it then be called the mystical group.

[p. 373]

Our next step should be to gain acquaintance with some typical examples. Professional mystics at the height of their development have often elaborately organized experiences and a philosophy based thereupon. But you remember what I said in my first lecture: phenomena are best understood when placed within their series, studied in their germ and in their over-ripe decay, and compared with their exaggerated and degenerated kindred. The range of mystical experience is very wide, much too wide for us to cover in the time at our disposal. Yet the method of serial study is so essential for interpretation that if we really wish to reach conclusions we must use it. I will begin, therefore, with phenomena which claim no special religious significance, and end with those of which the religious pretensions are extreme.

The simplest rudiment of mystical experience would seem to be that deepened sense of the significance of a maxim or formula which occasionally sweeps over one. "I've heard that said all my life," we exclaim, "but I never realized its full meaning until now." "When a fellow-monk," said Luther, "one day repeated the words of the Creed: 'I believe in the forgiveness of sins,' I saw the Scripture in an entirely new light; and straightway I felt as if I were born anew. It was as if I had found the door of paradise thrown wide open." [*1] This sense of deeper significance is not confined to rational propositions. Single words, [*2] and

[p. 374]

conjunctions of words, effects of light on land and sea, odors and musical sounds, all bring it when the mind is tuned aright. Most of us can remember the strangely moving power of passages in certain poems read when we were young, irrational doorways as they were through which the mystery of fact, the wildness and the pang of life, stole into our hearts and thrilled them. The words have now perhaps become mere polished surfaces for us; but lyric poetry and music are alive and significant only in proportion as they fetch these vague vistas of a life continuous with our own, beckoning and inviting, yet ever eluding our pursuit. We are alive or dead to the eternal inner message of the arts according as we have kept or lost this mystical susceptibility.

A more pronounced step forward on the mystical ladder is found in an extremely frequent phenomenon, that sudden feeling, namely, which sometimes sweeps over us, of having "been here before," as if at some indefinite past time, in just this place, with just these people, we were already saying just these things. As Tennyson writes:

"Moreover, something is or seems
  That touches me with mystic gleams,
  Like glimpses of forgotten dreams--

"Of something felt, like something here;
  Of something done, I know not where;
  Such as no language may declare." [*1]

[p. 375]

[paragraph continues] Sir James Crichton-Browne has given the technical name of "dreamy states" to these sudden invasions of vaguely reminiscent consciousness. [*1] They bring a sense of mystery and of the metaphysical duality of things, and the feeling of an enlargement of perception which seems imminent but which never completes itself. In Dr. Crichton-Browne's opinion they connect themselves with the perplexed and scared disturbances of self-consciousness which occasionally precede epileptic attacks. I think that this learned alienist takes a rather absurdly alarmist view of an intrinsically insignificant phenomenon. He follows it along the downward ladder, to insanity; our path pursues the upward ladder chiefly. The divergence shows how important it is to neglect no part of a phenomenon's connections, for we make it appear admirable or dreadful according to the context by which we set it off.

Somewhat deeper plunges into mystical consciousness are met with in yet other dreamy states. Such feelings as these which Charles Kingsley describes are surely far from being uncommon, especially in youth:--

"When I walk the fields, I am oppressed now and then with an innate feeling that everything I see has a meaning, if I could but understand it. And this feeling of being surrounded with truths which I cannot grasp amounts to indescribable awe sometimes.

[p. 376]

[paragraph continues] . . . Have you not felt that your real soul was imperceptible to your mental vision, except in a few hallowed moments?" [*1]

A much more extreme state of mystical consciousness is described by J. A. Symonds; and probably more persons than we suspect could give parallels to it from their own experience.

"Suddenly," writes Symonds, "at church, or in company, or when I was reading, and always, I think, when my muscles were at rest, I felt the approach of the mood. Irresistibly it took possession of my mind and will, lasted what seemed an eternity, and disappeared in a series of rapid sensations which resembled the awakening from anaesthetic influence. One reason why I disliked this kind of trance was that I could not describe it to myself. I cannot even now find words to render it intelligible. It consisted in a gradual but swiftly progressive obliteration of space, time, sensation, and the multitudinous factors of experience which seem to qualify what we are pleased to call our Self. In proportion as these conditions of ordinary consciousness were subtracted, the sense of an underlying or essential consciousness acquired intensity. At last nothing remained but a pure, absolute, abstract Self. The universe became without form and void of content. But Self persisted, formidable in its vivid keenness, feeling the most poignant doubt about reality, ready, as it seemed, to find existence break as breaks a bubble round about it. And what then? The apprehension of a coming dissolution, the grim conviction that this state was the last state of the conscious Self, the sense that I had followed the last thread of being to the verge of the abyss, and had arrived at demonstration of eternal Maya or illusion, stirred or seemed to stir me up again. The return to ordinary conditions of sentient existence began by my first recovering the power of touch, and then by the gradual though rapid influx of familiar impressions and diurnal interests. At last I felt myself once more a human being; and

[p. 377]

though the riddle of what is meant by life remained unsolved I was thankful for this return from the abyss--this deliverance from so awful an initiation into the mysteries of skepticism.

"This trance recurred with diminishing frequency until I reached the age of twenty-eight. It served to impress upon my growing nature the phantasmal unreality of all the circumstances which contribute to a merely phenomenal consciousness. Often have I asked myself with anguish, on waking from that formless state of denuded, keenly sentient being, Which is the unreality--the trance of fiery, vacant, apprehensive, skeptical Self from which I issue, or these surrounding phenomena and habits which veil that inner Self and build a self of flesh-and-blood conventionality? Again, are men the factors of some dream, the dream-like unsubstantiality of which they comprehend at such eventful moments? What would happen if the final stage of the trance were reached?" [*1]

In a recital like this there is certainly something suggestive of pathology. [*2] The next step into mystical states carries us into a realm that public opinion and ethical philosophy have long since branded as pathological, though private practice and certain lyric strains of poetry seem still to bear witness to its ideality. I refer to the consciousness produced by intoxicants and anaesthetics, especially by alcohol. The sway of alcohol over mankind is unquestionably due to its power to stimulate the mystical faculties of human nature, usually crushed to earth by the cold facts and dry criticisms of the sober hour. Sobriety diminishes, discriminates, and

[p. 378]

says no; drunkenness expands, unites, and says yes. It is in fact the great exciter of the Yes function in man. It brings its votary from the chill periphery of things to the radiant core. It makes him for the moment one with truth. Not through mere perversity do men run after it. To the poor and the unlettered it stands in the place of symphony concerts and of literature; and it is part of the deeper mystery and tragedy of life that whiffs and gleams of something that we immediately recognize as excellent should be vouchsafed to so many of us only in the fleeting earlier phases of what in its totality is so degrading a poisoning. The drunken consciousness is one bit of the mystic consciousness, and our total opinion of it must find its place in our opinion of that larger whole.

Nitrous oxide and ether, especially nitrous oxide, when sufficiently diluted with air, stimulate the mystical consciousness in an extraordinary degree. Depth beyond depth of truth seems revealed to the inhaler. This truth fades out, however, or escapes, at the moment of coming to; and if any words remain over in which it seemed to clothe itself, they prove to be the veriest nonsense. Nevertheless, the sense of a profound meaning having been there persists; and I know more than one person who is persuaded that in the nitrous oxide trance we have a genuine metaphysical revelation.

Some years ago I myself made some observations on this aspect of nitrous oxide intoxication, and reported them in print. One conclusion was forced upon my mind at that time, and my impression of its truth has ever since remained unshaken. It is that our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as we call it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely different. We may go through life without suspecting their existence; but apply the requisite stimulus,

[p. 379]

and at a touch they are there in all their completeness, definite types of mentality which probably somewhere have their field of application and adaptation. No account of the universe in its totality can be final which leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded. How to regard them is the question--for they are so discontinuous with ordinary consciousness. Yet they may determine attitudes though they cannot furnish formulas, and open a region though they fail to give a map. At any rate, they forbid a premature closing of our accounts with reality. Looking back on my own experiences, they all converge towards a kind of insight to which I cannot help ascribing some metaphysical significance. The keynote of it is invariably a reconciliation. It is as if the opposites of the world, whose contradictoriness and conflict make all our difficulties and troubles, were melted into unity. Not only do they, as contrasted species, belong to one and the same genus, but one of the species, the nobler and better one, is itself the genus, and so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself. This is a dark saying, I know, when thus expressed in terms of common logic, but I cannot wholly escape from its authority. I feel as if it must mean something, something like what the hegelian philosophy means, if one could only lay hold of it more clearly. Those who have ears to hear, let them hear; to me the living sense of its reality only comes in the artificial mystic state of mind. [*1]

I just now spoke of friends who believe in the anaesthetic revelation. For them too it is a monistic insight, in which the other in its various forms appears absorbed into the One.

[p. 380]

"Into this pervading genius," writes one of them, "we pass, forgetting and forgotten, and thenceforth each is all, in God. There is no higher, no deeper, no other, than the life in which we are founded. 'The One remains, the many change and pass;' and each and every one of us is the One that remains. . . . This is the ultimatum. . . . As sure as being--whence is all our care--so sure is content, beyond duplexity, antithesis, or trouble, where I have triumphed in a solitude that God is not above." [*1]

[p. 381]

This has the genuine religious mystic ring! I just now quoted J. A. Symonds. He also records a mystical experience

[p. 382]

with chloroform, as follows:--

"After the choking and stifling had passed away, I seemed at first in a state of utter blankness; then came flashes of intense light, alternating with blackness, and with a keen vision of what was going on in the room around me, but no sensation of touch. I thought that I was near death; when, suddenly, my soul became aware of God, who was manifestly dealing with me, handling me, so to speak, in an intense personal present reality. I felt him streaming in like light upon me. . . . I cannot describe the ecstasy I felt. Then, as I gradually awoke from the influence of the anaesthetics, the old sense of my relation to the world began to return, the new sense of my relation to God began to fade. I suddenly leapt to my feet on the chair where I was sitting, and shrieked out, 'It is too horrible, it is too horrible, it is too horrible,' meaning that I could not bear this disillusionment. Then I flung myself on the ground, and at last awoke covered with blood, calling to the two surgeons (who were frightened), 'Why did you not kill me? Why would you not let me die?' Only think of it. To have felt for that long dateless ecstasy of vision the very God, in all purity and tenderness and truth and absolute love, and then to find that I had after all had no revelation, but that I had been tricked by the abnormal excitement of my brain.

"Yet, this question remains, Is it possible that the inner sense of reality which succeeded, when my flesh was dead to impressions

[p. 383]

from without, to the ordinary sense of physical relations, was not a delusion but an actual experience? Is it possible that I, in that moment, felt what some of the saints have said they always felt, the undemonstrable but irrefragable certainty of God?" [*1]

[p. 384]

With this we make connection with religious mysticism pure and simple. Symonds's question takes us back to those examples which you will remember my quoting in the lecture on the Reality of the Unseen, of sudden realization of the immediate presence of God. The phenomenon in one shape or another is not uncommon.

[p. 385]

"I know," writes Mr. Trine, "an officer on our police force who has told me that many times when off duty, and on his way home in the evening, there comes to him such a vivid and vital realization of his oneness with this Infinite Power, and this Spirit of Infinite Peace so takes hold of and so fills him, that it seems as if his feet could hardly keep to the pavement, so buoyant and so exhilarated does he become by reason of this inflowing tide." [*1]

Certain aspects of nature seem to have a peculiar power of awakening such mystical moods. [*2] Most of the striking

[p. 386]

cases which I have collected have occurred out of doors. Literature has commemorated this fact in many passages of great beauty--this extract, for example, from Amiel's Journal Intime:--

"Shall I ever again have any of those prodigious reveries which sometimes came to me in former days? One day, in youth, at sunrise, sitting in the ruins of the castle of Faucigny; and again in the mountains, under the noonday sun, above Lavey, lying at the foot of a tree and visited by three butterflies; once more at night upon the shingly shore of the Northern Ocean, my back upon the sand and my vision ranging through the Milky Way;--such grand and spacious, immortal, cosmogonic reveries, when one reaches to the stars, when one owns the infinite! Moments divine, ecstatic hours; in which our thought flies from world to world, pierces the great enigma, breathes with a respiration broad, tranquil, and deep as the respiration of the ocean, serene and limitless as the blue firmament; . . . instants of irresistible intuition in which one feels one's self great as the universe, and calm as a god. . . . What hours, what memories! The vestiges they leave behind are enough to fill us with belief and enthusiasm, as if they were visits of the Holy Ghost." [*1]

Here is a similar record from the memoirs of that interesting German idealist, Malwida von Meysenbug:--

"I was alone upon the seashore as all these thoughts flowed over me, liberating and reconciling; and now again, as once before in distant days in the Alps of Dauphine, I was impelled to kneel down, this time before the illimitable ocean, symbol of the Infinite. I felt that I prayed as I had never prayed before, and knew now what prayer really is: to return from the solitude of individuation into the consciousness of unity with all that is, to kneel down as one that passes away, and to rise up as one imperishable.

[p. 387]

[paragraph continues] Earth, heaven, and sea resounded as in one vast world-encircling harmony. It was as if the chorus of all the great who had ever lived were about me. I felt myself one with them, and it appeared as if I heard their greeting: 'Thou too belongest to the company of those who overcome.'" [*1]

The well known passage from Walt Whitman is a classical expression of this sporadic type of mystical experience.

"I believe in you, my Soul . . .
  Loaf with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat;. . .
  Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.
  I mind how once we lay, such a transparent summer morning.
  Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass all the argument of the earth,
  And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,
  And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,
  And that all the men ever born are also my brothers and the women my sisters and lovers,
  And that a kelson of the creation is love." [*2]

I could easily give more instances, but one will suffice. I take it from the Autobiography of J. Trevor. [*3]

[p. 388]

"One brilliant Sunday morning, my wife and boys went to the Unitarian Chapel in Macclesfield. I felt it impossible to accompany them--as though to leave the sunshine on the hills, and go down there to the chapel, would be for the time an act of spiritual suicide. And I felt such need for new inspiration and expansion in my life. So, very reluctantly and sadly, I left my wife and boys to go down into the town, while I went further up into the hills with my stick and my dog. In the loveliness of the morning, and the beauty of the hills and valleys, I soon lost my sense of sadness and regret. For nearly an hour I walked along the road to the 'Cat and Fiddle,' and then returned. On the way back, suddenly, without warning, I felt that I was in Heaven--an inward state of peace and joy and assurance indescribably intense, accompanied with a sense of being bathed in a warm glow of light, as though the external condition had brought about the internal effect--a feeling of having passed beyond the body, though the scene around me stood out more clearly and as if nearer to me than before, by reason of the illumination in the midst of which I seemed to be placed. This deep emotion lasted, though with decreasing strength, until I reached home, and for some time after, only gradually passing away."

The writer adds that having had further experiences of a similar sort, he now knows them well.

"The spiritual life," he writes, "justifies itself to those who live it; but what can we say to those who do not understand? This, at least, we can say, that it is a life whose experiences are proved real to their possessor, because they remain with him when brought closest into contact with the objective realities of life. Dreams cannot stand this test. We wake from them to find that they are but dreams. Wanderings of an overwrought brain do not stand this test. These highest experiences that I have had of God's presence have been rare and brief--flashes of consciousness which have compelled me to exclaim with surprise--God is here!--or conditions of exaltation and insight, less intense, and only gradually passing away. I have severely questioned the worth of these moments. To no soul have I named them, lest I

[p. 389]

should be building my life and work on mere phantasies of the brain. But I find that, after every questioning and test, they stand out to-day as the most real experiences of my life, and experiences which have explained and justified and unified all past experiences and all past growth. Indeed, their reality and their far-reaching significance are ever becoming more clear and evident. When they came, I was living the fullest, strongest, sanest, deepest life. I was not seeking them. What I was seeking, with resolute determination, was to live more intensely my own life, as against what I knew would be the adverse judgment of the world. It was in the most real seasons that the Real Presence came, and I was aware that I was immersed in the infinite ocean of God." [*1]

Even the least mystical of you must by this time be convinced of the existence of mystical moments as states of consciousness of an entirely specific quality, and of the deep impression which they make on those who have them. A Canadian psychiatrist, Dr. R. M. Bucke, gives to the more distinctly characterized of these phenomena the name of cosmic consciousness. "Cosmic consciousness in its more striking instances is not," Dr. Bucke says, "simply an expansion or extension of the self-conscious mind with which we are all familiar, but the superaddition of a function as distinct from any possessed by the average man as self-consciousness is distinct from any function possessed by one of the higher animals."

"The prime characteristic of cosmic consciousness is a consciousness of the cosmos, that is, of the life and order of the universe. Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there occurs an intellectual enlightenment which alone would place the individual on a new plane of existence--would make him almost a member of a new species. To this is added a state of moral exaltation, an indescribable feeling of elevation, elation, and joyousness, and a quickening of the moral sense, which is

[p. 390]

fully as striking, and more important than is the enhanced intellectual power. With these come what may be called a sense of immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction that he shall have this, but the consciousness that he has it already." [*1]

It was Dr. Bucke's own experience of a typical onset of cosmic consciousness in his own person which led him to investigate it in others. He has printed his conclusions In a highly interesting volume, from which I take the following account of what occurred to him:--

"I had spent the evening in a great city, with two friends, reading and discussing poetry and philosophy. We parted at midnight. I had a long drive in a hansom to my lodging. My mind, deeply under the influence of the ideas, images, and emotions called up by the reading and talk, was calm and peaceful. I was in a state of quiet, almost passive enjoyment, not actually thinking, but letting ideas, images, and emotions flow of themselves, as it were, through my mind. All at once, without warning of any kind, I found myself wrapped in a flame-colored cloud. For an instant I thought of fire, an immense conflagration somewhere close by in that great city; the next, I knew that the fire was within myself. Directly afterward there came upon me a sense of exultation, of immense joyousness accompanied or immediately followed by an intellectual illumination impossible to describe. Among other things, I did not merely come to believe, but I saw that the universe is not composed of dead matter, but is, on the contrary, a living Presence; I became conscious in myself of eternal life. It was not a conviction that I would have eternal life, but a consciousness that I possessed eternal life then; I saw that all men are immortal; that the cosmic order is such that without any peradventure all things work together for the good of each and all; that the foundation principle of the world, of all the worlds, is what we call love, and that the happiness of each and all is in the long run

[p. 391]

absolutely certain. The vision lasted a few seconds and was gone; but the memory of it and the sense of the reality of what it taught has remained during the quarter of a century which has since elapsed. I knew that what the vision showed was true. I had attained to a point of view from which I saw that it must be true. That view, that conviction, I may say that consciousness, has never, even during periods of the deepest depression, been lost." [*1]

We have now seen enough of this cosmic or mystic consciousness, as it comes sporadically. We must next pass to its methodical cultivation as an element of the religious life. Hindus, Buddhists, Mohammedans, and Christians all have cultivated it methodically.

In India, training in mystical insight has been known from time immemorial under the name of yoga. Yoga means the experimental union of the individual with the divine. It is based on persevering exercise; and the diet, posture, breathing, intellectual concentration, and moral discipline vary slightly in the different systems which teach it. The yogi, or disciple, who has by these means overcome the obscurations of his lower nature sufficiently, enters into the condition termed samadhi, "and comes face to face with facts which no instinct or reason can ever know." He learns--

"That the mind itself has a higher state of existence, beyond reason, a superconscious state, and that when the mind gets to that higher state, then this knowledge beyond reasoning comes. . . . All the different steps in yoga are intended to bring us scientifically to the superconscious state or Samadhi. . . . Just as unconscious work is beneath consciousness, so there is another work which is above consciousness, and which, also, is not accompanied with the feeling of egoism . . . . There is no feeling

[p. 392]

of I, and yet the mind works, desireless, free from restlessness, objectless, bodiless. Then the Truth shines in its full effulgence, and we know ourselves--for Samadhi lies potential in us all--for what we truly are, free, immortal, omnipotent, loosed from the finite, and its contrasts of good and evil altogether, and identical with the Atman or Universal Soul." [*1]

The Vedantists say that one may stumble into superconsciousness sporadically, without the previous discipline, but it is then impure. Their test of its purity, like our test of religion's value, is empirical: its fruits must be good for life. When a man comes out of Samadhi, they assure us that he remains "enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character changed, his life changed, illumined." [*2]

The Buddhists used the word "samadhi" as well as the Hindus; but "dhyana" is their special word for higher states of contemplation. There seem to be four stages recognized in dhyana. The first stage comes through concentration of the mind upon one point. It excludes desire, but not discernment or judgment: it is still intellectual. In the second stage the intellectual functions drop off, and the satisfied sense of unity remains. In the third stage the satisfaction departs, and indifference begins, along with memory and

[p. 393]

self-consciousness. In the fourth stage the indifference, memory, and self-consciousness are perfected. [Just what "memory" and "self-consciousness" mean in this connection is doubtful. They cannot be the faculties familiar to us in the lower life.] Higher stages still of contemplation are mentioned--a region where there exists nothing, and where the mediator says: "There exists absolutely nothing," and stops. Then he reaches another region where he says: "There are neither ideas nor absence of ideas," and stops again. Then another region where, "having reached the end of both idea and perception, he stops finally." This would seem to be, not yet Nirvana, but as close an approach to it as this life affords. [*1]

In the Mohammedan world the Sufi sect and various dervish bodies are the possessors of the mystical tradition. The Sufis have existed in Persia from the earliest times, and as their pantheism is so at variance with the hot and rigid monotheism of the Arab mind, it has been suggested that Sufism must have been inoculated into Islam by Hindu influences. We Christians know little of Sufism, for its secrets are disclosed only to those initiated. To give its existence a certain liveliness in your minds, I will quote a Moslem document, and pass away from the subject.

Al-Ghazzali, a Persian philosopher and theologian, who flourished in the eleventh century, and ranks as one of the greatest doctors of the Moslem church, has left us one of the few autobiographies to be found outside of Christian literature. Strange that a species of book so abundant among ourselves should be so little represented elsewhere--the absence of strictly personal confessions is the chief difficulty to the purely literary student who would like to become acquainted with the inwardness of religions other than the Christian.

[p. 394]

M. Schmolders has translated a part of Al-Ghazzali's autobiography into French: [*1]--

"The Science of the Sufis," says the Moslem author, "aims at detaching the heart from all that is not God, and at giving to it for sole occupation the meditation of the divine being. Theory being more easy for me than practice, I read [certain books] until I understood all that can be learned by study and hearsay. Then I recognized that what pertains most exclusively to their method is just what no study can grasp, but only transport, ecstasy, and the transformation of the soul. How great, for example, is the difference between knowing the definitions of health, of satiety, with their causes and conditions, and being really healthy or filled. How different to know in what drunkenness consists--as being a state occasioned by a vapor that rises from the stomach--and being drunk effectively. Without doubt, the drunken man knows neither the definition of drunkenness nor what makes it interesting for science. Being drunk, he knows nothing; whilst the physician, although not drunk knows well in what drunkenness consists, and what are its predisposing conditions. Similarly there is a difference between knowing the nature of abstinence, and being abstinent or having one's soul detached from the world.--Thus I had learned what words could teach of Sufism, but what was left could be learned neither by study nor through the ears, but solely by giving one's self up to ecstasy and leading a pious life.

"Reflecting on my situation, I found myself tied down by a multitude of bonds--temptations on every side. Considering my teaching, I found it was impure before God. I saw myself struggling with all my might to achieve glory and to spread my name. [Here follows an account of his six months' hesitation to break away from the conditions of his life at Bagdad, at the end of which he fell ill with a paralysis of the tongue.] Then, feeling my own weakness, and having entirely given up my own will, I repaired to God like a man in distress who has no more

[p. 395]

resources. He answered, as he answers the wretch who invokes him. My heart no longer felt any difficulty in renouncing glory, wealth, and my children. So I quitted Bagdad, and reserving from my fortune only what was indispensable for my subsistence, I distributed the rest. I went to Syria, where I remained about two years, with no other occupation than living in retreat and solitude, conquering my desires, combating my passions, training myself to purify my soul, to make my character perfect, to prepare my heart for meditating on God--all according to the methods of the Sufis, as I had read of them.

"This retreat only increased my desire to live in solitude, and to complete the purification of my heart and fit it for meditation. But the vicissitudes of the times, the affairs of the family, the need of subsistence, changed in some respects my primitive resolve, and interfered with my plans for a purely solitary life. I had never yet found myself completely in ecstasy, save in a few single hours; nevertheless, I kept the hope of attaining this state. Every time that the accidents led me astray, I sought to return; and in this situation I spent ten years. During this solitary state things were revealed to me which it is impossible either to describe or to point out. I recognized for certain that the Sufis are assuredly walking in the path of God. Both in their acts and in their inaction, whether internal or external, they are illumined by the light which proceeds from the prophetic source. The first condition for a Sufi is to purge his heart entirely of all that is not God. The next key of the contemplative life consists in the humble prayers which escape from the fervent soul, and in the meditations on God in which the heart is swallowed up entirely. But in reality this is only the beginning of the Sufi life, the end of Sufism being total absorption in God. The intuitions and all that precede are, so to speak, only the threshold for those who enter. From the beginning revelations take place in so flagrant a shape that the Sufis see before them, whilst wide awake, the angels and the souls of the prophets. They hear their voices and obtain their favors. Then the transport rises from the perception of forms and figures to a degree which escapes all expression, and which no man may seek to give an account of without his words involving sin.

[p. 396]

"Whosoever has had no experience of the transport knows of the true nature of prophetism nothing but the name. He may meanwhile be sure of its existence, both by experience and by what he hears the Sufis say. As there are men endowed only with the sensitive faculty who reject what is offered them in the way of objects of the pure understanding, so there are intellectual men who reject and avoid the things perceived by the prophetic faculty. A blind man can understand nothing of colors save what he has learned by narration and hearsay. Yet God has brought prophetism near to men in giving them all a state analogous to it in its principal characters. This state is sleep. If you were to tell a man who was himself without experience of such a phenomenon that there are people who at times swoon away so as to resemble dead men, and who [in dreams] yet perceive things that are hidden, he would deny it [and give his reasons]. Nevertheless, his arguments would be refuted by actual experience. Wherefore, just as the understanding is a stage of human life in which an eye opens to discern various intellectual objects uncomprehended by sensation; just so in the prophetic the sight is illumined by a light which uncovers hidden things and objects which the intellect fails to reach. The chief properties of prophetism are perceptible only during the transport, by those who embrace the Sufi life. The prophet is endowed with qualities to which you possess nothing analogous, and which consequently you cannot possibly understand. How should you know their true nature, since one knows only what one can comprehend? But the transport which one attains by the method of the Sufis is like an immediate perception, as if one touched the objects with one's hand." [*1]

This incommunicableness of the transport is the keynote of all mysticism. Mystical truth exists for the individual who has the transport, but for no one else. In this, as I have said, it resembles the knowledge given to us in sensations more than that given by conceptual thought. Thought, with its remoteness and abstractness, has often enough in the history

[p. 397]

of philosophy been contrasted unfavorably with sensation.

It is a commonplace of metaphysics that God's knowledge cannot be discursive but must be intuitive, that is, must be constructed more after the pattern of what in ourselves is called immediate feeling, than after that of proposition and judgment. But our immediate feelings have no content but what the five senses supply; and we have seen and shall see again that mystics may emphatically deny that the senses play any part in the very highest type of knowledge which their transports yield.

 

In the Christian church there have always been mystics. Although many of them have been viewed with suspicion, some have gained favor in the eyes of the authorities. The experiences of these have been treated as precedents, and a codified system of mystical theology has been based upon them, in which everything legitimate finds its place. [*1] The basis of the system is "orison" or meditation, the methodical elevation of the soul towards God. Through the practice of orison the higher levels of mystical experience may be attained. It is odd that Protestantism, especially evangelical Protestantism, should seemingly have abandoned everything methodical in this line. Apart from what prayer may lead to, Protestant mystical experience appears to have been almost exclusively sporadic. It has been left to our mind-curers to reintroduce methodical meditation into our religious life.

The first thing to be aimed at in orison is the mind's detachment from outer sensations, for these interfere with its concentration upon ideal things. Such manuals as Saint Ignatius's Spiritual Exercises recommend the disciple to

[p. 398]

expel sensation by a graduated series of efforts to imagine holy scenes. The acme of this kind of discipline would be a semi-hallucinatory mono-ideism--an imaginary figure of Christ, for example, coming fully to occupy the mind. Sensorial images of this sort, whether literal or symbolic, play an enormous part in mysticism. [*1] But in certain cases imagery may fall away entirely, and in the very highest raptures it tends to do so. The state of consciousness becomes then insusceptible of any verbal description. Mystical teachers are unanimous as to this. Saint John of the Cross, for instance, one of the best of them, thus describes the condition called the "union of love," which, he says, is reached by "dark contemplation." In this the Deity compenetrates the soul, but in such a hidden way that the soul--

"finds no terms, no means, no comparison whereby to render the sublimity of the wisdom and the delicacy of the spiritual feeling with which she is filled. . . . We receive this mystical knowledge of God clothed in none of the kinds of images, in none of the sensible representations, which our mind makes use of in other circumstances. Accordingly in this knowledge, since the senses and the imagination are not employed, we get neither form nor impression, nor can we give any account or furnish any likeness, although the mysterious and sweet-tasting wisdom comes home so clearly to the inmost parts of our soul. Fancy a man seeing a certain kind of thing for the first time in his life. He can understand it, use and enjoy it, but he cannot apply a name to it, nor communicate any idea of it, even though all the while it be a mere thing of sense. How much greater will be his powerlessness when it goes beyond the senses! This is the peculiarity of the divine language. The more infused, intimate, spiritual, and supersensible it is, the more does it exceed the senses,

[p. 399]

both inner and outer, and impose silence upon them. . . . The soul then feels as if placed in a vast and profound solitude, to which no created thing has access, in an immense and boundless desert, desert the more delicious the more solitary it is. There, in this abyss of wisdom, the soul grows by what it drinks in from the well-springs of the comprehension of love, . . . and recognizes, however sublime and learned may be the terms we employ, how utterly vile, insignificant, and improper they are, when we seek to discourse of divine things by their means." [*1]

I cannot pretend to detail to you the sundry stages of the Christian mystical life. [*2] Our time would not suffice, for one thing; and moreover, I confess that the subdivisions and names which we find in the Catholic books seem to me to represent nothing objectively distinct. So many men, so many minds: I imagine that these experiences can be as infinitely varied as are the idiosyncrasies of individuals.

The cognitive aspects of them, their value in the way of revelation, is what we are directly concerned with, and it is easy to show by citation how strong an impression they leave of being revelations of new depths of truth. Saint Teresa is the expert of experts in describing such conditions, so I will turn immediately to what she says of one of the highest of them, the "orison of union."

[p. 400]

"In the orison of union," says Saint Teresa, "the soul is fully awake as regards God, but wholly asleep as regards things of this world and in respect of herself. During the short time the union lasts, she is as it were deprived of every feeling, and even if she would, she could not think of any single thing. Thus she needs to employ no artifice in order to arrest the use of her understanding: it remains so stricken with inactivity that she neither knows what she loves, nor in what manner she loves, nor what she wills. In short, she is utterly dead to the things of the world and lives solely in God. . . . I do not even know whether in this state she has enough life left to breathe. It seems to me she has not; or at least that if she does breathe, she is unaware of it. Her intellect would fain understand something of what is going on within her, but it has so little force now that it can act in no way whatsoever. So a person who falls into a deep faint appears as if dead. . . .

"Thus does God, when he raises a soul to union with himself, suspend the natural action of all her faculties. She neither sees, hears, nor understands, so long as she is united with God. But this time is always short, and it seems even shorter than it is. God establishes himself in the interior of this soul in such a way, that when she returns to herself, it is wholly impossible for her to doubt that she has been in God, and God in her. This truth remains so strongly impressed on her that, even though many years should pass without the condition returning, she can neither forget the favor she received, nor doubt of its reality. If you, nevertheless, ask how it is possible that the soul can see and understand that she has been in God, since during the union she has neither sight nor understanding, I reply that she does not see it then, but that she sees it clearly later, after she has returned to herself, not by any vision, but by a certitude which abides with her and which God alone can give her. I knew a person who was ignorant of the truth that God's mode of being in everything must be either by presence, by power, or by essence, but who, after having received the grace of which I am speaking, believed this truth in the most unshakable manner. So much so that, having consulted a half-learned man who was as ignorant on this point as she had been before she was

[p. 401]

enlightened, when he replied that God is in us only by 'grace,' she disbelieved his reply, so sure she was of the true answer; and when she came to ask wiser doctors, they confirmed her in her belief, which much consoled her. . . .

"But how, you will repeat, can one have such certainty in respect to what one does not see? This question, I am powerless to answer. These are secrets of God's omnipotence which it does not appertain to me to penetrate. All that I know is that I tell the truth; and I shall never believe that any soul who does not possess this certainty has ever been really united to God." [*1]

The kinds of truth communicable in mystical ways, whether these be sensible or supersensible, are various. Some of them relate to this world--visions of the future, the reading of hearts, the sudden understanding of texts, the knowledge of distant events, for example; but the most important revelations are theological or metaphysical.

"Saint Ignatius confessed one day to Father Laynez that a single hour of meditation at Manresa had taught him more truths about heavenly things than all the teachings of all the doctors put together could have taught him. . . . One day in orison, on the steps of the choir of the Dominican church, he saw in a distinct manner the plan of divine wisdom in the creation of the world. On another occasion, during a procession, his spirit was ravished in God, and it was given him to contemplate, in a form and images fitted to the weak understanding of a dweller on the earth, the deep mystery of the holy Trinity. This last vision flooded his heart with such sweetness, that the mere memory of it in after times made him shed abundant tears." [*2]

[p. 402]

Similarly with Saint Teresa. "One day, being in orison," she writes, "it was granted me to perceive in one instant how all things are seen and contained in God. I did not perceive them in their proper form, and nevertheless the view I had of them was of a sovereign clearness, and has remained vividly impressed upon my soul. It is one of the most signal of all the graces which the Lord has granted me. . . . The view was so subtile and delicate that the understanding cannot grasp it." [*1]

She goes on to tell how it was as if the Deity were an enormous and sovereignly limpid diamond, in which all our actions were contained in such a way that their full sinfulness

[p. 403]

appeared evident as never before. On another day, she relates, while she was reciting the Athanasian Creed--

"Our Lord made me comprehend in what way it is that one God can be in three persons. He made me see it so clearly that I remained as extremely surprised as I was comforted, . . . and now, when I think of the holy Trinity, or hear It spoken of, I understand how the three adorable Persons form only one God and I experience an unspeakable happiness."

On still another occasion, it was given to Saint Teresa to see and understand in what wise the Mother of God had been assumed into her place in Heaven. [*1]

The deliciousness of some of these states seems to be beyond anything known in ordinary consciousness. It evidently involves organic sensibilities, for it is spoken of as something too extreme to be borne, and as verging on bodily pain. [*2] But it is too subtle and piercing a delight for ordinary words to denote. God's touches, the wounds of his spear, references to ebriety and to nuptial union have to figure in the phraseology by which it is shadowed forth. Intellect and senses both swoon away in these highest states of ecstasy. "If our understanding comprehends," says Saint Teresa, "it is in a mode which remains unknown to it, and it can understand nothing of what it comprehends. For my own part, I do not believe that it does comprehend, because, as I said, it does not understand itself to do so. I confess that it is all a mystery in which I am lost." [*3] In the condition called raptus or ravishment by theologians, breathing and

[p. 404]

circulation are so depressed that it is a question among the doctors whether the soul be or be not temporarily dissevered from the body. One must read Saint Teresa's descriptions and the very exact distinctions which she makes, to persuade one's self that one is dealing, not with imaginary experiences, but with phenomena which, however rare, follow perfectly definite psychological types.

 

To the medical mind these ecstasies signify nothing but suggested and imitated hypnoid states, on an intellectual basis of superstition, and a corporeal one of degeneration and hysteria. Undoubtedly these pathological conditions have existed in many and possibly in all the cases, but that fact tells us nothing about the value for knowledge of the consciousness which they induce. To pass a spiritual judgment upon these states, we must not content ourselves with superficial medical talk, but inquire into their fruits for life. Their fruits appear to have been various. Stupefaction, for one thing, seems not to have been altogether absent as a result. You may remember the helplessness in the kitchen and schoolroom of poor Margaret Mary Alacoque. Many other ecstatics would have perished but for the care taken of them by admiring followers. The "other-worldliness" encouraged by the mystical consciousness makes this over-abstraction from practical life peculiarly liable to befall mystics in whom the character is naturally passive and the intellect feeble; but in natively strong minds and characters we find quite opposite results. The great Spanish mystics, who carried the habit of ecstasy as far as it has often been carried, appear for the most part to have shown indomitable spirit and energy, and all the more so for the trances in which they indulged.

Saint Ignatius was a mystic, but his mysticism made him assuredly one of the most powerfully practical human engines that ever lived. Saint John of the Cross, writing of

[p. 405]

the intuitions and "touches" by which God reaches the substance of the soul, tells us that--

"They enrich it marvelously. A single one of them may be sufficient to abolish at a stroke certain imperfections of which the soul during its whole life had vainly tried to rid itself, and to leave it adorned with virtues and loaded with supernatural gifts. A single one of these intoxicating consolations may reward it for all the labors undergone in its life--even were they numberless. Invested with an invincible courage, filled with an impassioned desire to suffer for its God, the soul then is seized with a strange torment--that of not being allowed to suffer enough." [*1]

Saint Teresa is as emphatic, and much more detailed. You may perhaps remember a passage I quoted from her in my first lecture. [*2] There are many similar pages in her autobiography. Where in literature is a more evidently veracious account of the formation of a new centre of spiritual energy, than is given in her description of the effects of certain ecstasies which in departing leave the soul upon a higher level of emotional excitement?

"Often, infirm and wrought upon with dreadful pains before the ecstasy, the soul emerges from it full of health and admirably disposed for action . . . as if God had willed that the body itself, already obedient to the soul's desires, should share in the soul's happiness. . . . The soul after such a favor is animated with a degree of courage so great that if at that moment its body should be torn to pieces for the cause of God, it would feel nothing but the liveliest comfort. Then it is that promises and heroic resolutions spring up in profusion in us, soaring desires, horror of the world, and the clear perception of our proper nothingness. . . . What empire is comparable to that of a soul who, from this sublime summit to which God has raised her,

[p. 406]

sees all the things of earth beneath her feet, and is captivated by no one of them? How ashamed she is of her former attachments! How amazed at her blindness! What lively pity she feels for those whom she recognizes still shrouded in the darkness! . . . She groans at having ever been sensitive to points of honor, at the illusion that made her ever see as honor what the world calls by that name. Now she sees in this name nothing more than an immense lie of which the world remains a victim. She discovers, in the new light from above, that in genuine honor there is nothing spurious, that to be faithful to this honor is to give our respect to what deserves to be respected really, and to consider as nothing, or as less than nothing, whatsoever perishes and is not agreeable to God. . . . She laughs when she sees grave persons, persons of orison, caring for points of honor for which she now feels profoundest contempt. It is suitable to the dignity of their rank to act thus, they pretend, and it makes them more useful to others. But she knows that in despising the dignity of their rank for the pure love of God they would do more good in a single day than they would effect in ten years by preserving it. . . . She laughs at herself that there should ever have been a time in her life when she made any case of money, when she ever desired it. . . . Oh! if human beings might only agree together to regard it as so much useless mud, what harmony would then reign in the world! With what friendship we would all treat each other if our interest in honor and in money could but disappear from earth! For my own part, I feel as if it would be a remedy for all our ills." [*1]

Mystical conditions may, therefore, render the soul more energetic in the lines which their inspiration favors. But this could be reckoned an advantage only in case the inspiration were a true one. If the inspiration were erroneous, the energy would be all the more mistaken and misbegotten. So we stand once more before that problem of truth which confronted us at the end of the lectures on saintliness. You will remember that we turned to mysticism precisely to get

[p. 407]

some light on truth. Do mystical states establish the truth of those theological affections in which the saintly life has its root?

In spite of their repudiation of articulate self-description, mystical states in general assert a pretty distinct theoretic drift. It is possible to give the outcome of the majority of them in terms that point in definite philosophical directions. One of these directions is optimism, and the other is monism. We pass into mystical states from out of ordinary consciousness as from a less into a more, as from a smallness into a vastness, and at the same time as from an unrest to a rest. We feel them as reconciling, unifying states. They appeal to the yes-function more than to the no-function in us. In them the unlimited absorbs the limits and peacefully closes the account. Their very denial of every adjective you may propose as applicable to the ultimate truth--He, the Self, the Atman, is to be described by "No! no!" only, say the Upanishads [*1]--though it seems on the surface to be a no-function, is a denial made on behalf of a deeper yes. Whoso calls the Absolute anything in particular, or says that it is this, seems implicitly to shut it off from being that--it is as if he lessened it. So we deny the "this," negating the negation which it seems to us to imply, in the interests of the higher affirmative attitude by which we are possessed. The fountain-head of Christian mysticism is Dionysius the Areopagite. He describes the absolute truth by negatives exclusively.

"The cause of all things is neither soul nor intellect; nor has it imagination, opinion, or reason, or intelligence; nor is it reason or intelligence; nor is it spoken or thought. It is neither number, nor order, nor magnitude, nor littleness, nor equality, nor inequality, nor similarity, nor dissimilarity. It neither stands, nor moves, nor rests. . . . It is neither essence, nor

[p. 408]

eternity, nor time. Even intellectual contact does not belong to it. It is neither science nor truth. It is not even royalty or wisdom; not one; not unity; not divinity or goodness; nor even spirit as we know it," etc., ad libitum. [*1]

But these qualifications are denied by Dionysius, not because the truth falls short of them, but because it so infinitely excels them. It is above them. It is super-lucent, super-splendent, super-essential, super-sublime, super everything that can be named. Like Hegel in his logic, mystics journey towards the positive pole of truth only by the "Methode der Absoluten Negativitat." [*2]

Thus come the paradoxical expressions that so abound in mystical writings. As when Eckhart tells of the still desert of the Godhead, "where never was seen difference, neither Father, Son, nor Holy Ghost, where there is no one at home, yet where the spark of the soul is more at peace than in itself." [*3] As when Boehme writes of the Primal Love, that "it may fitly be compared to Nothing, for it is deeper than any Thing, and is as nothing with respect to all things, forasmuch as it is not comprehensible by any of them. And because it is nothing respectively, it is therefore free from all things, and is that only good, which a man cannot express or utter what it is, there being nothing to which it may be compared, to express it by." [*4] Or as when Angelus Silesius sings:--

"Gott ist ein lauter Nichts, ihn ruhrt kein Nun noch Hier;
  Je mehr du nach ihm greiffst, je mehr entwind er dir." [*5]

[p. 409]

To this dialectical use, by the intellect, of negation as a mode of passage towards a higher kind of affirmation, there is correlated the subtlest of moral counterparts in the sphere of the personal will. Since denial of the finite self and its wants, since asceticism of some sort, is found in religious experience to be the only doorway to the larger and more blessed life, this moral mystery intertwines and combines with the intellectual mystery in all mystical writings.

"Love," continues Behmen, is Nothing, for "when thou art gone forth wholly from the Creature and from that which is visible, and art become Nothing to all that is Nature and Creature, then thou art in that eternal One, which is God himself, and then thou shalt feel within thee the highest virtue of Love. . . . The treasure of treasures for the soul is where she goeth out of the Somewhat into that Nothing out of which all things may be made. The soul here saith, I have nothing, for I am utterly stripped and naked; I can do nothing, for I have no manner of power, but am as water poured out; I am nothing, for all that I am is no more than an image of Being, and only God is to me I AM; and so, sitting down in my own Nothingness, I give glory to the eternal Being, and will nothing of myself, that so God may will all in me, being unto me my God and all things." [*1]

In Paul's language, I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. Only when I become as nothing can God enter in and no difference between his life and mine remain outstanding. [*2]

[p. 410]

This overcoming of all the usual barriers between the individual and the Absolute is the great mystic achievement. In mystic states we both become one with the Absolute and we become aware of our oneness. This is the everlasting and triumphant mystical tradition, hardly altered by differences of clime or creed. In Hinduism, in Neoplatonism, in Sufism, in Christian mysticism, in Whitmanism, we find the same recurring note, so that there is about mystical utterances an eternal unanimity which ought to make a critic stop and think, and which brings it about that the mystical classics have, as has been said, neither birthday nor native land. Perpetually telling of the unity of man with God, their speech antedates languages, and they do not grow old. [*1]

"That art Thou!" say the Upanishads, and the Vedantists add: "Not a part, not a mode of That, but identically That, that absolute Spirit of the World." "As pure water poured

[p. 411]

into pure water remains the same, thus, O Gautama, is the Self of a thinker who knows. Water in water, fire in fire, ether in ether, no one can distinguish them: likewise a man whose mind has entered into the Self." [*1] "'Every man,' says the Sufi Gulshan-Raz, whose heart is no longer shaken by any doubt, knows with certainty that there is no being save only One. . . . In his divine majesty the me, and we, the thou, are not found, for in the One there can be no distinction. Every being who is annulled and entirely separated from himself, hears resound outside of him this voice and this echo: I am God: he has an eternal way of existing, and is no longer subject to death.'" [*2] In the vision of God, says Plotinus, "what sees is not our reason, but something prior and superior to our reason. . . . He who thus sees does not properly see, does not distinguish or imagine two things. He changes, he ceases to be himself, preserves nothing of himself. Absorbed in God, he makes but one with him, like a centre of a circle coinciding with another centre." [*3] "Here," writes Suso, "the spirit dies, and yet is all alive in the marvels of the Godhead . . . and is lost in the stillness of the glorious dazzling obscurity and of the naked simple unity. It is in this modeless where that the highest bliss is to be found." [*4] "Ich bin so gross als Gott," sings Angelus Silesius again, "Er ist als ich so klein; Er kann nicht uber mich, ich unter ihm nicht sein." [*5]

In mystical literature such self-contradictory phrases as "dazzling obscurity," "whispering silence," "teeming desert," are continually met with. They prove that not conceptual

[p. 412]

speech, but music rather, is the element through which we are best spoken to by mystical truth. Many mystical scriptures are indeed little more than musical compositions.

"He who would hear the voice of Nada, 'the Soundless Sound,' and comprehend it, he has to learn the nature of Dharana. . . . When to himself his form appears unreal, as do on waking all the forms he sees in dreams, when he has ceased to hear the many, he may discern the ONE--the inner sound which kills the outer. . . . For then the soul will hear, and will remember. And then to the inner ear will speak THE VOICE OF THE SILENCE. . . . And now thy Self is lost in SELF, thyself unto THYSELF, merged in that SELF from which thou first didst radiate. . . . Behold! thou hast become the Light, thou hast become the Sound, thou art thy Master and thy God. Thou art THYSELF the object of thy search: the VOICE unbroken, that resounds throughout eternities, exempt from change, from sin exempt, the seven sounds in one, the VOICE OF THE SILENCE. Om tat Sat." [*1]

These words, if they do not awaken laughter as you receive them, probably stir chords within you which music and language touch in common. Music gives us ontological messages which non-musical criticism is unable to contradict, though it may laugh at our foolishness in minding them. There is a verge of the mind which these things haunt; and whispers therefrom mingle with the operations of our understanding, even as the waters of the infinite ocean send their waves to break among the pebbles that lie upon our shores.

"Here begins the sea that ends not till the world's end. Where we stand,
 Could we know the next high sea-mark set beyond these waves that gleam, [p. 413]
 We should know what never man hath known, nor eye of man hath scanned. . . .
 Ah, but here man's heart leaps, yearning towards the gloom with venturous glee,
 From the shore that hath no shore beyond it, set in all the sea." [*1]

That doctrine, for example, that eternity is timeless, that our "immortality," if we live in the eternal, is not so much future as already now and here, which we find so often expressed to-day in certain philosophic circles, finds its support in a "hear, hear!" or an "amen," which floats up from that mysteriously deeper level. [*2] We recognize the passwords to the mystical region as we hear them, but we cannot use them ourselves; it alone has the keeping of "the password primeval." [*3]

I have now sketched with extreme brevity and insufficiency, but as fairly as I am able in the time allowed, the general traits of the mystic range of consciousness. It is on the whole pantheistic and optimistic, or at least the opposite of pessimistic. It is anti-naturalistic, and harmonizes best with twice-bornness and so-called other-worldly states mind.

 

My next task is to inquire whether we can invoke it as authoritative. Does it furnish any warrant for the truth of the twice-bornness and supernaturality and pantheism which it favors? I must give my answer to this question as concisely as I can.

[p. 414]

In brief my answer is this--and I will divide it into three parts:--

(1) Mystical states, when well developed, usually are, and have the right to be, absolutely authoritative over the individuals to whom they come.

(2) No authority emanates from them which should make it a duty for those who stand outside of them to accept their revelations uncritically.

(3) They break down the authority of the non-mystical or rationalistic consciousness, based upon the understanding and the senses alone. They show it to be only one kind of consciousness. They open out the possibility of other orders of truth, in which, so far as anything in us vitally responds to them, we may freely continue to have faith.

I will take up these points one by one.

  

1.

As a matter of psychological fact, mystical states of a well-pronounced and emphatic sort are usually authoritative over those who have them. [*1] They have been "there," and know. It is vain for rationalism to grumble about this. If the mystical truth that comes to a man proves to be a force that he can live by, what mandate have we of the majority to order him to live in another way? We can throw him into a prison or a madhouse, but we cannot change his mind--we commonly attach it only the more stubbornly to its beliefs. [*2] It mocks our utmost efforts, as a matter of fact,

[p. 415]

and in point of logic it absolutely escapes our jurisdiction. Our own more "rational" beliefs are based on evidence exactly similar in nature to that which mystics quote for theirs. Our senses, namely, have assured us of certain states of fact; but mystical experiences are as direct perceptions of fact for those who have them as any sensations ever were for us. The records show that even though the five senses be in abeyance in them, they are absolutely sensational in their epistemological quality, if I may be pardoned the barbarous expression--that is, they are face to face presentations of what seems immediately to exist.

The mystic is, in short, invulnerable, and must be left, whether we relish it or not, in undisturbed enjoyment of his creed. Faith, says Tolstoy, is that by which men live. And faith-state and mystic state are practically convertible terms.

  

2.

But I now proceed to add that mystics have no right to claim that we ought to accept the deliverance of their peculiar experiences, if we are ourselves outsiders and feel no private call thereto. The utmost they can ever ask of us in this life is to admit that they establish a presumption. They form a consensus and have an unequivocal outcome; and it would be odd, mystics might say, if such a unanimous type of experience should prove to be altogether wrong. At bottom, however, this would only be an appeal to numbers, like the appeal of rationalism the other way; and the appeal to numbers has no logical force. If we acknowledge it, it is for "suggestive," not for logical reasons: we follow the majority because to do so suits our life.

[p. 416]

But even this presumption from the unanimity of mystics is far from being strong. In characterizing mystic states an pantheistic, optimistic, etc., I am afraid I over-simplified the truth. I did so for expository reasons, and to keep the closer to the classic mystical tradition. The classic religious mysticism, it now must be confessed, is only a "privileged case." It is an extract, kept true to type by the selection of the fittest specimens and their preservation in "schools." It is carved out from a much larger mass; and if we take the larger mass as seriously as religious mysticism has historically taken itself, we find that the supposed unanimity largely disappears. To begin with, even religious mysticism itself, the kind that accumulates traditions and makes schools, is much less unanimous than I have allowed. It has been both ascetic and antinomianly self-indulgent within the Christian church. [*1] It is dualistic in Sankhya, and monistic in Vedanta philosophy. I called it pantheistic; but the great Spanish mystics are anything but pantheists. They are with few exceptions non-metaphysical minds, for whom "the category of personality" is absolute. The "union" of man with God is for them much more like an occasional miracle than like an original identity. [*2] How different again, apart from the happiness common to all, is the mysticism of Walt Whitman, Edward Carpenter, Richard Jefferies, and other naturalistic pantheists, from the more distinctively Christian sort. [*3] The fact is that the mystical feeling of enlargement,

[p. 417]

union, and emancipation has no specific intellectual content whatever of its own. It is capable of forming matrimonial alliances with material furnished by the most diverse philosophies and theologies, provided only they can find a place in their framework for its peculiar emotional mood. We have no right, therefore, to invoke its prestige as distinctively in favor of any special belief, such as that in absolute idealism, or in the absolute monistic identity, or in the absolute goodness, of the world. It is only relatively in favor of all these things--it passes out of common human consciousness in the direction in which they lie.

So much for religious mysticism proper. But more remains to be told, for religious mysticism is only one half of mysticism. The other half has no accumulated traditions except those which the text-books on insanity supply. Open any one of these, and you will find abundant cases in which "mystical ideas" are cited as characteristic symptoms of enfeebled or deluded states of mind. In delusional insanity, paranoia, as they sometimes call it, we may have a diabolical mysticism, a sort of religious mysticism turned upside down. The same sense of ineffable importance in the smallest events, the same texts and words coming with new meanings, the same voices and visions and leadings and missions, the same controlling by extraneous powers; only this time the emotion is pessimistic: instead of consolations we have desolations; the meanings are dreadful; and the powers are enemies to life. It is evident that from the point of view of their psychological mechanism, the classic mysticism and these lower mysticisms spring from the same mental level, from that great subliminal or transmarginal region of which science is beginning to admit the existence, but of which so little is really known. That region contains every kind of matter: "seraph and snake" abide there side by side. To come from thence is no infallible credential. What comes must be sifted and tested, and run the gauntlet of confrontation

[p. 418]

with the total context of experience, just like what comes from the outer world of sense. Its value must be ascertained by empirical methods, so long as we are not mystics ourselves.

Once more, then, I repeat that non-mystics are under no obligation to acknowledge in mystical states a superior authority conferred on them by their intrinsic nature. [*1]

  

3.

Yet, I repeat once more, the existence of mystical states absolutely overthrows the pretension of non-mystical states to be the sole and ultimate dictators of what we may believe. As a rule, mystical states merely add a supersensuous meaning to the ordinary outward data of consciousness. They are excitements like the emotions of love or ambition, gifts to our spirit by means of which facts already objectively before us fall into a new expressiveness and make a new connection with our active life. They do not contradict these facts as such, or deny anything that our senses have immediately

[p. 419]

seized. [*1] It is the rationalistic critic rather who plays the part of denier in the controversy, and his denials have no strength, for there never can be a state of facts to which new meaning may not truthfully be added, provided the mind ascend to a more enveloping point of view. It must always remain an open question whether mystical states may not possibly be such superior points of view, windows through which the mind looks out upon a more extensive and inclusive world. The difference of the views seen from the different mystical windows need not prevent us from entertaining this supposition. The wider world would in that case prove to have a mixed constitution like that of this world, that is all. It would have its celestial and its infernal regions, its tempting and its saving moments, its valid experiences and its counterfeit ones, just as our world has them; but it would be a wider world all the same. We should have to use its experiences by selecting and subordinating and substituting just as is our custom in this ordinary naturalistic world; we should be liable to error just as we are now; yet the counting in of that wider world of meanings, and the serious dealing with it, might, in spite of all the perplexity, be indispensable stages in our approach to the final fullness of the truth.

In this shape, I think, we have to leave the subject. Mystical states indeed wield no authority due simply to their being mystical states. But the higher ones among them point in directions to which the religious sentiments even of non-mystical men incline. They tell of the supremacy of the ideal, of vastness, of union, of safety, and of rest. They offer us hypotheses, hypotheses which we may voluntarily ignore,

[p. 420]

but which as thinkers we cannot possibly upset. The supernaturalism and optimism to which they would persuade us may, interpreted in one way or another, be after all the truest of insights into the meaning of this life.

"Oh, the little more, and how much it is; and the little less, and what worlds away!" It may be that possibility and permission of this sort are all that are religious consciousness requires to live on. In my last lecture I shall have to try to persuade you that this is the case. Meanwhile, however, I am sure that for many of my readers this diet is too slender. If supernaturalism and inner union with the divine are true, you think, then not so much permission, as compulsion to believe, ought to be found. Philosophy has always professed to prove religious truth by coercive argument; and the construction of philosophies of this kind has always been one favorite function of the religious life, if we use this term in the large historic sense. But religious philosophy is an enormous subject, and in my next lecture I can only give that brief glance at it which my limits will allow.

Footnotes

^373:1 Newman's Securus judicat orbis terrarum is another instance.

^373:2 "Mesopotamia" is the stock comic instance.--An excellent Old German lady, who had done some traveling in her day, used to describe to me her Sehnsucht that she might yet visit "Philadelphia," whose wondrous name had always haunted her imagination. Of John Foster it is said that "single words (as chalcedony), or the names of ancient heroes, had a mighty fascination over him. 'At any time the word hermit was enough to transport him.' The words woods and forests would produce the most powerful emotion." Foster's Life, by RYLAND, New York, 1846, p. 3.

^374:1 The Two Voices. In a letter to Mr. B. P. Blood, Tennyson reports of himself as follows:--

"I have never had any revelations through anaesthetics, but a kind of waking trance--this for lack of a better word--I have frequently had, quite up from boyhood, when I have been all alone. This has come upon me through repeating my own name to myself silently, till all at once, as it were out of the intensity of the consciousness of individuality, individuality itself seemed to dissolve and fade away into boundless being, and this not a confused state but the clearest, the surest of the surest, utterly beyond words--where death was an [p. 375] almost laughable impossibility--the loss of personality (if so it were) seeming no extinction, but the only true life. I am ashamed of my feeble description. Have I not said the state is utterly beyond words?"

Professor Tyndall, in a letter, recalls Tennyson saying of this condition: "By God Almighty! there is no delusion in the matter! It is no nebulous ecstasy, but a state of transcendent wonder, associated with absolute clearness of mind." Memoirs of Alfred Tennyson, ii. 473.

^375:1 The Lancet, July 6 and 13, 1895, reprinted as the Cavendish Lecture, on Dreamy Mental States, London, Bailliere, 1895. They have been a good deal discussed of late by psychologists. See, for example, BERNARD-LEROY: L'Illusion de Fausse Reconnaissance, Paris, 1898.

^376:1 Charles Kingsley's Life, i. 55, quoted by INGE: Christian Mysticism, London, 1899, p. 341.

^377:1 H. F. BROWN: J. A. Symonds. a Biography, London, 1895, pp. 29-31, abridged.

^377:2 Crichton-Browne expressly says that Symonds's "highest nerve centres were in some degree enfeebled or damaged by these dreamy mental states which afflicted him so grievously."  Symonds was, however, a perfect monster of many-sided cerebral efficiency, and his critic gives no objective grounds whatever for his strange opinion, save that Symonds complained occasionally, as all susceptible and ambitious men complain, of lassitude and uncertainty as to his life's mission.

^379:1 What reader of Hegel can doubt that that sense of a perfected Being with all its otherness soaked up into itself, which dominates his whole philosophy, must have come from the prominence in his consciousness of mystical moods like this, in most persons kept subliminal? The notion is thoroughly characteristic of the mystical level and the Aufgabe of making it articulate was surely set to Hegel's intellect by mystical feeling.

^380:1 BENJAMIN PAUL BLOOD: The Anaesthetic Revelation and the Gist of Philosophy, Amsterdam, N. Y., 1874, pp. 35, 36. Mr. Blood has made several attempts to adumbrate the anaesthetic revelation, in pamphlets of rare literary distinction, privately printed and distributed by himself at Amsterdam. Xenos Clark, a philosopher, who died young at Amherst in the '80's, much lamented by those who knew him, was also impressed by the revelation. "In the first place," he once wrote to me, "Mr. Blood and I agree that the revelation is, if anything non-emotional. It is utterly flat. It is, as Mr. Blood says, 'the one sole and sufficient insight why, or not why, but how, the present is pushed on by the past, and sucked forward by the vacuity of the future. Its inevitableness defeats all attempts at stopping or accounting for it. It is all precedence and presupposition, and questioning is in regard to it forever too late. It is an initiation of the past.' The real secret would be the formula by which the 'now' keeps exfoliating out of itself, yet never escapes. What is it, indeed, that keeps existence exfoliating? The formal being of anything, the logical definition of it, is static. For mere logic every question contains its own answer--we simply fill the hole with the dirt we dug out. Why are twice two four? Because, in fact, four is twice two. Thus logic finds in life no propulsion, only a momentum. It goes because it is a-going. But the revelation adds: it goes because it is and was a-going. You walk, as it were, round yourself in the revelation. Ordinary philosophy is like a hound hunting his own tail. The more he hunts the farther he has to go, and his nose never catches up with his heels, because it is forever ahead of them. So the present is already a foregone conclusion, and I am ever too late to understand it. But at the moment of recovery from anaesthesis, just then, before starting on life, I catch, so to speak, a glimpse of my heels, a glimpse of the eternal process just in the act of starting. The truth is that we travel on a journey that was accomplished before we set out; and the real end of philosophy is accomplished, not when we arrive at, but when [p. 381] we remain in, our destination (being already there)--which may occur vicariously in this life when we cease our intellectual questioning. That is why there is a smile upon the face of the revelation, as we view it. It tells us that we are forever half a second too late--that's all. 'You could kiss your own lips, and have all the fun to yourself,' it says, if you only knew the trick. It would be perfectly easy if they would just stay there till you got round to them. Why don't you manage it somehow?"

Dialectically minded readers of this farrago will at least recognize the region of thought of which Mr. Clark writes, as familiar. In his latest pamphlet, "Tennyson's Trances and the Anaesthetic Revelation," Mr. Blood describes its value for life as follows:--

"The Anaesthetic Revelation is the Initiation of Man into the Immemorial Mystery of the Open Secret of Being, revealed as the Inevitable Vortex of Continuity. Inevitable is the word. Its motive is inherent--it is what has to be. It is not for any love or hate, nor for joy nor sorrow, nor good nor ill. End, beginning, or purpose, it knows not of.

"It affords no particular of the multiplicity and variety of things but it fills appreciation of the historical and the sacred with a secular and intimately personal illumination of the nature and motive of existence, which then seems reminiscent--as if it should have appeared, or shall yet appear, to every participant thereof.

"Although it is at first startling in its solemnity, it becomes directly such a matter of course--so old-fashioned, and so akin to proverbs that it inspires exultation rather than fear, and a sense of safety, as identified with the aboriginal and the universal. But no words may express the imposing certainty of the patient that he is realizing the primordial, Adamic surprise of Life.

"Repetition of the experience finds it ever the same, and as if it could not possibly be otherwise. The subject resumes his normal consciousness only to partially and fitfully remember its occurrence, and to try to formulate its baffling import--with only this consolatory afterthought: that he has known the oldest truth, and that he has done with human theories as to the origin, meaning, or destiny of the race. He is beyond instruction in 'spiritual things.'

"The lesson is one of central safety: the Kingdom is within. All days are judgment days: but there can be no climacteric purpose of eternity, nor any scheme of the whole. The astronomer abridges the row of bewildering figures by increasing his unit of measurement: [p. 382] so may we reduce the distracting multiplicity of things to the unity for which each of us stands.

"This has been my moral sustenance since I have known of it. In my first printed mention of it I declared: 'The world is no more the alien terror that was taught me. Spurning the cloud-grimed and still sultry battlements whence so lately Jehovan thunders boomed, my gray gull lifts her wing against the nightfall, and takes the dim leagues with a fearless eye.' And now, after twenty-seven years of this experience, the wing is grayer, but the eye is fearless still, while I renew and doubly emphasize that declaration. I know--as having known--the meaning of Existence: the sane centre of the universe--at once the wonder and the assurance of the soul--for which the speech of reason has as yet no name but the Anaesthetic Revelation."--I have considerably abridged the quotation.

^383:1 Op. cit., pp. 78-80, abridged. I subjoin, also abridging it, another interesting anaesthetic revelation communicated to me in manuscript by a friend in England. The subject, a gifted woman, was taking ether for a surgical operation.

"I wondered if I was in a prison being tortured, and why I remembered having heard it said that people 'learn through suffering,' and in view of what I was seeing, the inadequacy of this saying struck me so much that I said, aloud, 'to suffer is to learn.'

"With that I became unconscious again, and my last dream immediately preceded my real coming to. It only lasted a few seconds, and was most vivid and real to me, though it may not be clear in words.

"A great Being or Power was traveling through the sky, his foot was on a kind of lightning as a wheel is on a rail, it was his pathway. The lightning was made entirely of the spirits of innumerable people close to one another, and I was one of them. He moved in a straight line, and each part of the streak or flash came into its short conscious existence only that he might travel. I seemed to be directly under the foot of God, and I thought he was grinding his own life up out of my pain. Then I saw that what he had been trying with all his might to do was to change his course, to bend the line of lightning to which he was tied, in the direction in which he wanted to go. I felt my flexibility and helplessness, and knew that he would succeed. He bended me, turning his corner by means of my hurt, hurting me more than I had ever been hurt in my life, and at the acutest point of this, as he passed, I saw. I understood for a moment things that I have now forgotten, things that no one could remember while retaining sanity. The angle was an obtuse angle, and I remember thinking as I woke that had he made it a right or acute angle, I should have both suffered and 'seen' still more, and should probably have died.

"He went on and I came to. In that moment the whole of my life passed before me, including each little meaningless piece of distress, and I understood them. this was what it had all meant, this was the piece of work it had all been contributing to do. I did not see God's purpose, I only saw his intentness and his entire relentlessness towards his means. He thought no more of me than a man thinks of hurting a cork when he is opening wine, or hurting a cartridge when [p. 384] he is firing. And yet, on waking, my first feeling was, and it came with tears, 'Domine non sum digna,' for I had been lifted into a position for which I was too small. I realized that in that half hour under ether I had served God more distinctly and purely than I had ever done in my life before, or than I am capable of desiring to do. I was the means of his achieving and revealing something, I know not what or to whom, and that, to the exact extent of my capacity for suffering.

"While regaining consciousness, I wondered why, since I had gone so deep, I had seen nothing of what the saints call the love of God, nothing but his relentlessness. And then I heard an answer, which I could only just catch, saying, 'Knowledge and Love are One, and the measure is suffering'--I give the words as they came to me. With that I came finally to (into what seemed a dream world compared with the reality of what I was leaving), and I saw that what would be called the 'cause' of my experience was a slight operation under insufficient ether, in a bed pushed up against a window, a common city window in a common city street. If I had to formulate a few of the things I then caught a glimpse of, they would run somewhat as follows:--

"The eternal necessity of suffering and its eternal vicariousness. The veiled and incommunicable nature of the worst sufferings;--the passivity of genius, how it is essentially instrumental and defenseless, moved, not moving, it must do what it does;--the impossibility of discovery without its price;--finally, the excess of what the suffering 'seer' or genius pays over what his generation gains. (He seems like one who sweats his life out to earn enough to save a district from famine, and just as he staggers back, dying and satisfied, bringing a lac of rupees to buy grain with, God lifts the lac away, dropping one rupee, and says, 'That you may give them. That you have earned for them. The rest is for ME.') I perceived also in a way never to be forgotten, the excess of what we see over what we can demonstrate.

"And so on!--these things may seem to you delusions, or truisms; but for me they are dark truths, and the power to put them into even such words as these has been given me by an ether dream."

^385:1 In Tune with the Infinite, p. 137.

^385:2 The larger God may then swallow up the smaller one. I take this from Starbuck's manuscript collection:--

"I never lost the consciousness of the presence of God until I stood at the foot of the Horseshoe Falls, Niagara. Then I lost him in the immensity of what I saw. I also lost myself, feeling that I was an atom too small for the notice of Almighty God."

I subjoin another similar case from Starbuck's collection:--

"In that time the consciousness of God's nearness came to me sometimes. I say God, to describe what is indescribable. A presence, I might say, yet that is too suggestive of personality, and the moments of which I speak did not hold the consciousness of a personality, but something in myself made me feel myself a part of something bigger than I, that was controlling. I felt myself one with the grass, the trees, birds, insects, everything in Nature. I exulted in the mere fact of existence, of being a part of it all--the drizzling rain, the shadows of the clouds, the tree-trunks, and so on. In the years following, such moments continued to come, but I wanted them constantly. I knew so well the satisfaction of losing self in a perception of supreme power and love, that I was unhappy because that perception was not constant." The cases quoted in my third lecture, pp. 65, 66, 69, are still better ones of this type. In her essay, The Loss of Personality, in The Atlantic Monthly (vol. lxxxv. p. 195), Miss Ethel D. Puffer explains that the vanishing of the sense of self, and the feeling of immediate unity with the object, is due to the disappearance, in these rapturous experiences, of the motor adjustments which habitually intermediate between the constant background of consciousness (which is the Self) and the object in the foreground, whatever it may be. I must refer the reader to the highly instructive article, which seems to me to throw light upon the psychological conditions, though it fails to  account for the rapture or the revelation-value of the experience in the Subject's eyes.

^386:1 Op cit., i. 43-44.

^387:1 Memoiren einer Idealistin, 5te Auflage, 1900, iii. 166. For years she had been unable to pray, owing to materialistic belief.

^387:2 Whitman in another place expresses in a quieter way what was probably with him a chronic mystical perception: "There is," he writes, "apart from mere intellect, in the make-up of every superior human identity, a wondrous something that realizes without argument, frequently without what is called education (though I think it the goal and apex of all education deserving the name), an intuition of the absolute balance, in time and space, of the whole of this multifariousness this revel of fools, and incredible make-believe and general unsettledness, we call the world; a soul-sight of that divine clue and unseen thread which holds the whole congeries of things, all history and time, and all events, however trivial, however momentous, like a leashed dog in the hand of the hunter. [Of] such soul-sight and root-centre for the mind mere optimism explains only the surface." Whitman charges it against Carlyle that he lacked this perception. Specimen Days and Collect, Philadelphia, 1882, p. 174.

^387:3 My Quest for God, London, 1897, pp. 268, 269, abridged.

^389:1 Op. cit., pp. 256, 257, abridged.

^390:1 Cosmic Consciousness: a study in the evolution of the human Mind, Philadelphia, 1901, p. 2.

^391:1 Loc. cit., pp. 7, 8. My quotation follows the privately printed pamphlet which preceded Dr. Bucke's larger work, and differs verbally a little from the text of the latter.

^392:1 My quotations are from VIVEKANANDA, Raja Yoga, London, 1896. The completest source of information on Yoga is the work translated by VIHARI LALA MITRA: Yoga Vasishta Maha Ramayana. 4 vols. Calcutta, 1891-99.

^392:2 A European witness, after carefully comparing the results of Yoga with those of the hypnotic or dreamy states artificially producible by us, says: "It makes of its true disciples good, healthy, and happy men. . . . Through the mastery which the yogi attains over his thoughts and his body, he grows into a 'character.' By the subjection of his impulses and propensities to his will, and the fixing of the latter upon the ideal of goodness, he becomes a 'personality' hard to influence by others, and thus almost the opposite of what we usually imagine a medium so-called, or psychic subject to be. KARL KELLNER: Yoga: Eine Skizze, Munchen, 1896, p. 21.

^393:1 I follow the account in C. F. KOEPPEN: Die Religion des Buddha, Berlin, 1857, i. 585 ff.

^394:1 For a full account of him, see D. B. MACDONALD: The Life Of Al-Ghazzali, in the Journal of the American Oriental Society, 1899, vol. xx., p. 71.

^396:1 A. SCHMoLDERS: Essai sur les ecoles philosophiques chez les Arabes, Paris, 1842, pp. 54-68, abridged.

^397:1 GoRRES'S Christliche Mystik gives a full account of the facts. So does RIBET'S Mystique Divine, 2 vols., Paris, 1890. A still more methodical modern work is the Mystica Theologia of VALLGORNERA, 2 vols., Turin, 1890.

^398:1 M. ReCeJAC, in a recent volume, makes them essential. Mysticism he defines as "the tendency to draw near to the Absolute morally and by the aid of Symbols." See his Fondements de la Connaissance mystique, Paris, 1897, p. 66. But there are unquestionably mystical conditions in which sensible symbols play no part.

^399:1 Saint John of the Cross: The Dark Night of the Soul, book ii. ch. xvii., in Vie et Oeuvres, 3me edition, Paris, 1893, iii. 428-432. Chapter xi. of book ii. of Saint John's Ascent of Carmel is devoted to showing the harmfulness for the mystical life of the use of sensible imagery.

^399:2 In particular I omit mention of visual and auditory hallucinations, verbal and graphic automatisms, and such marvels as "levitation," stigmatization, and the healing of disease. These phenomena, which mystics have often presented (or are believed to have presented), have no essential mystical significance, for they occur with no consciousness of illumination whatever, when they occur, as they often do, in persons of non-mystical mind. Consciousness of illumination is for us the essential mark of "mystical" states.

^401:1 The Interior Castle, Fifth Abode, Ch. i., in Oeuvres, translated by BOUIX, iii. 421-424.

^401:2 BARTOLI-MICHEL: vie de Saint Ignace de Loyola, i. 34-36. Others have had illuminations about the created world, Jacob Boehme for instance. At the age of twenty-five he was "surrounded by the divine light, and replenished with the heavenly knowledge, insomuch as going abroad into the fields to a green, at Gorlitz, he there sat down and viewing the herbs and grass of the field, in his inward light he saw into their essences, use, and properties, which was discovered to [p. 402] him by their lineaments, figures, and signatures." Of a later period of experience he writes: "In one quarter of an hour I saw and knew more than if I had been many years together at an university. For I saw and knew the being of all things, the Byss and the Abyss, and the eternal generation of the holy Trinity, the descent and original of the world and of all creatures through the divine wisdom. I knew and saw in myself all the three worlds, the external and visible world being of a procreation or extern birth from both the internal and spiritual worlds; and I saw and knew the whole working essence, in the evil and in the good, and the mutual original and existence, and likewise how the fruitful bearing womb of eternity brought forth. So that I did not only greatly wonder at it, but did also exceedingly rejoice, albeit I could very hardly apprehend the same in my external man and set it down with the pen. For I had a thorough view of the universe as in a chaos, wherein all things are couched and wrapt up, but it was impossible for me to explicate the same." Jacob Behmen's Theosophic Philosophy, etc., by EDWARD TAYLOR, London, 1691, pp. 425, 427, abridged. So George Fox: "I was come up to the state of Adam in which he was before he fell. The creation was opened to me; and it was showed me, how all things had their names given to them, according to their nature and virtue. I was at a stand in my mind, whether I should practice physic for the good of mankind, seeing the nature and virtues of the creatures were so opened to me by the Lord." Journal, Philadelphia, no date, p. 69. Contemporary "Clairvoyance" abounds in similar revelations. Andrew Jackson Davis's cosmogonies, for example, or certain experiences related in the delectable "Reminiscences and Memories of Henry Thomas Butterworth," Lebanon, Ohio, 1886.

^402:1 Vie, pp. 581, 582.

^403:1 Loc. cit., p. 574.

^403:2 Saint Teresa discriminates between pain in which the body has a part and pure spiritual pain (Interior Castle, 6th Abode, ch. xi.). As for the bodily part in these celestial joys, she speaks of it as "penetrating to the marrow of the bones, whilst earthly pleasures affect only the surface of the senses. I think," she adds, "that this is a just description, and I cannot make it better." Ibid., 5th Abode, ch. i.

^403:3 Vie, p. 198.

^405:1 Oeuvres, ii. 320.

^405:2 Above, <page 22>.

^406:1 Vie, pp. 229, 230, 231-233, 243.

^407:1 MuLLER'S translation, part ii. p. 180.

^408:1 T. DAVIDSON'S translation, in Journal of Speculative Philosophy, 1893, vol. xxii., p. 399.

^408:2 "Deus propter excellentiam non immerito Nihil vocatur." Scotus Erigena, quoted by ANDREW SETH: Two Lectures on Theism, New York, 1897, p. 55.

^408:3 J. ROYCE: Studies in Good and Evil, p. 282.

^408:4 Jacob Bellmen's Dialogues on the Supersensual Life, translated by BERNARD HOLLAND, London, 1901, p. 48.

^408:5 Cherubinischer Wandersmann, Strophe 25.

^409:1 Op. cit., pp. 42, 74, abridged.

^409:2 From a French book I take this mystical expression of happiness in God's indwelling presence:--

"Jesus has come to take up his abode in my heart. It is not so much a habitation, an association, as a sort of fusion. Oh, new and blessed life! life which becomes each day more luminous. . . . The wall before me, dark a few moments since, is splendid at this hour because the sun shines on it. Wherever its rays fall they light up a conflagration of glory; the smallest speck of glass sparkles, each grain of sand emits fire; even so there is a royal song of triumph in my heart because [p. 410] the Lord is there. My days succeed each other; yesterday a blue sky; to day a clouded sun; a night filled with strange dreams; but as soon as the eyes open, and I regain consciousness and seem to begin life again, it is always the same figure before me, always the same presence filling my heart. . . . Formerly the day was dulled by the absence of the Lord. I used to wake invaded by all sorts of sad impressions, and I did not find him on my path. To-day he is with me; and the light cloudiness which covers things is not an obstacle to my communion with him. I feel the pressure of his hand, I feel something else which fills me with a serene joy; shall I dare to speak it out? Yes, for it is the true expression of what I experience. The Holy Spirit is not merely making me a visit; it is no mere dazzling apparition which may from one moment to another spread its wings and leave me in my night, it is a permanent habitation. He can depart only if he takes me with him. More than that; he is not other than myself: he is one with me. It is not a juxtaposition, it is a penetration, a profound modification of my nature, a new manner of my being." Quoted from the MS. of an old man by WILFRED MONOD: Il Vit: six meditations sur le mystere chretien, pp. 280-283.

^410:1 Compare M. MAETERLINCK: L'Ornement des Noces spirituelles de Ruysbroeck, Bruxelles, 1891, Introduction, p. xix.

^411:1 Upanishads, M. MuLLER'S translation, ii. 17, 334.

^411:2 SCHMoLDERS: Op. cit., p. 210.

^411:3 Enneads, BOUILLIER'S translation. Paris, 1861, iii. 561. Compare pp. 473-477, and vol. i. p. 27.

^411:4 Autobiography, pp. 309, 310.

^411:5 Op. cit., Strophe 10.

^412:1 H. P. BLAVATSKY: The voice of the Silence.

^413:1 SWINBURNE: On the Verge, in "A Midsummer vacation."

^413:2 Compare the extracts from Dr. Bucke, quoted on pp. 398, 399.

^413:3 As serious an attempt as I know to mediate between the mystical region and the discursive life is contained in an article on Aristotle's Unmoved Mover, by F. C. S. SCHILLER, in Mind, vol. ix., 1900.

^414:1 I abstract from weaker states, and from those cases of which the books are full, where the director (but usually not the subject) remains in doubt whether the experience may not have proceeded from the demon.

^414:2 Example: Mr. John Nelson writes of his imprisonment for preaching Methodism: "My soul was as a watered garden, and I could sing praises to God all day long; for he turned my captivity into joy, and gave me to rest as well on the boards, as if I had been on a bed of [p. 415] down. Now could I say, 'God's service is perfect freedom,' and I was carried out much in prayer that my enemies might drink of the same river of peace which my God gave so largely to me." Journal, London, no date, p. 172.

^416:1 RUYSBROECK, in the work which Maeterlinck has translated, has a chapter against the antinomianism of disciples. H. DELACROIX'S book (Essai sur le mysticisme speculatif en Allemagne au XIVme Siecle, Paris, 1900) is full of antinomian material. compare also A. JUNDT: Les Amis de Dieu au XIV Siecle, These de Strasbourg, 1879.

^416:2 Compare PAUL ROUSSELOT: Les Mystiques Espagnols, Paris, 1869, ch. xii.

^416:3 see CARPENTER'S Towards Democracy, especially the latter parts, and JEFFERIES'S wonderful and splendid mystic rhapsody, The Story of my Heart.

^418:1 In chapter i. of book ii. of his work Degeneration, "MAX NORDAU" seeks to undermine all mysticism by exposing the weakness of the lower kinds. Mysticism for him means any sudden perception of hidden significance in things. He explains such perception by the abundant uncompleted associations which experiences may arouse in a degenerate brain. These give to him who has the experience a vague and vast sense of its leading further, yet they awaken no definite or useful consequent in his thought. The explanation is a plausible one for certain sorts of feeling of significance, and other alienists (WERNICKE, for example, in his Grundriss der Psychiatrie, Theil ii., Leipzig, 1896) have explained "paranoiac" conditions by a laming of the association-organ. But the higher mystical flights, with their positiveness and abruptness, are surely products of no such merely negative condition. It seems far more reasonable to ascribe them to inroads from the subconscious life, of the cerebral activity correlative to which we as yet know nothing.

^419:1 They sometimes add subjective audita et visa to the facts, but as these are usually interpreted as transmundane, they oblige no alteration in the facts of sense.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 421]

  

Lecture XVIII

  

PHILOSOPHY

The subject of Saintliness left us face to face with the question, Is the sense of divine presence a sense of anything objectively true? We turned first to mysticism for an answer, and found that although mysticism is entirely willing to corroborate religion, it is too private (and also too various) in its utterances to be able to claim a universal authority. But philosophy publishes results which claim to be universally valid if they are valid at all, so we now turn with our question to philosophy. Can philosophy stamp a warrant of veracity upon the religious man's sense of the divine?

I imagine that many of you at this point begin to indulge in guesses at the goal to which I am tending. I have undermined the authority of mysticism, you say, and the next thing I shall probably do is to seek to discredit that of philosophy. Religion, you expect to hear me conclude, is nothing but an affair of faith, based either on vague sentiment, or on that vivid sense of the reality of things unseen of which in my second lecture and in the lecture on Mysticism I gave so many examples. It is essentially private and individualistic; it always exceeds our powers of formulation; and although attempts to pour its contents into a philosophic mould will probably always go on, men being what they are, yet these attempts are always secondary processes which in no way add to the authority, or warrant the veracity, of the sentiments from which they derive their own stimulus and borrow whatever glow of conviction they may themselves possess.

[p. 422]

[paragraph continues] In short, you suspect that I am planning to defend feeling at the expense of reason, to rehabilitate the primitive and unreflective, and to dissuade you from the hope of any Theology worthy of the name.

To a certain extent I have to admit that you guess rightly. I do believe that feeling is the deeper source of religion, and that philosophic and theological formulas are secondary products, like translations of a text into another tongue. But all such statements are misleading from their brevity, and it will take the whole hour for me to explain to you exactly what I mean.

When I call theological formulas secondary products, I mean that in a world in which no religious feeling had ever existed, I doubt whether any philosophic theology could ever have been framed. I doubt if dispassionate intellectual contemplation of the universe, apart from inner unhappiness and need of deliverance on the one hand and mystical emotion on the other, would ever have resulted in religious philosophies such as we now possess. Men would have begun with animistic explanations of natural fact, and criticised these away into scientific ones, as they actually have done. In the science they would have left a certain amount of "psychical research," even as they now will probably have to re-admit a certain amount. But high-flying speculations like those of either dogmatic or idealistic theology, these they would have had no motive to venture on, feeling no need of commerce with such deities. These speculations must, it seems to me, be classed as over-beliefs, buildings-out performed by the intellect into directions of which feeling originally supplied the hint.

But even if religious philosophy had to have its first hint supplied by feeling, may it not have dealt in a superior way with the matter which feeling suggested? Feeling is private and dumb, and unable to give an account of itself. It allows that its results are mysteries and enigmas, declines to justify

[p. 423]

them rationally, and on occasion is willing that they should even pass for paradoxical and absurd. Philosophy takes just the opposite attitude. Her aspiration is to reclaim from mystery and paradox whatever territory she touches. To find an escape from obscure and wayward personal persuasion to truth objectively valid for all thinking men has ever been the intellect's most cherished ideal. To redeem religion from unwholesome privacy, and to give public status and universal right of way to its deliverances, has been reason's task.

I believe that philosophy will always have opportunity to labor at this task. [*1] We are thinking beings, and we cannot exclude the intellect from participating in any of our functions. Even in soliloquizing with ourselves, we construe our feelings intellectually. Both our personal ideals and our religious and mystical experiences must be interpreted congruously with the kind of scenery which our thinking mind inhabits. The philosophic climate of our time inevitably forces its own clothing on us. Moreover, we must exchange our feelings with one another, and in doing so we have to speak, and to use general and abstract verbal formulas. Conceptions and constructions are thus a necessary part of our religion; and as moderator amid the clash of hypotheses, and mediator among the criticisms of one man's constructions by another, philosophy will always have much to do.

It would be strange if I disputed this, when these very lectures which I am giving are (as you will see more clearly from now onwards) a laborious attempt to extract from the privacies of religious experience some general facts which can be defined in formulas upon which everybody may agree.

Religious experience, in other words, spontaneously and inevitably engenders myths, superstitions, dogmas, creeds, and metaphysical theologies, and criticisms of one set of

[p. 424]

these by the adherents of another. Of late, impartial classifications and comparisons have become possible, alongside of the denunciations and anathemas by which the commerce between creeds used exclusively to be carried on. We have the beginnings of a "Science of Religions," so-called; and if these lectures could ever be accounted a crumb-like contribution to such a science, I should be made very happy.

But all these intellectual operations, whether they be constructive or comparative and critical, presuppose immediate experiences as their subject-matter. They are interpretative and inductive operations, operations after the fact, consequent upon religious feeling, not coordinate with it, not independent of what it ascertains.

 

The intellectualism in religion which I wish to discredit pretends to be something altogether different from this. It assumes to construct religious objects out of the resources of logical reason alone, or of logical reason drawing rigorous inference from non-subjective facts. It calls its conclusions dogmatic theology, or philosophy of the absolute, as the case may be; it does not call them science of religions. It reaches them in an a priori way, and warrants their veracity.

Warranted systems have ever been the idols of aspiring souls. All-inclusive, yet simple; noble, clean, luminous, stable, rigorous, true;--what more ideal refuge could there be than such a system would offer to spirits vexed by the muddiness and accidentality of the world of sensible things? Accordingly, we find inculcated in the theological schools of to-day, almost as much as in those of the fore-time, a disdain for merely possible or probable truth, and of results that only private assurance can grasp. Scholastics and idealists both express this disdain. Principal John Caird, for example, writes as follows in his Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion:--

[p. 425]

"Religion must indeed be a thing of the heart, but in order to elevate it from the region of subjective caprice and waywardness, and to distinguish between that which is true and false in religion, we must appeal to an objective standard. That which enters the heart must first be discerned by the intelligence to be true. It must be seen as having in its own nature a right to dominate feeling, and as constituting the principle by which feeling must be judged. [*1] In estimating the religious character of individuals, nations, or races, the first question is, not how they feel, but what they think and believe--not whether their religion is one which manifests itself in emotions, more or less vehement and enthusiastic, but what are the conceptions of God and divine things by which these emotions are called forth. Feeling is necessary in religion, but it is by the content or intelligent basis of a religion, and not by feeling, that its character and worth are to be determined." [*2]

Cardinal Newman, in his work, The Idea of a University, gives more emphatic expression still to this disdain for sentiment. [*3] Theology, he says, is a science in the strictest sense of the word. I will tell you, he says, what it is not--not "physical evidences" for God, not "natural religion," for these are but vague subjective interpretations:--

"If," he continues, "the Supreme Being is powerful or skillful, just so far as the telescope shows power, or the microscope shows skill, if his moral law is to be ascertained simply by the physical processes of the animal frame, or his will gathered from the immediate issues of human affairs, if his Essence is just as high and deep and broad as the universe and no more if this be the fact, then will I confess that there is no specific science about God, that theology is but a name, and a protest in its behalf an hypocrisy. Then, pious as it is to think of Him while the pageant of experiment or abstract reasoning passes by,

[p. 426]

still such piety is nothing more than a poetry of thought, or an ornament of language, a certain view taken of Nature which one man has and another has not, which gifted minds strike out, which others see to be admirable and ingenious, and which all would be the better for adopting. It is but the theology of Nature, just as we talk of the philosophy or the romance of history, or the poetry of childhood, or the picturesque or the sentimental or the humorous, or any other abstract quality which the genius or the caprice of the individual, or the fashion of the day, or the consent of the world, recognizes in any set of objects which are subjected to its contemplation. I do not see much difference between avowing that there is no God, and implying that nothing definite can be known for certain about Him."

What I mean by Theology, continues Newman, is none of these things: "I simply mean the Science of God, or the truths we know about God, put into a system, just as we have a science of the stars and call it astronomy, or of the crust of the earth and call it geology."

In both these extracts we have the issue clearly set before us: Feeling valid only for the individual is pitted against reason valid universally. The test is a perfectly plain one of fact. Theology based on pure reason must in point of fact convince men universally. If it did not, wherein would its superiority consist? If it only formed sects and schools, even as sentiment and mysticism form them, how would it fulfill its programme of freeing us from personal caprice and waywardness? This perfectly definite practical test of the pretensions of philosophy to found religion on universal reason simplifies my procedure to-day. I need not discredit philosophy by laborious criticism of its arguments. It will suffice if I show that as a matter of history it fails to prove its pretension to be "objectively" convincing. In fact, philosophy does so fail. It does not banish differences; it founds schools and sects just as feeling does. I believe, in fact, that the logical reason of man operates in this field of divinity exactly as it has always operated in love, or in

[p. 427]

patriotism, or in politics, or in any other of the wider affairs of life, in which our passions or our mystical intuitions fix our beliefs beforehand. It finds arguments for our conviction, for indeed it has to find them. It amplifies and defines our faith, and dignifies it and lends it words and plausibility. It hardly ever engenders it; it cannot now secure it. [*1]

 

Lend me your attention while I run through some of the points of the older systematic theology. You find them in both Protestant and Catholic manuals, best of all in the innumerable text-books published since Pope Leo's Encyclical recommending the study of Saint Thomas. I glance first at the arguments by which dogmatic theology establishes God's existence, after that at those by which it establishes his nature. [*2]

The arguments for God's existence have stood for hundreds of years with the waves of unbelieving criticism breaking against them, never totally discrediting them in the ears of the faithful, but on the whole slowly and surely washing out the mortar from between their joints. If you have a God

[p. 428]

already whom you believe in, these arguments confirm you. If you are atheistic, they fail to set you right. The proofs are various. The "cosmological" one, so-called, reasons from the contingence of the world to a First Cause which must contain whatever perfections the world itself contains. The "argument from design" reasons, from the fact that Nature's laws are mathematical, and her parts benevolently adapted to each other, that this cause is both intellectual and benevolent. The "moral argument" is that the moral law presupposes a lawgiver. The "argument ex consensu gentium" is that the belief in God is so widespread as to be grounded in the rational nature of man, and should therefore carry authority with it.

As I just said, I will not discuss these arguments technically. The bare fact that all idealists since Kant have felt entitled either to scout or to neglect them shows that they are not solid enough to serve as religion's all-sufficient foundation. Absolutely impersonal reasons would be in duty bound to show more general convincingness. Causation is indeed too obscure a principle to bear the weight of the whole structure of theology. As for the argument from design, see how Darwinian ideas have revolutionized it. Conceived as we now conceive them, as so many fortunate escapes from almost limitless processes of destruction, the benevolent adaptations which we find in Nature suggest a deity very different from the one who figured in the earlier versions of the argument. [*1] The fact is that these arguments

[p. 429]

do but follow the combined suggestions of the facts and of our feeling. They prove nothing rigorously. They only corroborate our preexistent partialities.

[p. 430]

If philosophy can do so little to establish God's existence, how stands it with her efforts to define his attributes? It is worth while to look at the attempts of systematic theology in this direction.

 

Since God is First Cause, this science of sciences says, he differs from all his creatures in possessing existence a se. From this "a-se-ity" on God's part, theology deduces by mere logic most of his other perfections. For instance, he must be both necessary and absolute, cannot not be, and cannot in any way be determined by anything else. This makes Him absolutely unlimited from without, and unlimited also from within; for limitation is non-being; and God is being itself. This unlimitedness makes God infinitely perfect. Moreover, God is One, and Only, for the infinitely perfect can admit no peer. He is Spiritual, for were He composed of physical parts, some other power would have to combine them into the total, and his aseity would thus be contradicted. He is therefore both simple and non-physical in nature. He is simple metaphysically also, that is to say, his nature and his existence cannot be distinct, as they are in finite substances which share their formal natures with one another, and are individual only in their material aspect. Since God is one and only, his essentia and his esse must be given at one stroke. This excludes from his being all those distinctions, so familiar in the world of finite things, between potentiality and actuality, substance and accidents, being and activity, existence and attributes. We can talk, it is true, of God's powers, acts, and attributes, but these discriminations are only "virtual," and made from the human point of view. In God all these points of view fall into an absolute identity of being.

[p. 431]

This absence of all potentiality in God obliges Him to be immutable. He is actuality, through and through. Were there anything potential about Him, He would either lose or gain by its actualization, and either loss or gain would contradict his perfection. He cannot, therefore, change. Furthermore, He is immense, boundless; for could He be outlined in space, He would be composite, and this would contradict his indivisibility. He is therefore omnipresent, indivisibly there, at every point of space. He is similarly wholly present at every point of time--in other words eternal. For if He began in time, He would need a prior cause, and that would contradict his aseity. If He ended it would contradict his necessity. If He went through any succession, it would contradict his immutability.

He has intelligence and will and every other creature-perfection, for we have them, and effectus nequit superare causam. In Him, however, they are absolutely and eternally in act, and their object, since God can be bounded by naught that is external, can primarily be nothing else than God himself. He knows himself, then, in one eternal indivisible act, and wills himself with an infinite self-pleasure. [*295] Since He must of logical necessity thus love and will himself, He cannot be called "free" ad intra, with the freedom of contrarieties that characterizes finite creatures. Ad extra, however, or with respect to his creation, God is free. He cannot need to create, being perfect in being and in happiness already. He wills to create, then, by an absolute freedom.

Being thus a substance endowed with intellect and will and freedom, God is a person; and a living person also, for He is both object and subject of his own activity, and to be this distinguishes the living from the lifeless. He is thus absolutely self-sufficient: his self-knowledge and self-love are both of them infinite and adequate, and need no extraneous conditions to perfect them.

He is omniscient, for in knowing himself as Cause He knows all creature things and events by implication. His knowledge is previsive, for He is present to all time. Even our free acts are

[p. 432]

known beforehand to Him, for otherwise his wisdom would admit of successive moments of enrichment, and this would contradict his immutability. He is omnipotent for everything that does not involve logical contradiction. He can make being--in other words his power includes creation. If what He creates were made of his own substance, it would have to be infinite in essence, as that substance is; but it is finite; so it must be non-divine in substance. If it were made of a substance, an eternally existing matter, for example, which God found there to his hand, and to which He simply gave its form, that would contradict God's definition as First Cause, and make Him a mere mover of something caused already. The things he creates, then, He creates ex nihilo, and gives them absolute being as so many finite substances additional to himself. The forms which he imprints upon them have their prototypes in his ideas. But as in God there is no such thing as multiplicity, and as these ideas for us are manifold, we must distinguish the ideas as they are in God and the way in which our minds externally imitate them. We must attribute them to Him only in a terminative sense, as differing aspects, from the finite point of view, of his unique essence.

God of course is holy, good, and just. He can do no evil, for He is positive being's fullness, and evil is negation. It is true that He has created physical evil in places, but only as a means of wider good, for bonum totius praeeminet bonum partis. Moral evil He cannot will, either as end or means, for that would contradict his holiness. By creating free beings He permits it only, neither his justice nor his goodness obliging Him to prevent the recipients of freedom from misusing the gift.

As regards God's purpose in creating, primarily it can only have been to exercise his absolute freedom by the manifestation to others of his glory. From this it follows that the others must be rational beings, capable in the first place of knowledge, love, and honor, and in the second place of happiness, for the knowledge and love of God is the mainspring of felicity. In so far forth one may say that God's secondary purpose in creating is love.

[p. 433]

I will not weary you by pursuing these metaphysical determinations farther, into the mysteries of God's Trinity, for example. What I have given will serve as a specimen of the orthodox philosophical theology of both Catholics and Protestants. Newman, filled with enthusiasm at God's list of perfections, continues the passage which I began to quote to you by a couple of pages of a rhetoric so magnificent that I can hardly refrain from adding them, in spite of the inroad they would make upon our time. [*1] He first enumerates God's attributes sonorously, then celebrates his ownership of everything in earth and Heaven, and the dependence of all that happens upon his permissive will. He gives us scholastic philosophy "touched with emotion," and every philosophy should be touched with emotion to be rightly understood. Emotionally, then, dogmatic theology is worth something to minds of the type of Newman's. It will aid us to estimate what it is worth intellectually, if at this point I make a short digression.

 

What God hath joined together, let no man put asunder. The Continental schools of philosophy have too often overlooked the fact that man's thinking is organically connected with his conduct. It seems to me to be the chief glory of English and Scottish thinkers to have kept the organic connection in view. The guiding principle of British philosophy has in fact been that every difference must make a difference, every theoretical difference somewhere issue in a practical difference, and that the best method of discussing points of theory is to begin by ascertaining what practical difference would result from one alternative or the other being true. What is the particular truth in question known as? In what facts does it result? What is its cash-value in

[p. 434]

terms of particular experience? This is the characteristic English way of taking up a question. In this way, you remember, Locke takes up the question of personal identity. What you mean by it is just your chain of particular memories, says he. That is the only concretely verifiable part of its significance. All further ideas about it, such as the oneness or manyness of the spiritual substance on which it is based, are therefore void of intelligible meaning; and propositions touching such ideas may be indifferently affirmed or denied. So Berkeley with his "matter."

The cash-value of matter is our physical sensations. That is what it is known as, all that we concretely verify of its conception. That, therefore, is the whole meaning of the term "matter"--any other pretended meaning is mere wind of words. Hume does the same thing with causation. It is known as habitual antecedence, and as tendency on our part to look for something definite to come. Apart from this practical meaning it has no significance whatever, and books about it may be committed to the flames, says Hume. Dugald Stewart and Thomas Brown, James Mill, John Mill, and Professor Bain, have followed more or less consistently the same method; and Shadworth Hodgson has used the principle with full explicitness. When all is said and done, it was English and Scotch writers, and not Kant, who introduced "the critical method" into philosophy, the one method fitted to make philosophy a study worthy of serious men. For what seriousness can possibly remain in debating philosophic propositions that will never make an appreciable difference to us in action? And what could it matter, if all propositions were practically indifferent, which of them we should agree to call true or which false?

An American philosopher of eminent originality, Mr. Charles Sanders Peirce, has rendered thought a service by disentangling from the particulars of its application the principle by which these men were instinctively guided, and

[p. 435]

by singling it out as fundamental and giving to it a Greek name. He calls it the principle of pragmatism, and he defends it somewhat as follows: [*1]--

Thought in movement has for its only conceivable motive the attainment of belief, or thought at rest. Only when our thought about a subject has found its rest in belief can our action on the subject firmly and safely begin. Beliefs, in short, are rules for action; and the whole function of thinking is but one step in the production of active habits. If there were any part of a thought that made no difference in the thought's practical consequences, then that part would be no proper element of the thought's significance. To develop a thought's meaning we need therefore only determine what conduct it is fitted to produce; that conduct is for us its sole significance; and the tangible fact at the root of all our thought-distinctions is that there is no one of them so fine as to consist in anything but a possible difference of practice. To attain perfect clearness in our thoughts of an object, we need then only consider what sensations, immediate or remote, we are conceivably to expect from it, and what conduct we must prepare in case the object should be true. Our conception of these practical consequences is for us the whole of our conception of the object, so far as that conception has positive significance at all.

This is the principle of Peirce, the principle of pragmatism. Such a principle will help us on this occasion to decide, among the various attributes set down in the scholastic inventory of God's perfections, whether some be not far less significant than others.

If, namely, we apply the principle of pragmatism to God's metaphysical attributes, strictly so called, as distinguished from his moral attributes, I think that, even were we forced by a coercive logic to believe them, we still should have to

[p. 436]

confess them to be destitute of all intelligible significance. Take God's aseity, for example; or his necessariness; his immateriality; his "simplicity" or superiority to the kind of inner variety and succession which we find in finite beings, his indivisibility, and lack of the inner distinctions of being and activity, substance and accident, potentiality and actuality, and the rest; his repudiation of inclusion in a genus; his actualized infinity; his "personality," apart from the moral qualities which it may comport; his relations to evil being permissive and not positive; his self-sufficiency, self-love, and absolute felicity in himself:--candidly speaking, how do such qualities as these make any definite connection with our life? And if they severally call for no distinctive adaptations of our conduct, what vital difference can it possibly make to a man's religion whether they be true or false?

For my own part, although I dislike to say aught that may grate upon tender associations, I must frankly confess that even though these attributes were faultlessly deduced, I cannot conceive of its being of the smallest consequence to us religiously that any one of them should be true. Pray, what specific act can I perform in order to adapt myself the better to God's simplicity? Or how does it assist me to plan my behavior, to know that his happiness is anyhow absolutely complete? In the middle of the century just past, Mayne Reid was the great writer of books of out-of-door adventure. He was forever extolling the hunters and field-observers of living animals' habits, and keeping up a fire of invective against the "closet-naturalists," as he called them, the collectors and classifiers, and handlers of skeletons and skins. When I was a boy, I used to think that a closet-naturalist must be the vilest type of wretch under the sun. But surely the systematic theologians are the closet-naturalists of the deity, even in Captain Mayne Reid's sense. What is their deduction of metaphysical attributes but a shuffling

[p. 437]

and matching of pedantic dictionary-adjectives, aloof from morals, aloof from human needs, something that might be worked out from the mere word "God" by one of those logical machines of wood and brass which recent ingenuity has contrived as well as by a man of flesh and blood. They have the trail of the serpent over them. One feels that in the theologians' hands, they are only a set of titles obtained by a mechanical manipulation of synonyms; verbality has stepped into the place of vision, professionalism into that of life. Instead of bread we have a stone; instead of a fish, a serpent. Did such a conglomeration of abstract terms give really the gist of our knowledge of the deity, schools of theology might indeed continue to flourish, but religion, vital religion, would have taken its flight from this world. What keeps religion going is something else than abstract definitions and systems of concatenated adjectives, and something different from faculties of theology and their professors. All these things are after-effects, secondary accretions upon those phenomena of vital conversation with the unseen divine, of which I have shown you so many instances, renewing themselves in saecula saeculorum in the lives of humble private men.

So much for the metaphysical attributes of God! From the point of view of practical religion, the metaphysical monster which they offer to our worship is an absolutely worthless invention of the scholarly mind.

 

What shall we now say of the attributes called moral? Pragmatically, they stand on an entirely different footing. They positively determine fear and hope and expectation, and are foundations for the saintly life. It needs but a glance at them to show how great is their significance.

God's holiness, for example: being holy, God can will nothing but the good. Being omnipotent, he can secure its triumph. Being omniscient, he can see us in the dark. Being

[p. 438]

just, he can punish us for what he sees. Being loving, he can pardon too. Being unalterable, we can count on him securely. These qualities enter into connection with our life, it is highly important that we should be informed concerning them. That God's purpose in creation should be the manifestation of his glory is also an attribute which has definite relations to our practical life. Among other things it has given a definite character to worship in all Christian countries. If dogmatic theology really does prove beyond dispute that a God with characters like these exists, she may well claim to give a solid basis to religious sentiment. But verily, how stands it with her arguments?

It stands with them as ill as with the arguments for his existence. Not only do post-Kantian idealists reject them root and branch, but it is a plain historic fact that they never have converted any one who has found in the moral complexion of the world, as he experienced it, reasons for doubting that a good God can have framed it. To prove God's goodness by the scholastic argument that there is no non-being in his essence would sound to such a witness simply silly.

No! the book of Job went over this whole matter once for all and definitively. Ratiocination is a relatively superficial and unreal path to the deity: "I will lay mine hand upon my mouth; I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye seeth Thee." An intellect perplexed and baffled, yet a trustful sense of presence--such is the situation of the man who is sincere with himself and with the facts, but who remains religious still. [*1]

[p. 439]

We must therefore, I think, bid a definitive good-by to dogmatic theology. In all sincerity our faith must do without that warrant. Modern idealism, I repeat, has said good-by to this theology forever. Can modern idealism give faith a better warrant, or must she still rely on her poor self for witness?

 

The basis of modern idealism is Kant's doctrine of the Transcendental Ego of Apperception. By this formidable term Kant merely meant the fact that the consciousness "I think them" must (potentially or actually) accompany all our objects. Former skeptics had said as much, but the "I" in question had remained for them identified with the personal individual. Kant abstracted and depersonalized it, and made it the most universal of all his categories, although for Kant himself the Transcendental Ego had no theological implications.

It was reserved for his successors to convert Kant's notion of Bewusstsein uberhaupt, or abstract consciousness, into an infinite concrete self-consciousness which is the soul of the world, and in which our sundry personal self-consciousnesses have their being. It would lead me into technicalities to show you even briefly how this transformation was in point of fact effected. Suffice it to say that in the Hegelian school, which to-day so deeply influences both British and American thinking, two principles have borne the brunt of the operation.

The first of these principles is that the old logic of identity never gives us more than a post-mortem dissection of disjecta membra, and that the fullness of life can be construed to thought only by recognizing that every object which our

[p. 440]

thought may propose to itself involves the notion of some other object which seems at first to negate the first one.

The second principle is that to be conscious of a negation is already virtually to be beyond it. The mere asking of a question or expression of a dissatisfaction proves that the answer or the satisfaction is already imminent; the finite, realized as such, is already the infinite in posse.

Applying these principles, we seem to get a propulsive force into our logic which the ordinary logic of a bare, stark self-identity in each thing never attains to. The objects of our thought now ACT within our thought, act as objects act when given in experience. They change and develop. They introduce something other than themselves along with them; and this other, at first only ideal or potential, presently proves itself also to be actual. It supersedes the thing at first supposed, and both verifies and corrects it, in developing the fullness of its meaning.

The program is excellent; the universe is a place where things are followed by other things that both correct and fulfill them; and a logic which gave us something like this movement of fact would express truth far better than the traditional school-logic, which never gets of its own accord from anything to anything else, and registers only predictions and subsumptions, or static resemblances and differences. Nothing could be more unlike the methods of dogmatic theology than those of this new logic. Let me quote in illustration some passages from the Scottish transcendentalist whom I have already named.

"How are we to conceive," Principal Caird writes, "of the reality in which all intelligence rests?" He replies: "Two things may without difficulty be proved, viz., that this reality is an absolute Spirit, and conversely that it is only in communion with this absolute Spirit or Intelligence that the finite Spirit can realize itself. It is absolute; for the faintest movement of human intelligence would be arrested, if it did not presuppose the absolute

[p. 441]

reality of intelligence, of thought itself. Doubt or denial themselves presuppose and indirectly affirm it. When I pronounce anything to be true, I pronounce it, indeed, to be relative to thought, but not to be relative to my thought, or to the thought of any other individual mind. From the existence of all individual minds as such I can abstract; I can think them away. But that which I cannot think away is thought or self-consciousness itself, in its independence and absoluteness, or, in other words, an Absolute Thought or Self-Consciousness."

Here, you see, Principal Caird makes the transition which Kant did not make: he converts the omnipresence of consciousness in general as a condition of "truth" being anywhere possible, into an omnipresent universal consciousness, which he identifies with God in his concreteness. He next proceeds to use the principle that to acknowledge your limits is in essence to be beyond them; and makes the transition to the religious experience of individuals in the following words:--

"If [Man] were only a creature of transient sensations and impulses, of an ever coming and going succession of intuitions, fancies, feelings, then nothing could ever have for him the character of objective truth or reality. But it is the prerogative of man's spiritual nature that he can yield himself up to a thought and will that are infinitely larger than his own. As a thinking self-conscious being, indeed, he may be said, by his very nature, to live in the atmosphere of the Universal Life. As a thinking being, it is possible for me to suppress and quell in my consciousness every movement of self-assertion, every notion and opinion that is merely mine, every desire that belongs to me as this particular Self, and to become the pure medium of a thought that is universal--in one word, to live no more my own life, but let my consciousness be possessed and suffused by the Infinite and Eternal life of spirit. And yet it is just in this renunciation of self that I truly gain myself, or realize the highest possibilities of my own nature. For whilst in one sense we give up self to live the universal and absolute life of reason, yet that

[p. 442]

to which we thus surrender ourselves is in reality our truer self. The life of absolute reason is not a life that is foreign to us."

Nevertheless, Principal Caird goes on to say, so far as we are able outwardly to realize this doctrine, the balm it offers remains incomplete. Whatever we may be in posse, the very best of us in actu falls very short of being absolutely divine. Social morality, love, and self-sacrifice even, merge our Self only in some other finite self or selves. They do not quite identify it with the Infinite. Man's ideal destiny, infinite in abstract logic, might thus seem in practice forever unrealizable.

"Is there, then," our author continues, "no solution of the contradiction between the ideal and the actual? We answer, There is such a solution, but in order to reach it we are carried beyond the sphere of morality into that of religion. It may be said to be the essential characteristic of religion as contrasted with morality, that it changes aspiration into fruition, anticipation into realization; that instead of leaving man in the interminable pursuit of a vanishing ideal, it makes him the actual partaker of a divine or infinite life. Whether we view religion from the human side or the divine--as the surrender of the soul to God, or as the life of God in the soul--in either aspect it is of its very essence that the Infinite has ceased to be a far-off vision, and has become a present reality. The very first pulsation of the spiritual life, when we rightly apprehend its significance, is the indication that the division between the Spirit and its object has vanished, that the ideal has become real, that the finite has reached its goal and become suffused with the presence and life of the Infinite.

"Oneness of mind and will with the divine mind and will is not the future hope and aim of religion, but its very beginning and birth in the soul. To enter on the religious life is to terminate the struggle. In that act which constitutes the beginning of the religious life--call it faith, or trust, or self-surrender, or by whatever name you will--there is involved the identification of the finite with a life which is eternally realized. It is true indeed

[p. 443]

that the religious life is progressive; but understood in the light of the foregoing idea, religious progress is not progress towards, but within the sphere of the Infinite. It is not the vain attempt by endless finite additions or increments to become possessed of infinite wealth, but it is the endeavor, by the constant exercise of spiritual activity, to appropriate that infinite inheritance of which we are already in possession. The whole future of the religious life is given in its beginning, but it is given implicitly. The position of the man who has entered on the religious life is that evil, error, imperfection, do not really belong to him: they are excrescences which have no organic relation to his true nature: they are already virtually, as they will be actually, suppressed and annulled, and in the very process of being annulled they become the means of spiritual progress. Though he is not exempt from temptation and conflict, [yet] in that inner sphere in which his true life lies, the struggle is over, the victory already achieved. It is not a finite but an infinite life which the spirit lives. Every pulse-beat of its [existence] is the expression and realization of the life of God." [*1]

You will readily admit that no description of the phenomena of the religious consciousness could be better than these words of your lamented preacher and philosopher. They reproduce the very rapture of those crises of conversion of which we have been hearing; they utter what the mystic felt but was unable to communicate; and the saint, in hearing them, recognizes his own experience. It is indeed gratifying to find the content of religion reported so unanimously. But when all is said and done, has Principal Caird--and I only use him as an example of that whole mode of thinking--transcended the sphere of feeling and of the direct experience of the individual, and laid the foundations of religion in impartial reason? Has he made religion universal by coercive reasoning, transformed it from a private

[p. 444]

faith into a public certainty? Has he rescued its affirmations from obscurity and mystery?

I believe that he has done nothing of the kind, but that he has simply reaffirmed the individual's experiences in a more generalized vocabulary. And again, I can be excused from proving technically that the transcendentalist reasonings fail to make religion universal, for I can point to the plain fact that a majority of scholars, even religiously disposed ones, stubbornly refuse to treat them as convincing. The whole of Germany, one may say, has positively rejected the Hegelian argumentation. As for Scotland, I need only mention Professor Fraser's and Professor Pringle-Pattison's memorable criticisms, with which so many of you are familiar. [*1] Once more, I ask, if transcendental idealism were

[p. 445]

as objectively and absolutely rational as it pretends to be, could it possibly fail so egregiously to be persuasive?

What religion reports, you must remember, always purports to be a fact of experience: the divine is actually present, religion says, and between it and ourselves relations of give and take are actual. If definite perceptions of fact like this cannot stand upon their own feet, surely abstract reasoning cannot give them the support they are in need of. Conceptual processes can class facts, define them, interpret them; but they do not produce them, nor can they reproduce their individuality. There is always a plus, a thisness, which feeling alone can answer for. Philosophy in this sphere is thus a secondary function, unable to warrant faith's veracity, and so I revert to the thesis which I announced at the beginning of this lecture.

In all sad sincerity I think we must conclude that the attempt to demonstrate by purely intellectual processes the truth of the deliverances of direct religious experience is absolutely hopeless.

 

It would be unfair to philosophy, however, to leave her under this negative sentence. Let me close, then, by briefly enumerating what she can do for religion. If she will abandon metaphysics and deduction for criticism and induction, and frankly transform herself from theology into science of religions, she can make herself enormously useful.

The spontaneous intellect of man always defines the divine which it feels in ways that harmonize with its temporary intellectual prepossessions. Philosophy can by comparison eliminate the local and the accidental from these definitions. Both from dogma and from worship she can remove historic incrustations. By confronting the spontaneous religious constructions with the results of natural science, philosophy can also eliminate doctrines that are now known to be scientifically absurd or incongruous.

[p. 446]

Sifting out in this way unworthy formulations, she can leave a residuum of conceptions that at least are possible. With these she can deal as hypotheses, testing them in all the manners, whether negative or positive, by which hypotheses are ever tested. She can reduce their number, as some are found more open to objection. She can perhaps become the champion of one which she picks out as being the most closely verified or verifiable. She can refine upon the definition of this hypothesis, distinguishing between what is innocent over-belief and symbolism in the expression of it, and what is to be literally taken. As a result, she can offer mediation between different believers, and help to bring about consensus of opinion. She can do this the more successfully, the better she discriminates the common and essential from the individual and local elements of the religious beliefs which she compares.

I do not see why a critical Science of Religions of this sort might not eventually command as general a public adhesion as is commanded by a physical science. Even the personally non-religious might accept its conclusions on trust, much as blind persons now accept the facts of optics--it might appear as foolish to refuse them. Yet as the science of optics has to be fed in the first instance, and continually verified later, by facts experienced by seeing persons; so the science of religions would depend for its original material on facts of personal experience, and would have to square itself with personal experience through all its critical reconstructions. It could never get away from concrete life, or work in a conceptual vacuum. It would forever have to confess, as every science confesses, that the subtlety of nature flies beyond it, and that its formulas are but approximations. Philosophy lives in words, but truth and fact well up into our lives in ways that exceed verbal formulation. There is in the living act of perception always something that glimmers and twinkles and will not be caught, and for

[p. 447]

which reflection comes too late. No one knows this as well as the philosopher. He must fire his volley of new vocables out of his conceptual shotgun, for his profession condemns him to this industry, but he secretly knows the hollowness and irrelevancy. His formulas are like stereoscopic or kinetoscopic photographs seen outside the instrument; they lack the depth, the motion, the vitality. In the religious sphere, in particular, belief that formulas are true can never wholly take the place of personal experience.

In my next lecture I will try to complete my rough description of religious experience; and in the lecture after that, which is the last one, I will try my hand at formulating conceptually the truth to which it is a witness.

Footnotes

^423:1 Compare Professor W. WALLACE'S Gifford Lectures, in Lectures and Essays, Oxford, 1898, pp. 17 ff.

^425:1 Op. cit., p. 174, abridged.

^425:2 Ibid., p. 186, abridged and italicized.

^425:3 Discourse II. Section 7.

^427:1 As regards the secondary character of intellectual constructions, and the primacy of feeling and instinct in founding religious beliefs see the striking work of H. FIELDING, The Hearts of Men, London, 1902, which came into my hands after my text was written. "Creeds," says the author, "are the grammar of religion, they are to religion what grammar is to speech. Words are the expression of our wants grammar is the theory formed afterwards. Speech never proceeded from grammar, but the reverse. As speech progresses and changes from unknown causes, grammar must follow" (p. 313). The whole book, which keeps unusually close to concrete facts, is little more than an amplification of this text.

^427:2 For convenience' sake, I follow the order of A. SToCKL'S Lehrbuch der Philosophie, 5te Auflage, Mainz, 1881, Band ii. B. BOEDDER'S Natural Theology, London, 1891, is a handy English Catholic Manual; but an almost identical doctrine is given by such Protestant theologians as C. HODGE: Systematic Theology, New York, 1873, or A. H. Strong: Systematic Theology, 5th edition, New York, 1896.

^428:1 It must not be forgotten that any form of disorder in the world might, by the design argument, suggest a God for just that kind of disorder. The truth is that any state of things whatever that can be named is logically susceptible of teleological interpretation. The ruins of the earthquake at Lisbon, for example: the whole of past history had to be planned exactly as it was to bring about in the fullness of time just that particular arrangement of debris of masonry, furniture, and once living bodies. No other train of causes would have been sufficient. And so of any other arrangement, bad or good, which might [p. 429] as a matter of fact be found resulting anywhere from previous conditions. To avoid such pessimistic consequences and save its beneficent designer, the design argument accordingly invokes two other principles, restrictive in their operation. The first is physical: Nature's forces tend of their own accord only to disorder and destruction, to heaps of ruins, not to architecture. This principle, though plausible at first sight, seems, in the light of recent biology, to be more and more improbable. The second principle is one of anthropomorphic interpretation. No arrangement that for us is "disorderly" can possibly have been an object of design at all. This principle is of course a mere assumption in the interests of anthropomorphic Theism.

When one views the world with no definite theological bias one way or the other, one sees that order and disorder, as we now recognize them, are purely human inventions. We are interested in certain types of arrangement, useful, aesthetic, or moral--so interested that whenever we find them realized, the fact emphatically rivets our attention. The result is that we work over the contents of the world selectively. It is overflowing with disorderly arrangements from our point of view, but order is the only thing we care for and look at, and by choosing, one can always find some sort of orderly arrangement in the midst of any chaos. If I should throw down a thousand beans at random upon a table, I could doubtless, by eliminating a sufficient number of them, leave the rest in almost any geometrical pattern you might propose to me, and you might then say that that pattern was the thing prefigured beforehand, and that the other beans were mere irrelevance and packing material. Our dealings with Nature are just like this. She is a vast plenum in which our attention draws capricious lines in innumerable directions. We count and name whatever lies upon the special lines we trace, whilst the other things and the untraced lines are neither named nor counted. There are in reality infinitely more things "unadapted" to each other in this world than there are things "adapted"; infinitely more things with irregular relations than with regular relations between them. But we look for the regular kind of thing exclusively, and ingeniously discover and preserve it in our memory. It accumulates with other regular kinds, until the collection of them fills our encyclopaedias. Yet all the while between and around them lies an [p. 430] infinite anonymous chaos of objects that no one ever thought of together, of relations that never yet attracted our attention.

The facts of order from which the physico-theological argument starts are thus easily susceptible of interpretation as arbitrary human products. So long as this is the case, although of course no argument against God follows, it follows that the argument for him will fail to constitute a knockdown proof of his existence. It will be convincing only to those who on other grounds believe in him already.

^431:295 For the scholastics the facultas appetendi embraces feeling, desire, and will.

^433:1 Op. cit., Discourse III. Section 7.

^435:1 In an article, How to make our Ideas Clear, in the Popular Science Monthly for January, 1878, vol. xii. p. 286.

^438:1 Pragmatically, the most important attribute of God is his punitive justice. But who, in the present state of theological opinion on that point, will dare maintain that hell fire or its equivalent in some shape is rendered certain by pure logic? Theology herself has largely based this doctrine upon revelation, and, in discussing it, has tended more and more to substitute conventional ideas of criminal law for a priori principles of reason. But the very notion that this glorious universe, [p. 439] with planets and winds, and laughing sky and ocean, should have been conceived and had its beams and rafters laid in technicalities of criminality, is incredible to our modern imagination. It weakens a religion to hear it argued upon such a basis.

^443:1 John Caird: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion London and New York, 1880, pp. 243-250, and 291-299, much abridged.

^444:1 A. C. FRASER: Philosophy of Theism, second edition, Edinburgh and London, 1899, especially part ii, chaps. vii. and viii. A. SETH [PRINGLE-PATTISON]: Hegelianism and Personality, Ibid., 1890, passim.

The most persuasive arguments in favor of a concrete individual Soul of the world, with which I am acquainted, are those of my colleague, Josiah Royce, in his Religious Aspect of Philosophy, Boston, 1885; in his Conception of God, New York and London, 1897; and lately in his Aberdeen Gifford Lectures, The World and the Individual, 2 vols., New York and London, 1901-02. I doubtless seem to some of my readers to evade the philosophic duty which my thesis in this lecture imposes on me, by not even attempting to meet Professor Royce's arguments articulately. I admit the momentary evasion. In the present lectures, which are cast throughout in a popular mould, there seemed no room for subtle metaphysical discussion, and for tactical purposes it was sufficient the contention of philosophy being what it is (namely, that religion can be transformed into a universally convincing science), to point to the fact that no religious philosophy has actually convinced the mass of thinkers. Meanwhile let me say that I hope that the present volume may be followed by another, if I am spared to write it, in which not only Professor Royce's arguments, but others for monistic absolutism shall be considered with all the technical fullness which their great importance calls for. At present I resign myself to lying passive under the reproach of superficiality.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 448]

  

Lecture XIX

  

OTHER CHARACTERISTICS

We have wound our way back, after our excursion through mysticism and philosophy, to where we were before: the uses of religion, its uses to the individual who has it, and the uses of the individual himself to the world, are the best arguments that truth is in it. We return to the empirical philosophy: the true is what works well, even though the qualification "on the whole" may always have to be added. In this lecture we must revert to description again, and finish our picture of the religious consciousness by a word about some of its other characteristic elements. Then, in a final lecture, we shall be free to make a general review and draw our independent conclusions.

The first point I will speak of is the part which the aesthetic life plays in determining one's choice of a religion. Men, I said awhile ago, involuntarily intellectualize their religious experience. They need formulas, just as they need fellowship in worship. I spoke, therefore, too contemptuously of the pragmatic uselessness of the famous scholastic list of attributes of the deity, for they have one use which I neglected to consider. The eloquent passage in which Newman enumerates them [*1] puts us on the track of it. Intoning them as he would intone a cathedral service, he shows how high is their aesthetic value. It enriches our bare piety to carry these exalted and mysterious verbal additions just as it enriches a church to have an organ and old brasses, marbles and frescoes and stained windows. Epithets lend an atmosphere

[p. 449]

and overtones to our devotion. They are like a hymn of praise and service of glory, and may sound the more sublime for being incomprehensible. Minds like Newman's [*1] grow as jealous of their credit as heathen priests are of that of the jewelry and ornaments that blaze upon their idols.

Among the buildings-out of religion which the mind spontaneously indulges in, the aesthetic motive must never be forgotten. I promised to say nothing of ecclesiastical systems in these lectures. I may be allowed, however, to put in a word at this point on the way in which their satisfaction of certain aesthetic needs contributes to their hold on human nature. Although some persons aim most at intellectual purity and simplification, for others richness is the supreme imaginative requirement. [*2] When one's mind is strongly of this type, an individual religion will hardly serve the purpose. The inner need is rather of something institutional and complex, majestic in the hierarchic interrelatedness of

[p. 450]

its parts, with authority descending from stage to stage, and at every stage objects for adjectives of mystery and splendor, derived in the last resort from the Godhead who is the fountain and culmination of the system. One feels then as if in presence of some vast incrusted work of jewelry or architecture; one hears the multitudinous liturgical appeal; one gets the honorific vibration coming from every quarter. Compared with such a noble complexity, in which ascending and descending movements seem in no way to jar upon stability, in which no single item, however humble, is insignificant, because so many august institutions hold it in its place, how flat does evangelical Protestantism appear, how bare the atmosphere of those isolated religious lives whose boast it is that "man in the bush with God may meet." [*1] What a pulverization and leveling of what a gloriously piled-up structure! To an imagination used to the perspectives of dignity and glory, the naked gospel scheme seems to offer an almshouse for a palace.

It is much like the patriotic sentiment of those brought up in ancient empires. How many emotions must be frustrated of their object, when one gives up the titles of dignity, the crimson lights and blare of brass, the gold embroidery, the plumed troops, the fear and trembling, and puts up with a president in a black coat who shakes hands with you, and comes, it may be, from a "home" upon a veldt or prairie with one sitting-room and a Bible on its centre-table. It pauperizes the monarchical imagination!

The strength of these aesthetic sentiments makes it rigorously impossible, it seems to me, that Protestantism, however superior in spiritual profundity it may be to Catholicism, should at the present day succeed in making many converts from the more venerable ecclesiasticism. The latter

[p. 451]

offers a so much richer pasturage and shade to the fancy, has so many cells with so many different kinds of honey, is so indulgent in its multiform appeals to human nature, that Protestantism will always show to Catholic eyes the almshouse physiognomy. The bitter negativity of it is to the Catholic mind incomprehensible. To intellectual Catholics many of the antiquated beliefs and practices to which the Church gives countenance are, if taken literally, as childish as they are to Protestants. But they are childish in the pleasing sense of "childlike"--innocent and amiable, and worthy to be smiled on in consideration of the undeveloped condition of the dear people's intellects. To the Protestant, on the contrary, they are childish in the sense of being idiotic falsehoods. He must stamp out their delicate and lovable redundancy, leaving the Catholic to shudder at his literalness. He appears to the latter as morose as if he were some hard-eyed, numb, monotonous kind of reptile. The two will never understand each other--their centres of emotional energy are too different. Rigorous truth and human nature's intricacies are always in need of a mutual interpreter. [*1] So much for the aesthetic diversities in the religious consciousness.

In most books on religion, three things are represented as its most essential elements. These are Sacrifice, Confession, and Prayer. I must say a word in turn of each of these elements, though briefly. First of Sacrifice.

[p. 452]

Sacrifices to gods are omnipresent in primeval worship; but, as cults have grown refined, burnt offerings and the blood of he-goats have been superseded by sacrifices more spiritual in their nature. Judaism, Islam, and Buddhism get along without ritual sacrifice; so does Christianity, save in so far as the notion is preserved in transfigured form in the mystery of Christ's atonement. These religions substitute offerings of the heart, renunciations of the inner self, for all those vain oblations. In the ascetic practices which Islam, Buddhism, and the older Christianity encourage we see how indestructible is the idea that sacrifice of some sort is a religious exercise. In lecturing on asceticism I spoke of its significance as symbolic of the sacrifices which life, whenever it is taken strenuously, calls for. [*1] But, as I said my say about those, and as these lectures expressly avoid earlier religious usages and questions of derivation, I will pass from the subject of Sacrifice altogether and turn to that of Confession.

In regard to Confession I will also be most brief, saying my word about it psychologically, not historically. Not nearly as widespread as sacrifice, it corresponds to a more inward and moral stage of sentiment. It is part of the general system of purgation and cleansing which one feels one's self in need of, in order to be in right relations to one's deity. For him who confesses, shams are over and realities have begun; he has exteriorized his rottenness. If he has not actually got rid of it, he at least no longer smears it over with a hypocritical show of virtue--he lives at least upon a basis of veracity. The complete decay of the practice of confession in Anglo-Saxon communities is a little hard to account for. Reaction against popery is of course the historic explanation, for in popery confession went with penances and absolution, and other inadmissible practices. But on the

[p. 453]

side of the sinner himself it seems as if the need ought to have been too great to accept so summary a refusal of its satisfaction. One would think that in more men the shell of secrecy would have had to open, the pent-in abscess to burst and gain relief, even though the ear that heard the confession were unworthy. The Catholic church, for obvious utilitarian reasons, has substituted auricular confession to one priest for the more radical act of public confession. We English-speaking Protestants, in the general self-reliance and unsociability of our nature, seem to find it enough if we take God alone into our confidence. [*1]

 

The next topic on which I must comment is Prayer--and this time it must be less briefly. We have heard much talk of late against prayer, especially against prayers for better weather and for the recovery of sick people. As regards prayers for the sick, if any medical fact can be considered to stand firm, it is that in certain environments prayer may contribute to recovery, and should be encouraged as a therapeutic measure. Being a normal factor of moral health in the person, its omission would be deleterious. The case of the weather is different. Notwithstanding the recency of the opposite belief, [*2] every one now knows that droughts and storms follow from physical antecedents, and that moral appeals cannot avert them. But petitional prayer is only one department of prayer; and if we take the word in the wider

[p. 454]

sense as meaning every kind of inward communion or conversation with the power recognized as divine, we can easily see that scientific criticism leaves it untouched.

Prayer in this wide sense is the very soul and essence of religion. "Religion," says a liberal French theologian, "is an intercourse, a conscious and voluntary relation, entered into by a soul in distress with the mysterious power upon which it feels itself to depend, and upon which its fate is contingent. This intercourse with God is realized by prayer. Prayer is religion in act; that is, prayer is real religion. It is prayer that distinguishes the religious phenomenon from such similar or neighboring phenomena as purely moral or aesthetic sentiment. Religion is nothing if it be not the vital act by which the entire mind seeks to save itself by clinging to the principle from which it draws its life. This act is prayer, by which term I understand no vain exercise of words, no mere repetition of certain sacred formula, but the very movement itself of the soul, putting itself in a personal relation of contact with the mysterious power of which it feels the presence--it may be even before it has a name by which to call it. Wherever this interior prayer is lacking, there is no religion; wherever, on the other hand, this prayer rises and stirs the soul, even in the absence of forms or of doctrines, we have living religion. One sees from this why "natural religion, so-called, is not properly a religion. It cuts man off from prayer. It leaves him and God in mutual remoteness, with no intimate commerce, no interior dialogue, no interchange, no action of God in man, no return of man to God. At bottom this pretended religion is only a philosophy. Born at epochs of rationalism, of critical investigations, it never was anything but an abstraction. An artificial and dead creation, it reveals to its examiner hardly one of the characters proper to religion." [*1]

[p. 455]

It seems to me that the entire series of our lectures proves the truth of M. Sabatier's contention. The religious phenomenon, studied as in inner fact, and apart from ecclesiastical or theological complications, has shown itself to consist everywhere, and at all its stages, in the consciousness which individuals have of an intercourse between themselves and higher powers with which they feel themselves to be related. This intercourse is realized at the time as being both active and mutual. If it be not effective; if it be not a give and take relation; if nothing be really transacted while it lasts; if the world is in no whit different for its having taken place; then prayer, taken in this wide meaning of a sense that something is transacting, is of course a feeling of what is illusory, and religion must on the whole be classed, not simply as containing elements of delusion--these undoubtedly everywhere exist--but as being rooted in delusion altogether, just as materialists and atheists have always said it was. At most there might remain, when the direct experiences of prayer were ruled out as false witnesses, some inferential belief that the whole order of existence must have a divine cause. But this way of contemplating nature, pleasing as it would doubtless be to persons of a pious taste, would leave to them but the spectators' part at a play, whereas in experimental religion and the prayerful life, we seem ourselves to be actors, and not in a play, but in a very serious reality.

The genuineness of religion is thus indissolubly bound up with the question whether the prayerful consciousness be or be not deceitful. The conviction that something is genuinely transacted in this consciousness is the very core of living religion. As to what is transacted, great differences of opinion have prevailed. The unseen powers have been supposed, and are yet supposed, to do things which no enlightened man can nowadays believe in. It may well prove that the sphere of influence in prayer is subjective exclusively, and

[p. 456]

that what is immediately changed is only the mind of the praying person. But however our opinion of prayer's effects may come to be limited by criticism, religion, in the vital sense in which these lectures study it, must stand or fall by the persuasion that effects of some sort genuinely do occur. Through prayer, religion insists, things which cannot be realized in any other manner come about: energy which but for prayer would be bound is by prayer set free and operates in some part, be it objective or subjective, of the world of facts.

This postulate is strikingly expressed in a letter written by the late Frederic W. H. Myers to a friend, who allows me to quote from it. It shows how independent the prayer-instinct is of usual doctrinal complications. Mr. Myers writes:--

"I am glad that you have asked me about prayer, because I have rather strong ideas on the subject. First consider what are the facts. There exists around us a spiritual universe, and that universe is in actual relation with the material. From the spiritual universe comes the energy which maintains the material; the energy which makes the life of each individual spirit. Our spirits are supported by a perpetual indrawal of this energy, and the vigor of that indrawal is perpetually changing, much as the vigor of our absorption of material nutriment changes from hour to hour.

"I call these 'facts' because I think that some scheme of this kind is the only one consistent with our actual evidence; too complex to summarize here. How, then, should we act on these facts? Plainly we must endeavor to draw in as much spiritual life as possible, and we must place our minds in any attitude which experience shows to be favorable to such indrawal. Prayer is the general name for that attitude of open and earnest expectancy. If we then ask to whom to pray, the answer (strangely enough) must be that that does not much matter. The prayer is not indeed a purely subjective thing;--it means a real increase in intensity of absorption of spiritual power or grace;--but we do not know enough of what takes place in the

[p. 457]

spiritual world to know how the prayer operates;--who is cognizant of it, or through what channel the grace is given. Better let children pray to Christ, who is at any rate the highest individual spirit of whom we have any knowledge. But it would be rash to say that Christ himself hears us; while to say that God hears us is merely to restate the first principle--that grace flows in from the infinite spiritual world."

Let us reserve the question of the truth or falsehood of the belief that power is absorbed until the next lecture, when our dogmatic conclusions, if we have any, must be reached. Let this lecture still confine itself to the description of phenomena; and as a concrete example of an extreme sort, of the way in which the prayerful life may still be led, let me take a case with which most of you must be acquainted, that of George Muller of Bristol, who died in 1898. Muller's prayers were of the crassest petitional order. Early in life he resolved on taking certain Bible promises in literal sincerity, and on letting himself be fed, not by his own worldly foresight, but by the Lord's hand. He had an extraordinarily active and successful career, among the fruits of which were the distribution of over two million copies of the Scripture text, in different languages; the equipment of several hundred missionaries; the circulation of more than a hundred and eleven million of scriptural books, pamphlets, and tracts; the building of five large orphanages, and the keeping and educating of thousands of orphans; finally, the establishment of schools in which over a hundred and twenty-one thousand youthful and adult pupils were taught. In the course of this work Mr. Muller received and administered nearly a million and a half of pounds sterling, and traveled over two hundred thousand miles of sea and land. [*1] During the sixty-eight years of his ministry, he never owned any property except his clothes and furniture, and cash in

[p. 458]

hand; and he left, at the age of eighty-six, an estate worth only a hundred and sixty pounds.

His method was to let his general wants be publicly known, but not to acquaint other people with the details of his temporary necessities. For the relief of the latter, he prayed directly to the Lord, believing that sooner or later prayers are always answered if one have trust enough. "When I lose such a thing as a key," he writes, "I ask the Lord to direct me to it, and I look for an answer to my prayer; when a person with whom I have made an appointment does not come, according to the fixed time, and I begin to be inconvenienced by it, I ask the Lord to be pleased to hasten him to me, and I look for an answer; when I do not understand a passage of the word of God, I lift up my heart to the Lord that he would be pleased by his Holy Spirit to instruct me, and I expect to be taught, though I do not fix the time when, and the manner how it should be; when I am going to minister in the Word, I seek help from the Lord, and . . . am not cast down, but of good cheer because I look for his assistance."

Muller's custom was to never run up bills, not even for a week. "As the Lord deals out to us by the day, . . . the week's payment might become due and we have no money to meet it; and thus those with whom we deal might be inconvenienced by us, and we be found acting against the commandment of the Lord: 'Owe no man anything.' From this day and henceforward whilst the Lord gives to us our supplies by the day, we purpose to pay at once for every article as it is purchased, and never to buy anything except we can pay for it at once, however much it may seem to be needed, and however much those with whom we deal may wish to be paid only by the week."

The articles needed of which Muller speaks were the food, fuel, etc., of his orphanages. Somehow, near as they often come to going without a meal, they hardly ever seem actually to have done so. "Greater and more manifest nearness of the Lord's presence I have never had than when after breakfast there were no means for dinner for more than a hundred persons; or when after dinner there were no means for the tea, and yet the Lord

[p. 459]

provided the tea; and all this without one single human being having been informed about our need. . . . Through Grace my mind is so fully assured of the faithfulness of the Lord, that in the midst of the greatest need, I am enabled in peace to go about my other work. Indeed, did not the Lord give me this, which is the result of trusting in him, I should scarcely be able to work at all; for it is now comparatively a rare thing that a day comes when I am not in need for one or another part of the work." [*1]

In building his orphanages simply by prayer and faith, Muller affirms that his prime motive was "to have something to point to as a visible proof that our God and Father is the same faithful God that he ever was--as willing as ever to prove himself the living God, in our day as formerly, to all that put their trust in him." [*2] For this reason he refused to borrow money for any of his enterprises. "How does it work when we thus anticipate God by going our own way? We certainly weaken faith instead of increasing it; and each time we work thus a deliverance of our own we find it more and more difficult to trust in God, till at last we give way entirely to our natural fallen reason and unbelief prevails. How different if one is enabled to wait God's own time, and to look alone to him for help and deliverance! When at last help comes, after many seasons of prayer it may be, how sweet it is, and what a present recompense! Dear Christian reader, if you have never walked in this path of obedience before, do so now, and you will then know experimentally the sweetness of the joy which results from it." [*3]

When the supplies came in but slowly, Muller always considered that this was for the trial of his faith and patience When his faith and patience had been sufficiently tried, the Lord would send more means. "And thus it has proved,"--I quote from his diary--"for to-day was given me the sum of 2050 pounds, of which 2000 are for the building fund [of a certain

[p. 460]

house], and 50 for present necessities. It is impossible to describe my joy in God when I received this donation. I was neither excited nor surprised; for I look out for answers to my prayers. I believe that God hears me. Yet my heart was so full of joy that I could only SIT before God, and admire him, like David in 2 Samuel vii. At last I cast myself flat down upon my face and burst forth in thanksgiving to God and in surrendering my heart afresh to him for his blessed service." [*1]

George Muller's is a case extreme in every respect, and in no respect more so than in the extraordinary narrowness of the man's intellectual horizon. His God was, as he often said, his business partner. He seems to have been for Muller little more than a sort of supernatural clergyman interested in the congregation of tradesmen and others in Bristol who were his saints, and in the orphanages and other enterprises, but unpossessed of any of those vaster and wilder and more ideal attributes with which the human imagination elsewhere has invested him. Muller, in short, was absolutely unphilosophical. His intensely private and practical conception of his relations with the Deity continued the traditions of the most primitive human thought. [*2] When we

[p. 461]

compare a mind like his with such a mind as, for example, Emerson's or Phillips Brooks's, we see the range which the religious consciousness covers.

There is an immense literature relating to answers to petitional prayer. The evangelical journals are filled with such answers, and books are devoted to the subject, [*1] but for us Muller's case will suffice.

 

A less sturdy beggar-like fashion of leading the prayerful life is followed by innumerable other Christians. Persistence in leaning on the Almighty for support and guidance will, such persons say, bring with it proofs, palpable but much more subtle, of his presence and active influence. The following description of a "led" life, by a German writer whom I have already quoted, would no doubt appear to countless Christians in every country as if transcribed

[p. 462]

from their own personal experience. One finds in this guided sort of life, says Dr. Hilty--

"That books and words (and sometimes people) come to one's cognizance just at the very moment in which one needs them; that one glides over great dangers as if with shut eyes, remaining ignorant of what would have terrified one or led one astray, until the peril is past--this being especially the case with temptations to vanity and sensuality; that paths on which one ought not to wander are, as it were, hedged off with thorns; but that on the other side great obstacles are suddenly removed; that when the time has come for something, one suddenly receives a courage that formerly failed, or perceives the root of a matter that until then was concealed, or discovers thoughts, talents, yea, even pieces of knowledge and insight, in one's self, of which it is impossible to say whence they come; finally, that persons help us or decline to help us, favor us or refuse us, as if they had to do so against their will, so that often those indifferent or even unfriendly to us yield us the greatest service and furtherance. (God takes often their worldly goods, from those whom he leads, at just the right moment, when they threaten to impede the effort after higher interests.)

"Besides all this, other noteworthy things come to pass, of which it is not easy to give account. There is no doubt whatever that now one walks continually through 'open doors' and on the easiest roads, with as little care and trouble as it is possible to imagine.

"Furthermore one finds one's self settling one's affairs neither too early nor too late, whereas they were wont to be spoiled by untimeliness, even when the preparations had been well laid. In addition to this, one does them with perfect tranquillity of mind, almost as if they were matters of no consequence, like errands done by us for another person, in which case we usually act more calmly than when we act in our own concerns. Again, one finds that one can wait for everything patiently, and that is one of life's great arts. One finds also that each thing comes duly, one thing after the other, so that one gains time to make one's footing sure before advancing farther. And then every

[p. 463]

thing occurs to us at the right moment, just what we ought to do, etc., and often in a very striking way, just as if a third person were keeping watch over those things which we are in easy danger of forgetting.

"Often, too, persons are sent to us at the right time, to offer or ask for what is needed, and what we should never have had the courage or resolution to undertake of our own accord.

"Through all these experiences one finds that one is kindly and tolerant of other people, even of such as are repulsive, negligent, or ill-willed, for they also are instruments of good in God's hand, and often most efficient ones. Without these thoughts it would be hard for even the best of us always to keep our equanimity. But with the consciousness of divine guidance, one sees many a thing in life quite differently from what would otherwise be possible.

"All these are things that every human being knows, who has had experience of them; and of which the most speaking examples could be brought forward. The highest resources of worldly wisdom are unable to attain that which, under divine leading, comes to us of its own accord." [*1]

Such accounts as this shade away into others where the belief is, not that particular events are tempered more towardly to us by a superintending providence, as a reward for our reliance, but that by cultivating the continuous sense of our connection with the power that made things as they are, we are tempered more towardly for their reception. The outward face of nature need not alter, but the expressions of meaning in it alter. It was dead and is alive again. It is like the difference between looking on a person without love, or upon the same person with love. In the latter case intercourse springs into new vitality. So when one's affections keep in touch with the divinity of the world's authorship, fear and egotism fall away; and in the equanimity that follows, one finds in the hours, as they succeed each other, a series of purely benignant opportunities. It is as if all doors

[p. 464]

were opened, and all paths freshly smoothed. We meet a new world when we meet the old world in the spirit which this kind of prayer infuses.

Such a spirit was that of Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus. [*1] It is that of mind-curers, of the transcendentalists, and of the so-called "liberal" Christians. As an expression of it, I will quote a page from one of Martineau's sermons:--

"The universe, open to the eye to-day, looks as it did a thousand years ago: and the morning hymn of Milton does but tell the beauty with which our own familiar sun dressed the earliest fields and gardens of the world. We see what all our fathers saw. And if we cannot find God in your house or in mine, upon the roadside or the margin of the sea; in the bursting seed or opening flower; in the day duty or the night musing; in the general laugh and the secret grief; in the procession of life, ever entering afresh, and solemnly passing by and dropping off; I do not think we should discern him any more on the grass of Eden, or beneath the moonlight of Gethsemane. Depend upon it, it is not the want of greater miracles, but of the soul to perceive such as are allowed us still, that makes us push all the sanctities into the far spaces we cannot reach. The devout feel that wherever God's hand is, there is miracle: and it is simply

[p. 465]

an indevoutness which imagines that only where miracle is, can there be the real hand of God. The customs of Heaven ought surely to be more sacred in our eyes than its anomalies; the dear old ways, of which the Most High is never tired, than the strange things which he does not love well enough ever to repeat. And he who will but discern beneath the sun, as he rises any morning, the supporting finger of the Almighty, may recover the sweet and reverent surprise with which Adam gazed on the first dawn in Paradise. It is no outward change, no shifting in time or place; but only the loving meditation of the pure in heart, that can reawaken the Eternal from the sleep within our souls: that can render him a reality again, and reassert for him once more his ancient name of 'the Living God.'" [*1]

When we see all things in God, and refer all things to him, we read in common matters superior expressions of meaning. The deadness with which custom invests the familiar vanishes, and existence as a whole appears transfigured. The state of a mind thus awakened from torpor is well expressed in these words, which I take from a friend's letter:--

"If we occupy ourselves in summing up all the mercies and bounties we are privileged to have, we are overwhelmed by their number (so great that we can imagine ourselves unable to give ourselves time even to begin to review the things we may imagine we have not). We sum them and realize that we are actually killed with God's kindness; that we are surrounded by bounties upon bounties, without which all would fall. Should we not love it; should we not feel buoyed up by the Eternal Arms?"

 

Sometimes this realization that facts are of divine sending, instead of being habitual, is casual, like a mystical experience.

[p. 466]

[paragraph continues] Father Gratry gives this instance from his youthful melancholy period:--

"One day I had a moment of consolation, because I met with something which seemed to me ideally perfect. It was a poor drummer beating the tattoo in the streets of Paris. I walked behind him in returning to the school on the evening of a holiday. His drum gave out the tattoo in such a way that, at that moment at least, however peevish I were, I could find no pretext for fault-finding. It was impossible to conceive more nerve or spirit, better time or measure, more clearness or richness, than were in this drumming. Ideal desire could go no farther in that direction. I was enchanted and consoled; the perfection of this wretched act did me good. Good is at least possible, I said. since the ideal can thus sometimes get embodied." [*1]

In Senancour's novel of Obermann a similar transient lifting of the veil is recorded. In Paris streets, on a March day, he comes across a flower in bloom, a jonquil:

"It was the strongest expression of desire: it was the first perfume of the year. I felt all the happiness destined for man. This unutterable harmony of souls, the phantom of the ideal world, arose in me complete. I never felt anything so great or so instantaneous. I know not what shape, what analogy, what secret of relation it was that made me see in this flower a limitless beauty. . . . I shall never inclose in a conception this power, this immensity that nothing will express; this form that nothing will contain; this ideal of a better world which one feels, but which, it seems, nature has not made actual." [*2]

We heard in previous lectures of the vivified face of the world as it may appear to converts after their awakening. [*3] As a rule, religious persons generally assume that whatever

[p. 467]

natural facts connect themselves in any way with their destiny are significant of the divine purposes with them. Through prayer the purpose, often far from obvious, comes home to them, and if it be "trial," strength to endure the trial is given. Thus at all stages of the prayerful life we find the persuasion that in the process of communion energy from on high flows in to meet demand, and becomes operative within the phenomenal world. So long as this operativeness is admitted to be real, it makes no essential difference whether its immediate effects be subjective or objective. The fundamental religious point is that in prayer, spiritual energy, which otherwise would slumber, does become active, and spiritual work of some kind is effected really.

So much for Prayer, taken in the wide sense of any kind of communion. As the core of religion, we must return to it in the next lecture.

 

The last aspect of the religious life which remains for me to touch upon is the fact that its manifestations so frequently connect themselves with the subconscious part of our existence. You may remember what I said in my opening lecture [*1] about the prevalence of the psychopathic temperament in religious biography. You will in point of fact hardly find a religious leader of any kind in whose life there is no record of automatisms. I speak not merely of savage priests and prophets, whose followers regard automatic utterance and action as by itself tantamount to inspiration, I speak of leaders of thought and subjects of intellectualized experience. Saint Paul had his visions, his ecstasies, his gift of tongues, small as was the importance he attached to the latter. The whole array of Christian saints and heresiarchs, including the greatest, the Barnards, the Loyolas, the Luthers, the Foxes, the Wesleys, had their visions, voices, rapt conditions, guiding impressions, and "openings." They had these

[p. 468]

things, because they had exalted sensibility, and to such things persons of exalted sensibility are liable. In such liability there lie, however, consequences for theology. Beliefs are strengthened wherever automatisms corroborate them. Incursions from beyond the transmarginal region have a peculiar power to increase conviction. The inchoate sense of presence is infinitely stronger than conception, but strong as it may be, it is seldom equal to the evidence of hallucination. Saints who actually see or hear their Saviour reach the acme of assurance. Motor automatisms, though rarer, are, if possible, even more convincing than sensations. The subjects here actually feel themselves played upon by powers beyond their will. The evidence is dynamic; the God or spirit moves the very organs of their body. [*1]

The great field for this sense of being the instrument of a higher power is of course "inspiration." It is easy to discriminate between the religious leaders who have been

[p. 469]

habitually subject to inspiration and those who have not. In the teachings of the Buddha, of Jesus, of Saint Paul (apart from his gift of tongues), of Saint Augustine, of Huss, of Luther, of Wesley, automatic or semi-automatic composition appears to have been only occasional. In the Hebrew prophets, on the contrary, in Mohammed, in some of the Alexandrians, in many minor Catholic saints, in Fox, in Joseph Smith, something like it appears to have been frequent, sometimes habitual. We have distinct professions of being under the direction of a foreign power, and serving as its mouthpiece. As regards the Hebrew prophets, it is extraordinary, writes an author who has made a careful study of them, to see--

"How, one after another, the same features are reproduced in the prophetic books. The process is always extremely different from what it would be if the prophet arrived at his insight into spiritual things by the tentative efforts of his own genius. There is something sharp and sudden about it. He can lay his finger, so to speak, on the moment when it came. And it always comes in the form of an overpowering force from without, against which he struggles, but in vain. Listen, for instance, [to] the opening of the book of Jeremiah. Read through in like manner the first two chapters of the prophecy of Ezekiel.

"It is not, however, only at the beginning of his career that the prophet passes through a crisis which is clearly not self-caused. Scattered all through the prophetic writings are expressions which speak of some strong and irresistible impulse coming down upon the prophet, determining his attitude to the events of his time, constraining his utterance, making his words the vehicle of a higher meaning than their own. For instance, this of Isaiah's: 'The Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand,'--an emphatic phrase which denotes the overmastering nature of the impulse--'and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people.' . . . Or passages like this from Ezekiel: 'The hand of the Lord God fell upon me,' 'The hand of the Lord was strong upon me.' The one standing characteristic

[p. 470]

of the prophet is that he speaks with the authority of Jehovah himself. Hence it is that the prophets one and all preface their addresses so confidently, 'The Word of the Lord,' or 'Thus saith the Lord.' They have even the audacity to speak in the first person, as if Jehovah himself were speaking. As in Isaiah: 'Hearken unto me, O Jacob, and Israel my called; I am He, I am the First, I also am the last,'--and so on. The personality of the prophet sinks entirely into the background; he feels himself for the time being the mouthpiece of the Almighty." [*1]

"We need to remember that prophecy was a profession, and that the prophets formed a professional class. There were schools of the prophets, in which the gift was regularly cultivated. A group of young men would gather round some commanding figure--a Samuel or an Elisha--and would not only record or spread the knowledge of his sayings and doings, but seek to catch themselves something of his inspiration. It seems that music played its part in their exercises. . . . It is perfectly clear that by no means all of these Sons of the prophets ever succeeded in acquiring more than a very small share in the gift which they sought. It was clearly possible to 'counterfeit' prophecy. Sometimes this was done deliberately. . . . But it by no means follows that in all cases where a false message was given, the giver of it was altogether conscious of what he was doing. [*2]

Here, to take another Jewish case, is the way in which Philo of Alexandria describes his inspiration:--

"Sometimes, when I have come to my work empty, I have suddenly become full; ideas being in an invisible manner showered upon me, and implanted in me from on high; so that through the influence of divine inspiration, I have become greatly excited, and have known neither the place in which I was, nor those who were present, nor myself, nor what I was

[p. 471]

saying, nor what I was writing, for then I have been conscious of a richness of interpretation, an enjoyment of light, a most penetrating insight, a most manifest energy in all that was to be done; having such effect on my mind as the clearest ocular demonstration would have on the eyes." [*1]

If we turn to Islam, we find that Mohammed's revelations all came from the subconscious sphere. To the question in what way he got them--

"Mohammed is said to have answered that sometimes he heard a knell as from a bell, and that this had the strongest effect on him; and when the angel went away, he had received the revelation. Sometimes again he held converse with the angel as with a man, so as easily to understand his words. The later authorities, however, . . . distinguish still other kinds. In the Itgan (103) the following are enumerated: 1, revelations with sound of bell, 2, by inspiration of the holy spirit in M.'s heart, 3, by Gabriel in human form, 4, by God immediately, either when awake (as in his journey to heaven) or in dream. . . . In Almawahib alladuniya the kinds are thus given: 1, Dream, 2, Inspiration of Gabriel in the Prophet's heart, 3, Gabriel taking Dahya's form, 4, with the bell-sound, etc., 5, Gabriel in propria persona (only twice), 6, revelation in heaven, 7, God appearing in person, but veiled, 8, God revealing himself immediately without veil. Others add two other stages, namely: 1, Gabriel in the form of still another man, 2, God showing himself personally in dream." [*2]

In none of these cases is the revelation distinctly motor. In the case of Joseph Smith (who had prophetic revelations innumerable in addition to the revealed translation of the

[p. 472]

gold plates which resulted in the Book of Mormon), although there may have been a motor element, the inspiration seems to have been predominantly sensorial. He began his translation by the aid of the "peep-stones" which he found, or thought or said that he found, with the gold plates--apparently a case of "crystal gazing." For some of the other revelations he used the peep-stones, but seems generally to have asked the Lord for more direct instruction. [*1]

Other revelations are described as "openings"--Fox's, for example, were evidently of the kind known in spiritistic circles of to-day as "impressions." As all effective initiators of change must needs live to some degree upon this psychopathic level of sudden perception or conviction of new truth, or of impulse to action so obsessive that it must be worked off, I will say nothing more about so very common a phenomenon.

When, in addition to these phenomena of inspiration, we take religious mysticism into the account, when we recall the striking and sudden unifications of a discordant self which we saw in conversion, and when we review the extravagant

[p. 473]

obsessions of tenderness, purity, and self-severity met with in saintliness, we cannot, I think, avoid the conclusion that in religion we have a department of human nature with unusually close relations to the transmarginal or subliminal region. If the word "subliminal" is offensive to any of you, as smelling too much of psychical research or other aberrations, call it by any other name you please, to distinguish it from the level of full sunlit consciousness. Call this latter the A-region of personality, if you care to, and call the other the B-region. The B-region, then, is obviously the larger part of each of us, for it is the abode of everything that is latent and the reservoir of everything that passes unrecorded or unobserved. It contains, for example, such things as all our momentarily inactive memories, and it harbors the springs of all our obscurely motived passions, impulses, likes, dislikes, and prejudices. Our intuitions, hypotheses, fancies, superstitions, persuasions, convictions, and in general all our non-rational operations, come from it. It is the source of our dreams, and apparently they may return to it. In it arise whatever mystical experiences we may have, and our automatisms, sensory or motor; our life in hypnotic and "hypnoid" conditions, if we are subjects to such conditions; our delusions, fixed ideas, and hysterical accidents, if we are hysteric subjects; our supra-normal cognitions, if such there be, and if we are telepathic subjects. It is also the fountain-head of much that feeds our religion. In persons deep in the religious life, as we have now abundantly seen--and this is my conclusion--the door into this region seems unusually wide open; at any rate, experiences making their entrance through that door have had emphatic influence in shaping religious history.

With this conclusion I turn back and close the circle which I opened in my first lecture, terminating thus the review which I then announced of inner religious phenomena as we find them in developed and articulate human

[p. 474]

individuals. I might easily, if the time allowed, multiply both my documents and my discriminations, but a broad treatment is, I believe, in itself better, and the most important characteristics of the subject lie, I think, before us already. In the next lecture, which is also the last one, we must try to draw the critical conclusions which so much material may suggest.

Footnotes

^448:1 Idea of a University, Discourse III. Section 7.

^449:1 Newman's imagination so innately craved an ecclesiastical system that he can write: "From the age of fifteen, dogma has been the fundamental principle of my religion: I know no other religion; I cannot enter into the idea of any other sort of religion." And again speaking of himself about the age of thirty, he writes: "I loved to act as feeling myself in my Bishop's sight, as if it were the sight of God." Apologia, 1897, pp. 48, 50.

^449:2 The intellectual difference is quite on a par in practical importance with the analogous difference in character. We saw, under the head of Saintliness, how some characters resent confusion and must live in purity, consistency, simplicity (above, <page 275> ff.). For others, on the contrary, superabundance, over-pressure, stimulation, lots of superficial relations, are indispensable. There are men who would suffer a very syncope if you should pay all their debts, bring it about that their engagements had been kept, their letters answered their perplexities relieved, and their duties fulfilled, down to one which lay on a clean table under their eyes with nothing to interfere with its immediate performance. A day stripped so staringly bare would be for them appalling. So with ease, elegance, tributes of affection, social recognitions--some of us require amounts of these things which to others would appear a mass of lying and sophistication.

^450:1 In Newman's Lectures on Justification Lecture VIII.  section 6, there is a splendid passage expressive of this aesthetic way of feeling the Christian scheme. It is unfortunately too long to quote.

^451:1 Compare the informality of Protestantism, where the "meek lover of the good," alone with his God, visits the sick, etc., for their own sakes, with the elaborate "business" that goes on in Catholic devotion, and carries with it the social excitement of all more complex businesses. An essentially worldly-minded Catholic woman can become a visitor of the sick on purely coquettish principles, with her confessor and director, her "merit" storing up, her patron saints, her privileged relation to the Almighty, drawing his attention as a professional devote, her definite "exercises," and her definitely recognized social pose in the organization.

^452:1 Above, <page 354> ff.

^453:1 A fuller discussion of confession is contained in the excellent work by FRANK GRANGER: The Soul of a Christian, London, 1900, ch. xii.

^453:2 Example: "The minister at Sudbury, being at the Thursday lecture in Boston, heard the officiating clergyman praying for rain. As soon as the service was over, he went to the petitioner and said 'You Boston ministers, as soon as a tulip wilts under your windows, go to church and pray for rain, until all Concord and Sudbury are under water.'" R. W. EMERSON: Lectures and Biographical Sketches, p. 363.

^454:1 AUGUSTE SABATIER: Esquisse d'une Philosophie de la Religion. 2me ed., 1897, pp. 24-26, abridged.

^457:1 My authority for these statistics is the little work on Muller, by FREDERIC G. WARNE, New York, 1898.

^459:1 The Life of Trust; Being a Narrative of the Lord's Dealings with George Muller, New American edition, N. Y., Crowell, pp. 228, 194, 219.

^459:2 Ibid., p. 126.

^459:3 Op. cit., p. 383, abridged.

^460:1 Ibid., p. 323.

^460:2 I cannot resist the temptation of quoting an expression of an even more primitive style of religious thought, which I find in Arber's English Garland, vol. vii. p. 440. Robert Lyde, an English sailor, along with an English boy, being prisoners on a French ship in 1689, set upon the crew, of seven Frenchmen, killed two, made the other five prisoners, and brought home the ship. Lyde thus describes how in this feat he found his God a very present help in time of trouble:--

"With the assistance of God I kept my feet when they three and one more did strive to throw me down. Feeling the Frenchman which hung about my middle hang very heavy, I said to the boy, 'Go round the binnacle, and knock down that man that hangeth on my back.' So the boy did strike him one blow on the head which made him fall. . . . Then I looked about for a marlin spike or anything else to strike them withal. But seeing nothing, I said, 'LORD! what [p. 461] shall I do?' Then casting up my eye upon my left side, and seeing a marlin spike hanging, I jerked my right arm and took hold, and struck the point four times about a quarter of an inch deep into the skull of that man that had hold of my left arm. [One of the Frenchmen then hauled the marlin spike away from him.] But through GOD'S wonderful providence! it either fell out of his hand, or else he threw it down, and at this time the Almighty GOD gave me strength enough to take one man in one hand, and throw at the other's head: and looking about again to see anything to strike them withal, but seeing nothing, I said, 'LORD! what shall I do now?' And then it pleased GOD to put me in mind of my knife in my pocket. And although two of the men had hold of my right arm, yet GOD Almighty strengthened me so that I put my right hand into my right pocket, drew out the knife and sheath, . . . put it between my legs and drew it out, and then cut the man's throat with it that had his back to my breast: and he immediately dropt down, and scarce ever stirred after."--I have slightly abridged Lyde's narrative.

^461:1 As, for instance, In Answer to Prayer, by the BISHOP OF RIPON and others, London, 1898; Touching Incidents and Remarkable Answers to Prayer, Harrisburg, Pa., 1898 (?); H. L. HASTINGS: The Guiding Hand, or Providential Direction, illustrated by Authentic Instances, Boston, 1898(?).

^463:1 C. HILTY: Gluck, Dritter Theil, 1900, pp. 92 ff.

^464:1 "Good Heaven!" says Epictetus, "any one thing in the creation is sufficient to demonstrate a Providence, to a humble and grateful mind. The mere possibility of producing milk from grass, cheese from milk, and wool from skins; who formed and planned it? Ought we not, whether we dig or plough or eat, to sing this hymn to God? Great is God, who has supplied us with these instruments to till the ground; great is God, who has given us hands and instruments of digestion, who has given us to grow insensibly and to breathe in sleep. These things we ought forever to celebrate. . . . But because the most of you are blind and insensible, there must be some one to fill this station, and lead, in behalf of all men, the hymn to God; for what else can I do, a lame old man, but sing hymns to God? Were I a nightingale, I would act the part of a nightingale; were I a swan, the part of a swan. But since I am a reasonable creature, it is my duty to praise God . . . and I call on you to join the same song." Works, book i. ch. xvi., CARTER-HIGGINSON (translation) abridged.

^465:1 JAMES MARTINEAU: end of the sermon "Help Thou Mine Unbelief," in Endeavours after a Christian Life, 2d series. Compare with this page the extract from Voysey on <page 270>, above, and those from Pascal and Madame Guyon on <page 281>.

^466:1 Souvenirs de ma Jeunesse, 1897, p. 122.

^466:2 Op. cit., Letter XXX.

^466:3 Above, <page 243> ff. Compare the withdrawal of expression from the world, in Melancholiacs, <page 148>.

^467:1 Above, pp. <page 25>, <page 26>.

^468:1 A friend of mine, a first-rate psychologist, who is a subject of graphic automatism, tells me that the appearance of independent actuation in the movements of his arm, when he writes automatically, is so distinct that it obliges him to abandon a psychophysical theory which he had previously believed in, the theory, namely, that we have no feeling of the discharge downwards of our voluntary motor-centres. We must normally have such a feeling, he thinks, or the sense of an absence would not be so striking as it is in these experiences. Graphic automatism of a fully developed kind is rare in religious history, so far as my knowledge goes. Such statements as Antonia Bourignon's, that "I do nothing but lend my hand and spirit to another power than mine," is shown by the context to indicate inspiration rather than directly automatic writing. In some eccentric sects this latter occurs. The most striking instance of it is probably the bulky volume called, "Oahspe, a new Bible in the Words of Jehovah and his angel ambassadors," Boston and London, 1891, written and illustrated automatically by DR. NEWBROUGH of New York, whom I understand to be now, or to have been lately, at the head of the spiritistic community of Shalam in New Mexico. The latest automatically written book which has come under my notice is "Zertoulem's Wisdom of the Ages," by GEORGE A. FULLER, Boston, 1901.

^470:1 W. SANDAY: The Oracles of God, London, 1892, pp. 49-56, abridged.

^470:2 Op. cit., p. 91. This author also cites Moses's and Isaiah's commissions, as given in Exodus, chaps. iii. and iv., and Isaiah, chap. vi.

^471:1 Quoted by AUGUSTUS CLISSOLD: The Prophetic Spirit in Genius and Madness, 1870, p. 67. Mr. Clissold is a Swedenborgian. Swedenborg's case is of course the palmary one of audita et visa, serving as a basis of religious revelation.

^471:2 NoLDEKE, Geschichte des Qorans, 1860, p. 16. Compare the fuller account in SIR WILLIAM MUIR'S: Life of Mahomet, 3d ed., 1894, ch. iii.

^472:1 The Mormon theocracy has always been governed by direct revelations accorded to the President of the Church and its Apostles. From an obliging letter written to me in 1899 by an eminent Mormon, I quote the following extract:--

"It may be very interesting for you to know that the President [Mr. Snow] of the Mormon Church claims to have had a number of revelations very recently from heaven. To explain fully what these revelations are, it is necessary to know that we, as a people, believe that the Church of Jesus Christ has again been established through messengers sent from heaven. This Church has at its head a prophet seer, and revelator, who gives to man God's holy will. Revelation is the means through which the will of God is declared directly and in fullness to man. These revelations are got through dreams of sleep or in waking visions of the mind, by voices without visional appearance or by actual manifestations of the Holy Presence before the eye. We believe that God has come in person and spoken to our prophet and revelator."

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 475]

  

Lecture XX

  

CONCLUSIONS

The material of our study of human nature is now spread before us; and in this parting hour, set free from the duty of description, we can draw our theoretical and practical conclusions. In my first lecture, defending the empirical method, I foretold that whatever conclusions we might come to could be reached by spiritual judgments only, appreciations of the significance for life of religion, taken "on the whole."  Our conclusions cannot be as sharp as dogmatic conclusions would be, but I will formulate them, when the time comes, as sharply as I can.

Summing up in the broadest possible way the characteristics of the religious life, as we have found them, it includes the following beliefs:--

1. That the visible world is part of a more spiritual universe from which it draws its chief significance;

2. That union or harmonious relation with that higher universe is our true end;

3. That prayer or inner communion with the spirit thereof--be that spirit "God" or "law"--is a process wherein work is really done, and spiritual energy flows in and produces effects, psychological or material, within the phenomenal world.

Religion includes also the following psychological characteristics:--

4. A new zest which adds itself like a gift to life, and takes the form either of lyrical enchantment or of appeal to earnestness and heroism.

[p. 476]

5. An assurance of safety and a temper of peace, and, in relation to others, a preponderance of loving affections.

In illustrating these characteristics by documents, we have been literally bathed in sentiment. In re-reading my manuscript, I am almost appalled at the amount of emotionality which I find in it. After so much of this, we can afford to be dryer and less sympathetic in the rest of the work that lies before us.

The sentimentality of many of my documents is a consequence of the fact that I sought them among the extravagances of the subject. If any of you are enemies of what our ancestors used to brand as enthusiasm, and are, nevertheless, still listening to me now, you have probably felt my selection to have been sometimes almost perverse, and have wished I might have stuck to soberer examples. I reply that I took these extremer examples as yielding the profounder information. To learn the secrets of any science, we go to expert specialists, even though they may be eccentric persons, and not to commonplace pupils. We combine what they tell us with the rest of our wisdom, and form our final judgment independently. Even so with religion. We who have pursued such radical expressions of it may now be sure that we know its secrets as authentically as anyone can know them who learns them from another; and we have next to answer, each of us for himself, the practical question: what are the dangers in this element of life? and in what proportion may it need to be restrained by other elements, to give the proper balance?

 

But this question suggests another one which I will answer immediately and get it out of the way, for it has more than once already vexed us. [*1] Ought it to be assumed that in all men the mixture of religion with other elements should be identical? Ought it, indeed, to be assumed that

[p. 477]

the lives of all men should show identical religious elements? In other words, is the existence of so many religious types and sects and creeds regrettable?

To these questions I answer "No" emphatically. And my reason is that I do not see how it is possible that creatures in such different positions and with such different powers as human individuals are, should have exactly the same functions and the same duties. No two of us have identical difficulties, nor should we be expected to work out identical solutions. Each, from his peculiar angle of observation, takes in a certain sphere of fact and trouble, which each must deal with in a unique manner. One of us must soften himself, another must harden himself; one must yield a point, another must stand firm--in order the better to defend the position assigned him. If an Emerson were forced to be a Wesley, or a Moody forced to be a Whitman, the total human consciousness of the divine would suffer. The divine can mean no single quality, it must mean a group of qualities, by being champions of which in alternation, different men may all find worthy missions. Each attitude being a syllable in human nature's total message, it takes the whole of us to spell the meaning out completely. So a "god of battles" must be allowed to be the god for one kind of person, a god of peace and heaven and home, the god for another. We must frankly recognize the fact that we live in partial systems, and that parts are not interchangeable in the spiritual life. If we are peevish and jealous, destruction of the self must be an element of our religion; why need it be one if we are good and sympathetic from the outset? If we are sick souls, we require a religion of deliverance; but why think so much of deliverance, if we are healthy-minded? [*1] Unquestionably, some men have the completer

[p. 478]

experience and the higher vocation, here just as in the social world; but for each man to stay in his own experience, whate'er it be, and for others to tolerate him there, is surely best.

 

But, you may now ask, would not this one-sidedness be cured if we should all espouse the science of religions as our own religion? In answering this question I must open again the general relations of the theoretic to the active life.

Knowledge about a thing is not the thing itself. You remember what Al-Ghazzali told us in the Lecture on Mysticism--that to understand the causes of drunkenness, as a physician understands them, is not to be drunk. A science might come to understand everything about the causes and elements of religion, and might even decide which elements were qualified, by their general harmony with other

[p. 479]

branches of knowledge, to be considered true; and yet the best man at this science might be the man who found it hardest to be personally devout. Tout savoir c'est tout pardonner. The name of Renan would doubtless occur to many persons as an example of the way in which breadth of knowledge may make one only a dilettante in possibilities, and blunt the acuteness of one's living faith. [*1] If religion be a function by which either God's cause or man's cause is to be really advanced, then he who lives the life of it, however narrowly, is a better servant than he who merely knows about it, however much. Knowledge about life is one thing; effective occupation of a place in life, with its dynamic currents passing through your being, is another.

For this reason, the science of religions may not be an equivalent for living religion; and if we turn to the inner difficulties of such a science, we see that a point comes when she must drop the purely theoretic attitude, and either let her knots remain uncut, or have them cut by active faith. To see this, suppose that we have our science of religions constituted as a matter of fact. Suppose that she has assimilated all the necessary historical material and distilled out of it as its essence the same conclusions which I myself a few moments ago pronounced. Suppose that she agrees that religion, wherever it is an active thing, involves a belief in ideal presences, and a belief that in our prayerful communion with them, [*2] work is done, and something real comes to pass. She has now to exert her critical activity, and to decide how far, in the light of other sciences and in that of general philosophy, such beliefs can be considered true.

Dogmatically to decide this is an impossible task. Not only are the other sciences and the philosophy still far from

[p. 480]

being completed, but in their present state we find them full of conflicts. The sciences of nature know nothing of spiritual presences, and on the whole hold no practical commerce whatever with the idealistic conceptions towards which general philosophy inclines. The scientist, so-called, is, during his scientific hours at least, so materialistic that one may well say that on the whole the influence of science goes against the notion that religion should be recognized at all. And this antipathy to religion finds an echo within the very science of religions itself. The cultivator of this science has to become acquainted with so many groveling and horrible superstitions that a presumption easily arises in his mind that any belief that is religious probably is false. In the "prayerful communion" of savages with such mumbo-jumbos of deities as they acknowledge, it is hard for us to see what genuine spiritual work--even though it were work relative only to their dark savage obligations--can possibly be done.

The consequence is that the conclusions of the science of religions are as likely to be adverse as they are to be favorable to the claim that the essence of religion is true. There is a notion in the air about us that religion is probably only an anachronism, a case of "survival," an atavistic relapse into a mode of thought which humanity in its more enlightened examples has outgrown; and this notion our religious anthropologists at present do little to counteract.

This view is so widespread at the present day that I must consider it with some explicitness before I pass to my own conclusions. Let me call it the "Survival theory," for brevity's sake.

The pivot round which the religious life, as we have traced it, revolves, is the interest of the individual in his private personal destiny. Religion, in short, is a monumental chapter in the history of human egotism. The gods

[p. 481]

believed in--whether by crude savages or by men disciplined intellectually--agree with each other in recognizing personal calls. Religious thought is carried on in terms of personality, this being, in the world of religion, the one fundamental fact. To-day, quite as much as at any previous age, the religious individual tells you that the divine meets him on the basis of his personal concerns.

Science, on the other hand, has ended by utterly repudiating the personal point of view. She catalogues her elements and records her laws indifferent as to what purpose may be shown forth by them, and constructs her theories quite careless of their bearing on human anxieties and fates. Though the scientist may individually nourish a religion, and be a theist in his irresponsible hours, the days are over when it could be said that for Science herself the heavens declare the glory of God and the firmament showeth his handiwork. Our solar system, with its harmonies, is seen now as but one passing case of a certain sort of moving equilibrium in the heavens, realized by a local accident in an appalling wilderness of worlds where no life can exist. In a span of time which as a cosmic interval will count but as an hour, it will have ceased to be. The Darwinian notion of chance production, and subsequent destruction, speedy or deferred, applies to the largest as well as to the smallest facts. It is impossible, in the present temper of the scientific imagination, to find in the driftings of the cosmic atoms, whether they work on the universal or on the particular scale, anything but a kind of aimless weather, doing and undoing, achieving no proper history, and leaving no result. Nature has no one distinguishable ultimate tendency with which it is possible to feel a sympathy. In the vast rhythm of her processes, as the scientific mind now follows them, she appears to cancel herself. The books of natural theology which satisfied the intellects of our grandfathers

[p. 482]

seem to us quite grotesque, [*1] representing, as they did, a

[p. 483]

[paragraph continues] God who conformed the largest things of nature to the paltriest of our private wants. The God whom science recognizes

[p. 484]

must be a God of universal laws exclusively, a God who does a wholesale, not a retail business. He cannot accommodate

[p. 485]

his processes to the convenience of individuals. The bubbles on the foam which coats a stormy sea are floating episodes, made and unmade by the forces of the wind and water. Our private selves are like those bubbles--epiphenomena, as Clifford, I believe, ingeniously called them; their destinies weigh nothing and determine nothing in the world's irremediable currents of events.

You see how natural it is, from this point of view, to treat religion as a mere survival, for religion does in fact perpetuate the traditions of the most primeval thought. To coerce the spiritual powers, or to square them and get them on our side, was, during enormous tracts of time, the one great object in our dealings with the natural world. For our ancestors, dreams, hallucinations, revelations, and cock-and-bull stories were inextricably mixed with facts. Up to a comparatively recent date such distinctions as those between what has been verified and what is only conjectured, between the impersonal and the personal aspects of existence, were hardly suspected or conceived. Whatever you imagined in a lively manner, whatever you thought fit to be true, you affirmed confidently; and whatever you affirmed, your comrades believed. Truth was what had not yet been contradicted, most things were taken into the mind from the point of view of their human suggestiveness, and the attention confined itself exclusively to the aesthetic and dramatic aspects of events. [*1]

[p. 486]

How indeed could it be otherwise? The extraordinary value, for explanation and prevision, of those mathematical and mechanical

[p. 487]

modes of conception which science uses, was a result that could not possibly have been expected in

[p. 488]

advance. Weight, movement, velocity, direction, position, what thin, pallid, uninteresting ideas! How could the richer animistic aspects of Nature, the peculiarities and oddities that make phenomena picturesquely striking or expressive, fail to have been first singled out and followed by philosophy as the more promising avenue to the knowledge of Nature's life? Well, it is still in these richer animistic and dramatic aspects that religion delights to dwell. It is the terror and beauty of phenomena, the "promise" of the dawn and of the rainbow, the "voice" of the thunder, the "gentleness" of the summer rain, the "sublimity" of the stars, and not the physical laws which these things follow, by which the religious mind still continues to be most impressed; and just as of yore, the devout man tells you that in the solitude of his room or of the fields he still feels the divine presence, that inflowings of help come in reply to his prayers, and that sacrifices to this unseen reality fill him with security and peace.

Pure anachronism! says the survival-theory;--anachronism for which deanthropomorphization of the imagination is the remedy required. The less we mix the private with the cosmic, the more we dwell in universal and impersonal terms, the truer heirs of Science we become.

In spite of the appeal which this impersonality of the scientific attitude makes to a certain magnanimity of temper, I believe it to be shallow, and I can now state my reason in comparatively few words. That reason is that, so long as we deal with the cosmic and the general, we deal only

[p. 489]

with the symbols of reality, but as soon as we deal with private and personal phenomena as such, we deal with realities in the completest sense of the term. I think I can easily make clear what I mean by these words.

 

The world of our experience consists at all times of two parts, an objective and a subjective part, of which the former may be incalculably more extensive than the latter, and yet the latter can never be omitted or suppressed. The objective part is the sum total of whatsoever at any given time we may be thinking of, the subjective part is the inner "state" in which the thinking comes to pass. What we think of may be enormous--the cosmic times and spaces, for example--whereas the inner state may be the most fugitive and paltry activity of mind. Yet the cosmic objects, so far as the experience yields them, are but ideal pictures of something whose existence we do not inwardly possess but only point at outwardly, while the inner state is our very experience itself; its reality and that of our experience are one. A conscious field plus its object as felt or thought of plus an attitude towards the object plus the sense of a self to whom the attitude belongs--such a concrete bit of personal experience may be a small bit, but it is a solid bit as long as it lasts; not hollow, not a mere abstract element of experience, such as the "object" is when taken all alone. It is a full fact, even though it be an insignificant fact; it is of the kind to which all realities whatsoever must belong; the motor currents of the world run through the like of it; it is on the line connecting real events with real events. That unsharable feeling which each one of us has of the pinch of his individual destiny as he privately feels it rolling out on fortune's wheel may be disparaged for its egotism, may be sneered at as unscientific, but it is the one thing that fills up the measure of our concrete actuality, and any would-be

[p. 490]

existent that should lack such a feeling, or its analogue, would be a piece of reality only half made up. [*1]

If this be true, it is absurd for science to say that the egotistic elements of experience should be suppressed. The axis of reality runs solely through the egotistic places--they are strung upon it like so many beads. To describe the world with all the various feelings of the individual pinch of destiny, all the various spiritual attitudes, left out from the description--they being as describable as anything else--would be something like offering a printed bill of fare as the equivalent for a solid meal. Religion makes no such blunder. The individual's religion may be egotistic, and those private realities which it keeps in touch with may be narrow enough; but at any rate it always remains infinitely less hollow and abstract, as far as it goes, than a science which prides itself on taking no account of anything private at all.

A bill of fare with one real raisin on it instead of the word "raisin," with one real egg instead of the word "egg," might be an inadequate meal, but it would at least be a commencement of reality. The contention of the survival-theory that we ought to stick to non-personal elements exclusively seems like saying that we ought to be satisfied forever with reading the naked bill of fare. I think, therefore, that however particular questions connected with our individual destinies may be answered, it is only by acknowledging them as genuine questions, and living in the sphere of thought which they open up, that we become profound. But to live thus is to be religious; so I unhesitatingly repudiate the survival-theory of religion, as being founded on an egregious mistake. It does not follow, because our ancestors

[p. 491]

made so many errors of fact and mixed them with their religion, that we should therefore leave off being religious at all. [*1] By being religious we establish ourselves in possession of ultimate reality at the only points at which reality

[p. 492]

is given us to guard. Our responsible concern is with our private destiny, after all.

You see now why I have been so individualistic throughout these lectures, and why I have seemed so bent on rehabilitating the element of feeling in religion and subordinating its intellectual part. Individuality is founded in feeling; and the recesses of feeling, the darker, blinder strata of character, are the only places in the world in which we catch real fact in the making, and directly perceive how events happen, and how work is actually done. [*1] Compared with this world of living individualized feelings, the world of generalized objects which the intellect contemplates is without solidity or life. As in stereoscopic or kinetoscopic pictures seen outside the instrument, the third dimension, the movement, the vital element, are not there. We get a beautiful picture of an express train supposed to be moving, but where in the picture, as I have heard a friend say, is the energy or the fifty miles an hour? [*2]

[p. 493]

Let us agree, then, that Religion, occupying herself with personal destinies and keeping thus in contact with the only absolute realities which we know, must necessarily play an eternal part in human history. The next thing to decide is what she reveals about those destinies, or whether indeed she reveals anything distinct enough to be considered a general message to mankind. We have done as you see, with our preliminaries, and our final summing up can now begin.

I am well aware that after all the palpitating documents which I have quoted, and all the perspectives of emotion-inspiring institution and belief that my previous lectures have opened, the dry analysis to which I now advance may appear to many of you like an anti-climax, a tapering-off

[p. 494]

and flattening out of the subject, instead of a crescendo of interest and result. I said awhile ago that the religious attitude of Protestants appears poverty-stricken to the Catholic imagination. Still more poverty-stricken, I fear, may my final summing up of the subject appear at first to some of you. On which account I pray you now to bear this point in mind, that in the present part of it I am expressly trying to reduce religion to its lowest admissible terms, to that minimum, free from individualistic excrescences, which all religions contain as their nucleus, and on which it may be hoped that all religious persons may agree. That established, we should have a result which might be small, but would at least be solid; and on it and round it the ruddier additional beliefs on which the different individuals make their venture might be grafted, and flourish as richly as you please. I shall add my own over-belief (which will be, I confess, of a somewhat pallid kind, as befits a critical philosopher), and you will, I hope, also add your over-beliefs, and we shall soon be in the varied world of concrete religious constructions once more. For the moment, let me dryly pursue the analytic part of the task.

Both thought and feeling are determinants of conduct, and the same conduct may be determined either by feeling or by thought. When we survey the whole field of religion, we find a great variety in the thoughts that have prevailed there; but the feelings on the one hand and the conduct on the other are almost always the same, for Stoic, Christian, and Buddhist saints are practically indistinguishable in their lives. The theories which Religion generates, being thus variable, are secondary; and if you wish to grasp her essence, you must look to the feelings and the conduct as being the more constant elements. It is between these two elements that the short circuit exists on which she carries on her principal business, while the ideas and symbols and other institutions form loop-lines which may be perfections

[p. 495]

and improvements, and may even some day all be united into one harmonious system, but which are not to be regarded as organs with an indispensable function, necessary at all times for religious life to go on. This seems to me the first conclusion which we are entitled to draw from the phenomena we have passed in review.

The next step is to characterize the feelings. To what psychological order do they belong?

The resultant outcome of them is in any case what Kant calls a "sthenic" affection, an excitement of the cheerful, expansive, "dynamogenic" order which, like any tonic, freshens our vital powers. In almost every lecture, but especially in the lectures on Conversion and on Saintliness, we have seen how this emotion overcomes temperamental melancholy and imparts endurance to the Subject, or a zest, or a meaning, or an enchantment and glory to the common objects of life. [*1] The name of "faith-state," by which Professor Leuba designates it, is a good one. [*2] It is a biological as well as a psychological condition, and Tolstoy is absolutely accurate in classing faith among the forces by which men live. [*3] The total absence of it, anhedonia, [*4] means collapse.

The faith-state may hold a very minimum of intellectual content. We saw examples of this in those sudden raptures of the divine presence, or in such mystical seizures as Dr. Bucke described. [*5] It may be a mere vague enthusiasm, half spiritual, half vital, a courage, and a feeling that great and wondrous things are in the air. [*6]

[p. 496]

When, however, a positive intellectual content is associated with a faith-state, it gets invincibly stamped in upon belief, [*1] and this explains the passionate loyalty of religious persons everywhere to the minutest details of their so widely differing creeds. Taking creeds and faith-state together, as forming "religions," and treating these as purely subjective phenomena, without regard to the question of their "truth," we are obliged, on account of their extraordinary influence upon action and endurance, to class them amongst the most important biological functions of mankind. Their stimulant and anaesthetic effect is so great that Professor Leuba, in a recent article, [*2] goes so far as to say

[p. 497]

that so long as men can use their God, they care very little who he is, or even whether he is at all. "The truth of the matter can be put," says Leuba, "in this way: God is not known, he is not understood; he is used--sometimes as meat-purveyor, sometimes as moral support, sometimes as friend, sometimes as an object of love. If he proves himself useful, the religious consciousness asks for no more than that. Does God really exist? How does he exist? What is he? are so many irrelevant questions. Not God, but life, more life, a larger, richer, more satisfying life, is, in the last analysis, the end of religion. The love of life, at any and every level of development, is the religious impulse." [*1]

At this purely subjective rating, therefore, Religion must be considered vindicated in a certain way from the attacks of her critics. It would seem that she cannot be a mere anachronism and survival, but must exert a permanent function, whether she be with or without intellectual content, and whether, if she have any, it be true or false.

We must next pass beyond the point of view of merely subjective utility, and make inquiry into the intellectual content itself.

First, is there, under all the discrepancies of the creeds,

[p. 498]

a common nucleus to which they bear their testimony unanimously?

And second, ought we to consider the testimony true?

I will take up the first question first, and answer it immediately in the affirmative. The warring gods and formulas of the various religions do indeed cancel each other, but there is a certain uniform deliverance in which religions all appear to meet. It consists of two parts:--

1. An uneasiness; and

2. Its solution.

1. The uneasiness, reduced to its simplest terms, is a sense that there is something wrong about us as we naturally stand.

2. The solution is a sense that we are saved from the wrongness by making proper connection with the higher powers.

In those more developed minds which alone we are studying, the wrongness takes a moral character, and the salvation takes a mystical tinge. I think we shall keep well within the limits of what is common to all such minds if we formulate the essence of their religious experience in terms like these:--

The individual, so far as he suffers from his wrongness and criticises it, is to that extent consciously beyond it, and in at least possible touch with something higher, if anything higher exist. Along with the wrong part there is thus a better part of him, even though it may be but a most helpless germ. With which part he should identify his real being is by no means obvious at this stage; but when stage 2 (the stage of solution or salvation) arrives, [*1] the man identifies his real being with the germinal higher part of himself; and does so in the following way. He becomes conscious 

[p. 499]

that this higher part is conterminous and continuous with a MORE of the same quality, which is operative in the universe outside of him, and which he can keep in working touch with, and in a fashion get on board of and save himself when all his lower being has gone to pieces in the wreck.

It seems to me that all the phenomena are accurately describable in these very simple general terms. [*1] They allow for the divided self and the struggle; they involve the change of personal centre and the surrender of the lower self; they express the appearance of exteriority of the helping power and yet account for our sense of union with it; [*2] and they fully justify our feelings of security and joy. There is probably no autobiographic document, among all those which I have quoted, to which the description will not well apply. One need only add such specific details as will adapt it to various theologies and various personal temperaments, and one will then have the various experiences reconstructed in their individual forms.

So far, however, as this analysis goes, the experiences are only psychological phenomena. They possess, it is true, enormous biological worth. Spiritual strength really increases in the subject when he has them, a new life opens for him, and they seem to him a place of conflux where the forces of two universes meet; and yet this may be nothing but his subjective way of feeling things, a mood of his own fancy, in spite of the effects produced. I now turn to my

[p. 500]

second question: What is the objective "truth" of their content? [*1]

The part of the content concerning which the question of truth most pertinently arises is that "MORE of the same quality" with which our own higher self appears in the experience to come into harmonious working relation. Is such a "more" merely our own notion, or does it really exist? If so, in what shape does it exist? Does it act, as well as exist? And in what form should we conceive of that "union" with it of which religious geniuses are so convinced?

It is in answering these questions that the various theologies perform their theoretic work, and that their divergencies most come to light. They all agree that the "more" really exists; though some of them hold it to exist in the shape of a personal god or gods, while others are satisfied to conceive it as a stream of ideal tendency embedded in the eternal structure of the world. They all agree, moreover, that it acts as well as exists, and that something really is effected for the better when you throw your life into its hands. It is when they treat of the experience of "union" with it that their speculative differences appear most clearly. Over this point pantheism and theism, nature and second birth, works and grace and karma, immortality and reincarnation, rationalism and mysticism, carry on inveterate disputes.

At the end of my lecture on Philosophy [*2] I held out the notion that an impartial science of religions might sift out from the midst of their discrepancies a common body of doctrine which she might also formulate in terms to which

[p. 501]

physical science need not object. This, I said, she might adopt as her own reconciling hypothesis, and recommend it for general belief. I also said that in my last lecture I should have to try my own hand at framing such an hypothesis.

The time has now come for this attempt. Who says "hypothesis" renounces the ambition to be coercive in his arguments. The most I can do is, accordingly, to offer something that may fit the facts so easily that your scientific logic will find no plausible pretext for vetoing your impulse to welcome it as true.

 

The "more," as we called it, and the meaning of our "union" with it, form the nucleus of our inquiry. Into what definite description can these words be translated, and for what definite facts do they stand? It would never do for us to place ourselves offhand at the position of a particular theology, the Christian theology, for example, and proceed immediately to define the "more" as Jehovah, and the "union" as his imputation to us of the righteousness of Christ. That would be unfair to other religions, and, from our present standpoint at least, would be an over-belief.

We must begin by using less particularized terms; and, since one of the duties of the science of religions is to keep religion in connection with the rest of science, we shall do well to seek first of all a way of describing the "more," which psychologists may also recognize as real. The subconscious self is nowadays a well-accredited psychological entity; and I believe that in it we have exactly the mediating term required. Apart from all religious considerations, there is actually and literally more life in our total soul than we are at any time aware of. The exploration of the transmarginal field has hardly yet been seriously undertaken, but what Mr. Myers said in 1892 in his essay on the Subliminal

[p. 502]

[paragraph continues] Consciousness [*1] is as true as when it was first written: "Each of us is in reality an abiding psychical entity far more extensive than he knows--an individuality which can never express itself completely through any corporeal manifestation. The Self manifests through the organism; but there is always some part of the Self unmanifested; and always, as it seems, some power of organic expression in abeyance or reserve." [*355] Much of the content of this larger background against which our conscious being stands out in relief is insignificant. Imperfect memories, silly jingles, inhibitive timidities, "dissolutive" phenomena of various sorts, as Myers calls them, enters into it for a large part. But in it many of the performances of genius seem also to have their origin; and in our study of conversion, of mystical experiences, and of prayer, we have seen how striking a part invasions from this region play in the religious life.

Let me then propose, as an hypothesis, that whatever it may be on its farther side, the "more" with which in religious experience we feel ourselves connected is on its hither side the subconscious continuation of our conscious life. Starting thus with a recognized psychological fact as our basis, we seem to preserve a contact with "science" which

[p. 503]

the ordinary theologian lacks. At the same time the theologian's contention that the religious man is moved by an external power is vindicated, for it is one of the peculiarities of invasions from the subconscious region to take on objective appearances, and to suggest to the Subject an external control. In the religious life the control is felt as "higher"; but since on our hypothesis it is primarily the higher faculties of our own hidden mind which are controlling, the sense of union with the power beyond us is a sense of something, not merely apparently, but literally true.

This doorway into the subject seems to me the best one for a science of religions, for it mediates between a number of different points of view. Yet it is only a doorway, and difficulties present themselves as soon as we step through it, and ask how far our transmarginal consciousness carries us if we follow it on its remoter side. Here the over-beliefs begin: here mysticism and the conversion-rapture and Vedantism and transcendental idealism bring in their monistic interpretations [*1] and tell us that the finite self rejoins the absolute self, for it was always one with God and identical with the soul of the world. [*2] Here the prophets of all the

[p. 504]

different religions come with their visions, voices, raptures, and other openings, supposed by each to authenticate his own peculiar faith.

Those of us who are not personally favored with such specific revelations must stand outside of them altogether and, for the present at least, decide that, since they corroborate incompatible theological doctrines, they neutralize one another and leave no fixed results. If we follow any one of them, or if we follow philosophical theory and embrace monistic pantheism on non-mystical grounds, we do so in the exercise of our individual freedom, and build out our religion in the way most congruous with our personal susceptibilities. Among these susceptibilities intellectual ones play a decisive part. Although the religious question is primarily a question of life, of living or not living in the higher union which opens itself to us as a gift, yet the spiritual excitement in which the gift appears a real one will often fail to be aroused in an individual until certain particular intellectual beliefs or ideas which, as we say, come home to him, are touched. [*1] These ideas will thus be essential

[p. 505]

to that individual's religion;--which is as much as to say that over-beliefs in various directions are absolutely indispensable, and that we should treat them with tenderness and tolerance so long as they are not intolerant themselves. As I have elsewhere written, the most interesting and valuable things about a man are usually his over-beliefs.

Disregarding the over beliefs, and confining ourselves to what is common and generic, we have in the fact that the conscious person is continuous with a wider self through which saving experiences come, [*1] a positive content of religious experience which, it seems to me, is literally and objectively true as far as it goes. If I now proceed to state my own hypothesis about the farther limits of this extension of our personality, I shall be offering my own over-belief--though I know it will appear a sorry under-belief to some of you--for which I can only bespeak the same indulgence which in a converse case I should accord to yours.

[p. 506]

The further limits of our being plunge, it seems to me, into an altogether other dimension of existence from the sensible and merely "understandable" world. Name it the mystical region, or the supernatural region, whichever you choose. So far as our ideal impulses originate in this region (and most of them do originate in it, for we find them possessing us in a way for which we cannot articulately account), we belong to it in a more intimate sense than that in which we belong to the visible world, for we belong in the most intimate sense wherever our ideals belong. Yet the unseen region in question is not merely ideal, for it produces effects in this world. When we commune with it, work is actually done upon our finite personality, for we are turned into new men, and consequences in the way of conduct follow in the natural world upon our regenerative change. [*1] But that which produces effects within another reality must be termed a reality itself, so I feel as if we had

[p. 507]

no philosophic excuse for calling the unseen or mystical world unreal.

God is the natural appellation, for us Christians at least, for the supreme reality, so I will call this higher part of the universe by the name of God. [*1] We and God have business with each other; and in opening ourselves to his influence our deepest destiny is fulfilled. The universe, at those parts of it which our personal being constitutes, takes a turn genuinely for the worse or for the better in proportion as each one of us fulfills or evades God's demands. As far as this goes I probably have you with me, for I only translate into schematic language what I may call the instinctive belief of mankind: God is real since he produces real effects.

The real effects in question, so far as I have as yet admitted them, are exerted on the personal centres of energy of the various subjects, but the spontaneous faith of most of the subjects is that they embrace a wider sphere than this. Most religious men believe (or "know," if they be mystical) that not only they themselves, but the whole universe of beings to whom the God is present, are secure in his parental hands. There is a sense, a dimension, they are sure, in which we are all saved, in spite of the gates of hell and all adverse terrestrial appearances. God's existence is the guarantee of an ideal order that shall be permanently preserved. This world may indeed, as science assures us, some day burn up or freeze; but if it is part of his order, the old ideals are sure to be brought elsewhere to fruition, so that where God is, tragedy is only provisional and partial, and shipwreck and dissolution are not the absolutely final things. Only when this farther step of faith concerning

[p. 508]

[paragraph continues] God is taken, and remote objective consequences are predicted, does religion, as it seems to me, get wholly free from the first immediate subjective experience, and bring a real hypothesis into play. A good hypothesis in science must have other properties than those of the phenomenon it is immediately invoked to explain, otherwise it is not prolific enough. God, meaning only what enters into the religious man's experience of union, falls short of being an hypothesis of this more useful order. He needs to enter into wider cosmic relations in order to justify the subject's absolute confidence and peace.

That the God with whom, starting from the hither side of our own extra-marginal self, we come at its remoter margin into commerce should be the absolute world-ruler, is of course a very considerable over-belief. Over-belief as it is, though, it is an article of almost every one's religion. Most of us pretend in some way to prop it upon our philosophy, but the philosophy itself is really propped upon this faith. What is this but to say that Religion, in her fullest exercise of function, is not a mere illumination of facts already elsewhere given, not a mere passion, like love, which views things in a rosier light. It is indeed that, as we have seen abundantly. But it is something more, namely, a postulator of new facts as well. The world interpreted religiously is not the materialistic world over again, with an altered expression; it must have, over and above the altered expression, a natural constitution different at some point from that which a materialistic world would have. It must be such that different events can be expected in it, different conduct must be required.

This thoroughly "pragmatic" view of religion has usually been taken as a matter of course by common men. They have interpolated divine miracles into the field of nature, they have built a heaven out beyond the grave. It is only transcendentalist metaphysicians who think that, without

[p. 509]

adding any concrete details to Nature, or subtracting any, but by simply calling it the expression of absolute spirit, you make it more divine just as it stands. I believe the pragmatic way of taking religion to be the deeper way. It gives it body as well as soul, it makes it claim, as everything real must claim, some characteristic realm of fact as its very own. What the more characteristically divine facts are, apart from the actual inflow of energy in the faith-state and the prayer-state, I know not. But the over-belief on which I am ready to make my personal venture is that they exist. The whole drift of my education goes to persuade me that the world of our present consciousness is only one out of many worlds of consciousness that exist, and that those other worlds must contain experiences which have a meaning for our life also; and that although in the main their experiences and those of this world keep discrete, yet the two become continuous at certain points, and higher energies filter in. By being faithful in my poor measure to this over-belief, I seem to myself to keep more sane and true. I can, of course, put myself into the sectarian scientist's attitude, and imagine vividly that the world of sensations and of scientific laws and objects may be all. But whenever I do this, I hear that inward monitor of which W. K. Clifford once wrote, whispering the word "bosh!" Humbug is humbug, even though it bear the scientific name, and the total expression of human experience, as I view it objectively, invincibly urges me beyond the narrow "scientific" bounds. Assuredly, the real world is of a different temperament--more intricately built than physical science allows. So my objective and my subjective conscience both hold me to the over-belief which I express. Who knows whether the faithfulness of individuals here below to their own poor over-beliefs may not actually help God in turn to be more effectively faithful to his own greater tasks?

Footnotes

^476:1 For example, on pages <page 135>, <page 160>, <page 326> above.

^477:1 From this point of view, the contrasts between the healthy and the morbid mind, and between the once-born and the twice-born types, of which I spoke in earlier lectures (see pp. 159-164), cease to be the radical antagonisms which many think them. The twice-born look down upon the rectilinear consciousness of life of the once-born as being "mere morality," and not properly religion. "Dr. Channing," an orthodox minister is reported to have said, "is excluded from the highest form of religious life by the extraordinary rectitude of his character." It is indeed true that the outlook upon life of the twice-born--holding as it does more of the element of evil in solution--is the wider and completer. The "heroic" or "solemn" way in which life comes to them is a "higher synthesis" into which healthy-mindedness and morbidness both enter and combine. Evil is not evaded, but sublated in the higher religious cheer of these persons (see pp. <page 47>-<page 52>, <page 354>-<page 357>). But the final consciousness which each type reaches of union with the divine has the same practical significance for the individual; and individuals may well be allowed to get to it by the channels which lie most open to their several temperaments. In the cases which were quoted in Lecture IV, of the mind-cure form of healthy-mindedness, we found abundant examples of regenerative process. The severity of the crisis in this process is a matter of degree. How long one shall continue to drink the consciousness of evil, and when one shall begin to short-circuit and get rid of it, are also matters of amount and degree, so that in many instances it is quite arbitrary whether we class the individual as a once-born or a twice-born subject.

^479:1 Compare, e.g., the quotation from Renan on <page 37>, above.

^479:2 "Prayerful" taken in the broader sense explained above on pp. <page 453> ff.

^482:1 How was it ever conceivable, we ask, that a man like Christian Wolff, in whose dry-as-dust head all the learning of the early eighteenth century was concentrated, should have preserved such a baby-like faith in the personal and human character of Nature as to expound her operations as he did in his work on the uses of natural things? This, for example, is the account he gives of the sun and its utility:--

"We see that God has created the sun to keep the changeable conditions on the earth in such an order that living creatures, men and beasts, may inhabit its surface. Since men are the most reasonable of creatures, and able to infer God's invisible being from the contemplation of the world, the sun in so far forth contributes to the primary purpose of creation: without it the race of man could not be preserved or continued. . . . The sun makes daylight, not only on our earth, but also on the other planets; and daylight is of the utmost utility to us, for by its means we can commodiously carry on those occupations which in the night-time would either be quite impossible. Or at any rate impossible without our going to the expense of artificial light. The beasts of the field can find food by day which they would not be able to find at night. Moreover we owe it to the sunlight that we are able to see everything that is on the earth's surface, not only near by, but also at a distance, and to recognize both near and far things according to their species, which again is of manifold use to us not only in the business necessary to human life, and when we are traveling, but also for the scientific knowledge of Nature, which knowledge for the most part depends on observations made with the help of sight, and without the sunshine, would have been impossible. If any one would rightly impress on his mind the great advantages which he derives from the sun, let him imagine himself living through only one month, and see how it would be with all his undertakings, if it were not day but night. He would then be sufficiently convinced out of his own experience, especially if he had much work to carry on in the street or in the fields. . . . From the sun we learn to recognize when it is midday, and by knowing this point of time exactly, we can set our clocks right, on which account astronomy owes much to the sun. . . . By help of the sun one can find the meridian. . . . But the meridian is the basis of our sun-dials, and generally speaking, we should have no sun-dials if we had no sun." Vernunftige Gedanken von den Absichter der naturlichen Dinge, 1782. pp. 74-84.

Or read the account of God's beneficence in the institution of "the [p. 483] great variety throughout the world of men's faces, voices, and hand-writing," given in Derham's Physico-theology, a book that had much vogue in the eighteenth century. "Had Man's body," says Dr. Derham, "been made according to any of the Atheistical Schemes, or any other Method than that of the infinite Lord of the World, this wise Variety would never have been: but Men's Faces would have been cast in the same, or not a very different Mould, their Organs of Speech would have sounded the same or not so great a Variety of Notes, and the same Structure of Muscles and Nerves would have given the Hand the same Direction in Writing. And in this Case what Confusion, what Disturbance, what Mischiefs would the world eternally have lain under! No Security could have been to our persons; no Certainty, no Enjoyment of our Possessions; no Justice between Man and Man, no Distinction between Good and Bad, between Friends and Foes, between Father and Child, Husband and Wife, Male or Female; but all would have been turned topsy-turvy, by being exposed to the Malice of the Envious and ill-Natured, to the Fraud and Violence of Knaves and Robbers, to the Forgeries of the crafty Cheat, to the Lusts of the Effeminate and Debauched, and what not! Our Courts of Justice can abundantly testify the dire Effects of Mistaking Men's Faces, of counterfeiting their Hands, and forging Writings. But now as the infinitely wise Creator and Ruler hath ordered the Matter, every man's Face can distinguish him in the Light, and his Voice in the Dark, his Hand-writing can speak for him though absent, and be his Witness, and secure his Contracts in future Generations. A manifest as well as admirable Indication of the divine Superintendence and Management."

A God so careful as to make provision even for the unmistakable signing of bank checks and deeds was a deity truly after the heart of eighteenth century Anglicanism.

I subjoin, omitting the capitals, Derham's "Vindication of God by the Institution of Hills and Valleys," and Wolff's altogether culinary account of the institution of Water:--

"The uses," says Wolff, "which water serves in human life are plain to see and need not be described at length. Water is a universal drink of man and beasts. Even though men have made themselves drinks that are artificial, they could not do this without water. Beer is brewed of water and malt, and it is the water in it which quenches thirst. Wine is prepared from grapes, which could never have grown without the help of water; and the same is true of those drinks which [p. 484] in England and other places they produce from fruit. . . . Therefore since God so planned the world that men and beasts should live upon it and find there everything required for their necessity and convenience, he also made water as one means whereby to make the earth into so excellent a dwelling. And this is all the more manifest when we consider the advantages which we obtain from this same water for the cleaning of our household utensils, of our clothing, and of other matters. . . . When one goes into a grinding-mill one sees that the grindstone must always be kept wet and then one will get a still greater idea of the use of water."

Of the hills and valleys, Derham, after praising their beauty, discourses as follows: "Some constitutions are indeed of so happy a strength, and so confirmed an health, as to be indifferent to almost any place or temperature of the air. But then others are so weakly and feeble, as not to be able to bear one, but can live comfortably in another place. With some the more subtle and finer air of the hills doth best agree, who are languishing and dying in the feculent and grosser air of great towns, or even the warmer and vaporous air of the valleys and waters. But contrariwise, others languish on the hills, and grow lusty and strong in the warmer air of the valleys.

"So that this opportunity of shifting our abode from the hills to the vales, is an admirable easement, refreshment, and great benefit to the valetudinarian, feeble part of mankind; affording those an easy and comfortable life, who would otherwise live miserably, languish, and pine away.

"To this salutary conformation of the earth we may add another great convenience of the hills, and that is affording commodious places for habitation, serving (as an eminent author wordeth it) as screens to keep off the cold and nipping blasts of the northern and easterly winds, and reflecting the benign and cherishing sunbeams and so rendering our habitations both more comfortable and more cheerly in winter.

"Lastly, it is to the hills that the fountains owe their rise and the rivers their conveyance, and consequently those vast masses and lofty piles are not, as they are charged such rude and useless excrescences of our ill-formed globe; but the admirable tools of nature, contrived and ordered by the infinite Creator, to do one of its most useful works. For, was the surface of the earth even and level, and the middle parts of its islands and continents not mountainous and high as now it is, it is most certain there could be no descent for the [p. 485] rivers, no conveyance for the waters; but, instead of gliding along those gentle declivities which the higher lands now afford them quite down to the sea, they would stagnate and perhaps stink, and also drown large tracts of land.

"[Thus] the hills and vales, though to a peevish and weary traveler they may seem incommodious and troublesome, yet are a noble work of the great Creator, and wisely appointed by him for the good of our sublunary world."

^485:1 Until the seventeenth century this mode of thought prevailed. One need only recall the dramatic treatment even of mechanical [p. 486] questions by Aristotle, as, for example, his explanation of the power of the lever to make a small weight raise a larger one. This is due, according to Aristotle, to the generally miraculous character of the circle and of all circular movement. The circle is both convex and concave; it is made by a fixed point and a moving line, which contradict each other; and whatever moves in a circle moves in opposite directions. Nevertheless, movement in a circle is the most "natural" movement; and the long arm of the lever, moving, as it does, in the larger circle, has the greater amount of this natural motion, and consequently requires the lesser force. Or recall the explanation by Herodotus of the position of the sun in winter: It moves to the south because of the cold which drives it into the warm parts of the heavens over Libya. Or listen to Saint Augustine's speculations: "Who gave to chaff such power to freeze that it preserves snow buried under it, and such power to warm that it ripens green fruit? Who can explain the strange properties of fire itself, which blackens all that it burns, though itself bright, and which, though of the most beautiful colors, discolors almost all that it touches and feeds upon, and turns blazing fuel into grimy cinders? . . . Then what wonderful properties do we find in charcoal, which is so brittle that a light tap breaks it, and a slight pressure pulverizes it, and yet is so strong that no moisture rots it, nor any time causes it to decay." City of God, book xxi, ch. iv.

Such aspects of things as these, their naturalness and unnaturalness the sympathies and antipathies of their superficial qualities, their eccentricities, their brightness and strength and destructiveness, were inevitably the ways in which they originally fastened our attention.

If you open early medical books, you will find sympathetic magic invoked on every page. Take, for example, the famous vulnerary ointment attributed to Paracelsus. For this there were a variety of receipts, including usually human fat, the fat of either a bull, a wild boar, or a bear, powdered earthworms, the usnia, or mossy growth on the weathered skull of a hanged criminal, and other materials equally unpleasant--the whole prepared under the planet Venus if possible, but never under Mars or Saturn. Then, if a splinter of wood, dipped in the patient's blood, or the bloodstained weapon that wounded him, be immersed in this ointment, the wound itself being tightly bound up, the latter infallibly gets well--I quote now Van Helmont's account--for the blood on the weapon or splinter, containing in it the spirit of the wounded man, is roused to active excitement [p. 487] by the contact of the ointment, whence there results to it a full commission or power to cure its cousin-german the blood in the patient's body. This it does by sucking out the dolorous and exotic impression from the wounded part. But to do this it has to implore the aid of the bull's fat, and other portions of the unguent. The reason why bull's fat is so powerful is that the bull at the time of slaughter is full of secret reluctancy and vindictive murmurs, and therefore dies with a higher flame of revenge about him than any other animal. And thus we have made it out, says this author, that the admirable efficacy of the ointment ought to be imputed, not to any auxiliary concurrence of Satan, but simply to the energy of the posthumous character of Revenge remaining firmly impressed upon the blood and concreted fat in the unguent. J. B. VAN HELMONT: A Ternary of Paradoxes, translated by WALTER CHARLETON, London, 1650.--I much abridge the original in my citations.

The author goes on to prove by the analogy of many other natural facts that this sympathetic action between things at a distance is the true rationale of the case. "If," he says, "the heart of a horse slain by a witch, taken out of the yet reeking carcase, be impaled upon an arrow and roasted, immediately the whole witch becomes tormented with the insufferable pains and cruelty of the fire, which could by no means happen unless there preceded a conjunction of the spirit of the witch with the spirit of the horse. In the reeking and yet panting heart, the spirit of the witch is kept captive, and the retreat of it prevented by the arrow transfixed. Similarly hath not many a murdered carcase at the coroner's inquest suffered a fresh haemorrhage or cruentation at the presence of the assassin?--the blood being, as in a furious fit of anger, enraged and agitated by the impress of revenge conceived against the murderer, at the instant of the soul's compulsive exile from the body. So, if you have dropsy, gout, or jaundice, by including some of your warm blood in the shell and white of an egg, which, exposed to a gentle heat, and mixed with a bait of flesh, you shall give to a hungry dog or hog, the disease shall instantly pass from you into the animal, and leave you entirely. And similarly again, if you burn some of the milk either of a cow or of a woman, the gland from which it issued will dry up. A gentleman at Brussels had his nose mowed off in a combat, but the celebrated surgeon Tagliacozzus digged a new nose for him out of the skin of the arm of a porter at Bologna. About thirteen months after his return to his own country, the engrafted nose [p. 488] grew cold, putrefied, and in a few days dropped off, and it was then discovered that the porter had expired, near about the same punctilio of time. There are still at Brussels eye-witnesses of this occurrence," says Van Helmont; and adds, "I pray what is there in this of superstition or of exalted imagination?"

Modern mind-cure literature--the works of Prentice Mulford, for example--is full of sympathetic magic.

^490:1 Compare Lotze's doctrine that the only meaning we can attach to the notion of a thing as it is "in itself" is by conceiving it as it is for itself, i.e., as a piece of full experience with a private sense of "pinch" or inner activity of some sort going with it.

^491:1 Even the errors of fact may possibly turn out not to be as wholesale as the scientist assumes. We saw in Lecture IV how the religious conception of the universe seems to many mind-curers "verified" from day to day by their experience of fact. "Experience of fact" is a field with so many things in it that the sectarian scientist methodically declining, as he does, to recognize such "facts" as mind-curers and others like them experience, otherwise than by such rude heads of classification as "bosh," "rot," "folly," certainly leaves out a mass of raw fact which, save for the industrious interest of the religious in the more personal aspects of reality, would never have succeeded in getting itself recorded at all. We know this to be true already in certain cases; it may, therefore, be true in others as well. Miraculous healings have always been part of the supernaturalist stock in trade, and have always been dismissed by the scientist as figments of the imagination. But the scientist's tardy education in the facts of hypnotism has recently given him an apperceiving mass for phenomena of this order, and he consequently now allows that the healings may exist, provided you expressly call them effects of "suggestion." Even the stigmata of the cross on Saint Francis's hands and feet may on these terms not be a fable. Similarly, the time-honored phenomenon of diabolical possession is on the point of being admitted by the scientist as a fact, now that he has the name of "hysterodemonopathy" by which to apperceive it. No one can foresee just how far this legitimation of occultist phenomena under newly found scientist titles may proceed--even "prophecy," even "levitation," might creep into the pale.

Thus the divorce between scientist facts and religious facts may not necessarily be as eternal as it at first sight seems, nor the personalism and romanticism of the world, as they appeared to primitive thinking, be matters so irrevocably outgrown. The final human opinion may, in short, in some manner now impossible to foresee, revert to the more personal style, just as any path of progress may follow a spiral rather than a straight line. If this were so, the rigorously impersonal view of science might one day appear as having been a temporarily useful eccentricity rather than the definitively triumphant position which the sectarian scientist at present so confidently announces it to be.

^492:1 Hume's criticism has banished causation from the world of physical objects, and "Science" is absolutely satisfied to define cause in terms of concomitant change-read Mach, Pearson, Ostwald. The "original" of the notion of causation is in our inner personal experience, and only there can causes in the old-fashioned sense be directly observed and described.

^492:2 When I read in a religious paper words like these: "Perhaps the best thing we can say of God is that he is the Inevitable Inference," I recognize the tendency to let religion evaporate in intellectual terms. Would martyrs have sung in the flames for a mere inference, however inevitable it might be? Original religious men, like Saint Francis, Luther, Behmen, have usually been enemies of the intellect's pretension to meddle with religious things. Yet the intellect, everywhere invasive, shows everywhere its shallowing effect. See how the ancient spirit of Methodism evaporates under those wonderfully able rationalistic booklets (which every one should read) of a philosopher like Professor Bowne (The Christian Revelation, The Christian Life The Atonement: Cincinnati and New York, 1898, 1899, 1900). See the positively expulsive purpose of philosophy properly so called:--

"Religion," writes M. Vacherot (La Religion, Paris, 1869, pp. 313, 436, et passim), [p. 493] "answers to a transient state or condition, not to a permanent determination of human nature, being merely an expression of that stage of the human mind which is dominated by the imagination. . . . Christianity has but a single possible final heir to its estate, and that is scientific philosophy."

In a still more radical vein, Professor Ribot (Psychologie des Sentiments, p. 310) describes the evaporation of religion. He sums it up in a single formula--the ever-growing predominance of the rational intellectual element, with the gradual fading out of the emotional element, this latter tending to enter into the group of purely intellectual sentiments. "Of religious sentiment properly so called, nothing survives at last save a vague respect for the unknowable x which is a last relic of the fear, and a certain attraction towards the ideal, which is a relic of the love, that characterized the earlier periods of religious growth. To state this more simply, religion tends to turn into religious philosophy.--These are psychologically entirely different things, the one being a theoretic construction of ratiocination, whereas the other is the living work of a group of persons, or of a great inspired leader, calling into play the entire thinking and feeling organism of man."

I find the same failure to recognize that the stronghold of religion lies in individuality in attempts like those of Professor Baldwin (Mental Development, Social and Ethical Interpretations, ch. x) and Mr. H. R. Marshall (Instinct and Reason, chaps. viii. to xii.) to make it a purely "conservative social force."

^495:1 Compare, for instance, pages <page 200>, <page 215>, <page 219>, <page 222>, <page 244>-<page 250>, <page 270>-<page 273>.

^495:2 American Journal of Psychology, vii. 345.

^495:3 Above, p. <page 181>.

^495:4 Above, p. <page 143>.

^495:5 Above, p. <page 391>.

^495:6 Example: Henri Perreyve writes to Gratry: "I do not know how to deal with the happiness which you aroused in me this morning. It overwhelms me; I want to do something, yet I can do nothing and [p. 496] am fit for nothing. . . . I would fain do great things." Again, after an inspiring interview, he writes: "I went homewards, intoxicated with joy, hope, and strength. I wanted to feed upon my happiness in solitude far from all men. It was late; but, unheeding that, I took a mountain path and went on like a madman, looking at the heavens, regardless of earth. Suddenly an instinct made me draw hastily back--I was on the very edge of a precipice, one step more and I must have fallen. I took fright and gave up my nocturnal promenade." A. GRATRY: Henri Perreyve, London, 1872, pp. 92, 89.

This primacy, in the faith-state, of vague expansive impulse over direction is well expressed in Walt Whitman's lines (Leaves of Grass, 1872, p. 190):--

"O to confront night, storms, hunger, ridicule, accidents, rebuffs, as the trees and animals do. . . .
  Dear Camerado! I confess I have urged you onward with me, and still urge you, without the least idea what is our destination
  Or whether we shall be victorious, or utterly quell'd and defeated."

This readiness for great things, and this sense that the world by its importance, wonderfulness, etc., is apt for their production, would seem to be the undifferentiated germ of all the higher faiths. Trust in our own dreams of ambition, or in our country's expansive destinies, and faith in the providence of God, all have their source in that onrush of our sanguine impulses, and in that sense of the exceedingness of the possible over the real.

^496:1 Compare LEUBA: Loc. cit., pp. 346-349.

^496:2 The Contents of Religious Consciousness, in The Monist, xi. 536, July 1901.

^497:1 Loc. cit., pp. 571, 572, abridged. See, also, this writer's extraordinarily true criticism of the notion that religion primarily seeks to solve the intellectual mystery of the world. Compare what W. BENDER says (in his Wesen der Religion, Bonn, 1888, pp. 85, 38): "Not the question about God, and not the inquiry into the origin and purpose of the world is religion, but the question about Man. All religious views of life are anthropocentric." "Religion is that activity of the human impulse towards self-preservation by means of which Man seeks to carry his essential vital purposes through against the adverse pressure of the world by raising himself freely towards the world's ordering and governing powers when the limits of his own strength are reached." The whole book is little more than a development of these words.

^498:1 Remember that for some men it arrives suddenly, for others gradually, whilst others again practically enjoy it all their life.

^499:1 The practical difficulties are: 1, to "realize the reality" of one's higher part; 2, to identify one's self with it exclusively; and 3, to identify it with all the rest of ideal being.

^499:2 "When mystical activity is at its height, we find consciousness possessed by the sense of a being at once excessive and identical with the self: great enough to be God; interior enough to be me. The "objectivity" of it ought in that case to be called excessivity, rather, or exceedingness." ReCeJAC: Essai sur les fondements de la conscience mystique, 1897, p. 46.

^500:1 The word "truth" is here taken to mean something additional to bare value for life, although the natural propensity of man is to believe that whatever has great value for life is thereby certified as true.

^500:2 Above, <page 445>.

^502:1 Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, vol. vii. p. 305. For a full statement of Mr. Myers's views, I may refer to his posthumous work, "Human Personality in the Light of Recent Research," which is already announced by Messrs. Longmans, Green & Co. as being in press. Mr. Myers for the first time proposed as a general psychological problem the exploration of the subliminal region of consciousness throughout its whole extent, and made the first methodical steps in its topography by treating as a natural series a mass of subliminal facts hitherto considered only as curious isolated facts and subjecting them to a systematized nomenclature. How important this exploration will prove, future work upon the path which Myers has opened can alone show. compare my paper: "Frederic Myers's services to Psychology," in the said Proceedings, part xlii., May, 1901.

^502:355 Compare the inventory given above on pp. <page 472>-<page 4>, and also what is said of the subconscious self on pp. <page 228>-<page 231>, <page 235>-<page 236>.

^503:1 Compare above, pp. <page 410> ff.

^503:2 One more expression of this belief, to increase the reader's familiarity with the notion of it:--

"If this room is full of darkness for thousands of years, and you come in and begin to weep and wail, 'Oh, the darkness,' will the darkness vanish? Bring the light in, strike a match, and light comes in a moment. So what good will it do you to think all your lives, 'Oh, I have done evil, I have made many mistakes'? It requires no ghost to tell us that. Bring in the light, and the evil goes in a moment. Strengthen the real nature, build up yourselves, the effulgent, the resplendent, the ever pure, call that up in every one whom you see. I wish that every one of us had come to such a state that even when we see the vilest of human beings we can see the God within, and instead of condemning, say, 'Rise, thou effulgent One, rise thou who art always pure, rise thou birthless and deathless, rise almighty, and manifest your nature.' . . . This is the highest prayer that the Advaita [p. 504] teaches. This is the one prayer: remembering our nature.". . . "Why does man go out to look for a God? . . . It is your own heart beating, and you did not know, you were mistaking it for something external. He, nearest of the near, my own self, the reality of my own life, my body and my soul.--I am Thee and Thou art Me. That is your own nature. Assert it, manifest it. Not to become pure, you are pure already. You are not to be perfect, you are that already. Every good thought which you think or act upon is simply tearing the veil, as it were, and the purity, the Infinity, the God behind, manifests itself--the eternal Subject of everything, the eternal Witness in this universe, your own Self. Knowledge is, as it were, a lower step, a degradation. We are It already; how to know It?" SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: Addresses, No. XII., Practical Vedanta, part iv. pp. 172, 174, London, 1897; and Lectures, The Real and the Apparent Man, p. 24, abridged.

^504:1 For instance, here is a case where a person exposed from her birth to Christian ideas had to wait till they came to her clad in spiritistic [p. 505] formulas before the saving experience set in:--

"For myself I can say that spiritualism has saved me. It was revealed to me at a critical moment of my life, and without it I don't know what I should have done. It has taught me to detach myself from worldly things and to place my hope in things to come. Through it I have learned to see in all men, even in those most criminal, even in those from whom I have most suffered, undeveloped brothers to whom I owed assistance, love, and forgiveness. I have learned that I must lose my temper over nothing despise no one, and pray for all. Most of all I have learned to pray! And although I have still much to learn in this domain, prayer ever brings me more strength, consolation, and comfort. I feel more than ever that I have only made a few steps on the long road of progress; but I look at its length without dismay, for I have confidence that the day will come when all my efforts shall be rewarded. So Spiritualism has a great place in my life, indeed it holds the first place there." Flournoy Collection.

^505:1 "The influence of the Holy Spirit, exquisitely called the Comforter, is a matter of actual experience, as solid a reality as that of electro magnetism." W. C. BROWNELL, Scribner's Magazine, vol. xxx. p. 112.

^506:1 That the transaction of opening ourselves, otherwise called prayer, is a perfectly definite one for certain persons, appears abundantly in the preceding lectures. I append another concrete example to rein force the impression on the reader's mind:--

"Man can learn to transcend these limitations [of finite thought] and draw power and wisdom at will. . . . The divine presence is known through experience. The turning to a higher plane is a distinct act of consciousness. It is not a vague, twilight or semi-conscious experience. It is not an ecstasy, it is not a trance. It is not super-consciousness in the Vedantic sense. It is not due to self-hypnotization. It is a perfectly calm, sane, sound, rational, common-sense shifting of consciousness from the phenomena of sense-perception to the phenomena of seership, from the thought of self to a distinctively higher realm. . . . For example, if the lower self be nervous, anxious, tense, one can in a few moments compel it to be calm. This is not done by a word simply. Again I say, it is not hypnotism. It is by the exercise of power. One feels the spirit of peace as definitely as heat is perceived on a hot summer day. The power can be as surely used as the sun s rays can be focused and made to do work, to set fire to wood." The Higher Law, vol. iv. pp. 4, 6, Boston, August, 1901.

^507:1 Transcendentalists are fond of the term "Over-soul," but as a rule they use it in an intellectualist sense, as meaning only a medium of communion. "God" is a causal agent as well as a medium of communion, and that is the aspect which I wish to emphasize.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 510]

  

POSTSCRIPT

In writing my concluding lecture I had to aim so much at simplification that I fear that my general philosophic position received so scant a statement as hardly to be intelligible to some of my readers. I therefore add this epilogue, which must also be so brief as possibly to remedy but little the defect. In a later work I may be enabled to state my position more amply and consequently more clearly.

Originality cannot be expected in a field like this, where all the attitudes and tempers that are possible have been exhibited in literature long ago, and where any new writer can immediately be classed under a familiar head. If one should make a division of all thinkers into naturalists and supernaturalists, I should undoubtedly have to go, along with most philosophers, into the supernaturalist branch. But there is a crasser and a more refined supernaturalism, and it is to the refined division that most philosophers at the present day belong. If not regular transcendental idealists, they at least obey the Kantian direction enough to bar out ideal entities from interfering causally in the course of phenomenal events. Refined supernaturalism is universalistic supernaturalism; for the "crasser" variety "piecemeal" supernaturalism would perhaps be the better name. It went with that older theology which to-day is supposed to reign only among uneducated people, or to be found among the few belated professors of the dualisms which Kant is thought to have displaced. It admits miracles and providential leadings, and finds no intellectual difficulty in mixing the ideal and the real worlds together by interpolating influences from the ideal region among the forces that causally determine

[p. 511]

the real world's details. In this the refined supernaturalists think that it muddles disparate dimensions of existence. For them the world of the ideal has no efficient causality, and never bursts into the world of phenomena at particular points. The ideal world, for them, is not a world of facts, but only of the meaning of facts; it is a point of view for judging facts. It appertains to a different "-ology," and inhabits a different dimension of being altogether from that in which existential propositions obtain. It cannot get down upon the flat level of experience and interpolate itself piecemeal between distinct portions of nature, as those who believe, for example, in divine aid coming in response to prayer, are bound to think it must.

Notwithstanding my own inability to accept either popular Christianity or scholastic theism, I suppose that my belief that in communion with the Ideal new force comes into the world, and new departures are made here below, subjects me to being classed among the supernaturalists of the piecemeal or crasser type. Universalistic supernaturalism surrenders, it seems to me, too easily to naturalism. It takes the facts of physical science at their face-value, and leaves the laws of life just as naturalism finds them, with no hope of remedy, in case their fruits are bad.

It confines itself to sentiments about life as a whole, sentiments which may be admiring and adoring, but which need not be so, as the existence of systematic pessimism proves. In this universalistic way of taking the ideal world, the essence of practical religion seems to me to evaporate. Both instinctively and for logical reasons, I find it hard to believe that principles can exist which make no difference in facts. [*1] But all facts

[p. 512]

are particular facts, and the whole interest of the question of God's existence seems to me to lie in the consequences for particulars which that existence may be expected to entail. That no concrete particular of experience should alter its complexion in consequence of a God being there seems to me an incredible proposition, and yet it is the thesis to which (implicitly at any rate) refined supernaturalism seems to cling. It is only with experience en bloc, it says, that the Absolute maintains relations. It condescends to no transactions of detail.

I am ignorant of Buddhism and speak under correction, and merely in order the better to describe my general point of view; but as I apprehend the Buddhistic doctrine of Karma, I agree in principle with that. All supernaturalists admit that facts are under the judgment of higher law; but for Buddhism as I interpret it, and for religion generally so far as it remains unweakened by transcendentalistic metaphysics, the word "judgment" here means no such bare academic verdict or platonic appreciation as it means in Vedantic or modern absolutist systems; it carries, on the contrary, execution with it, is in rebus as well as post rem, and operates "causally" as partial factor in the total fact. The universe becomes a gnosticism [*1] pure and simple on any other terms. But this view that judgment and execution

[p. 513]

go together is that of the crasser supernaturalist way of thinking, so the present volume must on the whole be classed with the other expressions of that creed.

I state the matter thus bluntly, because the current of thought in academic circles runs against me, and I feel like a man who must set his back against an open door quickly if he does not wish to see it closed and locked. In spite of its being so shocking to the reigning intellectual tastes, I believe that a candid consideration of piecemeal supernaturalism and a complete discussion of all its metaphysical bearings will show it to be the hypothesis by which the largest number of legitimate requirements are met. That of course would be a program for other books than this; what I now say sufficiently indicates to the philosophic reader the place where I belong.

If asked just where the differences in fact which are due to God's existence come in, I should have to say that in general I have no hypothesis to offer beyond what the phenomenon of "prayerful communion," especially when certain kinds of incursion from the subconscious region take part in it, immediately suggests. The appearance is that in this phenomenon something ideal, which in one sense is part of ourselves and in another sense is not ourselves, actually exerts an influence, raises our centre of personal energy, and produces regenerative effects unattainable in other ways. If, then, there be a wider world of being than that of our every-day consciousness, if in it there be forces whose effects on us are intermittent, if one facilitating condition of the effects be the openness of the "subliminal" door, we have the elements of a theory to which the phenomena of religious life lend plausibility. I am so impressed by the importance of these phenomena that I adopt the hypothesis which they so naturally suggest. At these places at least, I say, it would seem as though transmundane energies, God, if you will, produced immediate effects within

[p. 514]

the natural world to which the rest of our experience belongs.

The difference in natural "fact" which most of us would assign as the first difference which the existence of a God ought to make would, I imagine, be personal immortality. Religion, in fact, for the great majority of our own race means immortality, and nothing else. God is the producer of immortality; and whoever has doubts of immortality is written down as an atheist without farther trial. I have said nothing in my lectures about immortality or the belief therein, for to me it seems a secondary point. If our ideals are only cared for in "eternity," I do not see why we might not be willing to resign their care to other hands than ours. Yet I sympathize with the urgent impulse to be present ourselves, and in the conflict of impulses, both of them so vague yet both of them noble, I know not how to decide. It seems to me that it is eminently a case for facts to testify. Facts, I think, are yet lacking to prove "spirit-return," though I have the highest respect for the patient labors of Messrs. Myers, Hodgson, and Hyslop, and am somewhat impressed by their favorable conclusions. I consequently leave the matter open, with this brief word to save the reader from a possible perplexity as to why immortality got no mention in the body of this book. The ideal power with which we feel ourselves in connection, the "God" of ordinary men, is, both by ordinary men and by philosophers, endowed with certain of those metaphysical attributes which in the lecture on philosophy I treated with such disrespect. He is assumed as a matter of course to be "one and only" and to be "infinite"; and the notion of many finite gods is one which hardly any one thinks it worth while to consider, and still less to uphold. Nevertheless, in the interests of intellectual clearness, I feel bound to say that religious experience, as we have studied it, cannot be cited as unequivocally supporting the infinitist

[p. 515]

belief. The only thing that it unequivocally testifies to is that we can experience union with something larger than ourselves and in that union find our greatest peace. Philosophy, with its passion for unity, and mysticism with its monoideistic bent, both "pass to the limit" and identify the something with a unique God who is the all-inclusive soul of the world. Popular opinion, respectful to their authority, follows the example which they set.

Meanwhile the practical needs and experiences of religion seem to me sufficiently met by the belief that beyond each man and in a fashion continuous with him there exists a larger power which is friendly to him and to his ideals. All that the facts require is that the power should be both other and larger than our conscious selves. Anything larger will do, if only it be large enough to trust for the next step. It need not be infinite, it need not be solitary. It might conceivably even be only a larger and more godlike self, of which the present self would then be but the mutilated expression, and the universe might conceivably be a collection of such selves, of different degrees of inclusiveness, with no absolute unity realized in it at all. [*1] Thus would a sort of polytheism return upon us--a polytheism which I do not on this occasion defend, for my only aim at present is to keep the testimony of religious experience clearly within its proper bounds. [Compare <page 130> above.]

Upholders of the monistic view will say to such a polytheism (which, by the way, has always been the real religion of common people, and is so still to-day) that unless there be one all-inclusive God, our guarantee of security is left imperfect. In the Absolute, and in the Absolute only, all is saved. If there be different gods, each caring for his part, some portion of some of us might not be covered with divine protection, and our religious consolation would thus

[p. 516]

fail to be complete. It goes back to what was said on pages <page 129>-<page 131>, about the possibility of there being portions of the universe that may irretrievably be lost. Common sense is less sweeping in its demands than philosophy or mysticism have been wont to be, and can suffer the notion of this world being partly saved and partly lost. The ordinary moralistic state of mind makes the salvation of the world conditional upon the success with which each unit does its part. Partial and conditional salvation is in fact a most familiar notion when taken in the abstract, the only difficulty being to determine the details. Some men are even disinterested enough to be willing to be in the unsaved remnant as far as their persons go, if only they can be persuaded that their cause will prevail--all of us are willing, whenever our activity-excitement rises sufficiently high. I think, in fact, that a final philosophy of religion will have to consider the pluralistic hypothesis more seriously than it has hitherto been willing to consider it. For practical life at any rate, the chance of salvation is enough. No fact in human nature is more characteristic than its willingness to live on a chance. The existence of the chance makes the difference, as Edmund Gurney says, between a life of which the keynote is resignation and a life of which the keynote is hope. [*365] But all these statements are unsatisfactory from their brevity, and I can only say that I hope to return to the same questions in another book.

Footnotes

^511:1 Transcendental idealism, of course, insists that its ideal world makes this difference, that facts exist. We owe it to the Absolute that we have a world of fact at all. "A world" of fact!--that exactly is the trouble. An entire world is the smallest unit with which the Absolute can work, whereas to our finite minds work for the better ought to be [p. 512] done within this world, setting in at single points. Our difficulties and our ideals are all piecemeal affairs, but the Absolute can do no piecework for us; so that all the interests which our poor souls compass raise their heads too late. We should have spoken earlier, prayed for another world absolutely, before this world was born. It is strange, I have heard a friend say, to see this blind corner into which Christian thought has worked itself at last, with its God who can raise no particular weight whatever, who can help us with no private burden, and who is on the side of our enemies as much as he is on our own. Odd evolution from the God of David's psalms!

^512:1 See my Will to Believe and other Essays in popular Philosophy. 1897, p. 165.

^515:1 Such a notion is suggested in my Ingersoll Lecture On Human Immortality, Boston and London, 1899.

^516:365 Tertium Quid, 1887, p. 99. See also pp. <page 148>, <page 149>.

     
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 517] [p. 518]

[p. 519]

  

INDEX

Absolute, oneness with the, <page 410>

Abstractness of religious objects, <page 53>

ACHILLES, <page 85>

ACKERMANN, MADAME, <page 63>

Adaptation to environment, of things, <page 428>; of saints, <page 365>-<page 368>

Aesthetic elements in religions, <page 450>

Alacoque, <page 304>, <page 337>, <page 404>

Alcohol, <page 377>

AL-GHAZZALI, <page 393>

ALI, <page 334>

ALLEINE, <page 224>

ALLINE, <page 156>, <page 213>

Alternations of personality, <page 190>-<page 191>

ALVAREZ DE PAZ, <page 114>

AMIEL, <page 386>

Anaesthesia, <page 283>

Anaesthetic revelation, <page 377>-<page 383>

ANGELUS SILESIUS, <page 408>

Anger, <page 178>, <page 259>

"Anhedonia," <page 143>

Aristocratic type, <page 363>

ARISTOTLE, <page 486>

Ars, le Cure d', <page 296>

Asceticism, <page 268>, <page 291>-<page 304>, <page 352>-<page 357>

Aseity, God's, <page 430>, <page 436>

Atman, <page 392>

Attributes of God, <page 431>; their aesthetic use, <page 448>

AUGUSTINE, SAINT, s<page 68>, <page 353>, <page 486>

AURELIUS, See MARCUS

Automatic writing, <page 62>, <page 468>

Automatisms, <page 229>, <page 245>, <page 467>-<page 473>

 

BALDWIN, <page 339>, <page 493>

BASHKIRTSEFF, <page 82>

BEECHER, <page 251>

BEHMEN, See BOEHME

Belief, due to non-rationalistic impulses, <page 72>

BESANT, MRS., <page 24>, <page 165>

Bhagavad-Gita, <page 353>

BLAVATSKY, MADAM, <page 412>

BLOOD, <page 380>

BLUMHARDT, <page 111>

BOEHME, <page 401>, <page 408>

BOOTH, <page 200>

BOUGAUD, <page 336>

BOURGET, <page 258>

BOURIGNON, <page 315>

BOWNE, <page 492>

BRAINERD, <page 209>, <page 248>

BRAY, <page 244>, <page 251>, <page 285>

BROWNELL, <page 505>

BUCKE, <page 389>

Buddhism, <page 32>, <page 34>, <page 512>

Buddhist mysticism, <page 392>

BULLEN, <page 282>

BUNYAN, <page 154>, <page 157>

BUTTERWORTH, <page 402>

 

CAIRD, EDWARD, <page 104>

CAIRD, J., on feeling in religion, <page 424>; on absolute self, <page 440>; he does not prove, but reaffirms, religion's dicta, <page 443>.

CALL, <page 284>

CARLYLE, <page 41>, <page 294>

CARPENTER, <page 313>

Catharine, Saint, of Genoa, <page 284>

Catholicism and Protestantism compared, <page 112>, <page 329>, <page 455>

[p. 520]

Causality of God, <page 507>, <page 512>

Cause, <page 492>

CENNICK, <page 296>

Centres of personal energy, <page 193>, <page 261>, <page 513>

Cerebration, unconscious, <page 203>

Chance, <page 516>

CHANNING, <page 295>, <page 478>

CHAPMAN, <page 318>

Character, cause of its alterations, <page 190>; scheme of its differences of type, <page 194>, <page 211>; causes of its diversity, <page 256>; balance of, <page 333>

Charity, <page 269>, <page 273>, <page 347>

Chastity, <page 304>

Chiefs of tribes, <page 363>

Christian Science, <page 105>

Christ's atonement, <page 126>, <page 240>

Churches, <page 328>, <page 450>

CLARK, <page 380>

CLISSOLD, <page 471>

COE, <page 235>

Conduct, perfect, <page 347>

Confession, <page 451>

Consciousness, fields of, <page 226>; subliminal, <page 228>

Consistency, <page 290>

Conversion, to avarice, <page 175>

Conversion, Fletcher's, <page 178>; Tolstoy's, <page 180>; Bunyan's, <page 183>; in general, Lectures IX and X, passim; Bradley's, <page 186>; compared with natural moral growth, <page 196>; Hadley's, <page 198>; two types of, <page 202> ff.; Brainerd's, <page 209>; Alline's, <page 213>; Oxford graduate's, <page 216>; Ratisbonne's, <page 219>; instantaneous, <page 222>; is it a natural phenomenon? <page 225>; subliminal action involved, in sudden cases, <page 231>, <page 235>; fruits of, <page 232>; its momentousness, <page 234>; may be supernatural, <page 237>; its concomitants: sense of higher control, <page 239>, happiness, <page 243>, automatisms, <page 245>, luminous phenomena, <page 246>; its degree of permanence, <page 251>.

Cosmic consciousness, <page 389>

Counter-conversion, <page 173>

Courage, <page 260>, <page 282>

Crankiness, see Psychopathy

CRICHTON-BROWNE, <page 375>, <page 377>

Criminal character, <page 258>

Criteria of value of spiritual affections, <page 19>

CRUMP, <page 234>

Cure of bad habits, <page 264>

 

DAUDET, <page 164>

Death, <page 137>, <page 356>

DERHAM, <page 483>

Design, argument from, <page 428>, <page 482> ff.

Devoutness, <page 333>

DIONYSIUS AREOPAGITICUS, <page 407>

Disease, <page 97>, <page 111>

Disorder in contents of world, <page 428>

Divided Self, Lecture VIII, passim; Cases of: Saint Augustine, <page 168>, H. Alline, <page 170>

Divine, the, <page 32>

Dog, <page 276>

Dogmatism, <page 320>, <page 326>

DOWIE, <page 111>

DRESSER, H. W., <page 94>, <page 97>, <page 184>

Drink, <page 262>

DRUMMOND, <page 257>

Drunkenness, <page 377>, <page 394>, <page 478>

"Dryness," <page 201>

DUMAS, <page 274>

Dyes, on clothing, <page 289>

 

Earnestness, <page 258>

Ecclesiastical spirit, the, <page 328>, <page 331>

ECKHART, <page 408>

EDDY, <page 105>

EDWARDS, JONATHAN, <page 21>, <page 112>, <page 196>, <page 224>, <page 233>, <page 234>, <page 243>, <page 323>

[p. 521]

EDWARDS, MRS. J., <page 271>, <page 275>

Effects of religious states, <page 22>

Effeminacy, <page 357>

Ego of Apperception, <page 439>

ELLIS, HAVELOCK, <page 48>-<page 49>

ELWOOD, <page 287>

EMERSON, <page 32>, <page 164>, <page 202>, <page 234>, <page 324> Emotion, as alterer of life's value, <page 247>; of the character, <page 192>, <page 256> ff., <page 274>

Empirical method, <page 19>, <page 320> ff., <page 434>

Enemies, love your, <page 273>, <page 278>

Energy, personal, <page 193>; mystical states increase it, <page 405>

Environment, <page 348>, <page 362>

Epictetus, <page 464>

Epicureans, <page 140>

Equanimity, <page 279>

Ether, mystical effects of, <page 382>

Evil, ignored by healthy-mindedness, <page 87>, <page 104>, <page 128>; due to things or to the Self, <page 131>; its reality, <page 160>

Evolutionist optimism, <page 90>

Excesses of piety, <page 333>

Excitement, its effects, <page 192>, <page 261>, <page 273>, <page 319>

Experience, religious, the essence of, <page 498>

Extravagances of piety, <page 332>, <page 476>

Extreme cases, why we take them, <page 476>

 

Failure, <page 135>

Faith, <page 240>, <page 496>

Faith-state, <page 495>

Fanaticism, <page 331>

Fear, <page 96>, <page 156>, <page 158>, <page 257>, <page 270>

Feeling deeper than intellect in religion, <page 422>

FIELDING, <page 427>

FINNEY, <page 203>, <page 211>

FLETCHER, <page 96>, <page 178>

FLOURNOY, <page 67>, <page 505>

Flower, <page 466>

FOSTER, <page 175>, <page 373>

FOX, GEORGE, <page 8>, <page 286>, <page 328>, <page 402>

FRANCIS, SAINT, D'ASSISI, <page 313>

FRANCIS, SAINT, DE SALES, <page 12>

FRASER, <page 444>

Fruits, of conversion, <page 232>; of religion, <page 321>; of Saintliness, <page 349>

FULLER, <page 41>

 

GAMOND, <page 283>

GARDINER, <page 263>

Genius and insanity, <page 18>

Geniuses, see Religious leaders.

Gentleman, character of the, <page 311>, <page 363>

GERTRUDE, SAINT, <page 338>

"Gifts," <page 148>

Glory of God, <page 335>

GOD, <page 32>; sense of his presence, <page 65>-<page 71>, <page 266>, <page 270> ff.; historic changes in idea of him, <page 73>, <page 322> ff., <page 482>; mind-curer's idea of him, too; his honor, <page 335>; described by negatives, <page 408>; his attributes, scholastic proof of, <page 430>; the metaphysical ones are for us meaningless, <page 435>; the moral ones are ill-deduced, <page 437>; he is not a mere inference, <page 492>; is used, not known, <page 497>; his existence must make a difference among phenomena, <page 507>, <page 512>; his relation to the subconscious region, <page 237>, <page 505>; his tasks, <page 509>; may be finite and plural, <page 515>

GODDARD, <page 95>

GOETHE, <page 134>

GOUGH, <page 200>

GOURDON, <page 168>

"Grace," the operation of, <page 222>; the state of, <page 255>

GRATRY, <page 143>, <page 466>, <page 495>

[p. 522]

Greeks, their pessimism, <page 85>, <page 139>

Guidance, <page 461>

GURNEY, <page 516>

GUYON, <page 272>, <page 281>

 

HADLEY, <page 198>, <page 262>

HALE, <page 81>

HAMON, <page 358>

Happiness, <page 47>-<page 49>, <page 78>, <page 243>, <page 274>

HARNACK, <page 98>

Healthy-mindedness, Lectures IV and V, passim; its philosophy of evil, <page 129>; compared with morbid-mindedness, <page 159>, <page 477>

Heart, softening of, <page 262>

HEGEL, <page 379>, <page 439>, <page 444>

HELMONT, VAN, <page 487>

Heroism, <page 356>, <page 478>, note

Heterogeneous personality, <page 166>, <page 190>

Higher criticism, <page 6>

HILTY, <page 78>, <page 270>, <page 462>

HODGSON, R., <page 514>

HOMER, <page 85>

HUGO, <page 168>

Hypocrisy, <page 331>

Hypothesis, what makes a useful one, <page 508>

HYSLOP, <page 514>

 

IGNATIUS LOYOLA, <page 307>, <page 397>, <page 401>

Illness, <page 11>

"Imitation of Christ," the, <page 44>

Immortality, <page 514>

Impulses, <page 256>

Individuality, <page 492>

Inhibitions, <page 256> ff

Insane melancholy and religion, <page 142>

Insanity and genius <page 18>; and happiness, <page 274>

Institutional religion, <page 328>

Intellect a secondary force in religion, <page 422>, <page 504>

Intellectual weakness of some saints, <page 362>

Intolerance, <page 335>

Irascibility, <page 258>

 

JESUS, HARNACK on, <page 98>

JOB, <page 75>, <page 438>

JOHN, SAINT, OF THE CROSS, <page 299>, <page 398>, <page 404>

JOHNSTON, <page 252>

JONQUIL, <page 466>

JORDAN, <page 339>

JOUFFROY, <page 173>, <page 194>

Judgments, existential and spiritual, <page 6>

 

KANT, <page 54>, <page 438>

Karma, <page 512>

KELLNER, <page 392>

Kindliness, see Charity

KINGSLEY, <page 375>

 

LAGNEAU, <page 280>

Leaders, see Religious leaders

Leaders, of tribes, <page 363>

LEJEUNE, <page 111>, <page 306>

LESSING, <page 312>

LEUBA, <page 197>, <page 200>, <page 216>, <page 241>, <page 496>, <page 506>

Life, its significance, <page 148>

Life, the subconscious, <page 203>, <page 206>

LOCKER-LAMPSON, <page 39>

Logic, Hegelian, <page 439>

Louis, Saint, of Gonzaga, <page 343>

Love, see Charity

Love, cases of falling out of, <page 176>

Love of God, <page 271>

Love your enemies, <page 273>, <page 278>

LOWELL, <page 65>

Loyalty, to God, <page 335>

LUTFULLAH, <page 161>

LUTHER, <page 126>, <page 135>, <page 239>, <page 324>, <page 340>, <page 373>

Lutheran self-despair, <page 106>, <page 207>

Luxury, <page 357>

[p. 523]

LYCAON, <page 85>

Lyre, <page 261>

 

Mahomet, <page 168>. See MOHAMMED

MARCUS AURELIUS, <page 42>, <page 44>, <page 464>

MARGARET MARY, see ALACOQUE

Margin of consciousness, <page 227>

MARSHALL, <page 493>

MARTINEAU, <page 464>

MATHER, <page 297>

MAUDSLEY, <page 20>

Meaning of life, <page 148>

Medical criticism of religion, <page 404>

Medical materialism, <page 11> ff.

Melancholy, <page 142>, <page 274>; Lectures V and VI, passim; cases of, <page 145>, <page 146>, <page 154>, <page 156>, <page 194>

Melting moods, <page 262>

Method of judging value of religion, <page 19>, <page 221>

Methodism, <page 222>, <page 232>

MEYSENBUG, <page 386>

Militarism, <page 357>-<page 359>

Military type of character, <page 363>

MILL, <page 200>

Mind-cure, its sources and history, <page 92>-<page 95>; its opinion of fear, <page 96>; cases of, <page 100>-<page 103>, <page 118>, <page 121>; its message, <page 106>; its methods, <page 110>-<page 121>; it uses verification, <page 118>-<page 122>; its philosophy of evil, <page 129>

Miraculous character of conversion, <page 222>

MOHAMMED, <page 334>, <page 471>

MOLINOS, <page 128>

MOLTKE, VON, <page 259>, <page 358>

Monasteries, <page 291>

Monism, <page 407>

Morbidness compared with healthy-mindedness, <page 477>. See, also, Melancholy

Mormon revelations, <page 472>

Mortification, see Asceticism

MUIR, <page 471>

MULFORD, <page 488>

MULLER, <page 457>

MURISIER, <page 341>

MYERS, <page 228>, <page 229>, <page 456>, <page 501>, <page 514>

Mystic states, their effects, <page 22>, <page 405>

Mystical experiences, <page 66>

Mysticism, Lectures XVI and XVII, passim; its marks, <page 371>; its theoretic results, <page 407>, <page 413>, <page 419>; it cannot warrant truth, <page 414>; its results, <page 416>; its relation to the sense of union, <page 499>

Mystical region of experience, <page 505>

 

Natural theology, <page 482>

Naturalism, <page 139>, <page 164>

Nature, scientific view of, <page 481>

Negative accounts of deity, <page 408>

NELSON, <page 205>, <page 414>

NETTLETON, <page 211>

NEWMAN, F. W., <page 79>

NEWMAN, J. H., on dogmatic theology, <page 425>, <page 433>; his type of imagination, <page 448>

NIETZSCHE, <page 362>, <page 364>

Nitrous oxide, its mystical effects, <page 378>

No-function, <page 256>-<page 257>, <page 293>, <page 378>, <page 407>

Non-resistance, <page 276>, <page 350>, <page 367>

 

Obedience, <page 304>

OBERMANN, <page 466>

Omit, <page 290>

"Once-born" type, <page 79>, <page 163>, <page 355>, <page 477>

Oneness with God, see Union.

Optimism, systematic, <page 86>; and evolutionism, <page 90>; it may be shallow, <page 356>

Orderliness of world, <page 428>

Organism determines all mental states whatsoever, <page 15>

[p. 524]

Origin of mental states no criterion of their value, <page 16> ff.

Orison, <page 397>

Over-beliefs, <page 503>; the author's, <page 505>

Over-soul, <page 506>

Oxford, graduate of, <page 216>, <page 263>

 

Pagan feeling, <page 85>

Pantheism, <page 129>, <page 407>

PASCAL, <page 281>

PATON, <page 351>

PAUL, SAINT, <page 168>, <page 349>

PEEK, <page 248>

PEIRCE, <page 435>

Penny, <page 317>

PERREYVE, <page 495>

Persecutions, <page 331>, <page 335>

Personality, explained away by science, <page 117>, <page 481>; heterogeneous, <page 166>; alterations of, <page 190>, <page 206> ff.; is reality, <page 489>. See Character

PHILO, <page 470>

Philosophy, Lecture XVIII, passim; must coerce assent, <page 424>; scholastic, <page 430>; idealistic, <page 438>; unable to give a theoretic warrant to faith, <page 445>; its true office in religion, <page 445>

Photisms, <page 246>

Piety, <page 332> ff.

Pluralism, <page 129>

Polytheism, <page 129>, <page 515>

Poverty, <page 309>, <page 359>

"Pragmatism," <page 435>, <page 509>, <page 512>-<page 514>

Prayer, <page 451>; its definition, <page 454>; its essence, <page 454>; petitional, <page 456>; its effects, <page 464>-<page 467>, <page 513>

"Presence," sense of, <page 58>-<page 63>

Presence of God, <page 65>-<page 71>, <page 267>, <page 270> ff., <page 387>, <page 409>

Presence of God, the practice of, <page 114>

Primitive human thought, <page 485>

PRINGLE-PATTISON, <page 444>

Prophets, the Hebrew, <page 469>

Protestant theology, <page 239>

Protestantism and Catholicism, <page 112>, <page 223>, <page 323>, <page 450>

Providential leading, <page 461>

Psychopathy and religion, <page 23> ff.

PUFFER, <page 385>

Purity, <page 268>, <page 285>, <page 341>

 

Quakers, <page 8>, <page 286>

 

RAMAKRISHNA, <page 353>, <page 357>

Rationalism, <page 72>, <page 73>; its authority overthrown by mysticism, <page 419>

RATISBONNE, <page 219>, <page 252>

Reality of unseen objects, Lecture III, passim

RECEJAC, <page 398>, <page 499>

"Recollection," <page 114>, <page 284>

Redemption, <page 154>

Reformation of character, <page 314>

Regeneration, see Conversion; by relaxation, <page 109>

REID, <page 436>

Relaxation, salvation by, <page 108>. See Surrender

Religion, to be tested by fruits, not by origin, <page 11> ff., <page 324>; its definition, <page 27>, <page 3>r; is solemn, <page 38>; compared with Stoicism, <page 42>; its unique function, <page 51>; abstractness of its objects, <page 54>; differs according to temperament, <page 74>, <page 132>, <page 326>, and ought to differ, <page 477>; considered to be a "survival," <page 116>, <page 480>, <page 488>; its relations to melancholy, <page 142>; worldly passions may combine with it, <page 330>; its essential characters, <page 365>, <page 475>; its relation to prayer, <page 453>-<page 455>; asserts a fact, not a theory, <page 479>; its truth, <page 369>; more than science, it holds by concrete reality, <page 490>; attempts to

[p. 525]

evaporate it into philosophy, <page 492>; it is concerned with personal destinies, <page 480>, <page 493>; with feeling and conduct, <page 494>; is a sthenic affection, <page 495>; is for life, not for knowledge, <page 496>; its essential contents, <page 498>; it postulates issues of fact, <page 508>

Religious emotion, <page 274>

Religious leaders, often nervously unstable, <page 8> ff., <page 31>; their loneliness, <page 328>

"Religious sentiment," <page 28>

RENAN, <page 37>

Renunciations, <page 342>

Repentance, <page 125>

Resignation, <page 281>

Revelation, the anaesthetic, <page 377>-<page 384>

Revelations, see Automatisms.

Revelations, in Mormon Church, <page 472>

Revivalism, <page 223>

RIBET, <page 397>

RIBOT, <page 143>, <page 493>

RODRIGUEZ, <page 307>, <page 308>, <page 311>

ROYCE, <page 444>

RUTHERFORD, MARK, <page 75>

 

SABATIER, A., <page 454>

Sacrifice, <page 297>, <page 451>

SAINT-PIERRE, <page 82>

SAINTE-BEUVE, <page 255>, <page 309>

Saintliness, Sainte-Beuve on, <page 255>; its characteristics, <page 266>, <page 361>; criticism of, <page 320> ff.

Saintly conduct, <page 348>-<page 368>

Saints, dislike of natural man for, <page 363>

Salvation, <page 515>

SANDAY, <page 470>

SATAN, in picture, <page 50>

Scholastic arguments for God, <page 428>

Science, ignores personality and teleology, <page 481>; her "facts," <page 490>, <page 491>

"Science of Religions," <page 424>, <page 445>, <page 446>, <page 478>-<page 481>

Scientific conceptions, their late adoption, <page 486>

Second-birth, <page 154>, <page 162>, <page 163>

SEELEY, <page 76>

Self of the world, <page 439>

Self-despair, <page 108>, <page 127>, <page 205>

Self-surrender, <page 108>, <page 205>

SENANCOUR, <page 466>

SETH, <page 444>

Sexual temptation, <page 263>

Sexuality as cause of religion, <page 12>

"Shrew," <page 339>

Sickness, <page 111>

Sick souls, Lectures V and VI, passim

SIGHELE, <page 258>

Sin, <page 205>

Sinners, Christ died for, <page 127>

Skepticism, <page 325> ff.

SKOBELEFF, <page 260>

SMITH, JOSEPH, <page 471>

Softening of the heart, <page 262>

Solemnity, <page 38>, <page 48>

Soul, <page 191>

Soul, strength of, <page 268>

SPENCER, <page 348>, <page 366>

SPINOZA, <page 10>, <page 125>

Spiritism, <page 504>

Spirit-return, <page 514>

Spiritual judgments, <page 6>

Spiritual states, tests of their value, <page 19>

STARBUCK, <page 195>, <page 200>, <page 202>, <page 205>-<page 206>, <page 244>, <page 247>, <page 253>, <page 263>, <page 316>, <page 345>, <page 385>

STEVENSON, <page 135>, <page 290>

Stoicism, <page 42>-<page 45>, <page 140>

Strange appearance of world, <page 148>

Strength of soul, <page 268>

[p. 526]

Subconscious action in conversion, <page 232>, <page 237>

Subconscious life, <page 113>, <page 203>, <page 206>, <page 228>, <page 231>, <page 265>, <page 473>

Subconscious Self, as intermediary between the Self and God, <page 501>

Subliminal, see Subconscious

Sufis, <page 394>, <page 411>

Suggestion, <page 110>, <page 229>

Suicide, <page 144>

Supernaturalism its two kinds, <page 510>; criticism of universalistic, <page 511>

Supernatural world, <page 508>

Surrender, salvation by, <page 108>, <page 205>, <page 208>

Survival-theory of religion, <page 480>, <page 488>, <page 490>

Suso, <page 301>, <page 342>

SWINBURNE, <page 413>

SYMONDS, <page 376>, <page 381>

Sympathetic magic, <page 486>

Sympathy, see Charity

Systems, philosophic, <page 424>

 

Taine, <page 11>

TAYLOR, <page 241>

Tenderness, see Charity

TENNYSON, <page 374>

TERESA, SAINT, <page 22>, <page 339>, <page 352>, <page 400>, <page 402>, <page 403>, <page 405>

Theologia Germanica, <page 43>

Theologians, systematic, <page 437>

"Theopathy," <page 336>

THOREAU, <page 269>

Threshold, <page 132>

Tiger, <page 161>, <page 257>

Tobacco, <page 264>, <page 285>

TOLSTOY, <page 146>, <page 174>, <page 180>

TOWIANSKI, <page 276>

Tragedy of life, <page 355>

Tranquillity, <page 279>

Transcendentalism criticised, <page 511>

Transcendentalists, <page 506>

TREVOR, <page 387>

TRINE, <page 100>, <page 385>

Truth of religion, how to be tested, <page 368>; what it is, <page 500>; mystical perception of, <page 371>, <page 401>

"Twice-born," type, <page 163>, <page 355>, <page 477>

TYNDALL, <page 294>

 

"Unconscious cerebration," <page 204>

Unification of Self, <page 180>, <page 341>

"UNION MORALE," <page 267>

Union with God, <page 400>, <page 409>, <page 416>, <page 441>, <page 499> ff. See lectures on Conversion, passim

Unity of universe, <page 129>

Unreality, sense of, <page 62>

Unseen realities, Lecture III, passim

Upanishads, <page 410>

UPHAM, <page 284>

Utopias, <page 352>

 

VACHEROT, <page 492>

Value of spiritual affections, how tested, <page 19>

VAMBERY, <page 334>

Vedantism, <page 392>, <page 410>, <page 503>, <page 512>

Veracity, <page 8>, <page 286> ff.

VIVEKANANDA, <page 504>

VOLTAIRE, <page 36>

VOYSEY, <page 270>

 

War, <page 357>-<page 359>

Wealth-worship, <page 357>

WEAVER, <page 276>

WESLEY, <page 223>

Wesleyan self-despair, <page 106>, <page 207>

WHITE FIELD, <page 312>

WHITMAN, <page 83>, <page 387>, <page 496>

WOLFF, <page 482>

WOOD, HENRY, <page 94>, <page 98>, <page 116>

World, soul of the, <page 439>

Worry, <page 96>, <page 178>

 

Yes-function, <page 256>-<page 258>, <page 293>, <page 378>

Yoga, <page 391>

YOUNG, <page 251>

    
The Varieties of Religous Experience, by William James, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

  

WILLIAM JAMES

  

(1842-1910)

  

A NOTE ON THE AUTHOR OF "THE VARIETIES OF RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE"

The road by which William James arrived at his position of leadership among American philosophers was, during his childhood, youth and early maturity, quite as circuitous and unpredictable as were his father's ideas on the training of his children. That Swedenborgian theologian foresaw neither the career of novelist for his son Henry, nor that of pragmatist philosopher for the older William. The father's migrations between New York, Europe and Newport meant that William's education had variety if it did not have fixed direction. From 13 to 18 he studied in Europe and returned to Newport, Rhode Island, to study painting under the guidance of John La Farge. After a year, he gave up art for science and entered Harvard University, where his most influential teachers were Louis Agassiz and Charles W. Eliot. In 1863, William James began the study of medicine, and in 1865 he joined an expedition to the Amazon. Before long, he wrote: "If there is anything I hate, it is collecting." His studies constantly interrupted by ill health, James returned to Germany and began hearing lectures and reading voluminously in philosophy. He won his medical degree at Harvard in 1870. For four years he was an invalid in Cambridge, but finally, in 1873, he passed his gravest physical and spiritual crises and began the career by which he was to influence so profoundly generations of American students. From 1880 to 1907 he was successively assistant professor of philosophy, professor of psychology and professor of philosophy at Harvard. In 1890, the publication of his Principles of Psychology brought him the acknowledged leadership in the field of functional psychology. The selection of William James to deliver the Gifford lectures in Edinburgh was at once a tribute to him and a reward for the university that sponsored the undertaking. These lectures, collected in this volume, have since become famous as the standard scientific work on the psychology of the religious impulse. Death ended his career on August 27th, 1910.

 

    


===== BOOK: wbw.txt =====



The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE WOOD BEYOND THE WORLD

 

by William Morris

 

Hammersmith, Kelmscott Press

 

[1894]

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER I: OF GOLDEN WALTER AND HIS FATHER

Awhile ago there was a young man dwelling in a great and goodly city by the sea which had to name Langton on Holm. He was but of five and twenty winters, a fair-faced man, yellow-haired, tall and strong; rather wiser than foolisher than young men are mostly wont; a valiant youth, and a kind; not of many words but courteous of speech; no roisterer, nought masterful, but peaceable and knowing how to forbear: in a fray a perilous foe, and a trusty war-fellow. His father, with whom he was dwelling when this tale begins, was a great merchant, richer than a baron of the land, a head-man of the greatest of the Lineages of Langton, and a captain of the Porte; he was of the Lineage of the Goldings, therefore was he called Bartholomew Golden, and his son Golden Walter.

Now ye may well deem that such a youngling as this was looked upon by all as a lucky man without a lack; but there was this flaw in his lot, whereas he had fallen into the toils of love of a woman exceeding fair, and had taken her to wife, she nought unwilling as it seemed. But when they had been wedded some six months he found by manifest tokens, that his fairness was not so much to her but that she must seek to the foulness of one worser than he in all ways; wherefore his rest departed from him, whereas he hated her for her untruth and her hatred of him; yet would the sound of her voice, as she came and went in the house, make his heart beat; and the sight of her stirred desire within him, so that he longed for her to be sweet and kind with him, and deemed that, might it be so, he should forget all the evil gone by. But it was not so; for ever when she saw him, her face changed, and her hatred of him became manifest, and howsoever she were sweet with others, with him she was hard and sour.

So this went on a while till the chambers of his father's house, yea the very streets of the city, became loathsome to him; and yet he called to mind that the world was wide and he but a young man. So on a day as he sat with his father alone, he spake to him and said: "Father, I was on the quays even now, and I looked on the ships that were nigh boun, and thy sign I saw on a tall ship that seemed to me nighest boun. Will it be long ere she sail?"

"Nay," said his father, "that ship, which hight the Katherine, will they warp out of the haven in two days' time. But why askest thou of her?"

"The shortest word is best, father," said Walter, "and this it is, that I would depart in the said ship and see other lands."

"Yea and whither, son?" said the merchant.

"Whither she goeth," said Walter, "for I am ill at ease at home, as thou wottest, father."

The merchant held his peace awhile, and looked hard on his son, for there was strong love between them; but at last he said: "Well, son, maybe it were best for thee; but maybe also we shall not meet again."

"Yet if we do meet, father, then shalt thou see a new man in me."

"Well," said Bartholomew, "at least I know on whom to lay the loss of thee, and when thou art gone, for thou shalt have thine own way herein, she shall no longer abide in my house. Nay, but it were for the strife that should arise thenceforth betwixt her kindred and ours, it should go somewhat worse with her than that."

Said Walter: "I pray thee shame her not more than needs must be, lest, so doing, thou shame both me and thyself also."

Bartholomew held his peace again for a while; then he said: "Goeth she with child, my son?"

Walter reddened, and said: "I wot not; nor of whom the child may be." Then they both sat silent, till Bartholomew spake, saying: "The end of it is, son, that this is Monday, and that thou shalt go aboard in the small hours of Wednesday; and meanwhile I shall look to it that thou go not away empty-handed; the skipper of the Katherine is a good man and true, and knows the seas well; and my servant Robert the Low, who is clerk of the lading, is trustworthy and wise, and as myself in all matters that look towards chaffer. The Katherine is new and stout-builded, and should be lucky, whereas she is under the ward of her who is the saint called upon in the church where thou wert christened, and myself before thee; and thy mother, and my father and mother all lie under the chancel thereof, as thou wottest."

Therewith the elder rose up and went his ways about his business, and there was no more said betwixt him and his son on this matter.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER II: GOLDEN WALTER TAKES SHIP TO SAIL THE SEAS

When Walter went down to the Katherine next morning, there was the skipper Geoffrey, who did him reverence, and made him all cheer, and showed him his room aboard ship, and the plenteous goods which his father had sent down to the quays already, such haste as he had made. Walter thanked his father's love in his heart, but otherwise took little heed to his affairs, but wore away the time about the haven, gazing listlessly on the ships that were making them ready outward, or unlading, and the mariners and aliens coming and going: and all these were to him as the curious images woven on a tapestry.

At last when he had wellnigh come back again to the Katherine, he saw there a tall ship, which he had scarce noted before, a ship all- boun, which had her boats out, and men sitting to the oars thereof ready to tow her outwards when the hawser should be cast off, and by seeming her mariners were but abiding for some one or other to come aboard.

So Walter stood idly watching the said ship, and as he looked, lo! folk passing him toward the gangway. These were three; first came a dwarf, dark-brown of hue and hideous, with long arms and ears exceeding great and dog-teeth that stuck out like the fangs of a wild beast. He was clad in a rich coat of yellow silk, and bare in his hand a crooked bow, and was girt with a broad sax.

After him came a maiden, young by seeming, of scarce twenty summers; fair of face as a flower; grey-eyed, brown-haired, with lips full and red, slim and gentle of body. Simple was her array, of a short and strait green gown, so that on her right ankle was clear to see an iron ring.

Last of the three was a lady, tall and stately, so radiant of visage and glorious of raiment, that it were hard to say what like she was; for scarce might the eye gaze steady upon her exceeding beauty; yet must every son of Adam who found himself anigh her, lift up his eyes again after he had dropped them, and look again on her, and yet again and yet again. Even so did Walter, and as the three passed by him, it seemed to him as if all the other folk there about had vanished and were nought; nor had he any vision before his eyes of any looking on them, save himself alone. They went over the gangway into the ship, and he saw them go along the deck till they came to the house on the poop, and entered it and were gone from his sight.

There he stood staring, till little by little the thronging people of the quays came into his eye-shot again; then he saw how the hawser was cast off and the boats fell to tugging the big ship toward the harbour-mouth with hale and how of men. Then the sail fell down from the yard and was sheeted home and filled with the fair wind as the ship's bows ran up on the first green wave outside the haven. Even therewith the shipmen cast abroad a banner, whereon was done in a green field a grim wolf ramping up against a maiden, and so went the ship upon her way.

Walter stood awhile staring at her empty place where the waves ran into the haven-mouth, and then turned aside and toward the Katherine; and at first he was minded to go ask shipmaster Geoffrey of what he knew concerning the said ship and her alien wayfarers; but then it came into his mind, that all this was but an imagination or dream of the day, and that he were best to leave it untold to any. So therewith he went his way from the water-side, and through the streets unto his father's house; but when he was but a little way thence, and the door was before him, him-seemed for a moment of time that he beheld those three coming out down the steps of stone and into the street; to wit the dwarf, the maiden, and the stately lady: but when he stood still to abide their coming, and looked toward them, lo! there was nothing before him save the goodly house of Bartholomew Golden, and three children and a cur dog playing about the steps thereof, and about him were four or five passers-by going about their business. Then was he all confused in his mind, and knew not what to make of it, whether those whom he had seemed to see pass aboard ship were but images of a dream, or children of Adam in very flesh.

Howsoever, he entered the house, and found his father in the chamber, and fell to speech with him about their matters; but for all that he loved his father, and worshipped him as a wise and valiant man, yet at that hour he might not hearken the words of his mouth, so much was his mind entangled in the thought of those three, and they were ever before his eyes, as if they had been painted on a table by the best of limners. And of the two women he thought exceeding much, and cast no wyte upon himself for running after the desire of strange women. For he said to himself that he desired not either of the twain; nay, he might not tell which of the twain, the maiden or the stately queen, were clearest to his eyes; but sore he desired to see both of them again, and to know what they were.

So wore the hours till the Wednesday morning, and it was time that he should bid farewell to his father and get aboard ship; but his father led him down to the quays and on to the Katherine, and there Walter embraced him, not without tears and forebodings; for his heart was full. Then presently the old man went aland; the gangway was unshipped, the hawsers cast off; the oars of the towing-boats splashed in the dark water, the sail fell down from the yard, and was sheeted home, and out plunged the Katherine into the misty sea and rolled up the grey slopes, casting abroad her ancient withal, whereon was beaten the token of Bartholomew Golden, to wit a B and a G to the right and the left, and thereabove a cross and a triangle rising from the midst.

Walter stood on the stern and beheld, yet more with the mind of him than with his eyes; for it all seemed but the double of what the other ship had done; and the thought of it as if the twain were as beads strung on one string and led away by it into the same place, and thence to go in the like order, and so on again and again, and never to draw nigher to each other.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER III: WALTER HEARETH TIDINGS OF THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER

Fast sailed the Katherine over the seas, and nought befell to tell of, either to herself or her crew. She came to one cheaping-town and then to another, and so on to a third and a fourth; and at each was buying and selling after the manner of chapmen; and Walter not only looked on the doings of his father's folk, but lent a hand, what he might, to help them in all matters, whether it were in seaman's craft, or in chaffer. And the further he went and the longer the time wore, the more he was eased of his old trouble wherein his wife and her treason had to do.

But as for the other trouble, to wit his desire and longing to come up with those three, it yet flickered before him; and though he had not seen them again as one sees people in the streets, and as if he might touch them if he would, yet were their images often before his mind's eye; and yet, as time wore, not so often, nor so troublously; and forsooth both to those about him and to himself, he seemed as a man well healed of his melancholy mood.

Now they left that fourth stead, and sailed over the seas and came to a fifth, a very great and fair city, which they had made more than seven months from Langton on Holm; and by this time was Walter taking heed and joyance in such things as were toward in that fair city, so far from his kindred, and especially he looked on the fair women there, and desired them, and loved them; but lightly, as befalleth young men.

Now this was the last country whereto the Katherine was boun; so there they abode some ten months in daily chaffer, and in pleasuring them in beholding all that there was of rare and goodly, and making merry with the merchants and the towns-folk, and the country-folk beyond the gates, and Walter was grown as busy and gay as a strong young man is like to be, and was as one who would fain be of some account amongst his own folk.

But at the end of this while, it befell on a day, as he was leaving his hostel for his booth in the market, and had the door in his hand, there stood before him three mariners in the guise of his own country, and with them was one of clerkly aspect, whom he knew at once for his father's scrivener, Arnold Penstrong by name; and when Walter saw him his heart failed him and he cried out: "Arnold, what tidings? Is all well with the folk at Langton?"

Said Arnold: "Evil tidings are come with me; matters are ill with thy folk; for I may not hide that thy father, Bartholomew Golden, is dead, God rest his soul."

At that word it was to Walter as if all that trouble which but now had sat so light upon him, was once again fresh and heavy, and that his past life of the last few months had never been; and it was to him as if he saw his father lying dead on his bed, and heard the folk lamenting about the house. He held his peace awhile, and then he said in a voice as of an angry man:

"What, Arnold! and did he die in his bed, or how? for he was neither old nor ailing when we parted."

Said Arnold: "Yea, in his bed he died: but first he was somewhat sword-bitten."

"Yea, and how?" quoth Walter.

Said Arnold: "When thou wert gone, in a few days' wearing, thy father sent thy wife out of his house back to her kindred of the Reddings with no honour, and yet with no such shame as might have been, without blame to us of those who knew the tale of thee and her; which, God-a-mercy, will be pretty much the whole of the city."

"Nevertheless, the Reddings took it amiss, and would have a mote with us Goldings to talk of booting. By ill-luck we yea-said that for the saving of the city's peace. But what betid? We met in our Gild-hall, and there befell the talk between us; and in that talk certain words could not be hidden, though they were none too seemly nor too meek. And the said words once spoken drew forth the whetted steel; and there then was the hewing and thrusting! Two of ours were slain outright on the floor, and four of theirs, and many were hurt on either side. Of these was thy father, for as thou mayst well deem, he was nought backward in the fray; but despite his hurts, two in the side and one on the arm, he went home on his own feet, and we deemed that we had come to our above. But well-a-way! it was an evil victory, whereas in ten days he died of his hurts. God have his soul! But now, my master, thou mayst well wot that I am not come to tell thee this only, but moreover to bear the word of the kindred, to wit that thou come back with me straightway in the swift cutter which hath borne me and the tidings; and thou mayst look to it, that though she be swift and light, she is a keel full weatherly."

Then said Walter: "This is a bidding of war. Come back will I, and the Reddings shall wot of my coming. Are ye all-boun?"

"Yea," said Arnold, "we may up anchor this very day, or to-morrow morn at latest. But what aileth thee, master, that thou starest so wild over my shoulder? I pray thee take it not so much to heart! Ever it is the wont of fathers to depart this world before their sons."

But Walter's visage from wrathful red had become pale, and he pointed up street, and cried out: "Look! dost thou see?"

"See what, master?" quoth Arnold: "what! here cometh an ape in gay raiment; belike the beast of some jongleur. Nay, by God's wounds! 'tis a man, though he be exceeding mis-shapen like a very devil. Yea and now there cometh a pretty maid going as if she were of his meney; and lo! here, a most goodly and noble lady! Yea, I see; and doubtless she owneth both the two, and is of the greatest of the folk of this fair city; for on the maiden's ankle I saw an iron ring, which betokeneth thralldom amongst these aliens. But this is strange! for notest thou not how the folk in the street heed not this quaint show; nay not even the stately lady, though she be as lovely as a goddess of the gentiles, and beareth on her gems that would buy Langton twice over; surely they must be over-wont to strange and gallant sights. But now, master, but now!"

"Yea, what is it?" said Walter.

"Why, master, they should not yet be gone out of eye-shot, yet gone they are. What is become of them, are they sunk into the earth?"

"Tush, man!" said Walter, looking not on Arnold, but still staring down the street; "they have gone into some house while thine eyes were turned from them a moment."

"Nay, master, nay," said Arnold, "mine eyes were not off them one instant of time."

"Well," said Walter, somewhat snappishly, "they are gone now, and what have we to do to heed such toys, we with all this grief and strife on our hands? Now would I be alone to turn the matter of thine errand over in my mind. Meantime do thou tell the shipmaster Geoffrey and our other folk of these tidings, and thereafter get thee all ready; and come hither to me before sunrise to-morrow, and I shall be ready for my part; and so sail we back to Langton."

Therewith he turned him back into the house, and the others went their ways; but Walter sat alone in his chamber a long while, and pondered these things in his mind. And whiles he made up his mind that he would think no more of the vision of those three, but would fare back to Langton, and enter into the strife with the Reddings and quell them, or die else. But lo, when he was quite steady in this doom, and his heart was lightened thereby, he found that he thought no more of the Reddings and their strife, but as matters that were passed and done with, and that now he was thinking and devising if by any means he might find out in what land dwelt those three. And then again he strove to put that from him, saying that what he had seen was but meet for one brainsick, and a dreamer of dreams. But furthermore he thought, Yea, and was Arnold, who this last time had seen the images of those three, a dreamer of waking dreams? for he was nought wonted in such wise; then thought he: At least I am well content that he spake to me of their likeness, not I to him; for so I may tell that there was at least something before my eyes which grew not out of mine own brain. And yet again, why should I follow them; and what should I get by it; and indeed how shall I set about it?

Thus he turned the matter over and over; and at last, seeing that if he grew no foolisher over it, he grew no wiser, he became weary thereof, and bestirred him, and saw to the trussing up of his goods, and made all ready for his departure, and so wore the day and slept at nightfall; and at daybreak comes Arnold to lead him to their keel, which hight the Bartholomew. He tarried nought, and with few farewells went aboard ship, and an hour after they were in the open sea with the ship's head turned toward Langton on Holm.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER IV: STORM BEFALLS THE BARTHOLOMEW, AND SHE IS DRIVEN OFF HER COURSE

Now swift sailed the Bartholomew for four weeks toward the north-west with a fair wind, and all was well with ship and crew. Then the wind died out on even of a day, so that the ship scarce made way at all, though she rolled in a great swell of the sea, so great, that it seemed to ridge all the main athwart. Moreover down in the west was a great bank of cloud huddled up in haze, whereas for twenty days past the sky had been clear, save for a few bright white clouds flying before the wind. Now the shipmaster, a man right cunning in his craft, looked long on sea and sky, and then turned and bade the mariners take in sail and be right heedful. And when Walter asked him what he looked for, and wherefore he spake not to him thereof, he said surlily: "Why should I tell thee what any fool can see without telling, to wit that there is weather to hand?"

So they abode what should befall, and Walter went to his room to sleep away the uneasy while, for the night was now fallen; and he knew no more till he was waked up by great hubbub and clamour of the shipmen, and the whipping of ropes, and thunder of flapping sails, and the tossing and weltering of the ship withal. But, being a very stout-hearted young man, he lay still in his room, partly because he was a landsman, and had no mind to tumble about amongst the shipmen and hinder them; and withal he said to himself: What matter whether I go down to the bottom of the sea, or come back to Langton, since either way my life or my death will take away from me the fulfilment of desire? Yet soothly if there hath been a shift of wind, that is not so ill; for then shall we be driven to other lands, and so at the least our home-coming shall be delayed, and other tidings may hap amidst of our tarrying. So let all be as it will.

So in a little while, in spite of the ship's wallowing and the tumult of the wind and waves, he fell asleep again, and woke no more till it was full daylight, and there was the shipmaster standing in the door of his room, the sea-water all streaming from his wet- weather raiment. He said to Walter: "Young master, the sele of the day to thee! For by good hap we have gotten into another day. Now I shall tell thee that we have striven to beat, so as not to be driven off our course, but all would not avail, wherefore for these three hours we have been running before the wind; but, fair sir, so big hath been the sea that but for our ship being of the stoutest, and our men all yare, we had all grown exceeding wise concerning the ground of the mid-main. Praise be to St. Nicholas and all Hallows! for though ye shall presently look upon a new sea, and maybe a new land to boot, yet is that better than looking on the ugly things down below."

"Is all well with ship and crew then?" said Walter.

"Yea forsooth," said the shipmaster; "verily the Bartholomew is the darling of Oak Woods; come up and look at it, how she is dealing with wind and waves all free from fear."

So Walter did on his foul-weather raiment, and went up on to the quarter-deck, and there indeed was a change of days; for the sea was dark and tumbling mountain-high, and the white-horses were running down the valleys thereof, and the clouds drave low over all, and bore a scud of rain along with them; and though there was but a rag of sail on her, the ship flew before the wind, rolling a great wash of water from bulwark to bulwark.

Walter stood looking on it all awhile, holding on by a stay-rope, and saying to himself that it was well that they were driving so fast toward new things.

Then the shipmaster came up to him and clapped him on the shoulder and said: "Well, shipmate, cheer up! and now come below again and eat some meat, and drink a cup with me."

So Walter went down and ate and drank, and his heart was lighter than it had been since he had heard of his father's death, and the feud awaiting him at home, which forsooth he had deemed would stay his wanderings a weary while, and therewithal his hopes. But now it seemed as if he needs must wander, would he, would he not; and so it was that even this fed his hope; so sore his heart clung to that desire of his to seek home to those three that seemed to call him unto them.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER V: NOW THEY COME TO A NEW LAND

Three days they drave before the wind, and on the fourth the clouds lifted, the sun shone out and the offing was clear; the wind had much abated, though it still blew a breeze, and was a head wind for sailing toward the country of Langton. So then the master said that, since they were bewildered, and the wind so ill to deal with, it were best to go still before the wind that they might make some land and get knowledge of their whereabouts from the folk thereof. Withal he said that he deemed the land not to be very far distant.

So did they, and sailed on pleasantly enough, for the weather kept on mending, and the wind fell till it was but a light breeze, yet still foul for Langton.

So wore three days, and on the eve of the third, the man from the topmast cried out that he saw land ahead; and so did they all before the sun was quite set, though it were but a cloud no bigger than a man's hand.

When night fell they struck not sail, but went forth toward the land fair and softly; for it was early summer, so that the nights were neither long nor dark.

But when it was broad daylight, they opened a land, a long shore of rocks and mountains, and nought else that they could see at first. Nevertheless as day wore and they drew nigher, first they saw how the mountains fell away from the sea, and were behind a long wall of sheer cliff; and coming nigher yet, they beheld a green plain going up after a little in green bents and slopes to the feet of the said cliff-wall.

No city nor haven did they see there, not even when they were far nigher to the land; nevertheless, whereas they hankered for the peace of the green earth after all the tossing and unrest of the sea, and whereas also they doubted not to find at the least good and fresh water, and belike other bait in the plain under the mountains, they still sailed on not unmerrily; so that by nightfall they cast anchor in five-fathom water hard by the shore.

Next morning they found that they were lying a little way off the mouth of a river not right great; so they put out their boats and towed the ship up into the said river, and when they had gone up it for a mile or thereabouts they found the sea water failed, for little was the ebb and flow of the tide on that coast. Then was the river deep and clear, running between smooth grassy land like to meadows. Also on their left board they saw presently three head of neat cattle going, as if in a meadow of a homestead in their own land, and a few sheep; and thereafter, about a bow-draught from the river, they saw a little house of wood and straw-thatch under a wooded mound, and with orchard trees about it. They wondered little thereat, for they knew no cause why that land should not be builded, though it were in the far outlands. However, they drew their ship up to the bank, thinking that they would at least abide awhile and ask tidings and have some refreshing of the green plain, which was so lovely and pleasant.

But while they were busied herein they saw a man come out of the house, and down to the river to meet them; and they soon saw that he was tall and old, long-hoary of hair and beard, and clad mostly in the skins of beasts.

He drew nigh without any fear or mistrust, and coming close to them gave them the sele of the day in a kindly and pleasant voice. The shipmaster greeted him in his turn, and said withal: "Old man, art thou the king of this country?"

The elder laughed; "It hath had none other a long while," said he; "and at least there is no other son of Adam here to gainsay."

"Thou art alone here then?" said the master.

"Yea," said the old man; "save for the beasts of the field and the wood, and the creeping things, and fowl. Wherefore it is sweet to me to hear your voices."

Said the master: "Where be the other houses of the town?"

The old man laughed. Said he: "When I said that I was alone, I meant that I was alone in the land and not only alone in this stead. There is no house save this betwixt the sea and the dwellings of the Bears, over the cliff-wall yonder, yea and a long way over it."

"Yea," quoth the shipmaster grinning, "and be the bears of thy country so manlike, that they dwell in builded houses?"

The old man shook his head. "Sir," said he, "as to their bodily fashion, it is altogether manlike, save that they be one and all higher and bigger than most. For they be bears only in name; they be a nation of half wild men; for I have been told by them that there be many more than that tribe whose folk I have seen, and that they spread wide about behind these mountains from east to west. Now, sir, as to their souls and understandings I warrant them not; for miscreants they be, trowing neither in God nor his hallows."

Said the master: "Trow they in Mahound then?"

"Nay," said the elder, "I wot not for sure that they have so much as a false God; though I have it from them that they worship a certain woman with mickle worship."

Then spake Walter: "Yea, good sir, and how knowest thou that? dost thou deal with them at all?"

Said the old man: "Whiles some of that folk come hither and have of me what I can spare; a calf or two, or a half-dozen of lambs or hoggets; or a skin of wine or cyder of mine own making: and they give me in return such things as I can use, as skins of hart and bear and other peltries; for now I am old, I can but little of the hunting hereabout. Whiles, also, they bring little lumps of pure copper, and would give me gold also, but it is of little use in this lonely land. Sooth to say, to me they are not masterful or rough- handed; but glad am I that they have been here but of late, and are not like to come again this while; for terrible they are of aspect, and whereas ye be aliens, belike they would not hold their hands from off you; and moreover ye have weapons and other matters which they would covet sorely."

Quoth the master: "Since thou dealest with these wild men, will ye not deal with us in chaffer? For whereas we are come from long travel, we hanker after fresh victual, and here aboard are many things which were for thine avail."

Said the old man: "All that I have is yours, so that ye do but leave me enough till my next ingathering: of wine and cyder, such as it is, I have plenty for your service; ye may drink it till it is all gone, if ye will: a little corn and meal I have, but not much; yet are ye welcome thereto, since the standing corn in my garth is done blossoming, and I have other meat. Cheeses have I and dried fish; take what ye will thereof. But as to my neat and sheep, if ye have sore need of any, and will have them, I may not say you nay: but I pray you if ye may do without them, not to take my milch- beasts or their engenderers; for, as ye have heard me say, the Bear- folk have been here but of late, and they have had of me all I might spare: but now let me tell you, if ye long after flesh-meat, that there is venison of hart and hind, yea, and of buck and doe, to be had on this plain, and about the little woods at the feet of the rock-wall yonder: neither are they exceeding wild; for since I may not take them, I scare them not, and no other man do they see to hurt them; for the Bear-folk come straight to my house, and fare straight home thence. But I will lead you the nighest way to where the venison is easiest to be gotten. As to the wares in your ship, if ye will give me aught I will take it with a good will; and chiefly if ye have a fair knife or two and a roll of linen cloth, that were a good refreshment to me. But in any case what I have to give is free to you and welcome."

The shipmaster laughed: "Friend," said he, "we can thee mickle thanks for all that thou biddest us. And wot well that we be no lifters or sea-thieves to take thy livelihood from thee. So to- morrow, if thou wilt, we will go with thee and upraise the hunt, and meanwhile we will come aland, and walk on the green grass, and water our ship with thy good fresh water."

So the old carle went back to his house to make them ready what cheer he might, and the shipmen, who were twenty and one, all told, what with the mariners and Arnold and Walter's servants, went ashore, all but two who watched the ship and abode their turn. They went well-weaponed, for both the master and Walter deemed wariness wisdom, lest all might not be so good as it seemed. They took of their sail-cloths ashore and tilted them in on the meadow betwixt the house and the ship, and the carle brought them what he had for their avail, of fresh fruits, and cheeses, and milk, and wine, and cyder, and honey, and there they feasted nowise ill, and were right fain.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VI: THE OLD MAN TELLS WALTER OF HIMSELF. WALTER SEES A SHARD IN THE CLIFF-WALL

But when they had done their meat and drink the master and the shipmen went about the watering of the ship, and the others strayed off along the meadow, so that presently Walter was left alone with the carle, and fell to speech with him and said: "Father, meseemeth thou shouldest have some strange tale to tell, and as yet we have asked thee of nought save meat for our bellies: now if I ask thee concerning thy life, and how thou camest hither, and abided here, wilt thou tell me aught?"

The old man smiled on him and said: "Son, my tale were long to tell; and mayhappen concerning much thereof my memory should fail me; and withal there is grief therein, which I were loth to awaken: nevertheless if thou ask, I will answer as I may, and in any case will tell thee nought save the truth."

Said Walter: "Well then, hast thou been long here?"

"Yea," said the carle, "since I was a young man, and a stalwarth knight."

Said Walter: "This house, didst thou build it, and raise these garths, and plant orchard and vineyard, and gather together the neat and the sheep, or did some other do all this for thee?"

Said the carle: "I did none of all this; there was one here before me, and I entered into his inheritance, as though this were a lordly manor, with a fair castle thereon, and all well stocked and plenished."

Said Walter: "Didst thou find thy foregoer alive here?"

"Yea," said the elder, "yet he lived but for a little while after I came to him."

He was silent a while, and then he said: "I slew him: even so would he have it, though I bade him a better lot."

Said Walter: "Didst thou come hither of thine own will?"

"Mayhappen," said the carle; "who knoweth? Now have I no will to do either this or that. It is wont that maketh me do, or refrain."

Said Walter: "Tell me this; why didst thou slay the man? did he any scathe to thee?"

Said the elder: "When I slew him, I deemed that he was doing me all scathe: but now I know that it was not so. Thus it was: I would needs go where he had been before, and he stood in the path against me; and I overthrew him, and went on the way I would."

"What came thereof?" said Walter.

"Evil came of it," said the carle.

Then was Walter silent a while, and the old man spake nothing; but there came a smile in his face that was both sly and somewhat sad. Walter looked on him and said: "Was it from hence that thou wouldst go that road?"

"Yea," said the carle.

Said Walter: "And now wilt thou tell me what that road was; whither it went and whereto it led, that thou must needs wend it, though thy first stride were over a dead man?"

"I will not tell thee," said the carle.

Then they held their peace, both of them, and thereafter got on to other talk of no import.

So wore the day till night came; and they slept safely, and on the morrow after they had broken their fast, the more part of them set off with the carle to the hunting, and they went, all of them, a three hours' faring towards the foot of the cliffs, which was all grown over with coppice, hazel and thorn, with here and there a big oak or ash-tree; there it was, said the old man, where the venison was most and best.

Of their hunting need nought be said, saving that when the carle had put them on the track of the deer and shown them what to do, he came back again with Walter, who had no great lust for the hunting, and sorely longed to have some more talk with the said carle. He for his part seemed nought loth thereto, and so led Walter to a mound or hillock amidst the clear of the plain, whence all was to be seen save where the wood covered it; but just before where they now lay down there was no wood, save low bushes, betwixt them and the rock- wall; and Walter noted that whereas otherwhere, save in one place whereto their eyes were turned, the cliffs seemed wellnigh or quite sheer, or indeed in some places beetling over, in that said place they fell away from each other on either side; and before this sinking was a slope or scree, that went gently up toward the sinking of the wall. Walter looked long and earnestly at this place, and spake nought, till the carle said: "What! thou hast found something before thee to look on. What is it then?"

Quoth Walter: "Some would say that where yonder slopes run together up towards that sinking in the cliff-wall there will be a pass into the country beyond."

The carle smiled and said: "Yea, son; nor, so saying, would they err; for that is the pass into the Bear-country, whereby those huge men come down to chaffer with me."

"Yea," said Walter; and therewith he turned him a little, and scanned the rock-wall, and saw how a few miles from that pass it turned somewhat sharply toward the sea, narrowing the plain much there, till it made a bight, the face whereof looked wellnigh north, instead of west, as did the more part of the wall. And in the midst of that northern-looking bight was a dark place which seemed to Walter like a downright shard in the cliff. For the face of the wall was of a bleak grey, and it was but little furrowed.

So then Walter spake: "Lo, old friend, there yonder is again a place that meseemeth is a pass; whereunto doth that one lead?" And he pointed to it: but the old man did not follow the pointing of his finger, but, looking down on the ground, answered confusedly, and said:

"Maybe: I wot not. I deem that it also leadeth into the Bear- country by a roundabout road. It leadeth into the far land."

Walter answered nought: for a strange thought had come uppermost in his mind, that the carle knew far more than he would say of that pass, and that he himself might be led thereby to find the wondrous three. He caught his breath hardly, and his heart knocked against his ribs; but he refrained from speaking for a long while; but at last he spake in a sharp hard voice, which he scarce knew for his own: "Father, tell me, I adjure thee by God and All-hallows, was it through yonder shard that the road lay, when thou must needs make thy first stride over a dead man?"

The old man spake not a while, then he raised his head, and looked Walter full in the eyes, and said in a steady voice: "NO, IT WAS NOT." Thereafter they sat looking at each other a while; but at last Walter turned his eyes away, but knew not what they beheld nor where he was, but he was as one in a swoon. For he knew full well that the carle had lied to him, and that he might as well have said aye as no, and told him, that it verily was by that same shard that he had stridden over a dead man. Nevertheless he made as little semblance thereof as he might, and presently came to himself, and fell to talking of other matters, that had nought to do with the adventures of the land. But after a while he spake suddenly, and said: "My master, I was thinking of a thing."

"Yea, of what?" said the carle.

"Of this," said Walter; "that here in this land be strange adventures toward, and that if we, and I in especial, were to turn our backs on them, and go home with nothing done, it were pity of our lives: for all will be dull and deedless there. I was deeming it were good if we tried the adventure."

"What adventure?" said the old man, rising up on his elbow and staring sternly on him.

Said Walter: "The wending yonder pass to the eastward, whereby the huge men come to thee from out of the Bear-country; that we might see what should come thereof."

The carle leaned back again, and smiled and shook his head, and spake: "That adventure were speedily proven: death would come of it, my son."

"Yea, and how?" said Walter.

The carle said: "The big men would take thee, and offer thee up as a blood-offering to that woman, who is their Mawmet. And if ye go all, then shall they do the like with all of you."

Said Walter: "Is that sure?"

"Dead sure," said the carle.

"How knowest thou this?" said Walter.

"I have been there myself," said the carle.

"Yea," said Walter, "but thou camest away whole."

"Art thou sure thereof?" said the carle.

"Thou art alive yet, old man," said Walter, "for I have seen thee eat thy meat, which ghosts use not to do." And he laughed.

But the old man answered soberly: "If I escaped, it was by this, that another woman saved me, and not often shall that befall. Nor wholly was I saved; my body escaped forsooth. But where is my soul? Where is my heart, and my life? Young man, I rede thee, try no such adventure; but go home to thy kindred if thou canst. Moreover, wouldst thou fare alone? The others shall hinder thee."

Said Walter: "I am the master; they shall do as I bid them: besides, they will be well pleased to share my goods amongst them if I give them a writing to clear them of all charges which might be brought against them."

"My son! my son!" said the carle, "I pray thee go not to thy death!"

Walter heard him silently, but as if he were persuaded to refrain; and then the old man fell to, and told him much concerning this Bear-folk and their customs, speaking very freely of them; but Walter's ears were scarce open to this talk: whereas he deemed that he should have nought to do with those wild men; and he durst not ask again concerning the country whereto led the pass on the northward.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VII: WALTER COMES TO THE SHARD IN THE ROCK-WALL

As they were in converse thus, they heard the hunters blowing on their horns all together; whereon the old man arose, and said: "I deem by the blowing that the hunt will be over and done, and that they be blowing on their fellows who have gone scatter-meal about the wood. It is now some five hours after noon, and thy men will be getting back with their venison, and will be fainest of the victuals they have caught; therefore will I hasten on before, and get ready fire and water and other matters for the cooking. Wilt thou come with me, young master, or abide thy men here?"

Walter said lightly: "I will rest and abide them here; since I cannot fail to see them hence as they go on their ways to thine house. And it may be well that I be at hand to command them and forbid, and put some order amongst them, for rough playmates they be, some of them, and now all heated with the hunting and the joy of the green earth." Thus he spoke, as if nought were toward save supper and bed; but inwardly hope and fear were contending in him, and again his heart beat so hard, that he deemed that the carle must surely hear it. But the old man took him but according to his outward seeming, and nodded his head, and went away quietly toward his house.

When he had been gone a little, Walter rose up heedfully; he had with him a scrip wherein was some cheese and hard-fish, and a little flasket of wine; a short bow he had with him, and a quiver of arrows; and he was girt with a strong and good sword, and a wood- knife withal. He looked to all this gear that it was nought amiss, and then speedily went down off the mound, and when he was come down, he found that it covered him from men coming out of the wood, if he went straight thence to that shard of the rock-wall where was the pass that led southward.

Now it is no nay that thitherward he turned, and went wisely, lest the carle should make a backward cast, and see him, or lest any straggler of his own folk might happen upon him.

For to say sooth, he deemed that did they wind him, they would be like to let him of his journey. He had noted the bearings of the cliffs nigh the shard, and whereas he could see their heads everywhere except from the depths of the thicket, he was not like to go astray.

He had made no great way ere he heard the horns blowing all together again in one place, and looking thitherward through the leafy boughs (for he was now amidst of a thicket) he saw his men thronging the mound, and had no doubt therefore that they were blowing on him; but being well under cover he heeded it nought, and lying still a little, saw them go down off the mound and go all of them toward the carle's house, still blowing as they went, but not faring scatter- meal. Wherefore it was clear that they were nought troubled about him.

So he went on his way to the shard; and there is nothing to say of his journey till he got before it with the last of the clear day, and entered it straightway. It was in sooth a downright breach or cleft in the rock-wall, and there was no hill or bent leading up to it, nothing but a tumble of stones before it, which was somewhat uneasy going, yet needed nought but labour to overcome it, and when he had got over this, and was in the very pass itself, he found it no ill going: forsooth at first it was little worse than a rough road betwixt two great stony slopes, though a little trickle of water ran down amidst of it. So, though it was so nigh nightfall, yet Walter pressed on, yea, and long after the very night was come. For the moon rose wide and bright a little after nightfall. But at last he had gone so long, and was so wearied, that he deemed it nought but wisdom to rest him, and so lay down on a piece of greensward betwixt the stones, when he had eaten a morsel out of his satchel, and drunk of the water out of the stream. There as he lay, if he had any doubt of peril, his weariness soon made it all one to him, for presently he was sleeping as soundly as any man in Langton on Holm.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VIII: WALTER WENDS THE WASTE

Day was yet young when he awoke: he leapt to his feet, and went down to the stream and drank of its waters, and washed the night off him in a pool thereof, and then set forth on his way again. When he had gone some three hours, the road, which had been going up all the way, but somewhat gently, grew steeper, and the bent on either side lowered, and lowered, till it sank at last altogether, and then was he on a rough mountain-neck with little grass, and no water; save that now and again was a soft place with a flow amidst of it, and such places he must needs fetch a compass about, lest he be mired. He gave himself but little rest, eating what he needs must as he went. The day was bright and calm, so that the sun was never hidden, and he steered by it due south. All that day he went, and found no more change in that huge neck, save that whiles it was more and whiles less steep. A little before nightfall he happened on a shallow pool some twenty yards over; and he deemed it good to rest there, since there was water for his avail, though he might have made somewhat more out of the tail end of the day.

When dawn came again he awoke and arose, nor spent much time over his breakfast; but pressed on all he might; and now he said to himself, that whatsoever other peril were athwart his way, he was out of the danger of the chase of his own folk.

All this while he had seen no four-footed beast, save now and again a hill-fox, and once some outlandish kind of hare; and of fowl but very few: a crow or two, a long-winged hawk, and twice an eagle high up aloft.

Again, the third night, he slept in the stony wilderness, which still led him up and up. Only toward the end of the day, himseemed that it had been less steep for a long while: otherwise nought was changed, on all sides it was nought but the endless neck, wherefrom nought could be seen, but some other part of itself. This fourth night withal he found no water whereby he might rest, so that he awoke parched, and longing to drink just when the dawn was at its coldest.

But on the fifth morrow the ground rose but little, and at last, when he had been going wearily a long while, and now, hard on noontide, his thirst grieved him sorely, he came on a spring welling out from under a high rock, the water wherefrom trickled feebly away. So eager was he to drink, that at first he heeded nought else; but when his thirst was fully quenched his eyes caught sight of the stream which flowed from the well, and he gave a shout, for lo! it was running south. Wherefore it was with a merry heart that he went on, and as he went, came on more streams, all running south or thereabouts. He hastened on all he might, but in despite of all the speed he made, and that he felt the land now going down southward, night overtook him in that same wilderness. Yet when he stayed at last for sheer weariness, he lay down in what he deemed by the moonlight to be a shallow valley, with a ridge at the southern end thereof.

He slept long, and when he awoke the sun was high in the heavens, and never was brighter or clearer morning on the earth than was that. He arose and ate of what little was yet left him, and drank of the water of a stream which he had followed the evening before, and beside which he had laid him down; and then set forth again with no great hope to come on new tidings that day. But yet when he was fairly afoot, himseemed that there was something new in the air which he breathed, that was soft and bore sweet scents home to him; whereas heretofore, and that especially for the last three or four days, it had been harsh and void, like the face of the desert itself.

So on he went, and presently was mounting the ridge aforesaid, and, as oft happens when one climbs a steep place, he kept his eyes on the ground, till he felt he was on the top of the ridge. Then he stopped to take breath, and raised his head and looked, and lo! he was verily on the brow of the great mountain-neck, and down below him was the hanging of the great hill-slopes, which fell down, not slowly, as those he had been those days a-mounting, but speedily enough, though with little of broken places or sheer cliffs. But beyond this last of the desert there was before him a lovely land of wooded hills, green plains, and little valleys, stretching out far and wide, till it ended at last in great blue mountains and white snowy peaks beyond them.

Then for very surprise of joy his spirit wavered, and he felt faint and dizzy, so that he was fain to sit down a while and cover his face with his hands. Presently he came to his sober mind again, and stood up and looked forth keenly, and saw no sign of any dwelling of man. But he said to himself that that might well be because the good and well-grassed land was still so far off, and that he might yet look to find men and their dwellings when he had left the mountain wilderness quite behind him: So therewith he fell to going his ways down the mountain, and lost little time therein, whereas he now had his livelihood to look to.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER IX: WALTER HAPPENETH ON THE FIRST OF THOSE THREE CREATURES

What with one thing, what with another, as his having to turn out of his way for sheer rocks, or for slopes so steep that he might not try the peril of them, and again for bogs impassable, he was fully three days more before he had quite come out of the stony waste, and by that time, though he had never lacked water, his scanty victual was quite done, for all his careful husbandry thereof. But this troubled him little, whereas he looked to find wild fruits here and there and to shoot some small deer, as hare or coney, and make a shift to cook the same, since he had with him flint and fire-steel. Moreover the further he went, the surer he was that he should soon come across a dwelling, so smooth and fair as everything looked before him. And he had scant fear, save that he might happen on men who should enthrall him.

But when he was come down past the first green slopes, he was so worn, that he said to himself that rest was better than meat, so little as he had slept for the last three days; so he laid him down under an ash-tree by a stream-side, nor asked what was o'clock, but had his fill of sleep, and even when he awoke in the fresh morning was little fain of rising, but lay betwixt sleeping and waking for some three hours more; then he arose, and went further down the next green bent, yet somewhat slowly because of his hunger-weakness. And the scent of that fair land came up to him like the odour of one great nosegay.

So he came to where the land was level, and there were many trees, as oak and ash, and sweet-chestnut and wych-elm, and hornbeam and quicken-tree, not growing in a close wood or tangled thicket, but set as though in order on the flowery greensward, even as it might be in a great king's park.

So came he to a big bird-cherry, whereof many boughs hung low down laden with fruit: his belly rejoiced at the sight, and he caught hold of a bough, and fell to plucking and eating. But whiles he was amidst of this, he heard suddenly, close anigh him, a strange noise of roaring and braying, not very great, but exceeding fierce and terrible, and not like to the voice of any beast that he knew. As has been aforesaid, Walter was no faint-heart; but what with the weakness of his travail and hunger, what with the strangeness of his adventure and his loneliness, his spirit failed him; he turned round towards the noise, his knees shook and he trembled: this way and that he looked, and then gave a great cry and tumbled down in a swoon; for close before him, at his very feet, was the dwarf whose image he had seen before, clad in his yellow coat, and grinning up at him from his hideous hairy countenance.

How long he lay there as one dead, he knew not, but when he woke again there was the dwarf sitting on his hams close by him. And when he lifted up his head, the dwarf sent out that fearful harsh voice again; but this time Walter could make out words therein, and knew that the creature spoke and said:

"How now! What art thou? Whence comest? What wantest?"

Walter sat up and said: "I am a man; I hight Golden Walter; I come from Langton; I want victual."

Said the dwarf, writhing his face grievously, and laughing forsooth: "I know it all: I asked thee to see what wise thou wouldst lie. I was sent forth to look for thee; and I have brought thee loathsome bread with me, such as ye aliens must needs eat: take it!"

Therewith he drew a loaf from a satchel which he bore, and thrust it towards Walter, who took it somewhat doubtfully for all his hunger.

The dwarf yelled at him: "Art thou dainty, alien? Wouldst thou have flesh? Well, give me thy bow and an arrow or two, since thou art lazy-sick, and I will get thee a coney or a hare, or a quail maybe. Ah, I forgot; thou art dainty, and wilt not eat flesh as I do, blood and all together, but must needs half burn it in the fire, or mar it with hot water; as they say my Lady does: or as the Wretch, the Thing does; I know that, for I have seen It eating."

"Nay," said Walter, "this sufficeth;" and he fell to eating the bread, which was sweet between his teeth. Then when he had eaten a while, for hunger compelled him, he said to the dwarf: "But what meanest thou by the Wretch and the Thing? And what Lady is thy Lady?"

The creature let out another wordless roar as of furious anger; and then the words came: "It hath a face white and red, like to thine; and hands white as thine, yea, but whiter; and the like it is underneath its raiment, only whiter still: for I have seen It--yes, I have seen It; ah yes and yes and yes."

And therewith his words ran into gibber and yelling, and he rolled about and smote at the grass: but in a while he grew quiet again and sat still, and then fell to laughing horribly again, and then said: "But thou, fool, wilt think It fair if thou fallest into Its hands, and wilt repent it thereafter, as I did. Oh, the mocking and gibes of It, and the tears and shrieks of It; and the knife! What! sayest thou of my Lady?--What Lady? O alien, what other Lady is there? And what shall I tell thee of her? it is like that she made me, as she made the Bear men. But she made not the Wretch, the Thing; and she hateth It sorely, as I do. And some day to come--"

Thereat he brake off and fell to wordless yelling a long while, and thereafter spake all panting: "Now I have told thee overmuch, and O if my Lady come to hear thereof. Now I will go."

And therewith he took out two more loaves from his wallet, and tossed them to Walter, and so turned and went his ways; whiles walking upright, as Walter had seen his image on the quay of Langton; whiles bounding and rolling like a ball thrown by a lad; whiles scuttling along on all-fours like an evil beast, and ever and anon giving forth that harsh and evil cry.

Walter sat a while after he was out of sight, so stricken with horror and loathing and a fear of he knew not what, that he might not move. Then he plucked up a heart, and looked to his weapons and put the other loaves into his scrip.

Then he arose and went his ways wondering, yea and dreading, what kind of creature he should next fall in with. For soothly it seemed to him that it would be worse than death if they were all such as this one; and that if it were so, he must needs slay and be slain.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER X: WALTER HAPPENETH ON ANOTHER CREATURE IN THE STRANGE LAND

But as he went on through the fair and sweet land so bright and sun-litten, and he now rested and fed, the horror and fear ran off from him, and he wandered on merrily, neither did aught befall him save the coming of night, when he laid him down under a great spreading oak with his drawn sword ready to hand, and fell asleep at once, and woke not till the sun was high.

Then he arose and went on his way again; and the land was no worser than yesterday; but even better, it might be; the greensward more flowery, the oaks and chestnuts greater. Deer of diverse kinds he saw, and might easily have got his meat thereof; but he meddled not with them since he had his bread, and was timorous of lighting a fire. Withal he doubted little of having some entertainment; and that, might be, nought evil; since even that fearful dwarf had been courteous to him after his kind, and had done him good and not harm. But of the happening on the Wretch and the Thing, whereof the dwarf spake, he was yet somewhat afeard.

After he had gone a while and whenas the summer morn was at its brightest, he saw a little way ahead a grey rock rising up from amidst of a ring of oak-trees; so he turned thither straightway; for in this plain-land he had seen no rocks heretofore; and as he went he saw that there was a fountain gushing out from under the rock, which ran thence in a fair little stream. And when he had the rock and the fountain and the stream clear before him, lo! a child of Adam sitting beside the fountain under the shadow of the rock. He drew a little nigher, and then he saw that it was a woman, clad in green like the sward whereon she lay. She was playing with the welling out of the water, and she had trussed up her sleeves to the shoulder that she might thrust her bare arms therein. Her shoes of black leather lay on the grass beside her, and her feet and legs yet shone with the brook.

Belike amidst the splashing and clatter of the water she did not hear him drawing nigh, so that he was close to her before she lifted up her face and saw him, and he beheld her, that it was the maiden of the thrice-seen pageant. She reddened when she saw him, and hastily covered up her legs with her gown-skirt, and drew down the sleeves over her arms, but otherwise stirred not. As for him, he stood still, striving to speak to her; but no word might he bring out, and his heart beat sorely.

But the maiden spake to him in a clear sweet voice, wherein was now no trouble: "Thou art an alien, art thou not? For I have not seen thee before."

"Yea," he said, "I am an alien; wilt thou be good to me?"

She said: "And why not? I was afraid at first, for I thought it had been the King's Son. I looked to see none other; for of goodly men he has been the only one here in the land this long while, till thy coming."

He said: "Didst thou look for my coming at about this time?"

"O nay," she said; "how might I?"

Said Walter: "I wot not; but the other man seemed to be looking for me, and knew of me, and he brought me bread to eat."

She looked on him anxiously, and grew somewhat pale, as she said: "What other one?"

Now Walter did not know what the dwarf might be to her, fellow- servant or what not, so he would not show his loathing of him; but answered wisely: "The little man in the yellow raiment."

But when she heard that word, she went suddenly very pale, and leaned her head aback, and beat the air with her hands; but said presently in a faint voice: "I pray thee talk not of that one while I am by, nor even think of him, if thou mayest forbear."

He spake not, and she was a little while before she came to herself again; then she opened her eyes, and looked upon Walter and smiled kindly on him, as though to ask his pardon for having scared him. Then she rose up in her place, and stood before him; and they were nigh together, for the stream betwixt them was little.

But he still looked anxiously upon her and said: "Have I hurt thee? I pray thy pardon."

She looked on him more sweetly still, and said: "O nay; thou wouldst not hurt me, thou!"

Then she blushed very red, and he in like wise; but afterwards she turned pale, and laid a hand on her breast, and Walter cried out hastily: "O me! I have hurt thee again. Wherein have I done amiss?"

"In nought, in nought," she said; "but I am troubled, I wot not wherefore; some thought hath taken hold of me, and I know it not. Mayhappen in a little while I shall know what troubles me. Now I bid thee depart from me a little, and I will abide here; and when thou comest back, it will either be that I have found it out or not; and in either case I will tell thee."

She spoke earnestly to him; but he said: "How long shall I abide away?"

Her face was troubled as she answered him: "For no long while."

He smiled on her and turned away, and went a space to the other side of the oak-trees, whence she was still within eyeshot. There he abode until the time seemed long to him; but he schooled himself and forbore; for he said: Lest she send me away again. So he abided until again the time seemed long to him, and she called not to him: but once again he forbore to go; then at last he arose, and his heart beat and he trembled, and he walked back again speedily, and came to the maiden, who was still standing by the rock of the spring, her arms hanging down, her eyes downcast. She looked up at him as he drew nigh, and her face changed with eagerness as she said: "I am glad thou art come back, though it be no long while since thy departure" (sooth to say it was scarce half an hour in all). "Nevertheless I have been thinking many things, and thereof will I now tell thee."

He said: "Maiden, there is a river betwixt us, though it be no big one. Shall I not stride over, and come to thee, that we may sit down together side by side on the green grass?"

"Nay," she said, "not yet; tarry a while till I have told thee of matters. I must now tell thee of my thoughts in order."

Her colour went and came now, and she plaited the folds of her gown with restless fingers. At last she said: "Now the first thing is this; that though thou hast seen me first only within this hour, thou hast set thine heart upon me to have me for thy speech-friend and thy darling. And if this be not so, then is all my speech, yea and all my hope, come to an end at once."

"O yea!" said Walter, "even so it is: but how thou hast found this out I wot not; since now for the first time I say it, that thou art indeed my love, and my dear and my darling."

"Hush," she said, "hush! lest the wood have ears, and thy speech is loud: abide, and I shall tell thee how I know it. Whether this thy love shall outlast the first time that thou holdest my body in thine arms, I wot not, nor dost thou. But sore is my hope that it may be so; for I also, though it be but scarce an hour since I set eyes on thee, have cast mine eyes on thee to have thee for my love and my darling, and my speech-friend. And this is how I wot that thou lovest me, my friend. Now is all this dear and joyful, and overflows my heart with sweetness. But now must I tell thee of the fear and the evil which lieth behind it."

Then Walter stretched out his hands to her, and cried out: "Yea, yea! But whatever evil entangle us, now we both know these two things, to wit, that thou lovest me, and I thee, wilt thou not come hither, that I may cast mine arms about thee, and kiss thee, if not thy kind lips or thy friendly face at all, yet at least thy dear hand: yea, that I may touch thy body in some wise?"

She looked on him steadily, and said softly: "Nay, this above all things must not be; and that it may not be is a part of the evil which entangles us. But hearken, friend, once again I tell thee that thy voice is over loud in this wilderness fruitful of evil. Now I have told thee, indeed, of two things whereof we both wot; but next I must needs tell thee of things whereof I wot, and thou wottest not. Yet this were better, that thou pledge thy word not to touch so much as one of my hands, and that we go together a little way hence away from these tumbled stones, and sit down upon the open greensward; whereas here is cover if there be spying abroad."

Again, as she spoke, she turned very pale; but Walter said: "Since it must be so, I pledge thee my word to thee as I love thee."

And therewith she knelt down, and did on her foot-gear, and then sprang lightly over the rivulet; and then the twain of them went side by side some half a furlong thence, and sat down, shadowed by the boughs of a slim quicken-tree growing up out of the greensward, whereon for a good space around was neither bush nor brake.

There began the maiden to talk soberly, and said: "This is what I must needs say to thee now, that thou art come into a land perilous for any one that loveth aught of good; from which, forsooth, I were fain that thou wert gotten away safely, even though I should die of longing for thee. As for myself, my peril is, in a measure, less than thine; I mean the peril of death. But lo, thou, this iron on my foot is token that I am a thrall, and thou knowest in what wise thralls must pay for transgressions. Furthermore, of what I am, and how I came hither, time would fail me to tell; but somewhile, maybe, I shall tell thee. I serve an evil mistress, of whom I may say that scarce I wot if she be a woman or not; but by some creatures is she accounted for a god, and as a god is heried; and surely never god was crueller nor colder than she. Me she hateth sorely; yet if she hated me little or nought, small were the gain to me if it were her pleasure to deal hardly by me. But as things now are, and are like to be, it would not be for her pleasure, but for her pain and loss, to make an end of me, therefore, as I said e'en now, my mere life is not in peril with her; unless, perchance, some sudden passion get the better of her, and she slay me, and repent of it thereafter. For so it is, that if it be the least evil of her conditions that she is wanton, at least wanton she is to the letter. Many a time hath she cast the net for the catching of some goodly young man; and her latest prey (save it be thou) is the young man whom I named, when first I saw thee, by the name of the King's Son. He is with us yet, and I fear him; for of late hath he wearied of her, though it is but plain truth to say of her, that she is the wonder of all Beauties of the World. He hath wearied of her, I say, and hath cast his eyes upon me, and if I were heedless, he would betray me to the uttermost of the wrath of my mistress. For needs must I say of him, though he be a goodly man, and now fallen into thralldom, that he hath no bowels of compassion; but is a dastard, who for an hour's pleasure would undo me, and thereafter would stand by smiling and taking my mistress's pardon with good cheer, while for me would be no pardon. Seest thou, therefore, how it is with me between these two cruel fools? And moreover there are others of whom I will not even speak to thee."

And therewith she put her hands before her face, and wept, and murmured: "Who shall deliver me from this death in life?"

But Walter cried out: "For what else am I come hither, I, I?"

And it was a near thing that he did not take her in his arms, but he remembered his pledged word, and drew aback from her in terror, whereas he had an inkling of why she would not suffer it; and he wept with her.

But suddenly the Maid left weeping, and said in a changed voice: "Friend, whereas thou speakest of delivering me, it is more like that I shall deliver thee. And now I pray thy pardon for thus grieving thee with my grief, and that more especially because thou mayst not solace thy grief with kisses and caresses; but so it was, that for once I was smitten by the thought of the anguish of this land, and the joy of all the world besides."

Therewith she caught her breath in a half-sob, but refrained her and went on: "Now dear friend and darling, take good heed to all that I shall say to thee, whereas thou must do after the teaching of my words. And first, I deem by the monster having met thee at the gates of the land, and refreshed thee, that the Mistress hath looked for thy coming; nay, by thy coming hither at all, that she hath cast her net and caught thee. Hast thou noted aught that might seem to make this more like?"

Said Walter: "Three times in full daylight have I seen go past me the images of the monster and thee and a glorious lady, even as if ye were alive."

And therewith he told her in few words how it had gone with him since that day on the quay at Langton.

She said: "Then it is no longer perhaps, but certain, that thou art her latest catch; and even so I deemed from the first: and, dear friend, this is why I have not suffered thee to kiss or caress me, so sore as I longed for thee. For the Mistress will have thee for her only, and hath lured thee hither for nought else; and she is wise in wizardry (even as some deal am I), and wert thou to touch me with hand or mouth on my naked flesh, yea, or were it even my raiment, then would she scent the savour of thy love upon me, and then, though it may be she would spare thee, she would not spare me."

Then was she silent a little, and seemed very downcast, and Walter held his peace from grief and confusion and helplessness; for of wizardry he knew nought.

At last the Maid spake again, and said: "Nevertheless we will not die redeless. Now thou must look to this, that from henceforward it is thee, and not the King's Son, whom she desireth, and that so much the more that she hath not set eyes on thee. Remember this, whatsoever her seeming may be to thee. Now, therefore, shall the King's Son be free, though he know it not, to cast his love on whomso he will; and, in a way, I also shall be free to yeasay him. Though, forsooth, so fulfilled is she with malice and spite, that even then she may turn round on me to punish me for doing that which she would have me do. Now let me think of it."

Then was she silent a good while, and spoke at last: "Yea, all things are perilous, and a perilous rede I have thought of, whereof I will not tell thee as yet; so waste not the short while by asking me. At least the worst will be no worse than what shall come if we strive not against it. And now, my friend, amongst perils it is growing more and more perilous that we twain should be longer together. But I would say one thing yet; and maybe another thereafter. Thou hast cast thy love upon one who will be true to thee, whatsoever may befall; yet is she a guileful creature, and might not help it her life long, and now for thy very sake must needs be more guileful now than ever before. And as for me, the guileful, my love have I cast upon a lovely man, and one true and simple, and a stout-heart; but at such a pinch is he, that if he withstand all temptation, his withstanding may belike undo both him and me. Therefore swear we both of us, that by both of us shall all guile and all falling away be forgiven on the day when we shall be free to love each the other as our hearts will."

Walter cried out: "O love, I swear it indeed! thou art my Hallow, and I will swear it as on the relics of a Hallow; on thy hands and thy feet I swear it."

The words seemed to her a dear caress; and she laughed, and blushed, and looked full kindly on him; and then her face grew solemn, and she said: "On thy life I swear it!"

Then she said: "Now is there nought for thee to do but to go hence straight to the Golden House, which is my Mistress's house, and the only house in this land (save one which I may not see), and lieth southward no long way. How she will deal with thee, I wot not; but all I have said of her and thee and the King's Son is true. Therefore I say to thee, be wary and cold at heart, whatsoever outward semblance thou mayst make. If thou have to yield thee to her, then yield rather late than early, so as to gain time. Yet not so late as to seem shamed in yielding for fear's sake. Hold fast to thy life, my friend, for in warding that, thou wardest me from grief without remedy. Thou wilt see me ere long; it may be to-morrow, it may be some days hence. But forget not, that what I may do, that I am doing. Take heed also that thou pay no more heed to me, or rather less, than if thou wert meeting a maiden of no account in the streets of thine own town. O my love! barren is this first farewell, as was our first meeting; but surely shall there be another meeting better than the first, and the last farewell may be long and long yet."

Therewith she stood up, and he knelt before her a little while without any word, and then arose and went his ways; but when he had gone a space he turned about, and saw her still standing in the same place; she stayed a moment when she saw him turn, and then herself turned about.

So he departed through the fair land, and his heart was full with hope and fear as he went.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XI: WALTER HAPPENETH ON THE MISTRESS

It was but a little after noon when Walter left the Maid behind: he steered south by the sun, as the Maid had bidden him, and went swiftly; for, as a good knight wending to battle, the time seemed long to him till he should meet the foe.

So an hour before sunset he saw something white and gay gleaming through the boles of the oak-trees, and presently there was clear before him a most goodly house builded of white marble, carved all about with knots and imagery, and the carven folk were all painted of their lively colours, whether it were their raiment or their flesh, and the housings wherein they stood all done with gold and fair hues. Gay were the windows of the house; and there was a pillared porch before the great door, with images betwixt the pillars both of men and beasts: and when Walter looked up to the roof of the house, he saw that it gleamed and shone; for all the tiles were of yellow metal, which he deemed to be of very gold.

All this he saw as he went, and tarried not to gaze upon it; for he said, Belike there will be time for me to look on all this before I die. But he said also, that, though the house was not of the greatest, it was beyond compare of all houses of the world.

Now he entered it by the porch, and came into a hall many-pillared, and vaulted over, the walls painted with gold and ultramarine, the floor dark, and spangled with many colours, and the windows glazed with knots and pictures. Midmost thereof was a fountain of gold, whence the water ran two ways in gold-lined runnels, spanned twice with little bridges of silver. Long was that hall, and now not very light, so that Walter was come past the fountain before he saw any folk therein: then he looked up toward the high-seat, and himseemed that a great light shone thence, and dazzled his eyes; and he went on a little way, and then fell on his knees; for there before him on the high-seat sat that wondrous Lady, whose lively image had been shown to him thrice before; and she was clad in gold and jewels, as he had erst seen her. But now she was not alone; for by her side sat a young man, goodly enough, so far as Walter might see him, and most richly clad, with a jewelled sword by his side, and a chaplet of gems on his head. They held each other by the hand, and seemed to be in dear converse together; but they spake softly, so that Walter might not hear what they said, till at last the man spake aloud to the Lady: "Seest thou not that there is a man in the hall?"

"Yea," she said, "I see him yonder, kneeling on his knees; let him come nigher and give some account of himself."

So Walter stood up and drew nigh, and stood there, all shamefaced and confused, looking on those twain, and wondering at the beauty of the Lady. As for the man, who was slim, and black-haired, and straight-featured, for all his goodliness Walter accounted him little, and nowise deemed him to look chieftain-like.

Now the Lady spake not to Walter any more than erst; but at last the man said: "Why doest thou not kneel as thou didst erewhile?"

Walter was on the point of giving him back a fierce answer; but the Lady spake and said: "Nay, friend, it matters not whether he kneel or stand; but he may say, if he will, what he would have of me, and wherefore he is come hither."

Then spake Walter, for as wroth and ashamed as he was: "Lady, I have strayed into this land, and have come to thine house as I suppose, and if I be not welcome, I may well depart straightway, and seek a way out of thy land, if thou wouldst drive me thence, as well as out of thine house."

Thereat the Lady turned and looked on him, and when her eyes met his, he felt a pang of fear and desire mingled shoot through his heart. This time she spoke to him; but coldly, without either wrath or any thought of him: "Newcomer," she said, "I have not bidden thee hither; but here mayst thou abide a while if thou wilt; nevertheless, take heed that here is no King's Court. There is, forsooth, a folk that serveth me (or, it may be, more than one), of whom thou wert best to know nought. Of others I have but two servants, whom thou wilt see; and the one is a strange creature, who should scare thee or scathe thee with a good will, but of a good will shall serve nought save me; the other is a woman, a thrall, of little avail, save that, being compelled, she will work woman's service for me, but whom none else shall compel . . . Yea, but what is all this to thee; or to me that I should tell it to thee? I will not drive thee away; but if thine entertainment please thee not, make no plaint thereof to me, but depart at thy will. Now is this talk betwixt us overlong, since, as thou seest, I and this King's Son are in converse together. Art thou a King's Son?"

"Nay, Lady," said Walter, "I am but of the sons of the merchants."

"It matters not," she said; "go thy ways into one of the chambers."

And straightway she fell a-talking to the man who sat beside her concerning the singing of the birds beneath her window in the morning; and of how she had bathed her that day in a pool of the woodlands, when she had been heated with hunting, and so forth; and all as if there had been none there save her and the King's Son.

But Walter departed all ashamed, as though he had been a poor man thrust away from a rich kinsman's door; and he said to himself that this woman was hateful, and nought love-worthy, and that she was little like to tempt him, despite all the fairness of her body.

No one else he saw in the house that even; he found meat and drink duly served on a fair table, and thereafter he came on a goodly bed, and all things needful, but no child of Adam to do him service, or bid him welcome or warning. Nevertheless he ate, and drank, and slept, and put off thought of all these things till the morrow, all the more as he hoped to see the kind maiden some time betwixt sunrise and sunset on that new day.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XII: THE WEARING OF FOUR DAYS IN THE WOOD BEYOND THE WORLD

He arose betimes, but found no one to greet him, neither was there any sound of folk moving within the fair house; so he but broke his fast, and then went forth and wandered amongst the trees, till he found him a stream to bathe in, and after he had washed the night off him he lay down under a tree thereby for a while, but soon turned back toward the house, lest perchance the Maid should come thither and he should miss her.

It should be said that half a bow-shot from the house on that side (i.e. due north thereof) was a little hazel-brake, and round about it the trees were smaller of kind than the oaks and chestnuts he had passed through before, being mostly of birch and quicken-beam and young ash, with small wood betwixt them; so now he passed through the thicket, and, coming to the edge thereof, beheld the Lady and the King's Son walking together hand in hand, full lovingly by seeming.

He deemed it unmeet to draw back and hide him, so he went forth past them toward the house. The King's Son scowled on him as he passed, but the Lady, over whose beauteous face flickered the joyous morning smiles, took no more heed of him than if he had been one of the trees of the wood. But she had been so high and disdainful with him the evening before, that he thought little of that. The twain went on, skirting the hazel-copse, and he could not choose but turn his eyes on them, so sorely did the Lady's beauty draw them. Then befell another thing; for behind them the boughs of the hazels parted, and there stood that little evil thing, he or another of his kind; for he was quite unclad, save by his fell of yellowy-brown hair, and that he was girt with a leathern girdle, wherein was stuck an ugly two-edged knife: he stood upright a moment, and cast his eyes at Walter and grinned, but not as if he knew him; and scarce could Walter say whether it were the one he had seen, or another: then he cast himself down on his belly, and fell to creeping through the long grass like a serpent, following the footsteps of the Lady and her lover; and now, as he crept, Walter deemed, in his loathing, that the creature was liker to a ferret than aught else. He crept on marvellous swiftly, and was soon clean out of sight. But Walter stood staring after him for a while, and then lay down by the copse- side, that he might watch the house and the entry thereof; for he thought, now perchance presently will the kind maiden come hither to comfort me with a word or two. But hour passed by hour, and still she came not; and still he lay there, and thought of the Maid, and longed for her kindness and wisdom, till he could not refrain his tears, and wept for the lack of her. Then he arose, and went and sat in the porch, and was very downcast of mood.

But as he sat there, back comes the Lady again, the King's Son leading her by the hand; they entered the porch, and she passed by him so close that the odour of her raiment filled all the air about him, and the sleekness of her side nigh touched him, so that he could not fail to note that her garments were somewhat disarrayed, and that she kept her right hand (for her left the King's Son held) to her bosom to hold the cloth together there, whereas the rich raiment had been torn off from her right shoulder. As they passed by him, the King's Son once more scowled on him, wordless, but even more fiercely than before; and again the Lady heeded him nought.

After they had gone on a while, he entered the hall, and found it empty from end to end, and no sound in it save the tinkling of the fountain; but there was victual set on the board. He ate and drank thereof to keep life lusty within him, and then went out again to the wood-side to watch and to long; and the time hung heavy on his hands because of the lack of the fair Maiden.

He was of mind not to go into the house to his rest that night, but to sleep under the boughs of the forest. But a little after sunset he saw a bright-clad image moving amidst the carven images of the porch, and the King's Son came forth and went straight to him, and said: "Thou art to enter the house, and go into thy chamber forthwith, and by no means to go forth of it betwixt sunset and sunrise. My Lady will not away with thy prowling round the house in the night-tide."

Therewith he turned away, and went into the house again; and Walter followed him soberly, remembering how the Maid had bidden him forbear. So he went to his chamber, and slept.

But amidst of the night he awoke and deemed that he heard a voice not far off, so he crept out of his bed and peered around, lest, perchance, the Maid had come to speak with him; but his chamber was dusk and empty: then he went to the window and looked out, and saw the moon shining bright and white upon the greensward. And lo! the Lady walking with the King's Son, and he clad in thin and wanton raiment, but she in nought else save what God had given her of long, crispy yellow hair. Then was Walter ashamed to look on her, seeing that there was a man with her, and gat him back to his bed; but yet a long while ere he slept again he had the image before his eyes of the fair woman on the dewy moonlit grass.

The next day matters went much the same way, and the next also, save that his sorrow was increased, and he sickened sorely of hope deferred. On the fourth day also the forenoon wore as erst; but in the heat of the afternoon Walter sought to the hazel-copse, and laid him down there hard by a little clearing thereof, and slept from very weariness of grief. There, after a while, he woke with words still hanging in his ears, and he knew at once that it was they twain talking together.

The King's Son had just done his say, and now it was the Lady beginning in her honey-sweet voice, low but strong, wherein even was a little of huskiness; she said: "Otto, belike it were well to have a little patience, till we find out what the man is, and whence he cometh; it will always be easy to rid us of him; it is but a word to our Dwarf-king, and it will be done in a few minutes."

"Patience!" said the King's Son, angrily; "I wot not how to have patience with him; for I can see of him that he is rude and violent and headstrong, and a low-born wily one. Forsooth, he had patience enough with me the other even, when I rated him in, like the dog that he is, and he had no manhood to say one word to me. Soothly, as he followed after me, I had a mind to turn about and deal him a buffet on the face, to see if I could but draw one angry word from him."

The Lady laughed, and said: "Well, Otto, I know not; that which thou deemest dastardy in him may be but prudence and wisdom, and he an alien, far from his friends and nigh to his foes. Perchance we shall yet try him what he is. Meanwhile, I rede thee try him not with buffets, save he be weaponless and with bounden hands; or else I deem that but a little while shalt thou be fain of thy blow."

Now when Walter heard her words and the voice wherein they were said, he might not forbear being stirred by them, and to him, all lonely there, they seemed friendly.

But he lay still, and the King's Son answered the Lady and said: "I know not what is in thine heart concerning this runagate, that thou shouldst bemock me with his valiancy, whereof thou knowest nought. If thou deem me unworthy of thee, send me back safe to my father's country; I may look to have worship there; yea, and the love of fair women belike."

Therewith it seemed as if he had put forth his hand to the Lady to caress her, for she said: "Nay, lay not thine hand on my shoulder, for to-day and now it is not the hand of love, but of pride and folly, and would-be mastery. Nay, neither shalt thou rise up and leave me until thy mood is softer and kinder to me."

Then was there silence betwixt them a while, and thereafter the King's Son spake in a wheedling voice: "My goddess, I pray thee pardon me! But canst thou wonder that I fear thy wearying of me, and am therefore peevish and jealous? thou so far above the Queens of the World, and I a poor youth that without thee were nothing!"

She answered nought, and he went on again: "Was it not so, O goddess, that this man of the sons of the merchants was little heedful of thee, and thy loveliness and thy majesty?"

She laughed and said: "Maybe he deemed not that he had much to gain of us, seeing thee sitting by our side, and whereas we spake to him coldly and sternly and disdainfully. Withal, the poor youth was dazzled and shamefaced before us; that we could see in the eyes and the mien of him."

Now this she spoke so kindly and sweetly, that again was Walter all stirred thereat; and it came into his mind that it might be she knew he was anigh and hearing her, and that she spake as much for him as for the King's Son: but that one answered: "Lady, didst thou not see somewhat else in his eyes, to wit, that they had but of late looked on some fair woman other than thee? As for me, I deem it not so unlike that on the way to thine hall he may have fallen in with thy Maid."

He spoke in a faltering voice, as if shrinking from some storm that might come. And forsooth the Lady's voice was changed as she answered, though there was no outward heat in it; rather it was sharp and eager and cold at once. She said: "Yea, that is not ill thought of; but we may not always keep our thrall in mind. If it be so as thou deemest, we shall come to know it most like when we next fall in with her; or if she hath been shy this time, then shall she pay the heavier for it; for we will question her by the Fountain in the Hall as to what betid by the Fountain of the Rock."

Spake the King's Son, faltering yet more: "Lady, were it not better to question the man himself? the Maid is stout-hearted, and will not be speedily quelled into a true tale; whereas the man I deem of no account."

"No, no," said the Lady sharply, "it shall not be."

Then was she silent a while; and then she said: "How if the man should prove to be our master?"

"Nay, our Lady," said the King's Son, "thou art jesting with me; thou and thy might and thy wisdom, and all that thy wisdom may command, to be over-mastered by a gangrel churl!"

"But how if I will not have it command, King's Son?" said the Lady. "I tell thee I know thine heart, but thou knowest not mine. But be at peace! For since thou hast prayed for this woman--nay, not with thy words, I wot, but with thy trembling hands, and thine anxious eyes, and knitted brow--I say, since thou hast prayed for her so earnestly, she shall escape this time. But whether it will be to her gain in the long run, I misdoubt me. See thou to that, Otto! thou who hast held me in thine arms so oft. And now thou mayest depart if thou wilt."

It seemed to Walter as if the King's Son were dumbfoundered at her words: he answered nought, and presently he rose from the ground, and went his ways slowly toward the house. The Lady lay there a little while, and then went her ways also; but turned away from the house toward the wood at the other end thereof, whereby Walter had first come thither.

As for Walter, he was confused in mind and shaken in spirit; and withal he seemed to see guile and cruel deeds under the talk of those two, and waxed wrathful thereat. Yet he said to himself, that nought might he do, but was as one bound hand and foot, till he had seen the Maid again.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XIII: NOW IS THE HUNT UP

Next morning was he up betimes, but he was cast down and heavy of heart, not looking for aught else to betide than had betid those last four days. But otherwise it fell out; for when he came down into the hall, there was the lady sitting on the high-seat all alone, clad but in a coat of white linen; and she turned her head when she heard his footsteps, and looked on him, and greeted him, and said: "Come hither, guest."

So he went and stood before her, and she said: "Though as yet thou hast had no welcome here, and no honour, it hath not entered into thine heart to flee from us; and to say sooth, that is well for thee, for flee away from our hand thou mightest not, nor mightest thou depart without our furtherance. But for this we can thee thank, that thou hast abided here our bidding and eaten thine heart through the heavy wearing of four days, and made no plaint. Yet I cannot deem thee a dastard; thou so well knit and shapely of body, so clear-eyed and bold of visage. Wherefore now I ask thee, art thou willing to do me service, thereby to earn thy guesting?"

Walter answered her, somewhat faltering at first, for he was astonished at the change which had come over her; for now she spoke to him in friendly wise, though indeed as a great lady would speak to a young man ready to serve her in all honour. Said he: "Lady, I can thank thee humbly and heartily in that thou biddest me do thee service; for these days past I have loathed the emptiness of the hours, and nought better could I ask for than to serve so glorious a Mistress in all honour."

She frowned somewhat, and said: "Thou shalt not call me Mistress; there is but one who so calleth me, that is my thrall; and thou art none such. Thou shalt call me Lady, and I shall be well pleased that thou be my squire, and for this present thou shalt serve me in the hunting. So get thy gear; take thy bow and arrows, and gird thee to thy sword. For in this fair land may one find beasts more perilous than be buck or hart. I go now to array me; we will depart while the day is yet young; for so make we the summer day the fairest."

He made obeisance to her, and she arose and went to her chamber, and Walter dight himself, and then abode her in the porch; and in less than an hour she came out of the hall, and Walter's heart beat when he saw that the Maid followed her hard at heel, and scarce might he school his eyes not to gaze over-eagerly at his dear friend. She was clad even as she was before, and was changed in no wise, save that love troubled her face when she first beheld him, and she had much ado to master it: howbeit the Mistress heeded not the trouble of her, or made no semblance of heeding it, till the Maiden's face was all according to its wont.

But this Walter found strange, that after all that disdain of the Maid's thralldom which he had heard of the Mistress, and after all the threats against her, now was the Mistress become mild and debonaire to her, as a good lady to her good maiden. When Walter bowed the knee to her, she turned unto the Maid, and said: "Look thou, my Maid, at this fair new Squire that I have gotten! Will not he be valiant in the greenwood? And see whether he be well shapen or not. Doth he not touch thine heart, when thou thinkest of all the woe, and fear, and trouble of the World beyond the Wood, which he hath escaped, to dwell in this little land peaceably, and well- beloved both by the Mistress and the Maid? And thou, my Squire, look a little at this fair slim Maiden, and say if she pleaseth thee not: didst thou deem that we had any thing so fair in this lonely place?"

Frank and kind was the smile on her radiant visage, nor did she seem to note any whit the trouble on Walter's face, nor how he strove to keep his eyes from the Maid. As for her, she had so wholly mastered her countenance, that belike she used her face guilefully, for she stood as one humble but happy, with a smile on her face, blushing, and with her head hung down as if shamefaced before a goodly young man, a stranger.

But the Lady looked upon her kindly and said: "Come hither, child, and fear not this frank and free young man, who belike feareth thee a little, and full certainly feareth me; and yet only after the manner of men."

And therewith she took the Maid by the hand and drew her to her, and pressed her to her bosom, and kissed her cheeks and her lips, and undid the lacing of her gown and bared a shoulder of her, and swept away her skirt from her feet; and then turned to Walter and said: "Lo thou, Squire! is not this a lovely thing to have grown up amongst our rough oak-boles? What! art thou looking at the iron ring there? It is nought, save a token that she is mine, and that I may not be without her."

Then she took the Maid by the shoulders and turned her about as in sport, and said: "Go thou now, and bring hither the good grey ones; for needs must we bring home some venison to-day, whereas this stout warrior may not feed on nought save manchets and honey."

So the Maid went her way, taking care, as Walter deemed, to give no side glance to him. But he stood there shamefaced, so confused with all this openhearted kindness of the great Lady and with the fresh sight of the darling beauty of the Maid, that he went nigh to thinking that all he had heard since he had come to the porch of the house that first time was but a dream of evil.

But while he stood pondering these matters, and staring before him as one mazed, the Lady laughed out in his face, and touched him on the arm and said: "Ah, our Squire, is it so that now thou hast seen my Maid thou wouldst with a good will abide behind to talk with her? But call to mind thy word pledged to me e'en now! And moreover I tell thee this for thy behoof now she is out of ear-shot, that I will above all things take thee away to-day: for there be other eyes, and they nought uncomely, that look at whiles on my fair- ankled thrall; and who knows but the swords might be out if I take not the better heed, and give thee not every whit of thy will."

As she spoke and moved forward, he turned a little, so that now the edge of that hazel-coppice was within his eye-shot, and he deemed that once more he saw the yellow-brown evil thing crawling forth from the thicket; then, turning suddenly on the Lady, he met her eyes, and seemed in one moment of time to find a far other look in them than that of frankness and kindness; though in a flash they changed back again, and she said merrily and sweetly: "So, so, Sir Squire, now art thou awake again, and mayest for a little while look on me."

Now it came into his head, with that look of hers, all that might befall him and the Maid if he mastered not his passion, nor did what he might to dissemble; so he bent the knee to her, and spoke boldly to her in her own vein, and said: "Nay, most gracious of ladies, never would I abide behind to-day since thou farest afield. But if my speech be hampered, or mine eyes stray, is it not because my mind is confused by thy beauty, and the honey of kind words which floweth from thy mouth?"

She laughed outright at his word, but not disdainfully, and said: "This is well spoken, Squire, and even what a squire should say to his liege lady, when the sun is up on a fair morning, and she and he and all the world are glad."

She stood quite near him as she spoke, her hand was on his shoulder, and her eyes shone and sparkled. Sooth to say, that excusing of his confusion was like enough in seeming to the truth; for sure never creature was fashioned fairer than she: clad she was for the greenwood as the hunting-goddess of the Gentiles, with her green gown gathered unto her girdle, and sandals on her feet; a bow in her hand and a quiver at her back: she was taller and bigger of fashion than the dear Maiden, whiter of flesh, and more glorious, and brighter of hair; as a flower of flowers for fairness and fragrance.

She said: "Thou art verily a fair squire before the hunt is up, and if thou be as good in the hunting, all will be better than well, and the guest will be welcome. But lo! here cometh our Maid with the good grey ones. Go meet her, and we will tarry no longer than for thy taking the leash in hand."

So Walter looked, and saw the Maid coming with two couple of great hounds in the leash straining against her as she came along. He ran lightly to meet her, wondering if he should have a look, or a half- whisper from her; but she let him take the white thongs from her hand, with the same half-smile of shamefacedness still set on her face, and, going past him, came softly up to the Lady, swaying like a willow-branch in the wind, and stood before her, with her arms hanging down by her sides. Then the Lady turned to her, and said: "Look to thyself, our Maid, while we are away. This fair young man thou needest not to fear indeed, for he is good and leal; but what thou shalt do with the King's Son I wot not. He is a hot lover forsooth, but a hard man; and whiles evil is his mood, and perilous both to thee and me. And if thou do his will, it shall be ill for thee; and if thou do it not, take heed of him, and let me, and me only, come between his wrath and thee. I may do somewhat for thee. Even yesterday he was instant with me to have thee chastised after the manner of thralls; but I bade him keep silence of such words, and jeered him and mocked him, till he went away from me peevish and in anger. So look to it that thou fall not into any trap of his contrivance."

Then the Maid cast herself at the Mistress's feet, and kissed and embraced them; and as she rose up, the Lady laid her hand lightly on her head, and then, turning to Walter, cried out: "Now, Squire, let us leave all these troubles and wiles and desires behind us, and flit through the merry greenwood like the Gentiles of old days."

And therewith she drew up the laps of her gown till the whiteness of her knees was seen, and set off swiftly toward the wood that lay south of the house, and Walter followed, marvelling at her goodliness; nor durst he cast a look backward to the Maiden, for he knew that she desired him, and it was her only that he looked to for his deliverance from this house of guile and lies.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XIV: THE HUNTING OF THE HART

As they went, they found a change in the land, which grew emptier of big and wide-spreading trees, and more beset with thickets. From one of these they roused a hart, and Walter let slip his hounds thereafter and he and the Lady followed running. Exceeding swift was she, and well-breathed withal, so that Walter wondered at her; and eager she was in the chase as the very hounds, heeding nothing the scratching of briars or the whipping of stiff twigs as she sped on. But for all their eager hunting, the quarry outran both dogs and folk, and gat him into a great thicket, amidmost whereof was a wide plash of water. Into the thicket they followed him, but he took to the water under their eyes and made land on the other side; and because of the tangle of underwood, he swam across much faster than they might have any hope to come round on him; and so were the hunters left undone for that time.

So the Lady cast herself down on the green grass anigh the water, while Walter blew the hounds in and coupled them up; then he turned round to her, and lo! she was weeping for despite that they had lost the quarry; and again did Walter wonder that so little a matter should raise a passion of tears in her. He durst not ask what ailed her, or proffer her solace, but was not ill apaid by beholding her loveliness as she lay.

Presently she raised up her head and turned to Walter, and spake to him angrily and said: "Squire, why dost thou stand staring at me like a fool?"

"Yea, Lady," he said; "but the sight of thee maketh me foolish to do aught else but to look on thee."

She said, in a peevish voice: "Tush, Squire, the day is too far spent for soft and courtly speeches; what was good there is nought so good here. Withal, I know more of thine heart than thou deemest."

Walter hung down his head and reddened, and she looked on him, and her face changed, and she smiled and said, kindly this time: "Look ye, Squire, I am hot and weary, and ill-content; but presently it will be better with me; for my knees have been telling my shoulders that the cold water of this little lake will be sweet and pleasant this summer noonday, and that I shall forget my foil when I have taken my pleasure therein. Wherefore, go thou with thine hounds without the thicket and there abide my coming. And I bid thee look not aback as thou goest, for therein were peril to thee: I shall not keep thee tarrying long alone."

He bowed his head to her, and turned and went his ways. And now, when he was a little space away from her, he deemed her indeed a marvel of women, and wellnigh forgat all his doubts and fears concerning her, whether she were a fair image fashioned out of lies and guile, or it might be but an evil thing in the shape of a goodly woman. Forsooth, when he saw her caressing the dear and friendly Maid, his heart all turned against her, despite what his eyes and his ears told his mind, and she seemed like as it were a serpent enfolding the simplicity of the body which he loved.

But now it was all changed, and he lay on the grass and longed for her coming; which was delayed for somewhat more than an hour. Then she came back to him, smiling and fresh and cheerful, her green gown let down to her heels.

He sprang up to meet her, and she came close to him, and spake from a laughing face: "Squire, hast thou no meat in thy wallet? For, meseemeth, I fed thee when thou wert hungry the other day; do thou now the same by me."

He smiled, and louted to her, and took his wallet and brought out thence bread and flesh and wine, and spread them all out before her on the green grass, and then stood by humbly before her. But she said: "Nay, my Squire, sit down by me and eat with me, for to-day are we both hunters together."

So he sat down by her trembling, but neither for awe of her greatness, nor for fear and horror of her guile and sorcery.

A while they sat there together after they had done their meat, and the Lady fell a-talking with Walter concerning the parts of the earth, and the manners of men, and of his journeyings to and fro.

At last she said: "Thou hast told me much and answered all my questions wisely, and as my good Squire should, and that pleaseth me. But now tell me of the city wherein thou wert born and bred; a city whereof thou hast hitherto told me nought."

"Lady," he said, "it is a fair and a great city, and to many it seemeth lovely. But I have left it, and now it is nothing to me."

"Hast thou not kindred there?" said she.

"Yea," said he, "and foemen withal; and a false woman waylayeth my life there."

"And what was she?" said the Lady.

Said Walter: "She was but my wife."

"Was she fair?" said the Lady.

Walter looked on her a while, and then said: "I was going to say that she was wellnigh as fair as thou; but that may scarce be. Yet was she very fair. But now, kind and gracious Lady, I will say this word to thee: I marvel that thou askest so many things concerning the city of Langton on Holm, where I was born, and where are my kindred yet; for meseemeth that thou knowest it thyself."

"I know it, I?" said the Lady.

"What, then! thou knowest it not?" said Walter.

Spake the Lady, and some of her old disdain was in her words: "Dost thou deem that I wander about the world and its cheaping-steads like one of the chap-men? Nay, I dwell in the Wood beyond the World, and nowhere else. What hath put this word into thy mouth?"

He said: "Pardon me, Lady, if I have misdone; but thus it was: Mine own eyes beheld thee going down the quays of our city, and thence a ship-board, and the ship sailed out of the haven. And first of all went a strange dwarf, whom I have seen here, and then thy Maid; and then went thy gracious and lovely body."

The Lady's face changed as he spoke, and she turned red and then pale, and set her teeth; but she refrained her, and said: "Squire, I see of thee that thou art no liar, nor light of wit, therefore I suppose that thou hast verily seen some appearance of me; but never have I been in Langton, nor thought thereof, nor known that such a stead there was until thou namedst it e'en now. Wherefore, I deem that an enemy hath cast the shadow of me on the air of that land."

"Yea, my Lady," said Walter; "and what enemy mightest thou have to have done this?"

She was slow of answer, but spake at last from a quivering mouth of anger: "Knowest thou not the saw, that a man's foes are they of his own house? If I find out for a truth who hath done this, the said enemy shall have an evil hour with me."

Again she was silent, and she clenched her hands and strained her limbs in the heat of her anger; so that Walter was afraid of her, and all his misgivings came back to his heart again, and he repented that he had told her so much. But in a little while all that trouble and wrath seemed to flow off her, and again was she of good cheer, and kind and sweet to him and she said: "But in sooth, however it may be, I thank thee, my Squire and friend, for telling me hereof. And surely no wyte do I lay on thee. And, moreover, is it not this vision which hath brought thee hither?"

"So it is, Lady," said he.

"Then have we to thank it," said the Lady, "and thou art welcome to our land."

And therewith she held out her hand to him, and he took it on his knees and kissed it: and then it was as if a red-hot iron had run through his heart, and he felt faint, and bowed down his head. But he held her hand yet, and kissed it many times, and the wrist and the arm, and knew not where he was.

But she drew a little away from him, and arose and said: "Now is the day wearing, and if we are to bear back any venison we must buckle to the work. So arise, Squire, and take the hounds and come with me; for not far off is a little thicket which mostly harbours foison of deer, great and small. Let us come our ways."

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XV: THE SLAYING OF THE QUARRY

So they walked on quietly thence some half a mile, and ever the Lady would have Walter to walk by her side, and not follow a little behind her, as was meet for a servant to do; and she touched his hand at whiles as she showed him beast and fowl and tree, and the sweetness of her body overcame him, so that for a while he thought of nothing save her.

Now when they were come to the thicket-side, she turned to him and said: "Squire, I am no ill woodman, so that thou mayst trust me that we shall not be brought to shame the second time; and I shall do sagely; so nock an arrow to thy bow, and abide me here, and stir not hence; for I shall enter this thicket without the hounds, and arouse the quarry for thee; and see that thou be brisk and clean- shooting, and then shalt thou have a reward of me."

Therewith she drew up her skirts through her girdle again, took her bent bow in her hand, and drew an arrow out of the quiver, and stepped lightly into the thicket, leaving him longing for the sight of her, as he hearkened to the tread of her feet on the dry leaves, and the rustling of the brake as she thrust through it.

Thus he stood for a few minutes, and then he heard a kind of gibbering cry without words, yet as of a woman, coming from the thicket, and while his heart was yet gathering the thought that something had gone amiss, he glided swiftly, but with little stir, into the brake.

He had gone but a little way ere he saw the Lady standing there in a narrow clearing, her face pale as death, her knees cleaving together, her body swaying and tottering, her hands hanging down, and the bow and arrow fallen to the ground; and ten yards before her a great-headed yellow creature crouching flat to the earth and slowly drawing nigher.

He stopped short; one arrow was already notched to the string, and another hung loose to the lesser fingers of his string-hand. He raised his right hand, and drew and loosed in a twinkling; the shaft flew close to the Lady's side, and straightway all the wood rung with a huge roar, as the yellow lion turned about to bite at the shaft which had sunk deep into him behind the shoulder, as if a bolt out of the heavens had smitten him. But straightway had Walter loosed again, and then, throwing down his bow, he ran forward with his drawn sword gleaming in his hand, while the lion weltered and rolled, but had no might to move forward. Then Walter went up to him warily and thrust him through to the heart, and leapt aback, lest the beast might yet have life in him to smite; but he left his struggling, his huge voice died out, and he lay there moveless before the hunter.

Walter abode a little, facing him, and then turned about to the Lady, and she had fallen down in a heap whereas she stood, and lay there all huddled up and voiceless. So he knelt down by her, and lifted up her head, and bade her arise, for the foe was slain. And after a little she stretched out her limbs, and turned about on the grass, and seemed to sleep, and the colour came into her face again, and it grew soft and a little smiling. Thus she lay awhile, and Walter sat by her watching her, till at last she opened her eyes and sat up, and knew him, and smiling on him said: "What hath befallen, Squire, that I have slept and dreamed?"

He answered nothing, till her memory came back to her, and then she arose, trembling and pale, and said: "Let us leave this wood, for the Enemy is therein."

And she hastened away before him till they came out at the thicket- side whereas the hounds had been left, and they were standing there uneasy and whining; so Walter coupled them, while the Lady stayed not, but went away swiftly homeward, and Walter followed.

At last she stayed her swift feet, and turned round on Walter, and said: "Squire, come hither."

So did he, and she said: "I am weary again; let us sit under this quicken-tree, and rest us."

So they sat down, and she sat looking between her knees a while; and at last she said: "Why didst thou not bring the lion's hide?"

He said: "Lady, I will go back and flay the beast, and bring on the hide."

And he arose therewith, but she caught him by the skirts and drew him down, and said: "Nay, thou shalt not go; abide with me. Sit down again."

He did so, and she said: "Thou shalt not go from me; for I am afraid: I am not used to looking on the face of death."

She grew pale as she spoke, and set a hand to her breast, and sat so a while without speaking. At last she turned to him smiling, and said: "How was it with the aspect of me when I stood before the peril of the Enemy?" And she laid a hand upon his.

"O gracious one," quoth he, "thou wert, as ever, full lovely, but I feared for thee."

She moved not her hand from his, and she said: "Good and true Squire, I said ere I entered the thicket e'en now that I would reward thee if thou slewest the quarry. He is dead, though thou hast left the skin behind upon the carcase. Ask now thy reward, but take time to think what it shall be."

He felt her hand warm upon his, and drew in the sweet odour of her mingled with the woodland scents under the hot sun of the afternoon, and his heart was clouded with manlike desire of her. And it was a near thing but he had spoken, and craved of her the reward of the freedom of her Maid, and that he might depart with her into other lands; but as his mind wavered betwixt this and that, the Lady, who had been eyeing him keenly, drew her hand away from him; and therewith doubt and fear flowed into his mind, and he refrained him of speech.

Then she laughed merrily and said: "The good Squire is shamefaced; he feareth a lady more than a lion. Will it be a reward to thee if I bid thee to kiss my cheek?"

Therewith she leaned her face toward him, and he kissed her well- favouredly, and then sat gazing on her, wondering what should betide to him on the morrow.

Then she arose and said: "Come, Squire, and let us home; be not abashed, there shall be other rewards hereafter."

So they went their ways quietly; and it was nigh sunset against they entered the house again. Walter looked round for the Maid, but beheld her not; and the Lady said to him: "I go to my chamber, and now is thy service over for this day."

Then she nodded to him friendly and went her ways.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XVI: OF THE KING'S SON AND THE MAID

But as for Walter, he went out of the house again, and fared slowly over the woodlawns till he came to another close thicket or brake; he entered from mere wantonness, or that he might be the more apart and hidden, so as to think over his case. There he lay down under the thick boughs, but could not so herd his thoughts that they would dwell steady in looking into what might come to him within the next days; rather visions of those two women and the monster did but float before him, and fear and desire and the hope of life ran to and fro in his mind.

As he lay thus he heard footsteps drawing near, and he looked between the boughs, and though the sun had just set, he could see close by him a man and a woman going slowly, and they hand in hand; at first he deemed it would be the King's Son and the Lady, but presently he saw that it was the King's Son indeed, but that it was the Maid whom he was holding by the hand. And now he saw of him that his eyes were bright with desire, and of her that she was very pale. Yet when he heard her begin to speak, it was in a steady voice that she said: "King's Son, thou hast threatened me oft and unkindly, and now thou threatenest me again, and no less unkindly. But whatever were thy need herein before, now is there no more need; for my Mistress, of whom thou wert weary, is now grown weary of thee, and belike will not now reward me for drawing thy love to me, as once she would have done; to wit, before the coming of this stranger. Therefore I say, since I am but a thrall, poor and helpless, betwixt you two mighty ones, I have no choice but to do thy will."

As she spoke she looked all round about her, as one distraught by the anguish of fear. Walter, amidst of his wrath and grief, had wellnigh drawn his sword and rushed out of his lair upon the King's Son. But he deemed it sure that, so doing, he should undo the Maid altogether, and himself also belike, so he refrained him, though it were a hard matter.

The Maid had stayed her feet now close to where Walter lay, some five yards from him only, and he doubted whether she saw him not from where she stood. As to the King's Son, he was so intent upon the Maid, and so greedy of her beauty, that it was not like that he saw anything.

Now moreover Walter looked, and deemed that he beheld something through the grass and bracken on the other side of those two, an ugly brown and yellow body, which, if it were not some beast of the foumart kind, must needs be the monstrous dwarf, or one of his kin; and the flesh crept upon Walter's bones with the horror of him. But the King's Son spoke unto the Maid: "Sweetling, I shall take the gift thou givest me, neither shall I threaten thee any more, howbeit thou givest it not very gladly or graciously."

She smiled on him with her lips alone, for her eyes were wandering and haggard. "My lord," she said, "is not this the manner of women?"

"Well," he said, "I say that I will take thy love even so given. Yet let me hear again that thou lovest not that vile newcomer, and that thou hast not seen him, save this morning along with my Lady. Nay now, thou shalt swear it."

"What shall I swear by?" she said.

Quoth he, "Thou shalt swear by my body;" and therewith he thrust himself close up against her; but she drew her hand from his, and laid it on his breast, and said: "I swear it by thy body."

He smiled on her licorously, and took her by the shoulders, and kissed her face many times, and then stood aloof from her, and said: "Now have I had hansel: but tell me, when shall I come to thee?"

She spoke out clearly: "Within three days at furthest; I will do thee to wit of the day and the hour to-morrow, or the day after."

He kissed her once more, and said: "Forget it not, or the threat holds good."

And therewith he turned about and went his ways toward the house; and Walter saw the yellow-brown thing creeping after him in the gathering dusk.

As for the Maid, she stood for a while without moving, and looking after the King's Son and the creature that followed him. Then she turned about to where Walter lay and lightly put aside the boughs, and Walter leapt up, and they stood face to face. She said softly but eagerly: "Friend, touch me not yet!"

He spake not, but looked on her sternly. She said: "Thou art angry with me?"

Still he spake not; but she said: "Friend, this at least I will pray thee; not to play with life and death; with happiness and misery. Dost thou not remember the oath which we swore each to each but a little while ago? And dost thou deem that I have changed in these few days? Is thy mind concerning thee and me the same as it was? If it be not so, now tell me. For now have I the mind to do as if neither thou nor I are changed to each other, whoever may have kissed mine unwilling lips, or whomsoever thy lips may have kissed. But if thou hast changed, and wilt no longer give me thy love, nor crave mine, then shall this steel" (and she drew a sharp knife from her girdle) "be for the fool and the dastard who hath made thee wroth with me, my friend, and my friend that I deemed I had won. And then let come what will come! But if thou be nought changed, and the oath yet holds, then, when a little while hath passed, may we thrust all evil and guile and grief behind us, and long joy shall lie before us, and long life, and all honour in death: if only thou wilt do as I bid thee, O my dear, and my friend, and my first friend!"

He looked on her, and his breast heaved up as all the sweetness of her kind love took hold on him, and his face changed, and the tears filled his eyes and ran over, and rained down before her, and he stretched out his hand toward her.

Then she said exceeding sweetly: "Now indeed I see that it is well with me, yea, and with thee also. A sore pain it is to me, that not even now may I take thine hand, and cast mine arms about thee, and kiss the lips that love me. But so it has to be. My dear, even so I were fain to stand here long before thee, even if we spake no more word to each other; but abiding here is perilous; for there is ever an evil spy upon my doings, who has now as I deem followed the King's Son to the house, but who will return when he has tracked him home thither: so we must sunder. But belike there is yet time for a word or two: first, the rede which I had thought on for our deliverance is now afoot, though I durst not tell thee thereof, nor have time thereto. But this much shall I tell thee, that whereas great is the craft of my Mistress in wizardry, yet I also have some little craft therein, and this, which she hath not, to change the aspect of folk so utterly that they seem other than they verily are; yea, so that one may have the aspect of another. Now the next thing is this: whatsoever my Mistress may bid thee, do her will therein with no more nay-saying than thou deemest may please her. And the next thing: wheresoever thou mayst meet me, speak not to me, make no sign to me, even when I seem to be all alone, till I stoop down and touch the ring on my ankle with my right hand; but if I do so, then stay thee, without fail, till I speak. The last thing I will say to thee, dear friend, ere we both go our ways, this it is. When we are free, and thou knowest all that I have done, I pray thee deem me not evil and wicked, and be not wroth with me for my deed; whereas thou wottest well that I am not in like plight with other women. I have heard tell that when the knight goeth to the war, and hath overcome his foes by the shearing of swords and guileful tricks, and hath come back home to his own folk, they praise him and bless him, and crown him with flowers, and boast of him before God in the minster for his deliverance of friend and folk and city. Why shouldst thou be worse to me than this? Now is all said, my dear and my friend; farewell, farewell!"

Therewith she turned and went her ways toward the house in all speed, but making somewhat of a compass. And when she was gone, Walter knelt down and kissed the place where her feet had been, and arose thereafter, and made his way toward the house, he also, but slowly, and staying oft on his way.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XVII: OF THE HOUSE AND THE PLEASANCE IN THE WOOD

On the morrow morning Walter loitered a while about the house till the morn was grown old, and then about noon he took his bow and arrows and went into the woods to the northward, to get him some venison. He went somewhat far ere he shot him a fawn, and then he sat him down to rest under the shade of a great chestnut-tree, for it was not far past the hottest of the day. He looked around thence and saw below him a little dale with a pleasant stream running through it, and he bethought him of bathing therein, so he went down and had his pleasure of the water and the willowy banks; for he lay naked a while on the grass by the lip of the water, for joy of the flickering shade, and the little breeze that ran over the down-long ripples of the stream.

Then he did on his raiment, and began to come his ways up the bent, but had scarce gone three steps ere he saw a woman coming towards him from downstream. His heart came into his mouth when he saw her, for she stooped and reached down her arm, as if she would lay her hand on her ankle, so that at first he deemed it had been the Maid, but at the second eye-shot he saw that it was the Mistress. She stood still and looked on him, so that he deemed she would have him come to her. So he went to meet her, and grew somewhat shamefaced as he drew nigher, and wondered at her, for now was she clad but in one garment of some dark grey silky stuff, embroidered with, as it were, a garland of flowers about the middle, but which was so thin that, as the wind drifted it from side and limb, it hid her no more, but for the said garland, than if water were running over her: her face was full of smiling joy and content as she spake to him in a kind, caressing voice, and said: "I give thee good day, good Squire, and well art thou met." And she held out her hand to him. He knelt down before her and kissed it, and abode still upon his knees, and hanging down his head.

But she laughed outright, and stooped down to him, and put her hand to his arms, and raised him up, and said to him: "What is this, my Squire, that thou kneelest to me as to an idol?"

He said faltering: "I wot not; but perchance thou art an idol; and I fear thee."

"What!" she said, "more than yesterday, whenas thou sawest me afraid?"

Said he: "Yea, for that now I see thee unhidden, and meseemeth there hath been none such since the old days of the Gentiles."

She said: "Hast thou not yet bethought thee of a gift to crave of me, a reward for the slaying of mine enemy, and the saving of me from death?"

"O my Lady," he said, "even so much would I have done for any other lady, or, forsooth, for any poor man; for so my manhood would have bidden me. Speak not of gifts to me then. Moreover" (and he reddened therewith, and his voice faltered), "didst thou not give me my sweet reward yesterday? What more durst I ask?"

She held her peace awhile, and looked on him keenly; and he reddened under her gaze. Then wrath came into her face, and she reddened and knit her brows, and spake to him in a voice of anger, and said: "Nay, what is this? It is growing in my mind that thou deemest the gift of me unworthy! Thou, an alien, an outcast; one endowed with the little wisdom of the World without the Wood! And here I stand before thee, all glorious in my nakedness, and so fulfilled of wisdom, that I can make this wilderness to any whom I love more full of joy than the kingdoms and cities of the world--and thou!--Ah, but it is the Enemy that hath done this, and made the guileless guileful! Yet will I have the upper hand at least, though thou suffer for it, and I suffer for thee."

Walter stood before her with hanging head, and he put forth his hands as if praying off her anger, and pondered what answer he should make; for now he feared for himself and the Maid; so at last he looked up to her, and said boldly: "Nay, Lady, I know what thy words mean, whereas I remember thy first welcome of me. I wot, forsooth, that thou wouldst call me base-born, and of no account, and unworthy to touch the hem of thy raiment; and that I have been over-bold, and guilty towards thee; and doubtless this is sooth, and I have deserved thine anger: but I will not ask thee to pardon me, for I have done but what I must needs."

She looked on him calmly now, and without any wrath, but rather as if she would read what was written in his inmost heart. Then her face changed into joyousness again, and she smote her palms together, and cried out: "This is but foolish talk; for yesterday did I see thy valiancy, and to-day I have seen thy goodliness; and I say, that though thou mightest not be good enough for a fool woman of the earthly baronage, yet art thou good enough for me, the wise and the mighty, and the lovely. And whereas thou sayest that I gave thee but disdain when first thou camest to us, grudge not against me therefor, because it was done but to prove thee; and now thou art proven."

Then again he knelt down before her, and embraced her knees, and again she raised him up, and let her arm hang down over his shoulder, and her cheek brush his cheek; and she kissed his mouth and said: "Hereby is all forgiven, both thine offence and mine; and now cometh joy and merry days."

Therewith her smiling face grew grave, and she stood before him looking stately and gracious and kind at once, and she took his hand and said: "Thou mightest deem my chamber in the Golden House of the Wood over-queenly, since thou art no masterful man. So now hast thou chosen well the place wherein to meet me to-day, for hard by on the other side of the stream is a bower of pleasance, which, forsooth, not every one who cometh to this land may find; there shall I be to thee as one of the up-country damsels of thine own land, and thou shalt not be abashed."

She sidled up to him as she spoke, and would he, would he not, her sweet voice tickled his very soul with pleasure, and she looked aside on him happy and well-content.

So they crossed the stream by the shallow below the pool wherein Walter had bathed, and within a little they came upon a tall fence of flake-hurdles, and a simple gate therein. The Lady opened the same, and they entered thereby into a close all planted as a most fair garden, with hedges of rose and woodbine, and with linden-trees a-blossom, and long ways of green grass betwixt borders of lilies and clove-gilliflowers, and other sweet garland-flowers. And a branch of the stream which they had crossed erewhile wandered through that garden; and in the midst was a little house built of post and pan, and thatched with yellow straw, as if it were new done.

Then Walter looked this way and that, and wondered at first, and tried to think in his mind what should come next, and how matters would go with him; but his thought would not dwell steady on any other matter than the beauty of the Lady amidst the beauty of the garden; and withal she was now grown so sweet and kind, and even somewhat timid and shy with him, that scarce did he know whose hand he held, or whose fragrant bosom and sleek side went so close to him.

So they wandered here and there through the waning of the day, and when they entered at last into the cool dusk house, then they loved and played together, as if they were a pair of lovers guileless, with no fear for the morrow, and no seeds of enmity and death sown betwixt them.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XVIII: THE MAID GIVES WALTER TRYST

Now, on the morrow, when Walter was awake, he found there was no one lying beside him, and the day was no longer very young; so he arose, and went through the garden from end to end, and all about, and there was none there; and albeit that he dreaded to meet the Lady there, yet was he sad at heart and fearful of what might betide. Howsoever, he found the gate whereby they had entered yesterday, and he went out into the little dale; but when he had gone a step or two he turned about, and could see neither garden nor fence, nor any sign of what he had seen thereof but lately. He knit his brow and stood still to think of it, and his heart grew the heavier thereby; but presently he went his ways and crossed the stream, but had scarce come up on to the grass on the further side, ere he saw a woman coming to meet him, and at first, full as he was of the tide of yesterday and the wondrous garden, deemed that it would be the Lady; but the woman stayed her feet, and, stooping, laid a hand on her right ankle, and he saw that it was the Maid. He drew anigh to her, and saw that she was nought so sad of countenance as the last time she had met him, but flushed of cheek and bright-eyed.

As he came up to her she made a step or two to meet him, holding out her two hands, and then refrained her, and said smiling: "Ah, friend, belike this shall be the last time that I shall say to thee, touch me not, nay, not so much as my hand, or if it were but the hem of my raiment."

The joy grew up in his heart, and he gazed on her fondly, and said: "Why, what hath befallen of late?"

"O friend," she began, "this hath befallen."

But as he looked on her, the smile died from her face, and she became deadly pale to the very lips; she looked askance to her left side, whereas ran the stream; and Walter followed her eyes, and deemed for one instant that he saw the misshapen yellow visage of the dwarf peering round from a grey rock, but the next there was nothing. Then the Maid, though she were as pale as death, went on in a clear, steady, hard voice, wherein was no joy or kindness, keeping her face to Walter and her back to the stream: "This hath befallen, friend, that there is no longer any need to refrain thy love nor mine; therefore I say to thee, come to my chamber (and it is the red chamber over against thine, though thou knewest it not) an hour before this next midnight, and then thy sorrow and mine shall be at an end: and now I must needs depart. Follow me not, but remember!"

And therewith she turned about and fled like the wind down the stream.

But Walter stood wondering, and knew not what to make of it, whether it were for good or ill: for he knew now that she had paled and been seized with terror because of the upheaving of the ugly head; and yet she had seemed to speak out the very thing she had to say. Howsoever it were, he spake aloud to himself: Whatever comes, I will keep tryst with her.

Then he drew his sword, and turned this way and that, looking all about if he might see any sign of the Evil Thing; but nought might his eyes behold, save the grass, and the stream, and the bushes of the dale. So then, still holding his naked sword in his hand, he clomb the bent out of the dale; for that was the only way he knew to the Golden House; and when he came to the top, and the summer breeze blew in his face, and he looked down a fair green slope beset with goodly oaks and chestnuts, he was refreshed with the life of the earth, and he felt the good sword in his fist, and knew that there was might and longing in him, and the world seemed open unto him.

So he smiled, if it were somewhat grimly, and sheathed his sword and went on toward the house.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XIX: WALTER GOES TO FETCH HOME THE LION'S HIDE

He entered the cool dusk through the porch, and, looking down the pillared hall, saw beyond the fountain a gleam of gold, and when he came past the said fountain he looked up to the high-seat, and lo! the Lady sitting there clad in her queenly raiment. She called to him, and he came; and she hailed him, and spake graciously and calmly, yet as if she knew nought of him save as the leal servant of her, a high Lady. "Squire," she said, "we have deemed it meet to have the hide of the servant of the Enemy, the lion to wit, whom thou slewest yesterday, for a carpet to our feet; wherefore go now, take thy wood-knife, and flay the beast, and bring me home his skin. This shall be all thy service for this day, so mayst thou do it at thine own leisure, and not weary thyself. May good go with thee."

He bent the knee before her, and she smiled on him graciously, but reached out no hand for him to kiss, and heeded him but little. Wherefore, in spite of himself, and though he knew somewhat of her guile, he could not help marvelling that this should be she who had lain in his arms night-long but of late.

Howso that might be, he took his way toward the thicket where he had slain the lion, and came thither by then it was afternoon, at the hottest of the day. So he entered therein, and came to the very place whereas the Lady had lain, when she fell down before the terror of the lion; and there was the mark of her body on the grass where she had lain that while, like as it were the form of a hare. But when Walter went on to where he had slain that great beast, lo! he was gone, and there was no sign of him; but there were Walter's own footprints, and the two shafts which he had shot, one feathered red, and one blue. He said at first: Belike someone hath been here, and hath had the carcase away. Then he laughed in very despite, and said: How may that be, since there are no signs of dragging away of so huge a body, and no blood or fur on the grass if they had cut him up, and moreover no trampling of feet, as if there had been many men at the deed. Then was he all abashed, and again laughed in scorn of himself, and said: Forsooth I deemed I had done manly; but now forsooth I shot nought, and nought there was before the sword of my father's son. And what may I deem now, but that this is a land of mere lies, and that there is nought real and alive therein save me. Yea, belike even these trees and the green grass will presently depart from me, and leave me falling down through the clouds.

Therewith he turned away, and gat him to the road that led to the Golden House, wondering what next should befall him, and going slowly as he pondered his case. So came he to that first thicket where they had lost their quarry by water; so he entered the same, musing, and bathed him in the pool that was therein, after he had wandered about it awhile, and found nothing new.

So again he set him to the homeward road, when the day was now waning, and it was near sunset that he was come nigh unto the house, though it was hidden from him as then by a low bent that rose before him; and there he abode and looked about him.

Now as he looked, over the said bent came the figure of a woman, who stayed on the brow thereof and looked all about her, and then ran swiftly down to meet Walter, who saw at once that it was the Maid.

She made no stay then till she was but three paces from him, and then she stooped down and made the sign to him, and then spake to him breathlessly, and said: "Hearken! but speak not till I have done: I bade thee to-night's meeting because I saw that there was one anigh whom I must needs beguile. But by thine oath, and thy love, and all that thou art, I adjure thee come not unto me this night as I bade thee! but be hidden in the hazel-copse outside the house, as it draws toward midnight, and abide me there. Dost thou hearken, and wilt thou? Say yes or no in haste, for I may not tarry a moment of time. Who knoweth what is behind me?"

"Yes," said Walter hastily; "but friend and love--"

"No more," she said; "hope the best;" and turning from him she ran away swiftly, not by the way she had come, but sideways, as though to reach the house by fetching a compass.

But Walter went slowly on his way, thinking within himself that now at that present moment there was nought for it but to refrain him from doing, and to let others do; yet deemed he that it was little manly to be as the pawn upon the board, pushed about by the will of others.

Then, as he went, he bethought him of the Maiden's face and aspect, as she came running to him, and stood before him for that minute; and all eagerness he saw in her, and sore love of him, and distress of soul, all blent together.

So came he to the brow of the bent whence he could see lying before him, scarce more than a bow-shot away, the Golden House now gilded again and reddened by the setting sun. And even therewith came a gay image toward him, flashing back the level rays from gold and steel and silver; and lo! there was come the King's Son. They met presently, and the King's Son turned to go beside him, and said merrily: "I give thee good even, my Lady's Squire! I owe thee something of courtesy, whereas it is by thy means that I shall be made happy, both to-night, and to-morrow, and many to-morrows; and sooth it is, that but little courtesy have I done thee hitherto."

His face was full of joy, and the eyes of him shone with gladness. He was a goodly man, but to Walter he seemed an ill one; and he hated him so much, that he found it no easy matter to answer him; but he refrained himself, and said: "I can thee thank, King's Son; and good it is that someone is happy in this strange land."

"Art thou not happy then, Squire of my Lady?" said the other.

Walter had no mind to show this man his heart, nay, nor even a corner thereof; for he deemed him an enemy. So he smiled sweetly and somewhat foolishly, as a man luckily in love, and said: "O yea, yea, why should I not be so? How might I be otherwise?"

"Yea then," said the King's Son, "why didst thou say that thou wert glad someone is happy? Who is unhappy, deemest thou?" and he looked on him keenly.

Walter answered slowly: "Said I so? I suppose then that I was thinking of thee; for when first I saw thee, yea, and afterwards, thou didst seem heavy-hearted and ill-content."

The face of the King's Son cleared at this word, and he said: "Yea, so it was; for look you, both ways it was: I was unfree, and I had sown the true desire of my heart whereas it waxed not. But now I am on the brink and verge of freedom, and presently shall my desire be blossomed. Nay now, Squire, I deem thee a good fellow, though it may be somewhat of a fool; so I will no more speak riddles to thee. Thus it is: the Maid hath promised me all mine asking, and is mine; and in two or three days, by her helping also, I shall see the world again."

Quoth Walter, smiling askance on him: "And the Lady? what shall she say to this matter?"

The King's Son reddened, but smiled falsely enough, and said: "Sir Squire, thou knowest enough not to need to ask this. Why should I tell thee that she accounteth more of thy little finger than of my whole body? Now I tell thee hereof freely; first, because this my fruition of love, and my freeing from thralldom, is, in a way, of thy doing. For thou art become my supplanter, and hast taken thy place with yonder lovely tyrant. Fear not for me! she will let me go. As for thyself, see thou to it! But again I tell thee hereof because my heart is light and full of joy, and telling thee will pleasure me, and cannot do me any harm. For if thou say: How if I carry the tale to my Lady? I answer, thou wilt not. For I know that thine heart hath been somewhat set on the jewel that my hand holdeth; and thou knowest well on whose head the Lady's wrath would fall, and that would be neither thine nor mine."

"Thou sayest sooth," said Walter; "neither is treason my wont."

So they walked on silently a while, and then Walter said: "But how if the Maiden had nay-said thee; what hadst thou done then?"

"By the heavens!" said the King's Son fiercely, "she should have paid for her nay-say; then would I--" But he broke off, and said quietly, yet somewhat doggedly: "Why talk of what might have been? She gave me her yea-say pleasantly and sweetly."

Now Walter knew that the man lied, so he held his peace thereon; but presently he said: "When thou art free wilt thou go to thine own land again?"

"Yea," said the King's Son; "she will lead me thither."

"And wilt thou make her thy lady and queen when thou comest to thy father's land?" said Walter.

The King's Son knit his brow, and said: "When I am in mine own land I may do with her what I will; but I look for it that I shall do no otherwise with her than that she shall be well-content."

Then the talk between them dropped, and the King's Son turned off toward the wood, singing and joyous; but Walter went soberly toward the house. Forsooth he was not greatly cast down, for besides that he knew that the King's Son was false, he deemed that under this double tryst lay something which was a-doing in his own behalf. Yet was he eager and troubled, if not down-hearted, and his soul was cast about betwixt hope and fear.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XX: WALTER IS BIDDEN TO ANOTHER TRYST

So came he into the pillared hall, and there he found the Lady walking to and fro by the high-seat; and when he drew nigh she turned on him, and said in a voice rather eager than angry: "What hast thou done, Squire? Why art thou come before me?"

He was abashed, and bowed before her and said: "O gracious Lady, thou badest me service, and I have been about it."

She said: "Tell me then, tell me, what hath betided?"

"Lady," said he, "when I entered the thicket of thy swooning I found there no carcase of the lion, nor any sign of the dragging away of him."

She looked full in his face for a little, and then went to her chair, and sat down therein; and in a little while spake to him in a softer voice, and said: "Did I not tell thee that some enemy had done that unto me? and lo! now thou seest that so it is."

Then was she silent again, and knit her brows and set her teeth; and thereafter she spake harshly and fiercely: "But I will overcome her, and make her days evil, but keep death away from her, that she may die many times over; and know all the sickness of the heart, when foes be nigh, and friends afar, and there is none to deliver!"

Her eyes flashed, and her face was dark with anger; but she turned and caught Walter's eyes, and the sternness of his face, and she softened at once, and said: "But thou! this hath little to do with thee; and now to thee I speak: Now cometh even and night. Go thou to thy chamber, and there shalt thou find raiment worthy of thee, what thou now art, and what thou shalt be; do on the same, and make thyself most goodly, and then come thou hither and eat and drink with me, and afterwards depart whither thou wilt, till the night has worn to its midmost; and then come thou to my chamber, to wit, through the ivory door in the gallery above; and then and there shall I tell thee a thing, and it shall be for the weal both of thee and of me, but for the grief and woe of the Enemy."

Therewith she reached her hand to him, and he kissed it, and departed and came to his chamber, and found raiment therebefore rich beyond measure; and he wondered if any new snare lay therein: yet if there were, he saw no way whereby he might escape it, so he did it on, and became as the most glorious of kings, and yet lovelier than any king of the world.

Sithence he went his way into the pillared hall, when it was now night, and without the moon was up, and the trees of the wood as still as images. But within the hall shone bright with many candles, and the fountain glittered in the light of them, as it ran tinkling sweetly into the little stream; and the silvern bridges gleamed, and the pillars shone all round about.

And there on the dais was a table dight most royally, and the Lady sitting thereat, clad in her most glorious array, and behind her the Maid standing humbly, yet clad in precious web of shimmering gold, but with feet unshod, and the iron ring upon her ankle.

So Walter came his ways to the high-seat, and the Lady rose and greeted him, and took him by the hands, and kissed him on either cheek, and sat him down beside her. So they fell to their meat, and the Maid served them; but the Lady took no more heed of her than if she were one of the pillars of the hall; but Walter she caressed oft with sweet words, and the touch of her hand, making him drink out of her cup and eat out of her dish. As to him, he was bashful by seeming, but verily fearful; he took the Lady's caresses with what grace he might, and durst not so much as glance at her Maid. Long indeed seemed that banquet to him, and longer yet endured the weariness of his abiding there, kind to his foe and unkind to his friend; for after the banquet they still sat a while, and the Lady talked much to Walter about many things of the ways of the world, and he answered what he might, distraught as he was with the thought of those two trysts which he had to deal with.

At last spake the Lady and said: "Now must I leave thee for a little, and thou wottest where and how we shall meet next; and meanwhile disport thee as thou wilt, so that thou weary not thyself, for I love to see thee joyous."

Then she arose stately and grand; but she kissed Walter on the mouth ere she turned to go out of the hall. The Maid followed her; but or ever she was quite gone, she stooped and made that sign, and looked over her shoulder at Walter, as if in entreaty to him, and there was fear and anguish in her face; but he nodded his head to her in yea- say of the tryst in the hazel-copse, and in a trice she was gone.

Walter went down the hall, and forth into the early night; but in the jaws of the porch he came up against the King's Son, who, gazing at his attire glittering with all its gems in the moonlight, laughed out, and said: "Now may it be seen how thou art risen in degree above me, whereas I am but a king's son, and that a king of a far country; whereas thou art a king of kings, or shalt be this night, yea, and of this very country wherein we both are."

Now Walter saw the mock which lay under his words; but he kept back his wrath, and answered: "Fair sir, art thou as well contented with thy lot as when the sun went down? Hast thou no doubt or fear? Will the Maid verily keep tryst with thee, or hath she given thee yea-say but to escape thee this time? Or, again, may she not turn to the Lady and appeal to her against thee?"

Now when he had spoken these words, he repented thereof, and feared for himself and the Maid, lest he had stirred some misgiving in that young man's foolish heart. But the King's Son did but laugh, and answered nought but to Walter's last words, and said: "Yea, yea! this word of thine showeth how little thou wottest of that which lieth betwixt my darling and thine. Doth the lamb appeal from the shepherd to the wolf? Even so shall the Maid appeal from me to thy Lady. What! ask thy Lady at thy leisure what her wont hath been with her thrall; she shall think it a fair tale to tell thee thereof. But thereof is my Maid all whole now by reason of her wisdom in leechcraft, or somewhat more. And now I tell thee again, that the beforesaid Maid must needs do my will; for if I be the deep sea, and I deem not so ill of myself, that other one is the devil; as belike thou shalt find out for thyself later on. Yea, all is well with me, and more than well."

And therewith he swung merrily into the litten hall. But Walter went out into the moonlit night, and wandered about for an hour or more, and stole warily into the hall and thence into his own chamber. There he did off that royal array, and did his own raiment upon him; he girt him with sword and knife, took his bow and quiver, and stole down and out again, even as he had come in. Then he fetched a compass, and came down into the hazel-coppice from the north, and lay hidden there while the night wore, till he deemed it would lack but little of midnight.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXI: WALTER AND THE MAID FLEE FROM THE GOLDEN HOUSE

There he abode amidst the hazels, hearkening every littlest sound; and the sounds were nought but the night voices of the wood, till suddenly there burst forth from the house a great wailing cry. Walter's heart came up into his mouth, but he had no time to do aught, for following hard on the cry came the sound of light feet close to him, the boughs were thrust aside, and there was come the Maid, and she but in her white coat, and barefoot. And then first he felt the sweetness of her flesh on his, for she caught him by the hand and said breathlessly: "Now, now! there may yet be time, or even too much, it may be. For the saving of breath ask me no questions, but come!"

He dallied not, but went as she led, and they were lightfoot, both of them.

They went the same way, due south to wit, whereby he had gone a- hunting with the Lady; and whiles they ran and whiles they walked; but so fast they went, that by grey of the dawn they were come as far as that coppice or thicket of the Lion; and still they hastened onward, and but little had the Maid spoken, save here and there a word to hearten up Walter, and here and there a shy word of endearment. At last the dawn grew into early day, and as they came over the brow of a bent, they looked down over a plain land whereas the trees grew scatter-meal, and beyond the plain rose up the land into long green hills, and over those again were blue mountains great and far away.

Then spake the Maid: "Over yonder lie the outlying mountains of the Bears, and through them we needs must pass, to our great peril. Nay, friend," she said, as he handled his sword-hilt, "it must be patience and wisdom to bring us through, and not the fallow blade of one man, though he be a good one. But look! below there runs a stream through the first of the plain, and I see nought for it but we must now rest our bodies. Moreover I have a tale to tell thee which is burning my heart; for maybe there will be a pardon to ask of thee moreover; wherefore I fear thee."

Quoth Walter: "How may that be?"

She answered him not, but took his hand and led him down the bent. But he said: "Thou sayest, rest; but are we now out of all peril of the chase?"

She said: "I cannot tell till I know what hath befallen her. If she be not to hand to set on her trackers, they will scarce happen on us now; if it be not for that one."

And she shuddered, and he felt her hand change as he held it.

Then she said: "But peril or no peril, needs must we rest; for I tell thee again, what I have to say to thee burneth my bosom for fear of thee, so that I can go no further until I have told thee."

Then he said: "I wot not of this Queen and her mightiness and her servants. I will ask thereof later. But besides the others, is there not the King's Son, he who loves thee so unworthily?"

She paled somewhat, and said: "As for him, there had been nought for thee to fear in him, save his treason: but now shall he neither love nor hate any more; he died last midnight."

"Yea, and how?" said Walter.

"Nay," she said, "let me tell my tale all together once for all, lest thou blame me overmuch. But first we will wash us and comfort us as best we may, and then amidst our resting shall the word be said."

By then were they come down to the stream-side, which ran fair in pools and stickles amidst rocks and sandy banks. She said: "There behind the great grey rock is my bath, friend; and here is thine; and lo! the uprising of the sun!"

So she went her ways to the said rock, and he bathed him, and washed the night off him, and by then he was clad again she came back fresh and sweet from the water, and with her lap full of cherries from a wilding which overhung her bath. So they sat down together on the green grass above the sand, and ate the breakfast of the wilderness: and Walter was full of content as he watched her, and beheld her sweetness and her loveliness; yet were they, either of them, somewhat shy and shamefaced each with the other; so that he did but kiss her hands once and again, and though she shrank not from him, yet had she no boldness to cast herself into his arms.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXII: OF THE DWARF AND THE PARDON

Now she began to say: "My friend, now shall I tell thee what I have done for thee and me; and if thou have a mind to blame me, and punish me, yet remember first, that what I have done has been for thee and our hope of happy life. Well, I shall tell thee--"

But therewithal her speech failed her; and, springing up, she faced the bent and pointed with her finger, and she all deadly pale, and shaking so that she might scarce stand, and might speak no word, though a feeble gibbering came from her mouth.

Walter leapt up and put his arm about her, and looked whitherward she pointed, and at first saw nought; and then nought but a brown and yellow rock rolling down the bent: and then at last he saw that it was the Evil Thing which had met him when first he came into that land; and now it stood upright, and he could see that it was clad in a coat of yellow samite.

Then Walter stooped down and gat his bow into his hand, and stood before the Maid, while he nocked an arrow. But the monster made ready his tackle while Walter was stooping down, and or ever he could loose, his bow-string twanged, and an arrow flew forth and grazed the Maid's arm above the elbow, so that the blood ran, and the Dwarf gave forth a harsh and horrible cry. Then flew Walter's shaft, and true was it aimed, so that it smote the monster full on the breast, but fell down from him as if he were made of stone. Then the creature set up his horrible cry again, and loosed withal, and Walter deemed that he had smitten the Maid, for she fell down in a heap behind him. Then waxed Walter wood-wroth, and cast down his bow and drew his sword, and strode forward towards the bent against the Dwarf. But he roared out again, and there were words in his roar, and he said "Fool! thou shalt go free if thou wilt give up the Enemy."

"And who," said Walter, "is the Enemy?"

Yelled the Dwarf: "She, the pink and white thing lying there; she is not dead yet; she is but dying for fear of me. Yea, she hath reason! I could have set the shaft in her heart as easily as scratching her arm; but I need her body alive, that I may wreak me on her."

"What wilt thou do with her?" said Walter; for now he had heard that the Maid was not slain he had waxed wary again, and stood watching his chance.

The Dwarf yelled so at his last word, that no word came from the noise a while, and then he said: "What will I with her? Let me at her, and stand by and look on, and then shalt thou have a strange tale to carry off with thee. For I will let thee go this while."

Said Walter: "But what need to wreak thee? What hath she done to thee?"

"What need! what need!" roared the Dwarf; "have I not told thee that she is the Enemy? And thou askest of what she hath done! of what! Fool, she is the murderer! she hath slain the Lady that was our Lady, and that made us; she whom all we worshipped and adored. O impudent fool!"

Therewith he nocked and loosed another arrow, which would have smitten Walter in the face, but that he lowered his head in the very nick of time; then with a great shout he rushed up the bent, and was on the Dwarf before he could get his sword out, and leaping aloft dealt the creature a stroke amidmost of the crown; and so mightily be smote, that he drave the heavy sword right through to the teeth, so that he fell dead straightway.

Walter stood over him a minute, and when be saw that he moved not, he went slowly down to the stream, whereby the Maid yet lay cowering down and quivering all over, and covering her face with her hands. Then he took her by the wrist and said: "Up, Maiden, up! and tell me this tale of the slaying."

But she shrunk away from him, and looked at him with wild eyes, and said: "What hast thou done with him? Is he gone?"

"He is dead," said Walter; "I have slain him; there lies he with cloven skull on the bent-side: unless, forsooth, he vanish away like the lion I slew! or else, perchance, he will come to life again! And art thou a lie like to the rest of them? let me hear of this slaying."

She rose up, and stood before him trembling, and said: "O, thou art angry with me, and thine anger I cannot bear. Ah, what have I done? Thou hast slain one, and I, maybe, the other; and never had we escaped till both these twain were dead. Ah! thou dost not know! thou dost not know! O me! what shall I do to appease thy wrath!"

He looked on her, and his heart rose to his mouth at the thought of sundering from her. Still he looked on her, and her piteous friendly face melted all his heart; he threw down his sword, and took her by the shoulders, and kissed her face over and over, and strained her to him, so that he felt the sweetness of her bosom. Then he lifted her up like a child, and set her down on the green grass, and went down to the water, and filled his hat therefrom, and came back to her; then he gave her to drink, and bathed her face and her hands, so that the colour came aback to the cheeks and lips of her: and she smiled on him and kissed his hands, and said: "O now thou art kind to me."

"Yea," said he, "and true it is that if thou hast slain, I have done no less, and if thou hast lied, even so have I; and if thou hast played the wanton, as I deem not that thou hast, I full surely have so done. So now thou shalt pardon me, and when thy spirit has come back to thee, thou shalt tell me thy tale in all friendship, and in all loving-kindness will I hearken the same."

Therewith he knelt before her and kissed her feet. But she said: "Yea, yea; what thou willest, that will I do. But first tell me one thing. Hast thou buried this horror and hidden him in the earth?"

He deemed that fear had bewildered her, and that she scarcely yet knew how things had gone. But he said: "Fair sweet friend, I have not done it as yet; but now will I go and do it, if it seem good to thee."

"Yea," she said, "but first must thou smite off his head, and lie it by his buttocks when he is in the earth; or evil things will happen else. This of the burying is no idle matter, I bid thee believe."

"I doubt it not," said he; "surely such malice as was in this one will be hard to slay." And he picked up his sword, and turned to go to the field of deed.

She said: "I must needs go with thee; terror hath so filled my soul, that I durst not abide here without thee."

So they went both together to where the creature lay. The Maid durst not look on the dead monster, but Walter noted that he was girt with a big ungainly sax; so he drew it from the sheath, and there smote off the hideous head of the fiend with his own weapon. Then they twain together laboured the earth, she with Walter's sword, he with the ugly sax, till they had made a grave deep and wide enough; and therein they thrust the creature, and covered him up, weapons and all together.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXIII: OF THE PEACEFUL ENDING OF THAT WILD DAY

Thereafter Walter led the Maid down again, and said to her: "Now, sweetling, shall the story be told."

"Nay, friend," she said, "not here. This place hath been polluted by my craven fear, and the horror of the vile wretch, of whom no words may tell his vileness. Let us hence and onward. Thou seest I have once more come to life again."

"But," said he, "thou hast been hurt by the Dwarf's arrow."

She laughed, and said: "Had I never had greater hurt from them than that, little had been the tale thereof: yet whereas thou lookest dolorous about it, we will speedily heal it."

Therewith she sought about, and found nigh the stream-side certain herbs; and she spake words over them, and bade Walter lay them on the wound, which, forsooth, was of the least, and he did so, and bound a strip of his shirt about her arm; and then would she set forth. But he said: "Thou art all unshod; and but if that be seen to, our journey shall be stayed by thy foot-soreness: I may make a shift to fashion thee brogues."

She said: "I may well go barefoot. And in any case, I entreat thee that we tarry here no longer, but go away hence, if it be but for a mile."

And she looked piteously on him, so that he might not gainsay her.

So then they crossed the stream, and set forward, when amidst all these haps the day was worn to midmorning. But after they had gone a mile, they sat them down on a knoll under the shadow of a big thorn-tree, within sight of the mountains. Then said Walter: "Now will I cut thee the brogues from the skirt of my buff-coat, which shall be well meet for such work; and meanwhile shalt thou tell me thy tale."

"Thou art kind," she said; "but be kinder yet, and abide my tale till we have done our day's work. For we were best to make no long delay here; because, though thou hast slain the King-dwarf, yet there be others of his kindred, who swarm in some parts of the wood as the rabbits in a warren. Now true it is that they have but little understanding, less, it may be, than the very brute beasts; and that, as I said afore, unless they be set on our slot like to hounds, they shall have no inkling of where to seek us, yet might they happen upon us by mere misadventure. And moreover, friend," quoth she, blushing, "I would beg of thee some little respite; for though I scarce fear thy wrath any more, since thou hast been so kind to me, yet is there shame in that which I have to tell thee. Wherefore, since the fairest of the day is before us, let us use it all we may, and, when thou hast done me my new foot-gear, get us gone forward again."

He kissed her kindly and yea-said her asking: he had already fallen to work on the leather, and in a while had fashioned her the brogues; so she tied them to her feet, and arose with a smile and said: "Now am I hale and strong again, what with the rest, and what with thy loving-kindness, and thou shalt see how nimble I shall be to leave this land, for as fair as it is. Since forsooth a land of lies it is, and of grief to the children of Adam."

So they went their ways thence, and fared nimbly indeed, and made no stay till some three hours after noon, when they rested by a thicket-side, where the strawberries grew plenty; they ate thereof what they would: and from a great oak hard by Walter shot him first one culver, and then another, and hung them to his girdle to be for their evening's meal; sithence they went forward again, and nought befell them to tell of, till they were come, whenas it lacked scarce an hour of sunset, to the banks of another river, not right great, but bigger than the last one. There the Maid cast herself down and said: "Friend, no further will thy friend go this even; nay, to say sooth, she cannot. So now we will eat of thy venison, and then shall my tale be, since I may no longer delay it; and thereafter shall our slumber be sweet and safe as I deem."

She spake merrily now, and as one who feared nothing, and Walter was much heartened by her words and her voice, and he fell to and made a fire, and a woodland oven in the earth, and sithence dighted his fowl, and baked them after the manner of wood-men. And they ate, both of them, in all love, and in good-liking of life, and were much strengthened by their supper. And when they were done, Walter eked his fire, both against the chill of the midnight and dawning, and for a guard against wild beasts, and by that time night was come, and the moon arisen. Then the Maiden drew up to the fire, and turned to Walter and spake.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXIV: THE MAID TELLS OF WHAT HAD BEFALLEN HER

"Now, friend, by the clear of the moon and this firelight will I tell what I may and can of my tale. Thus it is: If I be wholly of the race of Adam I wot not nor can I tell thee how many years old I may be. For there are, as it were, shards or gaps in my life, wherein are but a few things dimly remembered, and doubtless many things forgotten. I remember well when I was a little child, and right happy, and there were people about me whom I loved, and who loved me. It was not in this land; but all things were lovely there; the year's beginning, the happy mid-year, the year's waning, the year's ending, and then again its beginning. That passed away, and then for a while is more than dimness, for nought I remember save that I was. Thereafter I remember again, and am a young maiden, and I know some things, and long to know more. I am nowise happy; I am amongst people who bid me go, and I go; and do this, and I do it: none loveth me, none tormenteth me; but I wear my heart in longing for I scarce know what. Neither then am I in this land, but in a land that I love not, and a house that is big and stately, but nought lovely. Then is a dim time again, and sithence a time not right clear; an evil time, wherein I am older, wellnigh grown to womanhood. There are a many folk about me, and they foul, and greedy, and hard; and my spirit is fierce, and my body feeble; and I am set to tasks that I would not do, by them that are unwiser than I; and smitten I am by them that are less valiant than I; and I know lack, and stripes, and divers misery. But all that is now become but a dim picture to me, save that amongst all these unfriends is a friend to me; an old woman, who telleth me sweet tales of other life, wherein all is high and goodly, or at the least valiant and doughty, and she setteth hope in my heart and learneth me, and maketh me to know much . . . O much . . . so that at last I am grown wise, and wise to be mighty if I durst. Yet am I nought in this land all this while, but, as meseemeth, in a great and a foul city."

"And then, as it were, I fall asleep; and in my sleep is nought, save here and there a wild dream, somedeal lovely, somedeal hideous: but of this dream is my Mistress a part, and the monster, withal, whose head thou didst cleave to-day. But when I am awaken from it, then am I verily in this land, and myself, as thou seest me to-day. And the first part of my life here is this, that I am in the pillared ball yonder, half-clad and with bound hands; and the Dwarf leadeth me to the Lady, and I hear his horrible croak as he sayeth: 'Lady, will this one do?' and then the sweet voice of the Lady saying: 'This one will do; thou shalt have thy reward: now, set thou the token upon her.' Then I remember the Dwarf dragging me away, and my heart sinking for fear of him: but for that time he did me no more harm than the rivetting upon my leg this iron ring which here thou seest."

"So from that time forward I have lived in this land, and been the thrall of the Lady; and I remember my life here day by day, and no part of it has fallen into the dimness of dreams. Thereof will I tell thee but little: but this I will tell thee, that in spite of my past dreams, or it may be because of them, I had not lost the wisdom which the old woman had erst learned me, and for more wisdom I longed. Maybe this longing shall now make both thee and me happy, but for the passing time it brought me grief. For at first my Mistress was indeed wayward with me, but as any great lady might be with her bought thrall, whiles caressing me, and whiles chastising me, as her mood went; but she seemed not to be cruel of malice, or with any set purpose. But so it was (rather little by little than by any great sudden uncovering of my intent), that she came to know that I also had some of the wisdom whereby she lived her queenly life. That was about two years after I was first her thrall, and three weary years have gone by since she began to see in me the enemy of her days. Now why or wherefore I know not, but it seemeth that it would not avail her to slay me outright, or suffer me to die; but nought withheld her from piling up griefs and miseries on my head. At last she set her servant, the Dwarf, upon me, even he whose head thou clavest to-day. Many things I bore from him whereof it were unseemly for my tongue to tell before thee; but the time came when he exceeded, and I could bear no more; and then I showed him this sharp knife (wherewith I would have thrust me through to the heart if thou hadst not pardoned me e'en now), and I told him that if he forbore me not, I would slay, not him, but myself; and this he might not away with because of the commandment of the Lady, who had given him the word that in any case I must be kept living. And her hand, withal, fear held somewhat hereafter. Yet was there need to me of all my wisdom; for with all this her hatred grew, and whiles raged within her so furiously that it overmastered her fear, and at such times she would have put me to death if I had not escaped her by some turn of my lore."

"Now further, I shall tell thee that somewhat more than a year ago hither to this land came the King's Son, the second goodly man, as thou art the third, whom her sorceries have drawn hither since I have dwelt here. Forsooth, when he first came, he seemed to us, to me, and yet more to my Lady, to be as beautiful as an angel, and sorely she loved him; and he her, after his fashion: but he was light-minded, and cold-hearted, and in a while he must needs turn his eyes upon me, and offer me his love, which was but foul and unkind as it turned out; for when I nay-said him, as maybe I had not done save for fear of my Mistress, he had no pity upon me, but spared not to lead me into the trap of her wrath, and leave me without help, or a good word. But, O friend, in spite of all grief and anguish, I learned still, and waxed wise, and wiser, abiding the day of my deliverance, which has come, and thou art come."

Therewith she took Walter's hands and kissed them; but he kissed her face, and her tears wet her lips. Then she went on: "But sithence, months ago, the Lady began to weary of this dastard, despite of his beauty; and then it was thy turn to be swept into her net; I partly guess how. For on a day in broad daylight, as I was serving my Mistress in the hall, and the Evil Thing, whose head is now cloven, was lying across the threshold of the door, as it were a dream fell upon me, though I strove to cast it off for fear of chastisement; for the pillared hall wavered, and vanished from my sight, and my feet were treading a rough stone pavement instead of the marble wonder of the hall, and there was the scent of the salt sea and of the tackle of ships, and behind me were tall houses, and before me the ships indeed, with their ropes beating and their sails flapping and their masts wavering; and in mine ears was the hale and how of mariners; things that I had seen and heard in the dimness of my life gone by."

"And there was I, and the Dwarf before me, and the Lady after me, going over the gangway aboard of a tall ship, and she gathered way and was gotten out of the haven, and straightway I saw the mariners cast abroad their ancient."

Quoth Walter: "What then! Sawest thou the blazon thereon, of a wolf-like beast ramping up against a maiden? And that might well have been thou."

She said: "Yea, so it was; but refrain thee, that I may tell on my tale! The ship and the sea vanished away, but I was not back in the hall of the Golden House; and again were we three in the street of the self-same town which we had but just left; but somewhat dim was my vision thereof, and I saw little save the door of a goodly house before me, and speedily it died out, and we were again in the pillared hall, wherein my thralldom was made manifest."

"Maiden," said Walter, "one question I would ask thee; to wit, didst thou see me on the quay by the ships?"

"Nay," she said, "there were many folk about, but they were all as images of the aliens to me. Now hearken further: three months thereafter came the dream upon me again, when we were all three together in the Pillared Hall; and again was the vision somewhat dim. Once more we were in the street of a busy town, but all unlike to that other one, and there were men standing together on our right hands by the door of a house."

"Yea, yea," quoth Walter; "and, forsooth, one of them was who but I."

"Refrain thee, beloved!" she said; "for my tale draweth to its ending, and I would have thee hearken heedfully: for maybe thou shalt once again deem my deed past pardon. Some twenty days after this last dream, I had some leisure from my Mistress's service, so I went to disport me by the Well of the Oak-tree (or forsooth she might have set in my mind the thought of going there, that I might meet thee and give her some occasion against me); and I sat thereby, nowise loving the earth, but sick at heart, because of late the King's Son had been more than ever instant with me to yield him my body, threatening me else with casting me into all that the worst could do to me of torments and shames day by day. I say my heart failed me, and I was wellnigh brought to the point of yea-saying his desires, that I might take the chance of something befalling me that were less bad than the worst. But here must I tell thee a thing, and pray thee to take it to heart. This, more than aught else, had given me strength to nay-say that dastard, that my wisdom both hath been, and now is, the wisdom of a wise maid, and not of a woman, and all the might thereof shall I lose with my maidenhead. Evil wilt thou think of me then, for all I was tried so sore, that I was at point to cast it all away, so wretchedly as I shrank from the horror of the Lady's wrath."

"But there as I sat pondering these things, I saw a man coming, and thought no otherwise thereof but that it was the King's Son, till I saw the stranger drawing near, and his golden hair, and his grey eyes; and then I heard his voice, and his kindness pierced my heart, and I knew that my friend had come to see me; and O, friend, these tears are for the sweetness of that past hour!"

Said Walter: "I came to see my friend, I also. Now have I noted what thou badest me; and I will forbear all as thou commandest me, till we be safe out of the desert and far away from all evil things; but wilt thou ban me from all caresses?"

She laughed amidst of her tears, and said: "O, nay, poor lad, if thou wilt be but wise."

Then she leaned toward him, and took his face betwixt her hands and kissed him oft, and the tears started in his eyes for love and pity of her.

Then she said: "Alas, friend! even yet mayst thou doom me guilty, and all thy love may turn away from me, when I have told thee all that I have done for the sake of thee and me. O, if then there might be some chastisement for the guilty woman, and not mere sundering!"

"Fear nothing, sweetling," said he; "for indeed I deem that already I know partly what thou hast done."

She sighed, and said: "I will tell thee next, that I banned thy kissing and caressing of me till to-day because I knew that my Mistress would surely know if a man, if thou, hadst so much as touched a finger of mine in love, it was to try me herein that on the morning of the hunting she kissed and embraced me, till I almost died thereof, and showed thee my shoulder and my limbs; and to try thee withal, if thine eye should glister or thy cheek flush thereat; for indeed she was raging in jealousy of thee. Next, my friend, even whiles we were talking together at the Well of the Rock, I was pondering on what we should do to escape from this land of lies. Maybe thou wilt say: Why didst thou not take my hand and flee with me as we fled to-day? Friend, it is most true, that were she not dead we had not escaped thus far. For her trackers would have followed us, set on by her, and brought us back to an evil fate. Therefore I tell thee that from the first I did plot the death of those two, the Dwarf and the Mistress. For no otherwise mightest thou live, or I escape from death in life. But as to the dastard who threatened me with a thrall's pains, I heeded him nought to live or die, for well I knew that thy valiant sword, yea, or thy bare hands, would speedily tame him. Now first I knew that I must make a show of yielding to the King's Son; and somewhat how I did therein, thou knowest. But no night and no time did I give him to bed me, till after I had met thee as thou wentest to the Golden House, before the adventure of fetching the lion's skin; and up to that time I had scarce known what to do, save ever to bid thee, with sore grief and pain, to yield thee to the wicked woman's desire. But as we spake together there by the stream, and I saw that the Evil Thing (whose head thou clavest e'en now) was spying on us, then amidst the sickness of terror which ever came over me whensoever I thought of him, and much more when I saw him (ah! he is dead now!), it came flashing into my mind how I might destroy my enemy. Therefore I made the Dwarf my messenger to her, by bidding thee to my bed in such wise that he might hear it. And wot thou well, that he speedily carried her the tidings. Meanwhile I hastened to lie to the King's Son, and all privily bade him come to me and not thee. And thereafter, by dint of waiting and watching, and taking the only chance that there was, I met thee as thou camest back from fetching the skin of the lion that never was, and gave thee that warning, or else had we been undone indeed."

Said Walter: "Was the lion of her making or of thine then?"

She said: "Of hers: why should I deal with such a matter?"

"Yea," said Walter, "but she verily swooned, and she was verily wroth with the Enemy."

The Maid smiled, and said: "If her lie was not like very sooth, then had she not been the crafts-master that I knew her: one may lie otherwise than with the tongue alone: yet indeed her wrath against the Enemy was nought feigned; for the Enemy was even I, and in these latter days never did her wrath leave me. But to go on with my tale."

"Now doubt thou not, that, when thou camest into the hall yester eve, the Mistress knew of thy counterfeit tryst with me, and meant nought but death for thee; yet first would she have thee in her arms again, therefore did she make much of thee at table (and that was partly for my torment also), and therefore did she make that tryst with thee, and deemed doubtless that thou wouldst not dare to forgo it, even if thou shouldst go to me thereafter."

"Now I had trained that dastard to me as I have told thee, but I gave him a sleepy draught, so that when I came to the bed he might not move toward me nor open his eyes: but I lay down beside him, so that the Lady might know that my body had been there; for well had she wotted if it had not. Then as there I lay I cast over him thy shape, so that none might have known but that thou wert lying by my side, and there, trembling, I abode what should befall. Thus I passed through the hour whenas thou shouldest have been at her chamber, and the time of my tryst with thee was come as the Mistress would be deeming; so that I looked for her speedily, and my heart well-nigh failed me for fear of her cruelty."

"Presently then I heard a stirring in her chamber, and I slipped from out the bed, and hid me behind the hangings, and was like to die for fear of her; and lo, presently she came stealing in softly, holding a lamp in one hand and a knife in the other. And I tell thee of a sooth that I also had a sharp knife in my hand to defend my life if need were. She held the lamp up above her head before she drew near to the bed-side, and I heard her mutter: 'She is not there then! but she shall be taken.' Then she went up to the bed and stooped over it, and laid her hand on the place where I had lain; and therewith her eyes turned to that false image of thee lying there, and she fell a-trembling and shaking, and the lamp fell to the ground and was quenched (but there was bright moonlight in the room, and still I could see what betid). But she uttered a noise like the low roar of a wild beast, and I saw her arm and hand rise up, and the flashing of the steel beneath the hand, and then down came the hand and the steel, and I went nigh to swooning lest perchance I had wrought over well, and thine image were thy very self. The dastard died without a groan: why should I lament him? I cannot. But the Lady drew him toward her, and snatched the clothes from off his shoulders and breast, and fell a-gibbering sounds mostly without meaning, but broken here and there with words. Then I heard her say: 'I shall forget; I shall forget; and the new days shall come.' Then was there silence of her a little, and thereafter she cried out in a terrible voice: 'O no, no, no! I cannot forget; I cannot forget;' and she raised a great wailing cry that filled all the night with horror (didst thou not hear it?), and caught up the knife from the bed and thrust it into her breast, and fell down a dead heap over the bed and on to the man whom she had slain. And then I thought of thee, and joy smote across my terror; how shall I gainsay it? And I fled away to thee, and I took thine hands in mine, thy dear hands, and we fled away together. Shall we be still together?"

He spoke slowly, and touched her not, and she, forbearing all sobbing and weeping, sat looking wistfully on him. He said: "I think thou hast told me all; and whether thy guile slew her, or her own evil heart, she was slain last night who lay in mine arms the night before. It was ill, and ill done of me, for I loved not her, but thee, and I wished for her death that I might be with thee. Thou wottest this, and still thou lovest me, it may be overweeningly. What have I to say then? If there be any guilt of guile, I also was in the guile; and if there be any guilt of murder, I also was in the murder. Thus we say to each other; and to God and his Hallows we say: 'We two have conspired to slay the woman who tormented one of us, and would have slain the other; and if we have done amiss therein, then shall we two together pay the penalty; for in this have we done as one body and one soul.'"

Therewith he put his arms about her and kissed her, but soberly and friendly, as if he would comfort her. And thereafter he said to her: "Maybe to-morrow, in the sunlight, I will ask thee of this woman, what she verily was; but now let her be. And thou, thou art over-wearied, and I bid thee sleep."

So he went about and gathered of bracken a great heap for her bed, and did his coat thereover, and led her thereto, and she lay down meekly, and smiled and crossed her arms over her bosom, and presently fell asleep. But as for him, he watched by the fire-side till dawn began to glimmer, and then he also laid him down and slept.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXV: OF THE TRIUMPHANT SUMMER ARRAY OF THE MAID

When the day was bright Walter arose, and met the Maid coming from the river-bank, fresh and rosy from the water. She paled a little when they met face to face, and she shrank from him shyly. But he took her hand and kissed her frankly; and the two were glad, and had no need to tell each other of their joy, though much else they deemed they had to say, could they have found words thereto.

So they came to their fire and sat down, and fell to breakfast; and ere they were done, the Maid said: "My Master, thou seest we be come nigh unto the hill-country, and to-day about sunset, belike, we shall come into the Land of the Bear-folk; and both it is, that there is peril if we fall into their hands, and that we may scarce escape them. Yet I deem that we may deal with the peril by wisdom."

"What is the peril?" said Walter; "I mean, what is the worst of it?"

Said the Maid: "To be offered up in sacrifice to their God."

"But if we escape death at their hands, what then?" said Walter.

"One of two things," said she; "the first that they shall take us into their tribe."

"And will they sunder us in that case?" said Walter.

"Nay," said she.

Walter laughed and said: "Therein is little harm then. But what is the other chance?"

Said she: "That we leave them with their goodwill, and come back to one of the lands of Christendom."

Said Walter: "I am not all so sure that this is the better of the two choices, though, forsooth, thou seemest to think so. But tell me now, what like is their God, that they should offer up new-comers to him?"

"Their God is a woman," she said, "and the Mother of their nation and tribes (or so they deem) before the days when they had chieftains and Lords of Battle."

"That will be long ago," said he; "how then may she be living now?"

Said the Maid: "Doubtless that woman of yore agone is dead this many and many a year; but they take to them still a new woman, one after other, as they may happen on them, to be in the stead of the Ancient Mother. And to tell thee the very truth right out, she that lieth dead in the Pillared Hall was even the last of these; and now, if they knew it, they lack a God. This shall we tell them."

"Yea, yea!" said Walter, "a goodly welcome shall we have of them then, if we come amongst them with our hands red with the blood of their God!"

She smiled on him and said: "If I come amongst them with the tidings that I have slain her, and they trow therein, without doubt they shall make me Lady and Goddess in her stead."

"This is a strange word," said Walter "but if so they do, how shall that further us in reaching the kindreds of the world, and the folk of Holy Church?"

She laughed outright, so joyous was she grown, now that she knew that his life was yet to be a part of hers. "Sweetheart," she said, "now I see that thou desirest wholly what I desire; yet in any case, abiding with them would be living and not dying, even as thou hadst it e'en now. But, forsooth, they will not hinder our departure if they deem me their God; they do not look for it, nor desire it, that their God should dwell with them daily. Have no fear." Then she laughed again, and said: "What! thou lookest on me and deemest me to be but a sorry image of a goddess; and me with my scanty coat and bare arms and naked feet! But wait! I know well how to array me when the time cometh. Thou shalt see it! And now, my Master, were it not meet that we took to the road?"

So they arose, and found a ford of the river that took the Maid but to the knee, and so set forth up the greensward of the slopes whereas there were but few trees; so went they faring toward the hill-country.

At the last they were come to the feet of the very hills, and in the hollows betwixt the buttresses of them grew nut and berry trees, and the greensward round about them was both thick and much flowery. There they stayed them and dined, whereas Walter had shot a hare by the way, and they had found a bubbling spring under a grey stone in a bight of the coppice, wherein now the birds were singing their best.

When they had eaten and had rested somewhat, the Maid arose and said: "Now shall the Queen array herself, and seem like a very goddess."

Then she fell to work, while Walter looked on; and she made a garland for her head of eglantine where the roses were the fairest; and with mingled flowers of the summer she wreathed her middle about, and let the garland of them hang down to below her knees; and knots of the flowers she made fast to the skirts of her coat, and did them for arm-rings about her arms, and for anklets and sandals for her feet. Then she set a garland about Walter's head, and then stood a little off from him and set her feet together, and lifted up her arms, and said: "Lo now! am I not as like to the Mother of Summer as if I were clad in silk and gold? and even so shall I be deemed by the folk of the Bear. Come now, thou shalt see how all shall be well."

She laughed joyously; but he might scarce laugh for pity of his love. Then they set forth again, and began to climb the hills, and the hours wore as they went in sweet converse; till at last Walter looked on the Maid, and smiled on her, and said: "One thing I would say to thee, lovely friend, to wit: wert thou clad in silk and gold, thy stately raiment might well suffer a few stains, or here and there a rent maybe; but stately would it be still when the folk of the Bear should come up against thee. But as to this flowery array of thine, in a few hours it shall be all faded and nought. Nay, even now, as I look on thee, the meadow-sweet that hangeth from thy girdle-stead has waxen dull, and welted; and the blossoming eyebright that is for a hem to the little white coat of thee is already forgetting how to be bright and blue. What sayest thou then?"

She laughed at his word, and stood still, and looked back over her shoulder, while with her fingers she dealt with the flowers about her side like to a bird preening his feathers. Then she said: "Is it verily so as thou sayest? Look again!"

So he looked, and wondered; for lo! beneath his eyes the spires of the meadow-sweet grew crisp and clear again, the eyebright blossoms shone once more over the whiteness of her legs; the eglantine roses opened, and all was as fresh and bright as if it were still growing on its own roots.

He wondered, and was even somedeal aghast; but she said: "Dear friend, be not troubled! did I not tell thee that I am wise in hidden lore? But in my wisdom shall be no longer any scathe to any man. And again, this my wisdom, as I told thee erst, shall end on the day whereon I am made all happy. And it is thou that shall wield it all, my Master. Yet must my wisdom needs endure for a little season yet. Let us on then, boldly and happily."

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXVI: THEY COME TO THE FOLK OF THE BEARS

On they went, and before long they were come up on to the down-country, where was scarce a tree, save gnarled and knotty thorn- bushes here and there, but nought else higher than the whin. And here on these upper lands they saw that the pastures were much burned with the drought, albeit summer was not worn old. Now they went making due south toward the mountains, whose heads they saw from time to time rising deep blue over the bleak greyness of the down-land ridges. And so they went, till at last, hard on sunset, after they had climbed long over a high bent, they came to the brow thereof, and, looking down, beheld new tidings.

There was a wide valley below them, greener than the downs which they had come over, and greener yet amidmost, from the watering of a stream which, all beset with willows, wound about the bottom. Sheep and neat were pasturing about the dale, and moreover a long line of smoke was going up straight into the windless heavens from the midst of a ring of little round houses built of turfs, and thatched with reed. And beyond that, toward an eastward-lying bight of the dale, they could see what looked like to a doom-ring of big stones, though there were no rocky places in that land. About the cooking-fire amidst of the houses, and here and there otherwhere, they saw, standing or going to and fro, huge figures of men and women, with children playing about betwixt them.

They stood and gazed down at it for a minute or two, and though all were at peace there, yet to Walter, at least, it seemed strange and awful. He spake softly, as though he would not have his voice reach those men, though they were, forsooth, out of earshot of anything save a shout: "Are these then the children of the Bear? What shall we do now?"

She said: "Yea, of the Bear they be, though there be other folks of them far and far away to the northward and eastward, near to the borders of the sea. And as to what we shall do, let us go down at once, and peacefully. Indeed, by now there will be no escape from them; for lo you! they have seen us."

Forsooth, some three or four of the big men had turned them toward the bent whereon stood the twain, and were hailing them in huge, rough voices, wherein, howsoever, seemed to be no anger or threat. So the Maid took Walter by the hand, and thus they went down quietly, and the Bear-folk, seeing them, stood all together, facing them, to abide their coming. Walter saw of them, that though they were very tall and bigly made, they were not so far above the stature of men as to be marvels. The carles were long-haired, and shaggy of beard, and their hair all red or tawny; their skins, where their naked flesh showed, were burned brown with sun and weather, but to a fair and pleasant brown, nought like to blackamoors. The queans were comely and well-eyed; nor was there anything of fierce or evil-looking about either the carles or the queans, but somewhat grave and solemn of aspect were they. Clad were they all, saving the young men-children, but somewhat scantily, and in nought save sheep-skins or deer-skins.

For weapons they saw amongst them clubs, and spears headed with bone or flint, and ugly axes of big flints set in wooden handles; nor was there, as far as they could see, either now or afterward, any bow amongst them. But some of the young men seemed to have slings done about their shoulders.

Now when they were come but three fathom from them, the Maid lifted up her voice, and spake clearly and sweetly: "Hail, ye folk of the Bears! we have come amongst you, and that for your good and not for your hurt: wherefore we would know if we be welcome."

There was an old man who stood foremost in the midst, clad in a mantle of deer-skins worked very goodly, and with a gold ring on his arm, and a chaplet of blue stones on his head, and he spake: "Little are ye, but so goodly, that if ye were but bigger, we should deem that ye were come from the Gods' House. Yet have I heard, that how mighty soever may the Gods be, and chiefly our God, they be at whiles nought so bigly made as we of the Bears. How this may be, I wot not. But if ye be not of the Gods or their kindred, then are ye mere aliens; and we know not what to do with aliens, save we meet them in battle, or give them to the God, or save we make them children of the Bear. But yet again, ye may be messengers of some folk who would bind friendship and alliance with us: in which case ye shall at the least depart in peace, and whiles ye are with us shall be our guests in all good cheer. Now, therefore, we bid you declare the matter unto us."

Then spake the Maid: "Father, it were easy for us to declare what we be unto you here present. But, meseemeth, ye who be gathered round the fire here this evening are less than the whole tale of the children of the Bear."

"So it is, Maiden," said the elder, "that many more children hath the Bear."

"This then we bid you," said the Maid, "that ye send the tokens round and gather your people to you, and when they be assembled in the Doom-ring, then shall we put our errand before you; and according to that, shall ye deal with us."

"Thou hast spoken well," said the elder; "and even so had we bidden you ourselves. To-morrow, before noon, shall ye stand in the Doom- ring in this Dale, and speak with the children of the Bear."

Therewith he turned to his own folk and called out something, whereof those twain knew not the meaning; and there came to him, one after another, six young men, unto each of whom he gave a thing from out his pouch, but what it was Walter might not see, save that it was little and of small account: to each, also, he spake a word or two, and straight they set off running, one after the other, turning toward the bent which was over against that whereby the twain had come into the Dale, and were soon out of sight in the gathering dusk.

Then the elder turned him again to Walter and the Maid, and spake: "Man and woman, whatsoever ye may be, or whatsoever may abide you to-morrow, to-night, ye are welcome guests to us; so we bid you come eat and drink at our fire."

So they sat all together upon the grass round about the embers of the fire, and ate curds and cheese, and drank milk in abundance; and as the night grew on them they quickened the fire, that they might have light. This wild folk talked merrily amongst themselves, with laughter enough and friendly jests, but to the new-comers they were few-spoken, though, as the twain deemed, for no enmity that they bore them. But this found Walter, that the younger ones, both men and women, seemed to find it a hard matter to keep their eyes off them; and seemed, withal, to gaze on them with somewhat of doubt, or, it might be, of fear.

So when the night was wearing a little, the elder arose and bade the twain to come with him, and led them to a small house or booth, which was amidmost of all, and somewhat bigger than the others, and he did them to wit that they should rest there that night, and bade them sleep in peace and without fear till the morrow. So they entered, and found beds thereon of heather and ling, and they laid them down sweetly, like brother and sister, when they had kissed each other. But they noted that four brisk men lay without the booth, and across the door, with their weapons beside them, so that they must needs look upon themselves as captives.

Then Walter might not refrain him, but spake: "Sweet and dear friend, I have come a long way from the quay at Langton, and the vision of the Dwarf, the Maid, and the Lady; and for this kiss wherewith I have kissed thee e'en now, and the kindness of thine eyes, it was worth the time and the travail. But to-morrow, meseemeth, I shall go no further in this world, though my journey be far longer than from Langton hither. And now may God and All Hallows keep thee amongst this wild folk, whenas I shall be gone from thee."

She laughed low and sweetly, and said: "Dear friend, dost thou speak to me thus mournfully to move me to love thee better? Then is thy labour lost; for no better may I love thee than now I do; and that is with mine whole heart. But keep a good courage, I bid thee; for we be not sundered yet, nor shall we be. Nor do I deem that we shall die here, or to-morrow; but many years hence, after we have known all the sweetness of life. Meanwhile, I bid thee good-night, fair friend!"

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXVII: MORNING AMONGST THE BEARS

So Walter laid him down and fell asleep, and knew no more till he awoke in bright daylight with the Maid standing over him. She was fresh from the water, for she had been to the river to bathe her, and the sun through the open door fell streaming on her feet close to Walter's pillow. He turned about and cast his arm about them, and caressed them, while she stood smiling upon him; then he arose and looked on her, and said: "How thou art fair and bright this morning! And yet . . . and yet . . . were it not well that thou do off thee all this faded and drooping bravery of leaves and blossoms, that maketh thee look like to a jongleur's damsel on a morrow of May-day?"

And he gazed ruefully on her.

She laughed on him merrily, and said: "Yea, and belike these others think no better of my attire, or not much better; for yonder they are gathering small wood for the burnt-offering; which, forsooth, shall be thou and I, unless I better it all by means of the wisdom I learned of the old woman, and perfected betwixt the stripes of my Mistress, whom a little while ago thou lovedst somewhat."

And as she spake her eyes sparkled, her cheek flushed, and her limbs and her feet seemed as if they could scarce refrain from dancing for joy. Then Walter knit his brow, and for a moment a thought half- framed was in his mind: Is it so, that she will bewray me and live without me? and he cast his eyes on to the ground. But she said: "Look up, and into mine eyes, friend, and see if there be in them any falseness toward thee! For I know thy thought; I know thy thought. Dost thou not see that my joy and gladness is for the love of thee, and the thought of the rest from trouble that is at hand?"

He looked up, and his eyes met the eyes of her love, and he would have cast his arms about her; but she drew aback and said: "Nay, thou must refrain thee awhile, dear friend, lest these folk cast eyes on us, and deem us over lover-like for what I am to bid them deem me. Abide a while, and then shall all be in me according to thy will. But now I must tell thee that it is not very far from noon, and that the Bears are streaming into the Dale, and already there is an host of men at the Doom-ring, and, as I said, the bale for the burnt-offering is wellnigh dight, whether it be for us, or for some other creature. And now I have to bid thee this, and it will be a thing easy for thee to do, to wit, that thou look as if thou wert of the race of the Gods, and not to blench, or show sign of blenching, whatever betide: to yea-say both my yea-say and my nay-say: and lastly this, which is the only hard thing for thee (but thou hast already done it before somewhat), to look upon me with no masterful eyes of love, nor as if thou wert at once praying me and commanding me; rather thou shalt so demean thee as if thou wert my man all simply, and nowise my master."

"O friend beloved," said Walter, "here at least art thou the master, and I will do all thy bidding, in certain hope of this, that either we shall live together or die together."

But as they spoke, in came the elder, and with him a young maiden, bearing with them their breakfast of curds arid cream and strawberries, and he bade them eat. So they ate, and were not unmerry; and the while of their eating the elder talked with them soberly, but not hardly, or with any seeming enmity: and ever his talk gat on to the drought, which was now burning up the down- pastures; and how the grass in the watered dales, which was no wide spread of land, would not hold out much longer unless the God sent them rain. And Walter noted that those two, the elder and the Maid, eyed each other curiously amidst of this talk; the elder intent on what she might say, and if she gave heed to his words; while on her side the Maid answered his speech graciously and pleasantly, but said little that was of any import: nor would she have him fix her eyes, which wandered lightly from this thing to that; nor would her lips grow stern and stable, but ever smiled in answer to the light of her eyes, as she sat there with her face as the very face of the gladness of the summer day.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXVIII: OF THE NEW GOD OF THE BEARS

At last the old man said: "My children, ye shall now come with me unto the Doom-ring of our folk, the Bears of the Southern Dales, and deliver to them your errand; and I beseech you to have pity upon your own bodies, as I have pity on them; on thine especially, Maiden, so fair and bright a creature as thou art; for so it is, that if ye deal us out light and lying words after the manner of dastards, ye shall miss the worship and glory of wending away amidst of the flames, a gift to the God and a hope to the people, and shall be passed by the rods of the folk, until ye faint and fail amongst them, and then shall ye be thrust down into the flow at the Dale's End, and a stone-laden hurdle cast upon you, that we may thenceforth forget your folly."

The Maid now looked full into his eyes, and Walter deemed that the old man shrank before her; but she said: "Thou art old and wise, O great man of the Bears, yet nought I need to learn of thee. Now lead us on our way to the Stead of the Errands."

So the elder brought them along to the Doom-ring at the eastern end of the Dale; and it was now all peopled with those huge men, weaponed after their fashion, and standing up, so that the grey stones thereof but showed a little over their heads. But amidmost of the said Ring was a big stone, fashioned as a chair, whereon sat a very old man, long-hoary and white-bearded, and on either side of him stood a great-limbed woman clad in war-gear, holding, each of them, a long spear, and with a flint-bladed knife in the girdle; and there were no other women in all the Mote.

Then the elder led those twain into the midst of the Mote, and there bade them go up on to a wide, flat-topped stone, six feet above the ground, just over against the ancient chieftain; and they mounted it by a rough stair, and stood there before that folk; Walter in his array of the outward world, which had been fair enough, of crimson cloth and silk, and white linen, but was now travel-stained and worn; and the Maid with nought upon her, save the smock wherein she had fled from the Golden House of the Wood beyond the World, decked with the faded flowers which she had wreathed about her yesterday. Nevertheless, so it was, that those big men eyed her intently, and with somewhat of worship.

Now did Walter, according to her bidding, sink down on his knees beside her, and drawing his sword, hold it before him, as if to keep all interlopers aloof from the Maid. And there was silence in the Mote, and all eyes were fixed on those twain.

At last the old chief arose and spake: "Ye men, here are come a man and a woman, we know not whence; whereas they have given word to our folk who first met them, that they would tell their errand to none save the Mote of the People; which it was their due to do, if they were minded to risk it. For either they be aliens without an errand hither, save, it may be, to beguile us, in which case they shall presently die an evil death; or they have come amongst us that we may give them to the God with flint-edge and fire; or they have a message to us from some folk or other, on the issue of which lieth life or death. Now shall ye hear what they have to say concerning themselves and their faring hither. But, meseemeth, it shall be the woman who is the chief and hath the word in her mouth; for, lo you! the man kneeleth at her feet, as one who would serve and worship her. Speak out then, woman, and let our warriors hear thee."

Then the Maid lifted up her voice, and spake out clear and shrilling, like to a flute of the best of the minstrels: "Ye men of the Children of the Bear, I would ask you a question, and let the chieftain who sitteth before me answer it."

The old man nodded his head, and she went on: "Tell me, Children of the Bear, how long a time is worn since ye saw the God of your worship made manifest in the body of a woman!"

Said the elder: "Many winters have worn since my father's father was a child, and saw the very God in the bodily form of a woman."

Then she said again: "Did ye rejoice at her coming, and would ye rejoice if once more she came amongst you?"

"Yea," said the old chieftain, "for she gave us gifts, and learned us lore, and came to us in no terrible shape, but as a young woman as goodly as thou."

Then said the Maid: "Now, then, is the day of your gladness come; for the old body is dead, and I am the new body of your God, come amongst you for your welfare."

Then fell a great silence on the Mote, till the old man spake and said: "What shall I say and live? For if thou be verily the God, and I threaten thee, wilt thou not destroy me? But thou hast spoken a great word with a sweet mouth, and hast taken the burden of blood on thy lily hands; and if the Children of the Bear be befooled of light liars, how shall they put the shame off them? Therefore I say, show to us a token; and if thou be the God, this shall be easy to thee; and if thou show it not, then is thy falsehood manifest, and thou shalt dree the weird. For we shall deliver thee into the hands of these women here, who shall thrust thee down into the flow which is hereby, after they have wearied themselves with whipping thee. But thy man that kneeleth at thy feet shall we give to the true God, and he shall go to her by the road of the flint and the fire. Hast thou heard? Then give to us the sign and the token."

She changed countenance no whit at his word; but her eyes were the brighter, and her cheek the fresher and her feet moved a little, as if they were growing glad before the dance; and she looked out over the Mote, and spake in her clear voice: "Old man, thou needest not to fear for thy words. Forsooth it is not me whom thou threatenest with stripes and a foul death, but some light fool and liar, who is not here. Now hearken! I wot well that ye would have somewhat of me, to wit, that I should send you rain to end this drought, which otherwise seemeth like to lie long upon you: but this rain, I must go into the mountains of the south to fetch it you; therefore shall certain of your warriors bring me on my way, with this my man, up to the great pass of the said mountains, and we shall set out thitherward this very day."

She was silent a while, and all looked on her, but none spake or moved, so that they seemed as images of stone amongst the stones.

Then she spake again and said: "Some would say, men of the Bear, that this were a sign and a token great enough; but I know you, and how stubborn and perverse of heart ye be; and how that the gift not yet within your hand is no gift to you; and the wonder ye see not, your hearts trow not. Therefore look ye upon me as here I stand, I who have come from the fairer country and the greenwood of the lands, and see if I bear not the summer with me, and the heart that maketh increase and the hand that giveth."

Lo then! as she spake, the faded flowers that hung about her gathered life and grew fresh again; the woodbine round her neck and her sleek shoulders knit itself together and embraced her freshly, and cast its scent about her face. The lilies that girded her loins lifted up their heads, and the gold of their tassels fell upon her; the eyebright grew clean blue again upon her smock; the eglantine found its blooms again, and then began to shed the leaves thereof upon her feet; the meadow-sweet wreathed amongst it made clear the sweetness of her legs, and the mouse-ear studded her raiment as with gems. There she stood amidst of the blossoms, like a great orient pearl against the fretwork of the goldsmiths, and the breeze that came up the valley from behind bore the sweetness of her fragrance all over the Man-mote.

Then, indeed, the Bears stood up, and shouted and cried, and smote on their shields, and tossed their spears aloft. Then the elder rose from his seat, and came up humbly to where she stood, and prayed her to say what she would have done; while the others drew about in knots, but durst not come very nigh to her. She answered the ancient chief, and said, that she would depart presently toward the mountains, whereby she might send them the rain which they lacked, and that thence she would away to the southward for a while; but that they should hear of her, or, it might be, see her, before they who were now of middle age should be gone to their fathers.

Then the old man besought her that they might make her a litter of fragrant green boughs, and so bear her away toward the mountain pass amidst a triumph of the whole folk. But she leapt lightly down from the stone, and walked to and fro on the greensward, while it seemed of her that her feet scarce touched the grass; and she spake to the ancient chief where he still kneeled in worship of her, and said "Nay; deemest thou of me that I need bearing by men's hands, or that I shall tire at all when I am doing my will, and I, the very heart of the year's increase? So it is, that the going of my feet over your pastures shall make them to thrive, both this year and the coming years: surely will I go afoot."

So they worshipped her the more, and blessed her; and then first of all they brought meat, the daintiest they might, both for her and for Walter. But they would not look on the Maid whiles she ate, or suffer Walter to behold her the while. Afterwards, when they had eaten, some twenty men, weaponed after their fashion, made them ready to wend with the Maiden up into the mountains, and anon they set out thitherward all together. Howbeit, the huge men held them ever somewhat aloof from the Maid; and when they came to the resting-place for that night, where was no house, for it was up amongst the foot-hills before the mountains, then it was a wonder to see how carefully they built up a sleeping-place for her, and tilted it over with their skin-cloaks, and how they watched nightlong about her. But Walter they let sleep peacefully on the grass, a little way aloof from the watchers round the Maid.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXIX: WALTER STRAYS IN THE PASS AND IS SUNDERED FROM THE MAID

Morning came, and they arose and went on their ways, and went all day till the sun was nigh set, and they were come up into the very pass; and in the jaws thereof was an earthen howe. There the Maid bade them stay, and she went up on to the howe, and stood there and spake to them, and said: "O men of the Bear, I give you thanks for your following, and I bless you, and promise you the increase of the earth. But now ye shall turn aback, and leave me to go my ways; and my man with the iron sword shall follow me. Now, maybe, I shall come amongst the Bear-folk again before long, and yet again, and learn them wisdom; but for this time it is enough. And I shall tell you that ye were best to hasten home straightway to your houses in the downland dales, for the weather which I have bidden for you is even now coming forth from the forge of storms in the heart of the mountains. Now this last word I give you, that times are changed since I wore the last shape of God that ye have seen, wherefore a change I command you. If so be aliens come amongst you, I will not that ye send them to me by the flint and the fire; rather, unless they be baleful unto you, and worthy of an evil death, ye shall suffer them to abide with you; ye shall make them become children of the Bears, if they be goodly enough and worthy, and they shall be my children as ye be; otherwise, if they be ill-favoured and weakling, let them live and be thralls to you, but not join with you, man to woman. Now depart ye with my blessing."

Therewith she came down from the mound, and went her ways up the pass so lightly, that it was to Walter, standing amongst the Bears, as if she had vanished away. But the men of that folk abode standing and worshipping their God for a little while, and that while he durst not sunder him from their company. But when they had blessed him and gone on their way backward, he betook him in haste to following the Maid, thinking to find her abiding him in some nook of the pass.

Howsoever, it was now twilight or more, and, for all his haste, dark night overtook him, so that perforce he was stayed amidst the tangle of the mountain ways. And, moreover, ere the night was grown old, the weather came upon him on the back of a great south wind, so that the mountain nooks rattled and roared, and there was the rain and the hail, with thunder and lightning, monstrous and terrible, and all the huge array of a summer storm. So he was driven at last to crouch under a big rock and abide the day.

But not so were his troubles at an end. For under the said rock he fell asleep, and when he awoke it was day indeed; but as to the pass, the way thereby was blind with the driving rain and the lowering lift; so that, though he struggled as well as he might against the storm and the tangle, he made but little way.

And now once more the thought came on him, that the Maid was of the fays, or of some race even mightier; and it came on him now not as erst, with half fear and whole desire, but with a bitter oppression of dread, of loss and misery; so that he began to fear that she had but won his love to leave him and forget him for a new-comer, after the wont of fay-women, as old tales tell.

Two days he battled thus with storm and blindness, and wanhope of his life; for he was growing weak and fordone. But the third morning the storm abated, though the rain yet fell heavily, and he could see his way somewhat as well as feel it: withal he found that now his path was leading him downwards. As it grew dusk, he came down into a grassy valley with a stream running through it to the southward, and the rain was now but little, coming down but in dashes from time to time. So he crept down to the stream-side, and lay amongst the bushes there; and said to himself, that on the morrow he would get him victual, so that he might live to seek his Maiden through the wide world. He was of somewhat better heart: but now that he was laid quiet, and had no more for that present to trouble him about the way, the anguish of his loss fell upon him the keener, and he might not refrain him from lamenting his dear Maiden aloud, as one who deemed himself in the empty wilderness: and thus he lamented for her sweetness and her loveliness, and the kindness of her voice and her speech, and her mirth. Then he fell to crying out concerning the beauty of her shaping, praising the parts of her body, as her face, and her hands, and her shoulders, and her feet, and cursing the evil fate which had sundered him from the friendliness of her, and the peerless fashion of her.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXX: NOW THEY MEET AGAIN

Complaining thus-wise, he fell asleep from sheer weariness, and when he awoke it was broad day, calm and bright and cloudless, with the scent of the earth refreshed going up into the heavens, and the birds singing sweetly in the bushes about him: for the dale whereunto he was now come was a fair and lovely place amidst the shelving slopes of the mountains, a paradise of the wilderness, and nought but pleasant and sweet things were to be seen there, now that the morn was so clear and sunny.

He arose and looked about him, and saw where, a hundred yards aloof, was a thicket of small wood, as thorn and elder and whitebeam, all wreathed about with the bines of wayfaring tree; it hid a bight of the stream, which turned round about it, and betwixt it and Walter was the grass short and thick, and sweet, and all beset with flowers; and he said to himself that it was even such a place as wherein the angels were leading the Blessed in the great painted paradise in the choir of the big church at Langton on Holm. But lo! as he looked he cried aloud for joy, for forth from the thicket on to the flowery grass came one like to an angel from out of the said picture, white-clad and bare-foot, sweet of flesh, with bright eyes and ruddy cheeks; for it was the Maid herself. So he ran to her, and she abode him, holding forth kind hands to him, and smiling, while she wept for joy of the meeting. He threw himself upon her, and spared not to kiss her, her cheeks and her mouth, and her arms and her shoulders, and wheresoever she would suffer it. Till at last she drew aback a little, laughing on him for love, and said: "Forbear now, friend, for it is enough for this time, and tell me how thou hast sped."

"Ill, ill," said he.

"What ails thee?" she said.

"Hunger," he said, "and longing for thee."

"Well," she said, "me thou hast; there is one ill quenched; take my hand, and we will see to the other one."

So he took her hand, and to hold it seemed to him sweet beyond measure. But he looked up, and saw a little blue smoke going up into the air from beyond the thicket; and he laughed, for he was weak with hunger, and he said: "Who is at the cooking yonder?"

"Thou shalt see," she said; and led him therewith into the said thicket and through it, and lo! a fair little grassy place, full of flowers, betwixt the bushes and the bight of the stream; and on the little sandy ere, just off the greensward, was a fire of sticks, and beside it two trouts lying, fat and red-flecked.

"Here is the breakfast," said she; "when it was time to wash the night off me e'en now, I went down the strand here into the rippling shallow, and saw the bank below it, where the water draws together yonder, and deepens, that it seemed like to hold fish; and whereas I looked to meet thee presently, I groped the bank for them, going softly; and lo thou! Help me now, that we cook them."

So they roasted them on the red embers, and fell to and ate well, both of them, and drank of the water of the stream out of each other's hollow hands; and that feast seemed glorious to them, such gladness went with it.

But when they were done with their meat, Walter said to the Maid: "And how didst thou know that thou shouldst see me presently?"

She said, looking on him wistfully: "This needed no wizardry. I lay not so far from thee last night, but that I heard thy voice and knew it."

Said he, "Why didst thou not come to me then, since thou heardest me bemoaning thee?"

She cast her eyes down, and plucked at the flowers and grass, and said: "It was dear to hear thee praising me; I knew not before that I was so sore desired, or that thou hadst taken such note of my body, and found it so dear."

Then she reddened sorely, and said: "I knew not that aught of me had such beauty as thou didst bewail."

And she wept for joy. Then she looked on him and smiled, and said: "Wilt thou have the very truth of it? I went close up to thee, and stood there hidden by the bushes and the night. And amidst thy bewailing, I knew that thou wouldst soon fall asleep, and in sooth I out-waked thee."

Then was she silent again; and he spake not, but looked on her shyly; and she said, reddening yet more: "Furthermore, I must needs tell thee that I feared to go to thee in the dark night, and my heart so yearning towards thee."

And she hung her head adown; but he said: "Is it so indeed, that thou fearest me? Then doth that make me afraid--afraid of thy nay- say. For I was going to entreat thee, and say to thee: Beloved, we have now gone through many troubles; let us now take a good reward at once, and wed together, here amidst this sweet and pleasant house of the mountains, ere we go further on our way; if indeed we go further at all. For where shall we find any place sweeter or happier than this?"

But she sprang up to her feet, and stood there trembling before him, because of her love; and she said: "Beloved, I have deemed that it were good for us to go seek mankind as they live in the world, and to live amongst them. And as for me, I will tell thee the sooth, to wit, that I long for this sorely. For I feel afraid in the wilderness, and as if I needed help and protection against my Mistress, though she be dead; and I need the comfort of many people, and the throngs of the cities. I cannot forget her: it was but last night that I dreamed (I suppose as the dawn grew a-cold) that I was yet under her hand, and she was stripping me for the torment; so that I woke up panting and crying out. I pray thee be not angry with me for telling thee of my desires; for if thou wouldst not have it so, then here will I abide with thee as thy mate, and strive to gather courage."

He rose up and kissed her face, and said: "Nay, I had in sooth no mind to abide here for ever; I meant but that we should feast a while here, and then depart: sooth it is, that if thou dreadest the wilderness, somewhat I dread the city."

She turned pale, and said: "Thou shalt have thy will, my friend, if it must be so. But bethink thee we be not yet at our journey's end, and may have many things and much strife to endure, before we be at peace and in welfare. Now shall I tell thee--did I not before?-- that while I am a maid untouched, my wisdom, and somedeal of might, abideth with me, and only so long. Therefore I entreat thee, let us go now, side by side, out of this fair valley, even as we are, so that my wisdom and might may help thee at need. For, my friend, I would not that our lives be short, so much of joy as hath now come into them."

"Yea, beloved," he said, "let us on straightway then, and shorten the while that sundereth us."

"Love," she said, "thou shalt pardon me one time for all. But this is to be said, that I know somewhat of the haps that lie a little way ahead of us; partly by my lore, and partly by what I learned of this land of the wild folk whiles thou wert lying asleep that morning."

So they left that pleasant place by the water, and came into the open valley, and went their ways through the pass; and it soon became stony again, as they mounted the bent which went up from out the dale. And when they came to the brow of the said bent, they had a sight of the open country lying fair and joyous in the sunshine, and amidst of it, against the blue hills, the walls and towers of a great city.

Then said the Maid: "O, dear friend, lo you! is not that our abode that lieth yonder, and is so beauteous? Dwell not our friends there, and our protection against uncouth wights, and mere evil things in guileful shapes? O city, I bid thee hail!"

But Walter looked on her, and smiled somewhat; and said: "I rejoice in thy joy. But there be evil things in yonder city also, though they be not fays nor devils, or it is like to no city that I wot of. And in every city shall foes grow up to us without rhyme or reason, and life therein shall be tangled unto us."

"Yea," she said; "but in the wilderness amongst the devils, what was to be done by manly might or valiancy? There hadst thou to fall back upon the guile and wizardry which I had filched from my very foes. But when we come down yonder, then shall thy valiancy prevail to cleave the tangle for us. Or at the least, it shall leave a tale of thee behind, and I shall worship thee."

He laughed, and his face grew brighter: "Mastery mows the meadow," quoth he, "and one man is of little might against many. But I promise thee I shall not be slothful before thee."

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXI: THEY COME UPON NEW FOLK

With that they went down from the bent again, and came to where the pass narrowed so much, that they went betwixt a steep wall of rock on either side; but after an hour's going, the said wall gave back suddenly, and, or they were ware almost, they came on another dale like to that which they had left, but not so fair, though it was grassy and well watered, and not so big either. But here indeed befell a change to them; for lo! tents and pavilions pitched in the said valley, and amidst of it a throng of men, mostly weaponed, and with horses ready saddled at hand. So they stayed their feet, and Walter's heart failed him, for he said to himself: Who wotteth what these men may be, save that they be aliens? It is most like that we shall be taken as thralls; and then, at the best, we shall be sundered; and that is all one with the worst.

But the Maid, when she saw the horses, and the gay tents, and the pennons fluttering, and the glitter of spears, and gleaming of white armour, smote her palms together for joy, and cried out: "Here now are come the folk of the city for our welcoming, and fair and lovely are they, and of many things shall they be thinking, and a many things shall they do, and we shall be partakers thereof. Come then, and let us meet them, fair friend!"

But Walter said: "Alas! thou knowest not: would that we might flee! But now is it over late; so put we a good face on it, and go to them quietly, as erewhile we did in the Bear-country."

So did they; and there sundered six from the men-at-arms and came to those twain, and made humble obeisance to Walter, but spake no word. Then they made as they would lead them to the others, and the twain went with them wondering, and came into the ring of men-at-arms, and stood before an old hoar knight, armed all, save his head, with most goodly armour, and he also bowed before Walter, but spake no word. Then they took them to the master pavilion, and made signs to them to sit, and they brought them dainty meat and good wine. And the while of their eating arose up a stir about them; and when they were done with their meat, the ancient knight came to them, still bowing in courteous wise, and did them to wit by signs that they should depart: and when they were without, they saw all the other tents struck, and men beginning to busy them with striking the pavilion, and the others mounted and ranked in good order for the road; and there were two horse-litters before them, wherein they were bidden to mount, Walter in one, and the Maid in the other, and no otherwise might they do. Then presently was a horn blown, and all took to the road together; and Walter saw betwixt the curtains of the litter that men-at-arms rode on either side of him, albeit they had left him his sword by his side.

So they went down the mountain-passes, and before sunset were gotten into the plain; but they made no stay for nightfall, save to eat a morsel and drink a draught, going through the night as men who knew their way well. As they went, Walter wondered what would betide, and if peradventure they also would be for offering them up to their Gods; whereas they were aliens for certain, and belike also Saracens. Moreover there was a cold fear at his heart that he should be sundered from the Maid, whereas their masters now were mighty men of war, holding in their hands that which all men desire, to wit, the manifest beauty of a woman. Yet he strove to think the best of it that he might. And so at last, when the night was far spent, and dawn was at hand, they stayed at a great and mighty gate in a huge wall. There they blew loudly on the horn thrice, and thereafter the gates were opened, and they all passed through into a street, which seemed to Walter in the glimmer to be both great and goodly amongst the abodes of men. Then it was but a little ere they came into a square, wide-spreading, one side whereof Walter took to be the front of a most goodly house. There the doors of the court opened to them or ever the horn might blow, though, forsooth, blow it did loudly three times; all they entered therein, and men came to Walter and signed to him to alight. So did he, and would have tarried to look about for the Maid, but they suffered it not, but led him up a huge stair into a chamber, very great, and but dimly lighted because of its greatness. Then they brought him to a bed dight as fair as might be, and made signs to him to strip and lie therein. Perforce he did so, and then they bore away his raiment, and left him lying there. So he lay there quietly, deeming it no avail for him, a mother-naked man, to seek escape thence; but it was long ere he might sleep, because of his trouble of mind. At last, pure weariness got the better of his hopes and fears, and he fell into slumber just as the dawn was passing into day.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXII: OF THE NEW KING OF THE CITY AND LAND OF STARK-WALL

When he awoke again the sun was shining brightly into that chamber, and he looked, and beheld that it was peerless of beauty and riches, amongst all that he had ever seen: the ceiling done with gold and over-sea blue; the walls hung with arras of the fairest, though he might not tell what was the history done therein. The chairs and stools were of carven work well be-painted, and amidmost was a great ivory chair under a cloth of estate, of bawdekin of gold and green, much be-pearled; and all the floor was of fine work alexandrine.

He looked on all this, wondering what had befallen him, when lo! there came folk into the chamber, to wit, two serving-men well- bedight, and three old men clad in rich gowns of silk. These came to him and (still by signs, without speech) bade him arise and come with them; and when he bade them look to it that he was naked, and laughed doubtfully, they neither laughed in answer, nor offered him any raiment, but still would have him arise, and he did so perforce. They brought him with them out of the chamber, and through certain passages pillared and goodly, till they came to a bath as fair as any might be; and there the serving-men washed him carefully and tenderly, the old men looking on the while. When it was done, still they offered not to clothe him, but led him out, and through the passages again, back to the chamber. Only this time he must pass between a double hedge of men, some weaponed, some in peaceful array, but all clad gloriously, and full chieftain-like of aspect, either for valiancy or wisdom.

In the chamber itself was now a concourse of men, of great estate by deeming of their array; but all these were standing orderly in a ring about the ivory chair aforesaid. Now said Walter to himself: Surely all this looks toward the knife and the altar for me; but he kept a stout countenance despite of all.

So they led him up to the ivory chair, and he beheld on either side thereof a bench, and on each was laid a set of raiment from the shirt upwards; but there was much diversity betwixt these arrays. For one was all of robes of peace, glorious and be-gemmed, unmeet for any save a great king; while the other was war-weed, seemly, well-fashioned, but little adorned; nay rather, worn and bestained with weather, and the pelting of the spear-storm.

Now those old men signed to Walter to take which of those raiments he would, and do it on. He looked to the right and the left, and when he had looked on the war-gear, the heart arose in him, and he called to mind the array of the Goldings in the forefront of battle, and he made one step toward the weapons, and laid his hand thereon. Then ran a glad murmur through that concourse, and the old men drew up to him smiling and joyous, and helped him to do them on; and as he took up the helm, he noted that over its broad brown iron sat a golden crown.

So when he was clad and weaponed, girt with a sword, and a steel axe in his hand, the elders showed him to the ivory throne, and he laid the axe on the arm of the chair, and drew forth the sword from the scabbard, and sat him down, and laid the ancient blade across his knees; then he looked about on those great men, and spake: "How long shall we speak no word to each other, or is it so that God hath stricken you dumb?"

Then all they cried out with one voice: "All hail to the King, the King of Battle!"

Spake Walter: "If I be king, will ye do my will as I bid you?"

Answered the elder: "Nought have we will to do, lord, save as thou biddest."

Said Walter: "Thou then, wilt thou answer a question in all truth?"

"Yea, lord," said the elder, "if I may live afterward."

Then said Walter: "The woman that came with me into your Camp of the Mountain, what hath befallen her?"

The elder answered: "Nought hath befallen her, either of good or evil, save that she hath slept and eaten and bathed her. What, then, is the King's pleasure concerning her?"

"That ye bring her hither to me straightway," said Walter.

"Yea," said the elder; "and in what guise shall we bring her hither? shall she be arrayed as a servant, or a great lady?"

Then Walter pondered a while, and spake at last: "Ask her what is her will herein, and as she will have it, so let it be. But set ye another chair beside mine, and lead her thereto. Thou wise old man, send one or two to bring her in hither, but abide thou, for I have a question or two to ask of thee yet. And ye, lords, abide here the coming of my she-fellow, if it weary you not."

So the elder spake to three of the most honourable of the lords, and they went their ways to bring in the Maid.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXIII: CONCERNING THE FASHION OF KING-MAKING IN STARK-WALL

Meanwhile the King spake to the elder, and said: "Now tell me whereof I am become king, and what is the fashion and cause of the king-making; for wondrous it is to me, whereas I am but an alien amidst of mighty men."

"Lord," said the old man, "thou art become king of a mighty city, which hath under it many other cities and wide lands, and havens by the sea-side, and which lacketh no wealth which men desire. Many wise men dwell therein, and of fools not more than in other lands. A valiant host shall follow thee to battle when needs must thou wend afield; an host not to be withstood, save by the ancient God-folk, if any of them were left upon the earth, as belike none are. And as to the name of our said city, it hight the City of the Stark-wall, or more shortly, Stark-wall. Now as to the fashion of our king- making: If our king dieth and leaveth an heir male, begotten of his body, then is he king after him; but if he die and leave no heir, then send we out a great lord, with knights and sergeants, to that pass of the mountain whereto ye came yesterday; and the first man that cometh unto them, they take and lead to the city, as they did with thee, lord. For we believe and trow that of old time our forefathers came down from the mountains by that same pass, poor and rude, but full of valiancy, before they conquered these lands, and builded the Stark-wall. But now furthermore, when we have gotten the said wanderer, and brought him home to our city, we behold him mother-naked, all the great men of us, both sages and warriors; then if we find him ill-fashioned and counterfeit of his body, we roll him in a great carpet till he dies; or whiles, if he be but a simple man, and without guile, we deliver him for thrall to some artificer amongst us, as a shoemaker, a wright, or what not, and so forget him. But in either case we make as if no such man had come to us, and we send again the lord and his knights to watch the pass; for we say that such an one the Fathers of old time have not sent us. But again, when we have seen to the new-comer that he is well-fashioned of his body, all is not done; for we deem that never would the Fathers send us a dolt or a craven to be our king. Therefore we bid the naked one take to him which he will of these raiments, either the ancient armour, which now thou bearest, lord, or this golden raiment here; and if he take the war-gear, as thou takedst it, King, it is well; but if he take the raiment of peace, then hath he the choice either to be thrall of some goodman of the city, or to be proven how wise he may be, and so fare the narrow edge betwixt death and kingship; for if he fall short of his wisdom, then shall he die the death. Thus is thy question answered, King, and praise be to the Fathers that they have sent us one whom none may doubt, either for wisdom or valiancy."

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXIV: NOW COMETH THE MAID TO THE KING

Then all they bowed before the King, and he spake again: "What is that noise that I hear without, as if it were the rising of the sea on a sandy shore, when the south-west wind is blowing."

Then the elder opened his mouth to answer; but before he might get out the word, there was a stir without the chamber door, and the throng parted, and lo! amidst of them came the Maid, and she yet clad in nought save the white coat wherewith she had won through the wilderness, save that on her head was a garland of red roses, and her middle was wreathed with the same. Fresh and fair she was as the dawn of June; her face bright, red-lipped, and clear-eyed, and her cheeks flushed with hope and love. She went straight to Walter where he sat, and lightly put away with her hand the elder who would lead her to the ivory throne beside the King; but she knelt down before him, and laid her hand on his steel-clad knee, and said: "O my lord, now I see that thou hast beguiled me, and that thou wert all along a king-born man coming home to thy realm. But so dear thou hast been to me; and so fair and clear, and so kind withal do thine eyes shine on me from under the grey war-helm, that I will beseech thee not to cast me out utterly, but suffer me to be thy servant and handmaid for a while. Wilt thou not?"

But the King stooped down to her and raised her up, and stood on his feet, and took her hands and kissed them, and set her down beside him, and said to her: "Sweetheart, this is now thy place till the night cometh, even by my side."

So she sat down there meek and valiant, her hands laid in her lap, and her feet one over the other; while the King said: "Lords, this is my beloved, and my spouse. Now, therefore, if ye will have me for King, ye must worship this one for Queen and Lady; or else suffer us both to go our ways in peace."

Then all they that were in the chamber cried out aloud: "The Queen, the Lady! The beloved of our lord!"

And this cry came from their hearts, and not their lips only; for as they looked on her, and the brightness of her beauty, they saw also the meekness of her demeanour, and the high heart of her, and they all fell to loving her. But the young men of them, their cheeks flushed as they beheld her, and their hearts went out to her, and they drew their swords and brandished them aloft, and cried out for her as men made suddenly drunk with love: "The Queen, the Lady, the lovely one!"

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXV: OF THE KING OF STARK-WALL AND HIS QUEEN

But while this betid, that murmur without, which is aforesaid, grew louder; and it smote on the King's ear, and he said again to the elder: "Tell us now of that noise withoutward, what is it?"

Said the elder: "If thou, King, and the Queen, wilt but arise and stand in the window, and go forth into the hanging gallery thereof, then shall ye know at once what is this rumour, and therewithal shall ye see a sight meet to rejoice the heart of a king new come into kingship."

So the King arose and took the Maid by the hand, and went to the window and looked forth; and lo! the great square of the place all thronged with folk as thick as they could stand, and the more part of the carles with a weapon in hand, and many armed right gallantly. Then he went out into the gallery with his Queen, still holding her hand, and his lords and wise men stood behind him. Straightway then arose a cry, and a shout of joy and welcome that rent the very heavens, and the great place was all glittering and strange with the tossing up of spears and the brandishing of swords, and the stretching forth of hands.

But the Maid spake softly to King Walter and said: "Here then is the wilderness left behind a long way, and here is warding and protection against the foes of our life and soul. O blessed be thou and thy valiant heart!"

But Walter spake nothing, but stood as one in a dream; and yet, if that might be, his longing toward her increased manifold.

But down below, amidst of the throng, stood two neighbours somewhat anigh to the window; and quoth one to the other: "See thou! the new man in the ancient armour of the Battle of the Waters, bearing the sword that slew the foeman king on the Day of the Doubtful Onset! Surely this is a sign of good-luck to us all."

"Yea," said the second, "he beareth his armour well, and the eyes are bright in the head of him: but hast thou beheld well his she- fellow, and what the like of her is?"

"I see her," said the other, "that she is a fair woman; yet somewhat worse clad than simply. She is in her smock, man, and were it not for the balusters I deem ye should see her barefoot. What is amiss with her?"

"Dost thou not see her," said the second neighbour, "that she is not only a fair woman, but yet more, one of those lovely ones that draw the heart out of a man's body, one may scarce say for why? Surely Stark-wall hath cast a lucky net this time. And as to her raiment, I see of her that she is clad in white and wreathed with roses, but that the flesh of her is so wholly pure and sweet that it maketh all her attire but a part of her body, and halloweth it, so that it hath the semblance of gems. Alas, my friend! let us hope that this Queen will fare abroad unseldom amongst the people."

Thus, then, they spake; but after a while the King and his mate went back into the chamber, and he gave command that the women of the Queen should come and fetch her away, to attire her in royal array. And thither came the fairest of the honourable damsels, and were fain of being her waiting-women. Therewithal the King was unarmed, and dight most gloriously, but still he bore the Sword of the King's Slaying: and sithence were the King and the Queen brought into the great hall of the palace, and they met on the dais, and kissed before the lords and other folk that thronged the hall. There they ate a morsel and drank a cup together while all beheld them; and then they were brought forth, and a white horse of the goodliest, well bedight, brought for each of them, and thereon they mounted and went their ways together, by the lane which the huge throng made for them, to the great church, for the hallowing and the crowning; and they were led by one squire alone, and he unarmed; for such was the custom of Stark-wall when a new king should be hallowed: so came they to the great church (for that folk was not miscreant, so to say), and they entered it, they two alone, and went into the choir: and when they had stood there a little while wondering at their lot, they heard how the bells fell a-ringing tunefully over their heads; and then drew near the sound of many trumpets blowing together, and thereafter the voices of many folk singing; and then were the great doors thrown open, and the bishop and his priests came into the church with singing and minstrelsy, and thereafter came the whole throng of the folk, and presently the nave of the church was filled by it, as when the water follows the cutting of the dam, and fills up the dyke. Thereafter came the bishop and his mates into the choir, and came up to the King, and gave him and the Queen the kiss of peace. This was mass sung gloriously; and thereafter was the King anointed and crowned, and great joy was made throughout the church. Afterwards they went back afoot to the palace, they two alone together, with none but the esquire going before to show them the way. And as they went, they passed close beside those two neighbours, whose talk has been told of afore, and the first one, he who had praised the King's war-array, spake and said: "Truly, neighbour, thou art in the right of it; and now the Queen has been dight duly, and hath a crown on her head, and is clad in white samite done all over with pearls, I see her to be of exceeding goodliness; as goodly, maybe, as the Lord King."

Quoth the other: "Unto me she seemeth as she did e'en now; she is clad in white, as then she was, and it is by reason of the pure and sweet flesh of her that the pearls shine out and glow, and by the holiness of her body is her rich attire hallowed; but, forsooth, it seemed to me as she went past as though paradise had come anigh to our city, and that all the air breathed of it. So I say, praise be to God and His Hallows who hath suffered her to dwell amongst us!"

Said the first man: "Forsooth, it is well; but knowest thou at all whence she cometh, and of what lineage she may be?"

"Nay," said the other, "I wot not whence she is; but this I wot full surely, that when she goeth away, they whom she leadeth with her shall be well bestead. Again, of her lineage nought know I; but this I know, that they that come of her, to the twentieth generation, shall bless and praise the memory of her, and hallow her name little less than they hallow the name of the Mother of God."

So spake those two; but the King and Queen came back to the palace, and sat among the lords and at the banquet which was held thereafter, and long was the time of their glory, till the night was far spent and all men must seek to their beds.

The Wood Beyond the World, by William Morris, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXVI: OF WALTER AND THE MAID IN THE DAYS OF THE KINGSHIP

Long it was, indeed, till the women, by the King's command, had brought the Maid to the King's chamber; and he met her, and took her by the shoulders and kissed her, and said: "Art thou not weary, sweetheart? Doth not the city, and the thronging folk, and the watching eyes of the great ones . . . doth it not all lie heavy on thee, as it doth upon me?"

She said: "And where is the city now? is not this the wilderness again, and thou and I alone together therein?"

He gazed at her eagerly, and she reddened, so that her eyes shone light amidst the darkness of the flush of her cheeks.

He spake trembling and softly, and said: "Is it not in one matter better than the wilderness? is not the fear gone, yea, every whit thereof?"

The dark flush had left her face, and she looked on him exceeding sweetly, and spoke steadily and clearly: "Even so it is, beloved." Therewith she set her hand to the girdle that girt her loins, and did it off, and held it out toward him, and said: "Here is the token; this is a maid's girdle, and the woman is ungirt."

So he took the girdle and her hand withal, and cast his arms about her: and amidst the sweetness of their love and their safety, and assured hope of many days of joy, they spake together of the hours when they fared the razor-edge betwixt guile and misery and death, and the sweeter yet it grew to them because of it; and many things she told him ere the dawn, of the evil days bygone, and the dealings of the Mistress with her, till the grey day stole into the chamber to make manifest her loveliness; which, forsooth, was better even than the deeming of that man amidst the throng whose heart had been so drawn towards her. So they rejoiced together in the new day.

But when the full day was, and Walter arose, he called his thanes and wise men to the council; and first he bade open the prison- doors, and feed the needy and clothe them, and make good cheer to all men, high and low, rich and unrich; and thereafter he took counsel with them on many matters, and they marvelled at his wisdom and the keenness of his wit; and so it was, that some were but half pleased thereat, whereas they saw that their will was like to give way before his in all matters. But the wiser of them rejoiced in him, and looked for good days while his life lasted.

Now of the deeds that he did, and his joys and his griefs, the tale shall tell no more; nor of how he saw Langton again, and his dealings there.

In Stark-wall he dwelt, and reigned a King, well beloved of his folk, sorely feared of their foemen. Strife he had to deal with, at home and abroad; but therein he was not quelled, till he fell asleep fair and softly, when this world had no more of deeds for him to do. Nor may it be said that the needy lamented him; for no needy had he left in his own land. And few foes he left behind to hate him.

As to the Maid, she so waxed in loveliness and kindness, that it was a year's joy for any to have cast eyes upon her in street or on field. All wizardry left her since the day of her wedding; yet of wit and wisdom she had enough left, and to spare; for she needed no going about, and no guile, any more than hard commands, to have her will done. So loved she was by all folk, forsooth, that it was a mere joy for any to go about her errands. To be short, she was the land's increase, and the city's safeguard, and the bliss of the folk.

Somewhat, as the days passed, it misgave her that she had beguiled the Bear-folk to deem her their God; and she considered and thought how she might atone it.

So the second year after they had come to Stark-wall, she went with certain folk to the head of the pass that led down to the Bears; and there she stayed the men-at-arms, and went on further with a two score of husbandmen whom she had redeemed from thralldom in Stark- wall; and when they were hard on the dales of the Bears, she left them there in a certain little dale, with their wains and horses, and seed-corn, and iron tools, and went down all bird-alone to the dwelling of those huge men, unguarded now by sorcery, and trusting in nought but her loveliness and kindness. Clad she was now, as when she fled from the Wood beyond the World, in a short white coat alone, with bare feet and naked arms; but the said coat was now embroidered with the imagery of blossoms in silk and gold, and gems, whereas now her wizardry had departed from her.

So she came to the Bears, and they knew her at once, and worshipped and blessed her, and feared her. But she told them that she had a gift for them, and was come to give it; and therewith she told them of the art of tillage, and bade them learn it; and when they asked her how they should do so, she told them of the men who were abiding them in the mountain dale, and bade the Bears take them for their brothers and sons of the ancient Fathers, and then they should be taught of them. This they behight her to do, and so she led them to where her freedmen lay, whom the Bears received with all joy and loving-kindness, and took them into their folk.

So they went back to their dales together; but the Maid went her ways back to her men-at-arms and the city of Stark-wall.

Thereafter she sent more gifts and messages to the Bears, but never again went herself to see them; for as good a face as she put on it that last time, yet her heart waxed cold with fear, and it almost seemed to her that her Mistress was alive again, and that she was escaping from her and plotting against her once more.

As for the Bears, they throve and multiplied; till at last strife arose great and grim betwixt them and other peoples; for they had become mighty in battle: yea, once and again they met the host of Stark-wall in fight, and overthrew and were overthrown. But that was a long while after the Maid had passed away.

Now of Walter and the Maid is no more to be told, saving that they begat between them goodly sons and fair daughters; whereof came a great lineage in Stark-wall; which lineage was so strong, and endured so long a while, that by then it had died out, folk had clean forgotten their ancient Custom of king-making, so that after Walter of Langton there was never another king that came down to them poor and lonely from out of the Mountains of the Bears




===== BOOK: wcwe.txt =====


    
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE WITCH-CULT IN WESTERN EUROPE

  

A Study in Anthropology

  

BY

  

MARGARET ALICE MURRAY

  

OXFORD

  

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

  

[1921]

  

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, October 2000 by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

  

PREFACE

THE mass of existing material on this subject is so great that I have not attempted to make a survey of the whole of European 'Witchcraft', but have confined myself to an intensive study of the cult in Great Britain. In order, however, to obtain a clearer understanding of the ritual and beliefs I have had recourse to French and Flemish sources, as the cult appears to have been the same throughout Western Europe. The New England records are unfortunately not published in extenso; this is the more unfortunate as the extracts already given to the public occasionally throw light on some of the English practices. It is more difficult to trace the English practices than the Scotch or French, for in England the cult was already in a decadent condition when the records were made; therefore records in a purely English colony would probably contain much of interest.

The sources from which the information is taken are the judicial records and contemporary chroniclers. In the case of the chroniclers I have studied their facts and not their opinions. I have also had access to some unpublished trials among the Edinburgh Justiciary Records and also in the Guernsey Greffe.

The following articles have already appeared in various journals, to whose editors I am indebted for kind permission to republish: 'Organization of Witch Societies' and 'Witches and the number Thirteen' in Folk Lore; 'The God of the Witches' in the Journal of the Manchester Oriental Society; 'Child Sacrifice', 'Witches' Familiars', 'The Devil's Mark', 'The Devil's Officers', 'Witches' Fertility Rites', 'Witches Transformations', in Man; and 'The Devil of North Berwick' in the Scottish Historical Review.

My thanks are due to Georgiana Aitken, W. Bonser, and Mary Slater for much kind help, also to Prof. C. G. Seligman for valuable suggestions and advice as to lines of research.

M. A. MURRAY.

UNIVERSITY COLLEGE,
          LONDON.

  

CONTENTS

PREFACE.

INTRODUCTION.

I. CONTINUITY OF THE RELIGION.

II. THE GOD.

1. As God.

2. As a Human Being.

3. Identification.

4. As an Animal.

III. ADMISSION CEREMONIES.

1. General.

2. The Introduction.

3. The Renunciation and Vows.

4. The Covenant.

5. The Baptism.

6. The Mark

IV. THE ASSEMBLIES.

1. The Sabbath, Method of going. The site. The date. The hour.

2. The Esbat. Business. The site. The time.

V. THE RITES.

1. General.

2. Homage.

3. The Dances.

4. The Music.

5. The Feast.

6. Candles.

7. The Sacrament.

8. Sacrifices: Of animals. Of children. Of the God.

9 Magic Words.

VI. THE RITES, continued.

1. General.

2. Rain-making.

3. Fertility.

VII. THE ORGANIZATION.

1. The Officer.

2. The Covens.

3. Duties.

4. Discipline.

VIII. THE FAMILIARS AND TRANSFORMATION.

1. The Divining Familiar.

2. The Domestic Familiar.

3. Methods of obtaining Familiars.

4. Transformations into Animals.

APPENDIX I.

Fairies and Witches.

APPENDIX II.

Trial of Silvain Nevillon. Taken from De Lancre's L'Incredulite et Mescreance.

APPENDIX III.

A. Covens and Names of Members.

B. Index of Witches' Names, with Notes.

APPENDIX IV.

Notes on the Trials of Joan of Arc and Gilles de Rais.

APPENDIX V.

Some Notes on 'Flying' Ointments. By Prof. A. J. Clark.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

GENERAL INDEX

  

INTRODUCTION

THE subject of Witches and Witchcraft has always suffered from the biassed opinions of the commentators, both contemporary and of later date. On the one hand are the writers who, having heard the evidence at first hand, believe implicitly in the facts and place upon them the unwarranted construction that those facts were due to supernatural power; on the other hand are the writers who, taking the evidence on hearsay and disbelieving the conclusions drawn by their opponents, deny the facts in toto. Both parties believed with equal firmness in a personal Devil, and both supported their arguments with quotations from the Bible. But as the believers were able to bring forward more texts than the unbelievers and had in their hands an unanswerable argument in the Witch of Endor, the unbelievers, who dared not contradict the Word of God, were forced to fall back on the theory that the witches suffered from hallucination, hysteria, and, to use the modern word, 'auto-suggestion'. These two classes still persist, the sceptic predominating. Between the believer who believed everything and the unbeliever who disbelieved everything there has been no critical examination of the evidence, which presents a new and untouched field of research to the student of comparative religion.

Among the believers in witchcraft everything which could not be explained by the knowledge at their disposal was laid to the credit of supernatural powers; and as everything incomprehensible is usually supposed to emanate from evil, the witches were believed to be possessed of devilish arts. As also every non-Christian God was, in the eyes of the Christians, the opponent of the Christian God, the witches were considered to worship the Enemy of Salvation, in other words, the Devil. The greater number of these writers, however, obtained the evidence at first hand, and it must therefore be accepted although the statements do not bear the construction put upon them. It is only by a careful comparison with the evidence of anthropology that the facts fall into their proper places and an organized religion stands revealed.

The common beliefs as to the powers of the witches are largely due to the credulous contemporary commentators, who misunderstood the evidence and then exaggerated some of the facts to suit their preconceived ideas of the supernatural powers of the witches; thereby laying themselves open to the ridicule of all their opponents, past and present. Yet the ridicule is not fully deserved, for the facts are there, though the explanation is wrong; for even the two points, which are usually considered the ultimate proof of the absurdity and incredibility of the whole system--the flying on a broomstick through the window or up the chimney, and the transformation into animals--are capable of explanation. The first can be accounted for when the form of early mound-dwellings is taken into consideration, and when it is remembered that among savage tribes there are often taboos connected with the door, the two-faced god being essentially a deity of the door. Besides this the fertility rites connected with the broom should be taken into account. The second should be compared with similar accounts of transformation into animals among the cults of other nations. Mr. A. B. Cook's comment on the Greek ritual applies quite as well to Western as to Eastern Europe: 'We may venture on the general statement that within the bounds of Hellenic mythology animal-metamorphosis commonly points to a preceding animal cult.'[1]

It is interesting to note the class of mind among those contemporary writers who believed in the reality of the facts confessed at the trials as compared with those who disbelieved. It will be seen that the most brilliant minds, the keenest intellects, the greatest investigators, were among the believers: Bodin, Lord Bacon, Raleigh, Boyle, Cudworth, Selden, Henry More, Sir Thomas Browne, Matthew Hale, Sir George Mackenzie, and many others, most of whom had heard the evidence at first hand. The sceptics were Weyer, pupil of the occultist Cornelius Agrippa; Reginald Scot, a Kentish country squire;

[1. Journal of Hellenic Studies, 1894, p. 160. The italics are in the original.]

Filmer, whose name was a byword for political bigotry; Wagstaffe, who went mad from drink; and Webster, a fanatical preacher.[1] The sceptics, with the exception of Weyer, appear to have had little or no first-hand evidence; their only weapon was an appeal to common sense and sentiment combined; their only method was a flat denial of every statement which appeared to point to supernatural powers. They could not disprove the statements; they could not explain them without opposing the accepted religious beliefs of their time, and so weakening their cause by exposing themselves to the serious charge of atheism; therefore they denied evidence which in the case of any other accusation would have been accepted as proof.

The evidence which I now bring forward is taken entirely from contemporary sources, i.e. the legal records of the trials, pamphlets giving accounts of individual witches, and the works of Inquisitors and other writers. I have omitted the opinions of the authors, and have examined only the recorded facts, without however including the stories of ghosts and other 'occult' phenomena with which all the commentators confuse the subject. I have also, for the reason given below, omitted all reference to charms and spells when performed by one witch alone, and have confined myself to those statements only which show the beliefs, organization, and ritual of a hitherto unrecognized cult.

In order to clear the ground I make a sharp distinction between Operative Witchcraft and Ritual Witchcraft. Under Operative Witchcraft I class all charms and spells, whether used by a professed witch or by a professed Christian, whether intended for good or for evil, for killing or for curing. Such charms and spells are common to every nation and country, and are practised by the priests and people of every religion. They are part of the common heritage of the human race and are therefore of no practical value in the study of any one particular cult.

Ritual Witchcraft--or, as I propose to call it, the Dianic

[1. See James Crossley's Introduction to Potts's Discoverie of Witchcraft, Chetham Society, pp. v-xii.]

cult-embraces the religious beliefs and ritual of the people, known in late mediaeval times as 'Witches'. The evidence proves that underlying the Christian religion was a cult practised by many classes of the community, chiefly, however, by the more ignorant or those in the less thickly inhabited parts of the country. It can be traced back to pre-Christian times, and appears to be the ancient religion of Western Europe. The god, anthropomorphic or theriomorphic, was worshipped in well-defined rites; the organization was highly developed; and the ritual is analogous to many other ancient rituals. The dates of the chief festivals suggest that the religion belonged to a race which had not reached the agricultural stage; and the evidence shows that various modifications were introduced, probably by invading peoples who brought in -their own beliefs. I have not attempted to disentangle the various cults; I am content merely to point out that it was a definite religion with beliefs, ritual, and organization as highly developed as that of any other cult in the world.

The deity of this cult was incarnate in a man, a woman, or an animal; the animal form being apparently earlier than the human, for the god was often spoken of as wearing the skin or attributes of an animal. At the same time, however, there was another form of the god in the shape of a man with two aces. Such a god is found in Italy (where he was called Janus or Dianus), in Southern France (see pp. 62, 129), and in the English Midlands. The feminine form of the name, Diana, is found throughout Western Europe as the name of the female deity or leader of the so-called Witches, and it is for this reason that I have called this ancient religion the Dianic cult. The geographical distribution of the two-faced god suggests that the race or races, who carried the cult, either did not remain in every country which they entered, or that in many places they and their religion were overwhelmed by subsequent invaders.

The dates of the two chief festivals, May Eve and November Eve, indicate the use of a calendar which is generally acknowledged to be pre-agricultural and earlier than the solstitial division of the year. The fertility rites of the cult bear out this indication, as they were for promoting the increase of animals and only rarely for the benefit of the crops. The cross -quarter-days, February 2 and August 1, which were also kept as festivals, were probably of later date, as, though classed among the great festivals, they were not of so high an importance as the May and November Eves. To February 2, Candlemas Day, probably belongs the sun-charm of the burning wheel, formed by the whirling dancers, each carrying a blazing torch; but no special ceremony seems to be assigned to August 1, Lammas Day, a fact suggestive of a later introduction of this festival,

The organization of the hierarchy was the same throughout Western Europe, with the slight local differences which always occur in any organization. The same organization, when carried to America, caused Cotton Mather to say, 'The witches are organized like Congregational Churches.' This gives the clue at once. In each Congregational Church there is a body of elders who manage the affairs of the Church, and the minister who conducts the religious services and is the chief person in religious matters; and there may also be a specially appointed person to conduct the services in the minister's absence; each Church is an independent entity and not necessarily connected with any other. In the same way there was among the witches a body of elders--the Coven--which managed the local affairs of the cult, and a man who, like the minister, held the chief place, though as God that place was infinitely higher in the eyes of the congregation than any held by a mere human being. In some of the larger congregations there was a person, inferior to the Chief, who took charge in the Chief's absence. In Southern France, however, there seems to have been a Grand Master who was supreme over several districts,

The position of the chief woman in the cult is still somewhat obscure. Professor Pearson sees, in her the Mother-Goddess worshipped chiefly by women. This is very probable, but at the time when the cult is recorded the worship of the male deity-appears to have superseded that of the female, and it is only on rare occasions that the God appears in female form to receive the homage of the worshippers. As a general rule the woman's position, when divine, is that of the familiar or substitute for the male god. There remains, however, the curious fact that the chief woman was often identified with the Queen of Faerie, or the Elfin Queen as she is sometimes called.

This connexion of the witches and fairies opens up a very wide field; at present it is little more than speculation that the two are identical, but there is promise that the theory may be proved at some later date when the subject is more fully worked out. It is now a commonplace of anthropology that the tales of fairies and elves preserve the tradition of a dwarf race which once inhabited Northern and Western Europe. Successive invasions drove them to the less fertile parts of each country which they inhabited, some betook themselves to the inhospitable north or the equally inhospitable mountains; some, however, remained in the open heaths and moors, living as mound-dwellers, venturing out chiefly at night and coming in contact with the ruling races only on rare occasions. As the conqueror always regards the religion of the conquered as superior to his own in the arts of evil magic, the dwarf race obtained the reputation of wizards and magicians, and their god was identified by the conquerors with the Principle of Evil. The identification of the witches with the dwarf or fairy race would give us a clear insight into much of the civilization of the early European peoples, especially as regards their religious ideas.

The religious rites varied according to circumstances and the requirements of the people. The greater number of the ceremonies appear to have been practised for the purpose of securing fertility. Of these the sexual ritual has been given an overwhelming and quite unwarranted importance in the trials, for it became an obsession with the Christian judges and recorders to investigate the smallest and most minute details of the rite. Though in late examples the ceremony had possibly degenerated into a Bacchanalian orgy, there is evidence to prove that, like the same rite in other countries, it was originally a ceremonial magic to ensure fertility. There is at present nothing to show how much of the Witches' Mass (in which the bread, the wine, and the candles were black) derived from the Christian ritual and how much belonged to the Dianic cult; it is, however, possible that the witches' service was the earlier form and influenced the Christian. The admission ceremonies were often elaborate, and it is here that the changes in the religion are most clearly marked; certain ceremonies must have been introduced when another cult was superimposed and became paramount, such as the specific renunciation of a previous religion which was obligatory on all new candidates, and the payment to the member who brought a new recruit into the fold. The other rites--the feasts and dances--show that it was a joyous religion; and as such it must have been quite incomprehensible to the gloomy Inquisitors and Reformers who suppressed it.

Much stress has always been laid by the sceptical writers on the undoubted fact that in many cases the witch confused dreams with reality and believed that she had visited the Sabbath when credible witnesses could prove that she had slept in her bed all the time. Yet such visions are known in other religions; Christians have met their Lord in dreams of the night and have been accounted saints for that very reason; Mahomed, though not released from the body, had interviews with Allah; Moses talked with God; the Egyptian Pharaohs record similar experiences. To the devotee of a certain temperament such visions occur, and it is only to be expected that in every case the vision should take the form required by the religion of the worshipper. Hence the Christian sees Christ and enters heaven; Mahomed was caught up to the Paradise of the true believers; the anthropomorphic Jehovah permitted only a back view to His votary; the Egyptian Pharaohs beheld their gods alive and moving on the earth. The witch also met her god at the actual Sabbath and again in her dreams, for that earthly Sabbath was to her the true Paradise, where there was more pleasure than she could express, and she believed also that the joy which she took in it was but the prelude to a much greater glory, for her god so held her heart that no other desire could enter in. Thus the witches often went to the gibbet and the stake, glorifying their god and committing their souls into his keeping, with a firm belief that death was but the entrance to an eternal life in which they would never be parted from him. Fanatics and visionaries as many of them were, they resemble those Christian martyrs whom the witch-persecutors often held in the highest honour.

Another objection is that, as the evidence of the witches at the trials is more or less uniform in character, it must be attributed to the publication by the Inquisitors of a questionary for the use of all judges concerned in such trials; in short, that the evidence is valueless, as it was given in answer to leading questions. No explanation is offered by the objectors as to how the Inquisitors arrived at the form of questionary, nor is any regard given to the injunction to all Inquisitors to acquaint themselves with all the details of any heresy which they were commissioned to root out; they were to obtain the information from those who would recant and use it against the accused; and to instruct other judges in the belief and ritual of the heresy, so that they also might recognize it and act accordingly. The objectors also overlook the fact that the believers in any given religion, when tried for their faith, exhibit a sameness in their accounts of the cult, usually with slight local differences. Had the testimony of the witches as to their beliefs varied widely, it would be prima facie evidence that there was no well-defined religion underlying their ritual; but the very uniformity of their confessions points to the reality of the occurrence.

Still another objection is that the evidence was always given under torture, and that the wretched victims consequently made reckless assertions and accusations. In most of the English and many of the Scotch trials legal torture was not applied; and it was only in the seventeenth century that pricking for the mark, starvation, and prevention of sleep were used. Even then there were many voluntary confessions given by those who, like the early Christian martyrs, rushed headlong on their fate, determined to die for their faith and their god.

Yet even if some of the evidence were given under torture and in answer to leading questions, there still remains a mass of details which cannot be explained away. Among others there are the close connexions of the witches with the fairies the persistence of the number thirteen in the Covens, the narrow geographical range of the domestic familiar, the avoidance of certain forms in the animal transformations, the limited number of personal names among the women-witches, and the survival of the names of some of the early gods.

In England the legal method of executing a witch was by hanging; after death the body was burnt and the ashes scattered. In Scotland, as a rule, the witch was strangled at the stake and the body burned, but there are several records of the culprit being sentenced to burning alive. In France burning alive was the invariable punishment.

In cases where popular fury, unrestrained by the law, worked its own vengeance on individuals, horrible scenes occurred; but these were the exception, and, examining only the legal aspect of the subject, it will be found that witches had a fair trial according to the methods of the period, and that their punishment was according to the law. There was, however, one popular method of dealing with a person accused of witchcraft which is interesting as showing the survival of a legal process, obsolete as regards the law itself, but remaining in full force among the people. This is the ordeal by water. In the Laws of Athelstan the full detail of this ordeal is given: after the person who was to undergo the ordeal had been prepared by prayer and fasting, he was tied, the right thumb to the right big toe, the left thumb to the left big toe, and was then cast into the water with suitable prayers to the Almighty to declare the right; if he sank he was considered innocent, if he floated he was guilty. The witch was 'tried' in the same way, except that she was tied 'crossways', i.e. the right thumb to the left big toe, and the left thumb to the right big toe. So great was the belief in this test that many women accused of witchcraft insisted on undergoing this ordeal, which was often conducted with solemnity and decency under the auspices of the minister of the parish and other grave persons. Unless there was strong feeling against the woman for other reasons, the mere fact of her floating did not rouse the populace against her, and she merely returned home; Widow Coman, for instance, was 'ducked' on three separate occasions at her own request.

The theologians of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were greatly exercised by the conclusive evidence which proved that people known to be devout and professing Christians had been present at the Sabbath, joined in the ceremonies, and worshipped the witches' god. The Inquisitors recognized the fact, and devote many pages of their books to the discussion of the course to be followed in the case of Christian priests, coming finally to the conclusion that if a priest merely went to the Sabbath but was not in any way in an official position there his sacred character preserved him from evil. The theologians of the Reformed Churches, who could not accept the sanctity of the priesthood with the same ease and were also desirous of finding some means of accounting for the presence of the devout laity, boldly evolved the theory that the Devil could for his own purposes assume the shape of good Christians in order to mislead the witches. By this plea the accused often succeeded in escaping when the examiners were religious ministers, but it was of no value to them when the trial was in a court of law, and the fact of their presence at an illegal assembly was proved. Lord Coke's definition of a witch summed up the law on the subject: 'A witch is a person who hath conference with the Devil, to consult with him or to do some act', and any person proved to have had such conference was thus convicted of a capital offence and sentenced accordingly. This accounts for the fact, commented on by all students of witch-trials, that a witch was often condemned even though she had invariably used her skill for good and not for evil; for healing the sick, not for casting sickness. If it were proved that she had obtained her knowledge from the 'Devil' she had broken the law and must die.

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

I. CONTINUITY OF THE RELIGION

OF the ancient religion of pre-Christian Britain there are few written records, but it is contrary to all experience that a cult should die out and leave no trace immediately on the introduction of a new religion. The so-called conversion of Britain meant the conversion of the rulers only; the mass of the people continued to follow their ancient customs and beliefs with a veneer of Christian rites. The centuries brought a deepening of Christianity which, introduced from above, gradually penetrated downwards through one class after another. During this process the laws against the practice of certain heathen rites became more strict as Christianity grew in power, the Church tried her strength against 'witches' in high places and was victorious, and in the fifteenth century open war was declared against the last remains of heathenism in the famous Bull of Innocent VIII.

This heathenism was practised only in certain places and among certain classes of the community. In other places the ancient ritual was either adopted into, or tolerated by, the Church; and the Maypole dances and other rustic festivities remained as survivals of the rites of the early cult.

Whether the religion which survived as the witch cult was the same as the religion of the Druids, or whether it belonged to a still earlier stratum, is not clear. Though the descriptions, of classical authors are rather too vague and scanty to settle such a point, sufficient remains to show that a fertility cult did once exist in these islands, akin to similar cults in the ancient world. Such rites would not he suppressed by the tribes who entered Great Britain after the withdrawal of the Romans; a continuance of the cult may therefore be expected among the people whom the Christian missionaries laboured to convert.

As the early historical records of these islands were made by Christian ecclesiastics, allowance must be made for the religious bias of the writers, which caused them to make Christianity appear as the only religion existing at the time. But though the historical records are silent on the subject the laws and enactments of the different communities, whether lay or ecclesiastical, retain very definite evidence of the continuance of the ancient cults.

In this connexion the dates of the conversion of England are instructive, The following table gives the principal dates:

597-604. Augustine's mission. London still heathen. Conversion of Aethelbert, King of Kent. After Aethelbert's death Christianity suffered a reverse.

604. Conversion of the King of the East Saxons, whose successor lapsed.

627. Conversion of the King of Northumbria.

628. Conversion of the King of East Anglia.

631-651. Aidan's missions.

635. Conversion of the King of Wessex.

653. Conversion of the King of Mercia.

654. Re-conversion of the King of the East Saxons.

681. Conversion of the King of the South Saxons.

An influx of heathenism occurred on two later occasions in the ninth century there was an invasion by the heathen Danes under Guthrum; and in the eleventh century the heathen king Cnut led his hordes to victory, As in the case of the Saxon kings of the seventh century, Guthrum and Cnut were converted and the tribes followed their leaders' example, professed Christianity, and were baptized.

But it cannot be imagined that these wholesale conversions were more than nominal in most cases, though the king's religion was outwardly the tribe's religion. If, as happened among the East Saxons, the king forsook his old gods, returned to them again, and finally forsook them altogether, the tribe followed his lead, and, in public at least, worshipped Christ, Odin, or any other deity whom the king favoured for the moment; but there can be hardly any doubt that in private the mass of the people adhered to the old religion to which they were accustomed. This tribal conversion is clearly marked when a heathen king married a Christian queen, or vice. versa; and it must also be noted that a king never changed his religion without careful consultation with his chief men.[1] An example of the two religions existing side by side is found in the account of Redwald, King of the East Saxons, who 'in the same temple had an altar to sacrifice to Christ, and another small one to offer victims to devils'.[2]

The continuity of the ancient religion is proved by the references to it in the classical authors, the ecclesiastical laws, and other legal and historical records.

1st cent. Strabo, 63 B.C.-A.D. 23.

'In an island close to Britain, Demeter and Persephone are venerated with rites similar to the orgies of Samothrace.'[3]

4th cent. Dionysius says that in islands near Jersey and Guernsey the rites of Bacchus were performed by the women, crowned with leaves; they danced and made an even greater shouting than the Thracians.[4]

7th cent. Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, 668-690.

The Liber Poenitentialis[5] of Theodore contains the earliest ecclesiastical laws of England. It consists of a list of offences and the penance due for each offence; one whole section is occupied with details of the ancient religion and of its rites. Such are:

Sacrifice to devils.

Eating and drinking in a heathen temple, (a) in ignorance, (b) after being told by the [Christian] priest that it is sacrilege and the table of devils, (c) as a cult of idols and in honour of idols.

'Not only celebrating feasts in the abominable places of the heathen and offering food there, but also consuming it. Serving this hidden idolatry, having relinquished Christ. If anyone at the kalends of January goes about as a stag or a bull; that is, making himself into a wild animal and dressing in the skin of a herd animal, and putting on the heads of beasts; those who in such wise transform themselves into the appearance of a wild animal, penance for three years because this is devilish.'

[1. Hunt, vol. I

2. Bede, Bk. II, ch. xv.

3. Strabo, Geography, Bk. IV, c. iv, 6.

4. Dionysius, Periegetes, II. 1120-5.

5. Thorpe, ii, pp. 32-4.]

The Laws of Wihtraed, King of Kent,[1] 690.
 Fines inflicted on those who offer to devils.

8th cent. The Confessionale and Poeniteniale of Ecgberht, first Archbishop of York,[2] 734-766.
 Prohibition of offerings to devils; of witchcraft; of auguries according to the methods of the heathen; of vows paid, loosed, or confirmed at wells, stones, or trees; of the gathering of herbs with any incantation except Christian prayers.

The Law of the Northumbrian priests.[3]
 'If then anyone be found that shall henceforth practise any heathenship, either by sacrifice or by "fyrt", or in any way love witchcraft, or worship idols, if he be a king's thane, let him pay X half-marks; half to Christ, half to the king. We are all to love and worship one God, and strictly hold one Christianity, and totally renounce all heathenship.'

9th cent. Decree attributed to a General Council of Ancyra.[4]
 'Certain wicked women, reverting to Satan, and seduced by the illusions and phantasms of demons, believe and profess that they ride at night with Diana on certain beasts, with an innumerable multitude of women, passing over immense distances, obeying her commands as their mistress, and evoked by her on certain nights.'

10th cent. Laws of Edward and Guthrum.[5] After 901.
 'If anyone violate christianity, or reverence heathenism, by word or by work, let him pay as well wer, as wite or lah-slit, according as the deed may be.'

Laws of King Athelslan,[6] 924-940.
 We have ordained respecting witchcrafts, and lyblacs, and morthdaeds: if anyone should be thereby killed, and he could not deny it, that he be liable in his life. But if he will deny it, and at the threefold ordeal shall be guilty; that he be cxx days in prison.'

Ecclesiastical canons of King Edgar,[7] 959.
 We enjoin, that every priest zealously promote Christianity, and totally extinguish every heathenism; and forbid

[1. Thorpe, i, p. 41.

2. Id., ii, p. 157 seq.

3. Id., ii, pp. 299, 303.

4. Scot, p. 66.--Lea, iii, p. 493.

5. Thorpe, i, p. 169,

6. Id., i, p. 203.

7. Id., ii, p. 249.]

well worshipings, and necromancies, and divinations, and enchantments, and man worshipings, and the vain practices which are carried on with various spells, and with "frithsplots",[1] and with elders, and also with various other trees, and with stones, and with many various delusions, with which men do much of what they should not.--And we enjoin, that every Christian man zealously accustom his children to Christianity, and teach them the Paternoster and the Creed. And we enjoin, that on feast days heathen songs and devil's games be abstained from.'

Laws of King Ethelred, [2] 978-1016.
 'Let every Christian man do as is needful to him; let him strictly keep his Christianity. . . . Let us zealously venerate right Christianity, and totally despise every heathenism.'

11th cent. Laws of King Cnut,[3] 1017-1035,
 'We earnestly forbid every heathenism: heathenism is, that men worship idols; that is, that they worship heathen gods, and the sun or the moon, fire or rivers, water-wells or stones, or forest trees of any kind; or love witchcraft, or promote morth-work in any wise.'

13th cent. Witchcraft made into a sect and heresy by the Church. The priest of Inverkeithing presented before the bishop in 1282 for leading a fertility dance at Easter round the phallic figure of a god; he was allowed to retain his benefice.[4]

14th cent. In 1303 the Bishop of Coventry was accused before the Pope for doing homage to the Devil.[3]

Trial of Dame Alice Kyteler, 1324.
 Tried for both operative and ritual witchcraft, and found guilty.

Nider's Formicarius, 1337.
 A detailed account of witches and their proceedings in Berne, which had been infested by them for more than sixty years.

[1. Frith = brushwood, splot = plot of ground; sometimes used for 'splotch, splash'.

2. Thorpe, i, pp. 311, 323, 351.

3. Id., i, p. 379.

4. Chronicles of Lanercost, p. 109, ed. Stevenson.

5. Rymer, ii, 934.]

15th cent. Joan of Arc burnt as a witch, 1431. Gilles de Rais executed as a witch, 1440.

Bernardo di Bosco, 1457.
 Sent by Pope Calixtus III to suppress the witches in Brescia and its neighbourhood.

Bull of Pope Innocent VIII, 1481,
 'It has come to our ears that numbers of both sexes do not avoid to have intercourse with demons, Incubi and Succubi; and that by their sorceries, and by their incantations, charms, and conjurations, they suffocate, extinguish, and cause to perish the births of women, the increase of animals, the corn of the ground, the grapes of the vineyard and the fruit of the trees, as well as men, women, flocks, herds, and other various kinds of animals, vines and apple trees, grass, corn and other fruits of the earth; making and procuring that men and women, flocks and herds and other animals shall suffer and be tormented both from within and without, so that men beget not, nor women conceive; and they impede the conjugal action of men and women.'

It will be seen by the foregoing that so far from the Bull of Pope Innocent VIII being the beginning of the 'outbreak of witchcraft ', as so many modern writers consider, it is only one of many ordinances against the practices of an earlier cult. It takes no account of the effect of these practices on the morals of the people who believed in them, but lays stress only on their power over fertility; the fertility of human beings, animals, and crops. In short it is exactly the pronouncement which one would expect from a Christian against a heathen form of religion in which the worship of a god of fertility was the central idea. It shows therefore that the witches were considered to deal with fertility only.

Looked upon in the light of a fertility cult, the ritual, of the witches becomes comprehensible. Originally for the promotion of fertility, it became gradually degraded into a method for blasting fertility, and thus the witches who had been once the means of bringing prosperity to the people and the land by driving out all evil influences, in process of time were looked upon as being themselves the evil influences, and were held in horror accordingly.

The actual feelings of the witches towards their religion have been recorded in very few cases, but they can be inferred from the few records which remain. The earliest example is from Lorraine in 1408, 'lequel mefait les susdites dames disoient et confessoient avoir endure a leur contentement et saoulement de plaisir que n'avoient eu onc de leur vie en tel pourchas'.[1] De Lancre took a certain amount of trouble to obtain the opinions of the witches, whereby he was obviously scandalized.

'Vne sorciere entre autres fort insigne nous dict qu'elle auoit tousiours creu, que la sorcelerie estoit la meilleure religion.--Ieanne Dibasson aagee de vingt neuf ans nous dict que le sabbat estoit le vray Paradis, ou il y a beaucoup plus de plaisir qu'on ne peut exprimer. Que ceux qui y vont trouuent le temps si court a force de plaisir & de contenteme[n]t, qu'ils n'en peuuent sortir sans vn merveilleux regret, de maniere qu'il leur tarde infiniment qu'ils n'y reuiennent.--Marie de la Ralde, aagee de vingt huict ans, tres belle femme, depose qu'elle auoit vn singulier plaisir d'aller au sabbat, si bien que quand on la venoit semondre d'y aller elle y alloit comme a nopces: non pas tant pour la liberte & licence qu'on a de s'accointer ensemble (ce que par modestie elle dict n'auoir iamais faict ny veu faire) mais parce que le Diable tenoit tellement lies leurs coeurs & leurs volontez qu'a peine y laissoit il entrer nul autre desir . . . An reste elle dict qu'elle ne croyoit faire aucun mal d'aller au sabbat, & qu'elle y auoit beaucoup plus de plaisir & contentement que d'aller a la Messe, parce que le Diable leur faisoit a croire qu'il estoit le vray Dieu, & que la ioye que les sorciers prenoyent au sabbat n'estoit qu'vn commencement d'vne beaucoup plus grande gloire.--Elles disoyent franchement, qu'elles y alloyent & voyoient toutes ces execrations auec vne volupte admirable, & vn desir enrager d'y aller & d'y estre, trouua[n]t les iours trop reculez de la nuict pour faire le voyage si desire, & le poinct ou les heures pour y aller trop lentes, & y estant, trop, courtes pour vn si agreable seiour & delicieux amusement.--En fin il a le faux martyre: & se trouue des Sorciers si acharnez a son seruice endiable, qu'il n'y a torture ny supplice qui les estonne, & diriez qu'ils vont au vray martyre & a la mort pour l'amour de luy, aussi gayement que s'ils alloient a vn festin de plaisir & reiouyssance publique.--Quand elles sont preuenues de la Iustice, elles ne pleurent & ne iettent vne seule larme, voire leur faux martyre soit de la torture, soit du gibet leur est si plaisant, qu'il tarde a plusieurs qu'elles ne

[1. Bournon, p. 23.]

soiet executees a mort, & souffre[n]t fort ioyeusement qu'on leur face le procez, tant il leur tarde qu'elles ne soient auec le Diable. Et ne s'impatientent de rien tant en leur prison, que de ce qu'elles ne lui peuuent tesmoigner co[m]bie[n]: elles souffrent & desirent souffrir pour luy."[1]

Bodin says, 'Il y en a d'autres, ausquelles Satan promet qu'elles seront bien heureuses apres cette vie, qui empesche qu'elles ne se repentent, & meurent obstinees en leur mechancete'.[2]

Madame de Bourignon's girls at Lille (1661) 'had not the least design of changing, to quit these abominable Pleasures, as one of them of Twenty-two Years old one day told me. No, said she, I will not be other than I am; I find too much content in my Condition.'[3] Though the English and Scotch witches' opinions are not reported, it is clear from the evidence that they were the same as those of the Basses-Pyrenees, for not only did they join of their own free will but in many cases there seems to have been no need of persuasion. In a great number of trials, when the witches acknowledged that they had been asked to become members of the society, there follows an expression of this sort, 'ye freely and willingly accepted and granted thereto'. And that they held -to their god as firmly as those de Lancre put to death is equally evident in view of the North Berwick witches, of Rebecca West and Rose Hallybread, who 'dyed very Stuburn, and Refractory without any Remorss, or seeming Terror of Conscience for their abominable Witch-craft';[4] Major Weir, who perished as a witch, renouncing all hope of heaven;[5] and the Northampton witches, Agnes Browne and her daughter, who 'were never heard to pray, or to call vppon God, never asking pardon for their offences either of God or the world in this their dangerous, and desperate Resolution, dyed'; Elinor Shaw and Mary Phillips, at their execution 'being desired to say their Prayers, they both set up a very loud Laughter,

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 124, 125, 126, 135, 208, 458.

2. Bodin, Fleau, p. 373.

3. Bourignon, Parole, p. 87.--Hale, p. 27. Full Tryals of Notorious Witches, p. 8.

4. Records of the Justiciary Court of Edinburgh, ii, p. 14.--Arnot, p. 359.]

calling for the Devil to come and help them in such a Blasphemous manner, as is not fit to Mention; so that the Sherif seeing their presumptious Impenitence, caused them to be Executed with all the Expedition possible; even while they were Cursing and raving, and as they liv'd the Devils true Factors, so they resolutely Dyed in his Service': the rest of the Coven also died 'without any confession or contrition'.[1]

[1. Witches of Northhamtonshire, p. 8.]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

II. THE GOD

  

1. As God

IT is impossible to understand the witch-cult without first understanding the position of the chief personage of that cult. He was known to the contemporary Christian judges and recorders as the Devil, and was called by them Satan, Lucifer, Beelzebub, the Foul Fiend, the Enemy of Salvation, and similar names appropriate to the Principle of Evil, the Devil of the Scriptures, with whom they identified him.

This was far from the view of the witches themselves. To them this so-called Devil was God, manifest and incarnate; they adored him on their knees, they addressed their prayers to him, they offered thanks to him as the giver of food and the necessities of life, they dedicated their children to him, and, there are indications that, like many another god, he was sacrificed for the good of his people.

The contemporary writers state in so many words that the witches believed in the divinity of their Master. Danaeus, writing in 1575, says, 'The Diuell com[m]aundeth them that they shall acknowledge him for their god, cal vpo[n] him, pray to him, and trust in him.--Then doe they all repeate the othe which they haue geuen vnto him; in acknowledging him to be their God.'[1] Gaule, in 1646, nearly a century later, says that the witches vow 'to take him [the Devil] for their God, worship, invoke, obey him'.[2]

The witches are even more explicit, and their evidence proves the belief that their Master was to them their God. The accusation against Elisabeth Vlamyncx of Alost, 1595, was that 'vous n'avez pas eu honte de vous agenouiller devant votre Belzebuth, que vous avez adore'.[3] The same accusation was made against Marion Grant of Aberdeen, 1596, that 'the Deuill quhome thow callis thy god . . . causit the worship him on thy kneis as thy lord'.[4] De Lancre (1609) records, as

[1. Danaeus, E 1, ch. iv.

2 Gaule, p. 62.

3. Cannaert, p. 45.

4. Spalding Club Miscellany, i, pp. 171, 172.]

did all the Inquisitors, the actual words of the witches; when they presented a young child, they fell on their knees and said, 'Grand Seigneur, lequel i'adore', and when the child was old enough to join the society she made her vow in these words: 'Ie me remets de tout poinct en ton pouuoir & entre tes mains, ne recognois autre Dieu: si bien que tu es mon Dieu'.[1] Silvain Nevillon, tried at Orleans in 1614, said, 'On dit au Diable nous vous recognoissons pour nostre maistre, nostre Dieu, nostre Createur'.[2] The Lancashire witch, Margaret Johnson, 1633, said: 'There appeared vnto her a spirit or divell in the similitude and proportion of a man. And the said divell or spirit bidd her call him by the name of Mamillion. And saith, that in all her talke and conferense shee calleth her said Divell Mamillion, my god.'[3] According to Madame Bourignon, 1661, 'Persons who were thus engaged to the Devil by a precise Contract, will allow no other God but him'.[4] Isobel Gowdie confessed that 'he maid vs beliew that ther wes no God besyd him.--We get all this power from the Divell, and when ve seik it from him, ve call him "owr Lord".--At each tyme, quhan ve wold meitt with him, we behoowit to ryse and mak our curtesie; and we wold say, "Ye ar welcom, owr Lord," and "How doe ye, my Lord."'[5] The Yorkshire witch, Alice Huson, 1664, stated that the Devil 'appeared like a Black Man upon a Black Horse, with Cloven Feet; and then I fell down, and did Worship him upon my Knees'.[6] Ann Armstrong in Northumberland, 1673, gave a good deal of information about her fellow witches: 'The said Ann Baites hath severall times danced with the divell att the places aforesaid, calling him, sometimes, her protector, and, other sometimes, her blessed saviour.-She saw Forster, Dryden, and Thompson, and the rest, and theire protector, which they call'd their god, sitting at the head of the table-When this informer used meanes to avoyd theire company, they threatned her, if she would not

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 398, 399.

2 Id., L'Incredulite, p. 80.

3. Baines, i, p. 607 note. For the name Mamillion see Layamon's Brut, p. 155, Everyman Library.

4. Bourignon, Vie, p. 222.--Hale, p. 37.

5. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 605, 607, 613.

6. Hale, p. 58.]

turne to theire god, the last shift should be the worst.'[1] At Crighton, 1678, the Devil himself preached to the witches, 'and most blasphemously mocked them, if they offered to trust in God who left them miserable in the world, and neither he nor his Son Jesus Christ ever appeared to them when they called on them, as he had, who would not cheat them'.[2] Even in America, 1692, Mary Osgood, the wife of Capt. Osgood, declared that 'the devil told her he was her God, and that she should serve and worship him'.[3]

Prayers were addressed to the Master by his followers, and in some instances the prayer was taught by him. Alice Gooderidge of Stapenhill in Derbyshire, 1597, herself a witch and the daughter of a witch, was charged by Sir Humphrey Ferrers 'with witchcraft about one Michael's Cow: which Cow when shee brake all thinges that they tied her in, ranne to this Alice Gooderige her house, scraping at the walls and windowes to haue come in: her olde mother Elizabeth Wright, tooke vpon her to help; vpon condition that she might haue a peny to bestow vpon her god, and so she came to the mans house kneeled downe before the Cow, crossed her with a sticke in the forehead, and prayed to her god, since which time the Cow continued wel'.[4] Antide Colas, 1598, confessed that 'Satan luy comma[n]da de le prier soir & matin, auant qu'elle s'addonnat a faire autre oeuure'.[5] Elizabeth Sawyer, the witch of Edmonton, 1621, was taught by the Devil; 'He asked of me to whom I prayed, and I answered him to lesus Christ, and he charged me then to pray no more to lesus Christ, but to him the Diuell, and he the Diuell taught me this prayer, Sanctibecetur nomen tuum, Amen'., Part of the dittay against Jonet Rendall, an Orkney witch, 1629, was that I the devill appeirit to you, Quhom ye called Walliman.--Indyttit and accusit for yt of your awne confessioune efter ye met your Walliman upoun the hill ye earn to Williame Rendalls hous quha haid ane seik hors and promeised to haill him if he could geve yow tua penneys for everie foot, And haveing gottin the

[1. Surtees Soc., xl, pp. 191-193. 

2. Fountainhall, i. 15.

3. Howell, vi, 660.--J. Hutchinson, ii, p. 31.

4. Alse Gooderidge, pp. 9, 10.

5. Boguet, p. 54.

6. Wonderfull Discouerie of Elizabeth Sawyer, C 4, rev.]

silver ye hailled the hors be praying to your Walliman, Lykeas ye have confest that thair is nather man nor beast sick that is not tane away be the hand of God bot for almis ye ar able to cur it be praying to your Walliman, and yt thair is nane yt geves yow almis bot they will thryve ather be sea or land it ye pray to yor Walliman'.[1] The witches of East Anglia, 1645, also prayed; 'Ellen the wife of Nicholas Greenleife of Barton in Sufolke, confessed, that when she prayed she prayed to the Devill and not to God.--Rebecca West confessed that her mother prayed constantly (and, as the world thought, very seriously), but she said it was to the devil, using these words, Oh my God, my God, meaning him and not the LORD.'[2]

A good example of the change of the word 'God', when used by the witch, into the word 'devil' when recorded by the Christian writer, is found at Bute in 1662: 'Jonet Stewart declares that quhen Alester McNivan was lying sick that Jonet Morisone and NcWilliam being in her house the said Jonet desyred NcWilliam to goe see the said Allester the said NcWilliam lifting up her curcheffe said "devill let him never be seene till I see him and devill let him never ryse ". . . [NcWilliam was asked] if she lifted up her curcheffe quhen Jonet Morisone desyred her to goe see Alester McNivan, saying "god let him never ryse till I goe see him."'[3]

  

2. As a Human Being.

  

(a) Man

The evidence of the witches makes it abundantly clear that the so-called Devil was a human being, generally a man, occasionally a woman. At the great Sabbaths, where he appeared in his grand array, he was disguised out of recognition; at the small meetings, in visiting his votaries, or when inducing a possible convert to join the ranks of the witch-society, he came in his own person, usually dressed plainly in the costume of the period. When in ordinary clothes he was indistinguishable from any other man of his own rank or age, but the evidence suggests that he made himself known by

[1. County Folklore, iii, Orkney, pp. 103,107-8.

2. Stearne, pp. 28, 38

3. Highland Papers, iii, pp. 16, 17.]

some manual gesture, by a password, or by some token carried on his person. The token seems to have been carried on the foot, and was perhaps a specially formed boot or shoe, or a foot-covering worn under the shoe.[1]

Besides the Grand Master himself there was often a second 'Devil', younger than the Chief. There is no indication whatsoever as to the method of appointing the head of the witch-community, but it seems probable that on the death of the principal 'Devil' the junior succeeded, and that the junior was appointed from among the officers (see chap. vii). This suggestion, however, does not appear to hold good where a woman was the Chief, for her second in command was always a man and often one well advanced in years. The elderly men always seem to have had grey beards.

Danaeus in 1575 summarizes the evidence and says of the Devil, 'he appeareth vnto them in likenesse of a man, insomuch that it hapneth many tymes, that among a great company of men, the Sorcerer only knoweth Satan, that is present, when other doo not know him, although they see another man, but who or what he is they know not'.[2] De Lancre says, 'On a obserue de tout temps que lors qu'il veut receuoir quelcun a faire pacte auec luy, il se presente tousiours en homme'.[3] Cooper states that 'the Wizards and Witches being met in a place and time appointed, the devil appears to them in humane shape'.[4] Even a modern writer, after studying the evidence, acknowledges that the, witches 'seem to have been undoubtedly the victims of unscrupulous and designing knaves, who personated Satan '.[5]

The witches not only described the personal appearance of the Devil, but often gave careful details as to his clothes; such details are naturally fuller when given by the women than by the men.

[1. It is possible that the shoe was cleft like the modern 'hygienic' shoe. Such a shoe is described in the ballad of the Cobler of Canterbury, date 1608, as part of a woman's costume:

'Her sleeves blue, her traine behind,
 With silver hookes was tucked, I find;
 Her shoes broad, and forked before.'

2. Danaeus, ch. iv.

3. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 69.

4. Cooper, Pleasant Treatise, p. 2.

5. Burns Begg, p. 217.]

England.--John Walsh of Dorsetshire, 1566, described the Devil, whom he called his Familiar, as 'sometymes like a man in all proportions, sauing that he had clouen feete'.[1] The Lancashire witch, Anne Chattox, 1613, said, 'A thing like a Christian man did sundry times come to this Examinate, and requested this Examinate to giue him her Soule: And in the end, this Examinate was contented to giue him her sayd Soule, shee being then in her owne house, in the Forrest of Pendle; wherevpon the Deuill then in the shape of a Man, sayd to this Examinate: Thou shalt want nothing.' Elizabeth Southerns of the same Coven said that 'there met her this Examinate a Spirit or Deuill, in the shape of a Boy, the one halfe of his Coate blacke, and the other browne'.[2] To Margaret Johnson, one of the later Lancashire witches, 1633, there appeared 'a spirit or divell in the similitude and proportion of a man, apparelled in a suite of black, tyed about wth silke pointes'.[3] The Yarmouth witch, 1644, 'when she was in Bed, heard one knock at her Door, and rising to her Window, she saw, it being Moonlight, a tall black Man there'.[4] The Essex witches, 1645, agreed very fairly in their description of the man who came amongst them: according to Elizabeth Clarke he appeared 'in the shape of a proper gentleman, with a laced band, having the whole proportion of a man . . . He had oftentimes knocked at her dore in the night time; and shee did arise open the dore and let him in'; Rebecca Weste gave evidence that 'the Devil appeared in the likeness of a proper young man'; and Rebecca Jones said that the Devil as 'a very handsome young man came to the door, who asked how she did'; on another occasion she met the Devil, 'as shee was going to St. Osyth to sell butter', in the form of a 'man in a ragged sute'.[5] There are two accounts of the evidence given by the Huntingdonshire witch, Joan Wallis of Keiston, 1646: Stearne says that she 'confessed the Devill came to her in the likenesse of a man in blackish cloathing, but had cloven feet'. Davenport's record is slightly different: 'Blackman came first to her, about a

[1. Examination of John Walsh.

2. Potts, D 3, B 2.

3. Baines, i, p. 607 note.

4. Hale, p. 46.

5. Howell, iv, 833, 836, 840, 854-5.]

twelve-moneth since, like a man something ancient, in blackish cloathes, but he had ugly feet uncovered.'[1] The evidence of the Suffolk witches, 1645-6, is to the same effect; Thomazine Ratcliffe of Shellie confessed that 'there came one in the likeness of a man.--One Richmond, a woman which lived at Brampford, confessed the Devill appeared to her in the likenesse of a man, called Daniel the Prophet.--One Bush of Barton, widdow, confessed that the Devill appeared to her in the shape of a young black man'.[2] All the Covens of Somerset, 1664, were evidently under one Chief; he came to Elizabeth Style as 'a handsome man'; to Elizabeth Style, Anne Bishop, Alice Duke, and Mary Penny as 'a Man in black Clothes, with a little Band'; to Christian Green 'in the shape of a Man in blackish Clothes'; and to Mary and Catherine Green as 'a little Man in black Clothes with a little Band'.[3] To the Yorkshire witch, Alice Huson, 1664, he appeared 'like a Black Man on a Horse upon the Moor', and again 'like a Black Man upon a Black Horse, with Cloven Feet'.[4] Abre Grinset of Dunwich, in Suffolk, 1665, said 'he did appear in the form of a Pretty handsom Young Man'.[5] In Northumberland, 1673, Ann Armstrong said that 'she see the said Ann Forster [with twelve others and] a long black man rideing on a bay galloway, as she thought, which they call'd there protector'.[6] The Devonshire witch Susanna Edwards, 1682, enters into some detail: 'She did meet with a gentleman in a field called the Parsonage Close in the town of Biddiford. And saith that his apparel was all of black. Upon which she did hope to have a piece of money of him. Whereupon the gentleman drawing near unto this examinant, she did make a curchy or courtesy unto him, as she did use to do to gentlemen. Being demanded what and who the gentleman she spake of was, the said examinant answered and said, That it was the Devil.'[7] In Northamptonshire, 1705, he came to Mary Phillips and Elinor Shaw as 'a tall black Man'.[8]

Scotland.--The earliest description is in the trial of Bessie

[1. Stearne, p. 13.--Davenport, p. 13.

2. Stearne, pp. 22, 29, 30.

3. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 136, 137, 147, 149, 156, 161-5.

4. Hale, p. 58.

5. Petto, p. 18.

6. Denham Tracts, ii, p. 301.

7. Howell, viii, 1035

8. Elinor Shaw and Mary Phillips, p. 6.]

Dunlop of Lyne in Ayrshire in 1576, and is one of the most detailed. Bessie never spoke of the person, who appeared to her, as the 'Devil', she invariably called him Thom Reid; but he stood to her in the same relation that the Devil stood to the witches, and like the Devil he demanded that she should believe on him. She described him as 'ane honest wele elderlie man, gray bairdit, and had ane gray coitt with Lumbart slevis of the auld fassoun; ane pair of gray brekis, and quhyte schankis, gartanit aboue the kne; ane blak bonet on his heid, cloise behind and plane befoir, with silkin laissis drawin throw the lippis thairof; and ane quhyte wand in his hand'.[1] Alison Peirson, 1588, must have recognized the man who appeared to her, for she 'wes conuict of the vsing of Sorcerie and Wichcraft, with the Inuocatioun of the spreitis of the Dewill; speciallie, in the visioune and forme of ane Mr. William Sympsoune, hir cousing and moder-brotheris-sone, quha sche affermit wes ane grit scoller and doctor of medicin'.[2] Though the Devil of North Berwick, 1590, appeared in disguise, it is not only certain that he was a man but his identity can be determined. Barbara Napier deposed that 'the devil wess with them in likeness of ane black man . . . the devil start up in the pulpit, like a mickle blak man, with ane black beard sticking out like ane goat's beard, clad in ane blak tatie [tattered] gown and ane ewill favoured scull bonnet on his heid; hauing ane black book in his hand'. Agnes Sampson's description in the official record was very brief: 'he had on him ane gown, and ane hat, which were both black';[3] but Melville, who probably heard her evidence, puts it more dramatically: 'The deuell wes cled in ane blak gown with ane blak hat vpon his head. . . . His faice was terrible, his noise lyk the bek of ane egle, gret bournyng eyn; his handis and leggis wer herry, with clawes vpon his handis, and feit lyk the griffon.'[4] John Fian merely mentions that the first time the Devil came he was clothed in white raiment.[5] The evidence from Aberdeen, 1596-7, points to there being two, Chiefs, one old and one young. Ellen Gray confessed that

[1. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 51-6.

2. Id., i, pt. ii, p. 162.

3. Id., i, pt. ii, pp. 245-6, 239. Spelling modernized.

4. Melville, pp. 395-6.

5. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 210.]

'the Devill, thy maister, apperit to thee in the scheap of ane agit man, beirdit, with a quhyt gown and a thrummit [shaggy] hatt'. Andro Man 'confessis that Crystsunday cum to hym in liknes of ane fair angell, and clad in quhyt claythis'. Christen Mitchell stated that 'Sathan apperit to the in the lyknes of a littill crippill man'; and Marion Grant gave evidence that 'the Deuill, quhom thow callis thy god, apperit to thee in ane gryte man his licknes, in silkin abuilzeament [habiliment], withe ane quhyt candill in his hand'.[1] Isobell Haldane of Perth, 1607, was carried away into a fairy hill, 'thair scho stayit thrie dayis, viz. fra Thurisday till Sonday at xii houris. Scho mett a man with ane gray beird, quha brocht hir furth agane.' This man stood to her in the same relation as Thom Reid to Bessie Dunlop, or as the Devil to the witches.[2] Jonet Rendall of Orkney, 1629, saw him 'claid in quhyt cloathis, with ane quhyt head and ane gray beard'.[3] In East Lothian, 1630, Alexander Hamilton met the Devil in the likeness of a black man.[4] At Eymouth, 1634, Bessie Bathgate was seen by two young men 'at 12 hours of even (when all people are in their beds) standing bare-legged and in her sark valicot, at the back of hir yard, conferring with the devil who was in green cloaths'.[5] Manie Haliburton of Dirlton, 1649, confessed that, when her daughter was ill, 'came the Devill, in licknes of a man, to hir hous, calling himselff a phisition'.[6] He came also as 'a Mediciner' to Sandie Hunter in East Lothian in 1649.[7] In the same year he appeared as a black man to Robert Grieve, 'an eminent Warlock' at Lauder.[8] In the same year also 'Janet Brown was charged with having held a meeting with the Devil appearing as a man, at the back of Broomhills'.[1] Among the Alloa witches, tried in 1658, Margret Duchall 'did freelie confes hir paction with the diwell, how he appeared first to hir in the liknes of a man in broun cloathis, and ane blak hat'; while Kathren Renny said 'that he first appeared to hir in the bodis medow

[1. Spalding Club Miscellany, i, pp. 124, 127; 164, 172.

2. Pitcairn, ii, p. 537.

3. County Folklore, iii, p. 103. Orkney.

4. From the record of the trial in the Justiciary Court, Edinburgh.

5. Spoltiswode Miscellany, ii, p. 65.

6. Pitcairn, iii, p. 599.

7. Sinclair, p. 122.

8. Id., p. 47.

9. Arnot, p. 358.]

in the liknes of a man with gray cloathis and ane blew cap'.[1] The years 1661 and 1662 are notable in the annals of Scotch witchcraft for the number of trials and the consequent mass of evidence, including many descriptions of the Grand-master. At Forfar, in 1661, Helen Guthrie said that at several meetings the devil was present 'in the shape of a black iron-hued man'; Katherine Porter 'saw the divill and he had ane blacke plaid about him'; when Issobell Smyth was alone gathering heather, 'hee appeared to hir alone lik ane braw gentleman'; and on another occasion 'like a light gentleman'.[2] Jonet Watson of Dalkeith, also in 1661, said 'that the Deivill apeired vnto her in the liknes of ane prettie boy, in grein clothes. . . . Shoe was at a Meitting in Newtoun-dein with the Deavill, who had grein clothes vpone him, and ane blak hatt vpone his head'.[3] In the same year an Edinburgh Coven was tried: Jonet Ker was accused that 'as you wer comeing from Edr to the park you mett with the devill at the bough in the liknes of a greavous black man'; Helene Casso 'met with the devill in liknes of a man with greine cloaths in the links of Dudingstone qr he wes gathering sticks amongst the whines'; Isobel Ramsay 'mett with the devill in the Liknes of a pleasant young man who said qr live you goodwyf and how does the minister And as you wes goeing away he gave you a sexpence saying God bud him give you that qch you wared and bought meall therwith As also you had ane uther meiting wt the devill in yor awne house in the liknes of yor awne husband as you wes lying in yor bed at qch tyme you engadged to be his servant'; Jonet Millar 'did meit wt the devill in liknes of ane young man in the hous besyd the standing stane'.[4] The trials of the Auldearne witches in 1662 are fully reported as regards matters which interested the recorder; unfortunately the appearance of the Devil was not one of these, therefore Isobel Gowdie's description is abbreviated to the following: 'He was a meikle black roch man. Sometimes he had boots and sometimes shoes on his foot; but still [always] his foot are

[1. Scottish Antiquary, ix, pp. 50, 51.

2. Kinloch, pp. 114,128, 132.

3. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.

4. From the records in the Justiciary Court, Edinburgh.]

forked and cloven.'[1] At Crook of Devon in Kinross-shire, in the same year, nine of the witches describe the men they saw, for evidently there were two 'Devils' in this district; Isobel Rutherford said that 'Sathan was in the likness of a man with gray cloathes and ane blue bannet, having ane beard'; Bessie Henderson, 'the Devil appeared to you in the likeness of ane bonnie young lad, with ane blue bonnet'; Robert Wilson, 'the Devil was riding on ane horse with fulyairt clothes and ane Spanish cape'; Bessie Neil, 'Sathan appeared to you with dun-coloured clothes'; Margaret Litster, 'Sathan having grey clothes'; Agnes Brugh, 'the Devil appeared in the twilight like unto a half long fellow with an dusti coloured coat'; Margaret Huggon, 'he was an uncouth man with black cloathes with ane hood on his head'; Janet Paton, 'Sathan had black coloured clothes and ane blue bonnet being an unkie like man'; Christian Grieve, 'Sathan did first appear to yow like ane little man with ane blue bonnet on his head with rough gray cloaths on him'.[2] Marie Lamont of Innerkip, also in 1662, said that 'the devil was in the likeness of a meikle black man, and sung to them, and they dancit'; he appeared again 'in the likeness of a black man with cloven featt'.[3] At Paisley, in 1678, the girl-witch Annabil Stuart said that 'the Devil in the shape of a Black man came to her Mother's House'; her brother John was more detailed in his description, he observed 'one of the black man's feet to be cloven: and that the black man's Apparel was black; and that he had a bluish Band and Handcuffs; and that he had Hogers[4] on his Legs without Shoes'; Margaret Jackson of the same Coven confirmed the description, 'the black man's Clothes were black, and he had white Handcuffs'.[5] The clearest evidence is from an unpublished trial of 1678 among the records in the Justiciary Court in Edinburgh:

'Margaret Lowis declaires that about Elevin years ago a man whom she thought to be ane Englishman that cured diseases in the countrey called [blank] Webb appeared to her in her own house and gave her a drink and told her that she

[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 603.

2. Burns Begg, pp. 221-39.

3. Sharpe, pp. 131, 134.

4. Hogers, a coarse stocking without the foot.

5. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 291-5, 297.]

would have children after the taking of that drink And declares that that man made her renunce her baptisme . . . and declares that she thought that the man who made her doe these things wes the divill and that she has hade severall meitings with that man after she knew him to be the divill. Margaret Smaill prisoner being examined anent the Cryme of witchcraft depones that having come into the house of Jannet Borthvick in Crightoun she saw a gentleman sitting with her, and they desyred her to sitt down and having sitten down the gentleman drank to her and she drank to him and therefter the said Jannet Borthvick told her that that gentleman was the divill and declares that at her desyre she renunced her baptisme and gave herself to the divill.'

At Borrowstowness in 1679 Annaple Thomson 'had a metting with the devill in your cwming betwixt Linlithgow and Borrowstownes, where the devil, in the lyknes of ane black man, told yow, that yow wis ane poore puddled bodie . . . And yow the said Annaple had ane other metting, and he inveitted yow to go alongst, and drink with him'. The same devil met Margaret Hamilton 'and conversed with yow at the town-well of Borrowstownes, and several tymes in yowr awin howss, and drank severall choppens of ale with you'.[1] The Renfrewshire trials of 1696 show that all Mrs. Fulton's grandchildren saw the same personage; Elizabeth Anderson, at the age of seven, 'saw a black grim Man go in to her Grandmothers House'; James Lindsay, aged fourteen, 'met his Grandmother with a black grim Man'; and little Thomas Lindsay was awaked by his grandmother 'one Night out of his Bed, and caused him take a Black Grimm Gentleman (as she called him) by the Hand'.[2] At Pittenweem, in 1704, 'this young Woman Isobel Adams [acknowledged] her compact with the Devil, which she says was made up after this manner, viz. That being in the House of the said Beatie Laing, and a Man at the end of the Table, Beatie proposes to Isobel, that since she would not Fee and Hire with her, that she would do it, with the Man at the end of the Table; And accordingly Isobel agreed to it, and spoke with the Man at that time in General terms. Eight days after, the same Person in Appearance comes to her, and owns that

[1. Scots Magazine, 1814, p. 200.

2. Narrative of the Sufferings of a Young Girle, pp. xxxix-xli--Sadd. Debell., pp. 38-40.]

he was the Devil.'[1] The latest instance is at Thurso in 1719, where the Devil met Margaret Nin-Gilbert 'in the way in the likeness of a man, and engaged her to take on with him, which she consented to; and she said she knew him to be the devil or he parted with her'.[2]

In Ireland one of the earliest known trials for ritual witchcraft occurred in 1324, the accused being the Lady Alice Kyteler. She was said to have met the Devil, who was called Robin son of Artis, 'in specie cuiusdam aethiopis cum duobus sociis ipso maioribus et longioribus'.[3]

In France also there is a considerable amount of evidence. The earliest example is in 143'0, when Pierronne, a follower of Joan of Arc, was put to death by fire as a witch. She persisted to the end in her statement, which she made on oath, that God appeared to her in human form and spoke to her as friend to friend, and that the last time she had seen him he was clothed in a scarlet cap and a long white robe.[4] Estebene de Cambrue of the parish of Amou in 1567 said that the witches danced round a great stone, 'sur laquelle est assis un grand homme noir, qu'elles appellent Monsieur'.[5] Jeanne Hervillier of Verberie near Compiegne, in 1578, daughter of a witch who had been condemned and burnt, 'confessa qu'a l'aage de douze ans sa mere la presenta au diable, en forme d'vn grand homme noir, & vestu de noir, botte, esperonne, auec vne espee au coste, & vn cheual noir a la porte'.[1], Francoise Secretain of Saint Claud in 1598 stated 'qu'elle s'estoit donnee au Diable, lequel auoit lors la semblance d'vn grand homme noir'; Thievenne Paget, from the same district, 'racontoit que le Diable s'apparut a elle la premiere fois en plein midy, en forme d'vn grand homme noir'; and Antide Colas 'disoit, que Satan s'apparut a elle en forme d'vn homme, de grande stature, ayant sa barbe & ses habillemens noirs'.[7] Jeanne d'Abadle, in the Basses-Pyrenees, 1609, 'dit qu'elle y vid le

[1. A true and full Relation of the Witches of Pittenweem, p. 10,--Sinclair, p. lxxxix.

2. Sharpe, p. 191.

3. Camden Society, Lady Alice Kyteler, p. 3.

4. Journal d'un bourgeois de Paris, p. 687.

5. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 123.

6. Bodin, p. 226.

7. Boguet, pp. 8, 96].

Diable en forme d'homme noir & hideux, auec six cornes en la teste, parfois huict'.[1] Silvain Nevillon, tried at Orleans in 1614, 'dit que le Sabbat se tenoit dans vne maison, ou il vit a la cheminee com[m]e ledit Sabbat se faisoit, vn homme noir, duquel on ne voyoit point la teste. Vit aussi vn grand homme noir a l'opposite de celuy de la cheminee. Dit que les deux Diables qui estoient au Sabbat, l'vn s'appelloit l'Orthon, & l'autre Traisnesac.'[2] Two sisters were tried in 1652: one 'dict avoir trouve ung diable en ghuise d'ung home a pied'; the other said that 'il entra dans sa chambre en forme d'ung chat par une fenestre et se changea en la posture d'un home vestu de rouge'.[3]

In Belgium, Digna Robert, 1565, met 'un beau jeune homme vetu d'une casaque noire, qui etait le diable, et se nommait Barrebon . . . A la Noel passee, un autre diable, nomme Crebas, est venu pres d'elle.' Elisabeth Vlamynx of Ninove in the Pays d'Alost, 1595, was accused 'que vous avez, avant comme apres le repas, vous septieme ou huitieme, danse sous les arbres en compagnie de votre Belzebuth et d'un autre demon, tous deux en pourpoint blanc a la mode francaise' Josine Labyns in 1664, aged about forty: 'passe dix-neuf ans le diable s'est offert a vos yeux, derriere votre habitation, sous la figure d'un grand seigneur, vetu en noir et portant des plumes sur son chapeau.'[4]

In the copper mines of Sweden, 1670, the Devil appeared as a minister.' In the province of Elfdale in the same year his dress was not the usual black of that period: 'He used to appear, but in different Habits; but for the most part we saw him in a gray Coat, and red and blue Stockings; he had a red Beard, a high-crown'd Hat, with Linnen of divers colours wrapt about it, and long Garters upon his Stockings." This is not unlike the costume of Thom Reid as described, more than a century before, by Bessie Dunlop.

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 130.

2. Id., L'Incredulite, pp. 799, 800. The second Devil is called Tramesabot on p. 802.

3. Van Elven, La Tradition, v (1891), p. 215. Neither the witches' names nor the place are given.

4. Cannaert, pp. 44, 53-4, 60.

5. Fountainhall, i, p. 14.

6. Horneck, Pt. ii, p. 316.]

In America the same evidence is found. At Hartford, 1662, 'Robert Sterne testifieth as followeth: I saw this woman goodwife Seager in ye woods with three more women and with them I saw two black creatures like two Indians but taller'; and Hugh Crosia 'sayd ye deuell opned ye dore of eben booths hous made it fly open and ye gate fly open being asked how he could tell he sayd ye deuell apeered to him like a boye and told him hee ded make them fly open and then ye boye went out of his sight.'[1] Elizabeth Knap at Groton, 1671, 'was with another maid yt boarded in ye house, where both of them saw ye appearance of a mans head and shoulders, wth a great white neckcloath, looking in at ye window, which shee hath since confessed, was ye Devill coming to her.--One day as shee was alone in a lower roome she looked out of ye window, and saw ye devill in ye habit of an old man, coming over a great meadow.'[2] At Salem, 1692, Mary Osgood saw him as a black man who presented a book; and Mary Lacey described him as a black man in a high-crowned hat.[3]

The evidence suggests that an important part of the Devil's costume was the head-covering, which he appears to have worn both in and out of doors. Though the fact is not of special interest in itself, it may throw light on one of the possible origins of the cult.

In 1576 Bessie Dunlop met Thom Reid, who was clearly the Devil; he was 'ane honest wele elderlie man, gray bairdit, and had ane gray coitt with Lumbart slevis of the auld fassoun; ane pair of gray brekis and quhyte schankis, gartanit aboue the kne; ane blak bonet on his heid, cloise behind and plane befoir, with silkin laissis drawin throw the lippis thairof.'[4] At North Berwick in 1590, 'the deuell, cled in a blak gown with a blak hat vpon his head, preachit vnto a gret nomber of them.'[5] Another description of the same event shows that 'the Devil start up in the pulpit, like a mickle black man clad in a black tatie gown; and an evil-favoured scull-bonnet on his head'.[6] At Aberdeen in 1597 Ellen Gray described the

[1. Taylor, pp. 81, 118.

2. Green, pp. 9, 14.

3. Howell, vi, 660, 664; J. Hutchinson, ii, pp. 31, 37.

4. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 51.

5. Melville, p. 395.

7. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 246. Spelling modernized.]

Devil as 'ane agit man, beirdit, with a quhyt gown and a thrummit hat'.[1] 'In 1609, in the Basses-Pyrenees, when the Devil appeared as a goat, 'on luy voit aussi quelque espece de bonet ou chapeau au dessus de ses cornes.'[2] The Alloa Coven in 1658 spoke of 'a man in broun clathis and ane blak hat'; and on two occasions of 'a young man with gray cloathis and ane blew cap'.[3] In 1661 Janet Watson of Dalkeith 'was at a Meitting in Newtoun-dein with the Deavill, who had grein cloathes vpone him, and ane blak hatt vpone his head'.' Five members of the Coven at Crook of Devon in 1662 spoke of the Devil's head-gear: 'Sathan was in the likeness of a man with gray cloathes and ane blue bannet, having ane beard. Ane bonnie young lad with ane blue bonnet. Ane uncouth man with black clothes with ane hood on his head. Sathan had all the said times black coloured cloathes and ane blue bonnet being an unkie like man. Ane little man with ane blue bonnet on his head with rough gray cloathes on him." In 1662 in Connecticut Robert Sterne saw 'two black creatures like two Indians, but taller'; I as he was at a little distance it is probable that he took a plumed or horned head-dress to be the same as the Indian head-gear. In Belgium in 1664 Josine Labyns saw the Devil wearing a plumed hat.[7] In Somerset in 1665 Mary Green said that when he met the witches 'the little Man put his hand to his Hat, saying How do ye, speaking low but big'.[8] At Torryburn Lilias Adie said that the light was sufficient to 'shew the devil, who wore a cap covering his cars and neck'.[9] In Sweden in 1670 the Devil came 'in a gray Coat, and red and blue Stockings, he had a red Beard, a high-crown'd Hat, with Linnen of divers colours wrapt about, and long Garters upon his Stockings'.[10] At Pittenweem in 1670 the young lass Isobel Adams saw the Devil as 'a man in black cloaths with a hat on his head, sitting at the table' in Beatty Laing's house."

[1. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 127.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 68.

3. Scottish Antiquary, ix, pp. 50, 51.

4. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.

5. Burns Begg, pp. 221, '223, 234, 235, 239.

6. Taylor, p. 81.

7. Cannaert, p. 60.

8. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 164.

9. Chambers, iii, p. 298.

10. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 316.

11. Sinclair, p. lxxxix.]

  

(b) Woman

The Queen of Elphin, or Elfhame, is sometimes called the Devil, and it is often impossible to distinguish between her and the Devil when the latter appears as a woman. Whether she was the same as the French Reine du Sabbat is equally difficult to determine. The greater part of the evidence regarding the woman-devil is from Scotland.

In 1576 Bessie Dunlop's evidence shows that Thom Reid, who was to her what the Devil was to witches, was under the orders of the Queen of Elfhame:

'Interrogat, Gif sche neuir askit the questioun at him, Quhairfoir he com to hir mair [than] ane vthir bodye? Ansuerit, Remembring hir, quhen sche was lyand in childbed-lair, with ane of her laiddis, that ane stout woman com in to hir, and sat doun on the forme besyde hir, and askit ane drink at her, and sche gaif hir; quha alsua tauld hir, that that barne wald de, and that hir husband suld mend of his seiknes. The said Bessie ansuerit, that sche remembrit wele thairof; and Thom said, That was the Quene of Elfame his maistres, quha had commandit him to wait vpoun hir, and to do hir gude. Confessit and fylit.'[1]

In 1588 Alison Peirson 'was conuict for hanting and repairing with the gude nychtbouris and Quene of Elfame, thir diuers 3eiris bypast, as scho had confest be hir depositiounis, declaring that scho could nocht say reddelie how lang scho wes with thame; and that scho had freindis in that court quhilk wes of hir awin blude, quha had gude acquentence of the Quene of Elphane. And that scho saw nocht the Quene thir seuin 3eir.'[2] In 1597 at Aberdeen Andro Man was accused that

'thriescoir yeris sensyne or thairby, the Devill, thy maister, come to thy motheris hous, in the liknes and scheap of a woman, quhom thow callis the Quene of Elphen, and was delyverit of a barne, as apperit to the their, thow confessis that be the space of threttie two yeris sensyn or thairby, thow begud to have carnall deall with that devilische spreit, the Quene of Elphen, on quhom thow begat dyveris bairnis, quhom thow hes sene sensyn . . . Thow confessis that the Devill, thy maister, quhom thow termes Christsonday, and

[1. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 56.

2. Id., i, pt. ii, p. 163.]

supponis to be ane engell, and Goddis godsone, albeit he hes a thraw by God, and swyis [sways] to the Quene of Elphen, is rasit be the speaking of the word Benedicite . . . Siclyk, thow affermis that the Quene of Elphen hes a grip of all the craft, bot Christsonday is the gudeman, and hes all power vnder God . . . Vpon the Ruidday in harvest, in this present yeir, quhilk fell on a Wedinsday, thow confessis and affermis, thow saw Christsonday cum out of the snaw in liknes of a staig, and that the Quene of Elphen was their, and vtheris with hir, rydand on quhyt haikneyes, and that thay com to the Binhill and the Binlocht, quhair thay vse commonlie to convene, and that thay quha convenis with thame kissis Christsonday and the Quene of Elphenis airss. Thow affermis that the quene is verray plesand, and wilbe auld and young quhen scho pleissis; scho mackis any kyng quhom scho pleisis, and lyis with any scho lykis'.[1]

Another Aberdeen witch, Marion Grant, was accused in the same year and confessed, 'that the Devill, thy maister, quhome thow termes Christsonday, causit the dans sindrie tymes with him and with Our Ladye, quha, as thow sayes, was a fine woman, cled in a quhyt walicot'.[1] In Ayrshire in 1605 Patrick Lowrie and Jonet Hunter were accused that they 'att Hallow-evin assemblit thame selffis vpon Lowdon-hill, quhair thair appeirit to thame ane devillische Spreit, in liknes of ane woman, and callit hir selff Helen Mcbrune'.[3] In the Basses-Pyrenees in 1609, one could 'en chasque village trouuer vne Royne du Sabbat, que Sathan tenoit en delices com[m]e vne espouse priuilegiee'.[4] At the witch-mass the worshippers 'luy baisent la main gauche, tremblans auec mille angoisses, & luy offrent du pain, des oeufs, & de l'argent: & la Royne du Sabbat les recoit, laquelle est assise a son coste gauche, & en sa main gauche elle tient vne paix ou platine, dans laquelle est grauee l'effigie de Lucifer, laquelle on ne baise qu'apres l'auoir premierement baisee a elle'.[5] In 1613 the Lancashire witch, Anne Chattox, made a confused statement as to the sex of the so-called spirits; it is however quite possible that the confusion is due to the recorder, who was accustomed to consider all demons as male: 'After their eating, the Deuill called

[1. Spalding Club Misc., pp. 119-21.

2. Id., i, p. 171.

3. Pitcairn, ii, p. 478.

4. De Lancre, L'Incredulite, p. 36.

5. Id., Tableau, p. 401.]

Fancie, and the other Spirit calling himselfe Tibbe, carried the remnant away: And she sayeth that at their said Banquet, the said Spirits gaue them light to see what they did, and that they were both shee Spirites and Diuels.'[1] In 1618 at Leicester Joan Willimott 'saith, that shee hath a Spirit which shee calleth Pretty, which was giuen vnto her by William Berry of Langholme in Rutlandshire, whom she serued three yeares; and that her Master when he gaue it vnto her, willed her to open her mouth, and hee would blow into her a Fairy which should doe her good; and that shee opened her mouth, and he did blow into her mouth; and that presently after his blowing, there came out of her mouth a Spirit, which stood vpon the ground in the shape and forme of a Woman, which Spirit did aske of her her Soule, which she then promised vnto it, being willed thereunto by her Master.'[2] William Barton was tried in Edinburgh about 1655:

'One day, says he, going from my own house in Kirkliston, to the Queens Ferry, I overtook in Dalmeny Muire, a young Gentlewoman, as to appearance beautiful and comely. I drew near to her, but she shunned my company, and when I insisted, she became angry and very nyce. Said I, we are both going one way, be pleased to accept of a convoy. At last after much entreaty she grew better natured, and at length came to that Familiarity, that she suffered me to embrace her, and to do that which Christian ears ought not to hear of. At this time I parted with her very joyful. The next night, she appeared to him in that same very place, and after that which should not be named, he became sensible, that it was the Devil. Here he renounced his Baptism, and gave up himself to her service, and she called him her beloved, and gave him this new name of Iohn Baptist, and received the Mark.'[3]

At Forfar in 1662 Marjorie Ritchie 'willingly and friely declared that the divill appeired to her thrie severall tymes in the similitud of a womane, the first tyme in on Jonet Barrie's house, the second tyme whyle she was putting vp lint in the companie of the said Jonet, and that the divill did take her by the hand at that tyme, and promised that she should never

[1. Potts, B 4.

2. Wonderful Discovery of Margaret and Phillip Flower, p. 117.

3. Sinclair, p. 160.]

want money; and therafter that the divill appeired to her in the moiss of Neutoune of Airly, wher and when she did renunce her baptism'.[1] In 1670 Jean Weir, sister of the notorious Major Weir, gave an account of how she entered the service of the Devil; the ceremony began as follows: 'When she keeped a school at Dalkeith, and teached childering, ane tall woman came to the declarants hous when the childering were there; and that she had, as appeared to her, ane chyld upon her back, and on or two at her foot; and that the said woman desyred that the declarant should imploy her to spick for her to the Queen of Farie, and strik and battle in her behalf with the said Queen (which was her own words).'[2] Among the Salem witches in 1692, this Rampant Hag, Martha Carrier, was the person, of whom the Confessions of the Witches, and of her own Children among the rest, agreed, That the Devil had promised her, she should be Queen of Hell.'[3]

  

3. Identification

As it is certain that the so-called 'Devil' was a human being, sometimes disguised and sometimes not, the instances in which these persons can be identified are worth investigating. In most cases these are usually men, and the names are often given, but it is only in the case of the Devil of North Berwick that the man in question is of any historic importance; the others are simply private individuals of little or no note.

Elizabeth Stile of Windsor, in 1579, gives a description of Father Rosimond's changes of form, which points to his being the Chief of the Windsor witches: 'She confesseth, her self often tymes to haue gon to Father Rosimond house where she founde hym sittyng in a Wood, not farre from thence, vnder the bodie of a Tree, sometymes in the shape of an Ape, and otherwhiles like an Horse.'[4] In the reign of Elizabeth, 1584, there is a list of eighty-seven suspected persons, among whom occur the names of 'Ould Birtles the great devil, Roger Birtles and his wife and Anne Birtles, Darnally the sorcerer, the oulde

[1. Kinloch, p. 144.

2. Law, p. 27 note.

3. Cotton Mather, p. 159.

4. Rehearsall both straung and true, par. 24.]

witche of Ramsbury, Maud Twogood Enchantress, Mother Gillian witch' and several other 'oulde witches'.[1] The account by John Stearne the pricker, in 1645, indicates that one of the magistrates of Fenny Drayton was the local Devil: 'Some will say, It is strange they should know when they should be searched, if it be kept private. I answer, Let it be kept never so private, it hath been common, and as common as any other thing, as they themselves have confessed: for so did they of Fenny-Drayton in Cambridge-shire, who made very large Confessions, as, that the devil told them of our coming to town.'[2] One of the clearest cases, however, is that of Marsh of Dunstable in 1649, 'whom Palmer confessed to be head of the whole Colledge of Witches, that hee knows in the world: This Palmer hath been a witch these sixty years (by his own confession) long enough to know and give in the totall summe of all the conjuring conclave, and the Society of Witches in England."[3]

In Scotland a certain number of identifications are also possible. Alison Peirson, tried in 1588, learnt all her charms and obtained all her knowledge from the Devil, who came to her in the form of Mr. William Sympson, her mother's brother's son, who was a great scholar and doctor of medicine in Edinburgh.[4] Jonet Stewart in 1597 'learnt her charms from umquhill Michaell Clark, smyth in Laswaid, and fra ane Italean strangear callit Mr. John Damiet, ane notorious knawin Enchanter and Sorcerer'.[5] In the trial of Marion Pardon of Hillswick in 1644 'it was given in evidence that a man spoke of the devil as Marion Pardon's pobe, i.e. nurse's husband or foster father'.[6] In a case tried at Lauder in 1649 there is an indication that one of the magistrates was the Chief of the witches; Robert Grieve accused a certain woman at a secret session of the court, 'but the Devil came that same night unto her, and told her that Hob Grieve had fyled her for a witch'.[7] Isobel Ramsay in 1661 was accused that 'you had ane uther meiting wt the devill in yor awne hous in the liknes of yor awne

[1. Calendar of State Papers. Domestic, 1584, p. 220.

2. Stearne, p. 45.

3. Gerish, The Divell's Delusions, p. 11

4. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 161-4.

5. Id., ii, pp. 26-7.

6. Hibbert, p. 578.

7. Sinclair, p. 48.]

husband as you wes lying in yor bed at qch tyme you engadged to be his servant and receaved a dollar from him'.[1] When a man had special knowledge as to which women were witches,, it is suggestive that he might be himself the Devil; as in the case of the Rev. Allan Logan, who 'was particularly knowing in the detection of witches. At the administration of the communion, he would cast his eye along, and say: "You witch wife, get up from the table of the Lord", when some poor creature would rise and depart.'[2]

It seems probable that the infamous Abbe Guibourg was the head of the Paris witches, for it was he who celebrated the 'black mass' and performed the sacrifice of a child, both of which were the duties of the 'Devil'.[3]

At Salem also the account given by the witches of the Rev. George Burroughs points to his filling the office of 'Devil', for he was 'Head Actor at some of their Hellish Randezvouses, and one who had the promise of being a King in Satan's kingdom.--He was the person who had Seduc'd and Compell'd them into the snares of Witchcraft'.[4] That Burroughs was a religious person is no argument against his being also the 'Devil' of Salem. Apart from the well-known psychological fact that a certain form of religious feeling can exist at the same time as the propensity to and practice of sexual indulgence, there is proof that many of the witches were outwardly religious according to the tenets of Christianity. So many Christian priests were also followers of the witch-religion that the Inquisitors of the sixteenth century were greatly exercised in their minds as to how to deal with the offender. Antide Colas confessed that she attended the midnight mass on Christmas Eve, then went to a witch meeting, and returned to the church in time for the mass at dawn on Christmas morning.[5] At Ipswich in 1645 'Mother Lakeland hath been a professour of Religion, a constant hearer of the Word for these many years, and yet a witch (as she confessed) for the space of near twenty years'.[6] The best-known case

[1. From the record in the Justiciary office, Edinburgh.

2. Chambers, iii, p. 299.

3. Ravaisson, 1679, pp. 334-6.

4. Mather, pp. 120, 125; J. Hutchinson, History, ii, pp. 37 seq.

5. Boguet, p. 125. 

6. Lawes against Witches and Conivration, p. 7.]

of the kind is that of Major Weir in Edinburgh in 1670, whose outward appearance tallies with the usual descriptions of the Devil, and whose conduct is only explainable on the supposition that he actually was the Chief of the witches: 'His garb was still a cloak, and somewhat dark, and he never went without his staff. He was a tall black man, and ordinarily looked down to the ground; a grim countenance, and a big nose.'[1] His reputation for piety was so great that a woman, who had actually seen him commit an offence against the criminal law, was flogged for mentioning the fact and thus defaming a man of such extreme and well-established piety. He was tried as a witch on his own unsolicited confession, and was burnt together with his staff, dying 'impenitent' and renouncing all hope of a Christian heaven. The most interesting case historically, however, is that of the Devil of the North Berwick witches (1590). The number of people involved was thirty-nine, i.e. three Covens; but though the names of all were known, only four were tried. The records are given in considerable detail, and the identification of the Chief is therefore possible.

The character of the accused in this case is of great importance when considering the evidence. Nothing more unlike the conventional idea of witches can well be imagined than the man and women who were arraigned on that occasion Agnes Sampson, the wise wife of Keith, was 'a woman not of the base and ignorant sort of Witches, but matron-like, grave and settled in her answers, which were all to some purpose'. John Fian, or Cunynghame, was a schoolmaster, therefore a man of education; Effie McCalyan, the daughter of Lord Cliftonhall, was a woman of family and position; Barbara Napier was also of good family. These were clearly the moving spirits of the band, and they were all persons capable of understanding the meaning and result of their actions.[2]

The accusation against the witches was that they had met together to plot the murder of the King and Queen by witchcraft. The trial therefore was on a double charge, Witchcraft

[1. Wilson, ii, p. 158.

2. The trials are published by Pitcairn, i, pt. ii.]

and high treason, and both charges had to be substantiated. Keeping in mind Lord Coke's definition of a witch as 'a person who has conference with the Devil to take counsel or to do some act', it is clear that the fact of the Devil's bodily presence at the meetings had to be proved first, then the fact of the 'conference', and finally the attempts at murder. The reports of the trial do not, however, differentiate these points in any way, and the religious prepossession of the recorders colours every account. It is therefore necessary to take the facts without the construction put upon them by the natural bias of the Christian judges and writers. The records give in some detail the account of several meetings where the deaths of the King and Queen were discussed, and instructions given and carried out to effect that purpose. At each meeting certain ceremonies proper to the presence of the Grand Master were performed, but the real object of the meeting was never forgotten or even obscured.

The actual evidence of the affair was given by Agnes Sampson (also called Anny Simpson or Tompson), John Fian, Euphemia or Effie McCalyan, and Barbara Napier. As it was a case of high treason, the two leaders, Sampson and Fian, were tortured to force them to divulge the name of the prime mover. Both these two and Effie McCalyan were condemned and executed; Barbara Napier, equally guilty according to the evidence but more fortunate in her jurors, was released; for which action the jurors themselves were subsequently tried.

Though the means used by the witches may seem ridiculous, the murderous intention is very clear. First they performed incantations to raise a storm to wreck the Queen's ship on her way to Scotland, and the storm which actually arose very nearly effected their purpose. As it failed, however, they betook themselves to the accredited method of melting a waxen image, but they were also ready to use poisons, which were to their minds the most virulent that could be prepared.

I have arranged the evidence so as to make as far as possible a consecutive narrative of the occurrences.

John Fian, tried December 26, 1590. The first items relate to his consulting with the Devil and working witchcraft.

7. Item, Fylit, for the rasing of wyndis att the Kingis passing to Denmark, and for the sending of ane letter to Marioun Linkup in Leyth, to that effect, bidding hir to meit him and the rest, on the see, within fyve dayes; quhair Satan delyuerit ane catt out of his hand to Robert Griersoune, gevand the word to 'Cast the same in the see hola!': And thaireftir, being mountit in a schip, and drank ilk ane to otheris, quhair Satane said, 'ye shall sink the schip ', lyke as thay thocht thay did. 8. Item, Fylit, for assembling him selff with Sathane, att the Kingis returning to Denmark; quhair Satan promeist to raise ane mist, and cast the Kingis Majestie in Ingland.

Agnes Sampson, tried January 27, 1591. The first part of the dittay is entirely occupied with her conferences with the devil and her healing the sick by his advice. 40. Item, fylit and convict, of the delyuerie of ane letter, quhilk John Fiene, clerk, maid in George Mutis bak[e] hous in the Pannis, accumpaneit with the gudwyff of the hous, Gelie Duncan [and eight others], quha convenit thair for rasing of storme, to stay the Quene's hame cuming to Scotland; eftir consultatioun, quhether Gelie Duncan or Bessie Thomsoun wes meitest to send the letter with; and concludit to send thc said Gelie, quhilk letter wes send to Marioun Lenchop in Leyth. The effect quhairoff is this: Marioun Lenchop, ye sall warne the rest of the sisteris, to raise the wind this day, att eleavin houris, to stay the Quenis cuming in Scotland. Lyke as they that wer convenit at the Pannis sould do their part be-eist; and to meit thame that wer in the Pannis; and att thair meting, thay sould mak the storme vniversall thro the see. [Then follows the method of doing this by casting in a cat.]

[From Newes from Scotland.] The said Agnis Tompson(Sampson) confessed, that the Divell, being then at North Barrick Kirke attending their comming, in the habit or likenesse of a man . . . and having made his ungodly exhortations, wherein be did greatly inveigh against the King of Scotland, he received their oathes for their good and true service towards him, and departed; which done, they returned to sea, and so home again. At which time, the witches demaunded of the Divell, 'why he did beare such hatred to the Kinge?' who aunswered, 'By reason the King is the greatest enemie hee hath in the world.' All which their confessions and depositions are still extant upon record.

Barbara Napier, tried May 8, 1591. Released. Assisors tried June 7, and acquitted. The said Barbara was accusit, that scho gaif hir presens, in the maist develisch and tressonabill Conventioune, haldin be hir and hir complices in the Divellis name, vpoune Lambmes-ewin last, att the New-heavin callit Aitchesounes-heavin, betuix Musselburcht and Prestonpannis, sin his Majestie come furth of Denmark; quhair war assemblit nyne principallis, to witt, Agnes Sampsoune, Jonett Straittoun, Ewfame McCalyeane, hir selff, Johne Fiene, Robert Griersoun, George Moitis wyffe in Prestoune, Margrett Thomsoune, and Donald Robesoune; quhilkis nyne persounes, the Devill, quha wes with thame in liknes of ane blak man, thocht maist meit to do the turne for the quhilk thay wer convenit; and thairfore, he sett thame nyne nerrest to him selff, in ane cumpany; and thay, togidder with the wyffe of Saltoune myle and the rest of the inferiouris, to the nowmer of threttie persounes, standand skairse the lenth of ane buird frae the foirsaid nyne persounes in ane vthir cumpany;[1] Agnes Sampsoune proponit the distructioune of his hienes persoune, saying to the Dewill, 'We haif ane turne ado, and we would fain be att itt gif we could, and thairfore help ws to itt'. The Dewill ansuerit, he sould do quhat he could, bott it wald be lang to, because it wald be thoirterit [thwarted], and he promeist to hir and thame ane pictour of walx, and ordenit hir and thame to hing, roist, and drop ane taid, and to lay the droppis of the taid [mixed with other supposedly virulent poisons], in his hienes way, quhair his Maiestie wald gang inowre or outowre, or in ony passage quhair itt mycht drop vpoun his hienes heid or body, for his hienes disttuctioune, that ane vther mycht haif rewlit in his Maiesties place, and the ward [government] mycht haif gane to the Dewill. Att the quhilk conventioune, his hienes name wes pronunceit in Latine; and Agnes Sampsoune wes appointit to mak the pictour and to gif it to the Devill to be inchantit, quhilk scho maid in deid, and gaif itt to him; and he promiseit to giff it to the said Barbara and to Effie McCalyan, att the nixt meting to be roistit. Margarett Thomsoun was appointit to dropp the taid. There wes ane appointit to seik sum of his hienes linning claithes, to do the turne with.

Agues Sampson, continued. Anny Sampsoun affirmed that sche, in company with nyn vthers witches, being convenit in the nycht besyd Prestounpannes, the deuell ther maister being present standing in the midis of thame; ther a body of wax, schaipen and maid be the said Anny Sampsoun, wrappit within a lynnyng claith, was fyrst delyuerit to the deuell quhilk efter he had prontincit his verde, delyuerit the said pictour to Anny Sampsoun, and sche to hir nyxt marrow, and sa euery ane round about, saying, 'This is King James the sext, ordonit to be consumed at the instance of a noble

[1. There were present on this occasion thirty-nine persons, or three Covens. See chap. vii on the Organization.]

man Francis Erle Bodowell![1] Efterwart again, at ther meting be nycht at the kirk of Northberick, wher the deuell, cled in a blak gown with a blak hat vpon his head, preachit vnto a gret nomber of them out of the pulpit, having lyk leicht candles rond about him. The effect of his language was till knaw, what skaith they had done, whow many they had won to ther oppinion sen their last meting, what succes the melting of the pictour had tane, and sic vain toyes. And because ane auld sely pure plowman, callit Grey Meill, chancit to say that 'nathing ailit the King yet, God be thankit' the deuell gaif him a gret blaw. Then dyuers amang them enterit in a raisonyng, maruelling that all ther deuelleric culd do na harm to the King, as it did till others dyuers. The deuell answer-it, 'Il est vn home de Dieu'.[1]

Euphemia McCalyan, tried June 9, 1591, executed (burnt alive) June 25, 1591. Evidence was first given as to her practising witchcraft and consorting with well-known witches. Item, indyttit and accusit, of the conventicle had att North Berwick Kirk, tuentie dayes before Michelmas, 1590; and thair inquyring for the Kings pictour, gewin by Annie Sampsoun to the Dewill, to be inchantit, for the tressonabill distructioun of the King. Item, indyttit and accusit, for being att ane Conventioun haldin at the New Heaven callit the Fayrie-hoillis, att Lambmes last wes, to the effect immediatlie aboue writtin. Item, Indytit and accusit, for an Conventioun halden by yow and utheris notorious Wichis, youre associattis, att the Brwme-hoillis, quhair yow and thay tuik the sea, Robert Griersoun being your admerell and Maister-manne. [Then comes the recital of the magical means used to raise a tempest], quhairby the Quene wes putt back be storme. Item, Indytit, for consulting with the said Annie Sampsoun, Robert Griersoun, and diuers vtheris Wichis, for the tressonabill staying of the Quene's hame-cuming, be storme and wind; and rasing of storme, to that effect; or ellis to haif drownit hir Majestie and hir cumpany, be coniuring of cattis and casting of thame in the sea, at Leith, at the bak of Robert Griersounis hous.

Barbara Napier, continued. And siclyke, the said Barbara was accusit, that sche gaif hir bodelie presens vpoun Alhallow-ewin last was, 1590 yeiris, to the frequent conuentioune haldin att the Kirk of North-Berwick, quhair sche dancit endlang

[1. Bannatyne Club, Melville, Memoirs, p. 395. The sycophantic Melville adds, 'And certanly he is a man of God, and dois na wrang wittingly, bot is inclynit to all godlynes, justice and virtu; therfore God hes preserued him in the midis of many dangers.']

the Kirk-yaird, and Gelie Duncan playit on ane trump, Johnne Fiene missellit [muffled] led the ring; Agnes Sampsoun and hir dochteris and all the rest following the said Barbara, to the nowmer of sevin scoir of persounes. . . . And the Devill start vp in the pulpett, lyke ane mekill blak man, haifand ane blak buik in his hand, callit on ewerie ane of thame, desyring thame all to be guid serwandis to him, and he sould be ane guid maister to thame. Robert Griersoun and Johne Fian stuid on his left hand; and the said Robert ffand grit fault with the Dewill, and cryit out, that all quhilkis wer besyd mycht heir, becaus his hienes pictour was nocht gewin thame, as wes promesit; the said Effie McCalyan remembrand and bid[d]and the said Robert Griersoun to speir for the pictour, meaning his Maiesties pictour, quhilk sould have been roistit. Robert Griersoun said thir wordis, 'Quhair is the thing ye promiseit? meaning the pictour of walx, dewysit for roisting and vndoing his hienes persoune, quhilk Agnes Sampsoune gaif to him; and Robert cryit to 'haif the turne done'; yit his hienes name was nocht nameit, quhill thay that wer wernen nameit him; craifand in playne termes his hienes pictour. Bot he ansuerit, 'It sould be gottin the nixt meitting; and he wald hald the nixt assemblie for that caus the soner: It was nocht reddie at that tyme.' Robert Griersoune ansuerit, 'Ye promiseit twyis and begylit ws.' And four honest-like wemene wer very ernist and instant to haif itt. And the said Barbara and Effie McCalyane gatt than ane promeis of the Dewill, that his hienes pictour sould be gottin to thame twa, and that rycht sone: And this mater of his hienes pictour was the caus of that assemblie.

This ends the evidence of the witches; the point to be proved now is the identity of the man whom they believed in and obeyed as God incarnate.

In all cases of murder or attempted murder it is necessary to find the person who would benefit, for murder is differentiated from manslaughter by the fact that it is deliberately planned and that it is done for a motive. In the case of the witches of North Berwick, the man who instigated the meetings, and to whom consequently suspicion points, was Francis Stewart Earl of Bothwell. His position as regards both the King and the witches must therefore be investigated.

Francis, afterwards Earl of Bothwell, was the eldest son of John Stewart and Jane Hepburn, sister of that Earl of Bothwell whom Mary Queen of Scots married. Francis succeeded his maternal uncle in title and estates. His father, Lord John Stewart, was an illegitimate son of James V. The Pope, however, legitimized all the natural children of James V; and Mary, after her accession, granted letters of legitimation[1] to her two half-brothers, John Stewart, and James, afterwards the Regent Moray. John was slightly the elder of the two, and had he been legitimate would have been the heir to the exclusion of Mary. The Regent Moray left only daughters, whereas John Stewart had several sons, of whom Francis was the eldest. Francis might therefore claim to be the next heir male to the throne of Scotland, and possibly of England, had James VI died without children. James's own opinion of the matter is shown in his speech to his Parliament in 1592, when he denounced Bothwell as an aspirant to the throne, although he was 'but a bastard, and could claim no title to the crown'. Bothwell, however, was himself no bastard, though his father was. But the significance of the witches' attempt, as well as the identity of the chief personage at their meeting, is given in Barbara Napier's evidence as to the reason for the attempted murder of the King, 'that another might have ruled in his Majesty's place, and the government might have gone to the Devil'. By changing the title 'the Devil' by which he was known to the witches, to the title 'Earl of Bothwell' by which he was known outside the community, the man and the motive are manifest. This hypothesis is borne out by the contemporary accounts.

The trial of the witches created a great stir, and Bothwell's name was freely coupled with the witches'. He denied all complicity; this was only natural, as confession would have meant an acknowledgement of high treason. But his followers might have betrayed him. The two leaders, Agnes Sampson and John Fian, were tortured. Sampson admitted that the wax image was made at the instance of Francis, Earl of Bothwell; an admission sufficiently damning, but beyond that she would say nothing. The real danger to Bothwell lay in Fian. Under torture he made admissions and signed a confession in the presence of the King. He was then

[1. Reg. Mag. Sig. Scot., No. 565, Feb. 7, 1550/1.]

'by the maister of the prison committed to ward, and appointed to a chamber by himselfe; where, foresaking his wicked wayes, acknowledging his most ungodly lyfe, shewing that he had too much folowed the allurements and enticements of Sathan, and fondly practised his conclusions, by conjuring, witchcraft, inchantment, sorcerie, and such like, hee renounced the Devill and all his wicked workes, vowed to lead the lyfe of a Christian, and seemed newly converted to God. The morrow after, upon conference had with him, he granted that the Devill had appeared unto him in the night before, appareled all in blacke, with a white wande in his hande; and that the Devill demaunded of him, "If hee woulde continue his faithfull service, according to his first oath and promise made to that effect": Whome (as hee then saide) he utterly renounced to his face, and said unto him in this manner, "Avoide! Sathan, avoide! for I have listned too much unto thee, and by the same thou hast undone me; in respect whereof I utterly forsake thee". To whome the Devill answered, that "once ere thou die thou shalt bee mine". And with that (as he sayd) the Devill brake the white wand, and immediately vanished foorth of his sight. Thus, all the daie, this Doctor Fian continued verie solitarie, and seemed to have a care of his owne soule, and would call uppon God, showing himselfe penitent for his wicked life; neverthelesse, the same night, hee found such meanes that he stole the key of the prison doore and chamber in which he was, which in the night hee opened and fled awaie to the Saltpans, where hee was alwayes resident, and first apprehended. Of whose sodaine departure, when the Kings Majestie had intelligence, hee presently commanded diligent inquirie to bee made for his apprehension; and for the better effecting thereof hee sent publike proclamations into all partes of his lande to the same effect. By means of whose hot and harde pursuite he was agayn taken, and brought to prison; and then, being called before the Kings Highnes, hee was reexamined, as well touching his departure, as also touching all that had before happened. But this Doctor, notwithstanding that his owne confession appeareth, remaining in recorde under his owne hande writting, and the same thereunto fixed in the presence of the Kings Majestie and sundrie of his Councell, yet did hee utterly denie the same. Whereupon the Kings Majestie, perceiving his stubborne wilfulnesse, conceived and imagined, that in the time of his absence, hee had entered into newe conference and league with the Devill his maister'. [Fian was then subjected to the most horrible tortures that could be devised.] 'And notwithstanding all these grievous paines and cruel torments, hee would not confess anie thinges; so deeply had the Devill entered into his heart, that hee utterly denied all that which he before avouched; and would saie nothing thereunto, but this, that what hee had done and saide before, was onely done and sayde, for fear of paynes which he had endured'.[1]

He continued steadfast and was executed at the Castle Hill. The character of Fian is perfectly consistent. Under torture he signed a confession, which confession might have implicated Bothwell. That night Bothwell himself, or one of his emissaries, obtained access to the prisoner and arranged for his escape. The wretched Fian was faced with death either way; if he retracted his confession, he would die as a criminal by the hands of the law; if he held to it, he would die as a traitor by the hands of his comrades. There was no alternative. All that day he 'continued verie solitarie', calling upon God, but by night he had made his choice and fled. He apparently escaped without difficulty. The story of his stealing the keys of his own cell and of the prison door is absurd; the escape was obviously effected by connivance just as later on Bothwell's own escape was effected. Fian went back to his own home, where, according to James's surmise, he had an interview with the Devil (i. e. Bothwell), and there he tamely waited till the officers of the law came and recaptured him. This tameness is not in keeping with the rest of his character. A man with sufficient courage and resource to get out of a strongly guarded prison would have made good his escape; an easy enough matter in those turbulent times. Fian then must have been retaken because he wished to be retaken. For fear of torture and in hope of pardon he signed the first confession, implicating Bothwell[2] yet later he endured agonies of torture with the certainty of death rather than acknowledge one word which might lead to the discovery that James was bent upon. James's surmise was perhaps more than a mere guess; it was prompted by his knowledge of the facts. Fian had had an interview

[1. Newes from Scotland. Quoted in Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 213-23.

2. It is perhaps significant that the confession of John Fian, and the trials of both Barbara Napier and of Bothwell himself for witchcraft, have disappeared from the Justiciary Records.]

with his Master, whom he believed to be God Incarnate, ane like many a Christian martyr he atoned for the first betrayal by steadfast courage through cruel torment even to death.

Reading the accounts in the light of this supposition, it is seen that every one, including James, suspected Bothwell. Even if they did not acknowledge his divinity, they feared the magical powers which, as Chief of the Witches, he was supposed to wield. It is impossible to study the details of this period without realizing the extraordinary fear which James had of his cousin; it was fear with an underlying horror, totally different from his feeling towards his other turbulent subjects. When Bothwell, seeking pardon, was introduced into Holyrood Palace by Lady Athol in the early morning of July 24, 1593, he entered the King's chamber. James, always undignified, was caught in the middle of his morning toilet; he tried to run into the Queen's room, but the way was barred by Bothwell's friends and the door was locked. 'The king, seeing no other refuge, asked what they meant. Came they to seek his life? let them take it--they would not get his soul.'[1] This remark, made in the urgency and excitement of the moment, is highly significant. Had Bothwell been, like many of James's other enemies, merely an assassin, James would not have spoken of his soul. But Bothwell as the Devil of the witches had the right to demand the yielding of the soul, and James was aware of the fact.

The birth of James's children removed Bothwell's hopes of succession; the power of the witch organization, of which he was the Chief, was broken by the death of its leaders. He had made a strong bid for power, he failed, fled the country, and finally died in poverty at Naples. There George Sandys the traveller heard of him: 'Here a certaine Calabrian hearing that I was an Englishman, came to me, and would needs perswade me that I had insight in magicke: for that Earle Bothel was my countryman, who liues at Naples, and is in those parts famous for suspected negromancie.'[2]

The Devil being actually a human being, the letter of introduction

[1. Burton, V, p. 283.

2. Sandys, p. 250.]

to him, given by a man-witch to a would-be proselyte, becomes quite credible. It is worth quoting verbatim:

'Monseigneur, d'autant qu'il me faut retirer de la Religion des Chrestiens, afin que ie multiplie vostre party, duquel estant, il est raisonnable que ie vous glorifie et assemble tant de gens que ie pourray, ie vous enuoye ce porteur pour estre du nombre: c'est pourquoy ie vous prie de l'aider en ses amours.'

Satan's reply to the novice shows a distinctly human trace of temper:

'Vous autres Chrestiens vous estes perfides et obstinez: Quand vous auez quelque violent desir, vous vous departez de vostre maistre, et auez recours a moy: mais quand vostre desir est accompli, vous me tournez le dos comme a vn ennemi, et vous en retournez a vostre Dieu, lequel estant benin et clement, vous pardonne et recoit volontiers. Mais fay moy vne promesse escrite et signee de ta main, par laquelle tu renonces volontairement ton Christ et ton Baptesme, et me promets que tu adhereras et seras auec moy iusqu'au iour du iugement; et apres iceluy tu te delecteras encore auec moy de souffrir les peines eternelles, et i'accompliray ton desir."

  

4. As an Animal

In many religions the disguising of the principal personage -whether god or priest-as an animal is well known. The custom is very ancient-such disguised human beings are found even among the palaeolithic drawings in France; and on a slate palette belonging to the late pre-dynastic period of Egypt there is a representation of a man disguised as a jackal and playing on a pipe.[2] The ritual disguise as an animal is condemned, with great particularity, as devilish, in the Liber Poenitentialis of Theodore of the seventh century (see supra, p. 21), showing that it continued in force

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 176, 177.

2. Quibell, pl. xxviii. The palette itself is now in the Ashmolean museum,

Oxford].

after the conversion of England to an outward appearance of Christianity. From the analogy of other religions in which tile custom occurs, it would appear that it is a ritual for the promotion of fertility; the animal represented being either the sacred animal of the tribe or the creature most used for food.

The suggestion that the Devil was a man, wearing either an animal's skin or a mask in the form of an animal's head as a ritual disguise, accounts as nothing else can for the witches' evidence as to his appearance and his changes of form. A confusion, however, exists from the fact that the witches, and therefore the recorders, usually spoke of the familiars as the Devil; but in almost every case the disguised man can, on examination of the evidence, be distinguished from the animal familiar.

The animal forms in which the Devil most commonly appeared were bull, cat, dog, goat, horse, and sheep. A few curious facts come to light on tabulating these forms; i.e. The Devil appears as a goat or a sheep in France only; he is never found in any country as a hare, though this was the traditional form for a witch to assume; nor is lie found as a toad, though this was a common form for the familiar; the fox and the ass also are unknown forms; and in Western Europe the pig is an animal almost entirely absent from all the rites and ceremonies as well as from the disguises of the Devil.

The witches never admitted in so many words that the Devil was a man disguised, but their evidence points strongly to the fact. In some cases the whole body was disguised, in others a mask was worn, usually over the face. The wearing of the mask is indicated partly by descriptions of its appearance, and partly by the description of the Devil's voice. The Lorraine witches in 1589 said that the Devils 'konnen nimmermehr die Menschliche Stimme so aussdrucklich nachreden, dass man nicht leicht daran mercke, dass es eine gemachte falsche Stimme sey. Nicolaea Ganatia, und fast alle andere sagen, dass sie eine Stimme von sich geben, gleich denen, so den Kopff in ein Fass oder zerbrochenen Hafen stecken und daraus reden. Auch geben sie etwann eine kleine leise Stimme von sich.'[1] The North Berwick Devil in 1590 was purposely disguised out of all recognition: ' The Devil start up in the pulpit, like a mickle black man, with a black beard sticking out like a goat's beard; and a high ribbed nose, falling down sharp like the beak of a hawk; with a long rumpill' [tail].[2] This was Barbara Napier's account; Agnes Sampson describes the same personage, 'The deuell caused all the company to com and kiss his ers, quhilk they said was cauld like yce; his body was hard lyk yrn, as they thocht that handled him; his faice was terrible, his noise lyk the bek of an egle, gret bournyng eyn: his handis and legis wer herry, with clawis vpon his handis and feit lyk the griffon, and spak with a how voice.'[3] Boguet states that 'on demanda a George Gandillon, si lors qu'il fut sollicite par Sata[n] de se bailler a luy, Satan parloit distinctement. Il respondit que non, & qu'a peine pouuoit il comprendre ce qu'il disoit.'[4] The evidence of the witches in the Basses-Pyrenees makes it clear that a disguise was worn, and that a mask was placed on the back either of the head or of the person; this also explains part of Agnes Sampson's evidence given above. The effect of the mask at the back of the head was to make the man appear two-faced, 'comme le dieu Janus'. In the other case 'le diable estoit en forme de bouc, avant vne queue, & au-dessoubs vn visage d'homme noir & n'a parole par ce visage de derriere.--Vne grande queue au derriere, & vne forme de visage au dessoubs: duquel visage il ne profere aucune parole, ains luy sert pour donner a baiser a ceux qui bon luy semble.--Marie d'Aspilecute dit qu'elle le baisa a ce visage de derriere au dessoubs d'vne grande queue; qu'elle l'y a baise par trois fois, & qu'il auoit ce visage faict comme le museau d'vn bouc.--Bertrand de Handuch, aagee de dix ans, confessa que le cul du grad maistre auoit vn visage derriere, & c'estoit le visage de derriere qu'on baisoit, & non le cul.'[5] The Devil of the Basses-Pyrenees evidently wore a mask over the face, for he had 'la voix effroyable & sans ton, quand il parle on diroit que cest vn mullet qui se met a braire, il a la voix

[1. Remigius, pt. i, p. 38.

2. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 246. Spelling modernized.

3. Melville, p. 395.

4. Boguet, p. 56.

5. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 68, 73, 126.]

casse, la parole malarticulee, & peu intelligible, parcequ'il a tousiours la voix triste & enrouee'. On occasions also 'il quitoit la forme de Bouc, & prenoit celle d'homme'.[1] In 1614 at Orleans Silvain Nevillon said 'qu'il vit a la cheminee vn homme noir duquel on ne voyoit pas la teste. Vit aussi vn grand homme noir a l'opposite de celuy de la cheminee, & que ledit hom[m]e noir parloit comme si la voix fut sortie d'vn poinson. Dit: Que le Diable dit le Sermo[n] au Sabbat, mais qu'on n'entend ce qu'il dit, parce qu'il parle com[m]e en gro[n]dant.'[2] The devil who appeared to Joan Wallis, the Huntingdonshire witch, in 1649, was in the shape of a man dressed in black, but he 'was not as her husband, which speaks to her like a man, but he as he had been some distance from her when he was with her'.[3] Thomazine Ratcliffe, a Suffolk witch, said that the Devil 'spoke with a hollow, shrill voyce'.[4] According to Mary Green (1665) the Somerset Devil, who was a little man, 'put his hand to his Hat, saying, How do ye? speaking low but big'.[5] In the same year Abre Grinset, another Suffolk witch, confessed that she met the Devil, who was in the form of 'a Pretty handsom Young Man, and spake to her with a hollow Solemn Voice'., John Stuart at Paisley (1678) said the Devil came to him as a black man, 'and that the black man's Apparel was black; and that the black man's Voice was hough and goustie'.[7]

The coldness of the devil's entire person, which is vouched for by several witches, suggests that the ritual disguise was not merely a mask over the face, but included a covering, possibly of leather or some other hard and cold substance, over the whole body and even the hands. Such a disguise was apparently not always worn, for in the great majority of cases there is no record of the Devil's temperature except in the sexual rites, and even then the witch could not always say whether the touch of the Devil was warm or not. In 1565 the Belgian witch, Digna Robert, said the devil 'etait froid dans tous ses membres'.[8] In 1590, at North Berwick, 'he caused all the company to com and kiss his ers,

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 225, 398.

2. Id., L'1ncredule, pp. 799-801.

3. Stearne, p. 13.

4. Id., p. 22.

5. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 164.

6. Petto, p. 18.

7. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 294-5.

8. Cannaert, p. 54.]

quhilk they said was cauld lyk yce; his body was hard lyk yrn, as they thocht that handled him'.[1] In 1598 Pierre Burgot, whose statement is quoted by several authors, 'a confesse, que le Diable luy donna a baiser sa main senestre, qui estoit noire, comme morte, & toute froide'.[2] In 1609, in the Basses-Pyrenees, Isaac de Queyran, aged 25, said that he and others 'le baiserent a vne fesse qui estoit blanche & rouge, & auoit la forme d'vne grande cuisse d'vn homme, & estoit velue'.[3] This shows the ritual disguise of the person and suggests the use of an animal's hide with the hair still attached. In 1645 the Essex witch Rebecca West said 'he kissed her, but was as cold as clay'.[4] At Salisbury in 1653, when the witch Anne Bodenham persuaded Anne Styles to join the community, 'then appeared two Spirits in the likenesse of great Boyes, with long shagged black hair, and stood by her looking over her shoulder, and the Witch took the Maids forefinger of her right hand, and pricked it with a pin, and squeezed out the blood and put it into a Pen, and put the Pen in the Maids hand, and held her hand to write in a great book, and one of the Spirits laid his hand or Claw upon the Witches whilest the Maid wrote; and the Spirits hand did feel cold to the Maid as it touched her hand, when the witches hand and hers were together writing'.[5] At Forfar in 1661 three of the witches agreed as to the coldness of the Devil; 'Elspet Alexander confesses that the divill kissed hir selfe that night and that it was ane cold kisse; Katheren Porter confesseth that the divill tooke hir by the hand, that his hand was cold; Isobell Smith confessed that he kissed hir and his mouth and breath were cold."; In 1662 the Crook of Devon witches were also in accord. Isabel Rutherford 'confesst that ye was at ane meeting at Turfhills, where Sathan took you by the hand and said "welcome, Isabel", and said that his hand was cold.--Margaret Litster confessed that Sathan took you be the hand and stayed the space of half an hour, Sathan having grey clothes and his hand cold.--Janet Paton confessed that Sathan asked you gif ye would be his servant, whilk ye did, and

[1. Melville, Memoirs, p. 395.

2. Boguet, pp. 53-4.

3. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 148.

4. Howell, iv, 842.

5. More, pp. 196-7.

6. Kinloch, pp. 115, 129,132.]

Sathan took you be the hand, and ye said that his hand was cold.' On the other hand Agnes Murie 'knew not whether his body was hot or cold'.' According to Isobel Gowdie at Auldearne in 1662, 'he was a meikle blak roch man, werie cold';[2] at Torryburn, Lilias Adie found his skin was cold';[3] and the Crighton witches in 1678 said, 'he was cold, and his breath was like a damp air'.[4] In 1697 little Thomas Lindsay declared that 'Jean Fulton his Grand-mother awaked him one Night out of his Bed, and caused him take a Black Grimm Gentleman (as she called him) by the Hand; which he felt to be cold'.[5]

The evidence as to the forms assumed by the Devil is tabulated here under each animal, each section being arranged in chronological order,

1. Bull.--In 1593 at Angers 'Michel des Rousseaux, age de 50 ans, dict que ledict homme noir appelle Iupin se transforma aussitost en Bouc . . . et apres leur auoir baille des bouetes de poudre, il se tra[n]sforma en Bouuard'.[6] At Aberdeen in 1597 Marion Grant confessed that 'the Devill apperit to the, sumtyme in the scheap of a beist, and sumtyme in the scheap of a man'. Jonet Lucas of the same Coven said that the Devil was with them, 'beand in likenes of ane beist'. Agnes Wobster, also of the same Coven, acknowledged that 'thaireftir Satan apperit to the in the likenes of a calff, and spak to the in manner forsaid, and baid the be a gude servand to him'.[7] In 1608 Gabriel Pelle confessed that he went with a friend to the Sabbath, where 'le Diable estoit en vache noire, & que cette vache noire luy fit renoncer Dieu'.[8] De Lancre says that at Tournelle the Devil appeared 'parfois comme vn grand Boeuf d'airain couche a terre, comme vn Boeuf naturel qui se repose'.[3] At Lille in 1661 the witches 'adored a beast with which they committed infamous things'.[10]

[1. Burns Begg, pp. 219, 221, 228, 230.

2. Pitcairn, iii, p. 603.

3. Chambers, iii, 298.

4. Fountainhall, i, p. 14.

5. Narrative of the sufferings of a Young Girle, p. xli; Sadd. Debell., p. 40.

6. De Lancre, L'Incredulite, p. 769.

7. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 12 9.

8. De Lancre, L'Incredulite, p. 794.

9. Id., Tableau, p. 68.

10. Bourignon, Parole, p. 87; Hale, p. 26.]

According to Isobel Gowdie in 1662, the Devil of Auldearne changed his form, or disguise, continually, 'somtym he vold be lyk a stirk, a bull, a deir, a rae, or a dowg'.[1] [In the above, I have taken the word 'beast' in its usual meaning as an animal of the cattle tribe, but it is quite possible that the Lille beast, beste in the original, may have been a goat and not a bull. This seems likely from the fact that the sacrifice was by fire as in the other places where the Devil used the goat-disguise.]

2. Cat.--The earliest example of the cat-disguise is in the trial of the Guernsey witches in 1563, when Martin Tulouff confessed:

'q il y a viron ung quartier d'an passez q il soy trouva auvecqs de la Vieillesse aultreme[n]t dit Collenette Gascoing, en la rue fosse au Coully, la ou 1 y avoet chinq ou vi chatz, dou il y en avoet ung qui estoet noir, qui menoit la dance, et danssoient et luy dyst ladte Collenette, q il besait ledt Chat et dt q il estoet sur ses pieds plat, et que ladite Collenette le besa p de derriere, et luy p la crysse, et q fra[n]coize Lenouff sa mere y estoet et Collette Salmon fae de Collas du port, laqlle alloet deva[n]t et s'agenouillerent tos deva[n]t le Chat et l'adorere[n]t en luy bailla[n]t ler foy, et luy dist ladite Vieillesse q ledit Chat estoet le diable.'[2]

Francoise Secretain, in 1598, saw the Devil 'tantost en forme de chat'. Rolande de Vernois said, 'Le Diable se presenta, pour lors au Sabbat en forme d'vn groz chat noir.'[3] In 1652 another French witch confessed that 'il entra dans sa chambre en forme d'ung chat et se changea en la posture d'un home vestu de rouge', who took her to the Sabbath.[4] Both the Devonshire witches, Mary Trembles and Susanna Edwards, in 1682, stated that they saw him as a lion, by which they possibly meant a large cat.[5] In this connexion it is worth noting that in Lapland as late as 1767 the devil appeared 'in the likeness of a cat, handling them from their feet to their mouth, and counting their teeth'.[6]

3. Dog.--At Chelmsford in 1556 Joan Waterhouse 'dydde as she had seene her mother doe, callynge Sathan, whiche

[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 613.

2. From a trial in the Guernsey Greffe.

3. Boguet, pp. 8, 70, 411.

4. La Tradition, v (1891), p. 215.

5. Howell, viii, 1034, 1036.

6. Pinkerton, i, p. 473.]

came to her (as she sayd) in the lykenes of a great dogge'.[1] In 1616 Barthelemy Minguet of Brecy was tried for witchcraft. 'Enquis, comme il a aduis quand le Sabbat se doit tenir. Respond, que c'est le Diable qui luy vient dire estant en forme de chien noir, faict comme vn barbet, parle a luy en ceste forme. Enquis, en quelle forme se met le Diable estant au Sabbat. Respond, qu'il ne l'a iamais veu autrement qu'en forme de barbet noir. Enquis, quelles ceremonies ils obseruent estant au Sabbat. Respond, que le Diable estant en forme de barbet noir (comme dessus est dit) se met tout droit sur les pattes de derriere, les preche',[2] etc. In Guernsey in 1617, Isabel Becquet went to Rocquaine Castle, 'the usual place where the Devil kept his Sabbath; no sooner had she arrived there than the Devil came to her in the form of a dog, with two great horns sticking up: and with one of his paws (which seemed to her like hands) took her by the hand: and calling her by her name told her that she was welcome; then immediately the Devil made her kneel down: while he himself stood up on his hind legs; he then made her express detestation of the Eternal in these words: I renounce God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; and then caused her to worship and invoke himself.'[3] Barton's wife, about 1655, stated that 'one Night going to a dancing upon Pentland-hills, he went before us in the likeness of a rough tanny-Dog, playing on a pair of Pipes, and his tail played ey wig wag wig wag'.[4] In 1658 an Alloa witch named Jonet Blak declared that he appeared to her first as 'a dog with a sowis head'.[5] In 1661 Jonet Watson of Dalkeith said that 'the Deivill apeired vnto her, in the liknes of ane prettie boy, in grein clothes, and went away from her in the liknes of ane blak doug'.[6] According to Marie Lamont of Innerkip in 1662, 'the devill in the likeness of a brown dog' helped to raise a storm., Margaret Hamilton, widow of James Pullwart of Borrowstowness in 1679, was accused that she met 'the devil in the likeness of a man, but he removed from you in the

[1. Witches of Chelmsford, p. 34; Philobiblon Soc., viii.

2. De Lancre, L'Incredulite p. 805.

3. Goldsmid, p. 12.

4. Sinclair, p. 163.

5. Scottish Antiquary, ix, 51.

5. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.

7. Sharpe, p. 132.]

likeness of an black dog'.[1] The Highland witches in the eighteenth century saw the devil as a dog; he was 'a large black ugly tyke', to whom the witches made obeisance; the dog acknowledged the homage 'by bowing, grinning, and clapping his paws'.[2] In the case of the dog-disguise, there is again a similarity with Lapp beliefs and customs, the appearance of the Devil as a dog being not uncommon in Lapland.[3]

4. Goat.--An interesting point as regards this form of disguise is that it does not occur in Great Britain, nor have I found it so far in Belgium. It prevailed chiefly in France, from which all my examples are taken. At Poictiers in 1574 'trois Sorciers & vne Sorciere declarent qu'ils estoyent trois fois l'an, a l'assemblee generale, ou plusieurs Sorciers se, trouuoyent pres d'vne croix d'vn carrefour, qui seruoit d'enseigne. Et la se trouuoit vn grand bouc noir, qui parloit comme, vne personne aux assistans, & dansoyent a l'entour du bouc.'[4] At Avignon in 1581 'when hee comes to be adored, he appeareth not in a humane forme, but as the Witches themselues haue deposed, as soone as they are agreed of the time that he is to mount vpon the altar (which is some rock or great stone in the fields) there to bee worshipped by them, hee instantly turneth himselfe into the forme of a great black Goate, although in all other occasions hee vseth to appeare in the shape of a man.[5] In Lorraine in 1589 the Devil 'sich in einen zottelichten Bock verwandelt hat, und viel starker reucht und ubeler stinckt als immer ein Bock im Anfang des Fruhlings thun mag'.[1] In Puy de Dome in 1594 Jane Bosdeau's lover took her to a meeting, and 'there appeared a great Black Goat with a Candle between his Horns'.[7] In 1598 'Satan apres auoir prins la figure d'vn Bouc, se consume en feu'.[1] In the Basses-Pyrenees in 1609:

'le Diable estoit en forme de bouc, ayant vne queue, & audessoubs vn visage d'homme noir, & n'a parole par ce visage

[1. Scots Magazine, 1814, p. 201. Spelling modernized.

2. Stewart, p. 175. The whole account is marred by the would-be comic style adopted by the author.

3. Pinkerton, i, p. 473.

4. Bodin, p. 187.

5. Michaelis, Discourse, p. 148.

6. Remigius, pt. i, p. 90.

7. F. Hutchinson, Historical Essay, p. 42.

8. Boguet, p. 141.]

de derriere.--Marie d'Aguerre dit qu'il y a vne grande cruche au milieu du Sabbat, d'ou sort le Diable en forme de bouc.--D'autres disent qu'il est comme vn grand bouc, ayant deux cornes devant & deux en derriere; que celles de devant se rebrassent en haut comme la perruque d'vne femme. Mais le commun est qu'il a seulement trois cornes, & qu'il a quelque espece de lumiere en celle du milieu. On luy voit aussi quelque espece de bonet ou chapeau au dessus de ces cornes. On a obserue de tout temps que lorsqu'il veut receuoir quelcun a faire pacte auec luy, il se presente tousiours en homme, pour ne l'effaroucher ou effraier: car faire pacte auec vn Bouc ouuertement, tiendroit plus de la beste que de la creature raisonnable. Mais le pacte faict, lors qu'il veut receuoir quelqu'vn A l'adoration, communeme[n]t il se represente en Bouc.'[1]

Silvain Nevillon confessed at Orleans in 1614 'qu'il a veu le Diable en plusieurs facons, tantost comme vn bouc, ayant vn visage deuant & vn autre derriere'.[2]

5. Horse--I give here only the references to the Devil when actually disguised as a horse, but there are a very great number of cases where he appeared riding on a horse. These cases are so numerous as to suggest that the horse was part of the ritual, especially as the riding Devil usually occurs in places where an animal disguise was not used, e.g. in 1598, in Aberdeen, where Andro Man 'confessis that Crystsunday rydis all the tyme that he is in thair cumpanie'.[3] The actual disguise as a horse is not common. Elizabeth Stile of Windsor in 1579 'confesseth, her self often tymes to haue gon to Father Rosimond house where she found hym sittyng in a Wood, not farre from thence, vnder the bodie of a Tree, sometymes in the shape of an Ape, and otherwhiles like an Horse'.[4] Helen Guthrie in 1661 stated that when the Forfar witches were trying to sink a ship, 'the divell wes there present with them all, in the shape of ane great horse. They returned all in the same liknes as of befor, except that the divell wes in the shape of a man.'[5] Mary Lacey of Salem in 1692 said that

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 67, 68, 69, 126.

2 Id., L'Incredulite, p. 800.

3. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 125. Cp. Elworthy on the Hobby-horse as the Devil, Horns of Honour, p. 140.

4. Reehearsall both Straung and True, par. 24.

5. Kinloch, pp. 122-3.]

he appeared in the shape of a horse, 'I was in bed and the devil came to me and bid me obey him."

6. Sheep.--The sheep-disguise, which is perhaps a form of the goat, is usually found in France only. In 1453 'Guillaume Edeline, docteur en theologie, prieur de S. Germain en Laye, et auparavant Augustin, et religieux de certaines aultres ordres . . . confessa, de sa bonne et franche voulonte, avoir fait hommage audit ennemy en l'espece et semblance d'ung mouton'.[2] Iaquema Paget and Antoine Gandillon in 1598 said that 'il prenoit la figure d'vn mouton noir, portant des cornes'.[3] In 1614 at Orleans Silvain Nevillon was induced to reveal all he knew; 'dit qu'il a veu le Diable en plusieurs facons, tantost comme vn bouc, ores comme vn gros mouton'.[4]

The rarer animal disguises are the deer and the bear. Of these the deer is found at Aberdeen in 1597, Andro Man 'confessis and affermis, thow saw Christsonday cum owt of the snaw in liknes of a staig';[5] at Auldearne in 1662, 'somtym he vold be lyk a stirk, a bull, a deir, a rae, or a dowg';[6] at Hartford, Connecticut, 1662, Rebecca Greensmith said that 'the devil first appeared to her in the form of a deer or fawn'.[7] The bear is still rarer, as I have found it only twice-once in Lorraine, and once in Lancashire. In 1589 'es haben die Geister auch etwann Lust sich in Gestalt eines Baren zu erzeigen'.[8] In 1613 Anne Chattox declared that the Devil 'came vpon this Examinate in the night time: and at diuerse and sundry times in the likenesse of a Beare, gaping as though lie would haue wearied [worried] this Examinate. And the last time of all shee, this Examinate, saw him, was vpon Thursday last yeare but one, next before Midsummer day, in the euening, like a Beare, and this Examinate would not then speake vnto him, for the which the said Deuill pulled this Examinate downe.'[9]

[1. Howell, vi, 663-4; J. Hutchinson, ii, pp. 36-7.

2. Chartier, iii, 44-5.

3. Boguet, p. 70.

4. De Lancre, L'Incredulite, p. 800.

5. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 121.

6. Pitcairn, iii, p. 613.

7. Taylor, p. 98.

8. Remigius, p. 98.

9. Potts, E 3.]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

III. ADMISSION CEREMONIES

  

1. General

In the ceremonies for admission, as in all the other ceremonies of the cult, the essentials are the same in every community and country, though the details differ. The two points which are the essence of the ceremony are invariable: the first, that the candidates must join of their own free will and without compulsion; the second, that they devote themselves, body and soul, to the Master and his service.

The ceremonies of admission differed also according to whether the candidate were a child or an adult. The most complete record of the admission of children comes from the Basses-Pyrenees in 1609:

'Les Sorcieres luy offre[n]t des petits enfans le genouil en terre, lui disant auec vne soubmission, Grand seigneur, lequel i'adore, ie vous ameine ce nouueau seruiteur, lequel estre perpetuellement vostre esclaue: Et le Diable en signe de remerciement & gratification leur respond, Approchez vous de moy: a quoy obeissant, elles en se trainant a genouil, le luy presentent, & luy receuant l'enfant entre ses bras, le rend a la Sorciere, la remercie, & puis luy recommande d'en auoir soing, leur disant par ce moyen sa troupe s'augmentera. Que si les enfans ayans attainct l'aage de neuf ans, par malheur se vouent au Diable sans estre forcez ny violentez d'aucun Sorcier, ils se prosternent par terre deuant Satan: lequel iettant du feu par les yeux, leur dit, Que demandez vous, voulez vous estre a moy? ils respondent qu'ouy, il leur dict, Venez vous de vostre bonne volonte? ils respondent qu'ouy, Faictes donc ce que ie veux, & ce que ie fay. Et alors la grande maistresse & Royne du Sabbat qui leur sert de pedagogue, dict a ce nouueau qui se presente, qu'il die a haute voix, Ie renie Dieu premierenment, puis Iesus Christ son Fils, le S. Esprit, la vierge, les Saincts, la Saincte Croix, le Chresme, le Baptesme, & la Foy que ie tiens, mes Parrain & Marraine, & me remets de tout poinct en ton pouuoir & entre tes mains, ne recognis autre Dieu: si bien que tu es mon Dieu & ie suis ton esclaue. Apres on luy baille vn crapaud habille auec son capot ou manteau, puis il commande qu'on I'adore; si bien qu'obeyssans & estants mis 'a genouil, ils baisent le Diable aupres de l'oeil gauche, A la poitrine, la fesse, a la cuisse, & aux parties honteuses, puis leuant la queue ils luy baisent le derriere.'[1]

The novice was then marked by a scratch from a sharp instrument, but was not admitted to the 'high mysteries' till about the age of twenty.[2] As no further ceremonies are mentioned, it may be concluded that the initiation into these mysteries was performed by degrees and without any special rites.

At Lille, about the middle of the seventeenth century, Madame Bourignon founded a home for girls of the lowest classes, 'pauvres et mal-originees, la plus part si ignorantes au fait de leur salut qu'elles vivoient comme des betes'.[1] After a few years, in 1661, she discovered that thirty-two of these girls were worshippers of the Devil, and in the habit of going to the Witches' Sabbaths. They 'had all contracted this Mischief before they came into the House'.[4] One of these girls named Bellot, aged fifteen, said 'that her Mother had taken her with her when she was very Young, and had even carried her in her Arms to the Witches Sabbaths'.[5] Another girl of twelve had been in the habit of going to the Sabbath since she also was 'very Young'. As the girls seem to have been genuinely fond of Madame Bourignon, she obtained a considerable amount of information from them. They told her that all worshippers of the Devil 'are constrained to offer him their Children. When a child thus offered to the Devil by its Parents, comes to the use of Reason, the Devil then demands its Soul, and makes it deny God and renounce Baptism, and all relating to the Faith, promising Homage and Fealty to the Devil in manner of a Marriage, and instead of a Ring, the Devil gives them a Mark with an iron awl [aleine de fer] in some part of the Body.'[6]

It is also clear that Marguerite Montvoisin[7] in Paris had

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 398.

2. Id. ib., p. 145.

3. Bourignon, Vie, p. 201.

4. Id., Parole, p. 85; Hale, p. 26.

5. Id., Vie, p. 211; Hale, p. 29.

6. Id. ib., p. 223; Hale, p. 37.

7. Ravaisson (the years 1679-81).]

been instructed in witchcraft from an early age; but as the trial in which she figures was for the attempted poisoning of the king and not for witchcraft, no ceremonies of initiation or admission are recorded.

In Great Britain the ceremonies for the reception of children are not given in any detail, though it was generally acknowledged that the witches dedicated their children to the Devil as soon as born; and from the evidence it appears that in many cases the witches had belonged to that religion all their lives. It was sometimes sufficient evidence against a woman that her mother had been a witch,[1] as it presupposed that she had been brought up as a worshipper of the Devil.

The Anderson children in Renfrewshire were all admitted to the society at an early age.[2] Elizabeth Anderson was only seven when she was first asked to swear fealty to the 'black grim Man'. James Lindsay was under fourteen, and his little brother Thomas was still 'below pupillarity' at the time of the trial, where he declared that he had been bribed, by the promise of a red coat, to serve 'the Gentleman, whom he knew thereafter to be the Devil'.[3] At Forfar in 1661 Jonet Howat was so young that when Isabel Syrie 'presented hir to the divell, the divell said, What shall I do with such a little bairn as she?' He accepted her, however, and she was evidently the pet of the community, the Devil calling her 'his bonny bird'.[4] At Paisley, Annabil Stuart was fourteen when, at her mother's persuasion, she took the vows of fidelity to the Devil.[5]

Elizabeth Frances at Chelmsford (tried in 1556) was about twelve years old when her grandmother first taught her the art of witchcraft.[6] Elizabeth Demdike, the famous Lancashire witch, 'brought vp her owne Children, instructed her Graund-children, and tooke great care and paines to bring them to be Witches'.[7] One of her granddaughters, Jennet Device, was aged nine at the time of the trial.

[1. Reg. Scot., Bk. II, p. 36 (quoting from C. Agrippa).

2. Narrative of the Sufferings of a Young Girle, p. xxxix.

3. Ib., pp. xi, xli.

4. Kinloch, pp. 124, 123.

5. Glanvil, ii, p. 291.

6. Philobiblon Society, viii, p. 24.

7. Potts, B 2.]

In Sweden the children were taken regularly to the assemblies,[1] and in America[2] also a child-witch is recorded in the person of Sarah Carrier, aged eight, who had made her vows two years before at her mother's instigation.

The ceremony for the admission of adults who were converts to the witch religion from Christianity follow certain main lines. These are (1) the free consent of the candidate, (2) the explicit denial and rejection of a previous religion, (3) the absolute and entire dedication of body and soul to the service and commands of the new Master and God.

The ceremonies being more startling and dramatic for adults than for children, they are recorded in Great Britain with the same careful detail as in France, and it is possible to trace the local variations; although in England, as is usual, the ceremonies had lost their significance to a far greater extent than in Scotland, and are described more shortly, probably because they were more curtailed.

The legal aspect of the admission ceremonies is welt expressed by Sir George Mackenzie, writing in 1699 on the Scotch laws relating to witchcraft in the seventeenth century:

'As to the relevancy of this Crime, the first Article useth to be, paction to serve the Devil, which is certainly relevant, per se, without any addition. . . Paction with the Devil is divided by Lawyers, in expressum, & tacitum, an express and tacit Paction. Express Paction is performed either by a formal Promise given to the Devil then present, or by presenting, a Supplication to him, or by giving the promise to a Proxie or Commissioner impowered by the Devil for that effect, which is used by some who dare not see himself. The Formula set down by Delrio, is, I deny God Creator of Heaven and Earth, and I adhere to thee, and believe in thee. But by the journal Books it appears, that the ordinary Form of express Paction confest by our Witness, is a simple Promise to serve him. Tacit Paction is either when a person who hath made no express Paction, useth the Words or Signs which Sorcerers use, knowing them to be such ... Renouncing of Baptism is by Delrio made an effect of Paction, yet with us it is relevant, per se . . . and the Solemnity confest by our Witches, is the putting one hand to the crown of the Head, and another to

[1. Horneck, pt. ii., pp. 317-2o.

2. Howell, vi, 669; J. Hutchinson, Hist of Massachusetts, ii, p. 44.]

the sole of the Foot, renouncing their Baptism in that posture. Delrio tells us, that the Devil useth to Baptize them of new, and to wipe off their Brow the old Baptism: And our Witches confess always the giving them new Names . . . The Devil's Mark useth to be a great Article with us, but it is not per se found relevant, except it be confest by them, that they got that Mark with their own consent; quo casu, it is equivalent to a Paction. This Mark is given them, as is alledg'd, by a Nip in any part of the body, and it is blew.'[1]

Reginald Scot,[2] writing considerably earlier, gives a somewhat similar account of the English witches, though couched in less legal phraseology:

'The order of their bargaine or profession is double; the one solemne and publike; the other secret and priuate. That which is called solemne or publike, is where witches come togither at certeine assemblies, at the times prefixed, and doo not onelie see the diuell in visible forme; but confer and talke familiarlie with him. In which conference the diuell exhorteth them to obserue their fidelitie vnto him, promising them long life and prosperitie. Then the witches assembled, commend a new disciple (whom they call a nouice) vnto him: and if the diuell find that yoong witch apt and forward in renunciation of christian faith, in despising anie of the seuen sacraments, in treading upon crosses, in spetting at the time of eleuation, in breaking their fast on fasting daies, and fasting on sundaies; then the diuell giueth foorth his hand, and the nouice joining hand in hand with him, promiseth to obserue and keepe all the diuell's commandements. This done, the diuell beginneth to be more bold with hir, telling hir plainlie that all this will not serue his turne; and therefore requireth homage at hir hands: yea, he also telleth hir, that she must grant him both hir bodie and soule to be tormented in euerlasting fire: which she yeeldeth vnto. Then he chargeth hir, to procure as manie men, women, and children also, as she can, to enter into this societie . . . Sometimes their homage with their oth and bargaine is receiued for a certeine terme of yeares; sometimes for euer. Sometimes it consisteth in the deniall of the whole faith, sometimes in part. The first is, when the soule is absolutelie yeelded to the diuell and hell-fier: the other is, when they haue but bargained not to obserue certeine ceremonies and statutes of the church; as to conceale faults at shrift, to fast on sundaies, etc. And this is doone either by oth, protestation of words, or by obligation in writing, sometimes sealed with wax, sometimes signed with bloud.'

[1. Mackenzie, Title x, pp. 47, 48.

2. Reginald Scot, Bk. III, pp. 40-2.]

Forbes says that

'an express Covenant is entred into betwixt a Witch, and the Devil appearing in some visible Shape. Whereby the former renounceth God and his Baptism, engages to serve the Devil, and do all the Mischief he can as Occasion offers, and leaves Soul and Body to his Disposal after Death. The Devil on his part articles with such Proselytes, concerning the Shape he is to appear to them in, the Services they are to expect from him, upon the Performance of certain Charms or ceremonious Rites. This League is made verbally, if the Party cannot write. And such as can write, sign a written Covenant with their Blood.'[1]

The general order of the ceremony of admission can be gathered from the evidence given at the trials, though no one trial gives the order in its entirety. The ceremony might take place privately, at a local meeting, or in full Sabbath; it was the same for either sex, except that the men were not usually introduced, the women were sometimes introduced, sometimes not. If there were any sort of introduction, it was by some one who was acquainted with the candidate; usually the person who had induced her to join. She was brought before the Devil, who asked her if she would be his faithful servant, and if she would renounce her previous religion, and dedicate herself to his service, taking him as her God. After the renunciation and vows, the Devil baptized her in his own great name, and among the Scotch witches gave her a new name by which she was known afterwards at the Sabbaths and other meetings. The ceremony concluded by (riving the witch a mark or 'flesh-brand' on some part of the body.

  

2. The Introduction.

It is not clear whether the introduction of a candidate by a member of the society was an early or a late detail. It is quite possible that it was early, the introducer standing in the same relation to the candidate as the Christian sponsors stand to a candidate for baptism. On the other hand, it is quite comprehensible that, when the witch religion became an object of persecution, no new member could be admitted unless

[1. W. Forbes, ii, 33, ed. 1730.]

vouched for by some trustworthy person. In the cases where the first meetings with the Devil are recorded, both systems are apparently in vogue. Occasionally, however, the accounts show a confusion on the part of the recorder. Thus Anne Chattox said that Mother Demdike introduced her to the Devil in Mother Demdike's own house, and that she there yielded her soul to him; and in another place she is reported as saying that 'a thing like a Christian man, for foure yeares togeather, did sundry, times come to this Examinate, and requested this Examinate to giue him her Soule: And in the end, this Examinate was contented to giue him her sayd Soule, shee being then in her owne house, in the Forrest of Pendle.'[1] The two statements are not inconsistent if we conclude that in her own house she consented to join the society, and in Mother Demdike's presence she took the vows. As a rule the men seem to have joined at the direct invitation of the Devil himself, especially when they came of witch families.

  

3. The Renunciation and Vows

The renunciation of previous errors of faith and the vows of fidelity to the new belief are part of the ceremony of admission of any convert to a new religion. The renunciation by the witches was explicit, but the records are apt to pass it over in a few words, e.g. 'I denied my baptism,' 'I forsook God and Christ,' 'Ils renient Dieu, la Vierge, et le reste,' 'Vne renonciation expresse a Iesu-Christ & a la foy'; but occasionally the words are given in full. Mackenzie, quoting from Del Rio, gives the formula thus: 'I deny God Creator of Heaven and Earth, and I adhere to thee, and believe in thee.'[2] The actual formula is still extant in the case of the priest Louis Gaufredy, tried before the Parliament of Aix in 1611:

'le Louys Gaufredy renonce a tous les biens tant spirituels que corporels qui me pourroyent estre conferez de la part de Dieu, de la vierge Marie & de tous les Saincts de Paradis, pareillement de mon patron S. Iean Baptiste, S. Pierre, S. Paul, & S. Francois, & de me donner de corps & d'ame a Lucifer

[1. Potts, B 4, D 3.

2. Mackenzie, p. 47, ed. 1699.]

icy present auec tous les biens que ie feray a iamais: excepte la valeur du Sacrement pour le regard de ceux qui le recevront: Et ainsi le signe et atteste.'[1]

Jeannette d'Abadie, aged sixteen, said that she was made to 'renoncer & renier son Createur, la saincte Vierge, les Saincts, le Baptesme, pere, mere, parens, le ciel, la terre & tout ce qui est au monde'.[2] The irrevocability of this renunciation was impressed upon the Swedish witches in a very dramatic manner: 'The Devil gave them a Purse, wherein there were shavings of Clocks with a Stone tied to it, which they threw into the water, and then were forced to speak these words: As these Shavings of the Clock do never return lo the Clock from which they are taken, so may my Soul never return to Heaven.'[3]

The vows to the new God were as explicit as the renunciation of the old. Danaeus says, 'He commaundeth them to forswere God theyr creator and all his power, promising perpetually to obey and worship him, who there standeth in their presence.'[4] The English witches merely took the vow of fealty and obedience, devoting themselves body and soul to him; sometimes only the soul, however, is mentioned: but the Scotch witches of both sexes laid one hand on the crown of the head, the other on the sole of the foot, and dedicated all that was between the two hands to the service of the Master.[5] There is a slight variation of this ceremony at Dalkeith in 1661, where the Devil laid his hand upon Jonet Watson's head, 'and bad her "give all ower to him that was vnder his hand", and shoe did so'.[6]

In Southern France the candidates, after renouncing their old faith, 'prennent Satan pour leur pere et protecteur, & la Diablesse pour leur mere'.[7] At Lille the children called the ceremony the Dedication,[8] showing that the same rite obtained there.

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 182.

2. Id. ib., p. 131.

3. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 322.

4. Danaeus, ch. ii, E 1.

5. Lord Fountainhall mentions a case where a pregnant woman excepted the unborn child, at which the devil was very angry. Decisions, i, p. 14.

6. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.

7. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 123.

8. Bourinon, Vie, p. 214; Hale, p. 31.]

  

4. The Covenant

The signing of a covenant does not occur in every case and was probably a late introduction. Forbes, as quoted above, gives the contract between the Devil and his follower, with the part which each engages to perform. In Somerset the witches signed whether they could write or not, those who could not write putting a cross or circle as their mark.'

The free consent of the candidate is a point always insisted on, and by the confessions of the witches themselves the consent was often not merely freely but actually willingly given. Isobel Crawford of the Irvine Coven in 1618 was accused that the devil 'come to hir awin dur in similitud of ane blak man, and prommeist, gif sche wold be his servand, sche sould have geir aneuch, and sould not want. Quhairunto sche was ever reddy to accord.'[2] Little Jonet Howat said that the Devil 'bade her renounce her God, and she answered, Marry, shall I.'[3] In the dittay against Christian Grieve, it is stated that 'Sathan desired you to be his servant whilk ye willingly granted to be . . . And sicklike the minister posing you upon the foresaid particulars especially anent the renunciation of your Baptism, ye answered that Sathan speired at you if ye would do it and ye answered "I warrand did I."'[4] Bessie Henderson and Janet Brugh, of the same Coven, acknowledged the same. To the former 'the Devil appeared and asked you gif you would be his servant whilk ye freely and instantly accepted and granted thereto'.[5] Janet Brugh was rather more emphatic: 'Sathan desired you to be his servant whilk ye willingly promised to be and likeways desired you to renounce your baptism whilk ye willingly did.'[6]

The written contract appealed very strongly to the legal minds of the judges and magistrates, and it is therefore often mentioned, but in Great Britain there is no record of the actual wording of any individual covenant; the Devil seems to have kept the parchment, paper, or book in his own custody. In France, however, such contracts occasionally fell into the

[1. Glanvil, ii, pp. 136,148.

2. Isobel Inch, p. 16.

3. Kinloch, p. 125. Spelling modernized.

4. Burns Begg, p. 239.

5. Id., pp. 223-4.

6. Id., p. 237.]

hands of the authorities; the earliest case being in 1453, when Guillaume Edeline, Prior of St. Germain-en-Laye, signed a compact with the Devil, which compact was afterwards found upon his person.' The witch Stevenote de Audebert, who was burnt in January 1619, showed de Lancre 'le pacte & conuention qu'elle auoit faict auec le Diable, escrite en sang de menstrues, & si horrible qu'on auoit horreur de la regarder'.[2]

The contract was said to be signed always in the blood of the witch, and here we come to a confusion between the mark made on the person and the mark made by the person. It seems clear that part of the ceremony of initiation was the cutting of the skin of the candidate to the effusion of blood. This is the early rite, and it seems probable that when the written contract came into vogue the blood was found to be a convenient writing-fluid, or was offered to the Devil in the form of a signature. This signing of a book plays a great part in the New England trials.

The contract was usually for the term of the witch's life, but sometimes it was for a term of years, the number of which varies considerably. As Scot says, 'Sometimes their homage with their oth and bargaine is receiued for a certeine terme of yeares; sometimes for ever.'[3] Popular belief assigns seven years as the length of time, at the end of which period the Devil was supposed to kill his votary. The tradition seems to be founded on fact, but there is also a certain amount of evidence that the witch was at liberty to discontinue or renew the contract at the end of the allotted term. Such a renewal seems also to have been made on the appointment of a new Chief. In France, England, and New England the term of years is mentioned; in Scotland it is mentioned by the legal authorities, but from the fact that it occurs seldom, if ever, in the trials it would seem that the contract of the Scotch witches was for life.

Magdalene de la Croix, Abbess of a religious house in Cordova in 1545, made a contract 'for the space of thirty years', she being then a girl of twelve.[4] In Paris in 1571 'il

[1. Lea, iii, p. 536.

2. De Lancre, L'Incredulite, p. 38.

3. Reg. Scot, Bk. III, p. 41.

4. Pleasant Treatise, p. 88.]

y eut vn aduocat lequel confessa qu'il auoit passe l'obligation au Diable renonceant a Dieu, & icelle signee de son propre sang. Encores s'est it verifie par plusieurs procez, que l'obligation reciproque entre le diable, & le sorcier, contient quelquesfois le terme d'vn an, deux ans, ou autre temps." At Faversham in 1645 Joan Williford said 'that the Devil promised to be her servant about twenty yeeres, and that the time is now almost expired'.[2] In Huntingdonshire in 1646 Elizabeth Weed of Great Catworth confessed that 'the Devill then offer'd her, that hee would doe what mischiefe she should require him; and said she must covenant with him that he must have her soule at the end of one and twenty years, which she granted'.[3] In 1652 Giles Fenderlin of Leaven Heath was tried for that when he was a soldier at Bell in Flanders he made a five-years' covenant with a Jesuit; 'after the said five years was expired, in 1643 he renew'd the said Covenant with the Jesuit for 14 years longer: whereupon he drew a Covenant for him with the Devil, pricking the two fore-fingers of his right hand with an needle, and drew bloud, wherewith he writ his name with his own bloud, and then covenanted with the Devil, That if he should be safely protected during the space Of 14 years aforesaid, while such time as it expired, that then he was to take away, both body and soul as his own right and interest.'[4] At Lille in 1661 Madame Bourignon's girls indicate the renewal of the contract: 'The Devil gives them a Mark, which Marks they renew as often as those Persons have any desire to quit him. The Devil reproves them then more severely and obligeth them to new Promises, making them also new Marks for assurance or pledge, that those Persons should continue faithful to him.',[5] In Somerset in 1664 Elizabeth Style said that the Devil 'promised her Mony, and that she should live gallantly, and have the pleasure of the World for Twelve years, if she would with her Blood sign his Paper, which was to give her Soul to him'.' At Groton in New England in 1671, according to Elizabeth Knap, 'the terme of time agreed upon with him was for 7 yeers; one yeere shee

[1. Bodin, Fleau, p. 172.

2 Examination of Joan Williford, p. 4.

3. Davenport, p. 1.

4. Mrs. Joan Peterson, p. 4.

5. Bourignon, Vie, p. 223; Hale, p. 37.

6. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 136.]

was to be faithfull in his service, and then ye other six hee would serve her, and make her a witch'.[1] At Newcastle-on-Tyne in 1673 Ann Armstrong 'deposeth that Ann Drydon had a lease for fifty yeares of the divill, whereof ten ar expired, Ann Forster had a lease of her life for 47 yeares, whereof seaven are yet to come. Lucy Thompson had a lease of two and forty, whereof two are yet to come, and, her lease being near out, they would have perswaded this informer to have taken a lease of three score yeares or upwards.'[2] In New England some of the 'afflicted' said of Goodwife C. that 'she had Covenanted with the Devil for ten Years, six of them were gone, and four more to come'.[3] In modern France the belief in the contract for a term of years is recorded, but nothing is said of the renewal of the contract or of the fate of the witch who refuses such a contract. In the department of Entre-Sambre-et-Meuse the full method of entering on such a contract is known: 'Si vous voulez venir au bois avec moi, vous verrez un homme venir a vous. Cest le chef. Il vous demandera si vous voulez vous engager dans la societe. Si vous acceptez, le terme d'engagement est de sept ans et vous gagnerez une plaquette par jour.'[4] Among the Walloons the neophyte takes with him a black hen, which the Devil buys, and then ratifies the contract, 'le pacte est fait pour une duree de sept ans.'[5]

  

5. The Baptism

Records of the baptism of candidates are rare, the rite being possibly copied from the Christian ceremony and therefore of later date. It does not seem to occur in England and hardly at all in Scotland. The earliest mention is in the Basses-Pyrenees (1609), where Jeannette d'Abadie stated 'qu'elle a veu souuent baptiser des enfans au sabbat, qu'elle nous expliqua estre des enfans des sorcieres & non autres, lesquelles ont accoutume faire plustost baptiser leurs enfans au sabbat qu'en l'Eglise'.[6] The rite, however, was practised in Bute in 1662: Margret NcLevine confessed--

[1. Green, p. 14. 

2. Surtees Soc., xl, p. 196.

3. Increase Mather, p. 205.

4. Lemoine, La Tradition, vi (1892), p. 106.

5. Monseur, p. 84,

6. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 131.]

'that being in a litle chamber in Balichtarach the devill came to her in the lyknes of a man and deseired hir to goe with him, and that she refusing he said I will not [blank] and she gave him [blank] she never saw afterward and that she knew it was the devill and after he went that he came bak and asked hir to give him hir hand quhich she refusing to doe he took hir by the midle finger of the rycht hand quhich he had almost cutt off hir and therwith left hir. Her finger was so sorely pained for the space of a moneth ther after that ther was no pain comparable to it, as also took her by the right leg quhich was sorly pained likewayes as also be the devill. Item he came to her againe as she was shaking straw in the barne of Ardroscidell in a very ugly shape and that there he desired hir to goe with him and she refusing he said to her I will either have thy self or then thy heart. Item that he healed her sore foot and finger quhich finger is yet be nummed. Item that before he haled her that she made a covenant with him and promised to doe him any service that he wold imploy hir in. Item that he asked quhat was her name. She answered him Margret the name that God gave me, and he said to her I baptise the Jonet.'[1]

Isobell NcNicoll 'confessed that as she was in her owne house her alone drawing acquavittie the devill came to her in the lyknes of a young man and desyred her to goe with him and confesses that she made a covenant with him quhairin he promised that she should not want meanes enough and she promised to be his servand. Item that he baptised her and gave her a new name and called her Caterine. Item that about a moneth therafter in the night as she went out of her own back dore she met with the devill and spok with him.'[2]--Jonet McNicoll 'confesses with remorse that about hallowday as she was in Mary Moore's house that there appeared to her two men the on a gross copperfaced man and the other a wele favored young man and that the copperfaced man quhom she knew to be ane evil spirit bade her goe with him. Item confesses that she made a covenant with him, and he promised that she wold not want meines eneugh and she promised to serve him and that he gave her a new name saying I baptise the Mary.'[3]--Jonet Morisoune

[1. Highland Papers, vol. iii, p. 6.

2. Ib., vol. iii, p. 12.

3. 1b., vol. iii, p. 13.]

'traysted with the divill at the Knockanrioch, being the second tyme of her meeting with him, that shee made covenant with the devill . . . quairin she promised to be his servant etc. that shee asked quhat was his name his answer was my name is Klareanough and he asked quhat was her name and she answered Jonet Morisoun, the name that God gave me, and he said belive not in Christ bot belive in me. I baptise the Margarat.'[1] The Swedish witches (1669) were also baptized; 'they added, that he caused them to be baptized too by such Priests as he had there, and made them confirm their Baptism with dreadful Oaths and Imprecations.'[2] Curiously enough the most detailed account comes from New England (1692). Mary Osgood, wife of Captain Osgood, went 'to five mile pond, where she was baptized by the devil, who dipped her face in the water, and made her renounce her former baptism, and told her she must be his, soul and body for ever, and that she must serve him, which she promised to do. She says, the renouncing her first baptism was after her dipping.'[3] The account of Goody Lacey's experience is given in the form of question and answer:

'Q. Goody Lacey! how many years since they were baptized? A. Three or four years ago, I suppose. Q. Who baptized them? A. The old serpent. Q. How did he do it? A. He dipped their heads in the water, saying, that they were his and that he had power over them. Q. Where was this? A. At Fall's River. Q. How many were baptized that day? A. Some of the chief; I think they were six baptized. Q. Name them. A. I think they were of the higher powers.'[4]

A near approach to the ceremony of baptism is the bloodrite at Auldearne, described by Isobel Gowdie and Janet Breadheid. The Devil marked Isobel on the shoulder, 'and suked owt my blood at that mark, and spowted it in his hand, and, sprinkling it on my head, said, "I baptise the, Janet, in my awin name."' The Devil marked Janet Breadheid in the same way on the shoulder, 'and suked out my

[1. Highland Papers, vol. iii, p. 22.

2. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 321.

3. Howell, vi, 660; J. Hutchinson, ii, p. 31.

4. J. Hutchinson, ii, p. 36.]

blood with his mowth, at that place; he spowted it in his hand, and sprinkled it on my head. He baptised me thairvith in his awin nam, "Christian."'[1]

Though baptism is rare, the giving of a new name on admission is peculiar to Scotland. The names seem to have been usually nicknames derived from various sources; personal peculiarities such as 'Weill dancing Janet', or 'Able and stout'; contractions of the proper name, as 'Naip' for Barbara Napier; or a title such as 'Rob the Rowar', for Robert Grierson, who kept the rows or rolls. Most of the other names appear to have been ordinary Christian names arbitrarily bestowed. There is nothing to throw any light on the reason for the change. In 1590 at North Berwick the witch-name was considered of the highest importance.

'Robert Griersoune being namit, thay ran all hirdie-girdie and wer angrie; for it wes promesit, that he sould be callit "Rot the Comptroller alias Rob the Rowar" for expreming of his name.--Effie McCalzane, Robert Griersoune, and the said Barbara, hapnit to be nameit thair; quhilk offendit all the cumpany: And that they sould nocht haif bene nameit with thair awin names; Robert Griersoun, to haif bene callit Rob the rowar; Effie to be callit Cane; and the said Barbara, to be callit Naip.'[2]

Later, the change of name was of so little value that at Crook of Devon several of the witches could not remember what they had been called; Bessie Henderson appears to have recollected the name after a time, for it is inserted towards the end of the confession; Robert Wilson could remember the Devil's name but not his own; Agnes Brugh and Christian Grieve could remember neither the Devil's nor their own.[3]

The so-called 'christening', i. e. naming, of animals, comes rather under the head of 'sacrifice' than of baptism, for the ceremony appears to have been purificatory.

[1. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 617.

2. Id., i, pt. ii, pp. 239, 246.

3. Burns Begg, x, pp. 224, 227, 232, 239.]

  

6. The Mark

The Witches' Mark, or Devil's Mark, as it is indifferently called, is one of the most important points in the indentification of a witch, as the infliction of it was often the final rite in the admission ceremonies. The fact that any person bore such a mark was taken as incontrovertible proof that the bearer was a witch.

There were two kinds of marks, which should be carefully differentiated, one of which was clearly natural, the other probably artificial. Both were said to be insensible to pain and not to bleed when pricked or pierced. Local anaesthesia is vouched for in much of the evidence, which suggests that there is a substratum of truth in the statements, but I can at present offer no solution of this problem.

The writers on witchcraft, particularly the legal authorities, recognize the value of the Mark as proof of witchcraft, and some differentiate between the two forms; the witches themselves made a distinction between the two, the natural being considered inferior to the artificial.

Reginald Scot in 1584 summarizes the evidence in a few words: 'The Diuell giveth to euerie nouice a marke, either with his teeth or with his clawes." The Lawes against Witches and Conivration, published 'by authority' in 1645, state that 'their said Familiar hath some big or little Teat upon their body, wher he sucketh them: and besides their sucking, the Devil leaveth other markes upon their bodies, sometimes like a Blew-spot, or Red-spot like a flea-biting'. Sir George Mackenzie, the famous Scotch lawyer, describing in 1699 what did and did not legally constitute a witch, says:

'The Devils Mark useth to be a great Article with us, but it is not per se found relevant, except it be confest by them, that they got that Mark with their own consent; quo casu, it is equivalent to a Paction. This Mark is given to them, as is alledg'd, by a Nip in any part of the Body, and it is blew. Delrio calls it Stigma, or Character, and alledges that it is sometimes like the impression of a Hare's foot, or the Foot of a Rat or Spider.'[2]

[1. Scot, Bk. III, p. 43; see also Danaeus, ch. iii.

2. Mackenzie, title x, p. 48.]

Forbes, writing in 1730, says:

'On the meaner Proselytes the Devil fixes in some secret Part of their Bodies a Mark, as his Seal to know his own by; which is like a Flea Bite or blew Spot, or sometimes resembles a little Teat, and the Part so stamped doth ever after remain insensible, and doth not bleed, tho' never so much nipped or pricked by thrusting a Pin, Awl or Bodkin into it; but if the Covenanter be of better Rank, the Devil only draws Blood of the Party, or touches him or her in some Part of the Body without any visible Mark remaining.'[1]

The Mark proper appears to have been the coloured spot or design which followed the infliction of a prick or nip by the claws or teeth of the Devil on the person of the neophyte. The red mark is described as being like a flea-bite, i. e. small and circular; the blue mark seems to have been larger and more elaborate, apparently in some kind of design. From the evidence five facts are clear: (1) that the mark was coloured, (2) that it was permanent, (3) that it was caused by the pricking or tearing of the skin, (4) that the operator passed his hand or fingers over the place, (5) that the pain could be severe and might last a considerable time. Put together in this way, the facts suggest tattooing.

Among the Aberdeen witches in 1597 Andro Man was accused that 'Christsunday [the Devil] bit a mark in the third finger of thy right hand, whilk thou has yet to show'; and Christen Mitchell also was accused that 'the Devil gave thee a nip on the back of thy right hand, for a mark that thou was one of his number'.[2] According to Boguet, writing in 1398, the witches of Eastern France were usually marked on the left shoulder, and the mark was in the, shape of the foot or footprint of a hare, but he also gives some exceptional cases:

'L'epaule gauche est l'endroit, ou plus ordinairement il marque les Sorciers. La marque des Sorciers est tantost come vne piste ou pied de lieure, & tantost d'autre facon. On en a veu vne, qui auoit vne figure rapportant en grandeur a vn petit denier, du centre de laquelle s'estendoient plusieurs filamens vers la circonference. La marque de la Belcuenotte, qui a este brulee a Besancon, estoit au dessus de sa nature, vn

[1. Forbes, ii, p. 33.

2 Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 120, 165. Spelling modernized.]

peu plus bas que le nombril. Celle, dont Guillauma Proby d'Anchay se trouua marquee au col du coste droit, estoit de mesme de la grandeur d'vn petit denier, tirant sur le brun. Iean de Vaux auoit la siene an doz, & ressembloit a vn petit chien noir.'[1]

De Lancre in 1609 says that in the Basses-Pyrenees 'comme le Diable faict sa marque, on sent vn peu de chaleur, qui penetre plus on moins profondement la chair, que plus ou moins il pince le lieu qu'il touche'. As regards the position of the mark he says:

'Il les egratigne tons auec le bras gauche, & les ongles de la main senestre. Et tout aussi tost prenant vne espingle d'or faux, il les marque le plus souuent dans le bla[n]c de 1'oeil gauche, & leur imprime vne marque qui semble vn petit crapaud'] [elsewhere he says 'vne patte de crapaud']; 'par fois dans l'epaule & coste gauche, ou dans la cuisse, leur rompant & dechirant la peau & la chair iusques a effusio[n] de sang; si bien que pendant trois mois ils ont de tres grandes douleurs.'[2]

Isobel Crawford of Irvine in 1618 had 'the devill's mark, quhilk was lyk ane braid dyn spott, in the inner syd of hir left thie, about ane handbraid under her lisk'.[3] The Lancashire witch, Margaret Johnson, in 1633, 'saith, that such Witches as have sharpe bones given them by the devill to pricke them, have no papps nor duggs, but their devil receiveth blood from the place, pricked with the bone, which witches are more grand witches than any that have marks '.[4] The Yarmouth witch, tried in 1644, saw a tall black man standing in the moonlight at her door: 'he told her, he must first see her Hand; and then taking out something like a Pen-knife, he gave it a little Scratch, so that Blood followed, and the Mark remained to that time." Rebecca Jones, an Essex witch tried in 1645, confessed that 'there came one morning one to the doore and knocked, and that this examinant going to the dore, shee saw there a very handsome young man, as shee then thought but now shee thinkes it was the devill; who asked this examinant how shee

[1. Boguet, pp. 315, 316, 317

2. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 195, 399.

3. Isobel Inch, p. 16. 

4. Whitaker, p. 216.

5. Hale, p. 46.]

did, and desired to see her left wrist, which shee shewed unto him: and he then tooke a pin from this examinant's owne sleeve, and pricked her wrist twice, and there came out a drop of bloud, which he took off with the top of his finger, and so departed'.[1] The child-witch, Jonet Howat of Forfar, tried in 1661, said that 'the devil kist hir and niped hir vpon one of hir shoulders, so as shoe hade great paine for some tyme therafter'; later he came to her, and 'calling hir his bony bird did kisse hir, and straiked her shoulder (quhich was niped) with his hand, and that presently after that shoe was eased of hir former paine'. Elspet Alexander, of the same Coven, was also marked on the shoulder; four weeks later 'the divill straiked hir shoulder with his fingers, and after that shoe hade ease in the place formerly niped by the devill'.[2] The witch girls at Lille in 1661 stated that 'le Diable leur fait quelque marque comme avec une aleine de fer en quelque partie du corps'.[3] Marie Lamont of Innerkip in 1662 confessed voluntarily that 'the devill nipit her upon the right syd, qlk was very painful for a tym, but yairefter he straikit it with his hand, and healed it; this she confesses to be his mark'.[4] In Bute in 1662 'Margaret NcWilliarn was tryed for the merk there was 3 merks fund, one up her left leg, next hard be the shine bone, another betwixt her shoulders a 3 degrees ane uthyr up her hensh, blew . . . Kat Moore was tried, and it was found undernethe her richt shoulder a little whyt unsensible spott'.[5] The Somerset witches, in 1664, were marked on the fingers; it was stated of Elizabeth Style that the Devil 'prickt the fourth Finger of hir right hand, between the middle and upper joynt (where the sign at the Examination remained)'; of Alice Duke, that 'the Devil prickt the fourth finger of her right hand between the middle and upper joynt (where the mark is yet to be seen)'; and of Christian Green, that 'the Man in black prickt the fourth finger of her Right-hand between the middle and upper joints, where the sign yet remains'.[6] At Paisley in 1678 Annabil Stuart confessed 'that the Devil took her by the Hand and nipped her Arm, which continued to be

[1. Howell, iv, 854-5.

2. Kinloch, pp. 124-6.

3. Bourignon, Vie, p. 223.

4. Sharpe, p. 132.

5. Highland Papers, iii, p. 17.

6. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 136, 148, 156.]

sore for half an hour'.[1] At Borrowstowness the Devil took Margaret Pringle 'by the right hand, whereby it was for eight days grievowslie pained; bot having it twitched of new againe, it imediatelie becam haill'.[2] Of the Renfrewshire Coven in 1696 little Thomas Lindsay received 'a Nip on the Neck which continued sore for Ten days'; and John Reid had, a Bite or Nipp in his Loyn, which he found painfull for a Fortnight'.[3] At Pittenweem in 1704 the 'young lass', Isobel Adams, confessed that the Devil 'put his mark in her flesh which was very painful'.[4]

The other form of the Devil's Mark was the 'little Teat'. It occurred on various parts of the body; was said to secrete milk and to give suck to the familiars, both human and animal; and was sometimes cut off by the witch before being searched. The descriptions of the 'teat' point to its being that natural phenomenon, the supernumerary nipple. Cases of polymastia or supernumerary breasts, and of polythelia or supernumerary nipples, are constantly recorded by modern medical observers. 'These accessory structures are usually situated on the chest wall, the upper part of the abdominal wall, or in the axillae, but they have been met with on the shoulder, the buttock, the thigh, and other extraordinary positions. As a rule they are functionless."' Polythelia occurs in both sexes; according to Bruce, 'Of 315 individuals taken indiscriminately and in succession, 7.619 per cent. presented supernumerary nipple; 9.11 per cent. of 207 men examined in succession presented supernumerary nipple; and 4.807 per cent. of 104 women.' He concludes that, 'according to present observations at least, supernumerary nipples occur much more frequently in the male than in the female.'[6]; Cameron tabulates the positions of the supernumerary nipple in 105 cases: 196 were situated in thorax, 5 in axilla, 2 in back, 1 on shoulder, 1 outside of thigh.'[7] All writers on the subject agree that the phenomenon is of more common occurrence than is usually supposed, but that many cases pass

[1. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 291.

2. Scots Magazine, 1814, p. 200.

3. Narrative of the Sufferings, pp. xli, xliv.

4. Sinclair, p. 259.

5. Thompson and Miles, ii, p. 341.

6. Journal of Anatomy, xiii, pp. 436, 447.

7. Id., xiii, p. 153.]

unnoticed unless well marked when in men or causing discomfort by functioning when in women. This view is supported by the fact that, during the recent unparalleled opportunity for the physical examination of large numbers of men, many cases have been published in the British Medial Journal for 1917 as occurring among recruits for the army. The supernumerary nipple is usually very much smaller than the normal; like the normal, it is a modification of cutaneous tissue and is not attached to muscular tissue; its removal is a simple operation, in fact it would be quite possible for an unskilled operator to cut it off with a sharp knife. In women the supernumerary nipple is observed to increase at the time of the periods; in some cases during lactation so much milk is secreted as to make it a matter of indifference whether the child is suckled at the normal nipples or at the supernumerary one. In cases of polymastia the nipple is not always formed; the milk, when secreted, issuing from a small opening. Though the nipple is congenital, the supernumerary breast may develop, or at any rate become noticeable, later; the theory being that the ducts carrying the secretion from the supernumerary to the normal breast become blocked in some way, and that the milk is thus exuded through the pore in the supernumerary breast. The change in the case quoted by Cameron, as well as in the case of the witch Rose Cullender, seems to have been caused by a strain.

Making allowance for the unscientific language of the recorders of the witch trials, it will be seen that the descriptions of the 'witch-pap' or 'little Teat' exactly coincide with these anatomical facts. I give the evidence below, the trials being in chronological order. It will be observed that the cases are from England and New England only; if the phenomena of polymastia and polythelia occurred in France and Scotland, there are no records of the fact in the witch-trials of those countries.

Alice Gooderidge and her mother, Elizabeth Wright, of Stapenhill near Burton-on-Trent, were tried in 1597:

'The old woman they stript, and found behind tier right sholder a thing much like the vdder of an ewe that giueth sucke with two teates, like vnto two great wartes, the one behinde vnder her armehole, the other a hand off towardes the top of her shoulder. Being demanded how long she had those teates, she aunswered she was borne so. Then did they search Alice Gooderige, and found vpon her belly, a hole of the bignesse of two pence, fresh and bloudy, as though some great wart had beene cut off the place.'[1]

The witch of Edmonton, tried in 1621

'The Bench commanded three women to search the body of Elizabeth Sawyer. They all three said, that they a little aboue the Fundiment of Elizabeth Sawyer found a thing like a Teate the bignesse of the little finger, and the length of half a finger, which was branched at the top like a teate, and seemed as though one had suckt it, and that the bottome thereof was blew, and the top of it was redde.'[2]

The greatest number of cases recorded in one place is in Essex during the trials before Sir Matthew Hale in 1645:

Anne Leech said 'that her imps did usually suck those teats which were found about the privie parts of her body. [Two women searched Mary Greenleife], and found that the said Mary had bigges or teates in her secret parts, not like emerods, nor in those places where women use to be troubled with them. The examinant, being asked how she came by those teats which were discovered in her secret parts, she saith she knows not unlesse she was born with them: but she never knew she had any such untill this time. [A woman searched Margaret Moone], she found three long teates or bigges in her secret parts, which seemed to have been lately sucked; and that they were not like pyles, for this informant knows well what they are, having been troubled with them herself. Upon the searching of her daughters, this informant found that two of them had biggs in their privy parts as the said Margaret their mother had. [Several women] were required to search Sarah Hating, the wife of William Hating; Elizabeth Harvy widow, and Marian Hocket widow, and upon her said search (being a midwife) found such marks or bigges, that she never saw in other women: for Sarah Hating had foure teats or bigges in those parts, almost an inch long, and as bigge as this informant's little finger: That the said Elizabeth Harvy had three such biggs, and about the same canting: And that the said Marian Hocket had no such bigges; but was found. in the same parts not like other honest women. Sarah Barton, the sister of the said Marian Hocket (also suspected of being a witch) said the said Marian had cut

[1. Alse Gooderidge, pp. 8, 9.

2. Elizabeth Sawyer, B 3, obv. and rev.]

off her bigs, whereby she might have been suspected to have been a witch, and laid plaisters to those places." 'Another Evidence deposed that she once heard the said Margaret [Landish] say, that her Imps did usually suck two Teats near the privy parts.'[2]

In Huntingdonshire in 1646 John Clarke junior, a labourer, was tried for witchcraft; John Browne, a tailor, deposed that he met Clarke on the road, Clarke 'said he was in haste; for his Father and Mother were accused for Witches, and that hee himselfe had beene searched: and this Informant answered, and so have I. Then Clarke asked this Informant, whether any thing were found about him, or not? he (this Informant) answered, that they said there were marks: Clarke said againe, had you no more wit but to have your marks found? I cut off mine three dayes before I was searched.'[3] John Palmer of St. Albans (1649) confessed that I upon his compact with the Divel, hee received a flesh brand, or mark, upon his side, which gave suck to two familiars'.[4] There were several cases in Yorkshire: In 1649 'they searched the body of the saide Mary Sikes, and founde upon the side of her seate a redd lumpe about the biggnes of a nutt, being wett, and that, when they wrung it with theire fingers, moisture came out of it like lee. And they founde upon her left side neare her arme a litle lumpe like a wart, and being puld out it stretcht about halfe an inch. And they further say that they never sawe the like upon anie other weomen.'[5] In 1650 Frances Ward 'saith that she was one of the fower that searched Margaret Morton, and found upon her two black spotts between her thigh and her body; they were like a wart, but it was none. And the other was black on both sides, an inch bread, and blew in the middest.'[6] At Scarborough in 1651.

'Margery Ffish, widdow, beinge commanded to searche the bodye of Anne Hunnam, otherwise Marchant, who was accused for witchcraft; she, this informante, and Elizabeth Jackson,

[1. Howell, iv, 838, 843, 848, 849, 850, 85 1.

2. Four Notorious Witches at Worcester, p. 4. The place is wrongly given: it should be Essex, not Worcester.

3. Davenport, p. 15.

4. Gerish, The Divel's Delusions, p. 12.

5. Surtees Soc., xl p. 30.

6. Id., xl, p. 38.]

and Eliz. Dale, did accordingly scarche the body of the saide Anne Hunnam, otherwise Marchant, and did finde a little blue spott upon her left side, into which spott this informant did thrust a pinne att which the sd. Ann Hunnam never moved or seemed to feel it, which spott grows, out of her ffleshe or skin at her waste of a great bignesse. Elizabeth Dale informeth upon oath, that she did, together with Margery Ffish, searche Ann Hunnam, otherwise Marchant, her bodye and saith that their was found on her left buttock a blue spott growing out of her fleshe or skin like a greate warte.'[1]

The Kentish witch, Mary Read of Lenham, in 1652, I had a visible Teat, under her tongue, and did show it to many, and it was likewise seen by this Observator.'[2] In the case of the Salisbury witch, Anne Bodenham, in 1652, 'Women searched the Witch in the Gaol, and they delivered on their oaths at the Assises, that they found on her shoulder a certain mark or Teat, about the length and bignesse of the Niple of a Womans breast, and hollow and soft as a Niple, with a hole on the top of it: And searching further, they likewise found in her secret place another Teat, soft, and like the former on her shoulder.'[3] In Yorkshire again, in 1654, Katherine Earle was accused, 'and the said Katherine hathe beene searched, and a marke founde upon her in the likenesse of a papp'.[4] At St. Albans, about 1660, there was a man-witch, who 'had like a Breast on his side'.[5] In the same year at Kidderminster a widow, her two daughters, and a man were brought to trial; 'the man had five teats, the mother three, and the eldest daughter one. When they went to search the woman, none were visible; one advised to lay them on their backs, and keep open their mouths, and they would appear; and so they presently appeared in sight.'[6] Alice Huson, of Burton Agnes, Yorks, in 1664, stated that 'I have, I confess, a Witch-pap, which is sucked by the Unclean Spirit'.[7] Abre Grinset, of Dunwich, Suffolk, in 1665, said, 'The Devil did appear in the form of a Pretty handsom Young Man first, and since Appeareth to her in the form of a blackish Gray Cat or Kitling, that it sucketh of a Tett (which Searchers

[1. Country Folklore, ii, p. 139.

2. Prod. and Trag. Hist., p. 6.

3. Bower, p. 28.

4. Surtees Soc., xl, p. 69.

5. Gerish, Relation of Mary Hall, p. 24.

6. Howell, iv, 827 note.

7. Hale, p. 58.]

since saw in the place She mentioned).'[1] In the same year, also in Suffolk, Rose Cullender was tried for witchcraft:

'The searchers [six women] began at her head, and so stript her naked, and in the lower part of her belly they found a thing like a teat of an inch long, they questioned her about it, and she said, that she had got a strain by carrying of water which caused that excrescence. But upon narrower search, they found in her privy parts three more excrescencies or teats, but smaller than the former: this deponent farther saith, that in the long teat at the end thereof there was a little hole, and it appeared unto them as if it had been lately sucked, and upon the straining of it there issued out white milky matter.'[2]

Temperance Lloyd, a Devon witch, was tried in 1682: 'Upon search of her body this informant did find in her, secret parts, two teats hanging nigh together like unto a piece of flesh that a child had suckt. And each of the said teats was about an inch in length." Bridget Bishop, one of the New England witches, was tried in 1692: 'A jury of Women found a preternatural Teat upon her Body: But upon a second search, within 3 or 4 hours, there was no such thing to be seen.'[4] Elizabeth Horner, another Devon witch, tried in 1696, I had something like a Nipple on her Shoulder, which the Children [who gave evidence] said was sucked by a Toad'.[5] Widow Coman, an Essex witch, died a natural death in 1699: 'Upon her death I requested Becke the midwife to search her body in the presence of some sober women, which she did and assured me she never saw the like in her life that her fundament was open like a mouse-hole and that in it were two long bigges out of which being pressed issued blood that they were neither piles nor emrods for she knew both but excrescencies like to biggs with nipples which seemed as if they had been frequently sucked.'[6], Elinor Shaw and Mary Phillips were executed in Northampton in 1704 for witchcraft: 'The Infernal Imps did Nightly Suck each of them a large Teat, or pieces of red Flesh in their Privy Parts.'[7]

The positions of the marks are worth noting. Of the

[1. Petto, p. 18.

2. Howell, vi, 696.

3. Id., viii, 1022.

4. Mather, p. 137.

5. F. Hutchinson, Historical Essay, p. 62.

6. Gilbert, p. 6.

7 Witches of Northamptonshire, p. 6.]

coloured mark it will be seen from the evidence given above that there were certain well-defined positions, which is in itself a strong suggestion of the artificial character of this mark. In France the usual position was the left shoulder; in the Basses-Pyrenees the left eye, the left side, and the thigh were also commonly marked; the variations given by Boguet are the abdomen, the back, and the right side of the neck. In England it seems that only the hand and wrist were marked; in Somerset the exact position was between the upper and middle joints of the fourth finger of the right hand, probably the 'ring-finger', but whether on the outer or inner surface is not recorded. In Scotland the position is very varied, the right hand, the right side, the shoulder, the back, the neck, and the loin; at Aberdeen the position on the right hand is still further defined as being on the back and on the third finger, i.e. the 'ring-finger'.

Reginald Scot does not distinguish between the two kinds of marks, when he says that if the witch 'have anie privie marke under hir arme pokes, under hir haire, under hir lip, or in her buttocke, or in her privities; it is a presumption sufficient for the judge to proceed to give sentence of death upon her'.[1] But from the positions in which supernumerary nipples are known to occur, it would seem that he is speaking of the 'little Teat' and not of the coloured mark. In six out of the thirty-two cases of supernumerary nipple cited above, the number of nipples is not given; though from the context it would appear that more than one was often found on each of the accused. If, therefore, we allow two apiece for those cases not definitely specified, there were sixty-three such nipples, an average roughly of two to each person; the number varying, however, from one to five (this last being a man). The position of the nipple on the body is given in forty-five out of the sixty-three cases: abdomen 2, axilla 1, buttock 1, fundament 3, groin 2, pudenda 30, shoulder 3, side 3, under tongue 1. In writing of supernumerary nipples and mammae erraticae Williams quotes cases recorded by modern observers, in which the accessory organ occurred on the abdomen, axilla, inguinal region, outer side of thigh, shoulder, and face.'

[1. R. Scot, Bk. II, ch. 5.

2. Journal of Anatomy, xxv, 225 seq.]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV. THE ASSEMBLIES

THERE were two kinds of assemblies; the one, known as the Sabbath, was the General Meeting of all the members of the religion; the other, to which I give-on the authority of Estebene de Cambrue--the name of Esbat, was only for the special and limited number who carried out the rites and practices of the cult, and was not for the general public.

The derivation of the word Sabbath in this connexion is quite unknown. It has clearly nothing to do with the number seven, and equally clearly it is not connected with the Jewish ceremonial. It is possibly a derivative of s'esbattre, 'to frolic'; a very suitable description of the joyous gaiety of the meetings.

  

1. Sabbath

Locomotion.-The method of going to the meetings varied according to the distance to be traversed. In an immense majority of cases the means of locomotion are not even mentioned, presumably therefore the witches went on foot, as would naturally be the case in going to the local meeting or Esbat, which was attended only by those who lived near. There are, however, a few instances where it was thought worth while to mention that the worshippers walked to the meeting. Boguet (1598), who yields to none in his accounts of magical means of going to the Sabbath, says, 'les Sorciers nea[n]tmoins vont quelquefois de pied au Sabbat, ce qui leur aduient principalement, lors que le lieu, ou ils font leur assemblee, n'est pas guieres eslongne de leur habitation', and rites in confirmation the evidence of George and Antoinette Gandillon and their father Pierre, Clauda Ianprost, Clauda Ian-guillaume, Iaquema Paget, Gros Iaques, the two brothers Claude and Claude Charloz, Pierre Willermoz, l'Aranthon, Pernette Molard, Ianne Platet, and Clauda Paget.[1] Iaquema Paget's account of how she and Antoine Tornier went to a

[1. Boguet, pp. 106-7.]

meeting on their way home. from the harvest field (see p. 121), proves that they were on foot. The Lang-Niddry witches (1608) clearly walked, they 'convenit thame selffis at Deanefute of Lang-Niddry . . . thaireffir thay past altogidder to the said Beigis hous in Lang-Nydry [where they drank]; and thaireftir come with all thair speid to Seaton-thorne be-north the zet; quhair the Devill. callit for the said Christiane Tod, and past to Robert Smartis house, and brocht hir out.... And thay thaireftir past altogidder, with the Devill, to the irne zet of Seatoun . . . And thaireftir come all bak agane to the Deane-fute, quhair first thai convenit.'[1] The distance from Lang Niddry to Seaton Castle is under a mile. Isaac de Queyran (1609), a young fellow of twenty-five, told de Lancre that those living at a distance flew home through the air, the near ones returned on foot.[2] Berthelemy Minguet of Brecy was tried in 1616: 'Enquis, de quelle facon sa femme fut au Sabbat la premiere fois. Respond, qu'elle y fut transportee par le Diable, lequel la rapporta apres le Sabbat, & que la seconde fois qu'elle y a este, elle y fut de son pied avec luy, & s'en retourna de son pied, & qu'elle n'y a iamais este que ces deux fois.'[3] Helen Guthrie of Forfar (1661) said that 'herselfe, Isobell Shyrie, and Elspet Alexander, did meit togither at ane aile house near to Barrie, a litle befor sunsett, efter they bade stayed in the said house about the spaice of ane houre drinking of thrie pintis of ale togidder, they went foorth to the sandis, and ther thrie other women met them, and the divell wes there present with them all . . . and they parted so late that night that she could get no lodging, but wes forced to lye at ane dyk syde all night'.[4] Christian Grieve, of Crook of Devon (1662), acknowledged I that ye came to the foresaid meeting immediately after your goodman and the rest went to bed, and that ye locked the door and put the key under the same, and that ye and the said Margaret Young your neighbor came foot for foot to the foresaid meeting and that ye stayed at the foresaid meeting about the space of two hours and came back again on your foot, and the foresaid Margaret Young

[1. Pitcairn, ii, pp. 542-3.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 148.

3. Id., L'Incredulite. P. 808.

4. Kinloch, pp. 122-3.]

with you, and found the key of the door in that same place where you left it, and declared that neither your husband nor any other in the house was waking at your return'.[1] At Lille (1661) the girl Bellot, then aged fifteen, said that 'her Mother had taken her with her when she was very Young, and had even carried her in her Arms to the Witches Sabbaths or Assemblies'.[2] At Strathdown (eighteenth century) the witches went along the side of the river Avon to Craic-pol-nain, fording the river on foot.[3]

In the cases cited above there is nothing in the least bizarre or extraordinary, but there are other methods recorded of reaching the distant meetings. Sometimes the obvious means was by riding on a horse; sometimes the witches were accused, or claimed the power, of flying through the air, of riding in the air on a stick, of riding on animals or human beings, which latter were sometimes in their own natural form and sometimes enchanted into the form of animals.

The following instances are of those who rode to or from the meetings on horseback. Agnes Sampson of North Berwick (1590) said that the Devil in mans likeness met her going out in the fields from her own house at Keith, betwixt five and six at even, being her alone and commanded her to be at North-berwick Kirk the next night: And she passed there on horse-back, conveyed by her Good-son, called Iohn Couper'.[4] Boguet (1608) mentions, in passing, the fact that the witches sometimes rode on horses.[5] The Lancashire witches (1613), after the meeting at Malking Tower, 'went out of the said House in their owne shapes and likenesses. And they all, by that they were forth of the dores, gotten on Horseback, like vnto foals, some of one colour, some of another.[6] This was the usual mode of locomotion among the Lancashire witches, for Margaret Johnson (1633) said that at the meeting at Hoarstones 'there was, at yt tyme, between 30 and 40 witches, who did all ride to the said meetinge'.[7] Isobell Gowdie (1662) said, 'I haid a little horse, and wold say, " Horse

[1. Burns Begg, p. 239.

2. Bourignon, Vie, p. 211; Hale, p. 29.

3. Stewart, p. 174.

4. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 239. Spelling modernized.

5. Boguet, p. 104.

6. Potts, G4.

7. Whitaker, p. 216.]

and Hattock, in the Divellis name!"[1] The most detailed account is from Sweden (1669):

'Another Boy confessed too, that one day he was carried away by his Mistriss, and to perform the journey he took his own Father's Horse out of the Meadow where it was, and upon his return she let the Horse go in her own ground. The next morning the Boys Father sought for his Horse, and not finding it, gave it over for lost; but the Boy told him the whole story, and so his Father fetcht the Horse back again.'[2]

We now come to the marvellous and magical means of locomotion. The belief in the power of witches to ride in the air is very ancient and universal in Europe. They flew either unsupported, being carried by the Devil, or were supported on a stick; sometimes, however, an animal which they rode passed through the air. The flying was usually preceded by an anointing of the whole or part of the body with a magical ointment.

The earliest example of unsupported flying is from Paul Grilland (1537), who gives an account of an Italian witch in 1526, who flew in the air with the help of a magic ointment.[2]

Reginald Scot (1584) says that the ointment 'whereby they ride in the aire' was made of the flesh of unbaptized children, and gives two recipes:

[1] 'The fat of yoong children, and seeth it with water in a brasen vessell, reseruing the thickest of that which remaineth boiled in the bottome, which they laie up and keepe, untill occasion serueth to use it. They put hereunto Eleoselinum, Aconitum, Frondes populeas, and Soote.' [2] 'Sium, acarum vulgare, pentaphyllon, the blood of a flitter mouse, solanum somniferum, and oleum. They stampe all these togither, and then they rubbe all parts of their bodys exceedinglie, till they looke red, and be verie hot, so as the pores may be opened, and their flesh soluble and loose. They ioine herewithall either fat, or oil in steed thereof, that the force of the ointment maie the rather pearse inwardly, and so be more effectuall. By this means in a moonlight night they seeme to be carried in the aire.'[4]

[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 604.

2. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 320.

3. Bodin, Fleau, p. 178.

4. Scot, pp. 41, 184. Scot is as usual, extraordinarily in accurate in his statements. The correct formulae, as given by Wierus, will be found in Appendix V, with notes on the ingredients by Prof. A. J. Clark.]

So far this is only hearsay evidence, but there is also a certain amount of first-hand testimony, the witches declaring that they actually passed through the air above ground, or had seen others do so.

In 1598 'Thieuenne Paget racontoit, que le Diable s'apparut a elle la premiere fois en plein midy, en forme d'vn grand homme noir, & que comme elle se fut baillee a luy, il l'embrassa & l'esleva en I'air, & la transporta en la maison du prel de Longchamois . . . & puis ]a rapporta au lieu mesme, ou il l'auoit prise. Antide Colas disoit, que le soir, que Satan s'apparut; a elle en forme d'vn homme de grande stature, ayant sa barbe & ses habillemens noirs, il la transporta au Sabbat, & qu'aux autres fois, il la venoit prendre dans son lict, & l'emportoit comme si c'eust este vn vent froid, l'empoignant par la teste.'[1]

Isaac de Queyran (1609), whose evidence has already been quoted, said that the witches living at a distance flew home through the air.[2] In France (1652) 'lors qu'elle vouloit aller aux danses, elle se oindoit d'ung onguen qui lui estoit donne par vn sorcier envoye par le diable. Que lors elle s'en alloit comme ung vent aux dictes danses avecque les aultres.'[3] At Crook of Devon (1661) Bessie Henderson confessed 'that ye was taken out of your bed to that meeting in an flight'.[4] The most detail comes from an English source: the Somerset witches (1664) claimed that they habitually flew through the air by means of a magical oil and magical words. Elizabeth Style said:

'Before they are carried to their meetings, they anoint their Foreheads, and Hand-wrists with an Oyl the Spirit brings them (which smells raw) and then they are carried in a very short time, using these words as they pass, Thout, tout a tout, tout, throughout and about. And when they go off from their Meetings, they say, Rentum, Tormentum . . . all are carried to their several homes in a short space.' Alice Duke gave the same testimony, noting besides that the oil was greenish in colour. Anne Bishop, the Officer of the Somerset covens, confessed that 'her Forehead being first anointed with

[1. Boguet, p. 96.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 148.

3. H. G. van Elven, La Tradition, 1891, p. 215. Unfortunately neither name nor place are given in the transcription.

4. Burns Begg, 223.]

a Feather dipt in Oyl, she hath been suddenly carried to the place of their meeting. . . . After all was ended, the Man in black vanished. The rest were oil a sudden conveighed to their homes.'[1]

The belief that the witches actually rode in the air seated on some concrete object, such as an animal, a human being, or a stick, is both ancient and universal, and is reflected in the ecclesiastical and civil laws, of which the earliest is the decree of the ninth century, attributed to the Council of Ancyra. 'Certeine wicked women following sathans prouocations, being seduced by the illusion of diuels, beleeve and professe, that in the night times they ride abroad, with Diana, the goddesse of the Pagans, or else with Herodias, with an innumerable multitude, vpon certeine beasts . . . and doo whatsoeuer those fairies or ladies command.'[2] The laws of Lorraine (1329-46) decree that 'celui qui fera magie, sortilege, billets de sort, pronostic d'oiseau ou se vanteroit d'avoir chevauche la nurt avec Diane ou telle autre vielle qui se dit magicienne, sera banni et payera dix livres tournois'.[3]

The witches themselves confirmed the statements about riding on animals to the Sabbath. Rolande du Vernier (1598) confessed 'que lors qu'elle y fiat, elle y alla sur vn gros mouton noir, qui la portoit si viste en I'air, qu'elle ne se pouuoit recognoistre'.[4] De Lancre says that the witches 'se font porter iusqu'audit lieu, sur vne beste, qui semble parfois vn cheual, & parfoys vn homme'.[5] Margaret Johnson (1633) 'saith, if they desyre to be in any place upon a sodaine, theire devill or spirit will, upon a rodde, dogge, or any thinge els, presently convey them thither'.[6] One of Madame Bourignon's girls, then aged twelve (1661), declared that 'her said Lover came upon a little Horse, and took her by the Hand, asking her if she would be his Mistress, and she saying Ay, she was catched up into the Air with him and the other Girls, and they

[1. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 139, 141, 148-9. 151.

2. Scot, Bk. iii, p. 66; Lea, iii, p. 493. I give Scot's translation as being more racily expressed.

3. J. Bournon, p. 19.

4. Boguet, p. 96.

5. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 123.

6. Whitaker, p. 216.]

flew all together to a great Castle'.[1] The Swedish witches (1669) said:

'He set us on a Beast which he had there ready, and carried us over Churches and high walls . . . he gives us a horn with a Salve in it, wherewith we do anoint our selves; and then he gives us a Saddle, with a Hammer and a wooden nail, thereby to fix the Saddle; whereupon we call upon the Devil, and away we go . . . For their journey they said they made use of all sorts of Instruments, of Beasts, of Men, of Spits and Posts. What the manner of their journey is, God alone knows . . . Blockula is scituated in a delicate large Meadow whereof you can see no end. They went into a little Meadow distinct from the other, where the Beasts went that they used to ride on: But the Men whom they made use of in their journey, stood in the House by the Gate in a slumbering posture, sleeping against the wall.'[2]

Human beings were also said to be ridden upon in other places besides Sweden. Agnes Spark of Forfar (1661) said she 'hard people ther present did speake of Isabell Shirie, and say that shoe was the devill's horse, and that the divill did allwayes ryde upon hir, and that shoe was shoad lyke ane mare, or ane horse'.[3] Ann Armstrong, of a Northumbrian Coven (1673).

'saith, that since she gave information against severall persons who ridd her to severall places where they had conversation with the divell, she hath beene severall times lately ridden by Anne Driden and Anne Forster, and was last night ridden by them to the rideing house in the close on the common . . . Whilst she was lying in that condition [i.e. "a fitt"], which happened one night a little before Christmas, about the change of the moone, the informant see the said Anne Forster come with a bridle, and bridled her and ridd upon her crosse-leggd, till they come to (the) rest of her companions at Rideing millne bridg-end, where they usually mett. And when she light of her back, pulld the bridle of this informer's head, now in the likenesse of a horse; but, when the bridle was taken of, she stood up in her own shape . . . And when they had done, bridled this informer, and the rest of the horses, and rid home . . . Upon Collupp Munday last, being the tenth of February, the said persons met at Allensford, where this

[1. Bourignon, Vie, p, 214; Hale, p. 31.

2. Horneck, pt. ii, pp. 316, 317, 318, 319, 321.

3. Kinloch, p. 129.]

informant was ridden upon by an inchanted bridle by Michael Aynsley and Margaret his wife. Which inchanted. bridle, when they tooke it from her head, she stood upp in her owne proper person . . . On Monday last at night, she, being in her father's house, see one Jane Baites, of Corbridge, come In the forme of a gray catt with a bridle hanging on her foote, and breath'd upon her and struck her dead, and bridled her, and rid upon her in the name of the devill southward, but the name of the place she does not now remember. And the said Jane allighted and pulld the bridle of her head.'[1]

The method of locomotion which has most impressed the popular imagination and has become proverbial was riding on a stick, generally said to be a broomstick. It must, however, be remembered that one of the earliest cases on record of stick-riding does not definitely state that the witch flew through the air. This was the case of the Lady Alice Kyteler in 1324, when 'in rifleing the closet of the ladie, they found a Pipe of oyntment, wherewith she greased a stafte, upon the which she ambled and galloped through thick and thin, when and in what maner she listed'.[2] Though Holinshed is not always a reliable authority, it is worth while to compare this account with the stick-riding of the Arab witches and the tree-riding of the Aberdeen Covens (see pp. 110, 134).

The number of cases vouched for by the persons who actually performed or saw the feat of riding on a stick through the air are disappointingly few. Guillaume Edeline, prior of St. Germain-en-Laye (1453), 'se mit en telle servitude de l'ennemy, qu'il luy convenoit estre en certain lieu toutes fois qu'il estoit par ledit ennemy evocque: ouquel lieu ilz avoient accoustume faire leur consistoire, et ne luy falloit que monter sur ung balay, qu'aussi-tost il estoit prestement transporte la ou ledit consistoire se faisoit'.[3] The Guernsey witch, Martin Tulouff (1563), confessed 'q il soy est trouve avecq la dite viellesse ou elle chevaucha ung genest et luy ung aultre, et q ladte viellesse monta a mont la chemynee et q il en perdyt la veue et q elle disoet deva[n]t q monter "Va au nom du diable et luciffer dessq[n] roches et espynes" q por luy il ne pouvoet

[1. Surtees Society, xl, pp. 191-2, 194, 197 Denham Tracts, ii, pp. 299-301, 304, 307.

2. Holinshed, Ireland, p. 58.

3. Chartier, iii, p. 45; Lea, iii, p. 536.]

ainsy faire, et dt q sa mere a chevauche le genest p IV ou V foys et q il l'a veue monter a mont la cheminee'.[1] Danaeus (IS 75) sums up the evidence of the witches themselves: 'He promiseth that himself will conuay them thither, that are so weak that they cannot trauaile of themselues: which many tymes he doth by meanes of a staffe or rod, which he deliuereth vnto the[m], or promiseth to doo it by force of a certen oyntment, which he will geue them: and sometimes he offreth them an horse to ride vpon.'[2] Boguet's experience (1598) is more dramatic than that of Danaeus: 'Les autres y vont, tantost sur vn Bouc, tantost sur vn cheual, & tantost sur vn ballet, ou ramasse, sortans ces derniers de leurs maisons le plus souuent par la cheminee . . . Les vns encor se frottent auparauant de certaine graisse, & oignement: les autres ne se frottent en aucune facon." He also records the actual evidence of individual witches: Francoise Secretain said 'qu'elle avoit este vne infinite de fois au Sabbat & assemblee des Sorciers . . . & qu'elle y alloit sur vn baston blanc, qu'elle mettoit entre ses iambes.[4]--Claudine Boban, ieune fille confessa, qu'elle, & sa mere montoient sur vne ramasse,[5] & que sortans le contremont de la cheminee elles alloient par l'air en ceste facon au Sabbat.'[6] In Belgium Claire Goessen (1603) confessed 'qu'elle s'est trouvee a diverses assemblees nocturnes tenues par lui, dans lesquelles elle s'est laissee transporter au moyen d'un baton enduit d'onguent'.[7] Isobel] Gowdie (1662) was fully reported, as regards the methods of locomotion used by the witches, though in other places her evidence is unfortunately cut short:

'I haid a little horse, and wold say, "Horse and Hattock, in the Divellis name!" And than ve vold flie away, quhair ve vold, be ewin as strawes wold flie wpon an hie-way. We will flie lyk strawes quhan we pleas; wild-strawes and corne-strawes wilbe horses to ws, an ve put thaim betwixt our foot, and say, "Horse and Hattok, in the Divellis name! " . . . Quhan

[1. From a trial in the Greffe, Guernsey. 

2. Danaeus, ch. iv.

3. Boguet, p. 104.

4. Id., pp. 9, 104.

5. A marginal note against the word ramasse gives 'autrement balait, & en Lyonnois coiue'.

6. Boguet, pp. 9, 97, 104.

7. Cannaert, p. 49.]

we wold ryd, we tak windle-strawes, or been-stakes [beanstalks] and put them betwixt owr foot, and say thryse,

Horse and Hattok, horse and goe,
 Horse and pellattis, ho! ho!

and immediatlie we flie away whair euir we wold . . . All the Coeven did fflie lyk cattis, bot Barbara Ronald, in Brightmanney, and I, still [always] read on an horse, quhich ve vold mak of a straw or beein-stalk.'[1]

Julian Cox (1664) said that 'one evening she walkt out about a Mile from her own House, and there came riding towards her three persons upon three Broom-staves, born up about a yard and an half from the ground. Two of them she formerly knew, which was a Witch and a Wizzard . . . The third person she knew not. He came in the shape of a black Man.'[2] Two of the New England witches (1692) confessed to riding on a pole; Mary Osgood, wife of Capt. Osgood of Andover,' was carried through the air to five-mile pond . . . she was transported back again through the air, in company with the forenamed persons, in the same manner as she went, and believes they were carried upon a pole'.[3] Goody Foster's evidence was reported by two authors: 'One Foster confessed that the Devil carry'd them on a pole, to a Witch-meeting; but the pole broke, and she hanging about [Martha] Carrier's neck, they both fell down, and she then received an hurt by the Fall, whereof she was not at this very time recovered." The second account is substantially the same: 'In particular Goody F. said (Inter alia) that she with two others (one of whom acknowledged the same) Rode from Andover to the same Village Witch meeting upon a stick above ground, and that in the way the stick brake, and gave the said F. a fall: whereupon, said she, I got a fall and hurt of which I am still sore.'[5]

Site.--The Sabbath seems to have been originally held on a fixed site. So much so was this the case that de Lancre is

[1. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 604, 608, 613.

2. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 194.

3. Howell, vi, 660; J. Hutchinson, Hist. of Massachusetts Bay, p. 31.

4. Cotton Mather, p. 158; Burr, p. 244. See also J. Hutchinson, ii, pp. 35-6.

5. Burr, p. 418.]

able to say, 'communement ils l'appellent Aquelarre, qui signifie Lane de Bouc, comme qui diroit la lane ou lade, ou le Bouc conuoque ses assemblees. Et de faict les Sorciers qui confessent, nomme[n]t le lieu pour la chose, & la chose ou Assemblee pour le lieu: tellement qu'encore que proprement Lane de Bouc, soit le Sabbat qui se tient es landes, si est-ce qu'ils appellent aussi bien Lane de Bouc, le Sabbat qui se tient es Eglises, & es places des villages, paroisses, maisons, & autres lieux.'[1] The confusion of the original Lane de Bouc, i.e. the Sabbath or Great Assembly, with local meetings is thus shown to be due to the inaccuracy of the witches themselves; and therefore it is not surprising that de Lancre and other authors should also fail to distinguish between the two. Still, in many of the records there are certain indications by which it is possible to recognize the localities where the real Sabbath, the true Lane de Bouc, was held.

De Lancre himself notes that the Sabbath must be held near a lake, stream, or water of some kind.[2] Bodin, however, gives a better clue, 'Les lieux des assemblees des Sorciers sont notables, & signalez de quelques arbres, ou croix.'[3] The croix is clearly the Christian form of the standing stone which is a marked feature in many descriptions of the Sabbath; and Bodin's statement recalls one of the laws of Cnut in the eleventh century, 'We earnestly forbid every heathenism: heathenism is, that men worship idols; that is that they worship heathen gods, or stones, or forest trees of any kind.'

Estebene de Cambrue (1567) said, 'Le lieu de ceste grande conuocation s'appelle generalement par tout le pays la Lanne de Bouc. Ou ils se mettent a dancer a l'entour d'vne pierre, qui est plantee audit lieu, sur laquelle est assis vn grand homme noir.[4] At Poictiers in 1574 four witches, one woman and three men, said that they went 'trois fois l'an, a l'assemblee generale, ou plusieurs Sorciers se trouuoye[n]t pres d'vne croix d'vn carrefour, qui seruoit d'enseigne'.[5] At Aberdeen in 1596 the witches acknowledged that they danced round the market cross and the 'fische croce' on All-Hallow-eve; and also round

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 65.

2. Id. ib., p. 72.

3. Bodin, Fleau, p. 181.

4. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 123.

5. Bodin, p. 187.]

'ane gray stane' at the foot of the hill at Craigleauch.[1] Margaret Johnson (1633) said 'shee was not at the greate meetinge at Hoarestones at the Forest of Pendle upon All Saints day'.[2] Though no stone is actually mentioned the name suggests that there had been, or still were, one or more stones standing in that place. The Swedish witches (1669) seem to have used the same site for both kinds of meetings; Blockula seems to have been a building of some kind, set in a meadow which was entered by a painted gate; within the building were rooms and some kind of chapel for the religious service.[3] The New England recorders (1692) did not enter into much detail, but even among them the fact is mentioned that there was I a General Meeting of the Witches, in a Field at Salem-Village'.[4]

In modern times the identification of stones or of certain places with the Devil or with witch meetings is very noticeable. Out of innumerable instances I will mention only a few. In Guernsey the Catioroc is always identified as the site of the Sabbath. In Belgium 'a Godarville (Hainaut) se trouve un tunnel hante par les sorcieres; elles y tiennent leur sabbat'.[5]

'Un bloc de pierre isole et d'aspect extraordinaire est generalement appele pierre du diable. Exemples: A) le dolmen detruit pres de Namur; B) la grande pierre en forme de table a demi encastree dans la route qui conduit du village de Seny a celui d'Ellemelle (Candroz); C) le fais du diable, bloc de gres d'environ 800 metres cubes, isole dans la bruyere entre Wanne et Grand-Halleux pres de Stavelot; D) les murs du diable a Pepinster, &c.--Dans plusieurs cantons, il y a un terrain que l'on appele tchan de makral "champ des sorciers". C'est le cas pres de Remouchamps, pres de Tongres, pres de la Gileppe et pres de Grand-Halleux.'[6]

[1. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 97-8, 114, 149, 153, 165, 167.

2. Whitaker, p. 216; Baines, i, p. 607 note, where the name is given as Hartford. The importance of the stone in the Sabbath ceremonies is very marked in the account of a meeting in Northumberland (1673). Ann Armstrong declared that 'she and the rest had drawne their compasse nigh to a bridg end, and the devil placed a stone in the middle of the compasse, they sett themselves downe, and bending towards the stone, repeated the Lord's prayer backwards'. Denham Tracts, ii, p. 307; Surtees Soc., xl, p. 197.

3. Horneck, pt. ii, pp. 321, 324.

4. Mather, p. 131.

5. Harou, La Tradition, vi (1892), p. 367.

6. Monseur, pp. 2, 88.]

It is also noticeable how many of our own stone circles, such as the Nine Maidens, the Dancing Maidens, and so on, are connected by tradition with women who danced there on the Sabbath.

Date.--It appears from the evidence that certain changes took place in course of time in the religion; and, as might be expected, this is shown very markedly in the festivals. The ancient festivals remained all through, and to them were added the festivals of the succeeding religions. The original celebrations belonged to the May-November year, a division of time which follows neither the solstices nor the agricultural seasons; I have shown below (pp. 130, 178) that there is reason to believe these festivals were connected with the breeding seasons of the flocks and herds.. The chief festivals were: in the spring, May Eve (April 30), called Roodmas or Rood Day in Britain and Walpurgis-Nacht in Germany; in the autumn, November Eve (October 31), called in Britain All hallow Eve. Between these two came: in the winter, Candlemas (February 2); and in the summer, the Gule of August (August 1), called Lammas in Britain. To these were added the festivals of the solstitial invaders, Beltane at midsummer and Yule at midwinter; the movable festival of Easter was also added, but the equinoxes were never observed in Britain. On the advent of Christianity the names of the festivals were changed, and the date of one--Roodmas--was slightly altered so as to fall on May 3; otherwise the dates were observed as before, but with ceremonies of the new religion. Therefore Boguet is justified in saying that the witches kept all the Christian festivals. But the Great Assemblies were always held on the four original days, and it is this fact which makes it possible to distinguish with certainty between the Sabbath and the Esbat whenever dates are mentioned.

De Lancre, generalizing from the evidence before him, says, 'Quelquefois il y a des Sabbats & assemblees generales qui se font ordinairement les quatre festes annuelles';[1] and he also gives the words of a witch, tried in 1567: 'Estebene de Cambrue dit que les Sorcieres n'alloient en la grande assemblee & au grand Sabbat que quatre fois l'annee.'[2] The four actual

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 64.

2. Id. ib., p. 123.]

days are given in only one trial, that of Issobell Smyth at Forfar in 1661, 'By these meitings shee mett with him every quarter at Candlemas, Rud-day, Lambemas, and Hallomas',[1] but it is very clear that these were the regular days, from the mention of them individually in both England and Scotland. At North Berwick 'Barbara Napier was accused of being present at the convention on Lammas Eve at the New haven' [three Covens, i. e., thirty-nine persons, were assembled]. 'And the said Barbara was accused that she gave her bodily presence upon All Hallow even last was, 1590 years, to the frequent convention holden at the Kirk of North-Berwick, where she danced endlong the Kirk-yard, and Gelie Duncan played on a trump, John Fian, missellit, led the ring; Agnes Sampson and her daughters and all the rest following the said Barbara, to the number of seven score persons.'[2] The dittays against the witches of Aberdeen in 1596 show that 'wpoun Hallowewin last bypast, att tuelff houris at ewin or thairby, thow the said Thomas Leyis . . . withe ane gryit number of vtheris witchis, come to the mercatt and fische croce of Aberdene, wnder the conduct and gyding of the Dewill present withe you, all in company, playing befoir yow on his kynd of instrumentis. Ye all dansit about baythe the saidis croces, and the meill mercatt, ane lang space of tyme.'[3] Christen Michell and Bessie Thom had been not only at the Allhallow Eve meeting with Thomas Leyis but also at another before that. 'Thow confessis that, thrie yeris sensyn, vpon the Ruidday, airlie in the morning,' [Bessie Thom: 'befoir sone rysing'] 'thow, accumpaniet with . . . certan vtheris witchis, thy devilische adherentis, convenit vpon Sainct Katherines Hill . . . and thair, vnder the conduct of Sathan, present with yow, playing befoir yow, efter his forme, ye all dansit a devilische danse, rydand on treis, be a lang space.'[4] In 1597 Issobell Richie, Margrat Og, Helene Rogie, Jonet Lucas, Jonet Dauidsone, Issobell Oige, and Beatrice Robbie were accused of a meeting at Craigleauche, near Aberdeen: 'Thow

[1. Kinloch, p. 133.

2 Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 245. Spelling modernized.

3. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 97-8.

4. lb., i, Christen Michell, p. 165; Bessie Thom, p. 167.]

art indyttit for the being at the twa devylische dances betuixt Lumfannand and Cragleauche, with vmquhile Margerat Bane, vpon Alhalowewin last, quhair thow conferrit with the Dewill.[1] In Ayrshire in 1604 Patrik Lowrie and his companion-witches were accused that they 'att Hallowevin in the yeir of God foirsaid, assemblit thame selffis vpon Lowdon-hill, quhair thair appeirit to thame ane devillische Spreit'.[2] Margaret Johnson, of the second generation of Lancashire witches, in 1633 said 'shee was not at the greate meetinge at Hartford in the Forrest of Pendle on All Saintes day'.[3] Isobel Gowdie (Auldearne, 1662) does not enter into her usual detail, but merely states that 'a Grand Meitting vold be about the end of ilk Quarter'.[4]

Of the festivals belonging to later religions several mentions are made. De Lancre, when giving a general account of the ceremonies, says that the witches of the Basses-Pyrenees went to their assemblies at Easter and other solemn festivals, and that their chief night was that of St. John the Baptist.[5] Jane Bosdeau, from the Puy-de-Dome district (1594), bears this out, for she went to a meeting with the Devil 'at Midnight on the Eve of St. John'.[6] Antide Colas (1598) 'auoit este au Sabbat a vn chacun bon iour de I'an, comme a Noel, a Pasques, a la feste de Dieu '.[7] Both generations of Lancashire witches (1613 and 1633) kept Good Friday.[8] Jonet Watson of Dalkeith (1661) was at a meeting 'about the tyme of the last Baille-ffyre night'.[9] The Crook of Devon witches (1662) met on St. Andrew's Day, at Yule.[10] In Connecticut (1662) the 'high frolic' was to be held at Christmas.[11]

Hour.--The actual hour at which the Sabbath was held is specified in very few cases; it appears to have been a

[1. Ib., i, Issobell Richie, p. 142; Margrat Og, p. 144; Helene Rogie, p. 147; Jonet Lucas, p. 149; Jonet Dauidsone, p. 150; Issobell Oige, p. 152; Beatrice Robbie, p. 153.

2. Pitcairn, ii, p. 478.

3. Baines, i, p. 607 note.

4. Pitcairn, iii, p. 606.

5. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 398.

6. F. Hutchinson, Historical Essay, p. 42.

7. Boguet, p. 125.

8. Chetham Society, vi, p. lxxiii; Whitaker, p. 216.

9. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.

10. Burns Begg, pp. 219, 226, 237.

11. J. Hutchinson, History of Massachusetts Bay. ii, p. 17; Taylor, p.98.]

nocturnal assembly, beginning about midnight and lasting till early dawn or cockcrow. 'Le coq s'oyt par fois es sabbats sonnat la retraicte aux Sorciers."

In the Vosges in 1408 the meeting was held 'en la minuit et la deuxieme heure'.[1] In Lorraine in 1589 'Johannes a Villa und Agathina des Schneiders Francisci Weib, sagt, eine oder zwey Stunde vor Mitternacht were die bequemste Zeit darzu'.[3] At North Berwick, in 1590, Agnes Sampson arrived at the appointed place 'about eleven hours at even'.[4] The Aberdeen witches in 1,597 held their dance 'wpon Hallowewin last bypast, at tuelff houris at ewin or thairby' (or more particularly) 'betuixt tuelff & ane houris at nycht'.[5] In 1598 the Lyons witch Francoise Secretain 'adioustoit qu'elle alloit tousiours au Sabbat enuiron la minuit, & beaucoup d'autres sorciers, que i'ay eu en main, ont dit le mesme'. Antide Colas, another Lyonnaise, went to the meeting on Christmas Eve between the midnight mass and the mass at dawn.'

The only daylight meeting which can be identified as a Sabbath occurred at Aberdeen, and may have been peculiar either to the locality or to the May-Day festival; or it may have been simply the continuation of the festival till the sun rose. Christen Mitchell and Bessie Thom were each accused that 'vpon the Ruidday, thrie yeris sensyn bygane, airlie in the morning, befoir sone rysing, thow convenit vpon Sanct Katherines Hill, accumpaniet with a numer of thy devilische factioun and band, the Devill your maister in cumpanie with yow'.[7]

  

2. The Esbat

Business.--The Esbat differed from the Sabbath by being primarily, for business, whereas the Sabbath was purely religious. In both, feasting and dancing brought the proceedings to a close. The business carried on at the Esbat was usually the practice of magic for the benefit of a client or for the harming of an enemy. Sometimes the Devil appears to

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 154. 

2. Bournon, p. 23.

3. Remigius, pt. i, p. 72.

4. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 239.

5. Spalding Club i. pp. 97, 114, 165, 167.

6. Boguet, pp. 119, 125.

7. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 165, 167.]

have ordered his followers to perform some action by which to impress the imagination of those who believed in his power though they did not worship him. Very often also the Esbat was for sheer enjoyment only, without any ulterior object, as the following quotations show:

Estebene de Cambrue (1567), who is the authority for the name Esbat as applied to local meetings, says that 'les petites assemblees qui se font pres des villes ou parroisses, ou il n'y va que ceux du lieu, ils les appellent les esbats: & se font ores en vn lieu de ladicte paroisse, ores en vn autre, ou on ne faict que sauter & folastrer, le Diable ny estant auec tout son grand arroy comme aux grandes assemblees'.[1] Alesoun Peirsoun (1588) was taken by a party of men and women, under the leadership of a man in green, 'fordir nor scho could tell; and saw with thame pypeing and mirrynes and gude scheir, and wes careit to Lowtheane, and saw wyne punchounis with tassis with them '.[2] Jonet Barker (1643) said that 'scho and ye said Margaret Lauder being wthin ye said Jonet Cranstones house tua pyntis of beir war drukkin be thame thre togidder in ye said house at quhilk ye devill appeirit to thame in ye liknes of ane tryme gentill man and drank wt thame all thre and that he Imbracet the said margaret lauder in his armes at ye drinking of ye beir and put his arme about hir waist'.[3] Isobel Bairdie (1649) was accused of meeting the Devil and drinking with him, 'the devil drank to her, and she pledging him, drank back again to him, and he pledged her, saying, Grammercie, you are very welcome.[4] Janet Brown (1649) 'was charged with having held a meeting with the Devil appearing as a man, at the back of Broomhills, who was at a wanton Play with Isobel Gairdner the elder, and Janet Thomson'.[5] In Forfar Helen Guthrie (1661) confessed that she went to several meetings; at one in the churchyard 'they daunced togither, and the ground under them wes all fyre flauchter, and Andrew Watson hade his vsuale staff in his hand, altho he be a blind man yet he daunced alse nimblie as any of the companye, and made also

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 123.

2 Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p.163.

3. From the record in the Justiciary Court of Edinburgh.

4. Arnot, p. 358.

5. Id., p. 358.]

great miriement by singing his old ballads, and that Isobell Shyrrie did sing her song called Tinkletum Tankletum; and that the divill kist every one of the women'. At another meeting 'they all daunced togither a whyle, and then went to Mary Rynd's house and sat doune together at the table . . . and made them selfes mirrie; and the divell made much of them all, but especiallie of Mary Rynd, and he kist them all'.[1] Elspet Bruce of the same Coven, 'by turning the sive and sheires, reased the divell, who being werry hard to be laid againe, ther wes a meiting of witches for laying of him . . . and at this meiting they had pipe-music and dauncing'.[2] Isobell Gowdie (1662) gives an account of one of these joyous assemblies: 'We killed an ox, in Burgie, abowt the dawing of the day, and we browght the ox with ws hom to Aulderne, and did eat all amongst ws, in an hows in Aulderne, and feasted on it.'[3] Marie Lamont (1662) also enjoyed her meetings; the first at which she was present was held in Kettie Scott's house, where the devil 'sung to them, and they dancit; he gave them wyn to drink, and wheat bread to eat, and they warr all very mirrie. She confesses, at that meiting the said Kettie Scott made her first acquaintance with the devill, and caused her to drink to him, and shak hands with him.--Shee was with Katie Scot and others at a meitting at Kempoch, wher they danced, and the devil kissed them when they went away.'[4] Annaple Thomson and the other witches of Borrowstowness (1679)--

'wis at several mettings with the devill in the linkes of Borrowstonenes, and in the howsse of you Bessie Vickar, and ye did eatt and drink with the devill, and with on another, and with witches in hir howss in the night tyme; and the devill and the said Wm Craw browght the ale which ye drank, extending to about sevin gallons, from the howss of Elizabeth Hamilton; and yow the said Annaple had ane other metting abowt fyve wekes ago, when yow wis goeing to the coalhill of Grange, and he inveitted you to go alongst, and drink with him . . . And yow the said Margret Hamilton has bein the devill's servant these eight or nyne yeeres bygane; and he appered and conversed with yow at the town-well at Borrowstownes, and several tymes in yowr awin howss, and drank severall. choppens of ale with you."

[1. Kinloch, pp. 120, 121.

2. Id., p. 122.

3. Pitcairn, iii, p. 613.

4. Sharpe, pp. 131, 134.

5. Scots Magazine, 1814, p. 200.]

The magical ceremonies performed by the witches with, the help of the Devil were usually for the destruction of, or for doing harm to, an enemy. Sometimes, however, the spells were originally for the promotion of fertility, but were misunderstood by the recorders and probably by the witches themselves. Alexia Violaea (1589) said that 'nachdem sie were mit ihren Gespielen umb und umb gelauffen eine ziemliche gut Weile, habe sie pflegen in die Hohe uber sich zu werffen ein reines subtiles Pulverlein, welches ihr der Teuffel darzu gegeben habe, darvon Raupen, Kaffern, Heuschrecken, und dergleichen andere Beschadigung mehr, so Hauffenweise wuchsen, dass die Acker darmit in einem Augenblick uberall beschmeist wurden'.[1] Isobel Gowdie's magical charm (1662) to come under this category:

We went be-east Kinlosse, and ther we yoaked an plewghe of paddokis. The Devill held the plewgh, and Johne Yownge in Mebestowne, our Officer, did drywe the plewghe. Paddokis did draw the plewgh, as oxen; qwickens wer sowmes, a riglen's horne wes a cowter, and an piece of an riglen's horne wes an sok. We went two seuerall tymes abowt; and all we of the Coven went still wp and downe with the plewghe, prayeing to the Divell for the fruit of that land.'[2]

The greater number of meetings were occupied with business of a magical character with the intention of harming certain specified persons; though any other kind of business was also transacted. The North Berwick witches opened the graves which the Devil indicated in order to obtain the means of making charms with dead men's bones; on another occasion they attempted to wreck a ship by magic.[3] The Lang Niddry witches (1608) went to the house of Beigis Tod, where they drank, and there christened a cat.[4] The Lancashire witches (1613) met at Malking Tower for two purposes; the first was to give a name to the familiar of Alison Device, which could not be done as she was not present, being then in prison; the second was to arrange a scheme or plot for the release of Mother Demdike, the principal witch of the community, then a prisoner in Lancaster Castle; the plot involved

[1. Remigius, pt. i, p. 91.

2. Pitcairn, iii, p. 603; see below, p. 171.

3. Id. pt. ii, pp. 210-11, 217, 239.

4. Id., ii, pp. 542-3.]

the killing of the gaoler and governor, and the blowing up of the castle.[1] In 1630 Alexander Hamilton was tried in Edinburgh,

'the said Alexr Hamiltoun haifing concaivet ane deidlie haitrent agains umqle Elizabeth Lausone Lady Ormestoun younger becaus the said Alexr being at her zet asking for almous she choisit him therfra saying to him "away custroun carle ye will get nothing heir". The said Alexr therupon in revenge therof accompaneit wt tua wemen mentionet in his depostiones come to Saltoun woid quhair he raisit the devill and quha appeirit to him and his associattis in the likenes of ane man cled in gray and the said Alexr and his associattis haifing schawin to him the caus of thair coming desyring him to schaw to thame be quhat meanes thay micht be revendget upon the said Lady."

Margaret Johnson (1633) deposed that 'She was not at the great witch-meeting on All Saints' Day, but was at a smaller meeting the Sunday after, 'where there was, at yt tyme, between 30 and 40 witches, who did all ride to the said meetinge, and the end of theire said meeting was to consult for the killinge and hurtinge of men and beasts.'[3] The Forfar witches (1661) claimed to have wrecked a ship.[4] Isobel Gowdie (1662) is as usual very dramatic in her account; on one occasion the witches met to make a charm against the minister of Auldearne, Mr. Harie Forbes: 'Satan wes with ws and learned ws the wordis to say thryse ower. Quhan we haid learned all thes wordis from the Divell, we fell all down wpon owr kneis, with owr hear down ower owr showlderis and eyes, and owr handis lifted wp, and owr eyes stedfastlie fixed wpon the Divell; and said the forsaidis wordis thryse ower to the Divell, striktlie, against Maister Harie Forbes his recowering from the said seiknes.' When making an image only a few of the witches were present with the Devil.[5] Marie Lamont (1662) claimed that her Coven raised storms on two occasions; and on a third, they in the likeness of 'kats', and the Devil as a man with cloven feet, made a charm with 'wyt

[1. Potts, C3, G3, 12, 13.

2. From the trial of 'Alexr Hamiltoun, warlok', in the Justiciary Court, Edinburgh.

3. Whitaker, p. 216.

4. Kinloch, p. 122.

5. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 609, 613.]

sand' against Blackhall younger and Mr. John Hamilton.[1] Amongst the most detailed accounts of the wax or clay images, and of the ritual for killing the person whom the image represented, are those of the Somerset witches[2] (1664). The baptism of the figure is an interesting point. The Paisley witches (1678) had a meeting to make a clay figure in order to kill an enemy of the witch in whose house the meeting was held.[3] At Borrowstowness part of the accusation was that ( ye and ilk ane of vow was at ane metting with the devill and other witches at the croce of Murestane, upon the threttein of October last, where you all danced and the devill acted the pyiper, and where yow indewored to have destroyed Andrew Mitchell'.[4] In New England the witches accused George Burroughs 'that he brought Poppets to them, and Thorns to stick into those Poppets'.[5]

At the Esbats it is also evident that the Devil wished to maintain an appearance of miraculous power not only before the world at large, but in the eyes of the witches as well. This will account for the meetings on the sea-shore in raging storms when vessels were liable to be wrecked, and there are also many indications that the destruction of an enemy was effected by means more certain than the making and pricking of a wax or clay figure, means which were used after the figure had been made. Some of the methods of maintaining this prestige are of the simplest, others are noted without any explanation: 'Satan faict en ce lieu [le Sabbat] tant de choses estrages & nouuelles que leur simplicite & abus prend cela pour quelques miracles.'[6] At Forfar (1661) the means of obtaining the result are apparent; during a great storm the Devil and the witches destroyed the bridge of Cortaquhie, and the destruction was so arranged as to appear to have been effected by magical power; but Helen Guthrie confessed that 'they went to the bridge of Cortaquhie with intentione to pull it doune, and that for this end shee her selfe, Jonnet Stout, and others of them, did thrust ther shoulderis againest the bridge, and that the divelt wes bussie among them acting

[1. Sharpe, pp. 132-4.

2. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 137-8, 164.

3. Id., pt. ii, p. 294.

4. Scots Magazine, 1814, p. 201.

5. Mather, p. 125. 

5. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 135.]

his pairt'. Issobell Smyth, who also assisted on the occasion, said, 'Wee all rewed that meitting, for wee hurt our selves lifting.'[1] Still more simple was the method of destroying the harvest of a field at Crook of Devon, where Bessie Henderson 'confessed and declared that Janet Paton was with you at ane meeting when they trampit down Thos. White's rie in the beginning of harvest, 1661, and that she had broad soales and trampit down more nor any of the rest'.[3] The Devil of Mohra in Sweden cared only to impress his followers; when the wall which they were building fell down 'some of the Witches are commonly hurt, which makes him laugh, but presently he cures them again'.[3]

Site.--In some places the Esbat was held at a fixed site, in others the site varied from week to week. In both cases, the locality was always in the near neighbourhood of the village whose inhabitants attended the meeting.

'Pour le lieu ordinaire c'est es carrefours, com[m]e disoit Isaac de Queyran, qui deposoit y auoir este au carrefour du Palays Galienne, pres la ville de Bourdeaux; ou aux places des paroisses au deuant des Eglises, & le plus souuent au droict de la grand' porte, si l'Eglise est plantee au milieu de la place comme elle est souuent, afin que le Diable plante sa chaire tout vis a vis du grand autel ou on met le Sainct sacrement: comme il est en la place d'Ascain, ou tous les tesmoins du lieu, nous ont dict que le Sabbat se faisoit. Il a aussi accoustume les tenir en quelque lieu desert, & sauuage, comme au milieu d'vne lande; & encore en lieu du tout hors de passage, de voisinage, d'habitation, & de rencontre: Et communement ils s'appellent Aquelarre[4] qui signifie Lane de Bouc, comme qui diroit la lane ou lade, ou le Bouc conuoque ses assemblees.'[5]

Danaeus emphasizes the variation of both site and date: 'They meete togither in certen apointed places, not al of them togither, nor at once, but certen of them whom he pleaseth to call, so that he apointeth where they shall meete, and at what houre of the day, or of the nighte.'[6] The Windsor

[1. Kinloch, pp. 122, 133.

2. Burns Begg, p. 224.

3. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 323.

4. The full name is Aquelarre de verros, prado del Cabron.

5. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 64-5.

5. Danaeus, ch. iv.]

witches, however, 'did accustome to meete within the backeside of Maister Dodges in the Pittes there'.[1] Boguet's evidence also points to there being a settled site for the Esbat in each village:

'Les Sorciers du coste de Longchamois s'assembloient en vn pre, qui est sur le grand chemin tirant a S. Claude, ou l'on voit les ruines d'vne maison. Ceux du coste de Coirieres tenoient leur Sabbat, sous le village de Coirieres proche l'eau, en vn lieu appelle es Combes, qui est du tout sans chemin. [Autres] se retrouuoient en vn lieu dict es Fontenelles, sous le village de Nezan, qui est vn lieu assez descouuert . . . le Sabbat des Sorciers de la Mouille se tenoit en la Cour du Priore du mesme lieu.'[2]

Jane Bosdeau (1594) went twice a week regularly to 'a Rendezvous of above Sixty Witches at Puy de dome'.[3] And the Swedish witches went so uniformly to one place that there was a special building for their rites:

'They unanimously confessed that Blockula is scituated in a delicate large Meadow whereof you can see no end. The place or house they met at, had before it a Gate painted with divers colours; through this Gate they went into a little Meadow distinct from the other . . . in a huge large Room of this House, they said, there stood a very long Table, at which the Witches did sit down: And that hard by this Room was another Chamber where there were very lovely and delicate Beds.'[4]

On the whole the weight of evidence in England and Scotland is in favour of Danaeus's statement that there was no fixed site, though this should be taken as referring to the local meetings only, not to the Great Assemblies. The Forfar witch-trials give much information: Helen Guthrie

'wes at a meitting in the church yeard of Forfar in the Holfe therof . . . Betwixt the oatseid and the bearseid [barleysowing], she wes at ane other meitting at the Pavilione hollis . . . This same year, betwixt the oatseid and bearseid, she was at a thrid meiting in the church yeard of Forfar in the holfe thereof, about the same tyme of the night as at the [former] meitings, viz. at midnight.-About the beginning of the last oat seid

[1. Rehearsall, p. 7.

2 Boguet, pp. 126-7.

3. F. Hutchinson, Historical Essay, p. 43.

4. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 321.]

tyme, Isabell Syrie did cary hir [Jonet Howat] to the Insch within the loch of Forfar, shoe saw at this tyme, about threteen witches with the divill, and they daunced togither . . . About four wiekes after the forsaid meiting in the Insch, the said Isabell Syrie caried hir to ane other meiting at Muryknowes. About three and a halfe yeares since, she [Elspet Alexander] was at a meiting with the divill at Peterden, midway betwixt Forfar and Dondie . . . About four wiekes after this mieting at Petterden, shoe was at ane second mieting at the Muryknowes . . . shoe was present at ane thrid mieting near Kerymure.'[1]

Isobel Gowdie's evidence is detailed as usual: 'The last tyme that owr Coven met, we, and an vther Coven, wer dauncing at the Hill of Earlseat; and befor that, betwixt Moynes and Bowgholl; and befor that we ves beyond the Meikleburne; and the vther Coven being at the Downie-hillis we went from beyond the Meikle-burne, and went besyd them, to the howssis at the Wood-end of Inshoch . . . Befor Candlemas, we went be-east Kinlosse.'[2] The same facts were elicited from the Kinross-shire witches; Robert Wilson 'confessed ye had ane meeting with the Devill at the Stanriegate, bewest the Cruick of Devon . . . the Devil appointed them to meet at the Bents of Balruddrie'.--Margaret Huggon confessed 'that ye was at another meeting with Sathan at the Stanriegate, bewest the Cruik of Devon . . . lykeways ye confessed 'ye was at another meeting with Satan at the Heathrie Knowe be-east the Cruik of Devon, where the Gallows stands a meeting at the back of Knocktinnie at the Gaitside . . . and another at the bents of Newbiggin'.--Janet Brugh 'confessed that ye was at ane meeting at Stanriegate . . . ye confessed that about Yule last bypast ye was at ane meeting with Sathan at Turfhills . . . lykeways ye confessed that ye was at the Bents of Balruddrie and Gibson's Craig, where Sathan was present at them both'.--Christian Grieve 'freely confessed that ye was at ane meeting with Sathan at the back of Andrew Dowie his house".[3] The Somerset witches (1664) varied in this respect. Those of Wincanton met in different places: Elizabeth Style 'hath been at several general meetings in the night at High Common, and a Common near Motcombe, at a place near Marnhull, and at

[1. Kinloch, pp. 120 seq.

2. Pitcairn, iii, p. 603.

3. Burns Begg, pp. 226 seq.]

other places'.--Alice Duke 'hath been at several meetings in Lie Common, and other places in the night'. But the Brewham Coven appear to have met commonly at Hussey's Knap in Brewham. Forest.[1]

Occasionally a reason is given for the change of site. 'Parfois vn Sabbat finy a vn coin de paroisse, on s'en va le tenir a vne autre, ou le Diable mene les mesmes personnes: mais la, on y en rencontre d'autres.'[2] Sometimes also a sidelight is thrown upon these gatherings, which explains the fact that in many cases the witches said that they did not know all the people present at a given meeting:

'Antoine Tornier, Et Iaquema Paget ont confesse, que comme elles retournoient a certain iour par ensemble de glanner, passans au long du pre de Longchamois, elles apperceurent que l'on y tenoit le Sabbat; Surquoy elles poserent bas leurs fardeaux, & allerent au lieu predict, ou elles firent comme les autres, & puis se retirerent chacune en leurs maisons, apres auoir reprins leurs fardeaux.'[3]

The Salem Witches (1692) met 'upon a plain grassy place, by which was a Cart path and sandy ground in the path, in which were the tracks of Horses feet'.4

Date and Hour.--There was no fixed day or hour for the Esbat, and in this it differed from the Sabbath, which was always at night. The Devil let his followers know the time, either by going to them himself or by sending a message by the officer. The message might be by word of mouth, or by some signal understood by the initiated.

Though there was no fixed day for the Esbat, it seems probable that one day in the week was observed in each locality.

Danaeus, in his general survey of the cult in 1575, says: 'He apointeth where they shall meete, and at what houre of the day, or of the night: wherein they haue no surenes, nor certentie. For these meetinges are not weekely, nor monthly, nor yeerely, but when and how often it shall seeme good to this their maister. And many times himself warneth them to

[1. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 140, 148, 156, 161.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 64.

3. Boguet, p. 102.

4. Burr, p. 418.]

meete, sometimes hee apoynteth others to warne them in his staede. But when he doth it himself, he appeareth. vnto them in likenesse of a man.'[1] De Lancre says that in the Basses-Pyrenees 'le lieu ou on le trouue ordinairement s'appelle Lanne de bouc, & en Basque Aquelarre de verros, prado del Cabron, & la les Sorciers le vont adorer trois nuicts durant, celle du Lundy, du Mercredy, & du Vendredy.--Les iours ordinaires de la conuocation du Sabbat, ou pour mieux dire les nuicts, sont celles du Mercredy venant au Ieudy, & du Vendredy venant au Samedy.--Catherine de Naguille de la paroisse d'Vstarits, aagee de onze ans, & sa compagne, nous ont asseure qu'elles auoie[n]t este au Sabbat en plein midy." Jane Bosdeau (1594) 'every Wednesday and Friday met a Rendezvous of aboue Sixty Witches at Puy de dome'.[3] Boguet says that the day of the Sabbath was variable, usually Thursday night;[4] while, according to Bodin, the most frequent was 'entre la nuict du Lundi & Mardi'.[5] Boguet also goes on to say, 'Le Sabbat ne se tient pas tousiours de nuict, ains que les Sorciers y vont aussi quelquefois de iour, selon que firent Antoine Tornier, & Iaquema Paget, & plusieurs autres de leur secte le confessent.'[6] The Lorraine witches also had the same custom:

'Alle zugleich, so viel ihrer bisher in Lotharingen peinlich sind verhoret worden, bekandten, dass solche Versammlung in keiner andern Nacht, als welche zu nechst vor dem Donnerstag oder Sambstag hergehet, gehalten werden.--Johannes a Villa und Agathina des Schneiders Francisci weib, sagt, eine oder zwey Stunde vor Mitternacht, were die bequemste Zeit darzu, und zwar nicht allein zu diesen Gespensten, sondern auch sonsten zu allerhand Gespensten, Bollergeisten, Irrgeisten, &c. Aber die Stunde nach Mitternacht diene nicht darzu.'[7]

The English and Scotch evidence is to the same effect. The witches 'are likewise reported to have each of them a Spirit or Imp attending on, or assigned to them. . . . These give the Witches notice to be ready on all Solemn appointments, and meetings, which are ordinarily on Tuesday or Wednesday night'.[8] Janet Breadheid of the Auldearne Coven emphasizes

[1. Danaeus, ch, iv.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 62, 398.

3. F. Hutchinson, p, 43.

4. Boguet, p. 124.

5. Bodin, Fleau, p. 182.

6. Boguet, p. 123.

7. Remigius, pp. 71, 72.

8. Pleasant Treatise, p. 4.]

the irregularity of the dates: 'Efter that, we vold still meit euerie ten, twelve, or twantie dayes continwally.'[1] Marie Lamont merely notes that the meetings were at night: 'The devil came to Kattrein Scott's house in the midst of the night. . . . When she had been at a mietting sine Zowle last, with other witches, in the night, the devill convoyed her home in the dawing.'[2] The Somerset witches had no special night: 'At every meeting before the Spirit vanisheth away, he appoints the next meeting place and time,'[3] and Mary Green went to a meeting 'on Thursday Night before Whitsunday last'.[4] At Paisley the meeting was on Thursday, the 4th of January, 1678, in the night, in John Stuart's house.[5] The Swedish witches were much harder worked: 'whereas formerly one journey a week would serve his turn, from their own Town to the place aforesaid, now they were forced to run to other Towns and places for Children, and that some of them did bring with them some fifteen, some sixteen Children every night.'[6]

The more modern examples suggest that the date became more fixed: 'On croit que c'est toujours un vendredi soir que les sorciers et sorcieres se reunissent.'[7] 'Sorciers et sorcieres vont au sabbat le vendredi, a travers les airs.'[8]

[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 617.

2. Sharpe, pp. 131, 133.

3. Glanvil, pt, ii, p. 139.

4. Id., pt. ii, p. 164.

5. Id., pt. ii, pp. 293, 297.

6. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 318.

7. Monseur, p. 87.

8. Lemoine, La Tradition, 1897, vi, p. 106.]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

V. THE RITES

  

1. General

THE exact order of the ceremonies is never given and probably varied in different localities, but the general rule of the ritual at the Sabbath seems to have been that proceedings began by the worshippers paying homage to the Devil, who sat or stood in a convenient place. The homage consisted in renewing the vows of fidelity and obedience, in kissing the Devil on any part of his person that he chose to indicate, and sometimes in turning a certain number of times widdershins. Then followed the reports of all magic worked since the previous Sabbath, either by individuals or at the Esbats, and at the same time the witches consulted the Master as to their cases and received instructions from him how to proceed; after which came admissions to the society or marriages of the members. This ended the business part of the meeting. Immediately after all the business was transacted, the religious service was celebrated, the ceremonial of which varied according to the season of the year; and it was followed by the 'obscene' fertility rites. The whole ceremony ended with feasting and dancing, and the assembly broke up at dawn.

This was apparently the usual course of the ritual of the Sabbath; the Esbat had less ceremonial, and the religious service was not performed. The Devil himself often went round and collected the congregation; and, not being in his 'grand arroy', he appeared as a man in ordinary dress. Instead of the religious service with the adoration of the god, the witches worked the spells and charms with which they bewitched or unbewitched their enemies and friends, or they exercised new methods which they learnt from their Master, or received instructions how to practise the arts of healing and secret poisoning, of causing and blasting fertility.

There are a few general accounts of the usual course of the Sabbath ritual. Danaeus (1575) does not distinguish clearly between the two classes of meetings, but at the same time he seems to have realized that a certain order was followed:

'Satan calleth them togither into a Diuelish Sinagoge, and that he may also vnderstand of them howe well and diligently they haue fulfilled their office of intoxicating committed vnto them, and who they haue slaine wherefore they meete togither in certen apointed places . . . Whe[n] they meete together he appeareth visibly vnto them in sundrie fourmes, as the head and chiefe of that congregation. . . . Then doe they all repeate the othe which they haue geuen vnto him, in acknowledging him to be their God, the[n] fal they to dauncing . . . Whiche beeing all finished, then he demaundeth agayne of them what they woulde require of him. . . . Vnto some he geueth poysons ready made, and others he teacheth howe to make and mingle new. . . . Finally, if in any thing they neede his presence and helpe, by couenant he promiseth to be present with them.'[1]

Boguet (1589) is more exact, as he obtained his knowledge at first hand:

'Les Sorciers estans assemblez en leur Synagogue adorent premierement Satan . . . ils luy offrent des chandelles, & le baisent aux parties honteuses de derriere. Quelquefois encor il tient vne image noire, qu'il faut baiser aux Sorciers. . . . Les Sorciers en second lieu dansent. . . . Les danses finies, les Sorciers viennent a s'accoupler. . . . Les Sorciers, apres s'estre veautrez parmy les plaisirs immondes de la chair, banquettent & se festoient. . . . Les Sorciers rendent conte a Satan de ce qu'ils ont fait des la derniere assemblee. . . . Il fait renoncer de nouueau a ces miserables, Dieu, Chresme, & Baptesme. Il leur fait rafraischir le serment solennel qu'ils ont fait.'[2]

The English account is put together from foreign sources to a great extent:

'They are carryed out of the house, either by the Window, Door, or Chimney, mounted on their Imps. . . . Thus brought to the designed place, they find a great number of others arrived there by the same means: who, before Lucifer takes his place in his throne as King, do make their accustomed homage, Adoring, and Proclaiming him their Lord, and rendring him all Honour. This Solemnity being finished, they sit to Table where no delicate meats are wanting. . . . At the sound of many pleasant Instruments the table is taken away, and the pleasant consort invites them to a Ball. . . . At

[1. Danaeus, ch. iv.

2. Boguet, pp. 131-9.]

the last, the lights are put out. The Incubus's in the shape of proper men satisfy the desires of the Witches, and the Succubus's serve for whores to the Wizards. At last before Aurora brings back the day, each one mounts on his spirit, and so returns to his respective dwelling place. . . . Sometimes at their solemn assemblies, the Devil commands, that each tell what wickedness he hath committed. . . . When the assembly is ready to break up, and the Devil to dispatch them, he publisheth this law with a loud voice, Revenge your selves or else you shall dye, then each one kissing the Posteriors of the Devil returns upon their aiery Vehicles to their habitations.'[1]

  

2. Homage

In some places the witches saluted their Chief by falling on their knees, and also by certain manual gestures; in other places by curtsies and obeisances. In Scotland, France, and Belgium, another rite was also in vogue, that of kissing the Devil on any part of his person that he might direct. At Como and Brescia the witches, 'when they paid reverence to the presiding demon, bent themselves backwards, lifting a foot in the air forwards.'[2]

Remigius, writing of the Lorraine witches in 1589, says:

'Es erzehlte die Beatrix Bayona dass einer unter ihnen allen der Oberster wer, welcher in einer Zell auff einem lichen Stuhl sasse, sehr ernsthafftig und prachtig heraus, zu demselbigen trete je einer nach dem andern, mit Furcht und Zittern, falle ihm zum Zeichen seiner Ehrerbietung fur die Fusse, und umbfange ihn mit aller Demuth und Reverentz.--Erstlich fallen sie nieder auff ihre Knie; darnach legen sie die Hande ausswendig zusammen, als diejenigen pflegen zu thun, welche obtestiren, jedoch auff dem Rucken und verkehrter Weise, sie haben den Rucken zu ihm gewandt, bleiben so lang kniend, biss er selbsten zu ihnen sagt, class es genugsam sey.'[3]

In Somerset (1664) the witches always mention the salutation:

'At their first meeting the Man in black bids them welcome, and they all make low obeysance to him.--[Elizabeth Style, Alice Duke, Anne Bishop, Mary Penny] met about nine of the Clock in the Night, in the Common near Trister Gate,

[1. Pleasant Treatise, pp. 5-7.

2. Lea, iii, p. 501.

3. Remigius, pt. i, pp. 89, 91.]

where they met a Man in black Clothes with a little Band, to whom they did Courtesie and due observance.--Mary Green [went with others to] Hussey's Knap in the Forrest in the Night time, where met them the Fiend in the shape of a little Man in black Clothes with a little band, to him all made obeysances. . . . On Thursday Night before Whitsunday last [she met several others] and being met they called out Robin. Upon which instantly appeared a little Man in black Clothes to whom all made obeysance, and the little Man put his hand to his Hat, saying, How do ye? speaking low but big. Then all made low obeysances to him again.'[1]

As late as the eighteenth century there is a similar account.

Danaeus (1575) and Cooper (1617) are the only writers who mention the kiss in their general accounts of the ceremonies. The former says: 'Then biddeth lie the[m] that they fall down & worship him, after what matter and gesture of body he pleaseth, and best liketh of. Thus some of them falle downe at his knees, some offre vnto him black burning cadles, other kisse him in some part of his body where he appeareth visibly.'[3] Cooper mentions it as part of the admission ceremony: 'Secondly, when this acknowledgement is made, in testimoniall of this subiection, Satan offers his back-parts to be kissed of his vassall.'[4]

The ceremony is one of the earliest of which there is any record. In 1303 a Bishop of Coventry was accused at Rome of a number of crimes, amongst others 'quod diabolo homagium fecerat, et eum fuerit osculatus in tergo'.[1] Guillaume Edeline was tried in 1453; he was 'docteur en theologie, prieur de S. Germain en Laye, et auparavant Augustin, et religieux de certaines aultres ordres. Confessa ledit sire Guillaume, de sa bonne et franche voulente, avoir fait hommage audit ennemy en l'espece et semblance d'ung mouton, en le baisant par le fondement en signe de reverence et d'hommage.'[6] Martin Tulouff, tried in Guernsey in 1563, went to a meeting, 'ou ly avoet chinq ou vi chatz, d'ou il y en avoet ung qui estoit noir, qui menoit la dance, et dt q il estoit sur ses pieds plat, et que ladite Collennette le besa p de derriere, et luy p la crysse.

[1. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 137, 139, 163, 164.

2. W. G. Stewart, p. 175.

3. Danaeus, ch. ii.

4. Cooper, p. 90.

5. Rymer, i, p. 956.

6. Chartier, iii, p. 45.]

Et luy dist ladite vieillesse q ledit chat estoit le diable.'[1] Estebene de Cambrue, in 1567, described the ceremonies at the Sabbath: 'Ils se mettent a dancer a l'entour d'une pierre, sur laquelle est assis vn grand homme noir, qu'elles appellent Mosieur, & chacun de l'assemblee luy va baiser le derriere.'[2] The witches of Poictiers in 1574 'dansoyent a l'entour du bouc: puis vn chacun luy baisoit le derriere'.[3] The same ceremony took place at North Berwick in 1590: 'Now efter that the deuell had endit his admonitions, he cam down out of the pulpit, and caused all the company to com and kiss his ers, quhilk they said was cauld lyk yce.'[4] Jane Bosdeau confessed that at meetings at Puy-de-Dome in 1594 'all the Witches had Candles which they lighted at his, and danced in a Circle Back to Back. They kiss'd his Backside, and pray'd that he would help them.'[5] Andro Man of Aberdeen in 1597 confessed 'that all thay quha convenis with thame kissis Christsonday and the Quene of Elphenis airss'.[1] Rolande de Vernois in 1598 'confessa que le Diable se presenta pour lors au Sabbat en forme d'vn gros chat noir. Que tous ceux, qui estoient au Sabbat, alloient baiser ce gros chat noir au derriere.'[7] Cornelie van Beverwyck, aged 75, at Ghent in 1598, was accused that 'vous n'avez pas craint de vous agenouiller devant lui, de lui rendre hommage et de baiser son derriere en signe de soumission'.[1] Claire Goessen in 1603 went to 'l'assemblee nocturne de Lembeke, ou, apres la danse, elle a, comme tous les assistans, baise un bouc a l'endroit de sa queue'.[9] Jeannette d'Abadie in 1609 in the Basses-Pyrenees said, regarding the renunciation which she made on admission, 'il luy faisoit renouueller toutes les fois qu'elle alloit au sabbat, puis elle l'alloit baiser au derriere.'[10] At the celebrated trial of Louis Gaufredy at Aix in 1610, Magdalene de Demandouls gave a detailed account of the homage rendered by the witches:

[1. From a trial in the Guernsey Greffe.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 123.

3. Bodin, p. 187.

4. Melville, p. 396; see also Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 210-12, 239, 246.

5. F. Hutchinson, p. 43.

6. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 121, 125.

7. Boguet, p. 411.

8. Cannaert, p. 46.

9. Id., p. 50.

10. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 131.]

'First the hagges and witches, who are people of a sordid and base condition, are the first that come to adore the Prince of the Synagogue, who is Lucifers lieftenant, and he that now holdeth that place is Lewes Gaufridy: then they adore the Princesse of the Synagogue who is a woman placed at his right hand. Next they goe and worship the Diuell who is seated in a Throne like a Prince. In the second place come the Sorcerers and Sorceresses, who are people of a middle condition, and these performe the same kind of adoration with the former, kneeling vpon the ground, but not prostrating themselves as doe the other; although they kisse the hands and feet of the Diuell as the first likewise doe. In the third place come the Magicians who are Gentlemen and people of a higher ranke.'[1]

Isobel Gowdie of Auldearne in 1662 said, 'Somtym he vold be lyk a stirk, a bull, a deir, a rae, or a dowg, and he vold hold wp his taill wntill we wold kiss his arce.'[2] The explanation of this rite is given in the French authorities:

'Le Diable estoit en forme de bouc, ayant vne queue, & au dessoubs vn visage d'homme noir, ou elle fut contrainte le baiser.--[Elle] depose, Que la premiere fois qu'elle luy fut presentee elle le baisa a ce visage de derriere au dessoubs d'vne grande queue: qu'elle l'y a baise par trois fois, & qu'il auoit aussi ce visage faict comme le museau d'vn bouc.--Il a vne grande queue au derriere, & vne forme de visage au dessoubs: duquel visage il ne profere aucune parole, ains luy sert pour le donner a baiser a ceux qui bon luy semble.--Es festes solemnelles on baisoit le Diable au derriere, mais les notables sorcieres le baisoient au visage.'[3] The two faces are thus distinctly vouched for, and the use of them seems to have been to distinguish the position of the witch in the society. The mask or disguise is clearly indicated in the evidence of Isaac de Queyron, who with others 'le baiserent a vne fesse qui estoit blanche & rouge, & auoit la forme d'vne grande cuisse d'vn homme, & estoit velue'.[4]

The Devil was also kissed on other parts of his person. Marion Grant of the Aberdeen witches (1597) confessed that he 'causit the kis him in dyvers pairtis, and worship him on thy kneis as thy lord'.[5] Some of the Lyons witches 'le baiserent aux parties honteuses de derriere: les autres le

[1. Michaelis, Historie, pp. 334-5.

2. Pitcairn, iii, p. 613.

3. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 68, 126, 128.

4. Id. ib., p. 148.

5. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 171.]

baisent sur l'espaule.'[1] Jeannette d'Abadie in the Basses-Pyrenees (1609) confessed 'que le Diable luy faisoit baiser son visage, puis le nombril, puis le membre viril, puis son derriere'.[2] In connexion with this last statement, it is worth comparing Doughty's account of an Arab custom: 'There is a strange custom, (not only of nomad women, but in the Arabic countries even among Christians, which may seem to remain of the old idolatry among them,) of mothers, their gossips, and even young maidens, visiting married women to kiss with a kind of devotion the hammam of the male children.'[3]

  

2. The Dances

Dances as an important part of fertility rites are too well known to need description. The witches' dances, taken in conjunction with the dates of the four great Sabbaths of the year, point to the fact that they also were intended to promote fertility. There were several forms of ritual dances, varying apparently according to the form of fertility required, whether of crops, animals, or human beings. The jumping dance seems to have had for its object the growth of the crops; the higher the performers jumped the higher the crops would grow. The so-called 'obscene' or 'indecent' dance was for the promotion of fertility among animals and women. When the dancers were disguised as animals, the dance was for the increase of the animals represented; when undisguised, for the fertility of human beings.

Although the dances took place at English witch meetings, they are merely mentioned and not described. The Scotch trials give rather fuller accounts, but the chief details are from France.

The two principal forms of the dance were the ring-dance and the follow-my-leader dance, but there was also a very complicated form which was not understood by the Inquisitors, who therefore dismiss it with the words 'tout est en confusion'. It still survives, however, in the Basses-Pyrenees, in some of the very villages which were inhabited by witches in the

[1. Boguet, p. 131.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 721 131

3. Doughty, Travels in Arabia Deserta, i, 89.]

sixteenth century--those witches whose proceedings de Lancre describes so vividly.[1]

The ring dances were usually round some object; sometimes a stone, sometimes the Devil stood or was enthroned in the middle. Thomas Leyis, with a great number of other witches, 'came to the Market and Fish Cross of Aberdeen, under the conduct and guiding of the Devil present with you, all in company, playing before you on his kind of instruments: Ye all danced about both the said crosses, and the meal market, a long space of time; in the which Devil's dance, thou the said Thomas was foremost and led the ring, and dang the said Kathren Mitchell, because she spoiled your dance, and ran not so fast about as the rest. Testified by the said Kathrein Mitchell, who was present with thee at the time forsaid dancing with the Devil.'[2] Margaret Og was indicted for going to Craigleauch 'on Hallow even last, and there, accompanied by thy own two daughters, and certain others, your devilish adherents and companions, ye danced all together, about a great stone, under the conduct of Satan, your master, a long space'.[3] Jonet Lucas was accused of 'danceing in ane ring' on the same occasion.[4] Beatrice Robbie was 'indited as a notorious witch, in coming, under the conduct of the Devil thy master, with certain others, thy devilish adherents, to Craigleauche, and there dancing altogether about a great stone, a long space, and the Devil your master playing before you'.[5] In the Basses-Pyrenees, 'Ils se mettent a dancer a l'entour d'une pierre, qui est plantee audit lieu, sur laquelle est assis un grand homme noir.'[6] Jane Bosdeau, who 'confessed freely and without Torture and continued constant in it in the midst of the Flames in which she was burnt', said that she had been to a witch-meeting, 'and danced in a circle back to back'.[7]

'Les Sorciers dansent, & font leurs danses en rond, doz contre doz. Les boiteux y vont plus dispostement que les

[1. Moret, Mysteres, Egytiens, pp. 247 seq.

2. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 97-8. Spelling modernized.

3. lb., i, p. 144. Spelling modernized.

4. Ib., p. 149.

5. lb., p. 153. Spelling modernized.

6. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 123.

7. F. Hutchinson, Historical Essay, p. 43.]

autres [et] incitoient les autres a sauter & danser.[1] . . . Quelquefois, mais rarement, ils dansent deux a deux, & par fois l'vn ca & l'autre la, & tousiours en confusion: estans telles danses semblables a celles des Fees, vrais Diables incorporez, qui regnoient il n'y a pas log temps.'[2] 'On y dance tousiours le dos tourne au centre de la dance, qui faict que les filles sont si accoutumees a porter les mains en arriere en cette dace ronde, qu'elles y trainent tout le corps, & luy donnent vn ply courbe en arriere, ayant les bras a demy tournez: si bien que la plupart ont le ventre communement grand, enfIe & avance, & vn peu penchant sur le deuant. On y dance fort peu souuent vn a vn, c'est a dire vn homme seul auec vne femme ou fille. . . . On n'y dancoit que trois sortes de bransles, communement se tournant les espaules l'vn a l'autre, & le dos d'vn chascun visant dans le rond de la dance, & le visage en dehors. La premiere c'est a la Bohemienne . . . La seconde c'est a sauts; ces deux sont en rond.'[3] 'Ils apperceurent a l'entree [d'vn bois], vn rond, ou cerne, dans lequel il y auoit plusieurs vestiges de pieds d'hom[m]es, d'e[n]fans, & d'Ours, ou bien d'autres bestes semblables,[4] lesquels estoient seulement enfoncez d'vn demy doigt dans la neige, quoy que pour eux ils y entrassent iusques a la ceinture.'[5]

The Swedish witches danced in the same manner. I We used to go to a gravel pit which lay hard by a cross-way, and there we put on a garment over our heads, and then danced round.''[6] The round dance was so essentially a witch dance that More says, 'It might be here very seasonable to enquire into the nature of those large dark Rings in the grass, which they call Fairy Circles, whether they be the Rendezvouz of Witches, or the dancing places of those little Puppet Spirits which they call Elves or Fairies.'[7]

It will be seen from the above quotations that there were many varieties in the ring dance; this was the case also in the follow-my-leader dance. There seems to have been also a combination of the two dances; or perhaps it would be more correct to say that sometimes the ring and follow-my-leader figures were used together so as to form one complete dance,

[1. Compare the account of the Forfar witch-dance. Kinloch, p. 120.

2. Boguet, pp. 131-2.

3. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 210.

4. Compare the dittay against Bessie Thom, who danced round the Fish Cross of Aberdeen with other witches 'in the lyknes of kattis and haris'. Spalding Club Misc., i, 167.

5. Boguet, p. 127.

6. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 316.

7. More, p. 232.]

as in the modern Lancers. In both forms of the dance one of the chief members of the society was the 'ring-leader', or leader of the dance. In the follow-my-leader dance this was often the Devil, but in the ring dances this place was usually taken by the second in command. When, however, the Devil was the leader, the second-in-command was in the rear to keep up those who could not move so quickly as the others. As pace was apparently of importance, and as it seems to have been a punishable offence to lag behind in the dance, this is possibly the origin of the expression 'The Devil take the hindmost'.

At North Berwick Barbara Napier met her comrades at the church, 'where she danced endlong the Kirk yard, and Gelie Duncan played on a trump, John Fian, missellit, led the ring; Agnes Sampson and her daughters and all the rest following the said Barbara, to the number of seven score of persons." Isobel Gowdie was unfortunately not encouraged to describe the dances in which she had taken part, so that our information, instead of being full and precise, is very meagre. 'Jean Martein is Maiden to the Coven that I am of; and her nickname is "Over the dyke with it", because the Devil always takes the Maiden in his hand next him, when we dance Gillatrypes; and when he would loup from [words broken here] he and she will say, "Over the dyke with it."'[2] Another Scotch example is Mr. Gideon Penman, who had been minister at Crighton. He usually 'was in the rear in all their dances, and beat up all those that were slow'."[3] Barton's wife 'one night going to a dancing upon Pentland Hills, he [the Devil] went before us in the likeness of a rough tanny Dog, playing on a pair of Pipes'.[4] De Lancre concludes his description of the dances (see above, p. 13 1) by an account of an ' endlong' dance. 'La troisieme est aussi le dos tourne, mais se tenant tous en long, & sans se deprendre des mains, ils s'approchent de si pres qu'ils se touchent, & se rencontrent dos a dos, vn homme auec vne femme; & a certaine cadance ils se choquent & frapent impudemment cul contre cul.'[5] It was perhaps this

[1. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 245-6. Spelling modernized.

2. Id., iii, p. 606. Spelling modernized.

3. Fountainhall, i, p. 14.

4. Sinclair, p. 163.

5. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 210.]

dance which the Devil led: 'Le Diable voit parfois dancer simplement comme spectateur; parfois il mene la dance, changeant souuent de main & se mettant a la main de celles qui luy plaisent le plus.'[1] In Northumberland in 1673 'their particular divell tooke them that did most evill, and danced with them first.--The devill, in the forme of a little black man and black cloaths, called of one Isabell Thompson, of Slealy, widdow, by name, and required of her what service she had done him. She replyd she had gott power of the body of one Margarett Teasdale. And after he had danced with her he dismissed her, and call'd of one Thomasine, wife of Edward Watson, of Slealy." Danaeus also notes that the Devil was the leader: 'The[n] fal they to dauncing, wherin he leadeth the daunce, or els they hoppe and daunce merely about him.'[3] This is perhaps what de Lancre means when he says that 'apres la dance ils se mettent par fois a sauter'.[4] A curious variation of the follow-my-leader dance was practised at Aberdeen on Rood Day, a date which as I have shown elsewhere corresponds with the Walpurgis-Nacht of the German witches. The meeting took place upon St. Katherine's Hill, 'and there under the conduct of Satan, present with you, playing before you, after his form, ye all danced a devilish dance, riding on trees, by a long space.'[5]

Other variations are also given. 'The dance is strange, and wonderful, as well as diabolical, for turning themselves back to back, they take one another by the arms and raise each other from the ground, then shake their heads to and fro like Anticks, and turn themselves as if they were mad.'[6] Reginald Scot, quoting Bodin, says: 'At these magicall assemblies, the witches neuer faile to danse; and in their danse they sing these words, Har bar, divell divell, danse here danse here, plaie here plaie here, Sabbath sabbath. And whiles they sing and

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 212.

2. Surtees Soc., xl, pp. 195, 197.

3. Danaeus, ch. iv.

4. De Lancre, op. cit., p. 211.

5. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 165, 167. Spelling modernized. The account of the Arab witches should be compared with this. 'In the time of Ibn Munkidh the witches rode about naked on a stick between the graves of the cemetery of Shaizar.' Wellhausen, p. 159.

6. Pleasant Treatise of Witches, p. 6.]

danse, euerie one hath a broome in hir hand, and holdeth it vp aloft. Item he saith, that these night-walking or rather night-dansing witches, brought out of Italie into France, that danse which is called La Volta.'[1] There is also a description of one of the dances of the Italian witches: 'At Como and Brescia a number of children from eight to twelve years of age, who had frequented the Sabbat, and had been re-converted by the inquisitors, gave exhibitions in which their skill showed that they had not been taught by human art. The woman was held behind her partner and they danced backward, and when they paid reverence to the presiding demon they bent themselves backwards, lifting a foot in the air forwards.'[2]

In Lorraine the round dance always moved to the left. As the dancers faced outwards, this would mean that they moved 'widdershins', i.e. against the sun. 'Ferner, class sie ihre Tantze in einem ronden Kreiss rings umbher fuhren, und die Rucke zusammen gekehret haben, wie eine unter den dreyen Gratiis pfleget furgerissen zu werden, und also zusammen tanzen. Sybilla Morelia sagt, dass der Reyhen allezeit auff der lincken Hand umbher gehe.'[3]

One form of the witches' dance seems to survive among the children in the Walloon districts of Belgium. It appears to be a mixture of the ordinary round dance and the third of de Lancre's dances; for it has no central personage, and the striking of back against back is a marked feature. 'Les enfants font une ronde et repetent un couplet. Chaque fois, un joueur designe fait demi-tour sur place et se remet a tourner avec les autres en faisant face a l'exterieur du cercle. Quand tous les joueurs sont retournes, ils se rapprochent et se heurtent le dos en cadence.'[4]

  

4. The Music

The music at the assemblies was of all kinds, both instrumental and vocal. The English trials hardly mention music, possibly because the Sabbath had fallen into a decadent condition; but the Scotch and French trials prove that it was an integral part of the celebration. The Devil himself was the

[1. Reg. Scot, Bk. iii, p. 42. La volta is said to be the origin of the waltz.

2. Lea, iii, p. 501.

3. Remigius, p. 82.

4. E. Monseur, p. 102.]

usual performer, but other members of the society could also supply the music, and occasionally one person held the position of piper to the Devil. The music was always as an accompaniment of the dance; the instrument in general use was a pipe, varied in England by a cittern, in Scotland by I the trump' or Jew's harp, also an instrument played with the mouth.

The Somerset witches said that 'the Man in black sometimes playes on a Pipe or Cittern, and the company dance'.'

The North Berwick witches (1590), when at the special meeting called to compass the death of the king, 'danced along the Kirk-yeard, Geilis Duncan playing on a Trump.'[3] The instrument of the Aberdeen Devil (1597), though not specified, was probably a pipe; it is usually called 'his forme of instrument' in the dittays. Isobel Cockie of Aberdeen was accused of being at a Sabbath on All-hallow Eve: 'Thou wast the ringleader, next Thomas Leyis; and because the Devil played not so melodiously and well as thou crewit, thou took his instrument out of his mouth, then took him on the chaps therewith, and played thyself thereon to the whole company.'[3] At another meeting, Jonet Lucas was present: 'Thou and they was under the conduct of thy master, the Devil, dancing in ane ring, and he playing melodiously upon ane instrument, albeit invisibly to you.'[4] At Tranent (1659) eight women and a man named John Douglas confessed to 'having merry meetings with Satan, enlivened with music and dancing. Douglas was the pyper, and the two favourite airs of his majesty were "Kilt thy coat, Maggie, and come thy way with me", and "Hulie the bed will fa'."'[5] Agnes Spark at Forfar (1661) 'did see about a dozen of people dancing, and they had sweet music amongst them, and, as she thought, it was the music of a pipe'.[6] Barton's wife was at a meeting in the Pentland Hills, where the Devil 'went before us in the likeness of a rough tanny Dog, playing on a pair of Pipes. The

[1. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 141.

2. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 239, 246.

3. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 114-15. Spelling modernized.

4. Id., i, p. 149. Spelling modernized.

5. Spottiswoode Miscellany, ii, p. 68.

6. Kinloch, p. 129. Spelling modernized.]

Spring he played (says she) was, 'The silly bit Chiken, gar cast it a pickle and it will grow meikle.'[1] At Crook of Devon (1662) the two old witches, Margaret Huggon and Janet Paton, confessed to being at a meeting, and 'the foresaids hail women was there likeways and did all dance and ane piper play'.[2]

In France the instruments were more varied. Marie d'Aspilcouette, aged nineteen, 'voyoit dancer auec violons, trompettes, ou tabourins, qui rendoyent vne tres grande harmonie'.[3] Isaac de Queyran, aged twenty-five, said that a minor devil (diabloton) played on a tambourine, while the witches danced.[4] But as usual de Lancre is at his best when making a general summary:

'Elles dancent au son du petit tabourin & de la fluste, & par fois auec ce long instrument qu'ils posent sur le col, puis s'allongeant iusqu'aupres de la ceinture; ils le battent auec vn petit baston: par fois auec vn violon. Mais ce ne sont les seuls instrumes du sabbat, car nous auos apprins de plusieurs, qu'on y oyt toute sorte d'instrumens, auec vne telle harmonie, qu'il n'y a concert au monde qui le puisse esgaler.'[5]

Vocal music was also heard at the meetings, sometimes as an accompaniment of the dance, sometimes as an entertainment in itself. When it was sung as a part of the dance, the words were usually addressed to the Master, and took the form of a hymn of praise. Such a hymn addressed to the god of fertility would be full of allusions and words to shock the sensibilities of the Christian priests and ministers who sat in judgement on the witches. Danaeus gives a general account of these scenes: 'Then fal they to dauncing, wherin he leadeth the daunce, or els they hoppe and daunce merely about him, singing most filthy songes made in his prayse.'[6] Sinclair had his account from a clergyman: 'a reverend Minister told me, that one who was the Devils Piper, a wizzard confest to him, that at a Ball of dancing, the Foul Spirit taught him a Baudy song to sing and play, as it were this night, and ere two days past all the Lads and Lasses of the town were lilting it throw

[1. Sinclair, p. 163.

2. Burns Begg, pp. 234, 235.

3. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 127.

4. Id. ib., p. 150. 

5. Id. ib., p. 211.

6. Danaeus, ch. iv.]

the street. It were abomination to rehearse it.'[1] At Forfar Helen Guthrie told the court that Andrew Watson 'made great merriment by singing his old ballads, and Isobell Shirrie did sing her song called 'Tinkletum Tankletum'.[2] Occasionally the Devil himself was the performer, as at Innerkip, where according to Marie Lamont 'he sung to us and we all dancit'.[3] Boguet notes that the music was sometimes vocal and sometimes instrumental: 'Les haubois ne manquent pas a ces esbats: car il y en a qui sont commis a faire le devoir de menestrier; Satan y ioue mesme de la flutte le plus souuent; & a d'autrefois les Sorciers se contentent de chanter a la voix, disant toutefois leurs chansons pesle-mesle, & auec vne confusion telle, qu'ils ne s'entendent pas les vns les autres.'[4] At Aix in 1610 'the Magicians and those that can reade, sing certaine Psalmes as they doe in the Church, especially Laudate Dominum de Coelis: Confitemini domino quoniam bonus, and the Canticle Benedicte, transferring all to the praise of Lucifer and the Diuels: And the Hagges and Sorcerers doe houle and vary their hellish cries high and low counterfeiting a kinde of villanous musicke. They also daunce at the sound of Viols and other instruments, which are brought thither by those that were skild to play vpon them.[5] At another French trial in 1652 the evidence showed that 'on dansait sans musique, aux chansons'.[6]

  

5. The Feast

The feast, like the rest of the ritual, varied in detail in different places. It took place either indoors or out according to the climate and the season; in Southern France almost invariably in the open air, in Scotland and Sweden almost always under cover; in England sometimes one, sometimes the other. Where it was usual to have it in the open, tables were carried out and the food laid upon them; indoor feasts were always spread on tables; but in the English accounts of the open-air meal the cloth was spread, picnic-fashion, on the ground. The food was supplied in different ways; sometimes

[1. Sinclair, p. 219.

2. Kinloch, p. 120.

3. Sharpe, p. 131.

4. Boguet, p. 132.

5. Michaelis, Hist., p. 336.

6. Van Elven, v (1891), p. 215.]

entirely by the devil, sometimes entirely by one member of the community, and sometimes-picnic-fashion again-all the company brought their own provisions. Consequently the quality of the food varied considerably; on some occasions it was very good, on others very homely. But no matter who provided it, the thanks of the feasters were solemnly and reverently given to the Master, to whose power the production of all food was due.

In a certain number of cases it is said that the food eaten at the feasts was of an unsatisfying nature. This statement is usually made in the general descriptions given by contemporary writers; it is rarely found in the personal confessions. When it does so occur, it is worth noting that the witch is generally a young girl. If this were always the case, it would be quite possible that then, as now, dancing and excitement had a great effect on the appetite, and that the ordinary amount of food would appear insufficient.

The taboo on salt is interesting, but it does not appear to have been by any means universal. It does not seem to occur at all in Great Britain, where the food at the feasts was quite normal.

Some authorities appear to think that the witches ate the best of everything. 'They sit to Table where no delicate meats are wanting to gratifie their Appetites, all dainties being brought in the twinckling of an Eye, by those spirits that attend the Assembly'.[1] Though this is dramatically expressed it is confirmed by the statements of the witches themselves. The Lancashire witches had a great feast when they met in Malking Tower to consult as to the rescue of Mother Demdike.

' The persons aforesaid had to their dinners Beefe, Bacon, and roasted Mutton; which Mutton (as this Examinates said brother said) was of a Wether of Christopher Swyers of Barley: which Wether was brought in the night before into this Examinates mothers house by the said lames Deuice, this Examinates said brother: and in this Examinates sight killed and eaten. . . . And before their said parting away, they all appointed to meete at the said Prestons wiues house that day twelue-moneths; at which time the said Prestons wife promised to make them a great Feast.'[2]

[1. Pleasant Treatise of Witches, p. 5.

2. Potts, G 3, 13, P 3.]

The feast of the Faversham witches was also indoors. 'Joan Cariden confessed that Goodwife Hott told her within these two daies that there was a great meeting at Goodwife Panterys house, and that Goodwife Dodson was there, and that Goodwife Gardner should have been there, but did not come, and the Divell sat at the upper end of the Table.'[1] This was always the Devil's place at the feast, and beside him sat the chief of the women witches. The Somerset trials give more detail than any of the other English cases. Elizabeth Style said that 'at their meeting they have usually Wine or good Beer, Cakes, Meat or the like. They eat and drink really when they meet in their bodies, dance also and have Musick. The Man in black sits at the higher end, and Anne Bishop usually next him. He useth some words before meat, and none after, his voice is audible, but very low.'[2] She enters into a little more detail in another place: 'They had Wine, Cakes, and Roastmeat (all brought by the Man in black) which they did eat and drink. They danced and were merry, and were bodily there, and in their Clothes.'[3] Alice Duke gave a similar account: 'All sate down, a white Cloth being spread on the ground, and did drink Wine, and eat Cakes and Meat.'[4] The Scotch trials show that it was usually the witches who entertained the Master and the rest of the band. Alison Peirson, whose adventures among the fairies are very interesting, stated that a man in green 'apperit to hir, ane lustie mane, with mony mene and wemen with him: And that scho sanit her and prayit, and past with thame fordir nor scho could tell; and saw with thame pypeing and mirrynes and gude scheir, and wes careit to Lowtheane, and saw wyne punchounis with tassis with thame'.[5] On another occasion a very considerable meeting took place 'in an old house near Castle Semple, where a splendid feast was prepared, which pleased the royal visitor so much, that he complimented his entertainers for their hospitality, and endearingly addressed them as "his bairns"'.[6] The Forfar witches had many feasts; Helen Guthrie says of one occasion:

[1. Examination of Joan Williford, p. 6.

2. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 139-40.

3. Id., p. 138.

4. Id., p. 149.

5. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 163.

6. Spottiswoode Misc., ii, p. 67.]

They went to Mary Rynd's house and sat doune together at the table, the divell being present at the head of it; and some of them went to Johne Benny's house, he being a brewer, and brought ale from hence . . . and others of them went to Alexander Hieche's and brought aqua vitae from thence, and thus made themselfes mirrie; and the divill made much of them all, but especiallie of Mary Rynd, and he kist them all except the said Helen herselfe, whose hand onlie he kist; and shee and Jonet Stout satt opposite one to another at the table.'[1]

Of the meeting at Muryknowes there are several accounts. The first is by little Jonet Howat, Helen Guthrie's young daughter: 'At this meiting there wer about twenty persones present with the divill, and they daunced togither and eat togither, having bieff, bread, and ale, and shoe did eat and drink with them hir self, bot hir bellie was not filled, and shoe filled the drink to the rest of the company.'[2] Elspet Alexander confirms this statement, 'The divill. and the witches did drinke together having flesh, bread, and aile';[3] and so also does the Jonet Stout who sat opposite to Helen Guthrie at the table, 'The divill and the said witches did eat and drinke, having flesh, bread, and aile upon ane table, and Joanet Huit was caper and filled the drinke'.[1] On one occasion they tried to wreck the Bridge of Cortaquhie; 'when we had done, Elspet [Bruce] gaive the divell ane goose in hir own house, and he dated hir mor than them all, because shee was ane prettie wornan.'[5] The Kinross-shire witches obtained their food from the Devil, and this is one of the few instances of complaints is to the quality of it. 'Sathan gave you [Robert Wilson] both meat and drink sundry times, but it never did you any good';[6] and Janet Brugh 'confessed that ye got rough bread and sour drink from Sathan at the Bents of Balruddrie'.[7] According to Marie Lamont, 'the devill. came to Kattrein Scott's house, in the midst of the night. He gave them wyn to drink, and wheat bread to eat, and they warr all very mirrie.'[8] Isobel Gowdie's confession gives a wealth of detail as usual:

'We would go to several houses in the night time. We

[1. Kinloch, p. 121.

2. Id., p. 124.

3. Id., p. 126.

4. Id., p. 127.

5. Id., p. 133. Dated = caressed.

6. Burns Begg, p. 227.

7. Id., p. 238.

8 Sharpe, p. 131.]

were at Candlemas last in Grangehill, where we got meat and drink enough. The Devil sat at the head of the table, and all the Coven about. That night he desired Alexander Elder in Earlseat to say the grace before meat, which he did; and is this:[1] "We eat this meat in the Devil's name " [etc.]. And then we began to eat. And when we had ended eating, we looked steadfastly to the Devil, and bowing ourselves to him, we said to the Devil, We thank thee, our Lord, for this.--We killed an ox, in Burgie, about the dawing of the day, and we brought the ox with us home to Aulderne, and did eat all amongst us in an house in Aulderne, and feasted on it.'[2]

At Borrowstowness the witches went to different houses for their feasts, which seem to have been supplied partly by the hostess, partly by the Devil and the guests.

'Ye and each person of you was at several meetings with the devil in the links of Borrowstowness, and in the house of you Bessie Vickar, and ye did eat and drink with the devil, and with one another, and with witches in her house in the night time; and the devil and the said William Craw brought the ale which ye drank, extending to about seven gallons, from the house of Elizabeth Hamilton.'[3]

In 1692 Goodwife Foster of Salem gave a rather charming description of the picnic feast with the Coven from Andover:

'I enquired what she did for Victuals' [at the meeting]; 'She answered that she carried Bread and Cheese in her pocket, and that she and the Andover Company came to the Village before the Meeting began, and sat down together under a tree, and eat their food, and that she drank water out of a Brook to quench her thirst.'[4]

The Continental evidence varies very little from the British. Except in a few details, the main facts are practically the same. De Lancre summarizes the evidence which he himself collected, and contrasts it with what other authorities said on the subject:

'Les liures disent que les sorciers mangent au Sabbat de ce que le Diable leur a appreste: mais bien souue[n]t il ne s'y

[1. The complete grace is given on p. 167. It will be seen that it is a corrupt version of some ancient form of words.

2. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 612, 613. Spelling modernized.

3. Scots Magazine, 1814, p. 200. Spelling modernized.

4. Burr, p. 418.]

trouue que des viandes qu'ils ont porte eux mesmes. Parfois il y a plusieurs tables seruies de bons viures, & d'autres fois de tres meschans: & a table on se sied selon sa qualite, ayant chacun son Demon assis aupres, & parfois vis a vis. Ils benissent leur table inuoquant Beelzebub, & le tenant pour celui qui leur faict ce bien.'[1]

The young man-witch, Isaac de Queyran, told de Lancre that the witches sat at a table with the Black Man at the end, and had bread and meat which was spread on a cloth.[2] The evidence at the trial of Louis Gaufredy at Aix in 1610 gives other details, though the eating of children's flesh is probably an exaggeration:

'They prouide a banquet, setting three tables according to the three diuersities of the people above named. They that haue the charge of bread, doe bring in bread made of corne. The drink which they haue is Malmsey. The meate they ordinarily eate is the flesh of young children, which they cooke and make ready in the Synagogue, sometimes bringing them thither aliue by stealing them from those houses where they haue opportunity to come. They haue no vse of kniues at table for feare least they should be laid a crosse. They haue also no salt.'[3]

Boguet also collected a considerable amount of information from the witches who fell into his hands:

'Les Sorciers, apres s'estre veautrez parmi les plaisirs immondes de la chair, banquettent & se festoient: leurs banquets estans composez de plusieurs sortes de viandes, selon les lieux, & qualitez des personnes. Par deca la table estoit couuerte de beurre, de fromage, & de chair. Clauda Ianguillaume, Iaquema Paget, & quelques autres adioustoient qu'iI y auoit vne grande chaudiere sur le feu, dans laquelle chacun alloit prendre de la chair. On y boit aussi du vin, & le plus souuent de 1'eau. . . . Antoine Tornier a confesse qu'elle en auoit beu [le vin] dans vn goubelet de bois; les autres parloient seulement d'eau. Mais il n'y a iamais sel en ces repas . . . Les Sorciers auant que de prendre leur repas benissent la table, mais auec des parolles remplies de blasphemes, faisans Beelzebub autheur & conseruateur de toutes choses . . . Ils accordent tous, qu'il n'y a point de gout aux viandes qu'ils mangent au Sabbat, & que la chair n'est autre chair que de cheual. Et adioustent en outre, que lors qu'ils sortent de

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 197.

2. Id. ib., p. 148.

3. Michaelis, Historie, pp. 335-6.]

table, ils sont aussi affamez que quand ils entrent. Antide Colas racontoit particulierement que les viandes estoient froides. . . . Toutesfois il faut croire que bien souuent l'on mange au Sabbat a bon escient, & non par fantaisie & imagination.'[1]

The cold food occurs also in the accusation against a Belgian witch, Elizabeth Vlamynx, in 1595: 'Vous-meme vous avez apporte aux convives un hochepot [hutsepot] froid, que vous aviez prepare d'avance.'[2]

In Sweden the witches collected the food and sent it to the Devil, who gave them as much of it as he thought fit. The feast was always held indoors in the house known as Blockula.

'In a huge large Room of this House, they said, there stood a very long Table, at which the Witches did sit down. . . . They sate down to Table, and those that the Devil esteemed most, were placed nearest to him, but the Children must stand at the door, where he himself gives them meat and drink. The diet they did use to have there, was, they said, Broth with Colworts and Bacon in it, Oatmeal, Bread spread with Butter, Milk and Cheese. And they added that sometimes it tasted very well, and sometimes very ill.'[3]

  

6. Candles

At first sight it would seem that the candles were naturally used only to illuminate the midnight festivities, but the evidence points to the burning lights being part of the ritual. This is also suggested by the importance, in the cult, of the early-spring festival of Candlemas; a festival which has long been recognized as of pre-Christian origin.

The light is particularly mentioned in many instances as being carried by the Devil, usually on his head; the witches often lit their torches and candles at this flame, though sometimes it seems that the Devil lit the torch and then presented it to the witch. To call the chief of the cult Lucifer was therefore peculiarly appropriate, especially at the Candlemas Sabbath.

In 1574 the witches of Poictiers went to a cross-roads: 'la se trouuoit vn grand bouc noir, qui parloit comme vne personne

[1. Boguet, pp. 135-9.

2. Cannaert, p. 45

3. Horneck, pp. 321-2, 327.]

aux assistans, & dansoyent a l'entour du bouc: puis vn chacun luy baisoit le derriere, auec vne chandelle ardente.'[1] The witches of North Berwick in 1590 mention candles as part of the ritual:

'At ther meting be nycht in the kirk of Northberick, the deuell, cled in a blak gown with a blak hat upon his head, preachit vnto a gret nomber of them out of the pulpit, having lyk leicht candles rond about him.'--John Fian blew up the Kirk doors, and blew in the lights, which were like mickle black candles, holden in an old man's hand, round about the pulpit.[3]--[John Fian] was taken to North Berwick church where Satan commanded him to make him homage with the rest of his servants; where he thought he saw the light of a candle, standing in the midst of his servants, which appeared blue lowe [flame].'[4]

In 1594 at Puy-de-Dome Jane Bosdeau went 'at Midnight on the Eve of St John into a Field, where there appeared a great Black Goat with a Candle between his Horns'.[5] At Aberdeen in 1597 Marion Grant confessed that 'the Deuill apperit to the, within this auchteine dayis or thairby, quhome thow callis thy god, about ane hour in the nicht, and apperit to the in ane gryte man his lickness, in silkin abuilzeament [habiliment], withe ane quhyt candill in his hand'.[6] In 1598 the witches whom Boguet tried said that--

'les Sorciers estans assemblez en leur Synagogue adorent premierement Satan, qui apparoit la, tantost en forme d'vn grand homme noir, tantost en forme de bouc, & pour plus grand hommage, ils luy offrent des chandelles, qui rendent vne flamme de couleur bleue. Quelquefois encor il tient vne image noire, qu'il fait baiser aux Sorciers. Antide Colas & ses compagnes, en baisant ceste image, offroient vne chandelle ou buche d'estrain ardente. Ces chandelles leur sont baillees par le Diable, & se perdent & esuanouissent des lors qu'elles luy ont este offertes. Il s'en est trouue qui ont confesse qu'ils alloient allumer le plus soutient leurs chandelles a vne autre chandelle, que le Demon, estant en forme de bouc, portoit au dessus de la teste entre les deux cornes.'[7]

[1. Bodin, Fleau, p. 187.

2. Melville, p. 395.

3. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 246. The ploughman, Gray Meal, who took a large part in the ceremonies, was an old man.

4. Id., i, pt. ii, p. 210.

5. F. Hutchinson, Hist. Essay, p. 42.

6. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 172.

7. Boguet, p. 131.]

Some of the witches of the Basses-Pyrenees, tried in 1609, said that the Devil was--

'comme vn grand bouc, ayat deux cornes deuant & deux en derriere. Mais le commun est qu'il a seulement trois cornes, & qu'il a quelque espece de lumiere en celle du milieu, de laquelle il a accoustume au sabbat d'esclairer, & donner du feu & de la lumiere, mesmes a ces Sorcieres qui tiennent quelques chandelles alumees aux ceremonies de la Messe qu'ils veulent contrefaire. On luy voit aussi quelque espece de bonet on chapeau au dessus de ses cornes.--Toute l'assemblee le vient adorer le baisant sous la queue, & allumant des chandelles noires.'[1]

Barthelemy Minguet of Brecy, a man of twenty-five, tried in 1616, described the ceremonies of the Sabbath; after the sermon the worshippers 'vont a l'offerte, tenant en leurs mains des chandelles de poix noire qui leur sont donnees par le Diable . In 1646 Elizabeth Weed of Great Catworth, Hunts, .confessed that the Devil came to her at night, 'and being demanded what light was there, she answered, none but the light of the Spirit.'[3] In 1652 a French witch stated that at the Sabbath 'on dansait sans musique, aux chansons. Toutes les femmes y etoient tenues par les diables par lors il y avoit de la lumiere une chandelle tenue au millieu par une femme que ne connoit. . . Au milieux il y auoit une feme masquee tenant une chandelle.'[4] Barton's wife was at a witch meeting in the Pentland Hills, 'and coming down the hill when we had done, which was the best sport, he [the Devil] carried the candle in his bottom under his tail, which played ey wig wag wig wag.", Helen Guthrie in 1661 does not expressly mention candles or torches, but her description of the flickering light on the ground suggests their use. She I was at a meiting in the churchyeard of Forfar in the Holfe therof, and they daunced togither, and the ground under them wes all fyre

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 68, 401.

2. Id., L'Incredulite p. 805.

3. Davenport, p. 2.

4. Van Elven, La Tradition, v (1891), p. 215.

5. Sinclair, p. 163. The account given by Barton's wife of the position of the candle on the Devil's person is paralleled by the peculiarly coarse description of the Light-bearers at the witch-sabbaths at Munster. Humborg, p, 120.]

flauchter'.[1] The Somerset witches stated that, when they met, 'the Man in Black bids them welcome, and they all make low obeysance to him, and he delivers some Wax Candles like little Torches, which they give back again at parting.'[2] The light seems to have been sometimes so arranged, probably in a lantern, as to be diffused. This was the case at Torryburn, where the assembly was ht by a light 'which came from darkness', it was sufficiently strong for the dancers to see one another's faces, and to show the Devil wearing a cap or hood which covered his neck and ears.'[3] The latest account of a witch-meeting in the eighteenth century describes how the witches of Strathdown went to Pol-nain and there were 'steering themselves to and fro in their riddles, by means of their oars the brooms, hallooing and skirling worse than the bogles, and each holding in her left hand a torch of fir'.[4]

There is one account where the candle was for use and not for ritual. John Stuart of Paisley, in 1678, admitted the Devil and some witches into his room one night in order to make a clay image of an enemy. 'Declares, that the black man did make the figure of the Head and Face and two Arms to the said Effigies. Declares, that the Devil set three Pins in the same, one in each side, and one in the Breast: And that the Declarant did hold the Candle to them all the time the Picture was making.'[5] John Stuart was the principal person on this occasion, and therefore had the honour of holding the light. The description of the event suggests that the saying 'To hold a candle to the Devil' took its rise in actual fact.

The material of which the candles or torches were made was pitch, according to de Lancre, and at North Berwick the lights were 'like lighted candles' burning with a blue flame. The white candle seems to have been essentially the attribute of the devil, the black candles or torches being distinctive of the witches. That the lights burned blue is due to the material of which the torches were made. The evanescent character of the light, when a wisp of straw was used, is noted in the evidence of Antide Colas.

[1. Kinloch, p. 120.

2. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 139.

3. Chambers, iii, p. 298.

4. Stewart, p. 175.

5. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 294.]

  

7. The Sacrament

The earliest example of the religious services occurs in 1324 in the trial of Lady Alice Kyteler: 'In rifeling the closet of the ladie, they found a Wafer of sacramentall bread, hauing the diuels name stamped thereon in stead of Jesus Christ.'[1] According to Boguet (1589) the Devil did not always perform the religious service himself, but mass was celebrated by a priest among his followers; this custom is found in all countries and seems to have been as common as that the Devil himself should perform the service.

'Celuy, qui est commis a faire l'office, est reuestu d'vne chappe noire sans croix, & apres auoir mis de l'eau dans le calice, it tourne le doz a l'autel, & puis esleue vn rond de raue teinte en noir, au lieu de l'hostie, & lors tous les Sorciers crient a haute voix, Maistre, aide nous. Le Diable en mesme temps pisse dans vn trou a terre, & fait de l'eau beniste de son vrine, de laquelle celuy, qui dit la messe, arrouse tous les assistans auec vn asperges noir.'[2]

The Devil of the Basses Pyrenees (1609) performed the religious ceremony himself:

'Il s'habille en Prestre pour dire Messe, laquelle it fait semblant de celebrer auec mille fourbes & souplesses, aupres d'vn arbre, ou parfois aupres d'vn rocher, dressant quelque forme d'autel sur des colones infernales, & sur iceluy sans dire le Confiteor, ny 1'Alleluya, tournant les feuillets d'vn certain liure qu'il a en main, it commence a marmoter quelques mots de la Messe, & arriuant a l'offertoire it s'assiet, & toute l'assemblee le vient adorer le baisant sous la queue, & allumant des chandelles noires: Puis luy baisent la main gauche, tremblans auec mille angoisses, & luy offrent du pain, des oeufs, & de l'argent: & la Royne du Sabbat les recoit, laquelle est assise a son coste gauche, & en sa main gauche elle tient vne paix ou platine, dans laquelle est grauee l'effigie de Lucifer, laquelle on ne baise qu'apres l'auoir premierement baisee a elle. Puis it se met a prescher, son subiect est communement de la vaine gloire. . . . Il finit son sermon, & continue ses autres ceremonies, leuant vne certaine Hostie laquelle est noire & ronde, auec sa figure imprimee au dessus: & disant ces paroles, Cecy est mon corps, it leue l'Hostie sur ses cornes & a cette esleuatio tous ceux de l'assemblee I'adore[n]t

[1. Holinshed, Ireland, p. 58.

2. Boguet, p. 141.]

en disant ces mots, Aquerra Goity, Aquerra Beyty, Aquerra Goity, Aquerra Beyty, qui veut dire, Cabron arriba, Cabron abaro, de mesme en font its au Calice repetant ces mots, iusqu'a ce qu'il a vuide tout ce qui est dans iceluy. Puis toute l'assemblee enuironnant l'autel en forme de croissant ou demy-lune, prosternez par terre, it leur fait vn autre sermon, puis leur baille a communier par ordre, donnant a chacun vn petit morceau de l'hostie, & pour leur donner moyen de l'aualer aisement, il leur donne deux gorgees de quelque medicine infernale, & certain breuuage de si mauuais goust & odeur, que l'aualant its suent, & neantmoins it est si froid, ou'il leur gele le corps, les nerfs, & les mouelles. Puis il s'accouple auec elles, & leur commande d'en faire de mesme, si bien qu'ils commettent mille incestes & autres pechez contre nature. Puis it les inuite a se mettre a table.'[1]

At Aix in 1610 Magdalene de Demandouls 'said that that accursed Magician Lewes [Gaufredy] did first inuent the saying of Masse at the Sabbaths, and did really consecrate and present the sacrifice to Lucifer. . . . She also related, that the said Magician did sprinkle the consecrated wine vpon all the company, at which time euery one cryeth, Sanguis eius super nos & filios nosotros.'[2]

Lord Fountainhall remarks, 'In 1670 we heard that the Devil appeared in the shape of a Minister, in the copper mines of Sweden, and attempted the same villainous apery.'[3] The Scotch witches, like the Swedish, performed the rite after the manner of the Reformed Churches. In 1678--

'the devill had a great meeting of witches in Loudian, where, among others, was a warlock who formerly had been admitted to the ministrie in the presbyterian tymes, and when the bishops came in, conformed with them. But being found flagitious and wicked, was deposed by them, and now he turnes a preacher under the devill of hellish doctrine; for the devill at this tyme preaches to his witches really (if I may so term it) the doctrine of the infernall pitt, viz. blasphemies against God and his son Christ. Among other things, he told them that they were more happy in him than they could be in God; him they saw, but God they could not see; and in mockrie of Christ and his holy ordinance of the sacrament

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 401-2.

2. Michaelis, Hist., p. 337. The use of this phrase suggests that the sprinkling was a fertility rite.

3. Fountainhall, i, pp. 14, 15.]

of his supper, he gives the sacrament to them, bidding them eat it and to drink it in remembrance of himself. This villan was assisting to Sathan in this action, and in preaching.'[1]

Fountainhall in writing of the same convention of witches says that the Devil 'adventured to give them the communion or holy sacrament, the bread was like wafers, the drink was sometimes blood sometimes black moss-water. He preached and most blasphemously mocked them, if they offered to trust in God who left them miserable in the world, and neither he nor his Son Jesus Christ ever appeared to them when they called on them, as he had, who would not cheat them.'[2]

The Abbe Guibourg (1679), head of the Paris witches, 'a fait chez la Voisin, revetu d'aube, d'etole et de manipule, une conjuration.'[3] The same Abbe celebrated mass more than once over the body of a woman and with the blood of a child, sacrificed for the occasion, in the chalice (see section on Sacrifice). The woman, who served as the altar for these masses, was always nude, and was the person for whose benefit the ceremony was performed. Marguerite Montvoisin makes this clear:

'It est vrai aussi qu'une sage-femme qui demeurait au coin de la rue des Deux-Portes, distilla aussi les entrailles d'un enfant dont la mere y avait accouche. . . . Avant la distillation, les entrailles de l'enfant et l'arriere-faix de la mere avaient ete portes a Saint-Denis, a Guibourg, par sa mere, la sage-femme et la mere de l'enfant, sur le ventre de laquelle sa mere, a son retour, lui dit que Guibourg avait dit la messe.'[4]

Guibourg acknowledged that, besides the one just quoted, he celebrated three masses in this way. At the first he used a conjuration. 'It dit la deuxieme messe dans une masure sur les remparts de Saint-Denis, sur la meme femme, avec les memes ceremonies. . . . Dit la troisieme a Paris chez la Voisin sur la meme femme.'[5] The woman mentioned in Guibourg's confession was Madame de Montespan herself. The following conjuration was used at the first mass:

'sur le ventre d'une femme': 'Astaroth, Asmodee, princes d'amitie, je vous conjure d'accepter le sacrifice que je vous

[1. Law, p. 145.

2. Fountainhall, i, p. 14.

3. Ravaisson, 1679-81, p. 336.

4. Id., p. 333.

5. Id., p. 335.]

presente de cet enfant pour les choses que je vous demande, qui sont l'amitie du Roi, de Mgr le Dauphin me soit continuee et etre honoree des princes et princesses de la cour, que rien ne me soit denie de tout ce que je demanderai au Roi, tant pour mes parents que serviteurs.'[1]

A very interesting case is that of the Rev. George Burroughs in New England (1692):

'He was Accused by Eight of the Confessing Witches, as being an Head Actor at some of their Hellish Randezvouses, and one who had the promise of being a King in Satan's kingdom, now going to be Erected. . . . One Lacy testify'd that she and the prisoner [Martha Carrier] were once Bodily present at a Witch-meeting in Salem Village; and that she knew the prisoner to be a Witch, and to have been at a Diabolical sacrament. . . . Another Lacy testify'd that the prisoner was at the Witch-meeting, in Salem Village, where they had Bread and Wine Administred unto them. . . . Deliverance Hobbs affirmed that this [Bridget] Bishop was at a General Meeting of the Witches, in a Field at Salem-Village, and there partook of a Diabolical Sacrament in Bread and Wine then administred.'[2]

Hutchinson had access to the same records and gives the same evidence, though even more strongly: 'Richard Carrier affirmed to the jury that he saw Mr. George Burroughs at the witch meeting at the village and saw him administer the sacrament. Mary Lacy, senr. and her daughter Mary affirmed that Mr. George Burroughs was at the witch meetings with witch sacrements, and that she knows Mr. Burroughs to be of the company of witches.'[3] John Hale has a similar record: 'This D. H. [Deliverance Hobbs] confessed she was at a Witch Meeting at Salem Village. . . . And the said G. B. preached to them, and such a Woman was their Deacon, and there they had a Sacrament.'[4] Abigail Williams said 'that the Witches had a Sacrament that day at an house in the Village, and that they had Red Bread and Red Drink.'[5] With the evidence before him Mather seems justified in saying that the witches had 'their Diabolical Sacraments, imitating the Baptism and the Supper of our Lord'.[6]

[1. Ravaisson, p. 335.

2. Cotton Mather, pp. 120, 131, 158.

3. J. Hutchinson, Hist. Of Massachusetts Bay, ii, p. 55.

4. Burr, p. 417.

5. Increase Mather, p. 210.

6. Cotton Mather, p. 81.]

  

8. Sacrifices

There are four forms of sacrifice: (1) the blood sacrifice, which was performed by making an offering of the witch's own blood; (2) the sacrifice of an animal; (3) the sacrifice of a human being, usually a child; (4) the sacrifice of the god.

1. The blood-sacrifice took place first at the admission of the neophyte. Originally a sacrifice, it was afterwards joined to the other ceremony of signing the contract, the blood serving as the writing fluid; it also seems to be confused in the seventeenth century with the pricking for the Mark, but the earlier evidence is clear. A writer who generalizes on the witchcraft religion and who recognizes the sacrificial nature of the act is Cooper; as he wrote in 1617 his evidence belongs practically to the sixteenth century. He says:

'In further token of their subiection unto Satan in yeelding vp themselues wholy vnto his deuotion, behold yet another ceremony heere vsually is performed: namely, to let themselues bloud in some apparant place of the body, yeelding the same to be sucked by Satan, as a sacrifice vnto him, and testifying thereby the full subiection of their liues and soules to his deuotion.'[1]

The earliest account of the ceremony is at Chelmsford in 1556. Elizabeth Francis 'learned this arte of witchcraft from her grandmother. When shee taughte it her, she counseiled her to geue of her bloudde to Sathan (as she termed it) whyche she delyuered to her in the likenesse of a whyte spotted Catte. Euery time that he [the cat] did any thynge for her, she sayde that he required a drop of bloude, which she gaue him by prycking herselfe.' Some time after, Elizabeth Francis presented the Satan-cat to Mother Waterhouse, passing on to her the instructions received from Elizabeth's grandmother. Mother Waterhouse 'gaue him for his labour a chicken, which he fyrste required of her and a drop of her blod. And thys she gaue him at all times when he dyd any thynge for her, by pricking her hand or face and puttinge

[1. Cooper, p. 91.]

the blond to hys mouth whyche he sucked.'[1] In 1566 John Walsh, a Dorset witch, confessed that 'at the first time when he had the Spirite, hys sayd maister did cause him to deliuer one drop of his blud, whych bloud the Spirite did take away vpon hys paw'.[2] In Belgium in 1603 Claire Goessen, 'apres avoir donne a boire de son sang a Satan, et avoir bu du sien, a fait avec lui un pacte.'[3]

In the case of the Lancashire witch, Margaret Johnson, in 1633, it is difficult to say whether the pricking was for the purpose of marking or for a blood sacrifice; the slight verbal alterations in the two MS. accounts of her confession suggest a confusion between the two ideas; the one appears to refer to the mark, the other (quoted here) to the sacrifice: 'Such witches as have sharp bones given them by the devill to pricke them, have no pappes or dugges whereon theire devil may sucke; but theire devill receiveth bloud from the place, pricked with the bone; and they are more grand witches than any yt have marks.'[4] In Suffolk in 1645 'one Bush of Barton widdow confessed that the Deuill appeared to her in the shape of a young black man . . . and asked her for bloud, which he drew out of her mouth, and it dropped on a paper'.[5] At Auldearne, in 1662, the blood was drawn for baptizing the witch; Isobel Gowdie said, 'The Divell marked me in the showlder, and suked owt my blood at that mark, and spowted it in his hand, and, sprinkling it on my head, said, "I baptise the, Janet, in my awin name."' Janet Breadheid's evidence is practically the same: 'The Divell marked me in the shoulder, and suked out my blood with his mowth at that place; he spowted it in his hand, and sprinkled it on my head. He baptised me thairvith, in his awin nam, Christian.'[6]

2. The sacrifice of animals was general, and the accounts give a certain amount of detail, but the ceremony was not as a rule sufficiently dramatic to be considered worth recording. The actual method of killing the animal is hardly ever given. The rite was usually performed privately by an individual; on

[1. Chelmsford Witches, pp. 24, 26, 29, 30. Philobiblon Society, viii.

2. Examination of John Walsh.

3. Cannaert, p. 48.

4. Whitaker, p. 216.

7. Stearne, p. 29.

6 Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 617.]

rare occasions it was celebrated by a whole Coven, but it does not occur at the Great Assembly, for there the sacrifice was of the God himself. The animals offered were generally a dog, a cat, or a fowl, and it is noteworthy that these were forms in which the Devil often appeared to his worshippers.

The chief authorities all agree as to the fact of animal sacrifices. Cotta compares it with the sacrifices offered by the heathen:

' Some bring their cursed Sorcery vnto their wished end by sacrificing vnto the Diuell some liuing creatures, as Serres likewise witnesseth, from the confession of Witches in Henry the fourth of France deprehended, among whom, one confessed to haue offered vnto his Deuill or Spirit a Beetle. This seemeth not improbable, by the Diabolicall litations (sic) and bloudy sacrifices, not onely of other creatures, but euen of men, wherewith in ancient time the heathen pleased their gods, which were no other then Diuels.'[1]

The number of sacrifices in the year is exaggerated by the writers on the subject, but the witches themselves are often quite definite in their information when it happens to be recorded. It appears from their statements that the rite was performed only on certain occasions, either to obtain help or as a thank-offering. Danaeus, speaking of the newly admitted witch, says, 'Then this vngracious and new servant of satan, euery day afterward offreth something of his goods to his patrone, some his dogge, some his hen, and some his cat.'[2] Scot, who always improves on his original, states that the witches depart after the Sabbath, 'not forgetting euery daie afterwards to offer to him, dogs, cats, hens, or bloud of their owne.'[3]

The earliest witch-trial in the British Isles shows animal sacrifice. In 1324 in Ireland Lady Alice Kyteler 'was charged to haue nightlie conference with a spirit called Robin Artisson, to whom she sacrificed in the high waie .ix. red cocks'.[4] In 1566 at Chelmsford Mother Waterhouse 'gaue him [i.e. the Satan-cat] for his labour a chicken, which he fyrste required of her, and a drop of her blod . . . Another tyme she rewarded hym as before, wyth a chicken and a droppe

[1. Cotta, p. 114.

2. Danaeus, ch. iv.

3. R. Scot, Bk. III, p. 44.

4. Holinshed, Ireland, p. 58.]

of her bloud, which chicken he eate vp cleane as he didde al the rest, and she cold fynde remaining neyther bones nor fethers.'[1] Joan Waterhouse, daughter of Mother Waterhouse, a girl of eighteen, said that the Deuil came in the likeness of a great dog, 'then asked hee her what she wolde geue hym, and she saide a red kocke'.[2] John Walsh of Dorset, in 1566, confessed that 'when he would call him [the Spirit], hee sayth hee must gene hym some Iyuing thing, as a Chicken, a Cat, or a Dog. And further he sayth he must geue hym twoo lyuing thynges once a yeare.'[3] In Lorraine in 1589 Beatrix Baonensis said, 'Etliche geben junge Huner, oder wohI alte Huner, wie Desideria Pari iensis, und Cathelonia Vincentia gethan hatten: Etliche schneiden ihre Haar ab und lieffern dieselbe dahin, etliche geben Spaher, etliche Vogel oder sonst nicht viel besonders, als da sein mochte gemuntz Geld aus Rindern Ledder, und wenn sie dergleichen nichts haben, so verschafft es ihnen ihr Geist, auff dass sie staffirt seyn.'[4] In Aberdeen in 1597 Andro Man gave evidence that 'the Devill thy maister, whom thow termis Christsunday . . . is rasit be the speking of the word Benedicte, and is laid agane be tacking of a dog vnder thy left oxster in thi richt hand, and casting the same in his mouth, and speking the word Maikpeblis.'[5] At Lang Niddry in 1608 the whole Coven performed a rite, beginning at the 'irne zet of Seatoun', where they christened a cat by the name of Margaret, 'and thaireftir come all bak agane to the Deane-fute, quhair first thai convenit, and cuist the kat to the Devill.'[6] In 1630 Alexander Hamilton had consultations with the Devil near Edinburgh, 'and afoir the devill his away passing the said Alexr was in use to cast to him ather ane kat or ane laif or ane dog or any uther sic beast he come be.'[7] In Bute in

[1. Philobiblon Society, viii, Chelmsford Witches, pp. 29, 30.

2. Id. ib., viii, p. 34.

3. Examination of John Walsh.

4. Remigius, pt. i, p. 54.

5. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 120; Burton, i, p. 252.

6. Pitcairn, ii, pp. 542-3.

7. From an unpublished trial in the Justiciary Court at Edinburgh. The meaning of the word laif is not clear. The Oxford dictionary gives lop-eared, the Scotch dictionary gives loaf. By analogy with the other accounts one would expect here a word meaning a hen.]

1622 Margaret NcWilliam 'renounced her baptisme and he baptised her and she gave him as a gift a hen or cock'.[1] In modern France the sacrifice of a fowl to the Devil still holds good: 'Celui qui veut devenir sorcier doit aller a un quatre chemins avec une poule noire, ou bien encore au cimetiere, sur une tombe et toujours a minuit. Il vient alors quelqu'un qui demande: "Que venez vous faire ici?" "Jai une poule a vendre," repond-on. Ce quelqu'un [est] le Mechante.'[2]

It is possible that the custom of burying a live animal to cure disease among farm animals, as well as the charm of casting a live cat into the sea to raise a storm, are forms of the animal sacrifice.

3. Child Sacrifice.--'The child-victim was usually a young infant, either a witch's child or unbaptized; in other words, it did not belong to the Christian community. This last is an important point, and was the reason why unbaptized children were considered to be in greater danger from witches than the baptized. 'If there be anie children vnbaptised, or not garded with the signe of the crosse, or orizons; then the witches may, or doo catch them from their mothers sides in the night, or out of their cradles, or otherwise kill them with their ceremonies.'[3] The same author quotes from the French authorities the crimes laid to the charge of witches, among which are the following: 'They sacrifice their owne children to the diuell before baptisme, holding them vp in the aire vnto him, and then thrust a needle into their braines'; and 'they burne their children when they haue sacrificed them'.[4] Boguet says, 'Les Matrones, & sages femmes sont accoustume d'offrir a Satan les petits enfans qu'elles recoiuent, & puis les faire mourir auant qu'ils soient baptizez, par le moye[n] d'vne grosse espingle qu'elles leur enfoncent dans le cerueau.'[5] Boguet's words imply that this was done at every birth at which a witch officiated; but it is impossible that this should be the case; the sacrifice was probably made for some special purpose, for which a new-born child was the appropriate victim.

The most detailed account of such sacrifices is given in the trial of the Paris witches (1679-81), whom Madame de

[1. Highland Papers, iii, p. 18.

2. Lemoine, vi, p. 109.

3. Reg. Scot, Bk. III, p. 41.

4. Id., Bk. II, p. 32.

5. Boguet, p.205.]

Montespan consulted. The whole ceremony was performed to the end that the love of Louis XIV should return to Madame de Montespan, at that time his discarded mistress; it seems to be a kind of fertility rite, hence its use on this occasion. The Abbe Guibourg was the sacrificing priest, and from this and other indications he appears to have been the Chief or Grand-master who, before a less educated tribunal, would have been called the Devil. Both he and the girl Montvoisin were practically agreed as to the rite; though from the girl's words it would appear that the child was already dead, while Guibourg's evidence implies that it was alive. Both witnesses gave their evidence soberly and gravely and without torture. Montvoisin, who was eighteen years old, stated that she had presented 'a la messe de Madame de Montespan, par l'ordre de sa mere, un enfant paraissant ne avant terme, le mit dans un bassin, Guibourg l'egorgea, versa dans le calice, et consacra le sang avec hostie'. Guibourg's evidence shows that the sacrifice was so far from being uncommon that the assistants were well used to the work, and did all that was required with the utmost celerity:

'Il avait achete un ecu l'enfant qui fut sacrifie a cette messe qui lui fut presente par une grande fille et ayant tire du sang de l'enfant qu'il piqua a la gorge avec un canif, it en versa dans le calice, apres quoi l'enfant fut retire et emporte dans un autre lieu, dont ensuite on lui rapporta le coeur et les entrailles pour en faire une deuxieme [oblation].'[1]

In Scotland it was firmly believed that sacrifices of children took place in all classes of society: 'The justices of the peace were seen familiarly conversing with the foul fiend, to whom one in Dumfries-shire actually offered up his firstborn child immediately after birth, stepping out with it in his arms to the staircase, where the devil stood ready, as it was suspected, to receive the innocent Victim.'[2] In the later witch-trials the sacrifice of the child seems to have been made after its burying, as in the case of the Witch of Calder in 1720, who confessed that she had given the Devil 'the body of a dead child of her own to make a roast of'.[3]

[1. Ravaisson, p. 334, 335

2. Sharpe, p. 147.

3. Chambers, iii, p. 450.]

It is possible that the killing of children by poison was one method of sacrifice when the cult was decadent and victims difficult to obtain. Reginald Scot's words, written in 1584, suggest that this was the case: 'This must be an infallible rule, that euerie fortnight, or at the least euerie moneth, each witch must kill one child at the least for hir part.' 'Sinistrari d'Ameno, writing about a century later, says the same: 'They promise the Devil sacrifices and offerings at stated times: once a fortnight or at least each month, the murder of some child, or an homicidal act of sorcery.'[2] It is impossible to believe in any great frequency of this sacrifice, but there is considerable foundation in fact for the statement that children were killed, and it accounts as nothing else can for the cold-blooded murders of children of which the witches were sometimes accused. The accusations seem to have been substantiated on several occasions, the method of sacrifice being by poison.[3]

The sacrifice of a child was often performed as a means of procuring certain magical materials or powers, which were obtained by preparing the sacrificed bodies in several ways. Scot says that the flesh of the child was boiled and consumed by the witches for two purposes. Of the thicker part of the concoction 'they make ointments, whereby they ride in the aire; but the thinner potion they put into flaggons, whereof whosoeuer drinketh, obseruing certeine ceremonies, immediatelie becommeth a maister or rather a mistresse in that practise and facultie.'[4] The Paris Coven confessed that they 'distilled' the entrails of the sacrificed child after Guibourg had celebrated the mass for Madame de Montespan, the method being probably the same as that described by Scot. A variant occurs in both France and Scotland, and is interesting as throwing light on the reasons for some of the savage rites of the witches: 'Pour ne confesser iamais le secret de l'escole, on faict au sabbat vne paste de millet noir, auec de la poudre du foye de quelque enfant non baptise qu'on faict secher, puis

[1. Scot, Bk. III, p. 42.

2. Sinistrari de Ameno, p. 27.

3. See, amongst others, the account of Mary Johnson (Essex, 1645), who was accused of poisoning two children; the symptoms suggest belladonna. Howell, iv, 844, 846.

4. Scot, Bk. III, p. 41.]

meslant cette poudre avec ladicte paste, elle a cette vertu de taciturnite: si bien que qui en mange ne confesse iamais.'[1] At Forfar, in 1661, Helen Guthrie and four others exhumed the body of an unbaptized infant, which was buried in the churchyard near the south-east door of the church, 'and took severall peices therof, as the feet, hands, a pairt of the head, and a pairt of the buttock, and they made a py therof, that they might eat of it, that by this meanes they might never make a confession (as they thought) of their witchcraftis.'[2] Here the idea of sympathetic magic is very clear; by eating the flesh of a child who had never spoken articulate words, the witches' own tongue's would be unable to articulate.

4. Sacrifice of the God.--The sacrifice of the witch-god was a decadent custom when the records were made in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The accounts of the actual rite come from France and Belgium, where a goat was substituted for the human victim. The sacrifice was by fire in both those countries, and there are indications that it was the same in Great Britain. It is uncertain whether the interval of time between the sacrifices was one, seven, or nine years.

Bodin and Boguet, each writing from his own knowledge of the subject, give very similar accounts, Bodin's being the more detailed. In describing a trial which took place in Poictiers in 1574, he says: 'La se trouuoit vn grand bouc noir, qui parloit comme vne personne aux assistans, & dansoyent a l'entour du bouc: puis vn chacun luy baisoit le derriere, auec vne chandelle ardente: & cela faict, le bouc se consommoit en feu, & de la ce[n]dre chacun en prenoit pour faire mourir le boeuf [etc.]. Et en fin le Diable leur disoit d'vne voix terrible des mots, Vengez vous ou vous mourrez.'[3] Boguet says that in the Lyons district in 1598 the Devil celebrated mass, and 'apres auoir prins la figure d'vn Bouc, se consume en feu, & reduit en cendre, laquelle les Sorciers recueillent, & cachent pour s'en seruir a l'execution de leurs desseins pernicieux & abominables'.[4] In 1603, a Belgian witch, Claire Goessen, was present at such a sacrifice, and her account is therefore that of an eyewitness. 'Elle s'est laissee transporter a l'assemblee

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 128.

2. Kinloch, p. 121.

3. Bodin, Fleau, pp. 187-8.

4. Boguet, p. 141.]

nocturne de Lembeke, ou, apres la danse, elle a, comme tous les assistans, baise un bouc a l'endroit de sa queue, lequel bouc fut ensuite brule et ses cendres distribuees et emportees par les convives.'[1] Jeanne de Belloc in 1609 'a veu le Grand maistre de l'assemblee se ietter dans les flammes an sabbat, se faire brusler iusques a ce qu'iI estoit reduit en poudre, & les grandes & insignes sorcieres prendre les dictes poudres pour ensorceler les petits enfants & les metier an sabbat, & en prenoient aussi dans la bouche pour ne reueler iamais'.[2] A French witch in 16S2 declared that at the Sabbath 'le diable s'y at mis en feu et en donne des cendres lesquelles tous faisaient voller en I'air pour faire mancquer les fruits de la terre'.[3] At Lille in 1661 the girls in Madame Bourignon's orphanage stated that 'on y adoroit une bete; & qu'on faisoit avec elle des infamies; & puis sur la fin on la bruloit, & chacun en prenoit des cendres, avec lesquelles on faisoit languir ou mourir des personnes, ou autres animaux.'[4]

The collection and use of the ashes by the worshippers point to the fact that we have here a sacrifice of the god of fertility. Originally the sprinkling of the ashes on fields or animals or in running water was a fertility charm; but when Christianity became sufficiently powerful to attempt the suppression of the ancient religion, such practices were represented as evil, and were therefore said to be 'pour faire mancquer les fruits de la terre'.

The animal-substitute for the divine victim is usually the latest form of the sacrifice; the intervening stages were first the volunteer, then the criminal, both of whom were accorded the power and rank of the divine being whom they personated. The period of time during which the substitute acted as the god varied in different places; so also did the interval between the sacrifices. Frazer has pointed out that the human victim, whether the god himself or his human substitute, did not content himself by merely not attempting to escape his destiny, but in many cases actually rushed on his fate, and died by his own hand or by voluntary submission to the sacrificer.

[1. Cannaert, p. 50.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 133.

3. La Tradition, 1891, V, p. 215. Neither name nor place are given.

4. Bourignon, Parole, p. 87.]

The witch-cult being a survival of an ancient religion, many of the beliefs and rites of these early religions are to be found in it. Of these the principal are: the voluntary substitute, the temporary transference of power to the substitute, and the self-devotion to death. As times changed and the ceremonies could no longer be performed openly, the sacrifices took on other forms. I have already suggested that the child-murders, of which the witches were often convicted, were in many cases probably offerings made to the God. In the same way, when, the time came for the God or his substitute to be sacrificed, recourse was had to methods which hid the real meaning of the ceremony; and the sacrifice of the incarnate deity, though taking place in public, was consummated at the hands of the public executioner. This explanation accounts for the fact that the bodies of witches, male or female, were always burnt and the ashes scattered; for the strong prejudice which existed, as late as the eighteenth century, against any other mode of disposing of their bodies; and for some of the otherwise inexplicable occurrences in connexion with the deaths of certain of the victims.

Read in the light of this theory much of the mystery which surrounds the fate of Joan of Arc is explained. She was put to death as a witch, and the conduct of her associates during her military career, as well as the evidence at her trial, bear out the fact that she belonged to the ancient religion, not to the Christian. Nine years after her death in the flames her commander, Gilles de Rais, was tried on the same charge and condemned to the same fate. The sentence was not carried out completely in his case; he was executed by hanging, and the body was snatched from the fire and buried in Christian ground. Like Joan herself, Gilles received a semi- canonization after death, and his shrine was visited by nursing mothers. Two centuries later Major Weir offered himself up and was executed as a witch in Edinburgh, refusing to the end all attempts to convert him to the Christian point of view.

The belief that the witch must be burnt and the ashes scattered was so ingrained in the popular mind that, when the severity of the laws began to relax, remonstrances were made by or to the authorities. In 1649 the Scotch General Assembly has a record: 'Concerning the matter of the buriall of the Lady Pittadro, who, being vnder a great scandall of witchcraft, and being incarcerat in the Tolbuith of this burgh during her triall before the justice, died in prison, The Comission of the Generall Assembly, having considered the report of the Comittee appointed for that purpose, Doe give their advyse to the Presbyterie of Dumfermling to show their dislike of that fact of the buriall of the Lady Pittadro, in respect of the maner and place, and that the said Presbyterie may labour to make the persons who hes buried her sensible of their offence in so doeing; and some of the persons who buried hir, being personallie present, are desired by the Comission to shew themselvis to the Presbyterie sensible of their miscarriage therein.'[1]

At Maidstone in 1652 'Anne Ashby, alias Cobler, Anne Martyn, Mary Browne, Anne Wilson, and Mildred Wright of Cranbrook, and Mary Read, of Lenham, being legally convicted, were according to the Laws of this Nation, adjudged to be hanged, at the common place of Execution. Some there were that wished rather, they might be burnt to Ashes; alledging that it was a received opinion among many, that the body of a witch being burnt, her bloud is prevented thereby from becomming hereditary to her Progeny in the same evill.'[2] The witches themselves also held the belief that they ought to die by fire. Anne Foster was tried for witchcraft at Northampton in 1674: 'after Sentence of Death was past upon her, she mightily desired to be Burned; but the Court would give no Ear to that, but that she should be hanged at the Common place of Execution.'[3]

  

9. Magic Words

The magic words known to the witches were used only for certain definite purposes, the most important use being to raise the Devil. I have omitted the charms which are founded on Christian prayers and formulas, and quote only those which appear to belong to the witch-cult.

In the section on Familiars it will be seen how the witches

[1. Scot. Hist. Soc., xxv, p. 348. See also Ross, Aberdour and Inchcolme, p. 339.

2. Prod. and Trag. History, p. 7.

3. Tryall of Ann Foster, p. 8.]

divined by means of animals, which animals were allotted to them by the Chief. In auguries and divinations of this kind in every part of the world a form of words is always used, and the augury is taken by the first animal of the desired species which is seen after the charm is spoken.

Agnes Sampson, the leading witch of the North Berwick Coven, 1590, summoned her familiar by calling 'Elva', and then divined by a dog, whom she dismissed by telling him to 'depart by the law he lives on'. She also used the formula, 'Haill, hola!', and 'Hola!' was also the cry when a cat was cast into the sea to raise a storm.' A man-witch of Alest, 1593, gave the devil's name as Abiron: 'quand il le vouloit voir il disoit: vien Abiron, sinon ie te quitteray.'[2] Andro Man at Aberdeen, 1597, 'confessis that the Devill, thy maister, is rasit be the speking of the word Benedicite, and is laid agane be tacking of a dog vnder thy left oxster in thi richt hand, and casting the same in his mouth, and speking the word Maikpeblis.--He grantit that this word Benedicite rasit the Dewill, and Maikpeblis laid him againe, strikin him on the faice with ane deice with the left hand.'[2] Alexander Hamilton of East Lothian, 1630, when covenanting with the devil, had 'ane battoun of fir in his hand the devill than gave the said Alexr command to tak that battoun quhan evir he had ado with him and therewt to strek thruse upone the ground and to chairge him to ruse up foule theiff'; the divining animals in this case were crows, cats, and dogs.[4] Marie Lamont of Innerkip, 1662, was instructed to call the Devil Serpent when she desired to speak with him.[5]

The Somerset witches, 1664, cried out Robin at an appointed place, and the Master then appeared in his proper form as a man: Elizabeth Style and Alice Duke also called him Robin when summoning him privately, and Elizabeth Style added, 'O Sathan give me my purpose', before saying what she wished done.[6] The Swedish witches, 1669, called their Chief

[1. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 211, 235, 238

2. De Lancre, L'Incredulite, p. 772.

3. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 120, 124.

4. From the record of the trial in the Justiciary Court of Edinburgh.

5. Sharpe, p. 132.

6. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 137, 164.]

with the cry, 'Antecessor, come and carry us to Blockula'; this they did at an appointed place, and the Devil then appeared as a man.[1]

The words used before starting to a meeting are rarely recorded; only a few remain. The earliest example is from Guernsey in 1563, when Martin Tulouff heard an old witch cry as she bestrode a broomstick, 'Va au nom du diable et luciffer p dessq[n] roches et espynes.' He then lost sight of her, with the inference that she flew through the air, though he acknowledged that he himself was not so successful.[2] The witches of the Basses-Pyrenees, 1609, anointed themselves before starting, and repeated the words 'Emen hetan, emen hetan', which de Lancre translates 'Ici et la, ici et la'. 'Quelquefois plus furieuses elles se batent entre elles mesmes, en disant, le suis Ie Diable, ie n'ay rien qui ne soit a toy, en ton nom Seigneur cette tien ne seruante s'oingt, & dois estre quelque iour Diable & maling Esprit comme toy.' When crossing water they cried, 'Haut la coude, Quillet,' upon which they could cross without getting wet; and when going a long distance they said, 'Pic suber hoeilhe, en ta la lane de bouc bien m'arrecoueille.'[3] Isobel Gowdie, 1662, gives two variants of the magic words used on these occasions: the first, 'Horse and hattock, in the Divellis name' is not unlike the form given by Martin Tulouff; the second is longer, 'Horse and hattock, horse and goe, Horse and pellattis, ho! ho!'[4] The Somerset witches, 1664, when starting to the meeting, said, 'Thout, tout a tout, tout, throughout and about'; and when returning, 'Rentum tormentum'. At parting they cried, 'A Boy! merry meet, merry part'[7] They also had a long form of words which were used when applying the flying ointment, but these are not recorded.

Other magical words were used at the religious services of the witches in the Basses-Pyrenees (1609). At the elevation

[1. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 316.

2. From the record of the trial in the Guernsey Greffe.

3. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 123, 400.

4. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 604, 608.

5. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 139, 141. 1 have pointed out that the cry of A Boy' is possibly the Christian recorder's method of expressing the Bacchic shout 'Evoe'. See Jour. Man. Or. Soc., 1916-17, p. 65.]

of the host the congregation cried, '"Aquerra goity, Aquerra beyty, Aquerra goity, Aquerra beyty," qui veut dire Cabron arriba Cabron abaro (sic)'; at the elevation of the chalice at a Christian service they said, 'Corbeau noir, corbeau noir.' There were two forms of words to be used when making the sign of the cross; the first was, 'In nomine Patrica, Aragueaco Petrica, Agora, Agora Valentia, Iouanda, goure gaitz goustia,' translated as 'Au nom de Patrique, Petrique, d'Arragon, a cette heure a cette heure Valence, tout nostre mal est passe'. The second roused de Lancre's horror as peculiarly blasphemous: 'In, nomine patrica, Aragueaco Petrica, Gastellaco Ianicot, Equidae ipordian pot,' 'au nom de Patrique, petrique d'Arragon. Iannicot de Castille faictes moy vn baiser au derriere.'[1] The mention of the ancient Basque god Janicot makes this spell unusually interesting. As the dances were also a religious rite the words used then must be recorded here. Bodin gives the formula, 'Har, har, diable, diable, saute icy, saute la, ioue icy, ioue la: Et les autres disoyent sabath sabath.'[2] The word diable is clearly Bodin's own interpellation for the name of the God, for the Guernsey version, which is currently reported to be used at the present day, runs 'Har, har, Hou, Hou, danse ici', etc.; Hou being the name of an ancient Breton god.[3] Jean Weir (1670) stated that at the instigation of some woman unnamed she put her foot on a cloth on the floor with her hand upon the crown of her head, and repeated thrice, 'All my cross and troubles go to the door with thee.'[4] This seems to have been an admission ceremony, but the words are of the same sentiment as the one recorded by de Lancre, 'tout notre mat est passe.'

There were also certain magical effects supposed to be brought about by the use of certain words. Martin Tulouff (1563) claimed that he could bewitch cows so that they gave blood instead of milk, by saying 'Butyrum de armento', but he admitted that he also used powders to accomplish his

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 401, 461, 462, 464.

2 Bodin, p. 190.

3. The names of the smaller islands are often compounded with the name of this deity, e.g. Li-hou, Brecq-hou, &c.

4. Law, p. 27 note.]

purpose.[1] Isobel Gowdie (1662) described how the witches laid a broom or a stool in their beds to represent themselves during their absence at a meeting. By the time that this record was made the witches evidently believed that the object took on the exact appearance of the woman, having forgotten its original meaning as a signal to show where she had gone. The words used on these occasions show no belief in the change of appearance of the object:

'I lay down this besom [or stool] in the Devil's name,
 Let it not stir till I come again.'

Her statements regarding the change of witches into animals I have examined in the section on Familiars (p. 234). The words used to effect these changes are given in full. When a witch wished to take on the form of a hare she said:

'I sall goe intill ane haire,
 With sorrow, and sych, and meikle caire;
 And I sall goe in the Divellis nam,
 Ay quhill I com hom againe.'

To change into a cat or a crow the last two lines were retained unaltered, but the first two were respectively,

'I sall goe intill ane catt,
 With sorrow, and sych, and a blak shot'

or

'I sall goe intill a craw,
 With sorrow, and sych, and a blak thraw.'

To return into human form the witch said:

'Haire, haire, God send thee caire.
 I am in an haire's liknes just now,
 Bot I sal be in a womanis liknes ewin now.'

From a cat or a crow, the words were 'Cat, cat, God send thee a blak shott' or 'Craw, craw, God send thee a blak thraw', with the last two lines as before. When the witch in animal form entered the house of another witch, she would say 'I conjure thee, Goe with me'; on which the second witch would turn into the same kind of animal as the first. If, however, they met in the open, the formula was slightly different, 'Divell speid the, Goe thow with me,' the result being the same.

[1. From a trial in the Guernsey Greffe.

2. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 607-8, 611.]

The Somerset trials record the words used for cursing anything. These were simply 'A Pox take it', the curse being supposed to take effect at once. If the curse were pronounced over an image of a person the words were 'A Pox on thee, I'le spite thee'.[1]

Alexander Elder's grace over meat is probably a corrupt form of some ancient rite:

We eat this meat in the Divellis nam,
 With sorrow, and sych, and meikle shame;
 We sall destroy hows and hald;
 Both sheip and noat in till the fald.
 Litle good sall come to the fore
 Of all the rest of the litle store.'[2]

The 'conjuring of cats' was a distinct feature, and is clearly derived from an early form of sacrifice. The details are recorded only in Scotland, and it is possible that Scotland is the only country in which it occurred, though the sanctity of the cat in other places suggests that the omission in the records is accidental.

In the dittay against John Fian, 1590, he was 'fylit, for the chaissing of ane catt in Tranent; in the quhilk chaise, he was careit heich aboue the ground, with gryt swyftnes, and as lychtlie as the catt hir selff, ower ane heicher dyke, nor he was able to lay his hand to the heid off:--And being inquyrit, to quhat effect he chaissit the samin? Ansuerit, that in ane conversatioune haldin at Brumhoillis, Sathan commandit all that were present, to tak cattis; tyke as he, for obedience to Sathan, chaissit the said catt, purpoiselie to be cassin in the sea, to raise windis for distructioune of schippis and boitis.'[3] Agnes Sampson of the same Coven as Fian confessed 'that at the time when his Majestie was in Denmark, shee being accompanied by the parties before speciallie named, tooke a cat and christened it, and afterwards bounde to each part of that cat, the cheefest parte of a dead man, and severall joyntis of his bodie: And that in the night following, the saide cat was convayed into the middest of the sea by all the witches, sayling in their riddles or cives, as is aforesaid, and so left the

[1. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 137, 139,148, 149.

2. Pitcairn, iii, p. 612. Sych = sighing, lamentation.
 3. Id., i, pt. ii, p. 212.]

said cat right before the towne of Leith in Scotland. This doone, there did arise such a tempest in the sea, as a greater hath not bene seene.'[1] The legal record of this event is more detailed and less dramatic; the sieves are never mentioned, the witches merely walking to the Pier-head in an ordinary and commonplace manner. The Coven at Prestonpans sent a letter to the Leith Coven that--

'they sould mak the storm vniuersall thro the sea. And within aucht dayes eftir the said Bill [letter] wes delyuerit, the said Agnes Sampsoune, Jonett Campbell, Johnne Fean, Gelie Duncan, and Meg Dyn baptesit ane catt in the wobstaris hous, in maner following: Fyrst, twa of thame held ane fingar, in the ane syd of the chimnay cruik, and ane vther held ane vther fingar in the vther syd, the twa nebbis of the fingars meting togidder; than thay patt the catt thryis throw the linkis of the cruik, and passit itt thryis vnder the chimnay. Thaireftir, att Begie Toddis hous, thay knitt to the foure feit of the catt, foure jountis of men; quhilk being done, the sayd Jonet fechit it to Leith; and about mydnycht, sche and the twa Linkhop, and twa wyfeis callit Stobbeis, came to the Pier-heid, and saying thir words, 'See that thair be na desait amangis ws'; and thay caist the catt in the see, sa far as thay mycht, quhilk swam owre and cam agane; and thay that wer in the Panis, caist in ane vthir catt in the see att xj houris. Eftir quhilk, be thair sorcerie and inchantment, the boit perischit betuix Leith and Kinghorne; quhilk thing the Deuill did, and went befoir, with ane stalf in his hand.'[2]

Beigis Todd was concerned in another 'conjuring of cats', this time at Seaton.

'Eftir thay had drukkin togidder a certane space, thay, in thair devillische maner, tuik ane katt, and drew the samyn nyne tymes throw the said Beigis cruik; and thaireftir come with all thair speed to Seaton-thorne, be-north the 3et. . . . And thay thaireftir past altogidder, with the Devill, to the irne 3et [iron gate] of Seatoun, quhair of new thay tuik ane cat, and drew the samyn nyne tymes throw the said Irne-3ett: And immediatlie thaireffir, came to the barne, foiranent George Feudaris dur, quhair thai christened the said catt, and callit hir Margaret: And thaireftir come all bak agane to the Deane-fute, quhair first thai convenit, and cuist the kat to the Devill.'[3]

[1. Newes from Scotland, see Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 218.

2. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 237.

3. Id., ii, p. 542.]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI. THE RITES (continued)

  

WITCHES' RAIN-MAKING AND FERTILITY RITES

  

1. General

IN common with many other religions of the Lower Culture, the witch-cult of Western Europe observed certain rites for rain-making and for causing or blasting fertility. This fact was recognized in the papal Bulls formulated against the witches who were denounced, not for moral offences, but for the destruction of fertility. The celebrated Decree of Innocent VIII, which in 1488 let loose the full force of the Church against the witches, says that 'they blight the marriage bed, destroy the births of women and the increase of cattle; they blast the corn on the ground, the grapes of the vineyard, the fruits of the trees, the grass and herbs of the field'. Adrian VI followed this up in 1521 with a Decretal Epistle, denouncing the witches 'as a Sect deviating from the Catholic Faith, denying their Baptism, and showing Contempt of the Ecclesiastical Sacraments, treading Crosses under their Feet, and, taking the Devil for their Lord, destroyed. the Fruits of the Earth by their Enchantments, Sorceries, and Superstitions'.

The charms used by the witches, the dances, the burning of the god and the broadcast scattering of his ashes, all point to the fact that this was a fertility cult; and this is the view taken also by those contemporary writers who give a more or less comprehensive account of the religion and ritual. Though most of the fertility or anti-fertility charms remaining to us were used by the witches either for their own benefit or to injure their enemies, enough remains to show that originally all these charms were to promote fertility in general and in particular. When the charm was for fertility in general, it was performed by the whole congregation together; but for the fertility of any particular woman, animal, or field, the ceremony was performed by one witch alone or by two at most.

The power which the witches claimed to possess over human fertility is shown in many of the trials. Jonet Clark was tried in Edinburgh in 1590 'for giving and taking away power from sundry men's Genital-members';[1] and in the same year and place Bessie Roy was accused of causing women's milk to dry up.[2] The number of midwives who practised witchcraft points also to this fact; they claimed to be able to cause and to prevent pregnancy, to cause and to prevent an easy delivery, to cast the labour-pains on an animal or a human being (husbands who were the victims are peculiarly incensed against these witches), and in every way to have power over the generative organs of both sexes. In short, it is possible to say that, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the better the midwife the better the witch.

The Red Book of Appin,[3] which was obtained from the Devil by a trick, is of great interest in this connexion. It was said to contain charms for the curing of diseases of cattle; among them must certainly have been some for promoting the fertility of the herds in general, and individual animals in particular. It is not unlikely that the charms as noted in the book were the result of many experiments, for we know that the witches were bound to give account to the Devil of all the magic they performed in the intervals between the Sabbaths, and he or his clerk recorded their doings. From this record the Devil instructed the witches. It is evident from the confessions and the evidence at the trials that the help of the witches was often required to promote fertility among human beings as well as among animals. The number of midwives who were also witches was very great, and the fact can hardly be accidental.

Witches were called in to perform incantations during the various events of a farm-yard. Margrat Og of Aberdeen, 1597, was 'indyttit as a manifest witche, in that, be the space of a yeirsyn or theirby, thy kow being in bulling, and James

[1. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 206; Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 301.

2. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 207.

3. J. G. Campbell, pp. 293-4. The book was in manuscript, and when last heard of was in the possession of the now-extinct Stewarts of Invernahyle.]

Farquhar, thy awin gude son haulding the kow, thow stuid on the ane syd of the kow, and thy dochter, Batrix Robbie, on the vther syd, and quhen the bull was lowping the kow, thow tuik a knyff and keist ower the kow, and thy dochter keapit the sam, and keist it over to the agane, and this ye did thryiss, quililk thou can nocht deny'.[1] At Auldearne the Coven, to which Isobel Gowdie belonged, performed a ceremony to obtain for themselves the benefit of a neighbour's crop. 'Befor Candlemas, we went be-east Kinlosse, and ther we yoaked an plewghe of paddokis. The Divell held the plewgh, and Johne Yownge in Mebestowne, our Officer, did drywe the plewghe. Paddokis did draw the plewgh as oxen; quickens wer sowmes, a riglen's horne was a cowter, and an piece of an riglen's horne was an sok. We went two seueral tymes abowt; and all we of the Coeven went still wp and downe with the plewghe, prayeing to the Divell for the fruit of that land, and that thistles and brieris might grow ther'.[2] Here the ploughing ceremony was to induce fertility for the benefit of the witches, while the draught animals and all the parts of the plough connoted barrenness for the owner of the soil.

The most detailed account of a charm for human fertility is given in the confession of the Abbe Guibourg, who appears to have been the Devil of the Paris witches. The ceremony took place at the house of a witch-midwife named Voisin or Montvoisin, and according to the editor was for the benefit of Louis XIV or Charles II, two of the most notorious libertines of their age.

'Il a fait chez la Voisin, revetu d'aube, d'etole et de manipule, une conjuration en presence de la Des Oeillets [attendant of Madame de Montespan], qui pretendait faire un charme pour le (Roi) et qui etait accompagnee d'un homme qui lui donna la conjuration, et comme il etait necessaire d'avoir du sperme des deux sexes, Des Oeillets ayant ses mois n'en put donner mais versa dans le calice de ses menstrues et l'homme qui l'accompagnait, ayant passe dans la ruelle du lit avec lui Guibourg, versa de son sperme dans le calice. Sur

[1. Spalding Club. Misc., i, p. 143.

2. Pitcairn, iii, p. 603. 'Toads did draw the plough as oxen, couch-grass was the harness and trace-chains, a gelded animal's horn was the Coulter, and a piece of a gelded animal's horn was the sock.']

le tout, la Des Oeillets et l'homme mirent chacun d'une poudre de sang de chauve-souris et de la farine pour donner un corps plus ferme a toute la composition et apres qu'iI eut recite la conjuration il tira le tout du calice qui fut mis dans un petit vaisseau que la Des Oeillets ou l'homme emporta.'[1]

The ecclesiastical robes and the use of the chalice point to this being a ceremony of a religious character, and should be compared with the child-sacrifices performed by the same priest or Devil (see pp. 150, 157).

An anti-fertility rite, which in its simplicity hardly deserves the name of a ceremony, took place at Crook of Devon in Kinross-shire. Bessie Henderson 'lykeways confessed and declared that Janet Paton was with you at ane meeting when they trampit down Thos. White's rie in the beginning of harvest, 1661, and that she had broad soals and trampit down more nor any of the rest'.[2]

  

2. Rain-making

The rain-making powers of the witches have hardly been noted by writers on the subject, for by the time the records were made the witches were credited with the blasting of fertility rather than its increase. Yet from what remains it is evident that the original meaning of much of the ritual was for the production of fertilizing rain, though both judges and witnesses believed that it was for storms and hail.

One of the earliest accounts of such powers is given in the story quoted by Reginald Scot from the Malleus Maleficarum, written in 1487, a century before Scot's own book:

'A little girle walking abroad with hir father in his land, heard him complaine of drought, wishing for raine, etc. Whie father (quoth the child) 'can make it raine or haile, when and where I list: He asked where she learned it. She said, of hir mother, who forbad hir to tell anie bodie thereof. He asked hir how hir mother taught hir? She answered, that hir mother committed hir to a maister, who would at anie time doo anie thing for hir. Whie then (said he) make it raine but onlie in my field. And so she went to the streame, and threw vp water in hir maisters name, and made it raine presentlie. And proceeding further with hir father, she made it haile in

[1. Ravaisson, 1679-81, p. 336.

2. Burns Begg, p. 224.]

another field, at hir father's request. Herevpon he accused his wife, and caused hir to be burned; and then he new christened his child againe.'[1]

Scot also gives 'certaine impossible actions' of witches when he ridicules the belief

'that the elements are obedient to witches, and at their commandement; or that they may at their pleasure send raine, haile, tempests, thunder, lightening; when she being but an old doting woman, casteth a flint stone ouer hir left shoulder, towards the west, or hurleth a little sea sand vp into the element, or wetteth a broome sprig in water, and sprinkleth the same in the aire; or diggeth a pit in the earth, and putting water therein, stirreth it about with hir finger; or boileth hogs bristles; or laieth sticks acrosse vpon a banke, where neuer a drop of water is; or burieth sage till it be rotten; all which things are confessed by witches, and affirmed by writers to be the meanes that witches vse to mooue extraordinarie tempests and raine'.[2]

More quotes Wierus to the same effect: 'Casting of Flint-Stones behind their backs towards the West, or flinging a little Sand in the Air, or striking a River with a Broom, and so sprinkling the Wet of it toward Heaven, the stirring of Urine or Water with their finger in a Hole in the ground, or boyling of Hogs Bristles in a Pot.'[3]

The throwing of stones as a fertility rite is found in the trial of Jonet Wischert, one of the chief witches at Aberdeen, and is there combined with a nudity rite. 'In hervest last bypast, Mr. William Raves huikes [saw thee at] the heid of thi awin gudmannis croft, and saw the tak all thi claiss about thi heid, and thow beand naikit from the middill down, tuik ane gryte number of steynis, and thi self gangand baklenis, keist ane pairt behind the our thi heid, and ane wther pairt fordward.'[4]

  

3. Fertility

Every contemporary writer who gives a general view of the religion and ritual observes the witches' powers over human fertility. Boguet says, 'Ils font encor cacher & retirer les

[1. Reg. Scot, Bk. III, p. 60.

2. Id., Bk. III, p. 60.

3. More, p. 168.

4. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 93.]

parties viriles, et puis les font ressortir quand il leur plait. Ils empeschent aussi tantost la copulation charnelle de l'hom[m]e & de la femme, en retirant les nerfs, & ostant la roideur du membre; et tantost la procreation en destournant ou bouchant les conduicts de la semence, pour empescher qu'elle ne descende aux vases de la generation.'[1] Scot, who quotes generally without any acknowledgement and often inaccurately, translates this statement, 'They also affirme that the vertue of generation is impeached by witches, both inwardlie, and outwardlie: for intrinsecallie they represse the courage, and they stop the passage of the mans seed, so as it may not descend to the vessels of generation: also they hurt extrinsecallie, with images, hearbs, &c.'[2] Bodin also remarks that witches, whether male or female, can affect only the generative organs.[3] Madame Bourignon says that the girls, whom she befriended,

'told me, that Persons who were thus engaged to the Devil by a precise Contract, will allow no other God but him, and therefore offer him whatsoever is dearest to them; nay, are constrained to offer him their Children, or else the Devil would Beat them, and contrive that they should never arrive to the State of Marriage, and so should have no Children, by reason that the Devil hath power by his Adherents, to hinder both the one and the other . . . So soon as they come to be able to beget Children, the Devil makes them offer the desire which they have of Marrying, to his Honor: And with this all the Fruit that may proceed from their Marriage. This they promise voluntarily, to the end that they may accomplish their Designs: For otherwise the Devil threatens to hinder them by all manner of means, that they shall not Marry, nor have Children.'[4]

Glanvil, writing on the Scotch trials of 1590, speaks of some Effects, Kinds, or Circumstances of Witchcraft, such as the giving and taking away power from sundry men's Genital-members. For which Jannet Clark was accused.'[5] In the official record Jonet Clark was tried and condemned for 'gewing of ane secreit member to Iohnne Coutis; and gewing and taking of power fra sindrie mennis memberis. Item, fylit of taking Iohnne Wattis secreit member fra him.'[6]

[1. Boguet, p. 211.

2. R. Scot, p. 77.

3. Bodin, pp. 125-7.

4. Bourignon, Vie, pp. 222-3; Hale, pp. 37-8.

5. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 301.

6. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 206.]

Sexual ritual occurs in many religions of the Lower Culture and has always horrified members of the higher religions both in ancient and modern times. In fertility cults it is one of the chief features, not only symbolizing the fertilizing power in the whole animate world, but, in the belief of the actors, actually assisting it and promoting its effects.

Such fertility rites are governed by certain rules, which vary in different countries, particularly as to the age of girls, i.e. whether they are over or under puberty. Among the witches there appears to have been a definite rule that no girl under puberty had sexual intercourse with the Devil. This is even stated as a fact by so great an authority as Bodin: 'Les diables ne font point de paction expresse auec les enfans, qui leurs sont vouez, s'ils n'ont attaint l'aage de puberte.'[1] The details of the trials show that this statement is accurate. 'Magdalene de la Croix, Abbesse des Moniales de Cordoue en Espaigne, confessa que Satan n'eust point copulation, ny cognoissance d'elle, qu'elle n'eust douze ans.'[2] Bodin and De Lancre both cite the case of Jeanne Hervillier of Verbery in Compiegne; she was a woman of fifty-two at the time of her trial in 1578, She 'confessa qu'a l'aage de douze ans sa mere la presenta au diable, en forme d'vn grand homme noir, & vestu de noir, botte, esperonne, auec vne espee an coste, et vn cheual noir a la porte, auquel la mere dit: Voicy ma fille que ie vous ay promise: Et a la fille, Voicy vostre amy, qui vous fera bien heureuse, et deslors qu'elle renonca a Dieu, & a la religion, & puis coucha auec elle charnellement, en la mesme sorte & maniere que' font les hommes auec les femmes.'[3] De Lancre also emphasizes the age: 'Ieanne Haruillier depose qu'encore sa mere l'eust vouee a Satan des sa naissance, neantmoins qu'il ne la cognut charnellement qu'elle n'eust attainct l'aage de douze ans.'[4] De Lancre's own experience points in the same direction; he found that the children were not treated in the same way as

[1. Bodin, p. 465.

2. Id., p. 465. The trial was in 1545, Magdalene being then forty-two. See also Pleasant Treatise, p. 6.

3. Id., p. 227.

4. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 183.]

adults, nor were they permitted to join in all the ceremonies until after they had passed childhood.[1]

The same rule appears to have held good in Scotland, for when little Jonet Howat was presented to the Devil, he said, 'What shall I do with such a little bairn as she?'[2] It is, however, rare to find child-witches in Great Britain, therefore the rules concerning them are difficult to discover.

Another rule appears to have been that there was no sexual connexion with a pregnant woman. In the case of Isobel Elliot, the Devil 'offered to lie with her, but forbore because she was with child; that after she was kirked the Devil often met her, and had carnal copulation with her'.[3]

Since the days of Reginald Scot it has been the fashion of all those writers who disbelieved in the magical powers of witches to point to the details of the sexual intercourse between the Devil and the witches as proof positive of hysteria and hallucination. This is not the attitude of mind of the recorders who heard the evidence at the trials. 'Les confessions des Sorciers, que i'ay eu en main, me font croire qu'il en est quelque chose: dautant qu'ils ont tous recogneu, qu'ils auoient este couplez auec le Diable, et que la semence qu'il iettoit estoit fort froide; Ce qui est conforme a ce qu'en rapporte Paul Grilland, et les Inquisiteurs de la foy.'[4] It pleaseth their new Maister oftentimes to offer himselfe familiarly vnto them, to dally and lye with them, in token of their more neere coniunction, and as it were marriage vnto him.'[5] 'Witches confessing, so frequently as they do, that the Devil lies with them, and withal complaining of his tedious and offensive coldness, it is a shrewd presumption that he doth lie with them indeed, and that it is not a meer Dream.'[6]

It is this statement of the physical coldness of the Devil which modern writers adduce to prove their contention that the witches suffered from hallucination. I have shown above (pp. 61 seq.) that the Devil was often masked and his whole person covered with a disguise, which accounts for part of the evidence but not for all, and certainly not for the most important item. For in trial after trial, in places far removed from

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 145, 398. Kinloch, p. 124.

2. Arnot, p. 360.

3. Boguet, p. 68.

4. Cooper, p. 92.

5. More, p. 241.]

one another and at periods more than a century apart, the same fact is vouched for with just the small variation of detail which shows the actuality of the event. This is that, when the woman admitted having had sexual intercourse with the Devil, in a large proportion of cases she added, 'The Devil was cold and his seed likewise.' These were women of every class and every age, from just above puberty to old women of over seventy, unmarried, married, and widows. It is unscientific to disbelieve everything, as Scot does, and it is equally unscientific to label all the phenomena as the imagination of hysterical women. By the nature of things the whole of this evidence rests only on the word of the women, but I have shown above (pp. 63-5) that there were cases in which the men found the Devil cold, and cases in which the women found other parts of the Devil's person to be cold also. Such a mass of evidence cannot be ignored, and in any other subject would obtain credence at once. But the hallucination-theory, being the easiest, appears to have obsessed the minds of many writers, to the exclusion of any attempt at explanation from an unbiassed point of view.

Students of comparative and primitive religion have explained the custom of sacred marriages as an attempt to influence the course of nature by magic, the people who practise the rite believing that thereby all crops and herds as well as the women were rendered fertile, and that barrenness was averted. This accounts very well for the occurrence of 'obscene rites' among the witches, but fails when it touches the question of the Devil's coldness. I offer here an explanation which I believe to be the true one, for it accounts for all the facts; those facts which the women confessed voluntarily and without torture or fear of punishment, like Isobel Gowdie, or adhered to as the truth even at the stake amid the flames, like Jane Bosdeau.

In ancient times the Sacred Marriage took place usually once a year; but besides this ceremony there were other sexual rites which were not celebrated at a fixed season, but might be performed in the precincts of the temple of a god or goddess at any time, the males being often the priests or temple officials. These are established facts, and it is not too much to suppose that the witches' ceremonies were similar. But if the women believed that sexual intercourse with the priests would increase fertility, how much more would they believe in the efficacy of such intercourse with the incarnate God of fertility himself. They would insist upon it as their right, and it probably became compulsory at certain seasons, such as the breeding periods of the herds or the sowing and reaping periods of the crops. Yet as the population and therefore the number of worshippers in each 'congregation' increased, it would become increasingly difficult and finally impossible for one man to comply with the requirements of so many women.[1] The problem then was that on the one hand there were a number of women demanding what was in their eyes a thing essential for themselves and their families, and on the other a man physically unable to satisfy all the calls upon him. The obvious solution of the problem is that the intercourse between the Chief and the women was by artificial means, and the evidence in the trials points clearly to this solution.

Artificial phalli are well known in the remains of ancient civilizations. In ancient Egypt it was not uncommon to have statues of which the phallus was of a different material from the figure, and so made that it could be removed from its place and carried in procession. The earliest of such statues are the colossal limestone figures of the fertility-god Min found at Koptos, dating to the first dynasty, perhaps B.C. 5500.[2] But similar figures are found at every period of Egyptian history, and a legend was current at the time of Plutarch to account for this usage as well as for the festival of the Phallephoria.[3] Unless the phallus itself were the object of adoration there would be no reason to carry it in procession as a religious ceremony, and it is easily understandable that such a cult would commend itself chiefly to women.[4]

[1. The Deuill your maister, beand in liknes of ane beist, haid carnall [deal] with ilk ane of you.'-Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 149.

2. Petrie pp. 7-9; Capart, p. 223.

3. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, xviii, 5.

4. On the other hand, the female generative organs were also adored, and presumably by men. This suggestion is borne out by the figures of women with the pudenda exposed and often exaggerated in size. Such figures are found in Egypt, where they were called Baubo, and a legend was invented to account for the attitude; and similar figures were actually known in ancient Christian churches (Payne Knight, Discourse on the Worship of Priapus).]

The phallus of a divine statue was not always merely for adoration and carrying in procession; the Roman bride sacrificed her virginity to the god Priapus as a sacred rite. This is probably the remains of a still more ancient custom when the god was personated by a man and not by an image. The same custom remained in other parts of the world as the jus primae noctis, which was held as an inalienable right by certain kings and other divine personages. As might be expected, this custom obtained also among the witches.

'Le Diable faict des mariages au Sabbat entre les Sorciers & Sorcieres, & leur joignant les mains, il leur dict hautement

Esta es buena parati
 Esta parati lo toma.

Mais auant qu'ils couchent ensemble, il s'accouple auec elles, oste la virginite des filles.'--Ieannette d'Abadie, aged sixteen, 's'accusoit elle mesme d'auoir este depucellee par Satan.'[1]

The occasional descriptions of the Devil's phallus show without question its artificial character:

In 1598 in Lorraine 'es sagte die Alexia Dragaea, ihre Bulschafft hatte einen [Glied] so starcken etc allezeit gehabt, wenn ihm gestanden, und so gross als ein Ofengabel-Stiel, dessgleichen sie zugegen zeigte, denn ohngefehr eine Gabel zugegen war, sagte auch wie sie kein Geleuth weder Hoden noch Beutel daran gemerckt hat'.[2]

'Iaquema Paget adioustoit, qu'elle auoit empoigne plusieurs fois auec la main le membre du Demon, qui la cognoissoit, et que le membre estoit froid comme glace, long d'vn bon doigt, & moindre en grosseur que celuy d'vn homme. Tieuenne Paget et Antoine Tornier adioustoient aussi, que le membre de leurs Demons estoit long et gros, comme l'vn de leurs doigts.'[3] 'Il a au deuant son membre tire et pendant, & le monstre tousiours long d'vn coudee.--Le membre du Demon est faict a escailles comme vn poisson.--Le membre du Diable

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 132, 404.

2. Remigius, pt. i, p. 19.

3. Boguet, pp. 68-9.]

s'il estoit estendu est long enuiron d'vne aulne, mais il le tient entortille et sinueux en forme de serpent.--Le Diable, soit qu'il ayt la forme d'homme, on qu'il soit en forme de Bouc, a tousiours vn membre de mulet, ayant choisy en imitation celuy de cet animal comme le mieux pourueu. Il l'a long et gros comme le bras.--Le membre du Diable est long enuiron la moitie d'vne aulne, de mediocre grosseur, rouge, obscur, & tortu, fort rude & comme piquant.--Ce mauuais Demon ait son membre myparty, moitie de fer, moitie de chair tout de son long, & de mesme les genitoires. Il tient tousiours son membre dehors.--Le Diable a le membre faict de corne, ou pour le moins il en a I'apparence: c'est pourquoy il faict tant crier les femmes.--Jeannette d'Abadie dit qu'elle n'a iamais senty, qu'il eust aucune semence, sauf quand il la depucella qu'elle la sentit froide, mais que celle des autres hommes qui l'ont cognue, est naturelle.'[1]

Sylvine de la Plaine, 1616, confessed 'qu'il a le membre faict comme vn cheual, en entrant est froid comme glace, iette la semence fort froide, & en sortant la brusle comme si c'estoit du feu'.[1] In 1662 Isobel Gowdie said, 'His memberis ar exceiding great and long; no man's memberis ar so bigg as they ar.'[3].

The artificial phallus will account as nothing else can for the pain suffered by many of the women; and that they suffered voluntarily, and even gladly, can only be understood by realizing that they endured it for motives other than physical satisfaction and pleasure. 'There appeared a great Black Goal with a Candle between his Horns . . . He had carnal knowledge of her which was with great pain." 'Presque toutes les Sorcieres rapportent que cet accouplement leur est le plus souuent des-agreable, tant pour la laideur & deformite de Satan, que pour ce qu'elles y ont vne extreme douleur.'[5] 'Elle fuyoit l'accouplement du Diable, a cause qu'ayant son membre faict en escailles il fait souffrir vne extresme douleur.'[6] At the Sabbath in the Basses Pyrenees, the Devil took the women behind some sort of screen, and the children 'les oyent crier comme personnes qui souffrent vne grande douleur, et ils les voyent aussi tost reuenir au Sabbat

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 68, 224-6.

2. Id., L'Incredulite, p. 808.

3. Pitcairn, iii, p. 610.

4. F. Hutchinson, Historical Essays, p. 47.

5. Boguet, p. 69.

6. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 132.]

toutes sanglantes'.[1] As regards brides, 'En cet accouplement il leur faict perdre vne infinite de sang, et leur faict souffrit mille douleurs.'[2] Widow Bush of Barton said that the Devil, who came to her as a young black man, 'was colder than man, and heavier, and could not performe nature as man.'[3]

The physical coldness of the Devil is vouched for in all parts of Europe.'[4]

Toutes les Sorcieres s'accordent en cela, que la semence, qu'elles recoiuent du Diable, est froide comme glace: Spranger & les Inquisiteurs, qui en ont veu. vne infinite, l'escriuent ainsi. Remy, qui a fait le procez a plus de deux milles Sorciers, en porte vn tesmoignage irrefragable. Ie puis asseurer au semblable, que celles, qui me sont passees par les mains, en ont confesse tout autant. Que si la semence est ainsi froide, il s'ensuit qu'elle est destituee de ses esprits vitaux, & ainsi qu'elle ne peut estre cause d'aucune generation.'[5]

Isobel Gowdie and Janet Breadheid of Auldearne both said that the Devil was 'a meikle, blak, roch man, werie cold; and I fand his nature als cold within me as spring-well-water'. Isobel continues, 'He is abler for ws that way than any man can be, onlie he ves heavie lyk a malt-sek; a hudg nature, verie cold, as yce.'[6]

Another point which goes to prove that the intercourse was by artificial means was that pregnancy did not follow, except by special consent of the woman. Jeannette d'Abadie, aged sixteen, said, 'Elle fuyoit l'accouplement du Diable, a cause qu'ayant son membre faict en escailles il fait souffrir vne extresme douleur; outre que la semence est extresmement froide, si bien qu'elle n'engrosse iamais, ni celle des autres hommes au

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 219.

2. Id. ib., p. 404.

3. Stearne, p. 29. The following references are in chronological order, and are only a few out of the many trials in which this coldness of the Devil is noted: 1565, Cannaert, p. 54; 1567, De Lancre, Tableau, p. 132; 1578, Bodin, Fleau, p. 227; 1590, Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 219; 1598, Boguet, op. cit., pp. 8, 412, 1645, Stearne, p. 29; 1649, Pitcairn, iii, p. 599; 1652, Van Elven, La Tradition 1891, V, p. 215; 1661, Kinloch and Baxter, p. 132; 1662, Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 611, 617; 1662, Burns Begg, x, pp. 222, 224, 231-2, 234; 1678, Fountainhall, i, p. 14; 1682, Howell, Viii, 1032; 170r, Trials of Elinor Shaw, p. 6.

4. Boguet, p. 92.

5. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 611, 617.]

sabbat, bien qu'elle soit naturelle.'[1] Boguet remarks, 'Il me souuient, qu'Antoinette Tornier, & Antoinette Gandillon, estans interroguees, si elles craignoient point de deuenir enceintes des oeuures du Diable; l'vne respondit qu'elle estoit trop vieille; l'autre que Dieu ne le vouloit pas permettre.'[2] According to Jeanne Hervillier, the Devil 'coucha auec elle charnellement, en la mesme sorte & maniere que font les hommes auec les femmes, horsmis que la semence estoit froide. Cele dit elle continua tous les huict ou quinze iours. . . . Et vn iour le diable luy demanda, si elle vouloit estre enceinte de luy, ce qu'elle ne voulut pas.'[3] But when the witch was willing to have a child, it is noticeable that there is then no complaint of the Devil's coldness. At Maidstone in 1652 'Anne Ashby, Anne Martyn, and one other of their Associates, pleaded that they were with child pregnant, but confessed it was not by any man, but by the Divell. . . . Anne Ashby and Anne Martyn confessed that the Divell had known them carnally, and that they had no hurt by it.'[4]

The Devil appears to have donned or doffed his disguise in the presence of his worshippers, and this was often the case at the time of the sexual rites, whether public or private:

'Il cognoist les Sorcieres tantost en forme d'homme tout noir, & tantost en forme de beste, comme d'vn chien, d'vn chat, d'vn bouc, d'vn mouton. Il cognoissoit Thieuenne Paget, & Antoine Tornier en forme d'vn homme noir: Et lors qu'il accouploit auec Iaquema Paget, & Antoine Gandillon, il prenoit la figure d'vn mouton noir, portant des cornes. Francoise Secretain a dit que son Demon se mettoit tantost en chien, tantost en chat, et tantost en poule, quand il la vouloit cognoistre charnellement. Or tout cecy me fait de tant mieux asseurer l'accouplement reel du Sorcier, & de la Sorciere auec le Demon.'[5]

In the Basses-Pyrenees Marie d'Aspilcouette 'disoit le mesme, pour ce qui est du membre en escailles, mais elle deposoit, que lors qu'il les vouloit cognoistre, il quitoit la forme de Bouc, & prenoit celle d'homme'.[6] 'Il entra dans sa chambre en forme d'ung chat et se changea en la posture d'un

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 132.

2. Boguet, p. 78.

3. Bodin, p. 227.

4. A Prodigious and Tragicall Historie, pp. 4, 5.

5. Boguet, p. 70.

6. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 225.]

home vestu de rouge.'[1] At an attempt to wreck a ship in a great storm 'the devil was there present with them all, in the shape of a great horse. . . . They returned all in the same like. ness as of before, except that the devil was in the shape of a man.'[2] 'The Deivill apeired vnto her, in the liknes of ane prettie boy in grein clothes. . . . And at that tyme the Deivil gaive hir his markis; and went away from her in the liknes of ane blak doug.'[3] 'He wold haw carnall dealling with ws in the shap of a deir, or in any vther shap, now and then. Somtym he vold be lyk a stirk, a bull, a deir, a rae, or a dowg, etc., and haw dealling with ws.'[4] 'Yow the said Margaret Hamilton, relict of James Pullwart . . . had carnall cowpulatiown with the devil in the lyknes of ane man, bot he removed from yow in the lyknes of ane black dowg.'[5] The most important instance is in Boguet's description of the religious ceremony at the Sabbath: 'Finalement Satan apres auoir prins la figure d'vn Bouc, se consume en feu, & reduit en cendre.'[6]

The witches' habit of speaking of every person of the other sex with whom they had sexual intercourse at the Sabbath as a 'devil' has led to much confusion in the accounts. The confusion has been accentuated by the fact that both male and female witches often used a disguise, or were at least veiled. 'Et pource que les hommes ne cedent guieres aux femmes en lubricite, c'est pourquoy le Demon se met aussi en femme ou Succube. . . . Ce qu'il fait principalement au Sabbat, selon que l'ont rapporte Pierre Gandillon, & George Gandillon, pere & fils, & les autres, lesquels disent tout vnanimement, qu'en leurs assemblees il y a plusieurs Demons, & que les vns exercent le mestier de l'homme pour les femmes, & les autres le mestier des femmes pour les hommes.'[7] 'The Incubus's in the shapes of proper men satisfy the desires of the Witches, and the Succubus's serve for Whores to the Wizards.'[8] Margaret

[1. H. G. van Elveu, La Tradition, 1891, v, p. 215. Place and names not given.

2. Kinloch, pp. 122, 123.

3. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.

4. Id., iii, pp. 611, 613.

5. Scots Magazine, 1817, p. 201.

6. Boguet, p. 141.

7. Id., p. 65.

8. Pleasant Treatise of Witches, p. 6. The remembrance of the numerous male devils at the Sabbath survives in the Samalsain dance in the Basses-Pyrenees, where the male attendants on the King and Queen of the dance are still called Satans. Moret, Mysteres Egyptiens, p. 247.]

Johnson said the same: 'Their spirittes vsuallie have knowledge of theire bodies . . . Shee also saith, that men Witches usualie have woemen spirittes and woemen witches men spirittes.'[1] The girls under Madame Bourignon's charge 'declared that they had daily carnal Cohabitation with the Devil; that they went to the Sabbaths or Meetings, where they Eat, Drank, Danc'd, and committed other Whoredom and Sensualities. Every one had her Devil in form of a Man; and the Men had their Devils in the form of a Woman. . . . They had not the least design of changing, to quit these abominable Pleasures, as one of them of Twenty-two Years old one day told me. No, said she, I will not be other than I am; I find too much content in my Condition; I am always Caressed." One girl of twelve said definitely that she knew the Devil very well, 'that he was a Boy a little bigger than her self; and that he was her Love, and lay with her every Night'; and another girl named Bellot, aged fifteen, 'said her Mother had taken her with her [to the Sabbath] when she was very Young, and that being a little Wench, this Man-Devil was then a little Boy too, and grew up as she did, having been always her Love, and Caressed her Day and Night.'[3] Such connexions sometimes resulted in marriage. Gaule mentions this fact in his general account: 'Oft times he marries them ere they part, either to himselfe, or their Familiar, or to one another; and that by the Book of Common Prayer (as a pretender to witchfinding lately told me in the Audience of many).'[4] This statement is borne out in the trials: 'Agnes Theobalda sagte, sie sey selbst zugegen auff der Hochzeit gewesen, da Cathalina, und Engel von Hudlingen, ihren Beelzebub zur Ehe genommen haben.'[5] The Devil of Isobel Ramsay's Coven was clearly her husband,[6] but there is nothing to show whether the marriage took place before she became

[1. Baines, i, pp. 607-8, note.

2. Bourignon, Parole, pp. 86, 87; Hale, pp. 26, 27.

3. Id., Vie, p. 214, 211; Hale, pp. 29, 31.

4. Gaule, p. 63.

5. Remigius, p. 131.

6. Record of Trial in the Edinburgh Justiciary Court.]

a witch, as in the case of Janet Breadheid of Auldearne, whose husband 'enticed her into that craft'.[1] I have quoted above (p. 179) the ceremony at the marriage of witches in the Basses-Pyrenees. Rebecca Weste, daughter of a witch, married the Devil by what may be a primitive rite; he came to her 'as shee was going to bed, and told her, he would marry her, and that shee could not deny him; shee said he kissed her, but was as cold as clay, and married her that night, in this manner; he tooke her by the hand and lead her about the chamber, and promised to be her loving husband till death, and to avenge her of her enemies; and that then shee promised him to be his obedient wife till death, and to deny God, and Christ Jesus.'[2] At Edinburgh in 1658 a young woman called Anderson was tried: 'her confessioun was, that scho did marry the devill.'[3] The Swedish witches in 1670 confessed that at Blockula 'the Devil had Sons and Daughters which he did marry together'.[4] Giraldus Cambrensis gives an account of a 'spirit' in the, form of a red-haired young man, called Simon, who 'was begotten upon the wife of a rustic in that parish, by a demon, in the shape of her husband, naming the man, and his father-in-law, then dead, and his mother, still alive; the truth of which the woman upon examination openly avowed'.[5]

[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 616.

2. Howell, iv, 842.

3. Nicoll's Diary, p. 212. Bannatyne Club.

4. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 323.

5. Davies, p. 183. Cp. also the birth of Merlin. Giraldus Cambrensis, Itinerary, Bk. I, xii, 91 b.]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII. THE ORGANIZATION

THE cult was organized in as careful a manner as any other religious community; each district however was independent, and therefore Mather is justified in saying that the witches 'form themselves after the manner of Congregational Churches'.[1]

  

1. The Officer

The Chief or supreme Head of each district was known to the recorders as the 'Devil'. Below him in each district, one or more officers-according to the size of the district-were appointed by the chief. The officers might be either men or women; their duties were to arrange for meetings, to send out notices, to keep the record of work done, to transact the business of the community, and to present new members. Evidently these persons also noted any likely convert, and either themselves entered into negotiations or reported to the Chief, who then took action as opportunity served. At the Esbats the officer appears to have taken command in the absence of the Grand Master; at the Sabbaths the officers were merely heads of their own Covens, and were known as Devils or Spirits, though recognized as greatly inferior to the Chief. The principal officer acted as clerk at the Sabbath and entered the witches' reports in his book; if he were a priest or ordained minister, he often performed part of the religious service; but the Devil himself always celebrated the mass or sacrament. In the absence of all direct information on the subject, it seems likely that the man who acted as principal officer became Grand Master on the death of the previous Chief Occasionally the Devil appointed a personal attendant for himself, who waited upon him on all solemn occasions, but does not appear to have held any official position in the community.

[1. Cotton Mather, p. 160.]

Estebene de Cambrue (1567) said that 'elle a veu au Sabbat vn Notaire qu'elle nomme, lequel a accoustume de leuer les defauts de celles qui ont manque de se trouuer au Sabbat.'[1] At the North Berwick meetings (1590), there were several officers, of whom Fian was the chief

'Robert Griersoun being namit, they all ran hirdie-girdie and wer angrie: for it wes promisit he sould be callit "Rot the Comptroller, alias Rob the Rowar," for expreming of his name.--Johnne Fiene wes ewer nerrest to the Devill, att his left elbok; Gray Meill kepit the dur.--The accusation of the saide Geillis Duncane aforesaide, who confessed he [Fian] was their Regester, and that there was not one man suffered to come to the Divels readinges but onelie hee.--[Fian's confession] That at the generall meetinges of those witches, he was always present; that he was clarke to all those that were in subiection to the Divels service, bearing the name of witches; that alway hee did take their oathes for their true service to the Divell; and that he wrote for them such matters as the Divell still pleased to commaund him.'[2]

Elizabeth Southerns, otherwise known as old Mother Demdike (1613), 'was generall agent for the Deuill in all these partes'.[3] The 'eminent warlok' Robert Grieve of Lauder (1649) 'was brought to a Confession of his being the Devils Officer in that Countrey for warning all Satans Vassals to come to the Meetings, where, and whensoever the Devil required. . . . The Devil gave him that charge, to be his Officer to warn all to the meetings; (as was said before,) in which charge he continued for the space of eighteen years and more.'[4] The evidence concerning Isobel Shyrie at Forfar (1661) is too long to quote, but it is clear that she acted as the officer.[5] Isobel Gowdie (1662) says definitely, 'Johne Young, in Mebestowne, is Officer to owr Coeven', and remarks in another part of her confession that 'Johne Yownge in Mebestowne, owr Officer, did drywe the plewghe'.[6] The only indication of a change of personnel, is given by Janet Breadheid, of the same Coven as Isobel Gowdie.

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 123.

2. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 219, 220, 239, 240.

3. Potts, B 2.

4. Sinclair, pp. 46, 47.

5. Kinloch, pp. 124, 129.

6. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 605.]

'Johne Taylor, my husband, was then Officer, bot Johne Young in Mebestoune, is now Officer to my Coeven. Quhan I cam first ther, the Divell called tham all be thair names, on the book; and my husband, than called thame at the door. . . . Whan we haid Great Meittingis, Walter Ledy, in Penick, my husband, and Alexander Elder, nixt to the Divell, wer Ruleris; and quhan ther wold be but fewar, I my self, the deceassit Jean Suthirland, Bessie Hay, Bessie Wilsone, and Janet Burnet wold rule thaim.'[1]

In Somerset (1664) Anne Bishop appears to have been the chief personage under the Devil, in other words the Officer.[2] At Paisley (1678) Bessie Weir 'was Officer to their several meetings.--Bessie Weir did intimate to him [John Stewart], that there was a meeting to be at his house the next day: And that the Devil under the shape of a black man, Margaret Jackson, Margery Craige, and the said Bessie Weir, were to be present. And that the said Bessie Weir required the Declarant to be there, which he promised.'[3] In New England (1692) it appears that both Bridget Bishop and Martha Carrier held high rank, and were probably Officers.

One duty seems to have been delegated to a particular individual, who might perhaps hold no other office, or who might, on the other hand, be the chief official; this was the manager, often the leader, of the dance. As pace seems to have been an essential in the dance, the leader was necessarily active and generally young. At North Berwick (1590) 'John Fein mussiled led the ring'.[4] In Aberdeen (1596) Thomas Leyis was the chief person in the dance; 'thow the said Thomas was formest and led the ring, and dang the said Kathren Mitchell, becaus scho spillet your dans, and ran nocht so fast about as the rest.'[5] Isobel Cockie of the same Coven was next in importance; 'in the quhilk danse, thow was the ringleader nixt Thomas Leyis.'[6] Mr. Gideon Penman (1678), who had once been minister at Crighton, went to the Sabbaths, where the Devil spoke of him as 'Mr. Gideon, my chaplain'.[7] The witches said that 'ordinarily Mr. Gideon was

[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 617.

2. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 139, 147, 148.

3. Id., pt. ii, pp. 291, 293.

4. Pitcairn, i, pt. iii, p. 246.

5. Spalding Club Misc., pp. 97, 98.

6. Ib., p. 115.

7. Fountainhall, i, p. 14.]

in the rear in all their dances, and beat up those that were slow'. This Mr. Gideon seems to be the same person as the 'warlock who formerly had been admitted to the ministrie in the Presbyterian times, and now he turnes a preacher under the devill.--This villan was assisting to Satan in this action' [giving the sacrament]' and in preaching."

The personal attendant of the Devil is rare. At Aberdeen (1596) Issobell Richie was accused that 'at that tyme thow ressauit thy honours fra the Dewyll, thy maister, and wer appoynted be him in all tymes thairefter, his speciall domestick servand and furriour'.[1] John McWilliarn Sclater (1656) was appointed cloak-bearer to the Devil.[3]

The Devil's piper was also an official appointment in Scotland, but does not occur elsewhere. John Douglas of Tranent (1659) was the Devil's piper[4] and so also was a man mentioned by Sinclair: 'A reverend Minister told me, that one who was the Devils Piper, a wizzard confest to him, that at a Ball of dancing, the Foul Spirit taught him a Baudy song to sing and play.'[5]

The Queen of the Sabbath may perhaps be considered as an official during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, though in early times she was probably the chief personage in the cult, as Pearson has pointed out.[6] It is not unlikely that she was originally the same as the Queen of Elf hame; in Scotland, however, in the seventeenth century, there is a Maiden of the Coven, which was an important position in the Esbat but entirely distinct from the Queen of Faery, while in other places a woman, not the Queen, is often the officer and holds the highest place after the Grand Master.

Elizabeth Stile of Windsor (1579) said that 'mother Seidre dwelling in the Almeshouse, was the maistres Witche of all the reste'.[7] Marion Grant of Aberdeen (1597) confessed that 'the Devill thy maister causit the dans sindrie tymes with him and with Our Ladye, quha, as thow sayes, was a fine woman, cled in a quhyte walicot'.[8] In France (1609) the

[1. Law p. 145.

2. Spalding Club. Misc., i, p. 142.

3. Spottiswoode Misc., ii, p. 67.

4. Ib., ii, p. 68.

5. Sinclair, p. 219.

6. Pearson, ii, p. 26.

7. Rehearsall, par. 26.

8. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 171.]

custom seems to have been universal, 'en chasque village trouuer vne Royne du Sabbat', who sat at the Devil's left hand during the celebration of the mass and received the offerings of the faithful.[1] The witches called her both the Grande Maitresse and the Reine du Sabbat.[2] Isobel Gowdie's confession (1662) shows that the Queen of Elthame was not the same as the chief woman of the Coven, for she saw the Queen only on going into the fairy-howe, while the Maiden of the Coven was at each meeting. 'We doe no great mater without owr Maiden.--Quhan we ar at meat, or in any vther place quhateuir, the Maiden of each Coven sittis abow the rest, nixt the Divell.'[3] In New England (1692) Deliverance Hobbs confessed that 'the said G.B. preached to them, and such a woman was their Deacon'.[4]

  

2. The Covens

The word coven is a derivative of 'convene', and is variously spelt coven, coeven, covine, cuwing, and even covey. The special meaning of the word among the witches is a 'band' or 'company', who were set apart for the practice of the rites of the religion and for the performance of magical ceremonies; in short, a kind of priesthood.

The Coven was composed of men and women, belonging to one district, though not necessarily all from one village, and was ruled by an officer under the command of the Grand Master. The members of the Coven were apparently bound to attend the weekly Esbat; and it was they who were instructed in and practised magical arts, and who performed all the rites and ceremonies of the cult. The rest of the villagers attended the Esbats when they could or when they felt so inclined, but did not necessarily work magic, and they attended the Sabbaths as a matter of course. This view of the organization of the religion is borne out by the common belief in modern France:

'Il est de croyance generale qu'il faut un nombre fixe de sorciers et de sorcieres dans chaque canton. Le nouvel initie reprend les vieux papiers de l'ancien.--Les mauvaises

[1. De Lancre, L'Incredulite, p. 36.

2. Id., Tableau, p. 401.

3. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 610, 613.

4 Burr, p. 417.]

gens forment une confrerie qui est dirigee par une sorciere. Celle-ci a la jarretiere comme marque de sa dignite. Elles se la transmettent successivement par rang d'anciennete. Il n'existe que cette difference de rang entre les sorciers et les sorcieres. Ceux-la se recrutent aussi bien parmi les gens maries que chez les celibataires.'[1]

The 'fixed number' among the witches of Great Britain seems to have been thirteen: twelve witches and their officer. The actual numbers can be obtained, as a rule, only when the full record of the trial is available; for when several witches in one district are brought to trial at the same time they will always be found to be members of a Coven, and usually the other members of the Coven are implicated or at least mentioned.

The earliest account of a Coven is in the trial of Bessie Dunlop (1567); when Thom Reid was trying to induce her to join the society, he took her 'to the kill-end, quhair he forbaid her to speik or feir for onye thing sche hard or saw; and quhene thai had gane ane lyfle pece fordwerd, sche saw twelf persounes, aucht wemene and four men: The men wer cled in gentilmennis clething, and the wemene had all plaiddis round about thame and wer verrie semelie lyke to se; and Thom was with thame.'[2] Clearly this was a Coven with Thom as the Officer, and he had brought Bessie to see and be seen. The witches tried at St. Osyth in Essex in 1582 were thirteen in number.[3] At the meeting of the North Berwick witches (1590) to consult on the means to compass the king's death, nine witches stood 'in ane cumpany', and the rest 'to the nowmer of threttie persons in ane vthir cumpany'; in other words, there were thirty-nine persons, or three Covens, present.[4] At Aberdeen (1596-7) sixty-four names of witches occur in the trials; of these, seven were merely mentioned as being known to the accused, though not as taking part in the ceremonies, and five were acquitted; thus leaving fifty-two persons, or four Covens. Out of these fifty-two, one was

[1. Lemoine, La Tradition, 1892, vi, pp. 108, 109. The italics are in the original.

2. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 52.

3. Witches taken at St. Oses.

4. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 245.]

condemned and executed at the assize in 1596 and twelve in 1597, making in all thirteen persons, or one Coven, who were put to death.[1] The great trial of the Lancashire witches in 1613 gives a grand total of fifty-two witches, or four Covens, whose names occur in the record. This includes the three Salmesbury witches mentioned by Grace Sowerbuts, whose evidence was discredited as being the outcome of a 'Popish plot' to destroy the three women as converts to the Reformed Church; but as the record shows that the other accused witches were tried on similar charges and condemned, it may be concluded that other causes occasioned the acquittal. Taking together, however, only those witches who are mentioned, in these trials, as having actually taken part in the ceremonies and practices of witchcraft in the neighbourhood of Pendle, it will be found that there were thirty-nine persons, or three Covens.[2] In Guernsey in 1617 Isabel Becquet confessed that--

'at the Sabbath the Devil used to summon the Wizards and Witches in regular order (she remembered very well having heard him call the old woman Collette the first, in these terms: Madame the Old Woman Becquette): then the woman Fallaise; and afterwards the woman Hardie. Item, he also called Marie, wife of Massy, and daughter of the said Collette. Said that after them she herself was called by the Devil: in these terms: The Little Becquette: she also heard him call there Collas Becquet, son of the said old woman (who [Collas] held her by the hand in dancing, and some one [a woman] whom she did not know, held her by the other hand): there were about six others there she did not know.'[3]

At Queensferry in 1644 thirteen women were tried and seven executed for witchcraft.[4]

At Alloa (1658), though thirteen persons, or one Coven, were brought to trial, the word is used to indicate a smaller number: 'Margret Duchall lykewayis declared that ther was sex women mair besyd hir self that was in thair cuwing' [then follow the names of the six].--'Jonet Blak confessed severall meetings with the abowenamed cuwing.--Kathren Renny being asked quhat meetingis scho

[1. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 87 seq.

2. Potts.

3. Goldsmid, p. 13. Translated from the French record.

4. Fyfe, p. 87.]

had with the diwell, and the rest of hir cuwing, scho ansuered scho had severall meitingis with all tham abowenamed.'[1] Little Jonet Howat of Forfar (1661) said, 'Ther was thair present with the divell besyd hirselfe, quhom he callit the prettie dauncer, the said Issobell Syrie, Mairie Rynd, Hellen Alexander, Issobell Dorward, and utheris whoise names shoe did not know, to the number of 13 of all.'[2] The trial of Jonet Kerr and Issobell Ramsay at Edinburgh (1661) gives the names of thirteen persons, or one Coven.[3] At Crook of Devon (1662) there 'were tried twelve women and one man, i.e. one Coven.[4] Isobel Gowdie of Auldearne (1662) gives the most detail concerning the Covens: 'Jean Mairten is Maiden of owr Coeven. Johne Younge is Officer to owr Coeven.--Ther ar threttein persons in ilk Coeven.' Her evidence shows that there were several Covens in the district:, The last tyme that owr Coven met, we, and an vther Coven, wer dauncing at the Hill of Earlseat, and befor that we ves beyond the Meikle-burne; and the vther Coven being at the Downie-hillis, we went besyd them.--[She and four others] with the Divell, wer onlie at the making of it [a charm], bot all the multitude of all owr Coevens got notice of it, at the next meitting . . . all my owin Coeven gott notice of it werie schortlie.' She also notes that each member of her Coven 'has an Sprit to wait wpon ws, quhan ve pleas to call wpon him'. Janet Breadheid, of the same Coven as Isobel Gowdie, gives the names of thirty-nine persons, or three Covens, who were present in the Kirk of Nairn when she was admitted into the Society.[5] In Somerset (1664) the number of accused was twenty-six persons, or two Covens.[6] At Newcastle-on-Tyne (1673) Ann Armstrong stated that at the meeting at the 'rideing house in the close on the common' she saw ten men and women whom she knew and 'thre more, whose names she knowes not'. At another meeting 'at Rideing Millne bridg-end she see the said Anne Forster, Anne Dryden, and

[1. Scottish Antiquary, ix, pp. 50-2.

2. Kinloch, p. 114.

3. From the record of the trial in the Edinburgh Justiciary Court.

4. Burns Begg, pp. 219 seq.

5. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603-17.

6. Glanvil. pt. ii; pp. 140 seq.]

Luce Thompson, and tenne more, unknowne to her.--Att the house of John Newton off the Riding, the said Lucy wished that a boyl'd capon with silver scrues might come down to her and the rest, which were five coveys consisting of thirteen person in every covey. At a large meeting at Allensford, where a great many witches were present, 'every thirteen of them had a divell with them in sundry shapes.' It is also noticeable that Ann Armstrong mentions twenty-six persons by name as having been at various meetings to her knowledge.[1] At Paisley (1692) thirteen persons of high position brought an action for libel against six others for saving that they, the thirteen, had drunk the Devil's health in the house of one of them; the libellers were punished, but the number of persons libelled suggests that the accusation' might have been true."'

  

3. Duties

An important part of the organization was the system of reporting to the Grand Master everything which had happened since the previous Great Assembly. The chief work of the Covens was the performance of magical rites, either publicly at the Esbats or privately in the houses of the witches and their neighbours. As these rites, especially when performed privately, were more or less in the nature of experiments, the results were reported and when successful were recorded in writing for future use. The book in which the records were made remained in the hands of the Devil, who in this way had always a store of well-tried magical spells and recipes to kill or cure, from which he could instruct his followers as occasion demanded.

The position of the Devil as the instructor of the witches is to be found in most of the trials in Great Britain. Cooper states this plainly: 'He deliuers unto his Proselite, and so to the rest, the Rules of his Art, instructing them in the manner of hurting and helping, and acquainting them with such medicines and poysons as are vsuall herevnto.'[3]. Bessie Dunlop (1567) never attempted to cure any disease without

[1. Surtees Soc., xl, pp. 191, 192; Denham Tracts, ii, pp. 300-2, 304.

2. Hector, i, pp. 51-6.

3. Cooper, Mystery, pp. 90-2.]

first consulting Thom Reid, 'quhen sundrie persounes cam to hir to seik help for thair beist, thair kow or yow, or for ane barne that was tane away with ane evill blast of wind, or elf-grippit, sche gait and sperit at Thom, Quhat mycht help thame?--Sche culd do nathing, quhill sche had first spokin with Thom.'[1] Alison Peirson (1588) learnt her craft from Mr. William Simpson, her mother's brother's son, who lived among the fairy folk; 'the saide Mr Williame tauld hir of ewerie seiknes and quhat herbis scho sould tak to haill thame, and how scho sould vse thame; and gewis hir his directioune att all tymes." Agnes Sampson, the Wise Wife of Keith (1590), always asked the Devil's advice in serious cases; ' she had a familiar spirit, who upon her call, did appear in a visible form, and resolve her of any doubtful matter, especially concerning the life or death of persons lying sick.'[3] Grissel Gairdner of Newburgh (1610) was executed for consulting with the [Devil], and seiking of responssis fra him, at all tymes this fourtene or fyftene 3eir bygane, for effectuating of hir devillisch intentiones'.[4] Elspeth Reoch in Orkney (1616) confessed that the fairy man, whom she met, told her 'he wald lerne her to ken and sie ony thing she wald desyre'.[5] Isobel Haldane of Perth (1623) also obtained all her information as to life and death from the man with the 'grey beird' whom she met among the fairy folk.[6] Jonet Rendall, another Orkney witch (1629), stated that 'the devill apperit to you, Quhom ye called Walliman, claid in quhyt cloathis with ane quhyt head and ane gray beard, And said to you He sould learne yow to win almiss be healling of folk'.[7] Sandie Hunter was only moderately successful in curing cattle till he covenanted with the Devil, who 'came to him in the form of a Mediciner, and said, Sandie, you have too long followed my trade, and never acknowledged me for your Master. You must now take on with me, and be my servant, and I will make you more perfect in your Calling. Whereupon the man gave up himself to the Devil. After this, he grew

[1. Pitcairn, ii, pp. 53, 54.

2. Id., ii, p. 164.

3. Id., ii, p. 230.

4. Id., iii, p. 96.

5. County Folklore, iii, p. 112; Mait. Cl. Misc., ii, p. 188.

6. Pitcairn, ii, p. 537.

7. County Folklore, iii, p. 103.]

very famous throw the Countrey, for his Charming and cureing of diseases in Men and Beasts.' ''Reginald Scot says that the witches were taught by the Devil to make magical ointments, and that he 'supplied their want of powders and roots to intoxicate withal'.[2] It was the Devil who pointed out which graves were to be opened in order to obtain the material for working magic; and when the bodies had been exhumed and dismembered, he told the witches how to use the fragments.[3] It was the Devil who made[4] or baptized[5] the wax and clay images, and who stuck the first thorn or pin into them.[6] It was the Devil who held the mock plough at Auldearne, and taught the witches of that place all the charms they knew. 'We get all this power from the Divell', says Isobell Gowdie.[7] It was the Devil who instigated and superintended the wrecking of the bridge at Cortaquhie, concerning which Helen Guthrie said, 'shee her selfe, Jonnet Stout, and others of them did thrust ther shoulderis againest the bridge', and Isobel Smyth confessed, 'Wee all rewed that meitting, for wee hurt our selves lifting.'[8]

The book in which the magical recipes were recorded must have been of great value to its owner, and one which he would not willingly allow to pass out of his hands. A volume of this kind was known to be extant till the beginning of the last century; it was called the Red Book of Appin. There are two stories as to how it was taken from the Devil, but both stories agree that it was obtained by a trick. It was in manuscript and contained charms for the cure of cattle, and was consulted when cows were bewitched and refused to give milk. It was also supposed to confer magical powers on the owner, who was said to know what the inquiry would be before the inquirer opened his lips; and it was in itself so magical that the owner had to wear a hoop of iron on his head when turning its leaves.[9] Another Devil's-book was carried away, apparently as a joke, by Mr. Williamson of

[1. Sinclair, p. 122.

2. Scot, Bk. III, p. 43.

3. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 211, 2-39, 245-6.

4. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 293-5.

5. Id., pt. ii, pp. 137-8.

6. Id., pt. ii, pp. 293-5.

7. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 605 seq.

8. Kinloch, pp. 122, 133.

9. Campbell, pp. 293-4.]

Cardrona, who took it from the witches as they danced on Minchmoor, but they followed him and he returned it.'

The system of reporting everything to the Chief of the community makes it certain that he was supplied with such current information as made his knowledge of public and private affairs appear miraculous to the uninitiated. Even those who supplied that information had firm faith in his supernatural power to kill or cure, and believed with equal ardour in the charms which he taught them to make and use.

In reviewing the evidence it seems clear that the witches of the Covens were bound to exercise their powers in the intervals between the meetings; they were bound to attend those meetings, unless absolutely prevented, in order to learn new methods as well as to make their reports; and they were bound to obey the Grand Master's orders and to treat him with the deference and respect due to his exalted position.

  

4. Discipline

Discipline was maintained by a system of rewards and punishments, enforced or relaxed according to the personal character of the Chief. As a rule only the severer punishments are recorded, but occasionally there are indications of minor chastisements.

The contemporary writers make the system of rewards and punishments very clear:

'Satan calleth them togither into a Diuelish Sinagoge, and that he may also vnderstand of them howe well and diligently they haue fulfilled their office of intoxicating committed vnto them, and who they haue slaine.'[2] 'Such as are absent, and have no care to be assoygned, are amerced to this paenalty, so to be beaten on the palms of their feete, to be whipt with iron rods, to be pincht and suckt by their Familiars till their heart blood come, till they repent them of their sloath, and promise more attendance and diligence for the future.'[3] 'Taking account also of the proceedings of his other Schollers, and so approuing or condemning accordingly.'[4] Sometimes at their

[1. Berwickshire Naturalists Club, xi, p. 265. Unfortunately the author of the article gives neither her authority for the statement, nor any indication of the date of the occurrence.

2. Danaeus, ch. iv.

3. Gaule, p, 65.

4. Cooper, p. 91.]

solemn assemblies, the Devil commands, that each tell what wickedness he hath committed, and according to the hainousness and detestableness of it, he is honoured and respected with a general applause. Those on the contrary, that have done no evil, are beaten and punished.'[1]

The usual punishment was beating, which was inflicted for various offences, 'chiefly disrespect or neglect of duty. At Arras in 1460 Jean Tacquet, a rich eschevin, 'had endeavoured to withdraw his allegiance from Satan who had forced him to continue it by beating him cruelly with a bull's pizzle.'[2] In Lorraine (1589) the Grand Master seems to have been peculiarly brutal:

'Jana Gerardina, Catharina Russa, und Francisca Fellaea bezeugten, dass sie mehr als einmal schwerlich mit harten Streichen hatten bussen mussen, wenn sie keinen Schaden oder Ungluck angestifft hatten. Und wie Nicolaea Morelia sagt, hat er sie dermassen zerschlagen, dass ihr der Athem davon ausgeblieben, und sie bey nahe gestorben ware; Uber welches sich dann nicht zu verwundern sey, sintemahl er eiserne Hande habe, mit denen er ihnen so unbarmhertzig die Kopffe zerschlagen, dass sie deren nicht mehr empfinden.'[3]

In the Lyons district (1598) 'les; Sorciers rendent conte a Satan de ce qu'ils ont fait des la derniere assemblee, estans ceux la les mieux venus qui ont commis le plus de meschancetez. Les autres sont sifflez & mocquez de tous; l'on les fait mettre a l'escart, & sont encor le plus soutient battus & maltraitez de leur Maistre'.[1] According to Bodin, 'chacun Sorcier doit rendre compte du mal qu'il a faict sur peine d'estre bien battu.'[5] De Lancre says, 'Les Sorciers le vont adorer trois nuicts durant. Ceux qui par nonchalance, ou autre petit empeschement ne s'y trouuent, sont fouettez & battus a l'outrance.'[6] Alexander Hamilton (1630) stated that 'thair was ane new tryst appointed be him to be keipit wt thame altogidder within xiii days thereftir upon the cauldbit mure Quhilk meitting was nocht keipit be the said Alexr for the quhilk caus and breking of that tryst the said Alexr was

[1. Pleasant Treatise, pp. 6-7.

2. Lea, iii, p. 525.

3. Remigius, pt. i, cap. xiii. p. 59.

4. Boguet, p. 139.

5. Bodin, p. 189.

6. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 398.]

maist rigorouslie strukin be the devill wt ane battoun at ane meitting keipit betuix thame schortlie thereftir upone gairnetoune hillis'.[1] In France (1652) two sisters were tried for witchcraft: 'Icelle confesse n'avoir faict mourir qu'un vaulx et d'avoir ete battu par le diable, deux fois, parce qu'elle ne vouloit faire mourir aultres personnes et bestiault.' The other sister was 'interrogee sy le diable ne luy avoit conseille de cracher la Sainte Hostie hors de sa bouche, ou bien ne la point recepvoir, dist que non, mais bien que le diable l'at une fois battue fort parce qu'elle l'avoit receu'.[1] The girls at Lille (1661) informed Madame Bourignon that the witches 'are constrained to offer him their Children, or else the Devil would Beat them'.[3] Isobel Gowdie's account is, as usual, very full:

'Som tymis, among owr felwis, we wold be calling him "Blak Johne", or the lyk, and he wold ken it, and heir ws weill aneughe; and he ewin then com to ws, and say, "I ken weill aneughe what 3e wer sayeing of me!" And then he vold beat and buffet ws werie sor. We wold be beattin if ve wer absent any tyme, or neglect any thing that wold be appointit to be done. Allexr Elder, in Earlseat, vold be werie often beattin. He is bot soft, and cowld never defend him self in the leist, bot greitt and cry, quhan he vold be scourging him. Bot Margret Wilson, in Auldearne, wold defend hir selfe fynelie, and cast wp hir handis to keip the stroakis off from hir; and Bessie Wilson would speak crustie with hir townge, and wold be belling again to him stowtlie. He wold be beatting and scurgeing ws all wp and downe with cardis [cords] and vther sharp scurges, like naked gwhastis; and we wold still be cryeing, "Pittie! pittie! Mercie! mercie, owr Lord!" Bot he vold haue neither pittie nor mercie. When he vold be angrie at ws, he wold girne at ws lyk a dowge, as iff he wold swallow ws wp.'[4]

The Swedish witches (1669) also had reason to complain of their Grand-Master's cruelty: 'heretofore it was sufficient to carry but one of their Children [to the meeting] or a strangers Child with them, but now he did plague them and

[1. From the record of the trial in the Edinburgh Justiciary Court.

2 Van Elven, La Tradition, v (1891), p. 215. The names of the witches; and the place are not given.

3. Bourignon, Vie, p. 222 Hale, p. 37.

4. Pitcairn, iii, p. 613.]

whip them if they did not procure him Children.'[1] Among the Northumberland witches (1673):

'All of them who had donne harme gave an accoant thereof to their protector, who made most of them that did most harme, and beate those who had donne no harme.--At the said meeting their particular divell tooke them that did most evill, and danced with them first, and called every of them to an account, and those that did most evill he maid most of.--The devill, in the forme of a little black man and black cloaths, calld of one Isabell Thompson, of Slealy, widdow, by name, and required of her what service she had done him. She replyd she had gott power of the body of one Margarett Teasdale. And after he had danced with her he dismissed her and call'd of one Thomasine, wife of Edward Watson, of Slealy.'[2]

Punishments for minor offences are rarely recorded. At North Berwick (1590), when the witches returned after sinking a ship, 'seeing that they tarried over long, hee at their comming enjoyned them all to a pennance, which was, that they should kisse his buttockes, in sign of duety to him.'[3] At Aberdeen (1597) Christen Mitchell confessed that when the Devil asked her to join, 'thow ansuerit, I will enter in thy band, bot I will nocht byd thairin; and thairefter that the Devill gawe the a wisk, and thow fell on thy face one the dyk of that yaird.'[4] Beigis Tod, who belonged to one of the North Berwick Covens but was not tried till 1608, was late in arriving at a meeting, 'quhair the Deuill appeirit to thame, and reprovet the said Beigis Tod verrie scherplie, for hir long tayreing; to quhome scho maid this ansuer, "Sir, I could wyn na soner."'[5] At Lille if any witch desired to leave the religion, 'the Devil reproves them then more severely, and obligeth them to new Promises.'[6] Occasionally the witches kept discipline among themselves; this seems to have been the case only when the culprit prevented the proper execution of magical performances. At Aberdeen Thomas Leyis 'led the ring, and dang the said Kathren Mitchell, becaus scho spillit your dans, and ran nocht sa fast about as the rest.'[7] At

[1. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 318.

2. Surtees Soc., xl, pp. 191, 195, 197.

3. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 217. 

4. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 165.

5. Pitcairn, ii, p. 542.

6. Bourignon, Vie, p. 223 Hale, p. 38.

7. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 97.]

Auldearne Isobel Gowdie described how the witches used flint arrow-heads: 'I shot at the Laird of Park, as he ves crossing the Burn of Boath; bot, thankis to God now, that he preserwit him. Bessie Hay gaw me a great cuffe, becaus I missed him.'[1] The former minister of Crighton, Mr. Gideon Penman, acted as the Devil's chaplain; 'ordinarily Mr. Gideon was in the rear in all their dances, and beat up all those that were slow.'[2] But a reasonable excuse for trifling misdemeanours could be accepted: 'The devill asked at Kathrine Moore quhair hir Husband was that he came not she answered there was a young bairne at home and that they could not both come.'[3]

Capital punishment was reserved for traitors, actual and potential. It must have been brought into use only after the cult had fallen upon evil days, and then only when the Chief himself was in danger. Beating to death, hanging, and poison were the usual means of execution.

The earliest instance occurred in 1450, when the Church had begun to use its power systematically against the witches. 'The Inquisitor of Como, Bartolomeo de Homate, the podesta Lorenzo da Carorezzo, and the notary Giovanni da Fossato, either out of curiosity or because they doubted the witches whom they were trying, went to a place of assembly at Mendrisio and witnessed the scene from a hiding-place. The presiding demon pretended not to know their presence, and in due course dismissed the assembly, but suddenly recalled his followers and set them on the officials, who were so beaten that they died within fifteen days.'[4] Alesoun Peirson (1588) was burnt as a witch, having gained her knowledge from the fairies, who threatened that 'gif scho wald speik and tell of thame and thair doingis, thay sould martir hir'.[5] The Lorraine witches (1589) took an oath of silence, 'welchen Eyd sie so hoch und heilig halten, dass wenn sie Eydbruchig werden, so darffir halten, also ob sie ewig darumb musten verdampt und gestrafft seyn.'[6] Alice Gooderidge, the Derbyshire witch (1597), was tried for witchcraft,

[1. Pitcairn, iii, p, 615.

2. Fountainhall, i, p. 14.

3. Highland Papers, iii, p. 26.

4. Lea, iii, p. 501.

5. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 163.

6. Remigius, ch. xviii, p. 83.]

'she should haue bin executed, but that her spirit killed her in the prison.'[1] Jeannette d'Abadie (1609) was more fortunate than most in that she was not killed, 'elle a este battue au sabbat reellement & corporelleme[n]t par deux sorcieres qu'elle nomme, par ce qu'elle auoit reuele les mysteres du sabbat.'[2] John Stewart, the 'juglour' of Irvine (1618)--

'for his better preferring to the day of the assys, was put in ane lockfast buith, quhair no maner of persoun might haif access to him quhil the dounsitting of the justice court, and for avoyding of putting violent handis on himself, was verie strictly gairdit and flitherit be the airms, as us is, and upon that same day of the assys, about half ane hour befoir the doun sitting of the justice court, Mr. David Dickson, minister at Irving; and Mr. George Dunbar, minister of Air, having went to him to exhort him to call on his God for mercie for his bygane wicked and evil lyf and that God wold of his infinite mercie, lowis him out of the handis of the devil quhom he had servit thir mony years by gane. He acquiescit to their prayer and godlie exhortation, and utterit thir wordis--I am so straithe gairdit that it lyis not in my hand to tak off my bonnett, nor to gett bread to my mouth. And immediately after the departing of the two ministers from him, the Juglour being sent for at the desyr of my Lord of Eglintoune, to be confrontit with ane woman of the burgh of Air, callit Janet Bous, quha was apprehendit by the Magistrates of the burghe of Air, for witchcraft, to the burghe of Irvine, purposlie for that effer. He was fund be the burrow officers, quha went about him stranglit and hangit be the cruik of the dur, with ane tait of hemp (or a string maid of hemp, supposed to haif been his garten, or string of his bonnet) not above the length of twa span long, his kneyis not being from the grund half ane span, and was brocht out of the hous, his lyf not being so layt expellit: but notwithstanding of quhatsomever meines usit to the contrair for remeid of his lyf, he revievit not, but so endit his lyf miserable by the help of the devill his maister.'[3]

Rebecca West, a young Essex witch (1645), confessed to Matthew Hopkins that 'if shee should discover any thing, they all told the said Rebecca, shee should endure more torments on earth, then could be in hell: and the said Rebecca

[1. Alse Gooderidge, p. 43.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 91.

3. Trial of Isobel Inch, p. 11.]

told this informant that shee promised to keepe all their secrets; and moreover they all told her, that shee must never confesse any thing, although the rope were about her necke, and shee ready to be hanged'.' In Fifeshire (1640) 'ane Mistres Hendersone (sister to Fordell Hendersone, in the presbytrey of Dumfermling), sometymes lady of Pittahro, being delated by many to be a witch, was apprehended and caried to Edenbroughe, wher she was keiped fast; and after her remaining in prison for a tyme, being in health att night, vpon the morne was founde dead. It was thought, and spoken by many, that she wronged her selfe, either by strangling or by poyson.'[2] The Swedish children (1670) were not spared: 'if the Children did at any time name the Names of those that had carried them away, they were again carried by force either to Blockula, or to the Cross way, and there miserably beaten, insomuch that some of them died of it.'[3] Whether Deliverance Hobbs (1692) was actually beaten, or whether her statement was made from the knowledge of what might happen to her, cannot be certain without reference to the records of the trial itself, as Mather's bias is apt to distort the evidence: 'She now testifi'd, that this Bishop tempted her to Sign the Book again, and to deny what she had confess'd. She affirm'd, that it was the Shape of this Prisoner, which whipped her with Iron Rods, to compel her thereunto.'[4] Elizabeth Anderson in Renfrewshire (1696) went with her father to a witch-meeting, 'severals of them being affraid that the Declarant would Confess, and tell of them as she done formerly on her Grand-mother, they threatened to tear her all in pieces if she did so.'[5] John Reid of the same Coven--

'after his Confession had called out of his prison Window, desiring Baily Scott to keep that old body Angus Forrester, who had been his fellow prisoner, closs and secure; whereupon the company asked John when they were leaving him on Friday night the 21th of May, whether he desired company or

[1. Howell, iv, 842.

2. Lamont, p. 12. For further particulars of this lady, see Ross, Aberdour and Inchcolme, p. 339.

3. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 319.

4. Cotton Mather, p. 131.

5. Narr. Of the Sufferings of a Yong Girle, p. xl.]

would be afraid alone, he said he had no fear of anything: So being left till Saturday in the Forenoon, he was found in this posture, viz. sitting upon a stool which was on the Hearth of the Chimney, with his feet on the floor and his Body straight upward, his shoulders touching the lintel of the Chimney, but his Neck tyed with his own neck-cloath (whereof the knot was behind) to a small stick thrust into a hole above the lintel of the Chimney, upon which the Company, especially John Campbel a Chyrurgeon who was called, thought at first in respect of his being in an ordinary posture of sitting, and the neck-cloath not having any drawn knot (or run loup) but an ordinary one which was not very strait, and the sticke not having the strength to bear the weight of his Body or the struggle, that he had not been quite dead; but finding it otherways, and that he was in such a Situation that he could not have been the Actor thereof himself, concluded that some extraordinary Agent had done it, especially considering that the Door of the Room was secured, and that there was a board set over the Window which was not there the night before when they left him.'[1]

A similar fate befell the warlock Playfair in 1597. He was found strangled in his prison at Dalkeith with the 'point' of his breeches tied round his neck.[2]

[1. Narr. Of the Sufferings of a Yong Girle, p. xliv; Sadducismus Debellatus, pp. 43-4.

2. Sharpe, P 46.]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII. FAMILIARS AND TRANSFORMATIONS

THE question of familiars is one which has always puzzled the student of witch-trials, and almost more than any other has been the cause of the belief that hysteria and hallucination were the foundation of the witches' confessions. Yet when the accounts are carefully examined, the circumstantial detail given in the evidence shows that here, as elsewhere, a foundation of fact underlies the statements of the accused. These statements are often misunderstood and therefore misrepresented by the recorders, and still more so by the modern commentator, but by comparison of the details a considerable amount of information can be gained.

The familiars can be divided into two types: (1) those by which the witch divined, (2) those who attended on the witch to obey her commands.

  

1. The Divining Familiar

The essence of this familiar is that it did not belong to the witch but was an animal which appeared accidentally after the performance of certain magical ceremonies. Forbes puts this quite clearly when describing the contract: 'The Devil on his Part articles with such Proselytes, concerning the Shape he is to appear to them in, the Services they are to expect from him, upon the Performance of certain Charms or ceremonious Rites.'[1] From this statement and from the facts revealed in the trials it would seem that the Devil appointed to the witch, on her admission, some kind of animal or animals by which she should divine, and which therefore represented himself for the time being, for he claimed the power, as God, to know and reveal the future. This explanation accounts for the fact that the witches always spoke of such animals as the Devil and believed that they could foretell the future by his means. The actual method of divination is

[1. Forbes, ii, p. 33.]

not preserved; all that remains of the ceremony are the words and gestures which were used before the appearance of the animal, and these only in few cases. The method was probably such as obtained in other places where auguries by animals and birds were practised, i.e. by the direction and pace of the animal, by its actions, by its voice if it emitted any sound, and so on. The method of making such observations and of translating them when made was part of the instruction given to the witch by the Devil; and was usually employed to discover whether a person were bewitched, the ultimate result of an illness, and the length of life of any given person.

In 1566 John Walsh, of Netherberry in Dorset, who 'knoweth when anye man is bewytched, sayth vpon his oth, that his Familiar would sometyme come vnto hym lyke a gray blackish Culuer, and somtime like a brended Dog, and somtimes lyke a man'.[1] In 1590 Agnes Sampson, the 'wise wife' of Keith, was--

'fylit and convict, that the Dewill apperit to hir in liknes of ane dog, att quhom she socht her haill responsis that quhene sche wes send for to haill the auld Lady Edmestoune, quhene sche lay seik, befoir the said Agnes departit, sche tauld to the gentilwemene, that sche sould tell thame that nycht quhidder the Lady wald haill or nocht; and appointit thame to be in the gardin efter supper, betuix fyve and sax att ewin. Sche passit to the gairdene, to devyise vpoun hir prayer, one quhat tyme sche chargeit the Dewill, calling him "Elva", to cum and speik to hir, quha come in owir the dyke, in liknes of ane dog, and come sa neir to hir, that sche wes effrayit, and chargeit him "on the law that he lewit on", to cum na neirar, bot to ansuer hir; and sche demandit, Quhidder the lady wald leif or nocht. He said, "Hir dayes war gane." Than he demandit, "Gif the gentilwemen hir dochteres, quhair thay wer?" And sche said, that "the gentilwemen said, that thay war to be thair". He ansuerit, "Ane of thame sould be in perrell, and that he sould haif ane of thame." Sche ansuerit, "It sould nocht be sa", and swa departit fra hir zowling. Fra this tyme quhill eftir supper, he remanit in the wall [well]. Quhen the gentilwemen come in, the dog come out of the wall, and apperit to thame; quhairatt thay wer effrayit. In the mene tyme, ane of the said gentilwemen, the Lady Torsenze, ran to the wall, being forceit and drawin by the Devill, quha wald

[1. Examination of John Walsh.]

haif drownit hir, war nocht the said Agnes and the rest of the gentilwemen gatt ane gryp of hir, and with all hir [their?] forceis drew hir abak agane, quhilk maid thame all effrayd. The dog passit away thaireftir with ane zowle.'[1]

Margerat Clarke, like Agnes Sampson a midwife of great reputation, was tried at Aberdeen in 1597 for witchcraft, in that, being sent for to a case

'and ane Androw Mar cuming for the, the Devill thy maister, quhome thow seruis, and quha techis the all this vytchcraft and sorcerie, apperit to the, in the licknes of ane horss, in ane how and den, and spak and conferrit with the a lang speace. [Being sent for to another case] and the said guidman of Kincragie sendand his awin best horss, with ane boy of his awin, to bring the to his wyiff; and the said boy on horse cuming to the, and thow beand on the horss behind the boy, att thy awin dure, thy maister Satane, the Dewill, apperit in the licknes of ane gray staig, and convoyit the and the boy fra thy awin houss to Kincragie, and keipit cumpanie all the way with you, with quhome thow haid thy secreitt conference.--Vpone Nwris [New-year's] day, thow was att the loche syid besyid Boigloche, and thair thow pudlit be ane lang speace, thy selff alane, in ane deip holl amongis the watter, castand watter, erd and stone oure thi schowlderis, and thair was besyid the thy maister the Deuill, quhome thow seruis, in the licknes of ane hen flichterincg, with quhome thow was thane consultand, and quhais directiounis than thow was taikand.'[2]

In Derbyshire in 1597, 'Whereas Alice Gooderige said her familiar was like one William Gregories dog of Stapenhill, there arose a rumor, his dog was her familiar: Wherefore hee with his neighbour maister Coxe went the next day to examin her concerning this report; and she saide, my diuel (I say) was like your dog. Now out vpon thee (saide Gregorie) and departed: she being further examined, saide she had her familiar of her mother.'[3] Alexander Hamilton, tried at Edinburgh in 1630, confessed that--

'haifing ane battoun of fir in his hand the devill than gave the said Alexr command to tak that battoun quhan evir he had ado with him and thairwt to strek thruse upone the ground and to nhairge him to ruse up foule theiff Conforme to

[1. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 236.

2. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 157-60.

3. Alse Gooderidge, p. 27.]

the whilk directioun and be streking of the said battone thryse upone the ground the devill was in use sumtymes to appeir to the said Alex in the liknes of ane corbie at uther tymes in the schape of ane katt and at uther tymes in the schape of ane dog and thereby the said Alexr did ressave reponsis frome him.--The said Alexr Hamiltoun coming to the said Thomas Homes house and seing him visseit with the said seiknes declairit to him that he was bewitchet and promeist to cure him thereof Lykas for this effect the said Alexr schortlie thereftir past to clarkingtoun burne besyde the rottoneraw haifing ane katt under his okister and thair wt his said battoun raisit Sathan his maister quha than appeirit to him in the liknes of ane corbie and thair instructit him be quhat meanis he sould cure the said Thomas of his said seiknes and he haifing ressauit that respons fra the devill the said Alexr thereftir cuist to him the kat quha therewt vanischet away.'[1]

Two of the Somerset witches in 1664 had familiars; to Elizabeth Style the familiar came as a black dog, 'and when she hath a desire to do harm, she calls the Spirit by the name of Robin, to whom when he appeareth, she useth these words, O Sathan give me my purpose. She then tells him what she would have done. And that he should so appear to her was part of her Contract with him.--Alice Duke saith, that when the Devil doth any thing for her, she calls for him by the name of Robin, upon which he appears, and when in the shape of a Man, she can hear him speak.'[2] This shows that the familiar, or Devil as she called him, was not always in the form of a man. The trial of Margaret Nin-Gilbert at Thurso was as late as 1719: 'Being interrogat, If ever the devil appeared afterwards to her? Confessed, That sometimes he appeared in the likeness of a great black horse, and other times riding on a black horse, and that he appeare sometimes in the likeness of a black cloud, and sometimes like a black henn.'[3]

  

2. The Domestic Familiar

Forbes, the great Scotch lawyer, says that 'to some he [the Devil] gives certain Spirits or Imps to correspond with, and serve them as their Familiars, known to them by some odd

[1. From an unpublished trial in the Justiciary Court at Edinburgh.

2. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 136, 137, 152.

3. Sharpe, p. 191.]

Names, to which they answer when called. These Imps are said to be kept in Pots or other Vessels.'[1] Though the domestic familiar is thus mentioned in the law of Scotland, it never occurs in the trials. It is confined so strictly to England that Hutchinson is able to say 'I meet with little mention of Imps in any Country but ours, where the Law makes the feeding, suckling, or rewarding of them to be Felony'.[2] It is not found north of Lancashire, and the chief records are in Essex, Suffolk, and the other Eastern counties.

The domestic familiar was always a small animal, was fed in a special manner on bread and milk and blood, and was kept, as Forbes points out, in a box or earthen pot on a bed of wool. It was used for working magic on the persons and property of other people, never for divining. Giffard records the general belief: 'The witches have their spirits, some hath one, some hath more, as two, three, foure, or five, some in one likenesse, and some in another, as like cats, weasils, toades, or mise, whom they nourish with milke or with a chicken, or by letting them suck now and then a drop of bloud.'[3]

In the earlier trials the witches confessed to pricking the hands or face and giving the resulting drop or drops of blood to the familiar. In the later trials this has developed into the sucking of the witch's blood by the familiar; and the supernumerary nipple, which was so marked a feature of the English witches, was popularly supposed to be caused by such sucking. It is more probable, however, that the witch who was possessed of a supernumerary nipple would regard it as something supernatural, and would use it to nourish a supernatural animal.

Elizabeth Francis, tried at Chelmsford in 1556,

'learned this arte of witchcraft of hyr grandmother whose nam mother Eue. Item when shee taughte it her, she counseiled her to renounce GOD and his worde and to geue of her bloudde to Sathan (as she termed it) whyche she delyuered her in the lykenesse of a whyte spotted Catte, and taughte her to feede the sayde Catte with breade and mylke, and she

[1. Forbes, ii, pp. 33.

2. F. Hutchinson. Hist. Essay, p. 77.

3. Giffard, p. 18.]

dyd so, also she taughte her to cal it by the name of Sathan and to kepe it in a basket. Item that euery tyme that he did any thynge for her, she sayde that he required a drop of blonde, which she gaue him by prycking herselfe, sometime in one place and then in an other. When shee had kept this Cat by the space of XV or XVI yeare, and as some saye (though vntruly) beinge wery of it, she came to one mother Waterhouse her neyghbour, she brought her this cat in her apron and taught her as she was instructed by her grandmother Eue, telling her that she must cal him Sathan and geue him of her bloude and breade and milke as before.--Mother Waterhouse receyued this cat of this Frances wife in the order as is before sayde. She (to trye him what he coulde do) wyld him to kyll a hog of her owne, which he dyd, and she gaue him for his labour a chicken, which he fyrste required of her and a drop of her blod. And thys she gaue him at all times when he dyd anythynge for her, by pricking her hand or face and puttinge the bloud to hys mouth whyche he sucked, and forthwith wold lye downe in hys pot againe, wherein she kepte him. Another tym she rewarded hym as before, wyth a chicken and a droppe of her bloud, which chicken he eate vp cleane as he didde at the rest, and she cold fynde remaining neyther bones nor fethers. Also she said that when she wolde wyl him to do any thinge for her, she wolde say her Pater noster in laten. Item, this mother Waterhouse confessed that shee fyrst turned this Cat into a tode by this meanes, she kept the cat a great while in woll in a pot, and at length being moued by pouertie to occupie the woll, she praied in the name of the father and of the sonne, and of the holy ghost that it wold turne into a tode, and forthwith it was turned into a tode, and so kept it in the pot without woll.'[1]

In 1579 at Windsor--

'one Mother Dutton dwellyng in Cleworthe Parishe keepeth a Spirite or Feende in the likenesse of a Toade, and fedeth the same Feende liyng in a border of greene Hearbes, within her Garden, with blood whiche she causeth to issue from her owne flancke. Mother Deuell, dwellyng nigh the Ponde in Windesore, hath a Spirite in the shape of a Blacke Catte, and calleth it Gille, whereby she is aided in her Witchcrafte, and she daiely feedeth it with Milke, mingled with her owne bloud. Mother Margaret, dwellying in the Almeshouse at Windesore, dooeth feede a Kitlyng or Feende by her named Ginnie, with crummes of bread and her owne blood. The saied Elizabeth Stile, of her self confesseth that she the same

[1. Witches at Chelmsford, pp. 24-32; Philobiblon Soc., viii.]

Elizabeth kept a Ratte, beeyng in very deede a wicked Spirite, namyng it Philip, and that she fedde the same Ratte with bloode, issuing from her right handwrest, the markes whereof euidently remaine.'[1]

At St. Osyth in Essex in 1582 Thomas Rabbet, aged eight, said that his mother Ursley Kemp 'hath foure seuerall spirites, the one called Tyffin, the other Tittey, the third Pigine, and the fourth Iacke: and being asked of what colours they were, saith, that Tyttey is like a little grey Cat,[2] Tyffin is like a white lambe, Pygine is black like a Toad, and Iacke is blacke like a Cat. And hee saith, hee hath seen his mother at times to giue thie[m] beere to drinke, and of a white Lofe or Cake to eate, and saith that in the night time the said spirites will come to his mother, and sucke blood of her vpon her armes and other places of her body.' Febey Hunt, stepdaughter of Ales Hunt of the accused witches, stated that 'shee hath seen her mother to haue two little thinges like horses,[3] the one white, the other blacke, the which shee kept in a little lowe earthen pot with woll, colour white and blacke, and that they stoode in her chamber by her bed side, and saith, that shee hath seene her mother to feede them with milke'. Ales Hunt herself said that 'shee had within VI. dayes before this examination two spirits, like unto little Coltes, the one blacke, and the other white: And saith she called them by the names of Iacke and Robbin. This Examinate saith that her sister (named Margerie Sammon) hath also two spirites like Toades, the one called Tom, and the other Robbyn.' Ursley Kemp confessed that 'about a quarter of a yere past, she went vnto mother Bennets house for a messe of milke, the which shee had promised her: But at her comming this examinate saith shee knocked at her dore, and no bodie made her any answere, whereupon shee went to her chamber windowe and looked in therat, saying, ho, ho, mother Bennet are you at home: And

[1. Rehearsall, par. 2-5.

2. Also called Tissey. Compare the name of the magic cat given to Frances More by Goodwife Weed, p. 219.

3. In Ales Hunt's own confession (q.v.) the animals in question are called colts. I would suggest that this is cotes, the well-known provincialism for cats; but the recorder understood the word as colts and further improved it into horses.]

casting her eyes aside, slice saw a spirit lift up a clothe, lying ouer a pot, looking much lik a Ferret. And it being asked of this examinate why the spirite did looke vpon her, shee said it was hungrie.[1] Elizabeth Bennet acknowledged that she had two 'spirits, one called Suckin, being blacke like a Dogge, the other called Lierd, beeing red like a Lion. Suckin this examinat saith is a hee, and the other a shee. Many tymes they drinke of her milke bowle. And when, and as often as they did drinke of the mylke: This Examynate saith they went into the sayd earthen pot, and lay in the wooll.' Ursley Kemp also gave evidence concerning Ales Hunt's familiars: 'About the foureteene or fifteene day of Januarie last, shee went to the house of William Hunt to see howe his wife did, and shee being from home, slice called at her chamber window and looked in, and then espied a spirite to looke out of a potcharde from vnder a clothe, the nose thereof beeing browne like vnto a Ferret.'[1] In 1588 in Essex an old woman, whose name is not given,

'confessed all: Which was this in effect: that she had three spirits: one like a cat, which she called Lightfoot, another like a toad, which she called Lunch, the third like a Weasill, which she called Makeshift. This Lightfoot, she said, one mother Barlie of W. solde her aboue sixteene yeares agoe, for an ouen cake, and told her the Cat would doe her good seruice, if she woulde, she might send her of her errand: this Cat was with her but a while, but the Weasill and the Toad came and offered their seruice: The Cat would kill kine, the Weasil would kill horses, the Toad would plague men in their bodies.--There was one olde mother W. of great T. which had a spirite like a Weasill: she was offended highlie with one H. M. home she went, and called forth her spirite, which lay in a pot of woll vnder her bed, she willed him to goe plague the man; he required what she would give him. She said she would give him a cocke, which she did.' Another Mother W. 'sayd she had a spirit in the likenesse of a yellow dun cat'.[2]

In Lancashire in 1613 old mother Demdike confessed that 'vpon a Sabbath day in the morning, this Examinate hauing

[1. Witches taken at St. Oses, A 3, A 5, C 3 and 4, B 2, B 5 and C 1, B 3.

2. Giffard, pp. 19, 27, 39.]

a litle Child vpon her knee, and she being in a slumber, the sayd Spirit appeared vnto her in the likenes of a browne Dogg, forcing himselfe to her knee, to get blood vnder her left Arme: and she being without any apparrell sauing her Smocke, the said Deuill did get blood vnder her left arme.'[1] Of the witches who plagued the Fairfax family at Fewstone in 1621, five had domestic familiars: Margaret Waite's was 'a deformed thing with many feet, black of colour, rough with hair, the bigness of a cat'; her daughter, Margaret Waite, had as 'her spirit, a white cat spotted with black, and named Inges'; Jennet Dibble had 'her spirit in the shape of a great black cat called Gibbe, which hath attended her now above 40 years'; Dibble's daughter, Margaret Thorpe, had a 'familiar in the shape of a bird, yellow of colour, about the bigness of a crow--the name of it is Tewhit'; Elizabeth Dickenson's spirit was 'in the likeness of a white cat, which she calleth Fillie, she hath kept it twenty years'.[2] The witch of Edmonton, Elizabeth Sawyer, in 1621, said: 'It is eight yeares since our first acquaintance, and three times in the weeke, the Diuell would come and see mee; he would come sometimes in the morning, and sometimes in the evening. Alwayes in the shape of a dogge, and of two collars, sometimes of blacke and .sometimes of white. I gaue him leaue to sucke of my bloud, the which hee asked of me. When he came barking to mee he then had done the inischiefe that I did bid him to doe for me. I did call the Diuell by the name of Tom. I did stroake him on the backe, and then he would becke vnto me, and wagge his tayle as being therewith contented.'[3] Margaret Johnson, another Lancashire witch in 1633, 'alsoe saith, yt when her devill did come to sucke her pappe, hee usually came to her, in ye liknes of a cat, sometymes of one colour, and sometymes on (sic) an other. And yt since this trouble befell her, her spirit hath left her, and shee never sawe him since.'[4]

From 1645 to 1647 are the chief records of the witch trials of Essex and the eastern counties, celebrated as the scene of Matthew Hopkins's work. The Essex trials took place in

[1. Potts, B 3.

2. Fairfax, pp. 32, 33, 34, 79, 82.

3. Wonderfull Discouerie of Elizabeth Sawyer.

3. Whitaker. p. 216.]

1645: John Sterne, Hopkins's assistant, deposed that when watching Elizabeth Clarke.

'the said Elizabeth desired this informant, and the rest that were in the roome with her, to sit downe, and said, shee would shew this informant and the rest some of her impes: and within halfe an houre there appeared a white thing in the likeness of a cat, but not altogether so big: and being asked, if she would not be afraid of her impes, the said Elizabeth answered, "What, do yee think I am afraid of my children?" And that shee called the name of that white impe, Hoult. And this informant further saith, That presently after there appeared another white impe, with red spots, as big as a small dog, which shee then called Jarmara: and that immediately after, there appeared at the threshold of the doore another impe about the bignesse of the first, but did presently vanish away. And then the said Elizabeth being asked, if any more impes would come? she answered, "That Vinegar Tom would come by and by". And forthwith there appeared another in the likenesse of a dumb dogge, somewhat bigger than any of the former. And the said Elizabeth also told this informant, that shee had three impes from her mother, which were of a browne colour, and two from the old beldam Weste; and that there had five [? four] impes appeared, but shee had one more, called Sack and Sugar. And the said Elizabeth further confessed to this informant, that shee had one impe for which she would fight up to the knees in bloud, before shee would lose it; and that her impes did commonly suck on the old beldam Weste, and that the said beldam's impes did suck on her the said Elizabeth likewise.--Anne Leech saith, That she had a grey impe sent to her, and that this examinant, together with the said Elizabeth Clark, and Elizabeth the wife of Edward Gooding, did about a yeer since, send their imps to kill a black cowe and a white cowe of Mr. Edwards, which was done accordingly. And this examinant saith, that she sent her grey impe, Elizabeth Clark a black imp, and Elizabeth Gooding a white imp. And this examinant confesseth, that she and the said Elizabeth Gooding, sent either of them an imp to destroy the childe of the said Mr. Edwards; this examinant's imp being then a white one, and Elizabeth Gooding's a black imp; and that about thirty yeers since, this examinant had the said white imp and two others, a grey and a black imp of one Anne, the wife of Robert Pearce of Stoak in Suffolk, being her brother; and that these imps went commonly from one to another, and did mischief where ever they went; and that when this examinant did not send and imploy them abroad to do mischief, she had not her health, but when they were imployed, she was healthfull and well, and that these imps did usually suck those teats which were found about the privie parts of her body.--Hellen Clark confesseth, that about six weeks since, the Devill. appeared to her in her house, in the likenesse of a white dog, and that she calleth that familiar Elimanzer; and that this examinant hath met often fed him with milk pottage.--Rebecca West saith, that about a month since, the aforesaid Anne Leech, Elizabeth Gooding, Hellen Clark, Anne West, and this examinant, met all together at the house of the aforesaid Elizabeth Clark in Mannyntree, where they spent some time in praying unto their familiars, and every one in order went to prayers; afterwards some of them read in a book, the book being Elizabeth Clarks; and this examinant saith, that forthwith their familiars appeared, and every one of them made their severall propositions to those familiars, what every one of them desired to have effected.--The Information of Matthew Hopkins, Gent. taken upon oath before the said justices. This informant saith, That being lately at Colchester, he went to the castle, where the said Rebecca Weste, with the other five, are secured until the next gaole delivery: and this informant going to Rebecca Weste, and asking her how shee came first to be a witch, the said Rebecca told this informant, that about a yeare since, or thereabouts, halfe an houre before sun-set, the said Anne Weste (her mother) carried the said Rebecca Weste towards Mannintree (which is about a small mile from the place where the said Anne dwelt) and the said Rebecca told this informant, that as her mother and shee walked together, the said Anne told the said Rebecca, shee must keepe secret whatsoever shee saw, whither they were then going; and the said Rebecca promised so to doe; and the said Rebecca told this informant, that her mother and shee went to the house of the aforesaid Elizabeth Clarke, where at their comming in they found the aforesaid Anne Leech, widow, Elizabeth Gooding, Hellen Clarke, and the house-keeper Elizabeth Clarke, and that forthwith the Devill appeared to them in the shape of a dogge; afterwards in the shape of two kitlyns; then in the shape of two dogges; and that the said familiars did doe homage in the first place to the said Elizabeth Clarke, and skipped up into her lap and kissed her; and then went and kissed all that were in the roome, except the said Rebecca: and the said Rebecca told this informant, that immediately one of the company asked the said Anne her mother, if shee had acquainted her daughter (the said Rebecca) with the businesse. [Rebecca then took an oath of secrecy]; after she had consented to all these things, the Devill. came into her lap, and kissed her, and promised to doe for her what she could desire.--The Information of Elizabeth Otley of Wyvenhoe, taken upon oath before the said justices. This informant saith, that Alice Dixon, who now stands committed for a suspected witch, did in the presence of Mary Johnson of the same town, charge and accuse the said Mary Johnson to be the death of this informant's child, saying, that the said Mary Johnson did carry an impe in her pocket to this informant's house, and put the said impe into the house, at an hole in the doore, bidding it go rock the cradle, and do the businesse she sent it about.--The Information of Joseph Long, Minister of Clacton in the County of Essex, taken before the said justices. This informant saith, that Anne the wife of John Cooper of Clacton aforesaid, being accused for a witch: Confessed unto this informant, that she the said Anne hath had three black impes suckled on the lower parts of her body; called by the names of Wynowe, Jeso, and Panu. And the said Anne further confessed unto this informant, that she the said Anne offered to give unto her daughter Sarah Cooper an impe in the likenes of a gray kite [kit], to suck on the said Sarah; which impes name the said Anne called Tom boy; and told the said Sarah, there was a cat for her.--This informant Henry Cornwall saith, that the said Margaret [Moone] did confesse to him that she had twelve impes, and called them by their names; of which he remembers onely these following: Jesus, Jockey, Sandy, Mrit. Elizabeth, and Collyn.--The information of Francis Milles, taken upon oath before the said justices. This informant saith, that she asking the said Margaret [Moone] for her impes, which sucked those teats; she said, if she might have some bread and beere, she would call her said impes; which being given unto her, she put the bread into the beere, and set it against an hole in the wall, and made a circle round the pot, and then cried, Come Christ, come Christ, come Mounsier, come Mounsier: And no impe appearing, she cried out and said, she had devilish daughters, which had carried her impes away in a white bagge, and wished they might be searched.--The information of Francis Stock, and John Felgate, taken upon oath before the said justices. The said Francis and John say, that the said Sarah Barton, told them, that the said Marian [Hocket] had given and delivered unto her the said Sarah three imps, and that the said Marian called them by the names of Littleman, Pretty-man, and Dainty.--This examinant, Elizabeth Harvie saith, that about halfe a yeer since, the said Marian Hocket brought three things to her house, two of them being smaller than mouses, and the other somewhat bigger and longer; and 'that the said Marian told this examinant they were pretty things, and would do her and this examinant good, if shee this examinant would keep them.--Rose Hallybread saith, that about fifteen or sixteen yeers since, there was an imp brought to her house by one Goodwife Hagtree, which imp this examinant entertained, fed it with oatmeale, and suckled it on her body, for the space of a yeer and a halfe, or thereabouts, and then lost it: And this examinant further saith, that about half a yeer since, one Joyce Boanes (who is now also accused for Witchcraft), brought to this examinants house another imp, in the likenesse of a small grey bird, which this examinant received. And this examinant further saith, that about eight dayes since, Susan Cock, Margaret Landish, and Joyce Boanes, (all which stand now suspected for Witchcraft) brought to this examinants house each of them an imp, (in all three) to which this examinant added one of her own imps; and then the said Joyce Boanes carryed the said four imps to the house of one Robert Turner, to torment his servant.--Joyce Boanes saith, that about thirteen yeers since, shee had two imps which came into the bed to her in the likenesse of mouses, and that they sucked on this examinants body. And this examinant also saith, that she carried one of her said imps, called Rug, to the house of the said Rose Hallybread; and that her said imp Rug, with the three imps of the said Rose Hallybread, Susan Cock, and Margaret Landish, each of them sending one, were carried by this examinant from the house of the said Rose Hallybread, to the house of the said Robert Turner to kill the servant of the said Robert.--Susan Cock saith, that about three or four yeeres since, one Margery Stoakes, this examinants mother, lying upon her death-bed, and this examinant comming to visit her, shee the said Margery desired this examinant privately to give entertainment to two of her imps, and withall told this examinant, they would do this examinant good: And this examinant saith, that the same night her said mother dyed, the said two imps came to her accordingly, and sucked on her body: And this examinant saith, that one of the said imps was like a mouse, and the name of that was Susan; that the other was of a yellow colour, about the bigness of a cat; and that the name of that imp was Besse.--Rebecca Jones saith, that as shee was going to St. Osyth (where this examinant doth now dwell) to sell her said masters butter, a man met with her, being in a ragged suite, and having such great eyes, that this examinant was much afraid of him; who came to this examinant, and gave her three things like to moules, having foure feet a piece, but without tayles, and of a black colour, and bid this examinant nurse the said three things, untill he did desire them againe; And this examinant asked the said man, what she should give them to eate, and he told this examinant milke, and that they would not hurt her, and wished her not to be afraid of them. And the said man told this examinant, that those three things which he gave her, would avenge her on her enemies, and bid her murther some, but not too many, and he would forgive her; and then went away from this examinant. And this examinant saith, that the names of her three imps were Margaret, Amie, and Susan. And that a while after, this examinant and one Joyce Boanes, now in prison, did send each of them an impe to kill one Thomas Bumstead of St. Osyth: And that the impe which the said Joyce Boanes sent was a dund one like unto a mouse.--Johan Cooper saith, That she hath been a witch about twenty yeers, and hath three familiars, two like mouses, and the third like a frog; the names of the two like mouses are Jack, and the other Prickeare, and the name of the third, like a frog, is Frog.--Anne Cate saith, That she hath four familiars, which shee had from her mother, about two and twenty yeeres since, and that the names of the said imps are James, Prickeare, Robyn, and Sparrow: and that three of these imps are like mouses, and the fourth like a sparrow, which she called Sparrow.'[1]

In 1646 the Huntingdonshire witches were tried. Elizabeth Weed of Great Catworth confessed that--

'about one and twenty yeares since she being saying her Prayers in the evening about bedtime, there did appeare unto her three Spirits, one in the likeness of a young man or boy, and the other two of two Puppies, the one white and the other black. Being demanded the name of the lesser Spirits, shee saith the name of the white one was Lilly, and the blacke one Priscill; and that the office of Lilly was to hurt man, woman, or childe; and the office of Priscill was to hurt Cattell when she desired.--Francis Moore saith, that about eight yeares since she received a little blacke puppy from one Margaret Simson of great Catworth, which dog the said Margaret had in her bed with her, and took it thence when she gave it to the Examinate: The Examinate further saith, that the said Margaret told her, that she must keep that dogge all her life time; and if she cursed any Cattell, and set the same dog upon them, they should presently dye, and the said Margaret told her that she had named it already, his name was Pretty. And the said Examinate further saith, that about the same time one goodwife Weed gave her a white Cat, telling her, that if she would deny God, and affirme the same by her bloud, then whomsoever she cursed and sent that Cat unto, they should dye shortly after. Whereupon the said Examinate

[1. Howell, iv, 834 et seq.]

saith that shee did deny God, and in affirmation thereof shee pricked her finger with a thorne, whence issued bloud, which the Cat presently licked, and the said goodwife (sic) Weed named the Cat Tissy. And she further saith, that she killed the said Dog and Cat about a yeare since.-Joan Wallis of Keiston said [that the Devil came to her] and shee asked what his name was, and he said his name was Blackeman, and asked her if she were poore, and she said I; then he told her he would send one Grissell and Greedigut to her, that shall do any thing for her. And after Blackman was departed from her, within three or four dayes, Grissell and Greedigut came to her, in the shapes of dogges with great brisles of hogges haire upon their backs.' The accounts given by John Winnick, Ellen Shepheard, and Anne Desborough suggest that they are confused amplifications of the ritual to be observed in taking a familiar, the ritual being clearly given in the confession of Francis Moore when she was presented with the cat Tissy. John Winnick said, 'On a Friday being in the barne [where he lost his purse] there appeared unto him a Spirit, blacke and shaggy, and having pawes like a Beare, but in bulk not fully so big as a Coney. The Spirit asked him what he ailed to be so sorrowfull, this Examinate answered that he had lost a purse and money, and knew not how to come by it againe. The Spirit replied, if you will forsake God and Christ, and fall down and worship me for your God, I will help you to your purse and mony againe: This Examinate said he would, and thereupon fell down upon his knees and held up his hands. Then the Spirit said, tomorrow about this time of the day, you shall find your purse. Whereupon at the time prefixed, this Examinate went unto the place, and found his purse upon the floore and tooke it up, and looking afterwards into it, he found there all the money that was formerly lost: but before he had looked into it, the same Spirit appears unto him, and said, there is your purse and your money in it: and then this Examinate fell downe upon his knees and said, my Lord and God I thanke you. The said Spirit at that time brought with him two other Spirits, for shape, bignesse, and colour, the one like a white Cat, the other like a grey Coney: and while this Examinate was upon his knees, the Beare Spirit spake to him, saying, you must worship these two Spirits as you worship me, and take them for your Gods also: then this Examinate directed his bodie towards them, and call'd them his Lords and Gods. Then the Beare Spirit told him that when he dyed he must have his soule, whereunto this Examinate yielded. Hee told him then also that they must suck of his body, to which this Examinate also yielded.--Ellen Shepheard saith that about five years since, when she was in her homsted at Molesworth, there appeared unto her a Spirit, somewhat like a Rat, but not fully so big, of an iron-grey colour, and said you must goe with me, and she said, I will not, avoid Satan, and thereupon he went away. Shee saith, that within a short time after, going into the field, cursing, and fretting, and blaspheming, there appeared three Spirits more with the former in the fashion of Rats, of an iron-grey, and said, you must forsake God and Christ, and goe with me, and take those Spirits for your Gods, and you shall have all happinesse, whereunto she consented: And moreover they said unto her, that when she dyed, they must have her body and soule, and said they must have blood from her, which she granted, and thereupon they sucked her upon and about her hippes.--Anne Desborough confesseth, that about thirty yeares since, the first weeke of Cleane Lent, there appeared unto her a thing some-what bigger than a Mouse, of a brown colour, and of the likenesse of a mouse. This was while shee lived at Tichmarsh in the County of Northampton: she being there in bed, and in a dreame, the said likenesse then gave her a nip, and thereby awakened her out of her dreame, and then told her (when she was awakened) that it must have part of her soule; whereupon she was in a great feare, and gave him no answer, but prayed to God, and thereupon it vanished away from her. About five dayes after, the same Mouse appeared to her againe, bringing with it another Mouse, about the bignesse of an ordinary Mouse, or very little bigger, browne like the former, save Only that the latter had some white about the belly, whereas the former was all browne. Then the Mouse that first appeared, said, we must sucke of your body. She yielded to them, and said, they should; upon her yielding, they went to her and sucked of her bodie, where the markes are found. The bigger mouse she called Tib, and the lesser Jone. Tib told her that she must forsake God and Christ, and take them for her Gods, telling her that when she dyed, they must have her soule, to all which she yielded.'[1]

In Cambridgeshire in 1647 Dorothy Ellis 'saith that about thirtie yeares since shee being much troubled in her minde there appeared unto hir the Devell in the liknes of a great catt and speak unto this ext and demanded of hir hir blood wch she gave hime after which the spirit in the liknes of a catt suck upon the body of this ex, and the first thing this ext commanded her spirit to doe was to goe and be witch four of the cattell of Tho. Hitch all which cattell presently died'.[2] John

[1. Davenport, pp. 1-12.

2. Gibbons, p-113.]

Palmer of St. Albans in 1649, 'upon his compact with the Divel, received a flesh brand, or mark, upon his side, which gave suck to two familiars, the one in the form of a dog, which he called George, and the other in the likeness of a woman, called Jezebell.'[1] Of the Somerset witches in 1664, Alice Duke 'confesseth that her Familiar doth commonly suck her right Breast about seven at night, in the shape of a little Cat of a dunnish colour, which is as smooth as a Want, and when she is suckt, she is in a kind of a Trance.--Christian Green saith, The Devil doth usually suck her left Brest about five of the Clock in the Morning in the likeness of an Hedghog, bending, and did so on Wednesday Morning last. She saith that it is painful to her, and that she is usually in a trance when she is suckt.'[2] In 1665 Abre Grinset of Dunwich in Suffolk 'did confess, that the Devil did appear in the form of a Pretty handsom Young Man first; and since Appeareth to her in the form of a blackish Gray Cat or Kitling, that it sucketh of a Tett and hath drawn blood'.[3]

The only published account of the animal familiar in France shows a combination of the two classes, for the creature was a toad kept in the house, fed in a particular way, and used for divination.

Silvain Nevillon and Gentien le Clerc were tried at Orleans in 1614. Silvain confessed--

'qu'iI y a des Sorciers qui nourrissent des Marionettes, qui sont de petits Diableteaux en forme de Crapaux, & leur font manger de la bouillie composee de laict & de farine, & leur donnent le premier mourceau, & n'oseroient s'absenter de leur maison sans leur demander conge, & luy faut dire combien de temps ils seront absens, comme trois ou quatre iours, & si elles disent que c'est trop, ceux qui les gardent, n'osent faire leur voyage ny outre-passer leur volonte. Et quand ils veulent aller en marchandise ou iouer, & scauoir s'il y fera bon, ils regardent si les-dites Marionettes sont ioyeuses, en ce cas ils vont en marchandise, ou iouer: mais si elles sont maussades & tristes, ils ne bougent de la maison.--Gentil ou Gentie[n] le Clerc dit qu'il y auoit plus d'acquest en sa Marionette qu'en Dieu. Et auoit veu souuent la Marionette dudit Neuillon, qui

[1. Gerish, The Divel's Delusions. p. 12.

2. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 151, 157.

3. Petto, p. 18.]

est comme vn gros crapaut tout noir, comme d'vne fourrure noire, & estoit dans vne boette cache soubs vn carreau, qui sautoit & leuoit quand on vouloit donner a manger audit crapaut. Qu'il l'a veu encore puis six sepmaines en la ruelle du lict dudict Neuillon, & qu'il a veu qu'il l'apportoit vne autre fois dans son manteau, qu'il luy a dit vne douzaine de fois, que s'iI vouloit it luy en feroit auoir vne. Qu'il y auoit plus profit en icelle qu'en Dieu, & qu'il gagneroit rien a regarder Dieu: mais que sa Marionette luy apportoit tousiours quelque chose.'[1] With this may be compared the account of a Lapp familiar in 1653: 'Dans chaque maison it y a un gros chat noir, duquel its font grand estime, parlant a luy comme s'il avoit de la raison, ne font rien qu'il ne luy communique, croyans qu'il leur aide en leurs entreprises, ne manquans tous les soirs de sortir de leurs cabannes pour le consulter, & les suit par tout oh its vont, tant a la pesche qu'a la chasse. Quoy que cet animal ait la figure d'un chat par son regard, qui est epouvantable, j'ay creu & croy encore que c'est un Diable familier.'

  

3. Methods of obtaining Familiars

There seem to have been four methods of obtaining familiars: 1, by gift from the Devil; 2, by gift from a fellow-witch: 3, by inheritance; 4, by magical ceremonies. Of these, Nos. 2 and 3 appear to be confined to the domestic familiar, consequently they are found chiefly in the eastern counties of England.

1. The gift of the Devil was sometimes a divining familiar, sometimes a domestic familiar, commonly presented at the admission ceremony. As the divining familiar it represented the Devil himself, and the 'responses' received to questions were believed to come from him. As the essential point of this class of familiar was that it should be a species of animals and not one special animal, the devil merely appointed to the witch what species she should observe in divining. The domestic familiar, being a small animal, could be actually given into the hands of the witch, with instructions for its feeding and for the method of using it. It was sometimes, but not always, identified with the devil, and was usually

[1. De Lancre, L'Incredulite, pp. 801, 803.

2. La Martiniere, pp. 42-3 (ed. 1671).]

called an 'imp',[1] perhaps with the idea of a small or miniature Devill like the Marionette of Silvain Nevillon. It acted as the 'Devil's substitute when he himself was not present, and was endowed with some, though not all, of his power; for this reason the witch often had more than one familiar, each to serve a single purpose. In 1645 at Ipswich Mother Lakeland confessed that after she had signed the covenant with the Devil, 'he furnished her with three Imps, two little Dogs and a Mole.'[2] In the same year, Rebecca Jones, an Essex witch,

'saith, that as slice was going to St Osyth to sell her masters butter, a man met with her, being in a ragged sute, and having such great eyes, that this examinant was much afraid of him; who came to this examinant and gave her three things like to moules, having foure feet a piece, but without tayles, and of a black colour, and bid this examinant nurse the said three things, untill he did desire them againe; And the said man told this examinant, that those three things which he gave her, would avenge her on her enemies, and bid her murther some, but not too many, and he would forgive her; and then went away from this examinant.'[3]

In 1646 the Huntingdonshire witch, Joane Wallis, said that Blackman 'told her he would send one Grissell and Greedigut to her, that shall do any thing for her. And after Blackman was departed from her, within three or four dayes, Grissell and Greedigut came to her, in the shapes of dogges.'[4] Another witch of the same Coven, Elizabeth Weed, confessed that 'there did appeare unto her three Spirits, one in the likenesse of a young man or boy, and the other two of two Puppies, the one white and the other black.'[5]

2. The gift from a fellow-witch was -always a domestic familiar, as to the Devil alone belonged the power of appointing a divining familiar; therefore this method of obtaining a familiar is found only in the eastern counties and other places where the domestic or sucking familiar is recorded. In 1556 Elizabeth Francis, whose evidence was corroborated by Mother

[1. Imp = A slip, sapling, scion; hence applied to persons with the meaning child, lad, boy.

2. Lawes against Witches, p. 7.

3. Howell, iv, 855.

4. Davenport, p. 12.

5. Id., p. 1.]

Waterhouse, said that 'she came to one mother Waterhouse her neighbour, she brought her this cat in her apron and taught her as she was instructed by her grandmother Eue, telling her that she must cal him Sathan and geue him of her bloude and bread and milke as before.--Mother Waterhouse said, she receyued this cat of this Frances wife in the order as is before sayde.'[1] In 1566 John Walsh, the Dorset witch, 'being demaunded whether he had euer any Familiar or no: he sayth that he had one of his sayde mayster. He being demaunded howe long he had the vse of the Familiar: He sayd one yeare by his sayd maister's life, and iiii yeres after his death.'[2] An Essex witch in 1588 had three familiars, 'one like a cat, which she called Lightfoot. This Lightfoote, she said, one mother Barlie, of W., solde her aboue sixteene yeares ago, for an ouen cake, and told her the Cat would do her good seruice, if she woulde, she might send her of her errand.'[3] At Orleans in 1614 Gentil le Clerc said that he had seen Nevillon's familiar, and that Nevillon 'luy a dit vne douzaine de fois, que s'il vouloit il luy en feroit auoir vne'.[4] Elizabeth Clarke in Essex in 1645 said she 'had three impes from her mother, which were of a broune colour, and two from old beldam Weste. The said Anne Weste seemed much to pitie this examinant for her lamenesse (having but one leg) and her poverty; And said to this examinant, That there was wayes and meanes for her to live much better then now shee did: And said, that shee would send to this examinant a thing like a little kitlyn, which would fetch home some victualls for this examinant; and that it should doe her no hurt.'[5] The Huntingdonshire witch, Francis Moore, in 1646, 'saith that about eight yeares since she received a little blacke puppy from one Margaret Simson of great Catworth. The Examinate further saith, that the said Margaret told her, that she must keep that dogge all her life time; and if she cursed any Cattell, and set the same dog upon them, they should presently dye. And the said Examinate further saith, that about the

[1. Witches at Chelmsford, pp. 20, 29.

2. Examination of John Walsh. His master was Sir Robert Draiton.

3. Giffard, p. C., see Percy Soc., viii.

De Lancre, L'Incredulite p. 803.

5. Howell, iv, 834, 836.]

same time one goodwife Weed gave her a white Cat, telling her, that if she would deny God, and affirme the same by her bloud, then whomsoever she cursed and sent that Cat unto, they should dye shortly after.'[1]

3. The profession of the witch-religion being hereditary, it is not uncommon to find that the familiar descended from mother to daughter. This, like the familiar given by one witch to another, was the domestic familiar. It was sometimes presented during the mother's lifetime or was left as a legacy at her death. Elizabeth Francis in 1556 stated that 'she learned this arte of witchcraft at the age of xii yeres of hyr grandmother whose nam mother Eue of Hatfyelde Peuerell, disseased. Item when shee taughte it her, she counseiled her to renounce GOD and his worde and to geue of her bloudde to Sathan (as she termed it) whyche she delyuered her in the lykenesse of a whyte spotted Catte.'[2] In 1582 Ales Hunt of St. Osyth confessed to having two spirits, and 'saith, that her sister (named Margerie Sammon) hath also two spirites like Toades, the one called Tom, and the other Robbyn: And saith further, her sayde Syster and shee had the sayd spyrites of their Mother, Mother Barnes.'[3] In 1597 the Derbyshire witch, Alse Gooderidge, stated that 'the Diuell appeared to me in lykenesse of a little partie-colored dog red and white, and I called him Minny. She saide she had her familiar of her mother.'[4] The Essex witches, tried in 1645, also inherited familiars from their mothers. Anne Cooper confessed 'that she the said Anne offered to give unto her daughter Sarah Cooper an impe in the likenes of a gray kite (i. e. kit, or cat), to suck on the said Sarah.--Susan Cock saith, that about three or four yeeres since, one Margery Stoakes, this examinants mother, lying upon her death-bed, and this examinant comming to visit her, shee the said Margery desired this examinant privately to give entertainment to two of her imps, and withall told this examinant, they would do this examinant good; And this examinant saith, that the same night her said mother dyed, the said two imps came to her

[1. Davenport, p. 5.

2. Witches at Chelmsford, p. 24. Philobiblon Soc., viii.

3. Witches taken at St. Oses, p. C 4.

4. Alse Gooderidge, pp. 26, 27.]

accordingly, and sucked on her body.--Anne Cate saith, That she hath four familiars, which shee had from her mother, about two and twenty yeeres since.'[1] In 1667 at Liverpool, 'Margaret Loy, being arraigned for a witch, confessed she was one; and when she was asked how long she had so been, replied, Since the death of her mother, who died thirty years ago; and at her decease she had nothing to leave her, and this widow Bridge, that were sisters, but her two spirits; and named them, the eldest spirit to this widow, and the other spirit to her the said Margaret Loy.'[2] This inheritance of a familiar may be compared with the Lapp custom: 'The Laplanders bequeath their Demons as part of their inheritance, which is the reason that one family excels another in this magical art.'[3]

4. The method of obtaining a familiar by means of magical words or actions is clearly described in two modern examples:

'Sometime in the beginning of the last century, two old dames attended the morning service at Llandaewi Brefi Church, and partook of the Holy Communion; but instead of eating the sacred bread like other communicants, they kept it in their mouths and went out. Then they walked round the Church outside nine times, and at the ninth time the Evil One came out from the Church wall in the form of a frog, to whom they gave the bread from their mouths, and by doing this wicked thing they were supposed to be selling themselves to Satan and become witches.--There was an old man in North Pembrokeshire, who used to say that he obtained the power of bewitching in the following manner: The bread of his first Communion he pocketed. He made pretence at eating it first of all, and then put it in his pocket. When he went out from the service there was a dog meeting him by the gate, to which he gave the bread, thus selling his soul to the Devil. Ever after, he possessed the power to bewitch.'[4]

On the analogy of these two examples, I suggest that in the accounts of familiars offering themselves to the witch, there was, previous to such appearance, some formula of words or some magical action which are not recorded. The animal,

[1. Howell, iv, 845, 853, 856,

2, Moore Rental, Chetham Society, xii, p. 59.

3. Scheffer, quoting Tornaeus.

4. Davies, p. 231. For a similar practice in modern England, see Transactions of the Devonshire Association. (1874), p. 201.]

which first appeared after such words or actions, would be considered as the Devil, as in the two cases quoted above. Such an explanation accounts for the statements of some of the witches that on the appearance of the animal they at once renounced the Christian religion and vowed obedience to the new God. It is noticeable that in many cases the accused acknowledged that, before the appearance of the animal, they had been 'banning and cursing', in other words, calling on the Devil; the appearance of the animal, after such summons, produced neither surprise nor alarm, and in fact seems to have been regarded as the effect of their words.

In 1556 Joan Waterhouse, the eighteen-year-old daughter of the witch Mother Waterhouse, of Hatfield Peveril, being angry with another girl, 'shee goinge home dydde as she had seene her mother doe, callynge Sathan, whiche came to her (as she sayd) in the lykenes of a great dogge'.[1] At Aberdeen in 1597 Agnes Wobster said that the Devil appeared 'in the liknes of a lamb, quhom thow callis thy God, and bletit on the, and thaireftir spak to the'.[2] James Device, one of the chief of the Lancashire witches in 1613, confessed 'that vpon Sheare Thursday was two yeares, his Grand-Mother Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Dembdike, did bid him this Examinate goe to the Church to receiue the Communion (the next day after being Good Friday) and then not to eate the Bread the Minister gaue him, but to bring it and deliuer it to such a thing as should meet him in his way homewards: Notwithstanding her perswasions, this Examinate did eate the Bread; and so in his comming homeward some fortie roodes off the said Church, there met him a thing in the shape of a Hare, who spoke vnto this Examinate, and asked him whether hee had brought the Bread.'[3] In 1621 Elizabeth Sawyer, the witch of Edmonton, said that 'the first time that the Diuell came vnto me was, when I was cursing, swearing, and blaspheming'.[4] The evidence of the Huntingdonshire witches, John Winnick and Ellen Shepheard, in 1646 (see above p. 219), and of Dorothy Ellis of Cambridgeshire in 1647, also show that the animal

[1. Witches at Chelmsford, p. 34. Philobiblon Soc., viii.

2. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 129.

3. Potts, H 3.

4. Goodcole, Wonderfull Discoverie, p. C.]

which appeared to the witch after an access of emotion was at once acknowledged as God and accepted as the familiar. Mary Osgood of Andover in 1692 'confesses that about II years ago, when she was in a melancholy state and condition, she used to walk abroad in her orchard; and upon a certain time, she saw the appearance of a cat, at the end of the house, which yet she thought was a real cat. However, at that time, it diverted her from praying to God, and instead thereof she prayed to the devil.[1]

The familiars in human form were human beings usually of the sex opposite to that of the witch. As these familiars, were generally called 'Devils' it is sometimes difficult to distinguish them from the Grand-master;[2] but the evidence, taken as a whole, suggests that at certain parts of the ritual every individual of the company was known as a Devil. This suggestion is borne out in the modern survival of an ancient dance in the Basses-Pyrenees, where the dancers to this day are called Satans.[3]

Lady Alice Kyteler, in 1324, was accused that the Devil came to her 'quandoque in specie cujusdam aethiopis cum duobus sociis'.[4] In 1598 the Lyons witches, Thievenne Paget and Antoine Tornier, speak of 'leurs Demons' as distinct from the great Devil, and the evidence of all the other witches shows that 'il y a encor des Demons, qui assistent a ces danses'.[5] De Lancre says that there was more than one Devil: the great one, who was called Maitre Leonard, and a little one called Maitre Jean Mullin. It was this smaller Devil who held the meetings in the absence of the Chief:

'en la place du Grad maistre, il n'y auoit qu'vn petit Diable ou Demon qui n'auoit point de cornes, lequel ne contentoit pas la compagnie comme son maistre. Qu'elles n'auoient tant de confiance en toute la trouppe des mauuais Anges qu'en celuy seul qu'ils auoient accoustume d'adorer & seruir.--A table on se sied selon sa qualite, ayant chacun son Demon assis aupres, & parfois vis a vis. Et quand ils ont mange, chaque Demon pre[n]d sa disciple par la main, & danse auec elle.'[6]

[1. J. Hutchinson, ii, p. 31; Howell, vi, 659.

2. Nos sorciers tiennent la plus-part de ces Demons pour leurs Dieux.' De Lancre, Tableau, p. 23.

3. Moret, pp. 247 seq.

4. Camden Soc., Dame Alice Kyteler, p. 3.

5. Boguet, pp. 69, 132.

6. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 67, 197.]

In 1618 Joan Willimott of Leicester confessed 'that shee hath a Spirit which shee calleth Pretty, which was giuen vnto her by William Berry, whom she serued three yeares; the Spirit stood vpon the ground in the shape and forme of a Woman, which Spirit did aske of her her Soule, which shee then promised vnto it, being willed thereunto by her Master'.[1] In 1633, Margaret Johnson, the Lancashire witch, stated that besides theire particular familiars or spirits, there was one greate or grand devill, or spirit, more eminent than the rest. Shee allsoe saith, yt if a witch have but one marke, shee hath but one spirit; if two, then two spirits; if three, yet but two spirits. Shee alsoe saith, that men witches usually have women spirits, and women witches men spirits.'[2] In 1649 at St. Albans a man witch had 'two familiars, the one in the form of a dog, which he called George, and the other in the likeness of a woman, called Jezebell'.[3] In 1662 at Auldearne Issobell Gowdie confessed

'ther is threttein persones in ilk Coeven; and ilk on of vs has an Sprit to wait wpon ws, quhan ve pleas to call wpon him. I remember not all the Spritis names; bot thair is on called Swein, quhilk waitis wpon the said Margret Wilson in Aulderne; he is still [always] clothed in grass-grein. The nixt Sprit is called Rorie, who waitis wpon Bessie Wilsone, in Aulderne; he is still clothed in yallow. The third Sprit is called The Roring Lyon, who waitis wpon Issobell Nicoll, in Lochlow, and he is still clothed in sea-grein. The fowrth Spirit is called Mak Hector, qwho waitis wpon Jean Martein, dawghter to the said Margret Wilson; he is a yowng-lyk Devill, clothed still in grass-grein . . . The nam of the fyft Sprit is Robert the Rule, and he still clothed in sadd-dun, and seimis to be a Comander of the rest of the Spritis; and he waittis wpon Margret Brodie, in Aulderne. The name of the saxt Sprit is called Thieff of Hell, Wait wpon Hir Selfe; and he waitis also on the said Bessie Wilson. The name of the sevinth Sprit is called The Read Reiver; and he is my owin Spirit, that waittis on my selfe, and is still clothed in blak. The aucht Spirit is called Robert the Jackis, still clothed in dune, and seimes to be aiged. He is ane glaiked gowked Spirit. The nynth Spirit is called Laing. The tenth

[1. Wonderfull Discoverie of Margaret and Phillip Flower, E 3.

2. Whitaker, p. 216.

3. Gerish, The Divel's Delusions, p. 12.]

Spirit is named Thomas a Fearie, &c.[1] Ther wilbe many vther Divellis, waiting wpon our Maister Divell; bot he is bigger and mor awfull than the rest of the Divellis, and they all reverence him. I will ken them all, on by on, from vtheris quhan they appeir lyk a man.'

In a later confession Issobell gave the names more fully. 'The names of owr Divellis that waited wpon ws, ar thes. First, Robert, the Jakis; Sanderis, the Read Reaver; Thomas. the Fearie; Swein, the roaring Lion; Thieffe of Hell, wait wpon hir self; Makhectour; Robert, the Rule; Hendrie Laing; and Rorie.'[2] In Connecticut in 1662 'Robert Sterne testifieth as followeth: I saw this woman goodwife Seager in ye woods wth three more women and with them I saw two black creatures like two Indians but taller. I saw the women dance round these black creatures and whiles I looked upon them one of the women G. Greensmith said looke who is yonder and then they ran away up the hill. I stood still and ye black things came towards mee and then I turned to come away.'[3]

  

4. Transformations into Animals

The belief that human beings can change themselves, or be changed, into animals carries with it the corollary that wounds received by a person when in the semblance of an animal will remain on the body after the return to human shape. This belief seems to be connected with the worship of animal-gods or sacred animals, the worshipper being changed into an animal by being invested with the skin of the creature, by the utterance of magical words, by the making of magical gestures, the wearing of a magical object, or the performance of magical ceremonies. The witches of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries appear to have carried on the tradition of the pre-Christian cults; and the stories of their transformations, when viewed in the light of the ancient examples, are capable of the same explanation. Much confusion, however, has been caused by the religious and so-called scientific

[1. Pitcairn notes: 'Issobell, as usual, appears to have been stopped short here by her interrogators, when she touched on such matters'. i.e., the fairies.

2. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 606, 614.

3. Taylor, p. 81.]

explanations of the contemporary commentators, as well as by the unfortunate belief of modern writers in the capacity of women for hysteria. At both periods pseudo-science has prevented the unbiassed examination of the material.

There are no records extant of the animals held sacred by the early inhabitants of Great Britain, but it is remarkable that the range of the witches' transformations was very limited; cats and hares were the usual animals, occasionally but rarely dogs, mice, crows, rooks, and bees. In France, where the solemn sacrifice of a goat at the Sabbath points to that animal being sacred, it is not surprising to find both men and women witches appearing as goats and sheep. Unless there were some definite meaning underlying the change of shape, there would be no reason to prevent the witches from transforming themselves into animals of any species. It would seem then that the witches, like the adorers of animal gods in earlier times, attempted to become one with their god or sacred animal by taking on his form; the change being induced by the same means and being as real to the witch as to Sigmund the Volsung[1] or the worshipper of Lycaean Zeus.[2]

In the earlier cults the worshipper, on becoming an animal, changed his outward shape to the eye of faith alone, though his actions and probably his voice proclaimed the transformation. The nearest approach to an outward change was by covering the body with the skin of the animal, or by wearing a part of the skin or a mask. The witches themselves admitted that they were masked and veiled, and the evidence of other witnesses goes to prove the same. Boguet suggests that the disguise was used to hide their identity, which was possibly the case at times, but it seems more probable, judging by the evidence, that the masking and veiling were for ritual purposes.

[1. Volsung Saga, Bks. I, II; Wm. Morris, Collected Works, xii, pp. 32, 77.

2. Pausanias, viii, 2, 3, 6, ed. Frazer. Cp. also the animal names applied to priests and priestesses, e. g. the King-bees of Ephesus; the Bee-priestesses of Demeter, of Delphi, of Proserpine, and of the Great Mother; the Doves of Dodona; the Bears in the sacred dance of Artemis; the Bulls at the feast of Poseidon at Ephesus; the Wolves at the Lupercalia, &c.]

In Lorraine in 1589 a male witness stated that 'indem wird er eine Hole, welche sie nennen die Morelianische Klippe, gewahr, darinnen sechs Weiber mit Larven umb ein Tisch, voll guldernen und silbernen Geschieren herumb tanzten.'--Bernhardt's Nicolaea said that she had seen in an open field 'mitten am hellen Tage, einen Tantz von Mannern und Weibern, und weil dieselben auff eine besondere Weise und hinterucks tantzten, kam es ihr frembd fur, stunde derhalben still, und sahe mit allein Fleiss zu da ward sic gewahr, das etliche in dem Reyhen waren so Geiss und Kuhfuss hatten'.[1] At North Berwick in 1590 seven score witches 'danced endlong the Kirk yard. John Fian, missellit [muffled, masked] led the ring.'[2] The witches whom Boguet examined in 1598 confessed to using masks: 'Les Sorciers dansent doz cotre doz, pour ne pas estre recogneus; pour la mesme raison its se masquent encor' auiourd'huy pour la plus part--Ils se masquent pour le iour d'huy, selon que Clauda Paget l'a confesse, & auec elle plusieurs autres--Estienne Poicheux rapportoit que partie des femmes, qu'elle auoit veues au Sabbat, estaient voilees. Et pour cela aussi les Lombards par leurs loix les appellent Mascas.'[3] In 1609 de Lancre points out that in the Basses-Pyrenees there were two grades of witches: 'Il y en a de deux sortes. Aucu[n]s sont voilez pour doner opinion aux pauures que ce sont des Princes & grads seigneurs. Les autres sont decouuerts & tout ouuerteme[n]t dacent, & ceux cy ne sont si pres du maistre, si fauoris ne si employez.'[4] In 1613 Barbe, the wife of jean-Remy Colin de Moyemont, said that 'elle a veu dancer les assistans en nombre de sept a huict personnes, partie desquelles elle ne cognoissoit ad cause des masques hideux qu'elles auoient de noire.'[5]

Josine Deblicq in Hainault (1616) was asked, 'Que savez vous de la troisieme danse? R. Elle eut lieu an Rond-Cheneau, sur le chemin de Nivelles, pres d'unc fontaine. Il y avait bien 21 ou 22 femmes, toutes masquees, chacune avec son amoureux accoutre d'un deguisement bleu, jaune ou noir.'[6] In 1652 a French witch 'dist qu'elles dansoient les dots l'une a

[1. Remigius, pt. i, pp. 65, 67.

2. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 245 6.

3. Boguet, pp. 120, 132-3.

4. De Lancre, Tableau, p, 129.

5. Fournier, p. 16.

6. Monoyer, p. 30.]

l'autre et qu'au milieux it y auoit vne feme masquee tenant vne chandelle'.[1]

It will be seen from the above that the witches were often disguised at the dance, a fact strongly suggesting that the masking was entirely ritual. As the witch trials in Great Britain seldom mention, much less describe, the dance, it follows that the greater number of the cases of masks are found in France, though a few occur in Scotland, still fewer in England.

The transformation by means of an animal's skin or head is mentioned in the Liber Poenitentialis of Theodore in 668 (see p. 21). It continued among the witches, and in 1598 in the Lyons district 'il y a encor des Demons, qui assistent a ces danses en forme de boucs, on de moutons. Antoine Tornier dit, que lors qu'elle dansoit, vn mouton noir la tenoit par la main auec ses pieds bien haireux, c'est a dire rudes & reuesches'.[2]

In many cases it is very certain that the transformation was ritual and not actual; that is to say the witches did not attempt to change their actual forms but called themselves cats, hares, or other animals. In the Aberdeen trials of 1596-7 the accused are stated to have 'come to the Fish Cross of this burgh, under the conduct of Sathan, ye all danced about the Fish Cross and about the Meal market a long space'. Here there is no suggestion of any change of form, yet in the accusation against Bessie Thom, who was tried for the same offence, the dittay states that there, accompanied with thy devilish companions and faction, transformed in other likeness, some in hares, some in cats, and some in other similitudes, ye all danced about the Fish Cross'.[3] In 1617 in Guernsey Marie Becquet said that 'every time that she went to the Sabbath, the Devil came to her, and it seemed as though he transformed her into a female dog'.[4] Again at Alloa in 1658, Margret Duchall, describing the murder of Cowdan's bairns, said 'after they war turned all in the liknes of cattis, they went in ouer jean Lindsayis zaird Dyk and went to Coudans hous, whair scho declared, that the Dewitt being with

[1. Van Elven, v, p. 215. 

2. Boguet, p. 132.

3. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 97, 114-15, 165; Bessie Thom, p. 167. Spelling modernized.

4. Goldsmid, p. 110.]

tham went up the stair first with margret tailzeor Besse Paton and elspit blak'. On the other hand, Jonet Blak and Kathren Renny, who were also present and described the same scene, said nothing about the cat-form, though they particularize the clothes of the other witches. Jonet Blak said, 'the diwell, margret tailzeor with ane long rok, and kathren renny with the short rok and the bony las with the blak pok all went up the stair togidder'; while Kathren Renny said that 'ther was ane bony las with ane blak pok, who went befor ower jean Lindsayis zaird dyk and Margret tailzeor with hir'.[1] The evidence of Marie Lamont (1662) suggests the same idea of a ritual, though not an actual, change; 'shee confessed, that shee, Kettie Scot, and Margrat Holm, cam to Allan Orr's house in the likenesse of kats, and followed his wif into the chalmer'; and on another occasion 'the devil turned them in likeness of kats, by shaking his hands above their heads'.[2] In Northumberland (1673) the same fact appears to underlie the evidence. Ann Armstrong declared that at a witch meeting Ann Baites 'hath been severall times in the shape of a catt and a hare, and in the shape of a greyhound and a bee, letting the divell see how many shapes she could turn herself into.--They [the witches] stood all upon a bare spott of ground, and bid this informer sing whilst they danced in severall shapes, first of a haire, then in their owne, and then in a catt, sometimes in a mouse, and in severall other shapes.--She see all the said persons beforemencioned danceing, some in the likenesse of haires, some in the likenesse of catts, others in the likenesse of bees, and some in their owne likenesse.'[3]

The method of making the ritual change by means of magical words is recorded in the Auldearne trials, where Isobel Gowdie, whose evidence was purely voluntary, gives the actual words both for the change into an animal and for the reversion into human form. To become a hare:

'I sall goe intill ane haire,
 With sorrow, and sych, and meikle caire,
 And I sall goe in the Divellis nam,
 Ay whill I coin hom againe.'

[1. Scottish Antiquity, ix, pp. 50-2.

2. Sharpe, pp. 132, 134.

3. Surtees Soc., xl, pp. 191, 193, 194.]

To become a cat or a crow the same verse was used with an alteration of the second line so as to force a rhyme; instead of 'meikle caire', the words were 'a blak shot' for a cat, and 'a blak thraw' for a crow or craw. To revert again to the human form the words were:

Hare, hare, God send thee care.
 I am in an hare's likeness just now,
 But I shall be in a woman's likeness even now',

with the same variation of 'a black shot' or 'a black thraw' for a cat or a crow. The Auldearne witches were also able to turn one another into animals:

'If we, in the shape of an cat, an crow, an hare, or any other likeness, &c., go to any of our neighbours houses, being Witches, we will say, I (or we) conjure thee Go with us (or me). And presently they become as we are, either cats, hares, crows, &c., and go with us whither we would. When one of us or more are in the shape of cats, and meet with any others our neighbours, we will say, Devil speed thee, Go thou with me. And immediately they will turn in the shape of a cat, and go with us.'[1]

The very simplicity of the method shows that the transformation was ritual; the witch announced to her fellow that she herself was an animal, a fact which the second witch would not have known otherwise; the second witch at once became a similar animal and went with the first to perform the ritual acts which were to follow. The witches were in their own estimation and in the belief of all their comrades, to whom they communicated the fact, actually animals, though to the uninitiated eye their natural forms remained unchanged. This is probably the explanation of Marie d'Aspilcouette's evidence, which de Lancre records in 1609:

'Elle a veu aussi les sorcieres insignes se changer en plusieurs sortes de bestes, pour faire peur a ceux qu'elles rencontroient: Mais celles qui se transformoyent ainsi, disoyent qu'elles n'estoyent veritablement transformees, mais seulement qu'elles sembloyent l'estre & neantmoins pendant qu'elles sont ainsi en apparences bestes, elles ne parlent du tout point'.[2]

[1. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 607, 608, 611. Spelling modernized.

2. De Lancre, Tableau, p. 128.]

The best example of transformation by means of a magical object placed on the person is from Northumberland (1673), where Ann Armstrong stated that 'Anne Forster come with a bridle, and bridled her and ridd upon her crosse-leggd, till they come to [the] rest of her companions. And when she light of her back, pulld the bridle of this informer's head, now in the likenesse of a horse; but, when the bridle was taken of, she stood up in her owne shape. . . . This informant was ridden upon by an inchanted bridle by Michael Aynsly and Margaret his wife, Which inchanted bridle, when they tooke it of from her head, she stood upp in her owne proper person. . . . Jane Baites of Corbridge come in the forme of a gray catt with a bridle hanging on her foote, and bridled her, and rid upon her in the name of the devill.'[1] This is again a clear account of the witch herself and her companions believing in the change of form caused by the magical object in exactly the same way that the shamans believe in their own transformation by similar means.

The Devil had naturally the same power as the witches, but in a greater degree. The evidence of Marie Lamont quoted above shows that he transformed them into animals by a gesture only. It seems possible that this was also the case with Isobel Shyrie at Forfar (1661), who was called 'Horse' and 'the Devil's horse'. The name seems to have given rise to the idea that 'she was shod like a mare or a horse'; she was in fact the officer or messenger who brought her companions to the meetings. She was never seen in the form of a horse, her transformation being probably effected by the Devil, in order that she might 'carry' the witches to and from the meetings; Agnes Spark said that Isobel 'carried her away to Littlemiln, [and] carried her back again to her own house'.'

There is also another method of transformation, which is the simplest. The witches themselves, like their contemporaries, often believed that the actual animals, which they saw, were human beings in animal form. Jeannette de Belloc, aged twenty-four, in the Basses-Pyrenees (1609), described the

[1. Surtees Soc., x1, pp. 192, 194, 197

2. Kinloch, p. 129. Spelling modernized.]

Sabbath as 'vne foire celebre de toutes sortes de choses, en laquelle aucuns se promene[n]t en leur propre forme, & d'autres sont transformez ne scayt pourquoy, en animaux. Elle n'a iamais veu aucune d'elles se trasformer en beste en sa presence, mais seulement certaines bestes courir par le sabbat.'[1] Helen Guthrie of Forfar (1661) states the case with even greater simplicity: 'The last summer except one, shee did sie John Tailzeour somtymes in the shape of a todde, and somtymes in the shape of a swyn, and that the said Johne Tailzeour in these shapes went wp and doune among William Millne, miller at Hetherstakes, his cornes for the destructioune of the same, because the said William hade taken the mylne ouer his head; and that the diuell cam to her and pointed out Johne Tailzeour in the forsaid shapes unto her, and told her that that wes Johne Tailzeour.'[1]

[1. De Lancre, Tableau, pp. 129, 130.

2. Kinloch, p. 123.]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

APPENDIX I

  

FAIRIES AND WITCHES

THE dwarf race which at one time inhabited Europe has left few concrete remains, but it has survived in innumerable stories of fairies and elves. Nothing, however, is known of the religious beliefs and cults of these early peoples, except the fact that every seven years they made a human sacrifice to their god--.'And aye at every seven years they pay the teind to hell'--and that like the Khonds they stole children from the neighbouring races and brought them up to be the victims.

That there was a strong connexion between witches and fairies has been known to all students of fairy lore. I suggest that the cult of the fairy or primitive race survived until less than three hundred years ago, and that the people who practised it were known as witches. I have already pointed out that many of the witch-beliefs and practices coincide with those of an existing dwarf race, viz. the Lapps. The Devil and the witches entered freely into the fairy mounds, the Devil is often spoken of as a fairy man, and he consorts with the Queen of Elfhame; fairy gold which turns to rubbish is commonly given by the Devil to the witches; and the name Robin is almost a generic name for the Devil, either as a man or as his substitute the familiar. The other name for the fairy Robin Goodfellow is Puck, which derives through the Gaelic Bouca from the Slavic Bog, which means God.

The evidence given below shows the close connexion between the fairies and the witches, and shows also the witches' belief in the superiority of the fairies to themselves in the matter of magic and healing powers.

1431. Joan of Arc. Not far from Domremy there is a certain tree that is called the Ladies' Tree [Arbor Dominarum], others call it the Fairies' Tree, Arbor Fatalium, gallice des Faees], beside which is a spring [which cured fevers]. It is a great tree, a beech [fagus], from which comes the may [unde venit mayum, gallice le beau may]. It belongs to Seigneur Pierre de Bourlemont. Old people, not of her lineage, said that fairy-ladies haunted there [conversabantur]. Had heard her godmother Jeanne, wife of the Mayor, say she had seen fairy-women there. She herself had never seen fairies at the tree that she knew of. She made garlands at the tree, with other girls, for the image of the Blessed Mary of Domremy. Sometimes with the other children she hung garlands on the tree, sometimes they left them, sometimes they took them away. 'She had danced there with the other children, but not since she was grown up. She had sung there more than she had danced. She had heard that it was said 'Jeanne received her mission at the tree of the fairy-ladies'.' The saints [Katharine and Margaret] came and spoke to her at the spring beside the Fairies' tree, but she would not say if they came to the tree itself.[2]

Denied having a mandrake, but knew there was one near the Fairies' tree.[3]

My godmother, who saw the fairy-ladies, was held as a good woman, not a diviner or a witch.[4]

Refused to say if she believed fairies to be evil spirits.[5]

She did not put chaplets on the Fairies' tree in honour of SS. Katharine and Margaret.[6]

Had never done anything with, or knew anything of, those who came in the air with the fairies [gallice en l'erre avec les faees]. Had heard they came on Thursdays, but considered it witchcraft.[7]

4th Article of Accusation. Jeanne was not instructed in her youth in the belief and primitive faith, but was imbued by certain old women in the use of witchcraft, divination, and other superstitious works or magic arts; many inhabitants of those villages have been noted from antiquity for the aforesaid misdeeds. Jeanne herself has said that she had heard from her godmother, and from many people, of visions and apparitions of Fairies, or Fairy spirits [gallice faees]; by others also she has been taught and imbued with wicked and pernicious errors of such spirits, insomuch that in the trial before you she confessed that up to this time she did not know that Fairies were evil spirits. Answer: As to the Fairy-ladies, she did not know what it was. As to instruction she learnt to believe and was well and duly taught to do what a good child should. As to her godmother she referred to what she had said before.[8]

5th Article. Near the village of Domremy is a certain great, big, and ancient tree called vulgarly The Charmed Fairy-tree of Bourlemont[9] [l'arbre charmine faee de Bourlemont]; beside the tree is a spring; round these gather, it is said, evil spirits called fairies, with whom those who use witchcraft are accustomed to dance at night, going round the tree and spring. Answer: as to the tree and spring, referred to her previous answers; denied the rest.[10]

6th Article. Jeanne frequented the said tree and spring alone, chiefly at night, sometimes in the day most often at the hour that

[1. Quicherat, i, p. 67; Murray, pp. 25-6.

2. Id., i, p. 87; M., p. 42.

3. Id., i, pp. 88-9; M., p. 43.

4. Id., i, p. 177; M., p. 80.

5. Id., i, p. 178; M., 80.

6. Id., i, p. 186; M., p. 84.

7. Id., i, p. 187; M., p. 84.

8. Id., i, p. 209; M., p. 91.

9. Bour-le-mont, cp. Bour-jo, 'a word of unknown derivation'. See Walter Scott, Witchcraft and Demonology.

10. Q., i, p. 2 10; M., p. 91.]

divine service was celebrated in church, in order to be alone: and dancing went round the spring and tree; afterwards hung many garlands of various herbs and flowers on the branches of the tree, made with her own hands, saying and singing before and after, certain incantations and songs with certain invocations, witch. crafts and other misdeeds; which [garlands] the following morning, were not found. Answer: Referred for part to previous answers, denied the rest.[1]

23rd Article. Her letters showed that she had consulted evil spirits. Denied ever having done anything by inspiration of evil spirits.[2]

1566. John Walsh, of Netherberry, Dorset. He being demaunded how he knoweth when anye man is bewytched: He sayth that he knew it partlye by the Feries, and saith that ther be iii. kindes of Feries, white, greene, and black. Which when he is disposed to vse, hee speaketh with them vpon hyls, where as there is great heapes of earth, as namely in Dorsetshire. And betwene the houres of xii. and one at noone, or at midnight he vseth them. Whereof (he sayth) the blacke Feries be the woorst.[3]

1576. Bessie Dunlop of Lyne, Ayrshire. Thom Reid apperit in hir awin hous to hir, about the xij hour of the day, quhair thair was sittand thre tailzeouris, and hir awin gudeman; and he tuke hir apperoun and led hir to the dure with him, and sche followit, and zeid [went] vp with him to the kill-end, quhair he forbaid hir to spelk or feir for onye thing sche hard or saw; and quhene thai had gane ane lytle pece fordwerd, sche saw twelf persounes, aucht wemene and four men: The men wer cled in gentilmennis clething, and the wemene had all plaiddis round about thame, and wer verrie semelie lyke to se; and Thorne was with thame: And demandit, Gif sche knew ony of thame? Ansuerit, Nane, except Thom. Demandit, What thai said to hir? Ansuerit, Thai baid hir sit down, and said, 'Welcum, Bessie, will thow go with ws?' Bot sche ansuerit nocht; becaus Thom had forbidden hir. And forder declarit, That sche knew nocht quhat purpois thai had amangis thaime, onlie sche saw thair lippis move; and within a schort space thai pairtit all away; and ane hiddeous vglie sowche of wind followit thame: and sche lay seik quhill Thom came agane bak fra thame. [In the margin, 'Confessit and fylit.'] Item, Sche being demandit, Gif sche sperit at Thom quhat persounes thai war? Ansuerit, That thai war the gude wychtis that wynnit in the Court of Elfame; quha come thair to desyre hir to go with thame: And forder, Thom desyrit hir to do the sam; quha ansuerit, 'Sche saw na proffeit to gang thai kynd of gaittis, vnles sche kend quhairfor'. Thom said, 'Seis thow nocht me, baith meit-worth, claith-worth, and gude aneuch lyke in persoun, and [he] suld make hir far better nor euer sche was?' Sche ansuerit, 'That sche duelt with hir awin husband and bairnis, and culd nocht leif thame.' And swa Thom began to be verrie crabit [angry] with hir, and said, 'Gif

[1. Q., i, pp. 211-12; M., pp. 91-2.

2. Id., i, p. 242; M., pp. 96-7.

3. Examination of John Walsh.]

swa sche thocht, sche wald get lytill gude of him.' Interrogat, Gif sche neuir askit the questioun at him, Quhairfoir he com to hir mair [than] ane vthir bodye? Ansuerit, Remembring hir, quhen sche was lyand in chyld-bed-lair, with ane of hir laiddis, that ane stout woman com in to hir, and sat doun on the forme besyde hir, and askit ane drink at hir, and sche gaif hir; quha alsua tauld hir, that that barne wald de, and that hir husband suld mend of his seiknes. The said Bessie ansuerit, that sche remembrit wele thairof; and Thom said, 'That was the Quene of Elfame his maistres, quha had commandit him to wait vpoun hir, and to do hir gude. Confessit and fylit.[1]

1588. Alesoun Peirsoun of Byrehill, Fifeshire. Was conuict for hanting and repairing with the gude nichtbouris and Quene of Elfame, thir diners 3eiris bypast, as scho had confesst be hir depositiounis, declaring that scho could nocht say reddelie how lang scho wes with thame; and that scho had friendis in that court quhilk wes of hir awin blude, quha had gude acquentance of the Quene of Elphane . . . And that scho saw nocht the Quene thir sewin 3eir: And that scho had mony guid friendis in that court, bot wer all away now: And that scho wes sewin 3eir ewill handlit in the Court of Elfane and had kynd freindis thair, bot had na will to visseit thame eftir the end. . . . In Grange-mure thair come ane man to hir, cled in grene clothis, quha said to hir, Gif scho wald be faithfuill, he wald do hir guid. He gaid away thane, and apperit to hir att ane vthir tyme, ane lustie mane, with mony mene and wemen with him: And that scho sanit hir and prayit, and past with thame forder nor scho could tell; and saw with thame pypeing and mirrynes and good scheir.[3]

1589. Beatrix Baonensis, in Lorraine. Etliche geben Spaher, etliche Vogel oder sonst nicht viel besonders, als da sein mochte gemuntzt Geld aus Rindern Ledder, und wenn sie dergleichen nichts haben, so verschafft es ihnen ihr Geist, auf dass sie staffirt seyn.[3]

1593. Another of my neighbours had his wife much troubled, and he went to her [the white witch], and she told him his wife was haunted with a fairie.[4]

1593. She had three or foure impes, some call them puckrels, one like a grey cat, another like a weasel, another like a mouse.[5]

1597. Christian Livingston of Leith. Scho afferinit that hir dochter was tane away with the Farie-folk, and declarit to Gothrayis wyff, than being with barne, that it was a man chyld scho was with; as it provit in deid: And that all the knawlege scho had was be hir dochter, wha met with the Fairie.[6]

1597. Isobell Strathaquhin and her daughter, of Aberdeen. Theye depone that hir self confessis that quhat skill so ever scho lies, scho hed it of hir mother; and hir mother learnit at ane elf man quha lay with hir.[7]

[1. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, pp. 52-3, 56-7.

2. Id., i, pt. ii, pp. 162-3.

3. Remigius, pt. i, p. 55

4. Giffard, p, 10; Percy Soc. viii.

5. Id. ib., p. 9.

6. Pitcairn, ii, p. 25.

7. Spalding Club Misc., i, p. 177.]

1597. Andro Man of Aberdeen. Thriescoir yeris sensyne or thairby, the Devill, thy maister, com to thy motheris hous, in the liknes and scheap of a woman, quhom thow callis the Quene of Elphen, and was delyverit of a barne, as apperit to the their . . . Thou confessis that be the space of threttie twa yeris sensyn or thairby, thow begud to have carnall deall with that devilische spreit, the Quene of Elphen, on quhom thow begat dyveris bairnis, quhom thow hes sene sensyn . . . Vpon the Ruidday in harvest, in this present yeir, quhilk fell on ane Wedinsday, thow confessis and affermis, thow saw Christsonday cum owt of the snaw in liknes of a staig, and that the Quene of Elphen was their, and vtheris with hir, rydand vpon quhyt haiknayes, and that thay com to the Binhill, and Binlocht, quhair thay vse commonlie to convene, and that thay quha convenis with thame kissis Christsonday and the Quene of Elphenis airss, as thow did thy selff. Item, thow affermis that the elphis hes schapes and claythis lyk men, and that thay will have fair coverit taiblis, and that thay ar bot schaddowis, bot ar starker nor men, and that thay have playing and dansing quhen thay pleas; and als that the quene is verray plesand, and wilbe auld and young quhen scho pleissis: scho mackis any kyng quhom scho pleisis, and lyis with any scho lykis . . . The said Andro confessis that Chrystsonday rydis all the tyme that he is in thair cumpanie, and lies carnall deall with thaim; also, that the men that cumis with thame, hes do with the Quene of Elfane.[1] . . . Thou confesses that the devil thy master, whom thou terms Christsunday, and supposes to be an angel and God's godson--albeit he has a thraw by God, and sways to the Quene of Elphin--is raised by the speaking of the word Benedicite. Suchlike thou affirms that the Queen of Elphin has a grip of all the craft, but Christsunday is the goodman, and has all power under God.[2]

1608. Lyons district. Ils dansent deux a deux, & par fois l'vn ca & l'autre la; estans telles danses semblables a celles des Fees, vrais Diables incorporez, qui regnoient il n'y a pas long temps.[3]

1015. Jonet Drever of Orkney. To be convict and giltie of the fostering of ane bairne in the hill of Westray to the fary folk callit of hir our guid nichtbouris And in haveing carnall deall with hir And haveing conversation with the fary xxvj 3eiris bygane In respect of her awne confessioun.[4]

1616. Katherine Caray of Orkney. At the doun going of the sun ane great number of fairie men mett her together with a maister man.[5]

1616. Elspeth Reoch of Orkney. Sho confest that quhen shoe wes ane young las of twelf yeiris of age or therby and haid wanderrit out of Caithnes quher sho wes borne to Lochquhaber ye cam to Allane McKeldowies wyfe quha wes your ant That she upon ane day being out of the loch in the contrey and returning and being at the Loch syd awaiting quhen the boit sould fetch hir in That thair cam tua men to her ane cled in blak and the uther with ane grein tartane plaid about him And that the man with the plaid said to her she was

[1. Spalding Club Misc., i, pp. 119, 121,125.

2. Burton, i, p. 253.

3. Boguet, p. 132.

4. Maitland Club Misc., li, p. 167. 

5. Dalyell, p. 536.]

ane prettie And he wald lerne her to ken and sie ony thing she wald desyre . . . And thairefter within tua yeir she bure her first bairne And being delyverit in hir sisteris hous the blak man cam to her that first came to hir in Lochquhaber And callit him selff ane farie man On yule day she confest the devell quhilk she callis the farie man lay with her At quhilk tyme he bade hir leave Orkney.[1]

1618. Joan Willimot of Leicester. This Examinate saith, That shee hath a spirit which shee calleth Pretty, which was giuen vnto her by William Berry of Langholme in Rutlandshire, whom she serued three yeares; and that her Master when hee gaue it vnto her, willed her to open her mouth, and hee would blow into her a Fairy which should doe her good; and that shee opened her mouth, and he did blow into her mouth; and that presently after his blowing, there, came out of her mouth a Spirit, which stood vpon the ground in the shape and forme of a Woman, which Spirit did aske of her her Soule, which shee then promised vnto it.[2]

1633. Isobel Sinclair of Orkney. Sex times at the reathes of the year, shoe hath bein controlled with the Phairie.[3]

1653. 'Yorkshire. There was (he saith) as I have heard the story credibly reported in this Country a Man apprehended for suspicion of Witchcraft, he was of that sort we call white Witches, which are such as do cures beyond the ordinary reasons and deductions of our usual practitioners, and are supposed (and most part of them truly) to do the same by ministration of spirits (from whence under their noble favours, most Sciences at first grow) and therefore are by good reason provided against by our Civil Laws, as being ways full of danger and deceit, and scarce ever otherwise obtained than by a devillish compact of the exchange of ones Soul to that assistant spirit, for the honour of its Mountebankery. What this man did was with a white powder which, he said, he received from the Fairies, and that going to a Hill he knocked three times, and the Hill opened, and he had access to, and conversed with a visible people; and offered, that if any Gentleman present would either go himself in person, or send his servant, he would conduct them thither, or shew them the place and persons from whom he had his skill.' [Hotham's account ends here; Webster continues first in his own words and then in inverted commas as if quoting, but gives no authority.] To this I shall only add thus much, that the man was accused for invoking and calling upon evil spirits, and was a very simple and illiterate person to any mans judgment, and had been formerly very poor, but had gotten some pretty little meanes to maintain himself, his Wife and diverse small children, by his cures done with this white powder, of which there were sufficient proofs, and the judge asking him how he came by the powder, he told a story to this effect. 'That one night before day was gone, as he was going home from his labour, being very sad

[1. County Folklore, iii, Orkney, pp. 112-14; Maitland Club Misc., ii, pp. 188-9.

2. Wonderfull Discoverie of Margaret and Phillip Flower, E 3.

3. Dalyell, p. 470.]

and full of heavy thoughts, not knowing how to get meat and drink for his Wife and Children, he met a fair Woman in fine cloaths, who asked him why he was so sad, and he told her it was by reason of his poverty, to which she said, that if he would follow her counsel she would help him to that which would serve to get him a good living: to which he said he would consent with all his heart, so it were not by unlawful ways: she told him it should not be by any such ways, but by doing of good and curing of sick people; and so warning him strictly to meet her there the next night at the same time, she de parted from him, and he went home. And the next night at the time appointed he duly waited, and she (according to promise) came and told him that it was well he came so duly, otherwise he had missed of that benefit, that she intended to do unto him, and so bade him follow her and not be afraid. Thereupon she led him to a little Hill and she knocked three times, and the Hill opened, and they went in, and came to a fair hall, wherein was a Queen sitting in great state, and many people about her, and the Gentlewoman that brought him, presented him to the Queen, and she said he was welcom, and bid the Gentlewoman give him some of the white powder, and teach him how to use it. which she did, and gave him a little wood box full of the white powder, and bad him give 2 or 3 grains of it to any that were sick, and it would heal them, and so she brought him forth of the Hill, and so they parted. And being asked by the judge whether the place within the Hill, which he called a Hall, were light or dark, he said indifferent, as it is with us in the twilight; and being asked how he got more powder, he said when he wanted he went to that Hill, and knocked three times, and said every time I am coming, I am coming, whereupon it opened, and he going in was conducted by the aforesaid Woman to the Queen, and so had more powder given him. This was the plain and simple story (however it may be judged of) that he told before the judge, the whole Court, and the jury, and there being no proof, but what cures he had done to very many, the jury did acquit him.'[1]

1655. It might be here very seasonable to enquire into the nature of those large dark Rings in the grass, which they call Fairy Circles, whether they be the Rendezvouz of Witches, or the dancing place of those little Puppet Spirits which they call Elves or Fairies.[2]

1661. Jonet Watson of Dalkeith. She confessed that three months before the Devill apeired vnto her, in the liknes of ane prettie boy, in grein clothes. As also about the tyme of the last Baille-fyre night, shoe was at a Meitting in Newtoun-dein with the Deavill, who had grein cloathes vpone him, and ane blak hatt vpone his head wher schoe denyd Christ, and took her self to be the servant of the Deivill.[3]

1662. Isobel Gowdie of Auldearne. I was in the Downie-hillis, and got meat ther from the Qwein of Fearrie, mor than I could eat. The Qwein of Fearrie is brawlie clothed in whyt linens, and in whyt and browne cloathes, &c.; and the King of Fearrie is a braw mail, weill favoured, and broad faced, &-c. Ther wes elf-bullis rowtting

[1. Webster, pp. 300.

2. More, p. 232.

3. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.]

and skoylling wp and downe thair and affrighted me . . . As for Elf-arrow-heidis, the Devill shapes them with his awin hand, and syne deliueris thame to Elf-boyes, who whyttis and dightis them with a sharp thing lyk a paking needle . . . We went in to the Downie hillis; the hill opened, and we cam to an fair and large braw rowme in the day tym. Thair ar great bullis rowtting and skoylling ther, at the entrie, quhilk feared me . . . The Devill wold giw ws the brawest lyk money that ewer wes coyned; within fowr and twantie houris it vold be horse-muke.[1]

1662. Janet Breadheld of Auldearne. He gaw me ane piece of money, lyk a testain . . . and gaw me an vthir piece of money, lyk the first, bot they both turned read, and I got nothing for thaim.[2]

1662. Bute. [The devil] 'gave her ane elf errow stone to shott him [a child of seven] which she did ten dayes therafter that the child dyed imediately therafter. Jonet Morisoune declares the devill told her it was the fayries that took John Glas child's lyfe. Mcfersone in Keretoule his dochter lay sick of a very unnaturall disease. The disease quhilk ailed her was blasting with the faryes and that she healed her with herbes. Item being questioned about her heileing of Alester Bannatyne who was sick of the lyk disease answred that he was blasted with the fairyes also and that she heiled him thereof with herbs and being questioned anent hir heileing of Patrick Glas dochter Barbara Glas answred that she was blasted with the faryes also. Being inquired quhat difference was betwix shooting and blasting sayes that quhen they are shott ther is no recoverie for it and if the shott be in the heart they died presently bot if it be not at the heart they will die in a while with it yet will at last die with it and that blasting is a whirlwinde that the fayries raises about that persone quhich they intend to wrong quhich may be healed two wayes ether by herbs or by charming.'[3]

1664. Alice Duke of Wincanton, Somerset. When the Devil doth anything for her, she calls for him by the name of Robin, upon which he appears.[4]

1664. Elizabeth Style of Wincanton, Somerset. When she hath a desire to do harm, she calls the Spirit by the name of Robin.[5]

1670. Jean Weir of Edinburgh. When she keeped a school at Dalkeith, and teached childering, ane tall woman came to the declarant's hous when the childering were there; she had, as appeared to her, ane chyld upon her back, and on or two at her foot; and the said woman desyred that the declarant should imploy her to spick for her to the Queen of Farie, and strik and battle in her behalf with the said Queen (which was her own words).[6]

1677. Inveraray. Donald McIlmichall was tried 'for that horrid cryme of corresponding with the devill'; the whole evidence being that he entered a fairy hill where he met many men and women 'and he playd on trumps to them quhen they danced'.[7]

[1. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 604, 607, 611, 613.

2 Id., iii, p. 617.

3. Highland Papers, iii, pp. 19, 23, 27.

4. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 152.

5. Id., ii, p. 137.

6. Law, p. 27 note. Highland Papers, iii, pp. 36-8.]

1697. Margaret Fulton in Renfrewshire. She was reputed a Witch, has the Mark of it, and acknowledged that her Husband had brought her back from the Fairies.[1]

1697. James Lindsay, alias Curat, in Renfrewshire. He was called the Gleid, or Squint-Ey'd Elff.[2]

Nineteenth century. It was the common rumour that Elphin Irving came not into the world like the other sinful creatures of the earth, but was one of the Kane-bairns of the fairies, whilk they had to pay to the enemy of man's salvation every seventh year. The poor lady-fairy,--a mother's aye a mother, be she Elve's flesh or Eve's flesh,--hid her Elf son beside the christened flesh in Marion Irving's cradle, and the auld enemy lost his prey for a time . . . And touching this lad, ye all ken his mother was a hawk of an uncannie nest, a second cousin of Kate Kimmer, of Barfloshan, as rank a witch as ever rode on ragwort.[3]

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

APPENDIX II

  

TRIAL OF SILVAIN NEVILLON AND GENTIEN LE CLERC AT ORLEANS, 1614-15

[This trial is included here as a specimen of purely ritual witchcraft, without spell-casting.]

Arrest & procedure faicte par le Lieutenant Criminel d Orleans, contre Siluain Neuillon, Gentien le Clerc dit Niuelle, & Mathurin Ferrand du village de Nouan en Sologne, conuaincus de sortilege le 20 Juin 1614.

Le Vendredy 20 Iuin 1614 ledit Lieutenant procedant a l'audition dudit Neuillon comireur & Masson, aage de 77 ans.

Ledit Lieutenant Criminel luy ayant dit qu'il luy vouloit faire raire on razer le poil & changer d'habits: afin qu'il dict verite. L'accuse s'escria en ces mots, Comment me veut-on faire mourir, Messieurs, si ie vous confesse la verite, vous ne me ferez pas razer.

A confesse auoir este an Sabbat prez Nouan, en vn lieu nomme Oliuet,

Dit que le Sabbat se tenoit dans vne maison, ou il vit a la cheminee com[m]e ledit Sabbat se faisoit, vn homme noir duquel on ne voyoit point la teste, & deux cheures on boucs en la mesme maison ayant grand poil noir. Il y auoit 200. personnes tons masquez, excepte vn nomine Ferrand. Qu'allant a l'offrande aucuns baillent de l'argent comme a l'Eglise.

Vit aussi vn grand homme noir a l'opposite de celuy de la cheminee, qui regardoit dans vn liure, dont les feuillets estoient noirs & bleuds, & marmotoit entre ses dents sans entendre ce qu'il disoit, leuoit vne hostie noire, puis vn calice de meschant estain tout

[1. Sadducismus Debellatus, p. 50.

2. Id., p. 25.

3. Cunningham, pp. 246, 251]

crasseux. Vit que tons les assistans dancoient en bransles dos a dos, & deux boucs ou cheures auec eux. Il y auoit des viandes si fades qu'il n'en peut aualler, & croit que c'estoit de la chair de cheual, & que ledit hom[m]e noir parloit comme si la voix fut sortie d'vn poinson: Et vit enuiron douze enfans portez par des femmes, & que le Diable batit vne femme auec vn baston, de ce qu'elle n'auoit pas apporte son enfant comme elle auoit promis, bailloit ledit homme noir des gasteaux auxdits petits enfans.

Dit que ceux qui ne vont au Sabbat, payent huict sols, qu'il y a des processions ou il a veu par fois six cens personnes, que les deux Diables qui estoient au Sabbat, l'vn s'appelloit l'Orthon, & l'autre Traisnesac, & qu'ils se baissoient enuers ceux qui leur emmenoient leurs enfans comme pour les remercier, & baisoient leursdits enfans au cul.

Dit qu'il a veu le Diable en plusieurs facons, tantost comme vn bouc, ayant vn visage deuant & vn autre derriere, ores comme vn gros mouton.

Qu'on baptise des enfans au Sabbat auec du Cresme, que des femmes apportent, & frottent la verge de quelque homme, & en font sortir de la sentence qu'elles amassent, & la meslent auec le Cresme, puis mettent cela sur la teste de l'enfant en prononcant quelques paroles en Latin.

Dit aussi auoir veu des Sorciers & Sorcieres qui apportoient des Hosties an Sabbat, lesquelles elles auoient garde lors qu'on leur auoit baille a communier a l'Eglise, & que le Diable faisoit des gestes comme en depitant sur icelles Hosties, desquelles on faisoit de lit poudre, & quelque fois on les mettoit dans l'eau, & que le Diable estoit fort ayse quand on luy apportoit lesdites Hosties.

Dit auoir ouy dire a Guilleaume le Clerc dit Nitelle, que pour auoir faict mourir vn homme le Diable donnoit de recompence huict sols, & pour vne femme cinq sols.

Dit que le Diable les bat ail Sabbat, quand ils ne scauent rendre compte d'auoir fait quelque mal, & qu'il leur dit en se separant vengez vous, autrement vous mourrez.

Dit que le iour qu'on a este a la Messe, on ne peut estre ensorcelle, on qu'on a vn Agnus Dei sur soy, que bien souuent ils appellent l'Hostie Iean le blanc, que les femmes chantent des chasons en l'honneur du Diable, & qu'a l'entree & sortie de table au Sabbat, on dit au Diable nous vous recognoissons pour nostre maistre, nostre Dieu, nostre Createur.

Que le Diable dit le Semo au Sabbat, mais qu'on n'entend ce qu'il dit, parce qu'il parle com[m]e en grodant, & qu'il iette de la poudre par toute l'assemblee, com[m]e on fait de l'eau beniste.

Vit qu'on frappoit dans l'eau d'vne baguette, & aussi tost vit comme il luy sembloit que c'estoit de la gresle.

Dit estre alle souuent an Sabbat de son pied tout esueille, & ne se grassoit point, d'autant que c'estoit folie de se graisser quand on tie va pas loing.

Dit que le Diable monstre une forme de membre viril au Sabbat, ong comme vne chandelle, & qu'il vit vne femme qui le baisa par la.

Dit que les Sorciers ne peuuent faire mal le Vendredy, a cause que Dieu y auoit souffert la mort, & estoit venu au monde ledit iour.

Dit qu'il y a des Sorciers qui nourrissent des Marionettes, qui sont de petits Diableteaux en forme de Crapaux, & leur font manger de la bouillie composee de laict & de farine, & leur donnent le premier mourceau, & n'oseroient s'absenter de leur maison sans leur demander conge, & luy faut dire combien de temps ils seront absens, comme trois ou quatre iours, & si elles disent que c'est trop, ceux qui les gardent, n'osent faire leur voyage ny outre-passer leur volonte.

Et quand ils veulent aller en marchandise ou iouer, & scauoir s'il y fera bon, ils regardent si lesdites Marionettes sont ioyeuses, en ce cas ils vont en marchandise, ou iouer: mais si elles sont maussades & tristes, ils ne bougent de la maison, & le plus souuent lesdites Marionettes vsent enuers eux de grandes menaces.

Interroge ledit Neuillon par ledit Lieutenant Criminel, si a son aduis vn Iuge pourroit faire prendre lesdites Marionettes, veu que ce sont Demons familliers.

Respond qu'vn bon Iuge pourroit bien faire emporter lesdites Marionettes, d'autant qu'elles craignent fort les bons Iuges: mais qu'vn Iuge qui ne feroit pas bien la Iustice, ny gagneroit rien, & que les Sorciers peuuent ensorceller vn meschant Iuge, parce que Dieu l'a abandonne.

Dit qu'il a veu bailler au Sabbat du pain benist, & de l'encens, mais il ne sentoit bon comme celuy de l'Eglise, & que c'estoit vn des Diables nomme Orthon qui le donnoit, lorsque Tramesabot disoit la Messe, & qu'auant la commencer il iettoit de l'eau beniste qui estoit faicte de pissat, & faisoit la reverence de l'espaule, & disoit, Asperges Diaboli.

Ledit Neuillon estoit conuaincu par le procez, d'auoir empoisonee & faict mourir plusieurs personnes & bestiaux, & d'auoir faict d'autres maux.

Gentil ou Gentie[n] le Clerc dit, que sa mere le presenta (dit-on) ell l'aage de trois ans au Sabbat, a vn bouc, qu'on appelloit l'Aspic. Dit qu'il fut baptise au Sabbat, au Carroir d'Oliuet, auec quatorze ou quinze autres, & que Ieanne Geraut porta du Chresme qui estoit jaune dans vn pot, & que ledit Neuillon ietta de la semence dans ledit pot, & vn nomme Semelle, & brouilloient cela auec vne petite cuilliere de bois, & puis leur en mirent a tous sur la teste.

Il vit marquer plusieurs personnes, mais les femmes principalement entre les tetins.

Qu'on baille a baiser la paix comme l'Eglise, & que cela semble vne tuille, & qu'on y baille vn denier ou vn double allant a l'offrande, l'eau beniste est iaune comme du pissat d'asne, & qu'apres qu'on la iettee on dit la Messe, & que c'est le Diable qui la dit, qu'il a vne Chasuble qui a vne croix: mais qu'elle n'a que trois barres: & tourne le dos a l'Autel quand il veut leuer l'Hostie & le Calice, qui sont noirs, & marmote dans vn liure, duquel la couuerture est toute velue comme d'vne peau de loup, auec des feuillets blancs & rouges, d'autres noirs.

Et quand ledit homme noir a iette, ou iette de l'eau beniste, chacun des assistans, se iette en terre comme on faict a l'Eglise sur la fosse des trespassez, auec vn morceau de hou qui a trois feuilles au bout. Apres la Messe on dance, puis on couche ensemble, hommes auec hommes, & femme auec des femmes. Puis on se met a table, ou il n'a iamais veu de sel. Et n'y a autre viande que grenouille & anguilles, & point de vin ains de l'eau.

Dit qu'il a cognu des hommes & s'est accouple auec eux; qu'il auoit vne couppe ou gondolle par le moyen de laquelle toutes les femmes le suiuoient pour y boire.

Qu'au Sabbat on y blasphemoit souuent, disant chardieu, c'est vne belle chose qu'ils font blanchir pour qu'on la voye de plus loing, & puis la mangent, & quand Ils l'ont mange il n'y en a plus, que les Prestres font cela pour amuser le monde, & que c'est vn beau Ianicot, qu'il y auoit plus d'acquest en sa Marionette qu'en Dieu. Et auoit veu souuent la Marionette dudit Neuillon, qui est comme vn gros crapaut tout noir, comme d'vne fourrure noire, & estoit dans vne boette cache soubs vn carreau, qui sautoit & leuoit quand on vouloit dormer a manger audit crapaut. Qu'il l'a veu encore puis six sepmaines en la ruelle du lict dudict Neuillon, & qu'il a veu qu'il l'apportoit vne autre fois dans son manteau, qu'il luy a dit vne douzaine de fois, que s'il vouloit il luy en feroit auoir vne. Qu'il y auoit plus profit en icelle qu'en Dieu, & qu'il ne gagnoit rien a regarder Dieu: mais que sa Marionette luy apportoit tousiours quelque chose.

Confesse auoir faict mourir plusieurs personnes, & qu'il scait faire dancer les boeufs dans vn cercle qu'il fait, & qu'vne vieille luy apprins.

Ils furent condamnez par sentence a estre pendus & bruslez. Appel en la Cour, ou au rapport de Monsieur Berulle, Conseiller en la seconde Chambre des Enquestes, deux Sorciers moururent. Cependant Gentien le Clerc seul, fut condamne par Arrest du 4 Feurier 1615.

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

APPENDIX III

  

A. NAMES OF WITCHES IN COVENS

  

I

  

1440. Machecoul

[Three were executed; of four equally guilty two fled, and two had died previously.]

1. Antonio Prelati
 2. Bertrand Poulein
 3. Etienne Corrillaut [executed]
 4. Etiennette Blanchu
 5. Eustache Blanchet
 6. Gilles de Rais [executed]
 7. Gilles de Sille [fled]
 8. Henri Griart [executed]
 9. Jean Rossignol [dead]
 10. Lenano Ceva
 11. Perrine Martin
 12. Robin Romulart [dead]
 13. Roger de Bricqueville [fled]

  

2

  

1582. Essex. St. Osyth

1. Ales Hunt
 2. Ales Manfield
 3. Ales Newman
 4. Annis Glascocke
 5. Annys Heade
 6. Cysley Celles
 7. Elizabeth Bennet
 8. Elizabeth Ewstace
 9. Joan Pechey
 10. Joan Robinson
 11. Margaret Grevell
 12. Margery Sanmmon
 13. Ursley Kemp

  

3

  

1590. North Berwick

[Those marked with a star are the nine who took part in the great attempt on James VI's life. Of these four were tried and executed. Of the rest of the Covens, Christian Tod, Donald Robson, and Robert Grierson were executed as witches in 1594, and Beigis Tod in 1608. The others appear to have escaped altogether.]

1, 2. Agnes Sampson and her daughter
 3. Agnes Stratton
 3. Alexander Quhytelaw.
 5. Annie Richardson
 *6. Barbara Napier
 7. Beigis Tod
 8. Bessie Broune
 9. Bessie Gwlene [Cowan]
 10. Bessie Robson
 11. Bessie Thomson
 12. Bessie Wright
 13. Catherine Campbell
 14. Catherine Duncan
 15. Catherene McGill
 16. Christian Carrington
 17. Christian Tod
 *18. Donald Robson
 19. Duncan Buchanan
 *20. Euphemia McCalyan
 21. Geillis Duncan
 22. Gilbert McGill
 23. Helen Lauder
 24. Helen Quhyte
 25. Issobell Gylour [Gylloun]
 26. Issobell Lauder
 27. Jannet Blandilands
 28. Jonnet Campbell
 29. Jonet Gaw [Gall]
 30. Jonet Logan
 31. Jonet Nicholson
 32. Jonet Stratton
 33. John Couper
 34. John Fian [officer]
 35. John Gordon [Gray-meill]
 36. John McGill
 37. Kaet Gray
 38. Kait Wallace
 39. Malie Geddie
 40. Margrett Aitchison
 41. Meg Begton
 42. Meg Dunn
 43. Meg Stillcart
 *44. Margret Thomsoun
 45. Marion Bailzie
 46. Marion Congilton
 47, 48. Marion Linkup and her sister
 49. Marion Nicholson
 50. Marion Paterson
 51. Marion Scheill [Shaw]
 52. Marion . . . [Irish Marion]
 53. Masie Aitchison
 54. Michael Clark
 55. Richard Graham
 56. Robert Grierson
 57, 58. Thomas Burnhill and his wife
 59, 60. . . . Stobbeis [2 women]
 61. Archie Henillis' wife
 62. George Mott's wife
 63. John Ramsay's wife
 64. Nicoll Murray's wife

  

4

  

1597. Aberdeen

[The following were executed.]

1. Andro Man
 2. Christen Reid
 3. Issobell Oige
 4. Issobell Richie
 5. Helen Rogie
 6. Jonet Grant
 7. Jonet Spaldarg
 8. Jonet Wishert
 9. Katherine Gerard
 10. Margrat Bean
 11. Margrat Og
 12. Marion Grant
 13. Thomas Leyis [officer]

[The following took a leading part in the ceremonies and were tried; seven were banished; no record as to the fate of the rest.]

1. Agnes Wobster
 2. Beatrice Robbie [banished]
 3. Bessie Thom
 4. Christen Mitchell
 5. Ellen Gray
 6. Elspet Leyis [banished]
 7. Issobell Coky
 8. Helen Fraser
 9. John Leyis [banished]
 10. Jonet Davidson [banished]
 11. Jonet Leyis [banished]
 12. Jonet Lucas [banished]
 13. Violet Lucas [banished]

  

5

  

1613. Lancashire

[Ten were executed; Elizabeth Demdike died in prison; Jennet Preston was acquitted, but was executed later. I suggest Jennet Hargreaves as the thirteenth, for she was the only one who was first at Malking Tower and afterwards in prison.]

1. Alice Nutter
 2. Alizon Device
 3. Anne Redferne
 4. Anne Whittle
 5. Elizabeth Demdike [officer]
 6. Elizabeth Device
 7. Isobel Robey
 8. James Device
 9. Jane Bulcock
 10. Jennet Hargreaves
 11. Jennet Preston
 12. John Bulcock
 13. Katherine Hewit

  

6.

  

1617. Guernsey

1. Collas Becquet
 2. Collette du Mont [officer]
 3. Isabel Becquet
 4. Marie Becquet
 5. The woman Fallaise
 6. The woman Hardie
 7. A woman she did not know
 8-13. Six others there she did not know

  

7

  

1644. Queensferry

[Seven were executed.]

1. Catherine Logie
 2. Catherine Thomson
 3. Elspet Cant
 4. Helen Hill
 5. Helen Thomson
 6. Isobel Young
 7. Janet Lowrie
 8. Janet Mowbray
 9. Margaret Brown
 10. Margaret Dauline
 11. Marion Dauline
 12. Marion Little
 13. Marion Stein

  

8

  

1649. Herts. St. Albans

1. Anne Smith
 2. John Lamen Sr.
 3. John Lamen Jr.
 4. John [? Joan] Lamen
 5. John Palmer
 6. John Salmon, Sr.
 7. Joseph Salmon
 8. Judeth Salmon
 9. Mary Bychance
 10. Mary Lamen, Sr
 11. Mary Lamen, Jr
 12. Sarah Smith
 13. Widow Palmer

  

9

  

1658 Alloa

1. Barbara Erskin
 2. Bessie Paton
 3. Elspet Black
 4. James Hudston
 5. James Kirk
 6. Jonet Millar
 7. Jonet Paterson
 8. Jonet Reid
 9. Kathren Black
 10. Kathren Renny
 11. Margret Demperstoun
 12. Margret Duchall
 13. Margret Tailzeour
 1661. Forfar

[The two Covens were led, one by Helen Guthrie, the other by Helen Cothills. I have put in the first Coven the names which occur most frequently together.]

  

1

1. Agnes Sparke
 2. Andrew Watson
 3. Elspet Alexander
 4. Elspet Bruce
 5. Helen Alexander
 6. Helen Guthrie [officer]
 7. Isobel Dorward
 8. Isobel Shyrie
 9. John Tailzeour
 10. Jonet Howit
 11. Jonet Stout
 12. Katherene Portour
 13. Mary Rynd

  

2

1. Bessie Croket
 2. Christen Whyte
 3. George Ellies
 4. Helen Cothills [officer]
 5. Isobel Smith
 6. Jonet Barrie
 7. Katharene Wallace
 8. Margaret Nicholl
 9. Marjorie Ritchie
 10. . . . Finlason
 11. . . . Hebrone
 12, 13. Two unnamed women mentioned by Katharene Portour.

  

11

  

1662. Auldearne

1. Barbara Ronald
 2. Bessie Hay
 3. Bessie Wilson
 4. Elspet Nishie
 5. Issobell Gowdie
 6. Issobell Nicoll
 7. Janet Breadheid
 8. Janet Burnet
 9. John Taylor
 10. John Young [officer]
 11. Jean Marten [the Maiden]
 12. Margret Brodie
 13. Margret Wilson

  

12

  

1662. Kinross-shire. Crook of Devon

1. Agnes Brugh
 2. Agnes Murie
 3. Agnes Pittendreich
 4. Bessie Henderson
 5. Bessie Nell
 6. Christian Grieve
 7. Isabel Rutherford
 8. Janet Brugh
 9. Janet Paton (of Crook)
 10. Janet Paton (of Kilduff)
 11. Margaret Huggon
 12. Margaret Litster
 13. Robert Wilson

  

13

  

1662. Hartford, Conn.

[Though the published records are incomplete, the number of names surviving suggests that a Coven existed here.]

1. Andrew Sanford
 2. Elizabeth Seager
 3. James Walkley
 4. Judith Varlet
 5. Mary Sanford
 6. Nathaniel Greensmith
 7. Rebecca Greensmith
 8. William Ayres
 9. Goodwife Ayres 
 10. Goodwife Grant
 11. Goodwife Palmer
 12. Goodwife Sanford

  

14

  

1662. Bute

1. Agnes . . . in Gortenis
 2. Annie Heyman [the Maiden]
 3. Cirstine Ballantyne [the Maiden] 
 4. Donald McCartour
 5. Elspet Galie
 6. Elspeth Gray
 7. Elspet NcWilliam
 8. Elspeth Spence
 9. Issobell More McKaw
 10. Issobell NcNeill
 11. Issobell NcNicoll
 12. Jonet McConachie
 13. Jonet McNeill
 14. Jonet McNickell
 15. Jonet Isack
 16. Jonet Morison
 17. Jonet Nicoll
 18. John Galy
 19. Kathrine Cristell
 20. Kathrine Frissell
 21. Kathrine McWilliam
 22. Kathrine Moore
 23. Kathrine Stewart
 24. Margaret McNeill
 25. Margaret McNickell
 26. Margaret Ncilduy
 27. Margaret NcLevin
 28. Margaret NcWilliam
 29. Margaret Smith
 30. Marie McKaw
 31. Marie More NcCuill
 32. Marie Stewart
 33. Patrick McKaw

[Besides eleven other incomplete names, of which five can be identified as being already mentioned above, leaving six to add to that number, i. e. thirty-nine in all.]

  

15

  

1664. Somerset

[In the first Coven I have put the names which occur most frequently together in the evidence.]

1

1. Alice Duke
 2. Alice Green
 3. Anne Bishop [officer],
 4. Catharine Green
 5. Christian Green
 6. Dinah Warberton
 7. Dorothy Warberton
 8. Elizabeth Stile
 9. Henry Walter
 10. Jone Syms
 11. Mary Green
 12. Mary Penny
 13. Mary Warberton

2

1. Christopher Ellen
 2. James Bush
 3. John Combes
 4. John Vining
 5. Julian Cox
 6. Margaret Agar [officer?]
 7. Margaret Clarke
 8. Rachel King
 9. Richard Dickes
 10. Richard Larmen
 11. Thomas Bolster
 12. Thomas Dunning
 13. . . . Durnford

  

16

  

1673. Northumberland

1. Anne Driden
 2. Anne Foster
 3. Anne Usher
 4. Elizabeth Pickering
 5. John Crauforth
 6. Lucy Thompson
 7. Margaret Aynsley
 8. Margarett (whose surname she knowes not)
 9. Michael Aynsley
 10. William Wright
 11-13. And three more, whose names she, knowes not

  

17

  

1697 Renfrewshire. Bargarran

1. Agnes Naismith
 2. Alexander Anderson
 3. James Lindsay
 4. Janet Rodgers
 5. Janet Wagh
 6. Jean Fulton [officer]
 7. John Lindsay
 8. John Reid
 9. Katherine Campbel
 10. Margaret Fulton
 11. Margaret Laing
 12. Margaret Rodgers
 13. Martha Semple

  

B. NAMES OF WITCHES

[Guernsey being a law unto itself in the matter of names, the following remarks refer only to England and Scotland.]

The lists of witch-names bring to light several facts as regards the women. One of these is the entire absence of Saxon names, such as Gertrude, Edith, Hilda; Old Testament names are so few in number as to be negligible; Scandinavian names are not found; the essentially Puritan names, such as Temperance, hardly occur; but the great mass of the names fall under eight heads with their dialectical differences: 1, Ann (Annis, Agnes, Annabel); 2, Alice (Alison); 3, Christian (Christen, Cirstine) 4, Elizabeth (Elspet, Isobel, Bessie); 5, Ellen (Elinor, Helen) 6, Joan (Jane, Janet, Jonet) 7, Margaret (Marget, Meg, Marjorie); 8, Marion (Mary).

At first sight the list suggests New Testament and Greek influence and though I am not prepared to dispute this, I would point out (1) that there was a British goddess called Anna, which may account not only for all the forms of Ann but also for the terminations in Alison and Marion; (2) that the name Christian clearly indicates the presence of another religion; (3) that there is at present nothing to prove that Isobel is a variant of Elizabeth--it is quite possible that Isobel was the original name and that the missionaries 'Christianized' it as Elizabeth; (4) that Helen was a pre-Christian name in Great Britain (s) that Margaret may have been originally Marget, the spelling and pronunciation being influenced by the Greek form; and as g and y are dialectically interchangeable, Marget would be the same as, or closely allied to, the Finnish Marjatta.

If Christianity had obtained the hold on the people which the ecclesiastical writers would have its believe, the name Mary should surely have been the most common, but it hardly occurs in Great Britain before 1645, while Marion is hardly used after that date. This looks as though Marion were the earlier form, and Mary may therefore be merely the contraction of the longer name.

As regards the name Joan I can offer no explanations or suggestions. I can only call attention to its overwhelming preponderance in comparison with the others.

In the lists the names are arranged without regard to local differences of spelling. The surnames are in alphabetical order.

        Abre Grinset 

       Dunwich 

       1663 

     
      Agnes Allene 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Beveridge 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Brodie 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Brown 

       Northampton 

       1612 

     
      Agnes Brugh 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Finnie 

       Edinburgh 

       1644 

     
      Agnes Forbes 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Agnes Frame 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Agnes Grant 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Murie 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Naismith 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Agnes Pittendreich 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Rawsterne 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Agnes Sampson 

       North Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Agnes Sharp 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Sparke 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Agnes Stratton 

       North Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Agnes Torrie 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Williamson 

       Samuelston 

       1662 

     
      Agnes Wobster 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Agnes . . . in Gortenis 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Alester McNiven 

       Bute 

       1642 

     
      Alexander Bell 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Alexander Elder 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Alexander Hamilton 

       Edinburgh 

       1630 

     
      Alexander Hunter 

       East Lothian 

       1649 

     
      Alexander Ledy 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Alexander Quhytelaw 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Alexander Shepheard 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Alexander Sussums 

       Suffolk 

       1646 

     
      Alice Dixon 

       Essex 

       1645 

     
      Alice Dixon 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Alice Duke 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Alice Gooderidge 

       Burton-on-Trent 

       1597 

     
      Alice Gray 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Alice Green 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Ales Hunt 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Alice Huson 

       Burton Agnes 

       1664 

     
      Alice Kyteler 

       Ireland 

       1324 

     
      Ales Mansfield 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Ales Newman 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Alice Nutter 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Alice Priestley 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Alse Young 

       Connecticut 

       1647 

     
      Alizon Device 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Alison Dick 

       Kirkcaldy 

       1636 

     
      Alesoun Peirsoun 

       Fifeshire 

       1588 

     
      Allan McKeldowie 

       Orkney 

       1616 

     
      Amy Duny 

       Essex 

       1645 

     
      Amie Hyndman, Snr. 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Amie Hyndman, Jnr. 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Andro Man 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Andrew Sanford 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Andrew Watson 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Anne Ashby 

       Maidstone 

       1652 

     
      Ann Baites 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Anne Baker 

       Leicester 

       1619 

     
      Anne Bishop 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Anne Blampied 

       Guernsey 

       1629 

     
      Anne Bodenham 

       Salisbury 

       1633 

     
      Anne Cate 

       Much Holland, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Anne Cooper 

       Clacton Essex 

       1645 

     
      Annas Craigie 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Anne Crunkshey 

       Lancs 

       1673 

     
      Anne Desborough 

       Hunts 

       1646 

     
      Anne Driden 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Anne Foster 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Ann Foster 

       Northampton 

       1674 

     
      Annis Glascocke 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Anne Grut 

       Guernsey 

       1614 

     
      Annis Heade 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Annie Heyman 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Anne Hunnam 

       Scarborough 

       1651 

     
      Anne Leach 

       Misley, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Anne Martyn 

       Maidstone 

       1652 

     
      Anne Massq 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Anne Parker 

       Suffolk 

       1645 

     
      Anne Parteis 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Anne Pearce 

       Suffolk 

       1645 

     
      Anne Redferne 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Annie Richardson 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Anne Smith 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      Annabil Stuart 

       Paisley 

       1678 

     
      Anie Tailzeour 

       Orkney 

       1633 

     
      Annaple Thomson 

       Borrowstowness 

       1679 

     
      Anne Usher 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Anne West 

       Lawford, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Anne Whitfield 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Anne Whittle 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Anthony Hunter 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Archibald Man 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Arthur Bill 

       Northampton 

       1612 

     
      Barbara Erskeine 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Barbara Friece 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Barbara Napier 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Barbara Ronald 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Beak Taiss 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Beigis Tod 

       N. Berwick 

       1598 

     
      Beatrice Laing 

       Pittenweem 

       1704 

     
      Beatrice Robbie 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Cirstine Ballantyne 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Christian Carington 

       N. Berwick 

       1597 

     
      Christian Carrington 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Christian Graham 

       Glasgow 

       1622 

     
      Christian Green 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Christian Grieve 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Christine Harnon 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Christiane Lewingstone 

       Leith 

       1597 

     
      Christen Miller 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Christen Mitchell 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Christen Reid 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Christian Saidler 

       Edinburgh 

       1597 

     
      Christian Tod 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Christen Whyte 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Christiane Wilson 

       Dalkeith 

       1661 

     
      Christian Young 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Christopher Dixon 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Christopher Ellen 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Christopher Hargreaves 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Christopher Howgate 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Cysley Celles 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Cecile Vaultier 

       Guernsey 

       1610 

     
      Collas Becquet 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Collette Becquet 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Collette de l'Estal 

       Guernsey 

       1622 

     
      Collette Dumont 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Collette Gascoing 

       Guernsey 

       1563 

     
      Collette la Gelee 

       Guernsey 

       1624 

     
      Collette Robin 

       Guernsey 

       1622 

     
      Collette Salmon 

       Guernsey 

       1563 

     
      Collette Sauvage 

       Guernsey 

       1639 

     
      Collette Tourtel 

       Guernsey 

       1576 

     
      Deliverance Hobbs 

       Salem 

       1692 

     
      Dinah Warberton 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Donald McCartour 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Donald Robesoune 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Doll Bilby 

       Burton Agnes 

       1664 

     
      Dorothy Green 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Dorothy Warberton 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Duncan Buchquhannane 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Bessie Aiken 

       Edinburgh 

       1597 

     
      Elspet Alexander 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Elizabeth Astley 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Elizabeth Atchinson 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Bessie Bathgate 

       Eymouth 

       1634 

     
      Elizabeth Bennet 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Elspet Blak 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Bessie Browne 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Elspet Bruce 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Elspet Cant 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Elizabeth Chandler 

       Hunts 

       1646 

     
      Elspet Chisholme 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth Clark 

       Manningtree 

       1645 

     
      Elizabeth Clawson 

       Conn. 

       1692 

     
      Bessie Croket 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Elizabeth Demdike 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Elizabeth Dempster 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth Device 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Elizabeth Dickenson 

       Knaresborough 

       1621 

     
      Bessie Dunlop 

       Ayrshire 

       1576 

     
      Elizabeth Duquenin 

       Guernsey 

       1610 

     
      Elizabeth Ewstace 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Elspet Falconer 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Elspet Findlay 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Elizabeth Fletcher 

       Knaresborough 

       1621 

     
      Elspett Forbes 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Elizabeth Francis 

       Chelmsford 

       1556 

     
      Bessie Friece 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Elspet Galie 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth Garlick 

       Conn. 

       1657 

     
      Elizabeth Gauvein 

       Guernsey 

       1639 

     
      Elspet Gilbert 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth Godman 

       Conn. 

       1653 

     
      Elizabeth Gooding 

       Manningtree 

       1645 

     
      Bessie Graham 

       Kilwinning 

       1649 

     
      Elspet Graham 

       Dalkeith 

       1661 

     
      Elspet Gray 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Bessie Gulene 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Elizabeth Hare 

       Essex 

       1645 

     
      Elizabeth Hargraves 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Elizabeth Harvy 

       Ramsey, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Bessie Hay 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Bessie Henderson 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth Howgate 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Bessie Hucheons 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth Knap 

       Groton 

       1671 

     
      Elspet Laird 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth le Hardy 

       Guernsey 

       1631 

     
      Elspet Leyis 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Elspet Macbeith 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Elspet Makhomie 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Bessie Moffat 

       Dalkeith 

       1661 

     
      Elspet Moinness 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Elspet NcWilliam 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Bessie Neil 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Elspet Nishie 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Bessie Paton 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Bessie Paul 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Bessie Peterkin 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth Pickering 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Elspeth Reoch 

       Orkney 

       1616 

     
      Bessie Robson 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Elizabeth Sawyer 

       Edmonton 

       1621 

     
      Elizabeth Seager 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Elspet Smyth 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Elspeth Spence 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Elizabeth Stile 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Elizabeth Stile 

       Windsor 

       1579 

     
      Elspet Strathaquhin 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Bessie Thom 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Bessie Thomson 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Bessie Vickar 

       Borrowstowness 

       1679 

     
      Elizabeth Weed 

       Hunts 

       1646 

     
      Bessie Weir 

       Paisley 

       1678 

     
      Bessie Wilson 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Bessie Wright 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Elizabeth Wright 

       Burton-on-Trent 

       1597 

     
      Bessie Young 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Ellen Bierley 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Ellen Gray 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Ellen Green 

       Leicester 

       1619 

     
      Elinor Shaw 

       Northampton 

       1705 

     
      Euphemia McCalyan 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Frances Dicconson 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Frances Moore 

       Hunts 

       1646 

     
      George Ellies 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Gideon Penman 

       Crighton 

       1678 

     
      Gilbert Fidlar 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Gilbert McGill 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Giles Fenderlin 

       Leaven Heath 

       1652 

     
      Gellis Duncan 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Gilles Hutton 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Girette le Parmentier 

       Guernsey 

       1620 

     
      Gracyenne Gousset 

       Guernsey 

       1563 

     
      Grace Hay 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Grissell Gairdner 

       Newburgh 

       1610 

     
      Grissall Sinklar 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Guillemine la Bousse 

       Guernsey 

       1622 

     
      Guillemine Vaultier 

       Guernsey 

       1610 

     
      Hellen Alexander 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Hellen Clark 

       Manningtree 

       1645 

     
      Helen Cothills 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Helen Fraser 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Helen Guthrie 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Helen Hill 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Helen Inglis 

       Auldearne 

       1661 

     
      Hellen Jenkinson 

       Northampton 

       1612 

     
      Helen Lauder 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Helene le Brun 

       Guernsey 

       1609 

     
      Helen Makkie 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Hellen Pennie 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Helen Rogie 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Helen Thomson 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Helen White 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Henry Graver 

       Knaresborough 

       1621 

     
      Henry Walter 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Hugh Crosia 

       Conn. 

       1693 

     
      Isobel Adams 

       Pittenweem 

       1704 

     
      Issabel Andrews 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Isobel Bairdie 

       Edinburgh 

       1649 

     
      Issobell Barroun 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Isabel Becquet 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Isobel Black 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Issobell Burnett 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Issobell Coky 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Isabel Condie 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Isobell Crawford 

       Irvine 

       1618 

     
      Isobel Dorward 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Issobell Forbes 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Isobel Friece 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Isobel Gairdner 

       Edinburgh 

       1649 

     
      Isabel Gibson 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Issobell Gowdie 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Issobell Griersoune 

       Edinburgh 

       1607 

     
      Isobell Gylour 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Isobel Haldane 

       Perth 

       1607 

     
      Isobel Inch 

       Irvine 

       1618 

     
      Issabell Johnson 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Isobell Lauder 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Issobell Menteithe 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Isobel More NcKaw 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Isobel More 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Issobell NcNeill 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Issobell NcNicoll 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Issobell Nicoll 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Issobell Oige 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Isobel Ramsay 

       Edinburgh 

       1661 

     
      Issobell Richie 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Issobell Robbie 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Isobel Robey 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Isabel Rutherford 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Issobell Shyrie 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Isabel Sidegraves 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Issobell Smith 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Issobell Strathaquhin 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Issabell Thompson 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Isobel Young 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      James Bush 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      James Device 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      James Hudston 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      James Kirk 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      James Og 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      James Walkley 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Jonet Anderson 

       Edinburgh 

       1657 

     
      Jane Baites 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Jonet Barrie 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Jeanne Bichot 

       Guernsey 

       1619 

     
      Jennet Bierley 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Jannet Blandilands 

       Edinburgh 

       1590 

     
      Janet Breadheid 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Janet Brown 

       Edinburgh 

       1649 

     
      Janet Brugh 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Jane Bulcock 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Janet Burnet 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Jonet Campbell 

       Edinburgh 

       1590 

     
      Jonet Campbell 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Joan Cariden 

       Faversham 

       1645 

     
      Joan Carrington 

       Conn. 

       1651 

     
      Jonett Clark 

       Edinburgh 

       1590 

     
      Jonet Cleracht 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jennot Cooke 

       Dalkeith 

       1661 

     
      Johan Cooper 

       Much Holland, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Jonet Corset 

       Pittenweem 

       1704 

     
      Jennet Cronkshaw 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Janet Cunningham 

       Edinburgh 

       1590 

     
      Jonet Davidson 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jeanne de Bertran 

       Guernsey 

       1626 

     
      Jenette de Garis 

       Guernsey 

       1631 

     
      Jonet Degeddes 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jennet Device 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Jennit Dibble 

       Knaresborough 

       1621 

     
      Jonet Drever 

       Orkney 

       1615 

     
      Jeannette Dumaresq 

       Guernsey 

       1570 

     
      Janet Finlay 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Jean Fulton 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Jonet Gaw (Gall) 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Jonet Grant 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jonett Grant 

       Edinburgh 

       1590 

     
      Jeanne Guignon 

       Guernsey 

       1570 

     
      Jonet Guissett 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jennet Hargraves 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Jonet Hird 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Jonet Hood 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Jane Hopper 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Jane Hott 

       Faversham 

       1645 

     
      Jonet Howit 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Jonet Hunter 

       Ayrshire 

       1605 

     
      Jonet Isack 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Jonat Kaw 

       Perth 

       1607 

     
      Jean King 

       Innerkip 

       1662 

     
      Jeanne le Cornu 

       Guernsey 

       1620 

     
      Jeannette le Gallees 

       Guernsey 

       1570 

     
      Jonet Leisk 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jonet Leyis 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jonet Logan 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Janet Lowry 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Jonet Lucas 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Joane Lucus 

       Northampton 

       1612 

     
      Jane Makepiece 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Janet Man 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Janet Mathie 

       Paisley 

       1678 

     
      Jonet McConachie 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Jonet Mcilmertine 

       Bute 

       1642 

     
      Jonet McNeill 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Jonet McNickell 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Jonet Mctyre 

       Bute 

       1642 

     
      Jenot Meiklejohn 

       Dalkeith 

       1661 

     
      Jonet Millar 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Jonet Morison 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Janet Mowbray 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Jonet Nctyre 

       Bute 

       1642 

     
      Jonet Nicholson 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Jonet Nicoll 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Jonet Paiston 

       Dalkeith 

       1661 

     
      Jonet Paterson 

       Alloa 

       1659 

     
      Janet Paton 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Janet Paton 

       Kilduff 

       1662 

     
      Joan Pechey 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Joan Peterson 

       Wapping 

       1652 

     
      Jennet Preston 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Jonet Reid 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Jonet Reid 

       Orkney 

       1633 

     
      Jonet Rendall 

       Orkney 

       1629 

     
      Joan Robinson 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Janet Rodgers 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Janet Scot 

       Innerkip 

       1662 

     
      Janet Smith 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Jonet Smyth 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jane Southworth 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Jonet Spaldarg 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Jonet Stewart 

       Edinburgh 

       1597 

     
      Jonet Stout 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Jonet Stratton 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Jean Sutherland 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Jone Syms 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Janet Thomson 

       Edinburgh 

       1649 

     
      Jeanne Tourgis 

       Guernsey 

       1622 

     
      Joane Vaughan 

       Northampton 

       1612 

     
      Janet Wagh 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Joan Walliford 

       Faversham 

       1645 

     
      Joane Wallis 

       Hunts 

       1646 

     
      Joan Waterhouse 

       Chelmsford 

       1556 

     
      Jonet Watson 

       Dalkeith 

       1661 

     
      Jean Weir 

       Edinburgh 

       1670 

     
      Jennet Wilkinson 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Joane Willimot 

       Leicester 

       1619 

     
      Jonet Wishert 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      John Brugh 

       Edinburgh 

       1643 

     
      John Bulcock 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      John Carington 

       Conn. 

       1651 

     
      John Clarke 

       Hunts 

       1646 

     
      John Combes 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      John Couper 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      John Crauforth 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Johnne Damiet 

       Edinburgh 

       1597 

     
      John Douglas 

       Tranent 

       1659 

     
      John Fian 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      John Galie 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      John Gordon (Gray-meill) 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      John Lamen, Snr. 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      John Lamen, Jnr. 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      John Leyis 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      John Lindsay 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      John McGill 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      John Palmer 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      John Ramsden 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      John Reid 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      John Robertson 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      John Salmon 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      John McWilliam Sclater 

       Edinburgh 

       1656 

     
      John Stewart 

       Irving 

       1618 

     
      John Stuart 

       Paisley 

       1678 

     
      John Tailzeour 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      John Taylor 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      John Vining 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      John Whitfield 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      John Winnick 

       Hunts 

       1646 

     
      John Young 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Joseph Salmon 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      Josine Deblicq 

       Hainault 

       1616 

     
      Joyce Boanes 

       St. Osyth 

       1645 

     
      Judith Moone 

       Thorp, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Judeth Salmon 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      Judith Varlet 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Julian Cox 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Katherine Blair 

       Glasgow 

       1622 

     
      Kathren Blak 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Katherine Campbell 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Katherine Campbell 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Katherine Carruthers 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Katherine Craige 

       Orkney 

       1633 

     
      Katherine Cristell 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Katherine Duncan 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Katherine Earle 

       Yorks 

       1654 

     
      Catherine Ellot 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Katherine Eustache 

       Guernsey 

       1581 

     
      Katherine Fernsche 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Katherine Ferris 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Katherine Frissell 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Katherine Gerard 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Kait Gray 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Catherine Green 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Catherine Halloudis 

       Guernsey 

       1622 

     
      Katherine Harrison 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Katherine Heirst 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Catherine Logie 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Katherine McGill 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Katherine McTeir 

       Ayrshire 

       1605 

     
      Katherine McWilliarn 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Katherine Miller 

       Orkney 

       1633 

     
      Kathren Mitchell 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Kathrin Moore 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Katherine Oswald 

       Edinburgh 

       1629 

     
      Katharene Portour 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Catherine Prays 

       Guernsey 

       1563 

     
      Kathren Renny 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Catherine Robert 

       Guernsey 

       1639 

     
      Katherine Scott 

       Innerkip 

       1662 

     
      Kathren Sowter 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Katherine Stewart 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Catherine Thomson 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Kait Wallace 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Katharene Wallace 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Lawrence Hay 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Laurenche Jehan 

       Guernsey 

       1570 

     
      Laurence I'Eustache 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Lilias Adie 

       Torryburn 

       1704 

     
      Lillie Wallace 

       Pittenweem 

       1704 

     
      Lucy Thompson 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Lydia Gilbert 

       Conn. 

       1654 

     
      Malie Geddie 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Manie Haliburton 

       Dirlton 

       1649 

     
      Marable Cooper 

       Orkney 

       1633 

     
      Margaret Agar 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Margaret Aitchison 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Margaret Aynsley 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Margaret Barclay 

       Irvine 

       1618 

     
      Margret Bean 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Meg Begtoun 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Marget Beveridge 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Margret Brodie 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Brown 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Margaret Clarke 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Margrat Cleraucht 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Margaret Craige 

       Paisley 

       1678 

     
      Margaret Dauline 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Margret Demperstoun 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Margret Duchall 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Margaret Duncane 

       Ayrshire 

       1605 

     
      Margaret Duncane 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Dwn 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Margaret Fulton 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Margaret Grevell 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Margaret Hamilton (Mitchell) 

       Borrowstowness 

       1679 

     
      Margaret Hamilton (Pullwart) 

       Borrowstowness 

       1679 

     
      Margrat Holm 

       Innerkip 

       1662 

     
      Margret Hucheons 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Huggon 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Marget Hutton 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Margrat Innes 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Margaret Jackson 

       Paisley 

       1678 

     
      Margaret Jennings 

       Conn. 

       1661 

     
      Margaret Johnson 

       Lancs 

       1633 

     
      Margaret Keltie 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Kyllie 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Laing 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Margaret Landish 

       St. Osyth 

       1645 

     
      Margaret Litster 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Loy 

       Liverpool 

       1667 

     
      Margaret McGuffok 

       Ayrshire 

       1605 

     
      Margret McKenzie 

       Innerkip 

       1662 

     
      Margaret McNeill 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Margaret McNickell 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Margaret McNish 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Margaret McWilliam 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Moone 

       Thorp, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Margaret Morton 

       Yorks 

       1650 

     
      Margaret Ncilduy 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Margaret NcLevin 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Nicoll 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Margaret Nin-Gilbert 

       Thurso 

       1719 

     
      Margret Og 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Margaret Pearson 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Marguerite Picot 

       Guernsey 

       1629 

     
      Margaret Pringle 

       Borrowstowness 

       1679 

     
      Margrat Reauch 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Margaret Rodgers 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Margrat Scherar 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Margaret Simson 

       Hunts 

       1646 

     
      Margaret Smith 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Margrat Smyth 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Meg Stillcart 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Margret Tailzeour 

       Alloa 

       1658 

     
      Marguerite Tardif 

       Guernsey 

       1624 

     
      Margaret Thomson 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Margaret Waite, Snr. 

       Knaresborough 

       1621 

     
      Margaret Waite, Jnr. 

       Knaresborough 

       1621 

     
      Margaret Wallace 

       Glasgow 

       1622 

     
      Margret Wilson 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Margaret Young 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Margarett (surname unknown) 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Marion Bailzie 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Marion Congilton 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Marion Dauline 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Marion Frissell 

       Bute 

       1642 

     
      Marrion Fyfe 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Marion Grant 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Marion Hocket 

       Ramsey, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Marion Linkup 

       Leith 

       1590 

     
      Marion Little 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Marion Nicholson 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Marion Paterson 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Marion Richart 

       Orkney 

       1633 

     
      Marion Scheill (Shaw) 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Marion Stein 

       Queensferry 

       1644 

     
      Marrion Thomson 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Marion Wod 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Marion (Irish Marion) 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Marjorie Dunbar 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Marjorie Man 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Marjorie Mutch 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Marjorie Ritchie 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Margery Sammon 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Margery Stoakes 

       St. Osyth 

       1645 

     
      Marjorie Taylor 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Martha Semple 

       Bargarran 

       1697 

     
      Martin Tulouff 

       Guernsey 

       1563 

     
      Mary Barber 

       Northampton 

       1612 

     
      Mary Barnes 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Marie Becquet 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Mary Bychance 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      Marie Clouet 

       Guernsey 

       1631 

     
      Marie de Calais 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Marie de Calais 

       Guernsey 

       1631 

     
      Marie du Mont 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Marie Gauvein 

       Guernsey 

       1570 

     
      Mary Green 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Mary Greenleife 

       Alresford, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Marie Guilbert 

       Guernsey 

       1639 

     
      Marie Guillemotte 

       Guernsey 

       1634 

     
      Mary Hunter 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Mary Johnson 

       Wyvenhoe, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Mary Johnson 

       Conn. 

       1647 

     
      Mary Lamen, Snr. 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      Mary Lamen, Jnr. 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      Marie Lamont 

       Innerkip 

       1662 

     
      Marie Mabille 

       Guernsey 

       1631 

     
      Marie Martin 

       Guernsey 

       1588 

     
      Marie McKaw 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Mary McNiven 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Marie Mortimer 

       Guernsey 

       1631 

     
      Marie More NcCuill 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Marie Paterson 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Mary Penny 

       Somerset 

       1664 

     
      Mary Phillips 

       Northampton 

       1705 

     
      Mary Read 

       Lenham 

       1652 

     
      Marie Roland 

       Guernsey 

       1601 

     
      Marie Roland 

       Guernsey 

       1634 

     
      Mary Rynd 

       Forfar 

       1661 

     
      Mary Sanford 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Marie Shuttleworth 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Mary Sikes 

       Yorks 

       1649 

     
      Marie Sohier 

       Guernsey 

       1626 

     
      Marie Spencer 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Marie Stewart 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Mary Trembles 

       Bideford 

       1682 

     
      Mary Warberton 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Masie Aitchison 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Mercy Disborough 

       Conn. 

       1692 

     
      Meslie Hirdall 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      Michael Aynsley 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Michael Clark 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Mildred Wright 

       Maidstone 

       1652 

     
      Nathaniel Greensmith 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Nicholas Jennings 

       Conn. 

       1661 

     
      Patrick Lowrie 

       Ayrshire 

       1605 

     
      Patrick McKaw 

       Bute 

       1662 

     
      Patrik Watson 

       Dirlton 

       1649 

     
      Perine Marest 

       Guernsey 

       1622 

     
      Philipine le Parmentier 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Rachel King 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Rebecca Greensmith 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      Rebecca Jones 

       St. Osyth 

       1645 

     
      Rebecca Weste 

       Lawford, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Richard Dickes 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Richard Graham 

       Edinburgh 

       1590 

     
      Richard Larmen 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Robert Griersoun 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Robert Grieve 

       Lauder 

       1649 

     
      Robert Wilkinson 

       Lancs 

       1613 

     
      Robert Wilson 

       Crook of Devon 

       1662 

     
      Rose Cullender 

       Bury 

       1664 

     
      Rose Hallybread 

       St. Osyth 

       1645 

     
      Sarah Barton 

       Harwich 

       1645 

     
      Sarah Cooper 

       Essex 

       1645 

     
      Sarah Hating 

       Ramsey, Essex 

       1645 

     
      Sarah Smith 

       St. Albans 

       1649 

     
      Susan Cock 

       St. Osyth 

       1645 

     
      Susanna Edwards 

       Bideford 

       1682 

     
      Susanne Prudhomme 

       Guernsey 

       1629 

     
      Susanne Rouanne 

       Guernsey 

       1631 

     
      Temperance Lloyd 

       Bideford 

       1682 

     
      Thomas Bolster 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Thomas Burnhill 

       N. Berwick 

       1590 

     
      Thomas Durning 

       Somerset 

       1665 

     
      Thomas Leyis 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Thomas Weir 

       Edinburgh 

       1670 

     
      Thomasse de Calais 

       Guernsey 

       1617 

     
      Thomazine Ratcliffe 

       Suffolk 

       1645 

     
      Thomasse Salmon 

       Guernsey 

       1570 

     
      Thomasine Watson 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
      Ursley Kemp 

       St. Osyth 

       1582 

     
      Vyolett Leyis 

       Aberdeen 

       1597 

     
      Walter Ledy 

       Auldearne 

       1662 

     
      William Ayres 

       Conn. 

       1662 

     
      William Barton 

       Queensferry 

       1655 

     
      William Berry 

       Rutland 

       1619 

     
      William Coke 

       Kirkcaldy 

       1636 

     
      William Craw 

       Borrowstowness 

       1679 

     
      William Wright 

       Northumberland 

       1673 

     
 
     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

APPENDIX IV

  

JOAN OF ARC AND GILLES DE RAIS

THESE two personages-so closely connected in life and dying similar deaths, yet as the poles asunder in character-have been minutely studied from the historical and medical. points of view, and in the case of Joan from the religious standpoint also. But hitherto the anthropological aspect has been disregarded. This is largely due to the fact that these intensive studies have been made of each person separately, whereas to obtain the true perspective the two should be taken together. This individual treatment is probably owing to the wide divergence of the two characters; the simplicity and purity of the one is in marked contrast with the repulsive attributes of the other. Yet anthropologically speaking the tie between the two is as strongly marked as the contrast of character.

The case of Joan is easily studied, as the documents are accessible.[1] Anatole France has realized that behind Joan there lay some unseen power, which Charles VII feared and from which he unwillingly accepted help. M. France sees in this power a party in the Church, and in his eyes the Church was a house divided against itself. Though agreeing with the view that Joan was the rallying-point of a great and powerful organization, I see in that organization the underlying religion which permeated the lower orders of the people in France as in England; that religion which I have set forth in the foregoing chapters. The men-at-arms, drawn from the lower orders, followed without hesitation one whom they believed to have been sent by their God, while the whole army was commanded by Marshal Gilles de Rais, who apparently tried to belong to both religions at once.

  

1. Joan of Arc

The questions asked by the judges at Joan's trial show that they were well aware of an underlying organization of which they stood in some dread. The judges were ecclesiastics, and the accusation against the prisoner was on points of Christian faith and doctrine and ecclesiastical observance. It was the first great trial of strength between the old and the new religions, and the political conditions gave the victory to the new, which was triumphant accordingly. 'We have caught her now', said the Bishop of Beauvais, and she was burned without even the formality of handing her over to the secular authorities. After the execution, the judges and counsellors who had sat in judgement on Joan received letters of indemnity from the Great Council; the Chancellor of England sent letters to the Emperor, to the kings and princes of Christendom, to all the nobles and towns of France, explaining that King Henry and his Counsellors had put Joan to death through zeal for the Christian Faith and the University of Paris sent similar letters to the Pope, the Emperor, and

[1. It is advisable to read the trial in the original Latin and French, as the translations have often a Christian bias, e.g. 'the King of Heaven' being rendered as 'our Lord' ' and 'my Lord' as 'our Saviour'. This is not merely inaccurate but actually misleading.]

the College of Cardinals. Such action can hardly be explained had Joan been an ordinary heretic or an ordinary political prisoner. But if she were in the eyes of the great mass of the population not merely a religious leader but actually the incarnate God, then it was only natural for the authorities who had compassed her death, to shelter themselves behind the bulwark of their zeal for the Christian religion, and to explain to the heads of that religion their reasons for the execution. On the other hand, the belief that Joan was God Incarnate will account, as nothing else can, for the extraordinary supineness of the French, who never lifted a finger to ransom or rescue Joan from the hands of either the Burgundians or the English. As God himself or his voluntary substitute she was doomed to suffer as the sacrifice for the people, and no one of those people could attempt to save her.

In comparing the facts elicited at the trial with the Dianic Cult as set out in the previous chapters, the coincidences are too numerous to be merely accidental. I do not propose to enter into a detailed discussion of the trial, I only wish to draw attention to a few points in this connexion.

The questions put to Joan on the subject of fairies appear to the modern reader to be entirely irrelevant, though much importance was evidently attached to her answers by the Court. She could not disprove, though she denied, the popular rumour that 'Joan received her mission at the tree of the Fairy-ladies' (Iohanna ceperat factum suum apud arborem Dominarum Fatalium), and she was finally forced to admit that she had first met the 'Voices' near that spot. Connexion with the fairies was as damning in the eyes of the Bishop of Beauvais and his colleagues as it was later in the eyes of the judges who tried John Walsh and Aleson Peirson.

The names of Christian saints, given to the persons whom Joan called her 'Voices', have misled modern writers; but the questions showered upon her show that the judges had shrewd suspicions as to the identity of these persons. That the 'Voices' were human beings is very clear from Joan's own testimony: 'Those of my party know well that the Voice had been sent to me from God, they have seen and known this Voice. My king and many others have also heard and seen the Voices which came to me. . . . I saw him [St. Michael] with my bodily eyes as well as I see you.' She refused to describe I St. Michael'; and bearing in mind some of the descriptions of the Devil in later trials, it is interesting to find that when the judges put the direct question to her as to whether I St. Michael' came to her naked, she did not give a direct answer. Later the following dialogue took place If the devil were to put himself in the form or likeness an angel, how would you know if it were a good or an evil angel?' asked the judges. Again Joan's reply was not direct: 'I should know quite well if it were St. Michael or a counterfeit.' She then stated that she had seen him many times before she knew him to be St. Michael; when a child she had seen him and had been afraid at first. Pressed for a description, she said he came ' in the form of a true honest man' [tres vray preudomme, forma unius verissimi probi hominis].[1] The accounts of the trial prove that Joan continually received advice from the 'saints'. The person whom she called 'St. Katherine' was obviously in the castle and able to communicate with the prisoner; this was not difficult, for the evidence shows that there was a concealed opening between Joan's room and the next. It was in the adjoining room, close to the opening, that the notaries sat to take down Joan's words when the spy Loyseleur engaged her in conversation; and it was evidently through this opening that 'St. Katherine' spoke when she awoke Joan 'without touching her', and again when Joan could not hear distinctly what she said 'on account of the noise in the castle'. A remark of Joan's that 'she often saw them [the Voices] among the Christians, they themselves unseen', is noteworthy for the use of the word Christian, suggesting that the 'Voices' were of a different religion. The remark should also be compared with the account given by Bessie Dunlop as to her recognizing Thom Reid when those about him did not know him; and with the statement by Danaeus that I among a great company of men, the Sorcerer only knoweth Satan, that is present, when other doo not know him, although they see another man, but who or what he is they know not'.

The points of mortal sin, of which Joan finally stood accused, were the following: 1, The attack on Paris on a feast day; 2, taking the Horse of the Bishop of Senlis; 3, leaping from the tower of Beaurevoir; 4, wearing male costume; 5, consenting to the death of Franquet d'Arras at Lagny.

Of these the most surprising to modern ideas is the one referring to costume, yet it was on this that the judges laid most stress. Even the severest of sumptuary laws has never made the wearing of male dress by a woman a capital crime; yet, though Joan had recanted and had been received into the Church, the moment that she put on male attire she was doomed on that account only. Whether she

[1. Compare Bessie Dunlop's more homely description of Thom Reid. An honest wele elderlie man.']

donned it by accident, by treachery, by force, or out of bravado, tile extraordinary fact remains that the mere resuming of male garments was the signal for her death without further trial. On the Sunday she wore the dress, on the Monday she was condemned, on the Tuesday the sentence was communicated to her, on the Wednesday she was burned, as an 'idolator, apostate, heretic, relapsed'. If, as I suppose, she were a member of the Dianic Cult, the wearing of male attire must have been, for her, an outward sign of that faith, and the resuming of it indicated the relapse; the inscription on the high cap, which she wore at her execution, shows that the judges at least held this opinion. Throughout the trial questions were poured upon her as to her reasons for wearing the dress, and she acknowledged that she wore it, not by the advice of a human man [per consilium hominis mundi] . . . 'Totum quod feci est per praeceptum Domimi, et si aliam praeciperet assumere ego assumerem, postquam hoc esset per praeceptum Dei.' Asked if she thought she would have been committing mortal sin by wearing women's clothes, she answered that she did better in obeying and serving her supreme Lord, who is God. She refused to wear women's dress except by command of God: 'I would rather die than revoke what God has made me do.'

On her letters were placed sometimes the words Jhesus Maria or a cross. 'Sometimes I put a cross as a sign for those of my party to whom I wrote so that they should not do as the letters said.' Though the mark was merely a code-signal to the recipient of the letter, it seems hardly probable that a Christian of that date would have used the symbol of the Faith for such a purpose. She also consistently refused to take an oath on the Gospels, and was with difficulty persuaded to do so on the Missal. When she was asked whether she had ever blasphemed [blasphemaverit] God, she replied that she had never cursed the Saints [maledixit Sanctum vel Sanctam]. When pressed whether she had not denied [denegaverit] God, she again refused a direct answer, saying that she had not denied the Saints [denegaverit Sanctum nec Sanctam].

The general feeling towards her among the Christian priesthood is shown by the action of Brother Richard. When he first entered her presence 'he made the sign of the cross and sprinkled holy water, and I said to him, Approach boldly, I shall not fly away.'

Another point to be noted is her answer that she learned the Paternoster, Ave Maria, and Credo from her mother, thus proving that she was not of a witch-family. According to Reginald Scot it was sufficient evidence to condemn a woman to death as a witch if her mother had been a witch before her. At the same time, however, Joan refused to say the Paternoster except in confession, when the priest's lips would have been sealed if she had proved herself not to be a Christian. She was very urgent to confess to the Bishop of, Beauvais, but he was too wary to be caught.

She first heard the 'Voices' at the age of thirteen, the usual time for the Devil and the witch to make 'paction'. One of her followers, Pierronne, was burnt as a witch, avowing to the last that she had spoken with God as friend with friend, and describing the costume of her Deity with a detail which shows the reality of the occurrence. If also there is any weight to be attached to certain names--as seems likely after studying the lists given above--then we have in this history four of the chief witch-names; Joan, the daughter of Isabel, and the two saints Katherine and Margaret. These coincidences may be small, but there are too many of them to be ignored.

There is evidence from Joan's own words that she felt herself divine and also that she knew her time was limited, but she never realized till the last that th end meant death; this, however, the 'Voices' knew and it was for this that they were preparing her. At the beginning of the trial, 'she said she had come from God, and had nothing to do here, asking to be sent back to God from whom she came [dixit quod venit ex parte Dei, et non habet quid negotiari quidquam, petens ut remitteretur ad Deum a quo venerat]. 'Many times she said to him [the King], I shall live a year, barely longer. During that year let as much as possible be done.' The 'Voices' told her she would be taken before the feast of St. John, and that thus it must be, and that she must not be troubled but accept willingly and God would help her. They also said it was necessary for her to be captured: 'Receive all willingly, care not for thy martyrdom, thou shalt come at last to the kingdom of paradise.' On the fatal Tuesday when she learned her doom, flesh and spirit quailed at the prospect of the agony to come, and she cried out that her 'Voices' had deceived her, for she had thought that in her imprisonment she had already suffered the promised martyrdom. Yet within twenty-four hours she went to the stake with courage unquenched, acknowledging that her 'Voices' were from God. Like John Fian nearly two centuries later, her spirit had sunk at first, and again like Fian she endured to the end, dying a martyr to the God who had exploited her confidence and simplicity and whom she had served so well. To her de Lancre's words might well apply, 'The witches are so devoted to his service that neither torture nor death can affright them, and they go to martyrdom and to death for love of him as gaily as to a festival of pleasure and public rejoicing.'

The ashes were collected and thrown into running water; a common rite, in religions of the Lower Culture, after the sacrifice of the Incarnate God. It is also worth noting that Rouen was one of the French cities in which there was still a living tradition of human sacrifice.

  

2. Gilles de Rais

Like Joan of Arc, Gilles de Rais was tried and executed as a witch and in the same way, much that is mysterious in this trial can also be explained by the Dianic Cult.

On the mother's side he descended from Tiphaine de Champtoce, and on the father's from Tiphaine de Husson; this latter was the niece of Bertrand du Guesclin, and called after du Guesclin's wife, who was a fairy woman.[1] The name Tiphaine appears to come from the same root as Fein, Finn, and Fian, all of which meant 'fairy' in Great Britain, and probably in Brittany as well. There is therefore a strong suggestion of a strain of fairy blood, and with that blood there may also have descended to Gilles many of the beliefs and customs of the dwarf race.

The bond between Gilles and Joan was a very close one. She obtained permission from the King to choose whom she would for her escort; her choice at once fell on Gilles, for she would naturally prefer those of her own faith. He held already a high command in the relieving, force, and added the protection of Joan as a special part of his duties. Later on, even after he had reached the high position of Marshal of France, he still continued those duties, remaining with her all day when she was wounded at the assault on Paris. It is an interesting point also that Charles VII granted permission to both these great leaders to bear the royal arms on their escutcheons. It seems incredible that a soldier of Gilles's character and standing should have made no move to rescue Joan by ransom or by force, when she was captured. She was not only a comrade, she was especially under his protection, and it is natural for us to think that his honour was involved. But if he regarded her as the destined victim, chosen and set apart for death, as required by the religion to which both he and she belonged, he could do nothing but remain inactive and let her fate be consummated. If this is so, then the 'Mystery of Orleans ', of which he was the author, would be a religious play of the same class as the mystery-plays of the Christians.

The extraordinary prodigality and extravagance of Gilles may have been due, as is usually suggested, to profligacy or to madness, but it may equally well have been that he took seriously the belief that as the Incarnate God--or at any rate as a candidate for that honour--he must give to all who asked. He rode a black horse, as also did Joan and the 'Devils' of later centuries; and on two separate occasions he attempted to enter into a compact with the 'Devil'. He could not decide to which religion he would belong, the old or the new, and his life was one long struggle. The old religion demanded human sacrifices and he gave them, the new religion regarded murder as mortal sin and he tried to offer expiation; openly he had Christian masses and prayers celebrated with the utmost pomp, secretly he followed the ancient cult; when he was about to remove the bodies of the human victims from the castle of Champtoce, he swore his accomplices to secrecy by the binding oaths of both religions; on the other hand members of the old faith, whom he consulted when in trouble, warned him that as long as he professed Christianity and practised its rites they could do nothing for him.

An infringement of the rights of the Church brought him under the ecclesiastical law, and the Church was not slow to take advantage of the position. Had he chosen to resist, his exalted position would have protected him, but he preferred to yield, and like Joan he stood his trial on the charge of heresy. The trial did not take long; he was arrested on September 14, and executed on October 26. With him were arrested eight others, of whom two were executed with him. Seeing that thirteen was always the number of witches in a Coven, it is surely more than an accidental coincidence that nine men and women, including Gilles, were arrested, two saved themselves by flight, and two more who had played a large part in the celebration of the rites of the old religion were already dead. Thus even as early as the middle of the fifteenth century the Coven of thirteen was in existence.

Gilles was charged with heresy before a Court composed of ecclesiastics only, and like Joan he was willing to be tried for his faith. He announced that he had always been a Christian, which may be taken to mean that there was some doubt as to whether he was not a heathen. He suddenly gave way to a curious outburst against the authority of the Court, saying that he would rather be hanged by the neck with a lace than submit to them as judges. This can only be understood by comparing his reference to 'hanging with a lace' with the method by which Playfair in 1597 (p. 204) John Stewart in 1618 (p. 202), and John Reid in 1697 (p. 203), met their deaths.

The sudden change of front in this haughty noble may be accounted for by the excommunication which was decreed against him, but this explains neither his passionate haste to confess all, and more than all, of which he was accused, nor his earnest and eager desire to die. How much of his confession was true cannot be determined now, but it is very evident that he was resolved to make his own death certain. His action in this may be compared with that of Major Weir in 1670, who also was executed on his own voluntary confession of witchcraft and crime. Gilles's last words, though couched in Christian phraseology, show that he had not realized the enormity of the crimes which he confessed: 'We have sinned, all three of us', he said to his two companions, 'but as soon as our souls have left our bodies we shall all see God in His glory in Paradise.' He was hanged on a gibbet above a pyre, but when the fire burned through the rope the body was snatched from the flames by several ladies of his family, who prepared it for burial with their own hands, and it was then interred in the Carmelite church close by. His two associates were also hanged, their bodies being burned and the ashes scattered.

On the spot where Gilles was executed his daughter erected a monument, to which came all nursing mothers to pray for an abundance of milk. Here again is a strong suggestion that he was regarded as the Incarnate God of fertility. Another suggestive fact is the length of time-nine years-which elapsed between the death of Joan and the death of Gilles. This is a usual interval when the Incarnate God is given a time-limit.

It required twenty-five years before an action of rehabilitation could be taken for Joan. In the case of Gilles, two years after the execution the King granted letters of rehabilitation for that 'the said Gilles, unduly and without cause, was condemned and put to death'.

An intensive study of this period might reveal the witch organization at the royal Court and possibly even the Grand-master to whom Joan owed allegiance, the 'God' who sent her. Giac, the King's favourite, was executed as a witch, and Joan's beau duc, the Duke d'Alencon, was also of the fraternity.

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

APPENDIX V

  

FLYING OINTMENTS

IMPORTANT NOTE 

  

WARNING: As noted in the text, several of the ingredients listed here are DEADLY POISONS.
 Some of these ingredients can KILL YOU simply through SKIN CONTACT.
 DO NOT TRY THIS.--JBH.

Here is a quote from an interview with Sharon Devlin, an experienced wiccan herbalist, from the book Drawing Down the Moon by Margot Adler: 

  "One day I decided to make a flying ointment. I was doing it in front of a student who I wanted to impress. Well, I made it about a thousand-fold stronger than I should have because I was using denatured alcohol instead of sprits of wine to extract it, which is what they did in the old days. And instead of lard I was using hydrophilic ointment. As a result I increased the potency about two hundred to three hundred percent, and I got enough under my fingernails just by mixing it to kill me. And I would have died if it hadn't been for a friend of mine who was a doctor and a magician, whom I called immediately. I learned a very heavy lesson. It was my first heavy experience with death, and a lot of bullshit pride went down the toilet with the rest of the flying ointment." 

  THE three formulae for the 'flying' ointment used by witches are as follows:

1. Du persil, de l'eau de l'Aconite, des feuilles de Peuple, et de la suye.

2. De la Berle, de l'Acorum vulgaire, de la Quintefeuille, du sang de chauuesouris, de la Morelle endormante, et de l'huyle.

3. De graisse d'enfant, de suc d'Ache, d'Aconite, de Quintefeuille, de Morelle, et de suye.

These formulae may be translated as follows -

1. Parsley, water of aconite, poplar leaves, and soot.

2. Water parsnip, sweet flag, cinquefoil, bat's blood, deadly night. shade, and oil.

3. Baby's fat, juice of water parsnip, aconite, cinquefoil, deadly nightshade, and soot.

These prescriptions show that the society of witches had a very creditable knowledge of the art of poisoning: aconite and deadly nightshade or belladonna are two of the three most poisonous plants growing freely in Europe, the third is hemlock, and in all probability 'persil' refers to hemlock and not to the harmless parsley, which it resembles closely.

The other ingredients have no marked toxic action, unless 'berle' and 'ache' refer not to the harmless water parsnip but to the poisonous water hemlock or cowbane. The baby's fat and bat's blood would of course have no action.

Aconite was one of the best-known poisons in ancient times; indeed it was so extensively used by professional poisoners in Rome during the Empire that a law was passed making its cultivation a capital offence. Aconite root contains about 0.4 percent of alkaloid and one-fifteenth of a grain of the alkaloid is a lethal dose. The drug has little effect upon the consciousness, but produces slowing, irregularity, and finally arrest of the heart.

The use of belladonna as a poison was also known in classical times; fourteen of the berries have been known to produce death; a moderate dose will produce wild excitement and delirium.

Hemlock is also a well-known and ancient poison; the fruit may contain as much as 0.9 per cent. of alkaloid, and  1/4 grain of the alkaloid may produce death. The action of hemlock usually is to produce a gradual motor paralysis, consciousness being unimpaired, and death being caused by paralysis of respiration, but sometimes hemlock may produce delirium and excitement.

There is no doubt, therefore, about the efficacy of these prescriptions and their ability to produce physiological effects. They were administered by being rubbed into the skin, which is not an efficient way of introducing most drugs into the body, indeed some have denied that alkaloids can be absorbed from the unbroken skin; but there is no doubt that alkaloids can be absorbed when rubbed into scratches or into the quick of the nails, and it must be remembered that an unbroken skin is only possessed by those who are free from vermin and who wash regularly, and neither of these conditions would be likely to apply to a mediaeval witch. Cases of poisoning associated with delirium have actually been recorded following the application of belladonna plasters to the skin.

Of the three prescriptions the first is a watery solution and would not be very efficacious when rubbed into the skin, but the second and third are ointments, and if they were rubbed into the skin in sufficient quantities definite physiological results would be produced.

The first preparation, which contains hemlock and aconite, would produce mental confusion, impaired movement, irregular action of the heart, dizziness and shortness of breath.

The belladonna in the second ointment would produce excitement which might pass into delirium.

The third ointment, containing both aconite and belladonna, would produce excitement and irregular action of the heart.

I cannot say whether any of these drugs would produce the impression of flying, but I consider the use of aconite interesting in this respect. Irregular action of the heart in a person falling asleep produces the well-known sensation of suddenly falling through space, and it seems quite possible that the combination of a delirifacient like belladonna with a drug producing irregular action of the heart like aconite might produce the sensation of flying.

A. J. CLARK.

     
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abbotsford Club Miscellany, vol. i. Edinburgh, 1837.
 Ady, Thomas. A Candle in the Dark. London, 1656.
 Alse Gooderige, The most Wonderfull and true Storie of. London, 1597.
 Arnot, Hugo, Criminal Trials. Edinburgh, 1785
 Baines, Edward. History of the County Palatine and Duchy of Lancaster. London, 1836.
 Bannatyne Club. Memoirs of Sir James Melville. Edinburgh, 1827.
 --- Historie and Life of King James the Sext. Edinburgh, 1825.
 --- Diary of John Nicoll. Edinburgh, 1836.
 --- Spottiswode's History of the Church of Scotland. Edinburgh, 1847-50.
 Baxter, Richard. Certainty of Worlds of Spirits. London, 1691.
 Beaumont, John. Historical Treatise of Spirits. London, 1705.
 Bede, Venerable. Ecclesiastical History (ed. Giles). London, 1843
 Bernard, Richard. Guide to Grand-Jury men. London, 1627.
 Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, vol. xi. Alnwick, 1887.
 Black, G. F. Scottish Antiquary, vol. ix. Edinburgh, 1895.
 Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, vol. i. Edinburgh, 1817.
 Bodin, Jean. De la Demonomanie des Sorciers. Rouen, 1604.
 --- Le Fleau des Demons et Sorciers. Nyort, 1616.
 Boguet, Henri. Discours des Sorciers. Lyons, 1608.
 Bourignon, Antoinette. La Parole de Dieu. Amsterdam, 1683.
 --- La vie exterieur. Amsterdam, 1683.
 Bounon, Jacques. Chroniques de la Lorraine. Nancy, 1838
 Bovett, Richard. Pandaemonium. London, 1684.
 Bower, Edmund. Dr. Lamb revived. London, 1653.
 Bromhall, Thomas. Treatise of Spectres. London, 1658.
 Burns Begg. Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. New Series, vol. x. Edinburgh.
 Burr, George Lincoln. Narratives of the Witchcraft Cases. New York, 1914
 Burton, John Hill. Criminal Trials. London, 1852.
 --- History of Scotland. Edinburgh, 1873.
 Calef, Robert. More Wonders of the Invisible World. Salem, 1861.
 Calendar of State Papers. Domestic, 1584. London, 1865.
 Cambrensis, Giraldus. Itinerary (Bohn's edition). London, 1847.
 Camden Society. Lady Alice Kyteler. London, 1843.
 Campbell, John Gregorson. Superstitions of the Highlands. Glasgow, 1902.
 Cannaert, J. B. Olim proces des Sorcieres en Belique. Gand, 1847.
 Chambers, Robert. Domestic Annals of Scotland. Edinburgh, 1861.
 Chartier, Jean. Chronique de Charles VII (ed. Vallet de Viriville). Paris, 1858.
 Chetham Society. Moore Rental. Manchester, 1847.
 --- Potts, Discoverie of Witchcraft. Manchester, 1858.
 Chronicon de Lanercost (ed. Stevenson). Maitland Club. Glasgow, 1839
 Collection of rare and curious Tracts relating to Witchcraft. London, 1838
 Cooper, Thomas. Mystery of Witchcraft. London, 1617.
 --- Pleasant Treatise of Witches. London, 1673.
 Cotta, John. Infallible, trite and assured Witch. London, 1625.
 --- Trial of Witchcraft. London, 1616.
 County Folklore, iii. Orkney. London, 1901.
 Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry. London, 1874.
 Dalyell, John Grahame. Darker Superstitions of Scotland. Edinburgh, 1834
 Danaeus, Lambert. Dialogue of Witches. [London?] 1575.
 Davenport, John. Witches of Huntingdon. London, 1646.
 Davies, J. Ceredig. Welsh Folklore. Aberystwith, 1911.
 De la Martiniere. Voyage des Pais Settentrionaux. Paris, 1682.
 De Lancre, Pierre. L'Incredulite et Mescreance du Sortilege. Paris, 1622.
 --- Tableau de l'Inconstance des mauvais Anges. Paris, 1613.
 Denham Tracts. London, 1895.
 Detection of damnable Drifts. 1579.
 Erah, J. Onurb. Key to Witchcrafte & Demonolatrie for Guidance of ye Slayers. The Watchers' Society, Cambridge, 1751.
 Elven, Henry van. La Tradition, vol. v. Paris, 1891.
 Examination of certain Witches at Chelmsford. Philobiblon Society, viii. London, 1863-4.
 Examination of A. Baker, Joane Willimot, and Ellen Greene. London, 1619.
 Examination of Joane Williford, Joan Cariden, and Jone Holl. (See Collection of rare and curious Tracts.) London, 1645.
 Examination of John Walsh. London, 1566.
 Fairfax, Edward. Demonologia (ed. W. Grainge). Harrogate, 1882.
 Flower, The Wonderful Discoverie of the Witchcrafts of Margaret and Phillip. London, 1619.
 Forbes, William. Institutes of the Law of Scotland. Edinburgh, 1722-30
 Foster, Tryall of Ann. Northampton, 1881.
 Fountainhall, Lord., Decisions. Edinburgh, 1759.
 Fournier, Alban. Epidemie de Sorcellerie en Lorraine. Nancy, 1891.
 French Intelligencer, No. 21. Thomason Tracts. London, 1652.
 Full Tryals of A Notorious Witches at Worcester. London, n. d.
 Gaule, John. Select Cases of Conscience. London, 1646.
 Gerish, William Blyth. Relation of Mary Hall of Gadsden. 1912.
 --- The Divel's Delusions. Bishops Stortford, 1914.
 --- The Severall Practices of Johane Harrison. 1909.
 Gibbons, A. Ely Episcopal Records. Lincoln, 1891.
 Giffard, George. Discourse of the subtill Practises of Devilles. London, 1587.
 --- Dialogue Concerning Witches. Percy Society, VIII. London, 1843.
 Gilbert, William. Witchcraft in Essex. London, 1909.
 Giraldus Cambrensis. Itinerary (Bohu's edition). London, 1847.
 Glanvil, Joseph. Sadducismus Triumphatus. London, 1681.
 Goldsmid, E. Confessions of Witches under Torture. Edinburgh, 1886.
 Goodcole, Henry. Wonderfull Discoverie of Elizabeth Sawyer. London, 1621.
 Gooderige, The Most wonderfull and true storie, of a certaine Witch named Alse. London, 1597.
 Green, Samuel Abbott. Groton in the Witchcraft Times. Cambridge, Mass., 1883.
 Hale, John. A modest Enquiry (ed. Burr). New York, 1914.
 Hale, Sir Matthew. Collection of Modern Relations. London, 1693.
 Harou, Alfred. La Tradition, vol. vi. Paris, 1892.
 Hector, William. Judicial Records of Renfrewshire. Paisley, 1876.
 Hibbert, Samuel. Description of the Shetland Isles. Edinburgh, 1822.
 Highland Papers, vol. iii. Witchcraft in Bute. Edinburgh, 1920.
 Holinshed, Raphael. Chronicles. London, 1587.
 Hopkins, Matthew. The Discovery of Witches. London, 1647.
 Horneck, Anthony. Appendix to Glanvil's Sadducismus Triumphatus. London, 1681.
 Howell, Thomas Bayly. State Trials. London, 1816.
 Humborg, Ludwig. Die Hexenprozesse in der Stadt Munster. [Munster?] 1882.
 Hunt, William. History of the English Church. London, 1901.
 Hutchinson, Bishop Francis. Historical Essay. London, 1718.
 Hutchinson, John. History of the Province of Massachuset's Bay. 1828.
 Inch, Trial of Isobel. Ardrossan (1855).
 James I. Demonologie. Edinburgh, 1597.
 James the Sext, Historie and Life of. Bannatyne Club. Edinburgh, 1825.
 Journal of Anatomy, vols. xiii and xxv. London, 1879, 1891.
 Journal d'un bourgeois de Paris. Pantheon Litteraire. Paris, 1838.
 Justiciary Court, Edinburgh, Records of the Proceedings of. Edinburgh, 1905.
 Kinloch, George Ritchie. Reliquiae Antiquae Scoticae. Edinburgh, 1848.
 Lamont, John. Diary. Maitland Club. Edinburgh, 1830.
 Law, Robert. Memorialls (ed. Sharpe). Edinburgh, 1818.
 Lawes against Witches and Conivration. Published by Authority. London, 1645.
 Lea, Henry Charles. History of the Inquisition. London, 1888.
 Lemoine, Jules. La Tradition, vol. vi. Paris, 1892.
 Mackenzie, Sir George. Laws and Customs of Scotland. Edinburgh. 1699.
 Maitland Club. Chronicon de Lanercost. Glasgow, 1839.
 --- Lamont's Diary. Glasgow, 1830
 Maitland Club Miscellany, vol. ii. Glasgow, 1840.
 Manchester Oriental Society's Journal. Manchester, 1916-17.
 Mather, Cotton. Wonders of the Invisible World. London, 1862.
 --- Increase. Remarkable Providences. London, 1890.
 Melville, Sir James. Memoirs. Bannatyne Club. Edinburgh.
 Michaelis, Sebastian. Admirable Historie of the Possession and Conversion of a Penitent Woman. London, 1613
 --- A Discourse of Spirits. London, 1613
 Monoyer, Jules. La Sorcellerie en Hainault. Essais d'histoire et d'archeologie. Mons, 1886.
 Monseur, Eugene. Le Folklore Wallon. Bruxelles (1592).
 Moore Rental. Chetham Society, vol. xii. Manchester, 1847.
 More, Henry. Antidote against Atheism. London, 1655.
 Moret, A. Mysteres Egyptiens. Paris, 1913.
 Murray, T. Douglas. Jeanne d'Arc. London, 1902.
 Narrative of the Sufferings of a young, Girle. Edinburgh, 1698.
 Nicoll, John. Diary. Bannatyne Club. Edinburgh, 1836.
 Notestein, Wallace. History of Witchcraft in England. Washington, 1911.
 Pearson, Karl. Chances of Death. London, 1897.
 Percy Society. Giffard's Dialogue of Witches. London, 1843.
 Perkins, William. Discourse of the damned Art of Witchcraft. Cambridge, 1608.
 Peterson. Tryall of Mrs. Joan. Thomason Tracts. London, 1652.
 Petto, Samuel. A faithful Narrative. London, 1693.
 Philobiblon Society. Examination of certain Witches. London, 1863-4.
 Pinkerton, John. Voyages. London, 1808-14
 Pitcairn, Robert. Criminal Trials. Edinburgh, 1833.
 Pittenweem, A true and full Relation of the Witches of Edinburgh, 1704.
 Pleasant Treatise of Witches. London, 1673.
 Potts, Thomas. Discoverie of Witches. Chetham Society. Manchester, 1845
 Prodigious and Tragicall History. See Collection of rare and curious Tracts. London, 1652.
 Quibell, James Edward. Hierakonpolis, ii. London, 1902.
 Quicherat, Jules Ettienne Joseph. Proces de condemnation et de rehabililation de Jeanne d'Arc. Paris, 1841.
 Ravaisson, Francois. Archives de la Bastille. Paris, 1873.
 Records of the Justiciary Court of Edinburgh. Edinburgh, 1905
 Registrum Magni Sigilli Regum Scotorum. Edinburgh, 1886.
 Rehearsall both straung and true. London, 1579.
 Remigius, Nicholas. Daemonolatria. Hamburg, 1693
 Roberts, Alexander. Treatise of Witchcraft. London, 1616.
 Ross, William. Aberdour and Inchcolme. Edinburgh, 1885.
 Rymer, Thomas. Foedera. London, 1704.
 Sadducismus Debellatus. London, 1698.
 St. Osees, A true and iust Recorde of all the Witches taken at. London, 1582.
 Sandys, George. Relation of a Journey. London, 1632.
 Sawyer, Wonderfull Discouerie of Elizabeth. 1621.
 Scot, Reginald. Discoverie of Witchcraft. London, 1584.
 Scots Magazine. Edinburgh, 1772 and 1814.
 Scott, Sir Walter. Demonology and Witchcraft. Morley's Universal Library. London, 1883
 Scottish Antiquary, vol. ix. Edinburgh, 1891.
 Scottish History Society, vol. xxv. Edinburgh, 1896.
 Sharpe, Charles Kirkpatrick. Historical Account of Witchcraft in Scotland. London, 1884.
 Shaw, Elinor, and Mary Phillips. Northampton, 1866.
 Sinclair, George. The Hydrostaticks. Edinburgh, 1672.
 --- Satan's Invisible World Discovered. Edinburgh, 1871.
 Sinclair, John. Statistical Account of Scotland, vol. xviii. Edinburgh, 1796.
 Sinistrari de Ameno, Ludovico Maria. Demoniality. Paris, 1879.
 Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. New Series, x. Edinburgh.
 Spalding Club Miscellany. Aberdeen, 1841.
 Spottiswode, John. History of the Church of Scotland. Edinburgh, 1847-50.
 Spottiswoode Miscellany. Edinburgh, 1844-5.
 Stearne, John. Confirmation and Discovery of Witchcraft. London, 1648.
 Stevenson, J. Chronicon de Lanercost. Maitland Club. Glasgow, 1839.
 'Stewart, William Grant. Popular Superstitions of the Highlanders. Edinburgh, 1823.
 Surtees Society, vol. xl. Durham, 1861.
 Taylor, John. Tracts relating to Northamptonshire. Northampton, 1866.
 Taylor, John. The Witchcraft Delusion in Colonial Connecticut. New York, n. d.
 Thomson, H. A., and Miles, A. Manual of Surgery. Oxford, 1913.
 Thorpe, Benjamin. Monumenta Ecclesiastica. [London] 1840.
 Tradition, La, Vol. v. van Elven's Les Proces de Sorcellerie au Moyen Age. Paris, 1891.
 --- vol. vi. Harou's Sorciers et Sorcieres. Paris, 1892.
 --- vol. vi. Lemoine's Sorcellerie contemporaine. Paris, 1892.
 True and exact Relation of the severall Informations, Examinations and Confessions of the late Witches executed in the County of Essex. London, 1645.
 True and iust Recorde of all the Witches taken at St. Oses. By W. W. London, 1582.
 Tryalls of Four Notorious Witches at Worcester. London, n. d.
 Wagstaffe, John. Question of Witchcraft. London, 1671.
 Walsh, Examination of John. London, 1566.
 Webster, John. Displaying of Supposed Witchcraft. London, 1677.
 Wellhausen, Julius. Reste arabischen Heidenthums. Berlin, 1897.
 Whitaker, T. D. History of Whalley. London, 1818.
 Wilson, Daniel. Memorials of Edinburgh in the Olden Time. Edinburgh, 1891.
 Witch of Wapping, The. Thomason Tracts. London, 1652.
 Witchcraft, Collection of rare and curious tracts on. Edinburgh, 1820.
 Witches of Northamptonshire. London, 1621.
 Wonderfull Discouerie of Elizabeth Sawyer. London, 1621.
 Wonderful Discoverie of Margaret and Philip Flower. London, 1619.

    
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, by Margaret Alice Murray, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

ADDENDUM

  

1324 Kilkenny, Ireland.

[This is the earliest record to give the names of all those who took part in the ceremonies. Two of the poorer women were burned; Dame Alice Kyteler returned to England; William Outlaw, her son, was imprisoned for a time. Nothing is known of the fate of the rest.]

1. Alice Kyteler
 2. Alice, wife of Henry the Smith
 3. Annota Lange
 4. Eva de Brounstoun
 5. Helena Galrussyn
 6. John Galrussyn
 7. Petronilla de Meath
 8. Robert de Bristol
 9. Robin, son of Artis (the Devil)
 10. Sarah, daughter of Petronilla
 11. Sysok Galrussyn
 12. William Payn of Boly
 13. William Outlaw.

    


===== BOOK: wild.txt =====


     
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

WILD TALENTS

  

by CHARLES FORT

  

New York: Claude Kendall

  

[1933]

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, July 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it not renewed at the US Copyright Office in a timely fashion.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 843]

  

WILD TALENTS

  

1

YOU know, I can only surmise about this--but John Henry Sanders, of 75 Colville Street, Derby, England, was the proprietor of a fish store, and I think that it was a small business. His wife helped. When I read of helpful wives, I take it that that means that husbands haven't large businesses. If Mrs. Sanders went about, shedding scales in her intercourses, I deduce that theirs wasn't much of a fish business.

Upon the evening of March 4, 1905, in the Sanders' home, in the bedroom of their housemaid, there was a fire. Nobody was at home, and the firemen had to break in. There was no fireplace in the bedroom. Not a trace of anything by which to explain was found, and the firemen reported: "Origin unknown." They returned to their station, and were immediately called back to this house. There was another fire. It was in another bedroom. Again--"Origin unknown."

The Sanders', in their fish store, were notified, and they hastened home. Money was missed. Many things were missed. The housemaid, Emma Piggott, was suspected. In her parents' home was found a box, from which the Sanders' took, and identified as theirs, L5, and a loot of such things as a carving set, sugar tongs, tablecloths, several dozen handkerchiefs, salt spoons, bottles of scent, curtain hooks, a hair brush, Turkish towels, gloves, a sponge, two watches, a puff box.

The girl was arrested, and in the Derby Borough Police Court, she was charged with arson and larceny. She admitted the thefts, but asserted her innocence of the fires. There was clearly such an appearance of relation between the thefts and the fires, which, if they had burned down the house, would have covered the thefts, that both charges were pressed.

[p. 844]

It is not only that there had been thefts, and then fires: so many things had been stolen that--unless the home of the Sanders' was a large household--some of these things would have been missed--unless all had been stolen at once. I have no datum for thinking that the Sanders lived upon any such scale as one in which valuables could have been stolen, from time to time, unknown to them. The indications were of one wide grab, and the girl's intention to set the house afire, to cover it.

Emma Piggott's lawyer showed that she had been nowhere near the house, at the time of the first fire; and that, when the second fire broke out, she, in the street, this off-evening of hers, returning, had called the attention of neighbors to smoke coming from a window. The case was too complicated for a police court, and was put off for the summer assizes.

Derby Mercury, July 19--trial of the girl resumed. The prosecution maintained that the fires could be explained only as of incendiary origin, and that the girl's motive for setting the house afire was plain, and that she had plundered so recklessly, because she had planned a general destruction, by which anything missing would be accounted for.

Again counsel for the defense showed that the girl could not have started the fires. The charge of arson was dropped. Emma Piggott was sentenced to six months' hard labor, for the thefts.

Upon Dec. 2, 1919, Ambrose Small, of Toronto, Canada, disappeared. He was known to have been in his office, in the Toronto Grand Opera House, of which he was the owner, between five and six o'clock, the evening of December 2nd. Nobody saw him leave his office. Nobody--at least nobody whose testimony can be accepted--saw him, this evening, outside the building. There were stories of a woman in the case. But Ambrose Small disappeared, and left more than a million dollars behind.

Then John Doughty, Small's secretary, vanished.

Small's safe deposit boxes were opened by Mrs. Small and other trustees of the estate. In the boxes were securities, valued at $1,125,000. An inventory was found. According to it, the sum of $105,000 was missing. There was an investigation, and bonds of the value of $105,000 were found, hidden in the home of Doughty's sister.

[p. 845]

All over the world, the disappearance of Ambrose Small was advertised, with offers of reward, in acres of newspaper space. He was in his office. He vanished.

Doughty, too, was sought. He had not only vanished: he had done all that he could to be unfindable. But he was traced to a town in Oregon, where he was living under the name of Cooper. He was taken back to Toronto, where he was indicted, charged with having stolen the bonds, and with having abducted Small, to cover the thefts.

It was the contention of the prosecution that Ambrose Small, wealthy, in good health, and with no known troubles of any importance, had no motive to vanish, and to leave $1,125,000 behind: but that his secretary, the embezzler, did have a motive for abducting him. The prosecution did not charge that Small had been soundlessly and invisibly picked out of his office, where he was surrounded by assistants. The attempt was to show that he had left his office, even though nobody had seen him go: thinkably he could have been abducted, unwitnessed, in a street. A newsboy testified that he had seen Small, in a nearby street, between 5 and 6 o'clock, evening of December 2nd, but the boy's father contradicted this story. Another newsboy told that, upon this evening, after 6 o'clock, Small had bought a newspaper from him: but, under examination, this boy admitted he was not sure of the date.

It seemed clear that there was relation between the embezzlement and the disappearance, which, were it not for the inventory, would have covered the thefts: but the accusation of abduction failed. Doughty was found guilty of embezzlement, and was sentenced to six years' imprisonment in the Kingston Penitentiary.

In the News of the World (London) June 6, 1926, there is an account of "strangely intertwined circumstances." In a public place, in the daytime, a man had died. On the footway, outside the Gaiety Theatre, London, Henry Arthur Chappell, the manager of the refreshment department of the Theatre, had been found dead. There was a post-mortem examination by a well-known pathologist, Prof. Piney. The man's skull was fractured. Prof. Piney gave his opinion that, if, because of heart failure, Chappell had fallen backward, the fractured skull might be accounted for: but he added that,

[p. 846]

though he had found indications of a slight affection of the heart, it was not such as would be likely to cause fainting.

The indications were that a murder had been committed. The police inquired into the matter, and learned that not long before there had been trouble. A girl, Rose Smith, employed at one of the refreshment counters, had been discharged by Chappell. One night she had placed on his doorstep a note telling that she intended to kill herself. Several nights later, she was arrested in Chappell's back garden. She was dressed in a man's clothes, and had a knife. Also she carried matches and a bottle of paraffin. Presumably she was bent upon murder and arson, but she was charged with trespassing, and was sentenced to two months' hard labor. It was learned that Chappell had died upon the day of this girl's release from prison.

Rose Smith was arrested. Chappell had no other known enemy. Upon the day of this girl's release, he had died.

But the accusation failed. A police inspector testified that, at the time of Chappell's death, Rose Smith had been in the Prisoners' Aid Home.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

2

I AM a collector of notes upon subjects that have diversity--such as deviations from concentricity in the lunar crater Copernicus, and a sudden appearance of purple Englishmen--stationary meteor-radiants, and a reported growth of hair on the bald head of a mummy--and "Did the girl swallow the octopus?"

But my liveliest interest is not so much in things, as in relations of things. I have spent much time thinking about the alleged pseudo-relations that are called coincidences. What if some of them should not be coincidences?

Ambrose Small disappeared, and to only one person could be attributed a motive for his disappearance. Only to one person's motives could the fires in the house in Derby be attributed. Only

[p. 847]

to one person's motives could be attributed the probable murder of Henry Chappell. But, according to the verdicts in all these cases, the meaning of all is of nothing but coincidence between motives and events.

Before I looked into the case of Ambrose Small, I was attracted to it by another seeming coincidence. That there could be any meaning in it seemed so preposterous that, as influenced by much experience, I gave it serious thought. About six years before the disappearance of Ambrose Small, Ambrose Bierce had disappeared. Newspapers all over the world had made much of the mystery of Ambrose Bierce. But what could the disappearance of one Ambrose, in Texas, have to do with the disappearance of another Ambrose, in Canada? Was somebody collecting Ambroses? There was in these questions an appearance of childishness that attracted my respectful attention.

Lloyd's Sunday News (London) June 20, r920--that, near the town of Stretton, Leicestershire, had been found the body of a cyclist, Annie Bella Wright. She had been killed by a wound in her head. The correspondent who wrote this story was an illogical fellow, who loaded his story with an unrelated circumstance: or, with a dim suspicion of an unexplained relationship, he noted that in a field, not far from where the body of the girl lay, was found the body of a crow.

In the explanation of coincidence there is much of laziness, and helplessness, and response to an instinctive fear that a scientific dogma will be endangered. It is a tag, or a label: but of course every tag, or label, fits well enough at times. A while ago, I noted a case of detectives who were searching for a glass-eyed man named Jackson. A Jackson, with a glass eye, was arrested in Boston. But he was not the Jackson they wanted, and pretty soon they got their glass-eyed Jackson, in Philadelphia. I never developed anything out of this item--such as that, if there's a Murphy with a hare lip, in Chicago, there must be another hare-lipped Murphy somewhere else. It would be a comforting idea to optimists, who think that ours is a balanced existence: all that I report is that I haven't confirmed it.

But the body of a girl, and the body of a crow--

[p. 848]

And, going over files of newspapers, I came upon this:

The body of a woman, found in the River Dee, near the town of Eccleston (London Daily Express, June 12, 1911). And near by was found the body of another woman. One of these women was a resident of Eccleston: the other was a visitor from the Isle of Man. They had been unknown to each other. About ten o'clock, morning of June 10th, they had gone out from houses in opposite parts of the town.

New York American, Oct. 20, 1929--"Two bodies found in desert mystery." In the Coachella desert, near Indio, California, had been found two dead men, about Too yards apart. One had been a resident of Coachella, but the other was not identified. "Authorities believe there was no connection between the two deaths."

In the New York Herald, Nov. 26, 1911, there is an account of the hanging of three men, for the murder of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, on Greenberry Hill, London. The names of the murderers were Green, Berry, and Hill. It does seem that this was only a matter of chance. Still, it may have been no coincidence, but a savage pun mixed with murder. New York Sun, Oct. 7, 1930--arm of William Lumsden, of Roslyn, Washington, crushed under a tractor. He was the third person, in three generations, in his family, to lose a left arm. This was coincidence, or I shall have to come out, accepting that there may be "curses" on families. But, near the beginning of a book, I don't like to come out so definitely. And we're getting away from our subject, which is Bodies.

"Unexplained drownings in Douglas Harbor, Isle of Man." In the London Daily News, Aug. 19, 1910, it was said that the bodies of a young man and of a girl had been found in the harbor. They were known as a "young couple," and their drowning would be understandable in terms of a common emotion, were it not that also there was a body of a middle-aged man "not known in any way connected with them."

London Daily Chronicle, Sept. 10, 1924--"Near Saltdean, Sussex, Mr. F. Pender, with two passengers in his sidecar, collided with a post, and all were seriously injured. In a field, by the side of the road, was found the body of a Rodwell shepherd, named Funnell, who had no known relation with the accident."

[p. 849]

An occurrence of the 14th of June, 1931, is told of, in the Home News (Bronx) of the 15th. "When Policeman Talbot, of the E. 126th St. station, went into Mt. Morris Park, at 10 A.M., yesterday, to awaken a man apparently asleep on a bench near the 124th St. gate, he found the man dead. Dr. Patterson, of Harlem Hospital, said that death had probably been caused by heart failure." New York Sun, June 15--that soon after the finding of this body on the bench, another dead man was found on a bench near by.

I have two stories, which resemble the foregoing stories, but I should like to have them considered together.

In November, 1888 (St. Louis Globe-Democrat, Dec. 20, 1888), two residents of Birmingham, Alabama, were murdered, and their bodies were found in the woods. "Then there was such a new mystery that these murder-mysteries were being overlooked." In the woods, near Birmingham, was found a third body. But this was the body of a stranger. "The body lies unidentified at the undertaker's rooms. No one who had seen it can remember having seen the man in life, and identification seems impossible. The dead man was evidently in good circumstances, if not wealthy, and what he could have been doing at the spot where his body was found is a mystery. Several persons who have seen the body are of the opinion that the man was a foreigner. Anyway he was an entire stranger in this vicinity, and his coming must have been as mysterious as his death."

I noted these circumstances, simply as a mystery. But when a situation repeats, I notice with my livelier interest. This situation is of local murders, and the appearance of the corpse of a stranger, who had not been a tramp.

Philadelphia Public Ledger, Feb. 4, 1892--murder near Johnstown, Pa.--a man and his wife, named Kring, had been butchered, and their bodies had been burned. Then, in the woods, near Johnstown, the corpse of a stranger was found. The body was well-dressed, but could not be identified. Another body was found--"well-dressed man, who bore no means of identification."

There is a view by which it can be shown, or more or less demonstrated, that there never has been a coincidence. That is, in anything like a final sense. By a coincidence is meant a false appearance,

[p. 850]

or suggestion, of relations among circumstances. But anybody who accepts that there is an underlying oneness of all things, accepts that there are no utter absences of relations among circumstances--

Or that there are no coincidences, in the sense that there are no real discords in either colors or musical notes--

That any two colors, or sounds, can be harmonized, by intermediately relating them to other colors, or sounds.

And I'd not say that my question, as to what the disappearance of one Ambrose could have to do with the disappearance of another Ambrose, is so senseless. The idea of causing Ambrose Small to disappear may have had origin in somebody's mind, by suggestion from the disappearance of Ambrose Bierce. If in no terms of physical abduction can the disappearance of Ambrose Small be explained, I'll not say that that has any meaning, until the physicists intelligibly define what they mean by physical terms.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

3

IN days of yore, when I was an especially bad young one, my punishment was having to go to the store, Saturdays, and work. I had to scrape off labels of other dealers' canned goods, and paste on my parent's label. Theoretically, I was so forced to labor to teach me the errors of deceitful ways. A good many brats are brought up, in the straight and narrow, somewhat deviously.

One time I had pyramids of canned goods, containing a variety of fruits and vegetables. But I had used all except peach labels. I pasted the peach labels on peach cans, and then came to apricots. Well, aren't apricots peaches? And there are plums that are virtually apricots. I went on, either mischievously, or scientifically, pasting the peach labels on cans of plums, cherries, string beans, and succotash. I can't quite define my motive, because to this day it has not been decided whether I am a humorist or a scientist. I think that it was mischief, but, as we go along, there will come a more respectful recognition that also it was scientific procedure.

[p. 851]

In the town of Derby, England--see the Derby Mercury, May 15, and following issues, 1905--there were occurrences that, to the undiscerning, will seem to have nothing to do with either peaches or succotash. In a girls' school, girls screamed and dropped to the floor, unconscious. There are readers who will think over well-known ways of peaches and succotash, and won't know what I am writing about. There are others, who will see "symbolism" in it, and will send me appreciations, and I won't know what they're writing about.

In five days, there were forty-five instances of girls who screamed and dropped unconscious. "The girls were exceedingly weak, and had to be carried home. One child had lost strength so that she could not even sit up." It was thought that some unknown, noxious gas, or vapor, was present: but mice were placed in the schoolrooms, and they were unaffected. Then the scientific explanation was "mass psychology." Having no more data to work on, it seems to me that this explanation is a fitting description. If a girl fainted, and, if, sympathetically, another girl fainted, it is well in accord with our impressions of human nature, which sees, eats, smells, thinks, loves, hates, talks, dresses, reads, and undergoes surgical operations, contagiously, to think of forty-three other girls losing consciousness, in involuntary imitativeness. There are mature persons who may feel superior to such hysteria, but so many of them haven't much consciousness.

In the Brooklyn Eagle, Aug. 1, 1894, there is a story of "mass psychology." In this case, too, it seems to me that the description fits--maybe. Considering the way people live, it is natural to them to die imitatively. There was, in July, 1894, a panic in a large vineyard, at Collis, near Fresno, California. Somebody in this vineyard had dropped dead of "heart failure." Somebody else dropped dead. A third victim had dropped and was dying. There wasn't a scientist, with a good and sticky explanation, on the place. It will be thought amusing: but the people in this vineyard believed that something uncanny was occurring, and they fled. "Everybody has left the place, and the authorities are preparing to begin a searching investigation." Anything more upon this subject is not findable. That is the usual experience after an announcement of a "searching investigation."

[p. 852]

If something can't be described any other way, it's "mass psychology." In the town of Bradford, England, in a house, in Columbia Street, 1st of March, 1923, there was one of those occasions of the congratulations, hates, malices, and gaieties, and more or less venomous jealousies that combine in the state that is said to be merry, of a wedding party. The babble of this wedding party suddenly turned to delirium. There were screams, and guests dropped to the floor, unconscious. Wedding bells--the gongs of ambulances--four persons were taken to hospitals.

This occurrence was told of in the London newspapers, and, though strange, it seemed that the conventional explanation fitted it.

Yorkshire Evening Argus--published in Bradford--March 3, 1923--particulars that make for restiveness against any conventional explanation--people in adjoining houses had been affected by this "mysterious malady." Several names of families, members of which had been overcome, unaccountably, were published--Downing, Blakey, Ingram.

If people, in different houses, and out of contact with one another--or not so circumstanced as to "mass" their psychologies--and all narrowly localized in one small neighborhood, were similarly affected, it seemed clear that here was a case of common exposure to something that was poisonous, or otherwise injurious. Of course an escape of gas was thought of; but there was no odor of gas. No leakage of gas was found. There was the usual searching investigation that precedes forgetfulness. It was somebody's suggestion that the "mysterious malady" had been caused by fumes from a nearby factory chimney. I think that the wedding party was the central circumstance, but I don't think of a factory chimney, which had never so expressed itself before, suddenly fuming at a wedding party. An Argus reporter wrote that the Health Officers had rejected this suggestion, and that he had investigated, and had detected no unusual odor in the neighborhood.

In this occurrence at Bradford, there was no odor of gas. I have noted a case in London, in which there was an odor of gas; nevertheless this case is no less mysterious. In the Weekly Dispatch (London), June 12, 1910, it is called "one of the most remarkable and mysterious cases of gas poisoning that have occurred in London in recent

[p. 853]

years." Early in the morning of June 10th, a woman telephoned to a police station, telling of what she thought was an escape of gas. A policeman went to the house, which was in Neale Street (Holborn). He considered the supposed leakage alarming, and rapped on doors of another floor in the house. There was no response, and he broke down a door, finding the occupants unconscious. In two neighboring houses, four unconscious persons were found. A circumstance that was considered extraordinary was that between these two houses was one in which nobody was affected, and in which there was no odor of gas. The gas company sent men, who searched for a leak, but in vain. Fumes, as if from an uncommon and easily discoverable escape of gas, had overcome occupants of three houses, but according to the local newspaper (the Holborn Guardian) the gas company, a week later, had been unable to discover its origin.

In December, 1921, there was an occurrence in the village of Zetel, Germany (London Daily News, Jan. 2, 1922). This was in the streets of a town. Somebody dropped unconscious: and, whether in an epidemic of fright, accounted for in terms of "mass psychology," or not, other persons dropped unconscious. "So far no light has been thrown on the mystery." It was thought that a "current of some kind" had passed over the village. This resembles the occurrence at El Paso, Texas, June 19, 1929 (New York Sun, Dec. 6, 1930). Scores of persons, in the streets, dropped unconscious, and several of them died. Whatever appeared here was called a "deadly miasma." And the linkage goes on to the scores of deaths in a fog, in the Meuse Valley, Belgium, Dec. 5, 1930--so that one could smoothly and logically start with affairs in a girls' school, and end up with a meteorological discussion.

Lloyd's Weekly News (London) Jan. 17, 1909--story from the Caucasian city of Baku. M. Krassilrukoff, and two companions, had gone upon a hunting trip, to Sand Island, in the Caspian Sea. Nothing had been heard from them, and there was an investigation. The searchers came upon the bodies of the three men, lying in positions that indicated that they had died without a struggle. No marks of injuries; no disarrangement of clothes. At the autopsy, no trace of poison was found. "The doctors, though they would not commit themselves to an explanation, thought the men had been stifled."

[p. 854]

The Observer (London) Aug. 23, 1925--"A mysterious tragedy is reported from the Polish Tatra mountains, near the health-resort of Zakopane. A party, composed of Mr. Kasznica, the Judge of the Supreme Court, his wife, a twelve-year-old son, and a young student of Cracow University, started in fine weather for a short excursion in the neighboring mountains. Two days later, three of them were found dead."

Mrs. Kasznica was alive. She told that all were climbing, and were in good condition, when suffocation came upon them. "A stifling wind," she thought. One after another they had dropped unconscious. The post-mortem examinations revealed nothing that indicated deaths by suffocation, nor anything else that could be definitely settled upon. "Some newspapers suggest a crime, but so far the case remains a mystery."

There have been cases that have been called mysterious, though they seem explicable enough in known circumstances of human affairs. See a story in the New York World-Telegram, March 9, 1931--about thirty men and women at work in the Howard Clothes Company factory, Nassau Street, Brooklyn--sudden terror and a panic of these people, to get to the street. The place was filled with a pungent, sickening odor. In the street, men and women collapsed, or reeled, and wandered away, in a semi-conscious condition. Several dozen of them were carried into stores, where they were given first-aid treatment, until ambulances arrived.

The phenomenon occurred in the second floor of the Cary Building, occupied by the clothing company. Nobody in any other part of the building was affected. All gas fixtures in the factory were intact. No gas bomb was found. Nothing was found out. But, considering many crimes of this period, the suspicion is strong that in some way, as an expression of human hatred, of origin in industrial troubles, a volume of poisonous gas had been discharged into this factory.

And it may be that, in terms of revenges, we are on the track of a general expression, even if we think of a hate that could pursue people far up on a mountainside.

In hosts of minds, today, are impressions that the word "eerie" means nothing except convenience to makers of crossword puzzles.

[p. 855]

[paragraph continues] There are gulfs of the unaccountable, but they are bridged by terminology. Four persons were taken from a wedding party to hospitals. Well, if not another case of such jocularity as mixing brick-has with confetti, it was ice cream again, and ptomaine poisoning. There is such a satisfaction in so explaining, and showing that one knows better than to sound the p in ptomaine, that probably vast holes of ignorance always will be bridged by very slender pedantries. Asphyxiation has seduced hosts of suspicions that would be resolute against such a common explanation as "gas poisoning."

New York Sun, May 22, 1928--story from the town of Newton, Mass. In this town, a physician was, by telephone, called to the home of William M. Duncan. There was nobody to meet him at the front door, but he got into the house. He called, but nobody answered. There seemed to be nobody at home, but he went through the house. He came to a room, upon the floor of which were lying four bodies. There was no odor of gas, but the doctor worked over the four, as if upon cases of asphyxiation, and they revived, and tried to explain. Duncan had gone to this room, and, upon entering it, had dropped, unconscious. Wondering at what was delaying him, his wife had followed, and down she had fallen. One of his sons came next, and, upon entering this room, had fallen to the floor. The other son, by chance, went to this room, and felt something overcoming him. Before losing consciousness, he had staggered to the telephone.

The doctor's explanation was "mass psychology."

It is likely that readers of the Sun were puzzled, until they came to this explanation, and then--"Oh, of course! mass psychology."

There is a continuity of all things that makes classifications fictions. But all human knowledge depends upon arrangements. Then all books--scientific, theological, philosophical--are only literary. In Scotland, in the month of September, 1903, there was an occurrence that can as reasonably be considered a case of "mass psychology," as can be some of the foregoing instances: but now we are emerging into data that seem to be of physical attacks. There will be more emerging. One can't, unless one be hopelessly, if not brutally, a scientist, or a logician, tie to any classification. The story is told in the Daily Messenger (Paris) Sept. 13, 1903.

[p. 856]

In a coal mine, near Coalbridge, Scotland, miners came upon the bodies of three men. There was no coal gas. There was no sign of violence of any kind. Two of these men were dead, but one of them revived. He could tell, enlighteningly, no more than could any other survivor in the stories of this group. He told that his name was Robert Bell, and that, with his two cousins, he had been walking in the mine, when he felt what he described as a "shock." No disturbance had been felt by anyone else in the mine. Though other parts of this mine were lighted by electricity, there was not a wire in this part. There was, at this point, a deadly discharge of an unknown force, just when, by coincidence, three men happened to be passing, or something more purposeful is suggested.

Down in the dark of a coal mine--and there is a seeming of the congruous between mysterious attacks and surroundings. Now I have a story of a similar occurrence at a point that was one of this earth's most crowded thoroughfares. See the New York Herald, Jan. 23, 1909. John Harding, who was the head of a department in John Wanamaker's store, was crossing Fifth Avenue, at Thirty-third Street, when he felt a stinging sensation upon his chest. There was no sign of a missile of any kind. Then he saw, near by, a man, who was rubbing his arm, looking around angrily. The other man told Harding that something unseen had struck him.

If this occurrence had been late at night, and, if only two persons were crossing Fifth Avenue, at Thirty-third Street; and if a force of intensity enough to kill had struck them, the explanation, upon the finding of the bodies, would probably be that two men had, by coincidence, died in one place, of heart failure. At any rate, see back to the case of the bodies on benches of a Harlem park. No reporter of the finding of these bodies questioned the explanation that two men, sitting near each other, had died, virtually simultaneously, of heart failure, by coincidence.

We emerge from seeming attacks upon more than one person at a time, into seemingly definitely directed attacks upon single persons. New York Herald Tribune, Dec. 4, 1931--Ann Harding, film actress, accompanied by her secretary, on her way, by train, to Venice, Florida. There came an intense pain in her shoulder. Miss Harding could not continue traveling, and left the train, at Jacksonville.

[p. 857]

[paragraph continues] A physician examined her, and found that her shoulder was dislocated. The secretary was mystified, because she had seen the occurrence of nothing by which to explain, and Miss Harding could offer no explanation of her injury.

Upon Dec. 7, 1931--see the New York Times, Dec. 8, 1931--the German steamship Brechsee arrived at Horsens, Jutland. Captain Ahrenkield told of one of his sailors, who had been unaccountably wounded. The man had been injured during a storm, but he seemed to have been singled out by something other than stormy conditions. The captain had seen him, wounded by nothing that was visible, falling to the deck, unconscious. It was a serious wound, four inches long, that had appeared upon the sailor's head, and the captain had sewed it with ordinary needle and thread.

In this case, unaccountable wounds did not appear upon several other sailors. Suppose, later, I tell of instances in which a number of persons were so injured. Mass psychology?

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

4

NOT a bottle of catsup can fall from a tenement-house fire-escape, in Harlem, without being noted--not only by the indignant people downstairs, but--even though infinitesimally--universally--maybe--

Affecting the price of pajamas, in Jersey City: the temper of somebody's mother-in-law, in Greenland; the demand, in China, for rhinoceros horns for the cure of rheumatism--maybe--

Because all things are inter-related--continuous--of an underlying oneness--

So then the underlying logic of the boy--who was guilty of much, but was at least innocent of ever having heard of a syllogism--who pasted a peach label on a can of string beans.

All things are so inter-related that, though the difference between a fruit and what is commonly called a vegetable seems obvious,

[p. 858]

there is no defining either. A tomato, for instance, represents the merging-point. Which is it--fruit or vegetable?

So then the underlying logic of the scientist--who is guilty of much, but also is very innocent--who, having started somewhere with his explanation of "mass psychology," keeps right on, sticking on that explanation. Inasmuch as there is always a view somewhere, in defense of anything conceivable, he must be at least minutely reasonable. If "mass psychology" applies definitely to one occurrence, it must, even though almost imperceptibly, apply to all occurrences. Phenomena of a man alone on a desert island can be explained in terms of "mass psychology"--inasmuch as the mind of no man is a unit, but is a community of mental states that influence one another.

Inter-relations of all things--and I can feel something like the hand of Emma Piggott reaching out to the hand, as it were, of the asphyxiated woman on the mountainside. John Doughty and bodies on benches in a Harlem park--as oxygen has affinity for hydrogen. Rose Smith--Ambrose Small--the body of a shepherd named Funnell--

Upon the morning of April 10, 1893, after several men had been taken to a Brooklyn hospital, somebody's attention was attracted to something queer. Several accidents, in quick succession, in different parts of the city would not be considered strange, but a similarity was noted. See the Brooklyn Eagle, April 10, 1893.

Then there was a hustle of ambulances, and much ringing of gongs--

Alex. Burgman, Geo. Sychers, Lawrence Beck, George Barton, Patrick Gibbons, James Meehan, George Bedell, Michael Brown, John Trowbridge, Timothy Hennessy, Philip Oldwell, and an unknown man--

In the course of a few hours, these men were injured, in the streets of Brooklyn, almost all of them by falling from high places, or by being struck by objects that fell from high places.

Again it is one of my questions that are so foolish, and that may not be so senseless--what could the fall of a man from a roof, in one part of Brooklyn, have to do with a rap on the sconce, by a flower pot, of another man, in another part of Brooklyn?

In the town of Colchester, England--as told in Lloyd's Daily 

[p. 859]

[paragraph continues] News (London) April 30, 1911--a soldier, garrisoned at Colchester, was, upon the evening of April 24th, struck senseless. He was so seriously injured that he was taken to the Garrison Hospital. Here he could give no account of what had befallen him. The next night, to this hospital, was taken another seriously injured soldier, who had been "struck senseless by an unseen assailant." Four nights later, a third soldier was taken to this hospital, suffering from the effects of a blow, about which he could tell nothing.

I have come upon a case of the "mass psychology" of lace curtains. About the last of March, 1892--see the Brooklyn Eagle, April 19, 1892--people who had been away from home, in Chicago, returned to find that during their absence there had been an orgy of curtains. Lace curtains were lying about, in lumps and distortions. It was a melancholy prostration of virtues: things so flimsy and frail, yet so upright, so long as they are supported. Bureau drawers had been ransacked for jewelry, and jewelry had been found. But nothing had been stolen. Strewn about were fragments of rings and watches that had been savagely smashed.

There are, in this account, several touches of the ghost story. There are many records of similar wanton, or furious, destructions in houses where poltergeist disturbances were occurring. Also there was mystery, because the police could not find out how this house had been entered.

Then came news of another house, which, while the dwellers were away, had been "mysteriously entered." Lace curtains, in rags, were lying about, and so were remains of dresses that had been slashed. Jewelry and other ornaments had been smashed. Nothing had been stolen.

So far as the police could learn, the occupants of these houses had no common enemy. A rage against lace curtains is hard to explain, but the hatred of somebody, whose windows were bare, against all finery and ornaments, is easily understandable. Soon after rages had swept through these two houses, other houses were entered, with no sign of how the vandal got in, and lace curtains were pulled down, and there was much destruction of finery and ornaments, and nothing was stolen.

New York Times, Jan. 26, 1873--that, in England, during the

[p. 860]

[paragraph continues] Pytchley hunt, Gen. Mayow fell dead from his saddle, and that about the same time, in Gloucestershire, the daughter of the Bishop of Gloucestershire, while hunting, was seriously injured; and that, upon the same day, in the north of England, a Miss Cavendish, while hunting, was killed. Not long afterward, a clergyman was killed, while hunting, in Lincolnshire. About the same time, two hunters, near Sanders' Gorse, were thrown, and were seriously injured.

In one of my incurable, scientific moments, I suggest that when diverse units, of, however, one character in common, are similarly affected, the incident force is related to the common character. But there is no suggestion that any visible hater of fox-hunters was traveling in England, pulling people from saddles, and tripping horses. But that there always has been intense feeling, in England, against fox-hunters is apparent to anyone who conceives of himself as a farmer--and his fences broken, and his crops trampled by an invasion of red coats--and a wild desire to make a Bunker Hill of it.

In the New York Evening World, Dec. 26, 1930, it was said that Warden Lewis E. Lawes, of Sing Sing Prison, had been ill. The Warden recovered, and, upon Christmas morning, left his room. He was told that a friend of his, Maurice Conway, who had come to visit him, had been found dead in bed. Upon Christmas Eve, Keeper John Hyland had been operated upon, "for appendicitis," and was in a serious condition in Ossining Hospital. In the same hospital was Keeper John Wescott, who also had been stricken "with appendicitis." Keeper Henry Barrett was in this hospital, waiting to be operated upon "for hernia."

Probably the most hated man in the New York State Prison Service was Asael J. Granger, Head Keeper of Clinton Prison, at Dannemora. He had effectively quelled the prison riot of July 22, 1929. Upon this Christmas Day, of 1930, in the Champlain Valley Hospital, Plattsburg, N. Y., Granger was operated upon "for appendicitis." Two days later he died. About this time, Harry M. Kaiser, the Warden of Clinton Prison, was suffering from what was said to be "high blood pressure." He died, three months later (New York Herald Tribune, March 24, 1931).

The London newspapers of March, 1926, told of fires that had

[p. 861]

simultaneously broken out in several parts of Closes Hall, the residence of Captain B. Heaton, near Clitheroe, Lancashire. The fires were in the woodwork under the roof, and were believed to have been caused by sparks from the kitchen stove. These fires were in places that were inaccessible to any ordinary incendiary: to get to them, the firemen had to chop holes in the roof. Nothing was said of previous fires here. Maybe it is strange that sparks from a kitchen stove should simultaneously ignite remote parts of a house, distances apart.

A fire in somebody's house did not much interest me: but then I read of a succession of similars. In three months, there had been ten other mansion fires. "Scotland Yard recently made arrangements for all details of mansion fires to be sent to them, in order that the circumstances might be collated, and the probable cause of the outbreaks discovered."

April 2, 1926--Ashley Moor, a mansion near Leominster, destroyed by fire.

Somebody, or something, was burning mansions. How it was done was the mystery. There was a scare, and probably these houses were more than ordinarily guarded: but so well-protected are they, ordinarily, that some extraordinary means of entrance is suggested. In no report was it said that there was any evidence of how an incendiary got into a house. No theft was reported. For months, every now and then there was a mansion fire. Presumably the detectives of Scotland Yard were busily collating.

The London newspapers, of November 6th, told of the thirtieth mansion fire in about ten months.

There were flaming mansions, and there were flaming utterances, in England.

Sometimes I am a collector of data, and only a collector, and am likely to be gross and miserly, piling up notes, pleased with merely numerically adding to my stores. Other times I have joys, when unexpectedly coming upon an outrageous story that may not be altogether a lie, or upon a macabre little thing that may make some reviewer of my more or less good works mad. But always there is present a feeling of unexplained relations of events that I

[p. 862]

note; and it is this far-away, haunting, or often taunting, awareness, or suspicion, that keeps me piling on

Or, in a feeling of relatability of seemingly most incongruous occurrences that nevertheless may be correlated into the service of one general theme, I am like a primitive farmer, who conceives that a zebra and a cow may be hitched together to draw his plow

But isn't there something common about zebras and cows?

An ostrich and a hyena.

Then the concept of a pageantry--the ransack of the jungles for creatures of the widest unlikeness to draw his plow--and former wild clatters of hoofs and patters of paws are the tramp of a song--here come the animals, two by two

Or John Doughty, three abreast with the dead men of a Harlem park, pulling on my theme--followed by the forty-five schoolgirls of Derby--and the fish dealer's housemaid, with her arms full of sponges and Turkish towels--followed by burning beds, most suggestively associated with her, but in no way that any conventional thinker can explain

Or the mansion fires in England, in the year 1926--and, in a minor hitch-up, I feel the relatability of two scenes:

In Hyde Park, London, an orator shouts: "What we want is no king and no law! How we'll get it will be, not with ballots, but with bullets!"

Far away in Gloucestershire, a house that dates back to Elizabethan times unaccountably bursts into flames.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

5

"GOOD morning!" said the dog. He disappeared in a thin, greenish vapor.

I have this record, upon newspaper authority.

It can't be said--and therefore will be said--that I have a marvelous credulity for newspaper yarns.

But I am so obviously offering everything in this book, as fiction.

[p. 863]

[paragraph continues] That is, if there is fiction. But this book is fiction in the sense that Pickwick Papers, and The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, and Uncle Tom's Cabin; Newton's Principia, Darwin's Origin of Species, Genesis, Gulliver's Travels, and mathematical theorems, and every history of the United States, and all other histories, are fictions. A library-myth that irritates me most is the classification of books under "fiction" and "non-fiction."

And yet there is something about the yarns that were told by Dickens that sets them apart, as it were, from the yarns that were told by Euclid. There is much in Dickens' grotesqueries that has the correspondence with experience that is called "truth," whereas such Euclidian characters as "mathematical points" are the vacancies that might be expected from a mind that had had scarcely any experience. That dog-story is axiomatic. It must be taken on faith. And, even though with effects that sometimes are not much admired, I ask questions.

It was told in the New York World, July 29, 1908--many petty robberies, in the neighborhood of Lincoln Avenue, Pittsburgh--detectives detailed to catch the thief. Early in the morning of July 26th, a big, black dog sauntered past them. "Good morning!" said the dog. He disappeared in a thin, greenish vapor.

There will be readers who will want to know what I mean by turning down this story, while accepting so many others in this book.

It is because I never write about marvels. The wonderful, or the never-before-heard-of, I leave to whimsical, or radical, fellows. All books written by me are of quite ordinary occurrences.

If, say sometime in the year 1847, a New Orleans newspaper told of a cat, who said: "Well, is it warm enough for you?" and instantly disappeared sulphurously, as should everybody who says that; and, if I had a clipping, dated sometime in the year 1930, telling of a mouse, who squeaked: "I was along this way, and thought I'd drop in," and vanished along a trail of purple sparklets; and something similar from the St. Helena Guardian, Aug. 17, 1905; and something like that from the Madras Mail, year 1879--I'd consider the story of the polite dog no marvel, and I'd admit him to our fold.

[p. 864]

But it is not that I take numerous repetitions, as a standard for admission--

The fellow who found the pearl in the oyster stew--the old fiddle that turned out to be a Stradivarius--the ring that was lost in a lake, and then what was found when a fish was caught--

But these often repeated yarns are conventional yarns.

And almost all liars are conventionalists.

The one quality that the lower animals have not in common with human beings is creative imagination. Neither a man, nor a dog, nor an oyster ever has had any. Of course there is another view, by which is seen that there is in everything a touch of creativeness. I cannot say that truth is stranger than fiction, because I have never had acquaintance with either. Though I have classed myself with some noted fictionists, I have to accept that the absolute fictionist never has existed. There is a fictional coloration to everybody's account of an "actual occurrence," and there is at least the lurk somewhere of what is called the "actual" in everybody's yarn. There is the hyphenated state of truth-fiction. Out of dozens of reported pearls in stews, most likely there have been instances; most likely once upon a time an old fiddle did turn out to be a Stradivarius; and it could be that once upon a time somebody did get a ring back fishwise.

But when I come upon the unconventional repeating, in times and places far apart, I feel--even though I have no absolute standards to judge by--that I am outside the field of ordinary liars.

Even in the matter of the talking dog, I think that the writer probably had something to base upon. Perhaps he had heard of talking dogs. It is not that I think it impossible that detectives could meet a dog, who would say: "Good morning!" That's no marvel. It is "Good morning!" and disappearing in the thin, greenish vapor that I am making such a time about. In the New York Herald Tribune, Feb. 21, 1928, there was an account of a French bulldog, owned by Mrs. Mabel Robinson, of Bangor, Maine. He could distinctly say: "Hello!" Mrs. J. Stuart Tompkins, tot West 85th Street, New York, read of this animal, and called up the Herald Tribune, telling of her dog, a Great Dane, who was at least equally accomplished.

[p. 865]

[paragraph continues] A reporter went to interview the dog, and handed him a piece of candy. "Thank you!" said the dog.

In the city of Northampton, England--see Lloyd's Weekly News (London), March 2, 1912--a detective chased a burglar, who had entered a hardware store. The burglar got away. The detective went back, and got into the store. There were objects hanging on hooks, overhead. "By coincidence," just as the detective passed under one of them, it fell. It was a scythe-blade. It cut off his ear. Now I am upon familiar ground; there are suggestions in this story that correlate with suggestions in other stories.

"A bank in Blackpool was robbed, in broad daylight, on Saturday, in mysterious circumstances"--so says the London Daily Telegraph, Aug. 7, 1926. It was one of the largest establishments in town--the Blackpool branch of the Midland Bank. At noon, Saturday, while the doors were closing, an official of the Corporation Tramways Department went into the building, with a bag, which contained L800, in Treasury notes. In the presence of about twenty-five customers, he placed the bag upon a counter. Then the doorman unlocked the front door for him to go out, and then return with another amount of money, in silver, from a motor van. The bag had vanished from the counter. It was a large, leather bag. Nobody could, without making himself conspicuous, try to conceal it. Nobody wearing a maternity cloak was reported.

In the afternoon, in a side street, near the bank, the bag was found, and was taken to a police station. But the lock on it was peculiar and complicated, and the police could not open it. An official of the Tramways Department was sent for. When the Tramways man arrived with the key, no money was found in the bag. If a bag can vanish from a bank, without passing the doorman, I record no marvel in telling of money that vanished from a bag, though maybe the bag had not been opened.

Well, then, there's nothing marvelous about it, if from a locked drawer of Mrs. Bradley's bureau, money disappeared. New York Times, Feb. 28, 1874--Mrs. Lydia Bradley, of Peoria, Ill., "mysteriously robbed." There were other occurrences; and they, too, were anything but marvelous. Pictures came down from the walls, and furniture sauntered about the place. Stoves slung their lids at people.

[p. 866]

[paragraph continues] Such doings have often been reported from houses, in the throes of poltergeist disturbances. There are many records of pictures that couldn't be kept hanging on walls. Chairs and tables have been known to form in orderly fashion, three or four abreast, and parade. In Mrs. Bradley's home, the doings were in the presence of the housemaid, Margaret Corvell. So the girl was suspected, and one time, in the midst of pranks by things that are ordinarily so staid and settled, somebody held her hands. While her hands were held, a loud crash was heard. A piano, which up to that moment had been behaving itself properly, joined in. But the girl was accused. She confessed to everything, including the stealing of the money, except whatever had occurred when her hands were held. There are dozens of poltergeist cases, in which the girl--oftenest a young housemaid--has confessed to all particulars, except things that occurred while she was held, tied, or being knocked about. Ignoring these omissions, accounts by investigators end with the satisfactory explanation that the girl had confessed.

In the Home News (Bronx, N. Y.), Sept. 25, 1927, is a story of "ghost-like depredations." In the town of Barberton, Ohio, lived an uncatchable thief. I call attention to an element often of openness, often of defiance, that will appear in many of our stories. It is as if there are criminals, and sometimes mischievous fellows, who can do unaccountable things and delight in mystifying their victims, confident that they cannot be caught. For ten years the uncatchable thief of Barberton had been operating, periodically. In some periods, as if to show off his talents, he returned to the same house half a dozen times.

In January, 1925, the police of London were in the state of mind of the rest of us, when we try to solve crossword puzzles that have been filled in with alleged Scotch dialect, obsolete terms, and names of improbable South American rodents. Somebody was playing a game, unfairly making it difficult. The things that he did were what a crossword author would call "vars." He was called the "cat burglar." Since his time, many minor fellows have been so named. The newspapers stressed what they called this criminal's uncanny ability to enter houses, but I think that the stress should have been upon his knowledge of just where to go, after entering houses,

[p. 867]

[paragraph continues] Whether he had the property of invisibility or not, residents of Mayfair reported losses of money and jewelry that could not be more mystifying if an invisible being had come in through doors or windows without having to open them, and had strolled through rooms, sizing up the lay of things. He was called the "cat burglar," because there was no conventional way of accounting for his entrances, except by thinking that he had climbed up the sides of houses--always knowing just what room to climb to--climbing with a skill that no cat has ever had. Sometimes it was said that marks were seen on drain pipes and on window sills. Just so long as the police can say something, that is accepted as next best to doing something. Of course, in this respect, I'd not pick out any one profession.

The "cat burglar" piled up jewelry that would satisfy anybody's dream of expensive junk, and then he vanished, maybe not in a thin, greenish vapor, but anyway in an atmosphere of the unfair mystification of crosswords that have been made difficult with "vars" and "obs." Perhaps marks were found on drain pipes and on window sills. But only logicians think that anything has any exclusive meaning. If I had the power of invisibly entering houses, but preferred to turn off suspicions, I'd make marks on drain pipes and window sills. Everything that ever has meant anything has just as truly meant something else. Otherwise experts, called to testify, at trials, would not be the fantastic exhibits that they so often are.

New York Evening Post, March 14, 1928--people in a block of houses, in the Third District of Vienna, terrorized. They were "haunted by a mysterious person," who entered houses, and stole small objects, never taking money, doing these things just to show what he could do. Then, from dusk to dawn, the police formed in a cordon around this block, and at approaches to it stationed police dogs. The disappearances of small objects, of little value, continued. There were stories of this "uncanny burglar or maniac" having been seen, "running lizardwise along moonlit roofs." My own notion is that nothing was seen running along roofs. There was such excitement that the "highest authorities" of Vienna University offered their mentalities for the help of the baffled policemen and their dogs. I wish I could record an intellectual contest between college professors

[p. 868]

and dogs; there might be some glee for my malices. There are probably many college professors, who at times read of strange crimes, and sympathize with civilization, because they had not taken to detective work. However, nothing more was said of the professors who offered to help the cops and the dogs. But there was a challenge here, and I am sorry to note that it was not accepted. It would have been a crowning show-off, if this perhaps occult sportsman had entered the homes of some of these "highest authorities," and had stolen from them whatever it is by which "highest authorities" maintain their authority, or had robbed them of their pants. But he did not rise to this opportunity. After we have more data, it will be my expression that probably he could not practice outside this one block of houses. However, he got into a house in which lived a policeman, and he went to the policeman's bedroom. He touched nothing else, but stole the policeman's revolver.

Upon the afternoon of June 18, 1907, occurred one of the most sensational, insolent, contemptible, or magnificent thefts in the annals of crime, as viewed by most Englishmen; or a crime not without a little interest to Americans. On a table, on the lawn back of the grandstand, at Ascot, the Ascot Cup was upon exhibition, 13 inches high, and 6 inches in diameter; 20-carat gold; weight 68 ounces. The cup was guarded by a policeman and by a representative of the makers. The story is told, in the London Times, June 19th. Presumably all around was a crowd, kept at a distance by the policeman, though, according to the standards of the Times, in the year 1907, it was not dignified to go into details much. From what I know of the religion of the Turf, in England, I assume that there was a crowd of devotees, looking worshipfully at this ikon.

It wasn't there.

About this time, there were a place and a time and a treasure that were worthy the attention of, or that were a challenge to, any magician. The place was Dublin Castle. Outside, day and night, a policeman and a soldier were on duty. Within a distance of fifty yards were the headquarters of the Dublin metropolitan police; of the Royal Irish Constabulary; the Dublin detective force; the military garrison. It was at the time of the Irish International Exhibition, at Dublin. Upon the 10th of July, King Edward and Queen Alexandra

[p. 869]

were to arrive to visit the Exhibition. In a safe in the strong room of the Castle had been kept the jewels that were worn by the Lord Lieutenant, upon State occasions. They were a barbaric pile of bracelets, rings, and other insignia, of a value of $250,000.

And of course. They had disappeared about the time of the disappearance of the Ascot Cup: sometime between June firth and July 6th.

All investigations came to nothing. For about twenty-four years nothing new came out. Then, according to a dispatch from London to the New York Times, Sept. 6, 1931, there was a report of attempted negotiations with the Dublin authorities, or an offer by which, "under certain conditions," the jewels would be returned. If this rumor were authentic, the remarkable part is that the various jeweled objects had not been broken up, but for twenty-four years had been kept intact. This is the look of the stunt.

But what I am worrying about is the big dog who said "Good morning!" and disappeared in a thin, greenish vapor. I am not satisfied with my explanation of why I rejected him. Considering some of my acceptances, it seems so illogical to turn down the dog who said "Good morning!"--except that only to the purist, or the scholar, can there be either the logical or the illogical. We have to get along with the logical-illogical, in our existence of the hyphen. Everything that is said to be logical is somewhere out of agreement with something, and everything that is said to be illogical is somewhere in agreement with something.

I need not worry about the big dog who said "Good morning!" If, considering some of my acceptances, I inconsistently turn him down, I am consistent with something else, and that is the need in every mind to turn down something--the need in every mind that believes, or accepts anything, to consider something else silly, preposterous, false, evil, immoral, terrible--taboo. It is not necessary that we should all agree in being revolted, shocked, or contemptuous. Some of us take Jehovah, and some of us take Allah, to despise, or to be amused with. To give it limits within which to seem to be, and to give it contrasts by which to seem to be, every mind must practice exclusions.

I draw my line at the dog who said "Good morning!" and disappeared

[p. 870]

in a thin, greenish vapor. He is a symbol of the false and arbitrary and unreasonable and inconsistent--though of course also the reasonable and consistent--limit, which everybody must somewhere set, in order to pretend to be.

You can't fool me with that dog-story.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

6

CONSERVATISM is our opposition. But I am in considerable sympathy with conservatives. I am often lazy, myself.

It's evenings, when I'm somewhat played out, when I'm likely to be most conservative. Everything that is highest and noblest in my composition is most pronounced when I'm not good for much. I may be quite savage, mornings: but, as my energy plays out, I become nobler and nobler, and lazier, and conservativer. Most likely my last utterance will be a platitude, if I've been dying long enough. If not, I shall probably laugh.

I like to read my Evening Newspaper comfortably. And it is uncomfortably that I come upon any new idea, or suggestion of the new, in an Evening Newspaper. It's a botheration, and I don't understand it, and it will cost me some thinking--oh, well, I'll clip it out, anyway.

But where are the scissors? But they aren't. Has anybody a pin? Nobody has. There was a time when one could maneuver over to the edge of a carpet, without having to leave one's chair, and pull up a tack. But everybody has rugs, nowadays. Oh, well, let it go.

Something in a newspaper about a mysterious hair-clipper. This is a new department of data, though hair-stealing links with other mysterious thefts. Where's a pin? Oh, well, there's nothing in particular about this matter of hair-clipping. A petty thief stole hair to sell, of course. Vague suggestions hanging over from reading of various phases of "black magic"--but, if there is a market for human hair, hair-clippers are accounted for--still--

And so I could go on, every now and then, for many years, feeling

[p. 871]

a haunt of a new idea, but feeling more comfortable, if doing nothing about it. But, daytimes, I go to Libraries, and, if several times, close together, something that is new to me, in newspapers, attracts my attention, I get the power somewhere to make a note of it.

These vague, new ideas that flutter momentarily in every mind--sometimes they're as hard to catch as is the moment they flutter in. It's like trying to pin a butterfly without catching it. They're gone. They can't develop, because one doesn't, or can't, note them, and collect notes. We'd all be somewhat enlightened--if that would be any good to us--were it not for easy chairs. Where's a pin? Hereafter I'm going to have a pet porcupine around the house. One can't learn much and also be comfortable. One can't learn much and let anybody else be comfortable.

Two cases of hairdressers' windows broken, and women's switches stolen. Probably to sell to other hairdressers.

I noted this, just as an oddity:

London Daily Chronicle, July 9, 1913--Paris--wealthy engineer, named Leramgourg, arrested. "At Leramgourg's residence, the police found locks of hair of 94 women."

I put this item with others upon freaks of collectors. In Oklahoma City, July, 1907, somebody collected ears. Bodies of three men--ears cut off. In April, 1913, a collector, who was known as Jack the Slipper-snatcher, operated in the subways of New York City. Girl going up the steps of a subway exit--one foot up from a step--the snatch of her slipper--

The fantastic, or the amusing--but it is as close to the appalling as is the beautiful to the hideous--

The murderer of the Conners child, in New York, in July, 1916, hacked hair from his victim.

I have only two records of male victims of hair-clippers. I conceive that once upon a time abundant whiskers were tempting. Where do manufacturers of false whiskers get their material? Both of these victims were children. There was a case of three gypsy women, who waylaid a boy, aged eight, and cut off his hair. That they were gypsies may be of occult suggestion, but this could be simply the theft of something that could be sold.

[p. 872]

A case is told of, in the People (London), Jan. 23, 1921. The residents of Glenshamrock Farm, Anchenleck, Ayrshire, Scotland, awoke one morning to find that during the night a burglar had made off with various articles. There were screams from the bedroom of a young female member of the household. Upon awakening, she had learned that her hair had been cut off. I say that this case was told of--but a case of what? And, in the New York Sun, March 7, 1928--a case of what? An old man had entered the home of Angelo Nappi, 83 1/2 Garside Street, Newark, N. J., and had cut off the hair of his three little daughters.

Old age and youth--male and female--there is the haunt, in stories of hair-clippers, of something that is not of hair-selling. If Jack the Slipper-snatcher were in the second-hand business, he'd have maneuvered girls into having both feet in the air.

I take a story from the Medium and Daybreak, Dec. 13, 1889. It was copied from the Brockville (Ontario) Daily Times, November 13th. There were doings in the home of George Dagg, a farmer, living in the Township of Clarendon, Province of Quebec, Canada. With Dagg lived his wife, two young children, and a little girl, aged i1, Dina McLean, who had been adopted from an orphan asylum. The report from which I quote was the result of investigations by Percy Woodcock. I know that that sounds fictitious, but just the same Percy Woodcock was a well-known painter. Also Mr. Woodcock was a spiritualist. It could be that he colored as much on paper as on canvas.

The first of the "uncanny" occurrences--as they are so persistently called by persons who do not realize how common they are--was upon September 15th. Windowpanes broke. There were unaccountable fires--as many as eight a day. Stones of unknown origin were thrown. A large stone struck one of the children, and "strange to say, it did not hurt her in the least"

And I give my opinion that, in comments upon my writings, my madness has been over-emphasized. Of course I couldn't pass any alienist's examination--but could any alienist? But when I come upon a detail like this of stones striking people harmlessly, in an Ontario newspaper, and have noted the same detail in a story in a Constantinople newspaper, and have come upon it in newspapers

[p. 873]

of Adelaide, South Australia, and Cornwall, England, and other places--and when I note that it is no standardized detail of ghost stories, so that probably not one of the writers had ever heard of anything of the kind before--I'd consider myself sane and reasonable in giving heed to this, if there were sanity and reasonableness.

"One afternoon, little Dina felt her hair, which hung in a long braid down her back, suddenly pulled, and, on crying out, the family found her braid almost cut off, simply hanging by a few hairs. On the same day, the little boy said that something had pulled his hair all over. Immediately it was seen by his mother that his hair, also, had been cut off, in chunks, as it were, all over his head."

Woodcock told of a voice that was heard. This is an element that does not appear in the great majority of cases of poltergeist disturbances. His story is of conversations that were carried on between him and an invisible being. There was a feud between the Daggs and neighbors named Wallace; and "the voice" accused Mrs. Wallace of having sent him, or her, or it, or whatever, to persecute the Daggs. Most of the time, the house was crowded. When this accusation was heard, a number of farmers went to the home of the Wallaces, and returned with Mrs. Wallace. The story is that "the voice" again accused Mrs. Wallace, but then made statements that were so inconsistent that it was not believed. It was an obscene voice, and Mr. Woodcock was shocked. He reasoned with it, pointing out that there were farmeresses present. And "the voice" was ashamed of itself. It repented. It sang a hymn and departed.

I take something from the Religio-Philosophical Journal, Oct. 4, 1873, and following issues, as copied from the Durand (Wisconsin) Times, and other newspapers. Home of Mr. Lynch, 14 miles from Menomonie, Wisconsin--had moved from Indiana, a few years before, and was living with a second wife and the four children of the first wife. She had died shortly before he had moved. Lynch went to town one day, and returned with a dress for his wife. Soon afterward, this dress was found in the barn, slashed to shreds. Objects all over the house vanished. Lynch bought another dress. This was found, in the barn, cut down to fit one of the children. Eggs rose from tables, teacups leaped, and a pan of soft soap wandered from room to room. One of the children, a boy, aged six, was

[p. 874]

thought to be playing tricks, because phenomena centered around him. Nobody lambasted him until he confessed, but he was tied in a chair--teacups as lively as ever.

There was the usual openness. No midnight mysteries of a haunted house. Sightseers were arriving in such numbers that there was no room in the house for them. Several hundred of them lounged outside, sitting on fences or leaning against anything that would hold them up, ready for a dash into the house, at any announcement of doings.

"One day one of the children, named Rena, was standing close to Mrs. Lynch. Her hair was sheared off, close to her scalp, and vanished."

There have been single instances, and there have been hair-clipping scares that were attributed to "mass psychology." Also I have noted cases in which girls were accused of having cut off their own hair, hoping to take up some newspaper space. My only reason for doubt is the satisfactory endings of these accounts, with statements that the girls had confessed.

There were accounts in the London newspapers, of Dec. 2 and 10, 1922, of a scare in places east and west of London. In a street, in Uxbridge, Middlesex, a woman found that her braid had been cut off. She had been aware of no such operation, but remembered that, in a crowd, her hat had been pushed over her eyes. According to the stories, women were terrorized by "a vanishing man." "Disappeared as if by magic." It is an uncatchable again, a defiant fellow, operating openly, as if confident that he could not be caught. Note that these are not ghost stories. They are stories of human beings, who seemed to have ghostly qualities, or powers. Dorris Whiting, aged 17, approaching her home, in the village of Orpington, saw a man, leaning on the gate. As she was passing him, he grabbed her, and cut off her hair. The girl screamed, and her father and brother ran to her. They searched, but the clipper was unfindable. A maid, employed by Mrs. Glanfield, of Crofton Hall, Orpington, was pounced upon by a man, who hacked off a handful of her hair. He vanished. There was excitement in Orpington, at the end of a bus route. A girl exclaimed that much of her hair had been cut off. Merely this does not seem mysterious; it seems that a deft

[p. 875]

fellow could have done this without being seen by the other passengers. But other girls were saying whatever girls say when they discover that their hair has been cut off. At Enfield, a girl named Brand, employed as a typist, at the Constitutional Club, was near the club house, one morning, about eight o'clock, when a man grabbed her and cut off her hair. "No trace of him was found, though the search was taken up a minute after the outrage."

I have noted occurrences in London, which look as if there was a desire, not generally for hair, or for anybody's hair, but for the hair, and then more hair, of one victim. See the Kensington (London) Express, Aug. 23, 5907. Twice a girl's hair had been clipped. In a London street, she felt a clip, the third time. The girl accused a man. He was arrested and was arraigned at the Mansion House. Neither the girl nor anybody else had seen him as a clipper, but he had "walked sharply away," and when accused had run. Nothing was said of either scissors or hair in any quantity found in his possession. The hair that had been cut off was not found. But "there was some hair on his jacket," and he was found guilty and was fined.

I have record of another case of "mass psychology." It is my expression that the description "mass psychology" does partly apply to it, just as would "horizontal ineptitude," or "metacarpal iridescence," or any other idea, or combination of ideas, apply, to some degree, to anything. In an existence of the hyphen, it is impossible to be altogether wrong--or right. This is why it is so hard to learn anything. It is hard to overcome that which cannot be altogether wrong with that which cannot be altogether right. I look forward to the time when I shall refuse to learn another thing, having accumulated errors enough.

In the Spiritualist, July 21, 1876, was published a story of "mass excitement" in Nanking and other cities of China. Uncatchables, who could not even be seen, were cutting off the pigtails of Chinamen, and there was a panic. More of the story was told, but I preferred to take accounts from a local newspaper. I give details, as I found them, in various issues of the North China Herald, from May 20 to Sept. 16, 1876.

Panic in Nanking and other towns, and its spread to Shanghai--

[p. 876]

people believed that invisibles were cutting off their pigtails. It was said that, regard this  of the invisibles as one would, there was no doubt that a number of pigtails had been cut off, and that great alarm existed, in consequence. "Many Chinamen have lost their tails, and we can hardly admit that the imaginary spirits are real men with steel shears, for it could hardly happen that someone would not be detected, before this, in the act of cutting. The most likely explanation is that the agents, whoever they may be, operate by means of some potent acid."

Panic spreading to Hangchow--"Numerous cases are reported, but few of them are authentic." "The cases are increasing daily."

In the streets of Shanghai, men, fearing attacks behind, were holding their pigtails in front of them. Quack doctors were advertising charms. Probably the reputable physicians, devoted to their own incantations, were indignant about this. The Military Commandant stationed soldiers in various parts of the city. "Suffice it to mention that, amongst much that is untrustworthy, there seem good grounds for believing that some children have actually lost part of their tails."

Sellers of charms suspected of cutting off pigtails, to stimulate business--mischievous children suspected--missionaries accused, and anti-Christian placards appearing in public places--rumors of drops of ink thrown in people's faces, "by invisible agencies," and people so treated dying--inhabitants of Woosin and Soochow mad with terror--the lynching of suspected persons--arrests and torture. People had suspended work, and had organized into guards. At Soo-chow broke out "the crushing mania," or a belief that at night people were crushed in their beds. The beating of gongs was taken up so that the supply ran out, and anybody who wanted a gong had to wait for one to be made.

The standardized way of telling of such a scare is to elaborate upon the extremities at the climax of the excitement, and to ignore, or slightingly to touch upon, the incidents that preceded. There was a panic, or a mania, in China. Perhaps there was. I have no Chinaman's account. For all I know, some Chinaman may have sent an account to his newspaper, of us, beating gongs, during the parrot-disease scare, of the year 1929, having seen a janitor knocking

[p. 877]

off dust from the cover of an ash can. There was  considerable excitement that was the product of delusions: nevertheless it does seem acceptable that there were cases of mysterious hair-clipping.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

7

RABID vampires--and froth on their bloody mouths. See the New York Times, Sept. 5, 1931--rabies in vampire bats, reported from the island of Trinidad. Or a jungle at night--darkness and dankness, tangle and murk--and little white streaks that are purities in the dark--pure, white froths on the bloody mouths of flying bats--or that there is nothing that is beautiful and white, aglow against tangle and dark, that is not symbolized by froth on a vampire's mouth.

I note that it is ten minutes past nine in the morning. At ten minutes past nine, tonight, if I think of this matter--and can reach a pencil, without having to get up from my chair--though sometimes I can scrawl a little with the burnt end of a match--I shall probably make a note to strike out those rabid bats, with froth on their bloody mouths. I shall be prim and austere, all played out, after my labors of the day, and with my horse powers stabled for the night. My better self is ascendant when my energy is low. The best literary standards are affronted by those sensational bats.

I now have a theory that our existence, as a whole, is an organism that is very old--a globular thing within a starry shell, afloat in a super-existence in which there may be countless other organisms--and that we, as cells in its composition, partake of, and are ruled by, its permeating senility. The theologians have recognized that the ideal is the imitation of God. If we be a part of such an organic thing, this thing is God to us, as I am God to the cells that compose me. When I see myself, and cats, and dogs losing irregularities of conduct, and approaching the irreproachable, with advancing age, I see that what is ennobling us

[p. 878]

is senility. I conclude that the virtues, the austerities, the proprieties are ideal in our existence, because they are imitations of the state of a whole existence, which is very old, good, and beyond reproach. The ideal state is meekness, or humility, or the semi-invalid state of the old. Year after year I am becoming nobler and nobler. If I can live to be decrepit enough, I shall be a saint.

It may be that there are vampires other than vampire bats. I have wondered at the specialization of appetite in the traditional stories of vampires. If blood be desired, why not the blood of cattle and sheep? According to many stories there have been unexplained attacks upon human beings; also there have been countless outrages upon other animals.

Possibly the remote ancestors of human beings were apes, though no evolutionist has made clear to me reasons for doubting the equally plausible theory that apes have either ascended, or descended, from humans. Still, I think that humans may have evolved from apes, because the simians openly imitate humans, as if conscious of a higher state, whereas the humans who act like apes are likely to deny it when criticized. Slashers and rippers of cattle may be throw-backs to the ape-era. But, though it is said that, in the Kenya Colony, Africa, baboons sometimes mutilate cattle, I'd not say that the case against them has been made out. London Daily Mail, May 18, 1925--that, for some years, an alarming epidemic of sheep-slashing and cattle-ripping had been breaking out, in the month of April, on Kenya stock ranches. Natives were blamed, but then it was learned that their cattle, too, had been attacked. Then it was said to be proved that chacma baboons were the marauders. Possibly the baboons, too, were unjustly blamed. Then what? The wounds were long, deep cuts, as if vicious slashes with a knife; but it was explained that baboons kill by ripping with their thumbnails.

The most widely known case of cattle-mutilation is that in which was involved a young lawyer, George Edalji, son of a Hindu, who was a clergyman in the village of Wyrley, Staffordshire, England. The first of a series of outrages occurred upon the night of Feb. 2, 1903. A valuable horse was ripped. Then, at intervals, up to August 27th, there were mutilations of horses, cows, and sheep.

[p. 879]

[paragraph continues] Suspicion was directed to Edalji, because of anonymous letters, accusing him.

After the mutilation of a horse, August 27th, Edalji was arrested. The police searched his house, and, according to them, found an old coat, upon which were bloodstains. In the presence of Edalji's parents and his sister, the police said that there were horse hairs upon this coat. The coat was taken to the police station, where Dr. Butler, the police surgeon, examined it, reporting that upon it he had found twenty-nine horse hairs. The police said that shoes worn by Edalji exactly fitted tracks in the field, where the horse had been mutilated. They learned that the young man had been away from home, that night, "taking a walk," as told by him. The case against Edalji convinced a jury, which found him guilty, and he was sentenced to seven years, penal servitude.

I now have a theory that our existence is a phantom--that it died, long ago, probably of old age--that the thing is a ghost. So the unreality of its composition--its phantom justice and make-believe juries and incredible judges. There seems to be a ghostly justice surviving in the old spook, having the ghost's liking for public appearances, at times. Let there be publicity enough, and Justice prevails. In a Dreyfus case, when the attention of the world is attracted, Justice, after much delay, and after a fashion, appears. Probably in the prison with Edalji were other prisoners who had been sent there, about as he had been sent. They stayed there. But Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, with much publicity, took up Edalji's case. In his account, in Great Stories of Real Life, Doyle says that when the police inspector found the old coat, upon which, according to him, there were horse hairs, Mrs. Edalji and Miss Edalji examined it and denied that there was a horse hair upon it: that Edalji's father said: "You can take the coat. I am satisfied that there is no horse hair on it." Doyle's statements imply that somewhere near the police station was a stable. As to the statement that Edalji's shoes exactly fitted tracks in the field, where the horse was ripped, Doyle says that the outrage occurred just outside a large colliery, and that hundreds of excited miners had swarmed over the place, making it impossible to pick out any one track. Because of Doyle's disclosures--so it is said--or because of the publicity,

[p. 880]

the Government appointed a Committee to investigate, and the report of this Committee was that Edalji had been wrongfully convicted.

Sometimes slashers of cattle have been caught, and, when called upon to explain, have said that they had obeyed an "irresistible impulse." The better-educated of these unresisting ones transform the rude word "slasher" into "vivisectionist," and, instead of sneaking into fields at night, work at regular hours, in their laboratories. There are persons who wonder at the state of mind of the people in general, back in times when the torture of humans was sanctioned. The guts of a man were dragged out for the glory of God. "Abdominal exploration" of a dog is for the glory of Science. The state of mind that was, and the state of mind that is, are about the same, and the unpleasant features of anything are glossed over, so long as mainly anything is glorious.

According to a reconsideration, by the English Government, in the Edalji case, the slasher of cattle, of Wyrley, remained uncaught. In the summer of 1907, in the same region, again there was slashing.

Aug. 22, 1907--a horse mutilated, near Wyrley. It was said that blood had been found on the horns of a cow, and that the horse had been gored. Five nights later, two horses, in another field, were slashed so that they died. September 8--horse slashed, at Breenwood, Staffordshire. A young butcher, named Morgan, was accused, but he was able to show that he had been in his home, at the time. For about a month injuries to horses continued to be reported. They had been injured "by barbed wires," or "by nails projecting from fences."

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 881]

  

8

SOME time in the year 1867, a fishing smack sailed from Boston. One of the sailors was a Portuguese, who called himself "James Brown." Two of the crew were missing, and were searched for. The captain went into the hold. He held up his lantern, and saw the body of one of these men, in the clutches of "Brown," who was sucking blood from it. Near by was the body of the other sailor. It was bloodless. "Brown" was tried, convicted, and sentenced to be hanged, but President Johnson commuted the sentence to life imprisonment. In October, 1892, the vampire was transferred from the Ohio Penitentiary to the National Asylum, Washington, D. C., and his story was re-told in the newspapers. See the Brooklyn Eagle, Nov. 4, 1892.

Ottawa Free Press, Sept. 17, 1910--that, near the town of Galazanna, Portugal, a child had been found dead, in a field. The corpse was bloodless. The child had been seen last with a man named Salvarrey. He was arrested, and confessed that he was a vampire.

See the New York Sun, April 14, 1931, for an account of the murders of nine persons, all but one of them females, which in the year 1929 terrorized the people of Dusseldorf, Germany. The murderer, Peter Kurten, was caught. At his trial, he made no defense, and described himself as a vampire.

I have a collection of stories of children, upon whom, at night, small wounds appeared. Rather to my own wonderment, considering that I am a theorist, I have not jumped to the conclusion that these stories are data of vampires, but have thought the explanation of rat bites satisfactory enough. But, in the Yorkshire Evening Argus, March 13, 1924, I came upon a rat story that seems queer. Inquest upon the death of Martha Senior, aged 68, of New Street, Batley. "On the toes and fingers were a lot of wounds that rather suggested rat bites." It was said that these little wounds could

[p. 882]

have had nothing to do with the woman's death, which, according to the coroner, was from valvular heart disease. The only explanation acceptable to the coroner was that, before the police took charge of the body, the woman must have been dead considerable time, during which rats mutilated the corpse. But Mrs. Elizabeth Lake, a neighbor, testified that she had found Mrs. Senior lying on the floor, and that Mrs. Senior had told her that she was dying. This statement meant that the woman had been attacked by something, before dying. The coroner disposed of it by saying that the woman must have been dead considerable time, before the body was found, and that Mrs. Lake was mistaken in thinking that Mrs. Senior had spoken to her.

The fun of everything, in our existence of comedy-tragedy--and I was suspicious of the story of terrorized Chinamen, as told by English reporters, because it was a story of panic that omitted the jokes--mania without the smile. Every fiendish occurrence that gnashes its circumstances, and sinks its particulars into a victim, wags a joke. In June, 1899, there was, in many parts of the U. S. A., much amusement. Something, in New York City, Washington, and Chicago, was sending people to hospitals. I don't recommend the beating of a gong to drive away a hellish thing: but I think that that treatment is as enlightened as is giving to it a funny name. Hospitals of Ann Arbor, Mich.; Toledo, Ohio; Rochester, N. Y.; Reading, Pa.--

"The kissing bug," it was called.

The story of the origin of the "kissing bug" scare-joke in that, upon the 19th of June, 1899, a Washington newspaper man, hearing of an unusual number of persons, who, at the Emergency Hospital, had applied for treatment for "bug bites," investigated, learning of "a very noticeable number of patients," who were suffering with swellings, mostly upon their lips, "apparently the result of insect bites." According to Dr. L. O. Howard, writing in Popular Science Monthly, 56-31, there were six insects, in the United States, that could inflict dangerous bites, or punctures, but all of them were of uncommon occurrence. So Dr. Howard rejected the insect-explanation. In his opinion there had arisen a senseless scare, like

[p. 883]

those of former times, in southern Europe, when hosts of hysterical persons imagined that tarantulas had bitten them.

This is "mass psychology" again--or the Taboo-explanation. To the regret of my contrariness, it is impossible for me utterly to disagree with anybody. I think with Dr. Howard that the "kissing bug" scare was like the tarantula scares. But it could be that some of those people of southern Europe did not merely imagine that something was biting them. If somebody should like to write a book, but is like millions of persons who would like to write books, but fortunately don't know just what to write books about, I suggest a study of scares, with the idea of showing that they were not altogether hysteria and mass psychology, and that there may have been something to be scared about.

New York Herald, July 9--names and addresses of it persons, who upon one day (8th of July) had either scared their bodies into producing swellings, or had been bitten by something that the scientists refused to believe existed. And people who were bitten captured insects. Entomological News, September, 1899--some of these insects, which were sent to the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, were house flies, bees, beetles, and even a butterfly. There are wings of vampires that lull with scientific articles. See Taboo, as represented by Dr. E. Murray-Aaron, writing in the Scientific American, July 22, 1899--nothing but sensation-mongering from Richmond, Va., to Augusta, Me.

There was a sensational horse, in Cincinnati. His jaw swelled. Would a child, aged. four, be too young for "mass psychology"? I suppose not. I am not denying that there was much mass psychology in this. Cedar Falls, Iowa--a four-year-old child bitten. Trenton, N. J.--Helen Lersch, two years old, bitten--died. Bay Shore, L. I.--a child, aged two, bitten.

Later, I shall give instances of sizeable wounds that have appeared upon people: but, in this chapter, I am considering tiny punctures that may not have been either rat bites or insect stings. An account, in the Chicago Tribune, July 11, 1899, is suggestive of traditional vampire stories. A woman had been bitten. "The marks of two small incisors could be seen."

I don't know whether I am of a cruel and bloodthirsty disposition,

[p. 884]

or not. Most likely I am, but not more so than any other historian. Or, conforming to the conditions of our existence, I am amiable-bloodthirsty. In my desire for vampires, which is not in the least a queer desire, inasmuch as I have a theory that there are vampires, I was not satisfied with the "kissing bug": what I wanted was an account of hospital cases, not in the summer time. The insect-explanation, even though it was not upheld by Taboo, is too much at home, in the summer time. I needed an account, not in the summer time, to fill out my collection of data. Any collector will understand how pleased I was to come upon--London Daily Mail, April 20, 1920--an account of human suffering. "A number of people in country places have been bitten by some mysterious creature with a very poisonous fang. It is rare for any sort of poisonous bite or sting to occur before summer, and as a rule the culprit is known. This spring doctors have attended case after case, where the swellings have been sudden and severe, though there is little sign of the bite, itself." I have record of several winter time cases. See La Nature, (Supplement) Jan. 16, 1897--that, while filling a stove with coal, in a house in the Rue de la Tour, Paris, a concierge had felt a stinging sensation upon his arm, which swelled. He was taken to a hospital, where he died. People in the house said that they had seen gigantic wasps entering the house by way of stovepipes.

But the most mysterious of cases of insect bites, or alleged insect bites, is that of the small wound that led to the death of Lord Carnarvon, if be accepted that his death, and the deaths of fourteen other persons, were in any especial way related to the opening, or the violation, of the tomb of Tut-Ankh-Amen. Lord Carnarvon was stung by what was supposed to be an insect. What was said to be blood poisoning set in. What was said to be septic pneumonia followed.

The stories of the "kissing bug" differ from vampire stories, in that victims were painfully wounded. But there was an occurrence in Upper Broadway, New York City, May 7, 1909, that may be more in agreement. It seems possible that a woman could, in a street crowd, viciously jab several persons with a hat pin, without being detected: but it does seem unlikely that she could enjoy

[p. 885]

such a stroll, jabbing at least five men and a woman, before being interfered with. A Broadway policeman learned that upon somebody a small wound, as if made by a hat pin, had appeared. Four other men and a woman joined the crowd and showed that they had been similarly wounded. The policeman arrested, as the cause of the excitement, a woman, who told that her name was Mary Maloney, and gave a false address.

Perhaps she had no address. She may have been guilty, but perhaps she was shabby. If somebody must be arrested, it is wise to pick out one who does not look very self-defensive. "Plead guilty and you'll get off with a light sentence." It is dangerous to be anywhere near any scene of crime, considering the way detectives pick up "suspects," even an hour or so later, obviously arguing that when somebody commits a crime, he hangs around to be suspected.

I have never been jabbed with a hat pin, but I have sat on pointed things, and my responses were so energetic that I suspect that at least six persons were not jabbed with a hat pin, before the jabber was caught. See data to come, that indicate that people may be--by some means at present not understood--wounded, and not know it until later. Also that a woman was accused makes me doubt that the marauder was caught. Women don't do such things. I have a long list of Jacks, ranging from the rippers and stranglers to the egg throwers and the ink squirters: but Mary Maloney is the only alleged Jill in my collection. Women don't do such things. They have their own deviltries.

Upon Dec. 4, 1913, Mrs. Wesley Graff, who sat in a box, in the Lyric Theatre, New York City, felt something scratching her hand. She felt a pain like the sting of a wasp, and, staggering from her chair, fainted, first accusing a young man near her. The manager of the theater held the young man, and called the police. Policemen searched, and found, on the floor, a common darning needle. It was their theory that the young man was a white slaver, who by means of a hypodermic injection, had sought to render a victim insensible, probably having waiting outside, a cab, to which he, explaining that he was her companion, would carry her. There were marks upon Mrs. Graff's arm, but it seems that they were not made by a darning needle.

[p. 886]

With the idea that the needle might be tipped with a drug, the police sent it to a chemist. To my astonishment, I record that he reported that he had found neither drug, nor poison, on it. A strange circumstance is that, at this place, where a woman was wounded somewhat as if by a darning needle, was found this darning needle, which was suggestive of a commonplace explanation.

Then arose the story that a gang of white slavers was operating in the city. But in the newspapers were published interviews with physicians, who stated that they knew of no drug by which women could be affected so as to make them easily abductable, because the pain of an injection would give minutes of warning, before a victim could be rendered helpless. But it may be that something, or somebody, was abroad, mysteriously wounding women. In the Brooklyn Eagle, December 6, it was said that, in a period of two weeks, the Committee of Fourteen, of New York City, had heard a dozen complaints of mysterious, minor attacks upon women, and had investigated, but had been unable to learn anything definite in any case.

See back to the story of the Chicago woman, and "marks of two small incisors." Upon Mrs. Graff's arm were two little punctures. December 29--girl named Marian Brindle said that something had stung her. Upon her arm were two little punctures.

It may be that, in the period of the scare in New York City, the first occurrence of which was in November, 1913, a vampire was abroad. It could be that we pick up the trail more than a year before this time. In October, 1912, Miss Jean Milne, aged 67, was living alone in her home, in West Ferry, Dundee, Scotland. London Times, Nov. 5, 1912--the finding of her body. The woman had been beaten, presumably with a poker, which was found, according to the account in the Times: but it was said that, though she had been struck on the head, her skull was not fractured: so her death was not altogether accounted for. There was more of this story, in the London Weekly Dispatch, Nov. 24, 1912. Upon this body were found perforations, as if having been made by a fork.

Late at night, Feb. 2, 1913, the body of a woman was found on the tracks of the London Underground Railway, near the Kensington High-street station. The body had been run over, and the head

[p. 887]

had been cut off. The body was identified as that of Miss Maud Frances Davies, who, alone, had been traveling around the world, and, earlier in the day, had, upon a ship train, arrived in London. She had friends and relatives in South Kensington, and presumably she was on her way to visit them. But the explanation at the inquest (London Times, Feb. 6, 1913) was that she had probably committed suicide by placing her neck upon a rail.

"Dr. Townsend said that over the heart he found a number of small, punctured wounds, over a dozen of which had penetrated the muscles; and one had entered the ventricle cavity of the heart. These punctures had been caused in life, with a sharp instrument, such as a hat pin. They were not enough to cause death, but had been made a few hours previously."

Upon December 29th, of this year, 1913, a woman, known as "Scotch Dolly," was found dead in her room, 18 Etham Street, S. E., London. A man, who had lived with her, was arrested, but was released, because he was able to show that, before the time of her death, he had left the woman. Her face was bruised, but she had seldom been sober, and the man, Williams, before leaving her, had struck her. The verdict was that she had died of heart failure, "from shock."

Upon one of this woman's legs was found a series of 38 little, double wounds. They were not explained. "The Coroner: 'Have you ever had a similar case, yourself?' Dr. Spilsbury: 'No: not exactly like this.'"

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

9

UPON April 16, 1922, a man was taken to Charing Cross Hospital, London, suffering from a wound in his neck. It was said that he would tell nothing about himself, except that, while walking along a turning, off Coventry Street, he had been stabbed. Hours later, another man, who had been wounded in the neck, entered the hospital. He told, with a foreign

[p. 888]

accent, that in a turning, off Coventry Street, he had been so wounded. He signed his name in the hospital register as Pilbert, but would, it was said, give no other information about the assault upon him. Late in the day, another wounded man was taken to this hospital, where, according to the records, he refused to tell anything about what had befallen him, except that he had been stabbed in the neck while walking along a turning off Coventry Street.

In the pockets of one of these men were found racing slips. The police explained that probably all of them were victims of a turf-feud.

It is, considering many other data, quite thinkable that, instead of refusing to tell how they had been wounded, these men were unable to tell, but that this inability was so mysterious that the hospital authorities recorded it as refusal. See the London Daily Express, April 17, and the People, April 23, 1922.

In a London hospital, there is small chance for an unconventional record, and probably in no London newspaper would have been published any reporter's notion of the lurk of an invisible and murderous thing, in a turning, off Coventry Street. But, in the London Daily Mail, Sept. 26, 1923, there was an account of something like this, but far away. It was a facetious account. Murderous things always have, somewhere, been regarded humorously. Or fondly. No address was published, or probably this one would have received letters from women, wanting to marry it. The story was that, in September, 1923, there was a Mumiai scare in India. Mumiais are invisibles that grab people. They have no sense of the mystic: don't dwell in enchanted woods, nor feel out for victims from old towers, or ruins; no valuation for midnight. In daylight, in the streets of cities, they grab people. Coolies, in the city of Lahore, believed that a Mumiai was abroad. There was a panic in Lahore, and it fed upon screams of rickshaw men, who thought that they were grabbed.

Probably the Daily Mail published this story, because of wavelets of gratification that arose from it, at London breakfast tables. It is usually thought that the value of coolies is only in their willingness to work for a few cents a day: but I have a notion that they

[p. 889]

have another function; or that, if it were not for coolies, and their silly superstitions that give the rest of us some sense of superiority to keep going on, millions of the rest of us would lie down and die of chagrin. Sometime I shall develop a theory of Evolution in aristocratic terms, showing that things probably made of themselves oysters and lions and hyenas, just for the thrill of gratification in being able to say that at least they weren't elephants, or worms, or human beings. I know how it is, myself, and have compensations, in thinking of silly, credulous people who believe that a dog ever said "Good morning!" and disappeared in a thin, greenish vapor.

Away back in the year 1890, the Japanese were coolies. Then they showed such talents for slaughter that now they are respected everywhere. But, in the year 1890, the Japanese were supposed to be little more than a nation of artists. A story of a panic in Japan was something to smile smugly about. I take a story from the Religio-Philosophical Journal, May 17, 1890, as copied from the newspapers. People in Japan thought that, sometimes in the streets, and sometimes in their houses, an invisible thing was attacking them. They thought that upon persons were appearing wounds, each a slash about an inch long. They thought that, at the time of an attack, little pain was felt.

Possibly a Jap, educated according to what is supposed to be an education, having his ideas as to the identity and geographical distribution of coolies, has looked over files of American newspapers, and has come upon accounts of a series of occurrences in New York City, in the winter of 1891-92, and has been amused to note the mystery that New York reporters infused into their accounts of woundings of men, in the streets of New York. The reporters told of a "vanishing man." The assassin "disappeared marvelously." As noted, in the New York Sun, Jan. 14, 1892, five men had been stabbed by an unknown assailant. There were other attacks. The police were blamed, and in the downtown precincts of the city, the most important order, each day, was to catch the stabber.

January 17--"Slasher captured." The police were out to get him, and one of them got an unterrifying-looking little fellow, named Dowd. It was said that he had been caught, stabbing a man.

In the mixture of all situations, it is impossible to be unable to

[p. 890]

pick out grounds for reasonably believing, or disbelieving, anything. Say that it is our preference to believe--or to accept--that it was not the "marvelously disappearing" slasher who was caught, but somebody else who would do just as well. Then we note that, twenty minutes earlier, another policeman had caught a man, who had, this policeman said, seized somebody, and was about to stab him. Or June, 1899--and two men were out to catch the "kissing bug"--and one of them caught a beetle, and the other nabbed a butterfly. The policeman of the first arrest was ignored: the captor of Dowd was made a roundsman.

Dowd pleaded not guilty. He said that he had had nothing to do with the other assaults, and had drawn a knife only in this one case, which had been a quarrel. His lawyer pleaded not guilty, but insane. He was found insane, and was sent to the asylum for insane criminals, at Auburn, N. Y.

The outrages in New York stopped. Brooklyn Eagle, March 12, 1892--dispatch from Vienna, Austria--"This city continues to be shocked by mysterious murders. The latest victim is Leopold Buchinger, who was stabbed to the heart by an undetected assassin, in one of the most public places in Vienna. This makes the list of such tragedies five in number, and there is a growing feeling of terror among the public."

Say that it's an old castle, hidden away in a Balkan forest--and somebody was wounded, at night--but, as if lulled by a vampire's wings, felt no pain. This would be only an ordinarily incredible story.

In November, 1901, a woman told a policeman, of Kiel, Germany, that, while walking in a street in Kiel, she learned that she had been unaccountably wounded. She had felt no pain. She could not explain.

The police probably explained. If a doctor was consulted, he probably explained learnedly.

Another woman--about thirty women--"curious and inexplicable attacks." Then men were similarly injured. About eighty persons, openly, in the streets, were stabbed by an uncatchable--an invisible--or it may be the most fitting description to say that, upon the bodies of people of Kiel, wounds appeared. See the London Daily 

[p. 891]

[paragraph continues] Mail, Dec. 7, 1901--"The extraordinary thing about the mystery is that some marvelously sharp instrument must have been used, because the victims do not seem to know that they are wounded, until several minutes after an attack."

And yet I think that something of an explanation of these Jacks is findable in every male's recollections of his own boyhood--the ringing of door bells, just to torment people--stretching a string over sidewalks, to knock off hats--other, pestiferous tricks. It is not only "just for fun"; there is an engagement of the imagination in these pranks. It will be my expression that, when the more powerful and more definite imagination of an adult human similarly engages and concentrates, phenomena that will be considered beyond

belief, or acceptance, by readers who do not realize of what common occurrence they are, develop.

We have had stories of series of accidents, and perhaps my suspicion that they were not mere coincidences has been regarded at least tolerantly. I have data of three automobile accidents that occurred at times not far apart; and, as to this series, I note a seeming association with minor attacks upon other automobiles, and upon people, that suggests the doings of one criminal. If so, he will have to be called occult, whether we take readily to, or are much repelled by, that term.

Upon the night of April 9, 1927, Alexander Nemko and Pearl Devon were motoring through Hyde Park, London, when their car dashed down an incline, and plunged into the Serpentine. The car sank in fifteen feet of water. Though terrified and drowning, Nemko had his wits with him, so that he opened the door of the car, and dragged his companion to the surface, and, with her, swam ashore.

There was nothing in the lay of the land by which to explain. The newspapers noted that there had never been an accident here before. "The steering gear apparently failed," was Nemko's attempt to explain. Perhaps it is queer that right at this point, so near a body of water, the steering gear failed: but, considered by itself, as mysteries usually are considered, there is little that can be said against Nemko's way of explaining.

Two nights later, a taxicab plunged into the Thames, at Walton.

[p. 892]

[paragraph continues] The passenger swam ashore, but the driver was, it seems, drowned. His body was dredged for but was not found. The passenger, who must have been jostled past having any clear remembrance of what occurred, explained that, at the brink of the river, the rear wheels of the car had dropped into a deep rut, and that the car had jolted into the river.

Upon May 3rd--see the London Evening Standard, May 6--William Farrance and Beatrice Villes, of Linomroad, Clapham, London, were driving near Tunbridge Wells, when the car suddenly plunged toward a hedge, at the left of the road. Farrance succeeded in forcing the car to the right. Again something drove it toward the hedge. Farrance was powerless to stop it, and it broke through the hedge, overturning, killing the girl.

A schoolgirl, Beryl de Meza, was shot by somebody unknown and unseen, while playing in the street, near her home, at Hampstead, London.

At Sheffield, there was an occurrence that was atrocious, but that may not be uncanny, but that attracts my attention because of the fiendishness of something else with which it associates. At the Soho Grinding Works, it was found, morning of April 29th, that grinding wheels had been chipped, and that belting had been stripped from pulleys. Nails had been driven, points upward, in chairs upon which the grinders sat. Tools had been thrown into motors, and currents had been turned on, causing much damage. All this looks like sabotage, malicious but scarcely "fiendish": but in a building next door there had been doings that are so describable. Chickens had been tortured: combs cut off, legs broken, the head of one burned: others mutilated, and their injuries smeared with white paint.

London Evening Standard, May 5--"Mystery of four shooting affairs." A boy, playing in Mitcham Park, London, was shot in the head, by an air gun, it was thought, though no air gun pellet was found. At Tooting Bec-common, an "air gun pellet"--though it was not said that an air gun pellet was found--passed through the windshield of a motor car. In Stamford two men were shot by an unknown assailant. London Sunday Express, May 8--Mr. George Berlam, of Leigh-on-Sea, motoring on the road from London to

[p. 893]

[paragraph continues] Southend--he heard a report, and his windshield was splintered. In accounts of the punctured windshield, at Tooting Bec-common, the driver of the car was quoted as saying that he had heard a report, and at the same time a laugh, "though nobody was about, at the time."

Wounds have appeared upon people. Usually the explanation is that they were stabbed. Objects have been mutilated. Windowpanes and automobile windshields have been pierced, as if by bullets, but by bullets that could not be found. Such were the doings of the "phantom sniper of Camden" (N. J.). He appeared first, in November, 1927: but the first clipping that I have, relating to him, is from the New York Evening Post, Jan. 26, 1928--a store window pierced by a bullet--the eighth reported occurrence. Later, the stories were definitely of a "phantom sniper" and his "phantom bullets."

New York Herald Tribune, Feb. 9, 1928--Collingswood, N. J., February 8--"The 'phantom sniper,' if it was the work of South Jersey's mysterious marksman, scored his most sensational attack tonight when a window in the home of William T. Turnbull was shattered by what appeared to be a charge of shot.

"Police at first believed it an attempted assassination, but, as in all the other cases, no missile was found.

"Turnbull, a Philadelphia stockbroker, and a former president of the Collingswood Borough Council, who was seated near the window, reading, was spattered with glass. He said that an automobile had stopped in front of the house a few minutes before. The absence of any grains of shot added to the mystery."

I have sent letters of enquiry to all persons mentioned in the various reports. I have received not one answer. It may be preferable to some readers to think that there are no such persons. Still, I note that not one of these letters was dead-lettered back to me.

The attacks continued until Feb. 28, 1928. Windowpanes and windshields of automobiles were pierced by something that made no report of a gun, and that was unfindable. Something, or somebody, who was unseen, caused excitement in half a dozen towns from Philadelphia to Newark. Even if I could persuade myself that I am over-fanciful in my own notions, the seemingly veritable

[p. 894]

stories of the existence of a missile-less gun would be interesting. Authorities in Jersey towns, noting the range of the malefactor, were especially watchful of motorists: but it is my notion that he had no need for anything on wheels in which to do his traveling. I noticed a similar range, in the doings in England, in April and May, 1927.

Snipings by the "Camden phantom" were the show-off, and nobody was injured by him: but a more harmful fellow operated in Boston, beginning about Nov. 1, 1930. I think that these sportsmen, who possibly are sentimental opponents to the shooting of game birds and deer, and practice their cruelties in ways that seem to them less condemnable, divide into the unoccult, and into more imaginative fellows who have found out how to practice occultly. In Boston, a noiseless weapon was used, but, this time, in two weeks, two men and a woman were seriously injured, and bullets of small caliber were removed from their wounds. These attacks so alarmed people that policemen, armed with riot guns, lined the roads south of Boston, with orders to catch the "silent sniper." The attacks continued until about the middle of February, 1931. Nobody was caught.

In this period (Nov. 12, 1931) a dispatch to the newspapers, from Bogota, Colombia, told of a "puzzling crime wave." In the hospitals were forty-five persons, suffering with stab wounds. "The police were unable to explain what appeared to be a general attack, but they arrested more than 200 persons."

Another occurrence of "phantom bullets," in the State of New Jersey, was told of, in the New York Herald, Feb. 2, 1916. Mr. and Mrs. Charles F. Repp, of Glassboro, N. J., had been fired upon by "phantom bullets." This was a special attack upon one house. There were sounds of breaking glass, and bullet holes were found in windowpanes, but nothing beyond the windowpanes was marked. It is such a circumstance as was told of in accounts of the "Camden sniper." It is as if somebody fired, not only with a missile-less gun, or with invisible bullets, but as if with intent only to perforate windows, and with the effects controlled by, and limited by, his intent. Consequently, instead of thinking of a shooting at windowpanes, I tend simply to think that holes appeared in window

[p. 895]

glass. Nobody in the house was injured, but Mr. and Mrs. Repp were terrified and they fled. Members of the Township Committee investigated, and they reported that, though no bullets were findable, the windows "were broken much as a window usually is, when a bullet crashes through it."

That's the story. Of witnesses, I. C. Soddy and Howard R. Moore were mentioned. I sent letters of enquiry to all persons whose names were given, and received not one reply. There are several ways of explaining. One is that it is probable that persons who have experiences such as those told of in this book, receive so many "crank letters" that they answer none. Dear me--once upon a time, I enjoyed a sense of amusement and superiority toward "cranks." And now here am I, a "crank," myself. Like most writers, I have the moralist somewhere in my composition, and here I warn--take care, oh, reader, with whom you are amused, unless you enjoy laughing at yourself.

It seemed to me doubtful that a woman could go along Upper Broadway, and jab, with a hat pin, five men and a woman, before being caught. There has been a gathering of suggestions of not ordinary woundings. In Lloyd's Weekly News (London) Feb. 21, 1909, there was an account of a panic in Berlin. Many women, in the streets of the city, had been stabbed. It was said that the assailant had been seen, and he was described as "a young man, always vanishing." If he was seen, he is another of the "uncatchables." In this newspaper of February 23, it was said that 73 women had been stabbed, all except four of them not seriously.

We have had data that suggest the existence of vampires, other than humans of the type of the Portuguese sailor: but the brazen and serialized--sometimes murderous, but sometimes petty--assaults upon men and women are of a different order, and seem to me to be the work of imaginative criminals, stabbing people to make mystery, and to make a stir. I feel that I can understand their motives, because once upon a time I was an imaginative criminal, myself. Once upon a time I was a boy. One time, when I was a boy, I caught a lot of flies. There was nothing of the criminal, nor of the malicious, in what I did, this time, but it seems to give me an understanding of the "phantom" stabbers and snipers. I painted

[p. 896]

the backs of the flies red, and turned them loose. There was an imaginative pleasure in thinking of flies, so bearing my mark, attracting attention, causing people to wonder, spreading far, appearing in distant places, so marked by me.

In some of our stories there is much suggestion that there was no "vanishing man"--that wounds appeared upon people, as appeared--or as it was said to have appeared--a wound on the head of a sailor. See back to the story told by the captain of the Brechsee. Or that wounds appeared upon people, and that the victims, examined by the police, were more or less bullied into giving some kind of description of an assailant. However, some of the stories of the "vanishing man" look as if he, too, may be. There may be several ways of doing these things. Early in the year 1907, a "vanishing man" was reported from the town of Winchester, England. I take from the Weekly Dispatch (London), Feb. 10, 1907. Women of Winchester were complaining of an "uncatchable," who was committing petty assaults upon them, such as rapping their hands. "A mysterious feature of the affair is that the man disappears, as if by magic."

The "phantom stabber" of Bridgeport, Conn., appeared first Feb. 20, 1925, and the last of his attacks, of which I have record, was upon June 1, 1928. That was a long time in which to operate uncaught. In the daytime, mostly, though sometimes at night, girls were stabbed: in the streets; in such public places as a department store, and the entrance of a library. Descriptions of the assailant were indefinite. In almost all instances the wounds were not serious. One of the stories, as told in the New York Herald Tribune, Aug. 27, 1927, is typical of the circumstances of publicity, or of the confidence of an assailant that he could not be caught. If my stories will be regarded as ghost stories, a novelty about them is the eeriness of crowded thoroughfares--a lurk near Coventry Street, London, and the sneak of an invisible in Broadway, New York. I expect sometime to hear of a haunted subway, during rush hours. Edgar Allan Poe would say of me that I'm no artist, and don't know how to infuse atmosphere. One would think that I had never heard of the uncanniness of dark nights in lonely places. Some of the stories are of desperate plays for notoriety. I have a story now, not of

[p. 897]

doings in a graveyard, but in a department store. Bridgeport, Conn.--staged on a staircase, with an audience of hundreds of persons, there was a very theatrical performance. A review of this melodrama was published in the Herald Tribune--

"The stabber who has terrorized Bridgeport for the last thirty months suddenly appeared this afternoon and claimed his twenty-third victim in a crowded down-town department store. The victim was Isabelle Pelskur, fourteen, 539 Main Street, messenger girl employed in the D. M. Read store. The girl was stabbed in the store where she is employed.

"The stabbing occurred at 4:50, just two minutes before closing time of the store. Already some of the store doors had been locked, and the large crowd of shoppers were being ushered from the store. The employees were leaving their counters, and the victim had started up the stairs from the arcade side of the first floor to the women's dressing room.

"The girl had scarcely ascended more than half a dozen steps when she was attacked by the assailant who lunged his sharp blade into her side, causing a severe wound."

He got away. Nobody reported having seen him escaping. The girl could give only a "meager" description of him.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

10

RELATIVELY to the principles of modern science, werewolves cannot be. But I know of no such principle that is other than tautology or approximation. It is myth-stuff. Then, if relatively to a group of phantoms, werewolves cannot be, there are at least negative grounds for thinking that they are quite likely.

Relatively to the principles, or lack of principles, of ultra-modern science, there isn't anything that can't be, even though also it is not clear how anything can be.

So my acceptance, or pseudo-conclusion, is that werewolves are quite likely-unlikely.

[p. 898]

Once upon a time, when minds were dosed with the pill-theory of matter, werewolves were said to be physically impossible. Very little globes were said to be the ultimates of matter, and were supposed to be understandable, and people thought they knew what matter is. But the pills have rolled away. Now we are told that the ultimates are waves. It is impossible to think of a wave. One has to think of something that is waving. If anybody can think of crime, virtue, or color, independent of somebody who is criminal, virtuous, or colored, that thinker--or whatever--may say that he knows what he is talking about, in denying the existence of anything, upon physical grounds. To say that the "ultimate waves" are electrical comes no closer to saying something. If there is no definition of electricity better than that of saying that it is a mode of motion, we're not enlighteningly told that the "ultimate waves" are moving motions.

My suspicion is that we've got everything reversed; or that all things that have the sanction of scientists, or that are in agreement with their myths, are ghosts: and that things called "ghosts," are, because they are not in agreement with the spooks of science, the more nearly real things. I now suspect that the spiritualists are reversedly right--that there is a ghost-world--but that it is our existence--that when spirits die they become human beings.

I now have a theory that once upon a time, we were real and alive, but departed into this state that we call "existence"--that we have carried over with us from the real existence, from which we died, the ideas of Truth, and of axioms and principles and generalizations--ideas that really meant something when we were really alive, but that, of course, now, in our phantom-existence--which is demonstrable by any X-ray photograph of any of us--can have only phantom-meaning--so then our never-ending, but always frustrated, search for our lost reality. We come upon chimera and mystification, but persistently have beliefs, as retentions from an experience in which there were things to believe in. I'd not say that all of us are directly ghosts: most of us may be the descendants of the departed from a real existence, who, in our spook-world, pseudo-propagated.

Once upon a time--but in our own times--there were two alleged

[p. 899]

marvels that were sources of uncommon contempt, or amusement, to scientists: they were the transformation of elements into other elements, and the transformation of human animals into other animals.

The history of science is a record of the transformations of contempts and amusements.

I think that the idea of werewolves is most silly, degraded, and superstitious: therefore I incline toward it respectfully. It is so laughable that I am serious about this.

Marauding animals have often unaccountably appeared in, or near, human communities, in Europe and the United States. The explanation of an escape from a menagerie has, many times, been unsatisfactory, or has had nothing to base upon. I have collected notes upon these occurrences, as teleportations, but also there may be lycanthropy.

Nobody has ever been finally reasonable, and it is impossible for me to be absolutely unreasonable. I can tell no yarn that is wholly a yarn, if it be my whim, or inspiration, to come out for the existence of werewolves.

What is there that absolutely sets apart the story of a man who turned into an ape, or a hyena, from the story of a caterpillar that became a butterfly? Or rascals who almost starve to death, and then learn to take on the looks of philanthropists? There are shabby young doctors and clergymen, who turn so sleek, after learning the lingo of altruists, that they have the appearance of very different animals. Or the series of portraits of Napoleon Bonaparte--and so much of his mind upon classical models--and the transformation of a haggard young man into much resemblance to the Roman Emperor Augustus.

It is a matter of common belief that men have come from animals called "lower," not necessarily from apes, though the ape-theory seems to fit best, and is the most popular. Then why not that occasionally a human sloughs backward? Data of reversions, not of individuals, but of species, are common in biology.

I have come upon many allusions to the "leopard men" and the "hyena men" of African tribes, but the most definite story that I know of is an article by Richard Bagot, in the Cornhill Magazine,

[p. 900]

[paragraph continues] October, 1918, upon the alleged powers of natives of Northern Nigeria to take on the forms of lower animals. An experience attributed to Capt. Shott, D. S. O., is told of. It is said that raiding hyenas had been wounded by gun-traps, and in each case had been traced to a point where the hyena tracks had ceased, and had been succeeded by human footprints, leading to a native town. A particular of the traditional werewolf story is that when a werewolf is injured, the injury appears upon a corresponding part of the human being of its origin. Bagot told of Capt. Shott's experience, alleged experience, whatever, with "an enormous brute" that had been shot, and had made off, leaving tracks that were followed. The hunters came to a spot where they found the jaw of the animal, lying in a pool of blood. The tracks went on toward a native town. The next day a native died. His jaw had been shot away.

There have been many appearances of animals that were unexplained--anyway until I appeared upon the horizon of this field of data. It seems to me that my expressions upon Teleportations are somewhat satisfactory in most of the cases--that is, that there is a force, distributive of forms of life and other phenomena that could switch an animal, say from a jungle in Madagascar to a back yard somewhere in Nebraska. But theories of mine are not so godlike as to deny any right of being for all other theories. I'd not be dogmatic and say positively that once upon a time a lemur was magically transported from Africa to Nebraska: possibly somebody in Lincoln, Nebraska, had been transformed into a lemur, or was a werelemur.

Whatever the explanation may be, the story was told, in the New York Sun, Nov. 12, 1931. Dr. E. R. Mathers, of Lincoln, Nebraska, had seen a strange, small animal in his yard, acting queerly. The next day he found the creature dead. The body was taken to Dr. I. H. Blake, of the University of Nebraska, who identified it as that of an African lemur, of the Galaga group. A lemur is a monkey-like animal, with a long snout: size about that of a monkey.

I wrote to Dr. Mathers about this, and, considerably to my surprise, because mostly my "crank" letters are very properly ignored, received an answer, dated Nov. 21, 1931. Dr. Mathers verified the

[p. 901]

story. The lemur, stuffed and mounted, is now upon exhibition in the museum of the State University, at Lincoln. Where it had come from had not been learned. There was no story of an escape, anywhere, that could match this appearance in a back yard. Accounts had been spread-headed, with illustrations, in the Lincoln State Journal, October 23rd, and in the Sunday State Journal, October 25th: but not even in some other back yard had this animal been seen, according to absence of statements. I neglected to ask whether, at the time of the appearance of the lemur, the disappearance of any resident of Lincoln was reported.

Suppose, at a meeting of the National Academy of Sciences, 1 should read a paper upon the transformation of a man into a hyena. There would be only one way of doing that. I recommend it to unrecognized geniuses, who can't otherwise get a hearing. It would have to be a hold-up.

But, without having to pull a gun, at the meeting of the N. A. S., at New Haven, Conn., Nov. 18, 1931, Dr. Richard C. Tolman suggested that energy may be transforming into matter.

If one can't think of a man transforming into a hyena, let one try to think of the motions of a thing turning into a thing.

My expression is that, in our existence of the hyphen, or of intermediateness between so-called opposites, there is no energy, and there is no matter: but that there is matter-energy, manifesting in different degrees of emphasis one way or the other:

That it is not thinkable that energy could turn into matter: but that it is thinkable that energy-matter could, by a difference of emphasis, turn into matter-energy--

Or that there is no man who is without the hyena-element in his composition, and that there is no hyena that is not at least rudimentarily human--or that at least it may be reasoned that, by no absolute transformation, but by a shift of emphasis, a man-hyena might turn into a hyena-man.

The year 1931--and there were everywhere, but most notably in the U. S. A., such shifts, or reversions, from the state that is called "civilization," that there was talk of repealing laws against carrying weapons, and of the arming of citizens to protect themselves, as if such cities as New York and Chicago were frontier towns,

[p. 902]

[paragraph continues] Out of policemen--in all except physical appearance--had come wolves that had preyed upon nocturnal women. There were chases of savages through the streets of New York City. Jackals on juries picked up bits from kills by bigger beasts, and snarled their jackal-verdicts.

New York Times, June 30, 1931--"Police at Mineola hunt apelike animal--hairy creature, about four feet tall."

Out of judges had come swine.

County Judge W. Bernard Vause found guilty of using the mails to defraud, and sentenced to six years in Atlanta Penitentiary. Federal Judge Grover M. Moscowitz was censured by the House of Representatives. The Magistrates, who, facing charges of corruption, resigned, were Mancuso, Ewald, McQuade, Goodman, Simpson. Vitale was removed. Crater disappeared. Rosenbluth went away, for his health's sake.

And, near Mineola, Long Island, a gorilla was reported.

The first excitement was at Lewis & Valentine's nursery--story told by half a dozen persons--an ape that had come out of the woods, had looked them over, and had retreated. It seems that the police  heard of "mass psychology": so they had to explain less learnedly. Several days later, they were so impressed with repeating stories that a dozen members of the Nassau County Police Department were armed with shotguns, and were assigned to ape-duty.

No circus had appeared anywhere near Mineola, about this time; and from neither any Zoo, nor from anybody's smaller menagerie, had the escape of any animal been reported. Ordinarily let nothing escape, or let nothing large, wild, and hairy appear, but let it be called an ape, anyway--and, upon the rise of an ape-scare, one expects to hear of cows reported as gorillas: trees, shadows, vacancies taking on ape-forms. But--New York Herald Tribune, June 27th--Mrs. E. H. Tandy, of Star Cliff Drive, Malverne, reported something as if she had not heard of the ape-scare. She called up the. police station, saying that there was a lion in her back yard. The policeman, who incredulously received this message, waited for another policeman to return to the station, and share the joke. Both waited for the arrival of a third disbeliever. The three incredulous policemen set out, several hours after the telephone call,

[p. 903]

and by that time there wasn't anything to. disturb anybody's conventional beliefs, in Mrs. Tandy's back yard.

There was no marauding. All the stories were of a large and hairy animal that was appearing and disappearing--

And appearing and disappearing in the vast jungles not far from Mineola, Long Island, were skunks that were coming from lawyers. Some of them were caught and rendered inoffensive by disbarment. There was a capture of several dozen medical hyenas, who had been picking up livings in the trains of bootleggers. It could be that an occurrence, in New Jersey, was not at all special, but represented a general slump back toward a state of about simian development. There was an examination of applicants for positions in the schools of Irvington. In mathematics, no question beyond arithmetic was asked: in spelling, no unusual word was listed. One hundred and sixteen applicants took the examination, and all failed to pass. The average mark was 31.5. The creep of jungle-life stripped clothes from people. Nudists appeared in many places. And it was not until later in the year, that the staunchest opponent of disclosures spoke out, in the name of decency, or swaddling--or when Pope Pius XI refused to receive Mahatma Gandhi, unless he'd put on pants.

Upon the 29th of June, the ape-story was taken so seriously, at Mineola, that Police Captain Earle Comstock ordered out a dozen special motor patrols, armed with revolvers and sawed-off shotguns, with gas and ball ammunition, led by Sergeant Berkley Hyde. A posse of citizens was organized, and it was joined by twenty nurserymen, who were armed with sickles, clubs, and pitchforks. Numerous footprints were found. "The prints seemed to be solely those of the hind feet, and were about the size and shape of a man's hand, though the thumb was set farther back than would be the case with a man's hand." However, no ape was seen. As to prior observations, Policeman Fred Koehler, who had been assigned to investigate, reported statements by ten persons.

The animal disappeared about the last of June. Upon July 18th, it was reported again, and by persons who were out of communization with each other. It was near Huntington, L. I. A nurseryman, named Stockman, called up the police, saying that members

[p. 904]

of his family had seen an animal, resembling a gorilla, running through shrubbery. Then a farmer, named Bruno, three miles away, telephoned that he had seen a strange animal. Policemen went to both places, and found tracks, but lost them in the woods. The animal was not reported again.

And I suppose I shall get a letter from somebody in Long Island, asking me not to publish his name, unless I consider that positively necessary, but assuring me that, of all the theorists, who had tried to explain the Ape of Mineola, only I have insight and penetration

Or an impulse that had come upon him, in June, 1931, to climb trees, and to chatter, and to pick over the heads of his neighbors--and then blankness. He had awakened from a trance, and had found on his carpet tracks of "thumbed footprints." A peculiar, greenish mud. He had gone to Lewis and Valentine's nursery, and there he had seen a patch of this mud, which was not known to exist anywhere else.

And, if I don't take seriously this letter that I shall probably receive from somebody in Long Island, it will be because probably also I shall hear from somebody else, telling me that above all he shrinks from notoriety, but that personal considerations must be swept aside for the sake of science--that, as told in the newspapers, somebody had slung a brick, hitting the retreating ape, and that he had been unable to sit down next morning.

But the germination of a new idea, I'm feeling. I have wondered about occultly stealing a money-bag from a bank. But that is so paltry, compared with abilities, not considered occult, by which respectable operators steal banks. Or psychically dislocating somebody's shoulder, in a petty revenge--whereas, politically, and upon the noblest of idealistic principles, whole nations may be dislocated. But, when it comes to the Miracle of Mineola, I feel the stirrings of Usefulness--

Or the makings of a new religion--founded as solidly as any religion ever has been founded--

All ye who are world-weary--unsatisfied with mere nudism, which isn't reverting far enough--unsatisfied with decadence in creeds and politics of today, which conceivably might be more primitive--conceiving that, after all, the confusion in the sciences

[p. 905]

isn't blankness, and that the cave-arts are at least scrawling something--all ye who are craving a more drastic degeneration--and a possible answer to your prayer--

"Make me, oh, make me, an ape again!"

What I need, to keep me somewhat happy, and to some degree interested in my work, is opposition. If lofty and academic, so much the better: if sanctified, I'm in great luck. I suspect that it may be regrettable, but, though I am much of a builder, I can't be somewhat happy, as a writer, unless also I'm mauling something. Most likely this is the werewolf in my composition. But the science of physics, which, at one time, was thought forever to have disposed of werewolves, vampires, witches, and other pets of mine, is today such an attempted systematization of the principles of magic, that I am at a loss for eminent professors to be disagreeable to. Upon the principles of quantum mechanics, one can make reasonable almost any miracle, such as entering a closed room without penetrating a wall, or jumping from one place to another without traversing the space between. The only reason why the exponents of ultra-modern mechanics are taken more solemnly than I am is that the reader does not have to pretend that he knows what I am writing about, There are alarmed scientists, who try to confine their ideas of magic to the actions of electronic particles, or waves: but, in the Physical Review, April, 1931, were published letters from Prof. Einstein, Prof. R. C. Tolman, and Dr. Boris Podolsky that indicate that this refinement cannot be maintained. Prof. Einstein applies the Principle of Uncertainty not only to atomic affairs, but to such occurrences as the opening and shutting of a shutter on a camera.

There can be no science, or pretended science, except upon the basis of ideal certainty. Anything else is to some degree guesswork. As a guesser, I'll not admit my inferiority to any scientist, imbecile, or rabbit. The position today of what is said to be the science of physics is so desperate, and so confused, that its exponents are trying to incorporate into one system both former principles and the denial of them. Even in the anaemia and frazzle of religion, today, there is no worse state of desperation, or decomposition. The attempt to take the principle of uncertainty--or the principle of unprincipledness--into science is about the same as would be an attempt by

[p. 906]

theologians to preach the word of God, and also include atheism in their doctrines.

As an Intermediatist, I find the principle of uncertainty unsatisfactorily expressed. My own expressions are upon the principled-unprincipled rule-misrule of our pseudo-existence by certainty-uncertainty--

Or, whereas it seems unquestionable that no man has ever been transformed into a hyena, we can be no more than sure-unsure about this.

About the first of January, 1849, somebody, employed in a Paris cemetery, came upon parts of a human body, strewn on the walks. Up in the leafless trees dangled parts of a body. He came to a new-made grave, from which, during the night, had been dug the corpse of a woman. This corpse had been torn to pieces, which, in a frenzy, had been scattered. For details, see Galignani's Messenger (Paris) March 10, 23, 24, 1849.

Several nights later, in another Paris cemetery, there was a similar occurrence.

The cemeteries of Paris were guarded by men and dogs, but the ghoul eluded them, and dug up bodies of women. Upon the night of March 8th, guards outside the cemetery of St. Parnasse saw somebody, or something, climbing a wall of the cemetery. Face of a wolf, or a clothed hyena--they could give no description. They fired at it, but it escaped.

Near a new-made grave, at St. Parnasse, they set a spring-gun. It was loaded with nails and bits of iron, for the sake of scattering. One morning, later in March, it was found that, during the night, this gun had discharged. Part of a soldier's uniform that had been shot away was found.

A gravedigger heard of a soldier, who had been taken to a Paris hospital, where he had told that he had been shot by an unknown assailant. It was said that he had been wounded by a discharge of nails and bits of iron.

The soldier's name was Francis Bertrand. The suspicion against him was considered preposterous. He was a young man of twenty-five, who had advanced himself to the position of Sergeant-Major

[p. 907]

of Infantry. "He bore a good name, and was accounted a man of gentle disposition, and an excellent soldier."

But his uniform was examined, and the fragment of cloth that had been found in the cemetery fitted into a gap in the sleeve of it.

The crime of the ghoul was unknown, or was unrecognized, in French law. Bertrand was found guilty, and was sentenced to imprisonment for one year, the maximum penalty for the only charge that could be brought against him. Virtually he could explain nothing, except that he had surrendered to an "irresistible impulse." But there is one detail of his account of himself that I especially notice. It is that, after each desecration, there came to him another irresistible impulse." That was to make for shelter--a hut, a trench in a field, anywhere--and there lie in, a trance, then rising from the ghoul into the soldier.

I have picked up another item. It is from the San Francisco Daily Evening Bulletin, June 27, 1874--"Bertrand the Ghoul is still alive: he is cured of his hideous disease, and is cited as a model of gentleness and propriety."

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

11

DAMN the particle, but there is salvation for the aggregate. A gust of wind is wild and free, but there are handcuffs on the storm.

During the World War, no course of a single bullet could have been predicted absolutely, but any competent mathematician could have written the equations of the conflict as a whole.

This is the attempt by the theologians of science to admit the Uncertainty Principle, and to cancel it. Similarly reason the scientists of theology:

The single records of the Bible may not be altogether accurate, but the good, old book, as a whole, is Immortal Truth.

Says Dr. C. G. Darwin, in New Conceptions of Matter:

"We cannot say exactly what will happen to a single electron, but

[p. 908]

we can confidently estimate the probabilities. If an experiment is carried out, with a thousand electrons, what was a probability for one, becomes nearly a certainty. Physical theory confidently predicts that the millions of millions of electrons in our bodies will behave even more regularly, and that to find a case of noticeable departure from the average, we should have to wait for a time quite fantastically longer than the estimated age of the universe."

This reasoning is based upon the scientific delusion that there are final bodies, or wholes.

Arthur B. Mitchell, of 472 McAllister Avenue, Utica, N. Y., goes out for the evening. It can't be said exactly what will happen to a single cell of Mr. Mitchell's composition, but every wink of an eye, or scratch of an ear, of this body, as a whole, can be foretold.

But now we have a change of view, as to this body that had been regarded as a whole. Now Mr. Mitchell is regarded as one of many units in this community known as Utica. Now the admission is that Mr. Mitchell's conduct may be slightly irregular, but the contention is that the politics of Utica, as a whole, is never a surprise.

But surprising things, in Utica, are reported. Well, Utica is only one of the many communities that make up the State of New York. But the State of New York--

My own expression is that ours is an intermediate existence, poised, or fluctuating back and forth between two unrealizable extremes that may be called positiveness and negativeness; a hyphenated state of goodness-badness, coldness-heat, equilibrium-inequilibrium, certainty-uncertainty. I conceive of our existence as an organism in which positivizing and negativizing manifestations, or conflicts, are metabolic. Certainty, or regularity, exists to a high degree, in the movements of the planets, but not absolutely, because of small, un-formulable digressions: and negativeness exists to a high degree, in the freaks of a cyclone, though not absolutely, because a still more frenzied state of eccentricity can always be thought of.

My expression is that there are things, beings, and events that conform strikingly to regularized generalizations, but that also there are outrageous, silly, fiendish, bizarre, idiotic, monstrous things, beings, and events that illustrate just as strikingly universal imbecility, crime, or unformulability, or fantasy.

[p. 909]

In the London newspapers, last of March, 1908, was told a story, which, when starting off, was called "what the coroner for South Northumberland described as the most  case that he had ever investigated." The story was of a woman, at Whitley Bay, near Blyth, England, who, according to her statement, had found her sister, burned to death on an unscorched bed. This was the equivalence of the old stories of "spontaneous combustion of human bodies." It was said that the coroner was at first puzzled by this story; but that he learned that the woman who told it had been intoxicated, and soon compelled her to admit that she had found her sister, suffering from burns, in another part of the house, and had carried her to her bedroom.

But, in my experience with Taboo, I have so many notes upon coroners, who have seen to it that testimony was what it should be; and so many records of fires that, according to all that is supposed to be known of chemical affinity, should not have been, that, between what should and what shouldn't, I am so confused that all that I can say about a story of a woman who burned to death on an unscorched bed is that it is possible-impossible.

Looking over data, I note a case that has no bearing on the story of the burning woman on the unscorched bed, but that is a story of strange fires, or of fires that would be strange, if stories of similar fires were not so common. It is a case that interests me, because it aligns with the stories of Emma Piggott and John Doughty. There was an occurrence, and it was followed by something else that seems related: but, in terms of common knowledge, it cannot be maintained that between the first occurrence and the following occurrences there was relationship. Most of the story was told in the London Times, Aug. 21, 1856: but, whenever it is possible for me to do so, I go to local newspapers for what I call data. I take from various issues of the Bedford Times and the Bedford Mercury.

Upon the 12th of August, 1856, a resident of Bedford, named Moulton, was absent from home. He was upon a business trip to Ireland. At home were Mrs. Moulton and the housemaid, Anne Fennimore. To fumigate the house, the girl burned sulphur, in an earthenware jar, on the floor. The burning sulphur ran out on the floor, and set the house afire. This fire was put out.

[p. 910]

About an hour later, a mattress was found burning, in another room. But the fire from the sulphur had not extended beyond one room, and this mattress was in another part of the house. Smoke was seen, coming from a chest. Later, smoke was seen coming from a closet, and in it linen was found burning. Other isolated fires broke out. Moulton was sent for, and returned, upon the evening of the 16th. He took off damp clothes, and threw them on the floor. Next morning these clothes were found afire. Then came a succession of about forty fires, in curtains, in closets, and in bureau drawers. Neighbors and policemen came in, and were soon fearful for their safety. Not only objects around them flamed: so flamed their handkerchiefs.

There were so many witnesses, and so much talk in the town, that there was an investigation. Considering that nobody was harmed, it seems queer to read that the investigation was a coroner's inquest: but the coroner was the official who took up the investigation. Witnesses told of such occurrences as picking up a pillow and setting it down--pillow flaming. There was an attempt to explain, in commonplace terms: but nothing that could suggest arson was found, and Moulton had insured neither the house nor the furniture. The outstanding puzzlement was that an ordinary fire seemed to be in some way related to the fires that followed it, but in no way that could be defined. The verdict of the jury was that the fire from the burning sulphur was accidental, but that there was no evidence to show what had caused the succeeding fires.

This story attracted attention in London. After the first account, in the Times, there was considerable correspondence. At the inquest, two physicians had given their opinion that the sulphur fire must have been the cause of the other fires--or that inflammable, sulphurous fumes had probably spread throughout Moulton's house. But the jury had refused to accept this explanation, because of testimony that chairs and sofas that had been carried out into the yard, had flamed. The fires were in a period of five days, and it is probable that in that length of time any permeation by fumes would have been detected. In the discussion in the Times it was pointed out that sulphurous fumes are oxides and are not inflammable.

However, I come to another fire, and maybe I'll explain this one.

[p. 911]

It was upon the night of Jan. 21, 1909. Upon this night, a small-town woman exasperated a New York hotel clerk. Perhaps I explain her unusual behavior by thinking that, having come from a small town, she started picturing the dangers of the big city, and let her imaginings become an obsession. The woman was Mrs. Mary Wells Jennings, of Brewster, N. Y. Place--the Greek Hotel, 30 E. 42nd Street. See the Brooklyn Eagle, Jan. 22, 1909. Mrs. Jennings asked the night clerk to change her room, saying that she feared fire. The clerk assigned her to another room. Not long afterward--wouldn't he let her have another room? So another room. Again she annoyed the clerk. Room changed again. A few hours later, in an unoccupied room, where, during alterations, paints were stored, a fire broke out.

St. Louis Globe-Democrat, Dec. 16, 1889.--"In some mysterious way, a fire started in the mahogany desk in the center of the office of the Secretary of War, at Washington, D. C. Several official papers were destroyed, but it was said that they were of no especial value, and could be replaced. Secretary Proctor cannot understand how the fire originated, as he does not smoke, and keeps no matches about his desk."

It may be that there have been other cases, in which, "in some mysterious way" have been destroyed papers that were of no especial value, and could be replaced. Upon Sept. 16, 1920, London newspapers told of three fires that had broken out simultaneously in different departments of the Government Office, in Tothill Street, Westminster, London. It was not said that papers of no especial value had been destroyed, but it was said that these simultaneous fires had not been explained. London Sunday Express, May 2, 1920--"Upon the night of April 28, fire of mysterious origin broke out at the War Office, Constantinople, where the archives are stored. The iron doors were locked, and it was impossible to gain entrance to the building until afternoon. Many important documents were destroyed."

The body of a girl--and the body of a crow--and a newspaper correspondent's vague feeling of an unknown relationship--A woman who was away from home

Upon the night of April 6, 1919--see the Dartford (Kent)

[p. 912]

[paragraph continues] Chronicle, April 7--Mr. J. Temple Thurston was alone in his home, Hawley Manor, near Dartford. His wife was abroad. Particulars of the absence of his wife, or of anything leading to the absence of his wife, are missing. Something had broken up this home. The servants had been dismissed. Thurston was alone.

At 2:40 o'clock, morning of April 7th, the firemen were called to Hawley Manor. Outside Thurston's room, the house was blazing: but in his room there was no fire. Thurston was dead. His body was scorched: but upon his clothes there was no trace of fire.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

12

FROM the story of J. Temple Thurston, I pick up that this man, with his clothes on, was so scorched as to bring on death by heart failure, by a fire that did not affect his clothes. This body was fully clothed, when found, about three o'clock in the morning. Thurston had not been sitting up, drinking. There was no suggestion that he had been reading. It was commented upon, at the inquest, as queer, that he should have been up and fully clothed about three o'clock in the morning. The verdict, at the inquest, was of death from heart failure, due to inhaling smoke. The scorches were large red patches on the thighs and lower parts of the legs. It was much as if, bound to a stake, the man had stood in a fire that had not mounted high.

In this burning house, nothing was afire in Thurston's room. Nothing was found--such as charred fragments of nightclothes--to suggest that, about three o'clock, Thurston, awakened by a fire elsewhere in the house, had gone from his room, and had been burned, and had returned to his room, where he had dressed, but had then been overcome.

It may be that he had died hours before the house was afire.

It has seemed to me most fitting to regard all accounts in this book, as "stories." There has been a permeation of the fantastic, or whatever we think we mean by "untrueness." Our stories have not

[p. 913]

been realistic. And there is something about the story of J. Temple Thurston that, to me, gives it the look of a revised story. It is as if, in an imagined scene, an author had killed off a character by burning, and then, thinking it over, as some writers do, had noted inconsistencies, such as a burned body, and no mention of a fire anywhere in the house--so then, as an afterthought, the fire in the house--but, still, such an amateurish negligence in the authorship of this story, that the fire was not explained.

To the firemen, this fire in the house was as unaccountable as, to the coroner, was the burned body in the unscorched clothes. When the firemen broke into Hawley Manor, they found the fire raging outside Thurston's room. It was near no fireplace; near no electric wires that might have crossed. There was no odor of paraffin, nor was there anything else suggestive of arson, or of ordinary arson. There had been no robbery. In Thurston's pockets were money and his watch. The fire, of unknown origin, seemed directed upon Thurston's room, as if to destroy, clothes and all, this burned body in the unscorched clothes. Outside, the door of this room was blazing, when the firemen arrived.

We have had other stories of unaccountable injuries. According to them, men and women have been stabbed, but have not known until later that they were wounded. There was no evidence to indicate that Thurston knew of his scorched condition, tried to escape, or called for help.

There are stories of persons who have been found dead, with bullet wounds, under clothing that showed no sign of the passage of bullets. The police-explanation has been of persons who were killed, while undressed, and were then dressed by the murderers. New York Times, July I, 1872--mysterious murder, at Bridgeport, Conn., of Capt. Colvocoresses--shot through the heart--clothes not perforated. Brooklyn Eagle, July 8, 1891--Carl Gros found dead, near Maspeth, L. I.--no marks in the clothes to correspond with wounds in the body. Man found dead in Paris, Feb. 14, 1912--bullet wound--no sign of bullet passing through clothes.

I have come upon so many stories of showers of stones that have entered closed rooms, leaving no sign of entrance in either ceilings or walls, that I have not much sense of strangeness in the idea that

[p. 914]

bullets, or a knife, could pierce a body, under uncut clothes. There are stories of bullets that have entered closed rooms, without disturbing the materials of walls or ceilings.

Dispatch, dated March 3, 1929, to the San Francisco Chronicle--clipping sent to me by Miriam Allen de Ford, of San Francisco--"Newton, N. J.--The county prosecutor's office here is baffled by the greatest mystery in its history. For days a rain of buckshot, at intervals, has been falling in the office of the Newton garage, a small room, with one door and one window. There are no marks on the walls or ceiling, and there are no holes in the room, through which the shot could enter."

About two years later, being not very speedy in getting around to this, I wrote to the County Prosecutor, at Newton, and received a reply, signed by Mr. George R. Vaughan--"This occurrence turned out to be a hoax, perpetrated by some local jokesters."

There is a story, in the Charleston (S. C.) News and Courier, Nov. 12, 1886, not of bullets falling in a closed room, but, nevertheless, of unaccountable bullets--two men in a field, near Walterboro, Colleton Co., S. C.--small shot falling around them. They thought that it was a discharge from a sportsman's gun, but the rain of lead continued. They gathered specimens, which they took to the office of the Colleton Press.

Religio-Philosophical Journal, March 6, 1880--copying from the Cincinnati Inquirer--that, at Lebanon, Ohio, people of the town were in a state of excitement: that showers of birdshot were falling from the ceiling of John W. Lingo's hardware store. A committee had been appointed, and according to its report, the phenomenon was veritable: slow-falling volleys of shot, not of the size of any sold in the store, were appearing from no detectable point of origin. There was another circumstance, and it may have had much to do with the phenomenon: about five years before, somebody, at night, had entered this store, and had been shot by Lingo, escaping without being identified.

In the R. P. J., April 24, 1880, a correspondent, J. H. Marshall, wrote, after having read of the Lingo case, of experiences of his, in the summer of 1867. Bullets fell in every room in his house, forcefully, but not with gunshot velocity--large birdshot--broad daylight--

[p. 915]

short intervals, and then falls that lasted an hour or more. Many bullets appeared, but when Marshall undertook to gather them, he could never find more than half a dozen. About the same time raps were heard.

How bullets could enter closed rooms is no more mysterious than is the howness of Houdini's escape from prison cells, though, according to all that was supposed to be known of physical confinements, that was impossible. In Russia, Houdini made, from a prison van, an escape that involved no expert knowledge, nor dexterity, in matters of locks. He was put into this van, and the door was soldered. He appeared outside, and the police called it an unfair contest, because, so to pass through solid walls, he must have been a spirit. Anyway, this story is told by Will Goldston, President of the Magicians' Club (London).

I have a story of a horse that appeared in what would, to any ordinary horse, be a closed room. It makes one nervous, maybe. One glances around, and would at least not be incredulous, seeing almost any damned thing, sitting in a chair, staring at one. I'd like to have readers, who consider themselves superior to such notions, note whether they can resist just a glance. The story of the horse was told in the London Daily Mail, May 28, 1906. If anyone wants to argue that it is all fantasy and lies, I think, myself, that it is more comfortable so to argue. One morning, in May, 1906, at Furnace Mill, Lambhurst, Kent, England, the miller, J. C. Playfair, went to his stable, and found horses turned around in their stalls, and one of them missing. It is common for one who has lost something, to search in all reasonable places, and then, in desperation, to look into places where not at all reasonably could the missing thing be. Adjoining the stable, was a hay room: the doorway was barely wide enough for a man to enter. Mr. Playfair, unable to find a trace of his missing horse, went to the hay room doorway, probably feeling as irrational as would somebody, who had lost an elephant, peering into a kitchen closet. The horse was in the hay room. A partition had to be knocked down to get him out.

There were other occurrences that could not be. Heavy barrels of lime, with nobody perceptibly near them, were hurled down the stairs. This was in the daytime. Though occasionally I do go slinking

[p. 916]

about, at night, with our data, mostly ours are sunlight mysteries. The mill was an isolated building, and nobody--at least nobody seeable--could approach it unseen. There were two watchdogs. A large water butt, so heavy that to move it was beyond human strength, was overthrown. Locked and bolted doors opened. I mention that the miller had a young son.

About the middle of March, 1901--that a woman was stabbed to death, in a fiction--or in a scene like an imagined scene that did not belong to what we call "reality." The look of the story of Lavinia Farrar is that it, too, was "revised," and by an amateurish, or negligent, or in some unknown way hampered, "author," who, in an attempt to cover up his crime, bungled--or that this woman had been killed inexplicably, in commonplace terms, and that, later, means were taken, but awkwardly, or almost blindly, and only by way of increasing the mystery, to make the murder seem understandable in terms of common human experience.

Cambridge (England) Daily News, March 16, 1901--that Lavinia Farrar, aged 72, a blind woman, "of independent means," had been found dead on her kitchen floor, face bruised, nose broken. Near the body was a blood-stained knife, and there were drops of blood on the floor. The body was dressed, and, until the post-mortem examination, no wound to account for the death was seen. At the inquest, two doctors testified that the woman had been stabbed to the heart, but that there was no puncture in her garments of which there were four. The woman, undressed, could not have stabbed herself, and then have dressed, because death had come to her almost instantly. A knife could not have been inserted through openings in the garments, because their fastenings were along lines far apart.

A knife was on the floor, and blood was on the floor. But it seemed that this blood had not come from the woman's wound. This wound was almost bloodless. Only one of her garments, the innermost, was blood-stained, and only slightly. There had been no robbery. The jury returned an open verdict.

Upon the evening of March 9, 1929--see the New York Times, March 10, 11, 1929--Isidor Fink, of 4 East 132nd Street, New York City, was ironing something. He was the proprietor of the Fifth

[p. 917]

[paragraph continues] Avenue Laundry. A hot iron was on the gas stove. Because of the hold-ups that were of such frequent occurrence at the time, he was afraid; the windows of his room were closed, and the door was bolted.

A woman, who heard screams, and sounds as if of blows, but no sound of shots, notified the police. Policeman Albert Kattenborn went to the place, but was unable to get in. He lifted a boy through the transom. The boy unbolted the door. On the floor lay Fink, two bullet wounds in his chest, and one in his left wrist, which was powder-marked. He was dead. There was money in his pockets, and the cash register had not been touched. No weapon was found. The man had died instantly, or almost instantly.

There was a theory that the murderer had crawled through the transom. A hinge on this transom was broken, but there was no statement, as to the look of this break, as indicating recency, or not. The transom was so narrow that Policeman Kattenborn had to lift a boy through it. It would have to be thought that, having sneaked noiselessly through this transom, the murderer then, with much difficulty, left the room the same way, instead of simply unbolting the door. It might be thought that the murderer had climbed up, outside, and had fired through the transom. But Fink's wrist was powder-burned, indicating that he had not been fired at from a distance. More than two years later, Police Commissioner Mulrooney, in a radio-talk, called this murder, in a closed room, an "insoluble mystery."

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

13

IF a man was scorched, though upon his clothes there was no sign of fire, it could be that the woman of Whitley Bay, who told of having found her sister burned to death on an unscorched bed, reported accurately. If the woman confessed that she had lied, that ends the mystery, or that stimulates interest. The statement that somebody, operated upon by the police, or by a coroner,

[p. 918]

confessed, has the meaning that has a statement that under pressure an apple produces cider. However, this analogy breaks down. I have never heard of an apple that would, if properly pressed, yield cider, if wanted; or ginger ale, if required; or home brew, all according to what was wanted.

Once upon a time, when mine was an undeveloped suspiciousness, and I'd let dogmatists pull their pedantries over my perceptions, I nevertheless collected occasional notes upon what seemed to me to be unexplained phenomena. I don't do things mildly, and at the same time much enjoy myself in various ways: I act as if trying to make allness out of something. A search for the unexplained became an obsession. I undertook the job of going through all scientific periodicals, at least by way of indexes, published in English and French, from the year 1800, available in the libraries of New York and London. As I went along, with my little suspicions in their infancies, new subjects appeared to me--something queer about some hailstorms--the odd and the unexplained in archaeological discoveries, and in Arctic explorations. By the time I got through with the "grand tour," as I called this search of all available periodicals, to distinguish it from special investigations, I was interested in so many subjects that had cropped up later, or that I had missed earlier, that I made the tour all over again--and then again had the same experience, and had to go touring again--and so on--until now it is my recognition that in every field of phenomena--and in later years I have multiplied my subjects by very much shifting to the newspapers--is somewhere the unexplained, or the irreconcilable, or the mysterious--in unformulable motions of all planets; volcanic eruptions, murders, hailstorms, protective colorations of insects, chemical reactions, disappearances of human beings, stars, comets, juries, diseases, cats, lampposts, newly married couples, cathode rays, hoaxes, impostures, wars, births, deaths.

Everywhere is the tabooed, or the disregarded. The monks of science dwell in smuggeries that are walled away from event-jungles. Or some of them do. Nowadays a good many of them are going native. There are scientific dervishes who whirl amok, brandishing startling statements; but mostly they whirl not far

[p. 919]

from their origins, and their excitements are exaggerations of old-fashioned complacencies.

Because of several cases that I have noted, the subject of Fires attracted my attention. One reads hundreds of accounts of fires, and many of them are mysterious, but one's ruling thought is that the unexplained would be renderable in terms of accidents, carelessness, or arson, if one knew all the circumstances. But keep this subject in mind, and, as in every other field of phenomena, one comes upon cases that are irreconcilables.

Glasgow News, May 20, 1878--doings in John Shattock's farmhouse, near Bridgewater. Fires had started up unaccountably. A Superintendent of Police investigated and suspected a servant girl, Ann Kidner, aged 12, because he had seen a hayrick flame, while she was passing it. Loud raps were heard. Things in the house, such as dishes and loaves of bread, moved about. The policeman ignored whatever he could not explain, and arrested the girl, accusing her of tossing lighted matches. But a magistrate freed her, saying that the evidence was insufficient.

There is a story of "devilish manifestations," in the Quebec Daily Mercury, Oct. 6, 1880. For two weeks, in the Hudson Hotel, in the town of Hudson, on the Ottawa River, furniture had been given to disorderly conduct: the beds had been especially excitable. A fire had broken out in a stall in the stable. This fire was quenched, but another fire broke out. A priest was sent for, and he sprinkled the stable with holy water. The stable burned down.

There are several recorded cases of such. fires ending with the burning of buildings; but a similarity that runs through the great majority of the stories is of fires localized in special places, and not extending. They are oftenest in the presence of a girl, aged from 12 to 20; but seldom do they occur at night, when they would be most dangerous. It is a peculiarity. See back to the case of the fires in the house in Bedford. It seems that, if those fires had been ordinary fires, the house would have burned down. The cases are of fires, in unscorched surroundings.

New Zealand Times, Dec. 9, 1886--copying from the San Francisco Bulletin, about October 14--that Willie Brough, 12 years old, who had caused excitement in the town of Turlock, Madison Co.,

[p. 920]

[paragraph continues] Cal., by setting things afire, "by his glance," had been expelled from the Turlock school, because of his freaks. His parents had cast him off, believing him to be possessed by a devil, but a farmer had taken him in, and had sent him to school. "On the first day, there were five fires in the school: one in the center of the ceiling, one in the teacher's desk, one in her wardrobe, and two on the wall. The boy discovered all, and cried from fright. The trustees met and expelled him, that night." For another account, see the New York Herald, Oct. 16, 1886.

Setting fire to teacher's desk, or to her wardrobe, is understandable, and would have been more understandable to me, when I was 12 years old; but in terms of no known powers of mischievous youngsters, can there be an explanation of setting a ceiling, or walls, afire. It seems to me that no yarn-spinner would have thought of any such particular, or would have made his story look improbable with it, if he had thought of it. I have other accounts in which similar statements occur. This particular of fires on walls is unknown in standardized yarns of uncanny doings. If writers of subsequent accounts probably had never heard of Willie Brough, it is improbable that several of them could invent, or would invent, anything so unlikely. It seems that my reasoning is that, under some circumstances, if something is highly unlikely, it is probable. John Stuart Mill missed that.

Upon the 6th of August, 1887, in a little, two-story frame house, in Victoria Street, Woodstock, New Brunswick, occupied by Reginald C. Hoyt, his wife, four children of his own, and two nieces, fires broke out. See the New York World, Aug. 8, 1887. Within a few hours, there were about forty fires. They were fires in un-scorched surroundings. They did not extend to their surroundings, because they were immediately put out, or because some unknown condition limited them. "The fires can be traced to no human agency, and even the most skeptical are staggered. Now a curtain, high up and out of reach, would burst into flames, then a bed quilt in another room: a basket of clothes on a shed, a child's dress, hanging on a hook."

New York Herald, Jan. 6, 1895--fires in the home of Adam Colwell, 84 Guernsey Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn--that, in 20 hours,

[p. 921]

preceding noon, January 5th, when Colwell's frame house burned down, there had been many fires. Policemen had been sent to investigate. They had seen furniture burst into flames. Policemen and firemen had reported that the fires were of unknown origin. The Fire Marshal said: "It might be thought that the child Rhoda started two of the fires, but she cannot be considered guilty of the others, as she was being questioned, when some of them began. I do not want to be quoted as a believer in the supernatural, but I have no explanation to offer, as to the cause of the fires, or of the throwing around of the furniture."

Colwell's story was that, upon the afternoon of January 4th, in the presence of his wife and his step-daughter Rhoda, aged 16, a crash was heard. A large, empty, parlor stove had fallen to the floor. Four pictures, fell from walls. Colwell had been out. Upon his return, while hearing an account of what had occurred, he smelled smoke. A bed was afire. He called a policeman, Roundsman Daly, who put out the fire, and then, because of unaccountable circumstances, remained in the house. It was said that the Roundsman saw wallpaper, near the shoulder of Colwell's son Willie start to burn. Detective Sergeant Dunn arrived. There was another fire, and a heavy lamp fell from a hook. The house burned down, and the Colwells, who were in poor circumstances, lost everything but their clothes. They were taken to the police station.

Captain Rhoades, of the Greenpoint Precinct, said: "The people we arrested had nothing to do with the strange fires. The more I look into it, the deeper the mystery. So far I can attribute it to no other cause than a supernatural agency. Why, the fires broke out under the very noses of the men I sent to investigate."

Sergeant Dunn--"There were things that happened before my eyes that I did not believe were possible."

New York Herald, January 7--"Policemen and firemen artfully tricked by a pretty, young girl."

Mr. J. L. Hope, of Flushing, L. I., had called upon Captain Rhoades, telling him that Rhoda had been a housemaid in his home, where, between November 19 and December 19, four mysterious fires had occurred. "Now the Captain was sure of Rhoda's

[p. 922]

guilt, and he told her so." "She was frightened, and was advised to tell the truth."

And Rhoda told what she was "advised" to tell. She "sobbed" that she had started the fires, because she did not like the neighborhood in which she lived, and wanted to move away: that she had knocked pictures from the walls, while her mother was in another part of the house, and had dropped burning matches into beds, continuing; her trickeries after policemen, detectives, and firemen had arrived.

The Colwells were poor people, and occupied only the top floor of the house that burned down. Colwell, a carpenter, had been out of work two years, and the family was living on the small wages of his son. Insurance was not mentioned.

The police captain's conclusion was that the fires that had seemed "supernatural" to him, were naturally accounted for, because, if when Rhoda was in Flushing, she set things afire, fires in her own home could be so explained. Rather than to start a long investigation into the origin of the fires in Flushing, the police captain gave the girl what was considered sound and wholesome advice. And--though it seems quaint, today--the girl listened to advice. "Pretty, young girls" have tricked more than policemen and firemen. Possibly a dozen male susceptibles could have looked right at this pretty, young girl, and not have seen her strike a match, and flip it into furniture; but no flip of a match could set wallpaper afire. The case is like the case of Emma Piggott. Only to one person's motives could fires be attributed: but by no known means could she have started some of these fires.

Said Dr. Hastings H. Hart, of the Russell Sage Foundation, as reported in the newspapers, May 10, 1931: "Morons for the most part can be the most useful citizens, and a great deal of the valuable work being done in the United States is being done by such mentally deficient persons."

Dr. Hart was given very good newspaper space for this opinion, which turned out to be popular. One can't offend anybody with any statement that is interpreted as applying to everybody else. Inasmuch as my own usefulness has not been very widely recognized, I am a little flattered, myself. To deny, ridicule, or reasonably explain away occurrences that are the data of this book, is what I call

[p. 923]

useful. A general acceptance that such things are would be unsettling. I am an evil one, quite as was anybody, in the past, who collected data that were contrary to the orthodoxy of his time. Some of the most useful work is being done in the support of Taboo. The break of Taboo in any savage tribe would bring on perhaps fatal disorders. As to the taboos of savages, my impressions are that it is their taboos that are keeping them from being civilized; that, consequently, one fetish is worth a hundred missionaries.

I shall take an account of "mysterious fires" from the St. Louis Globe-Democrat, Dec. 19, 1891. I shall go on to quote from a Canadian newspaper, with the idea of supporting Dr. Hart's observations. Reporters, scientists, policemen, spiritualists--all have investigated phenomena of "poltergeist girls" in ways essentially the same as the way of a Canadian newspaper man--and that has been to pick out whatever agreed with their preconceptions, or with their mental deficiencies, or their social usefulness, and to disregard everything else.

According to the story in the Globe-Democrat, there had been "extraordinary" occurrences in the home of Robert Dawson, a farmer, at Thorah, near Toronto, Canada. In his household were his wife and an adopted daughter, an English girl, Jennie Bramwell, aged 14. Adopted daughters, with housemaids, are attracting my attention, in these cases. The girl had been ill. She had gone into a trance, and had exclaimed: "Look at that!" pointing to a ceiling. The ceiling was afire. Soon the girl startled Mr. and Mrs. Dawson by pointing to another fire. Next day many fires broke out. As soon as one was extinguished, another started up. While Mrs. Dawson and the girl were sitting, facing a wall, the wallpaper blazed. Jennie Bramwell's dress flamed, and Mrs. Dawson's hands were burned, extinguishing the fire. For a week, fires broke out. A kitten flamed. A circumstance that is unlike a particular in the Bedford case, is that furniture carried outside, and set in the yard, did not burn.

An account, in the Toronto Globe, November 9, was by a reporter, who was a person of usefulness. He told of the charred patches of wallpaper, which looked as if a lighted lamp had been held to the places. Conditions were miserable. All furniture had

[p. 924]

been moved to the yard. The girl had been sent back to the orphan asylum, from which she had been adopted, because the fires had been attributed to her. With her departure, phenomena had stopped. The reporter described her as "a half-witted girl, who had walked about, setting things afire." He was doubtful as to what to think of the reported flaming of a kitten, and asked to see it. He wrote that it was nothing but a kitten, with a few hairs on its back slightly singed. But the chief difficulty was to explain the fire on the ceiling, and the fires on the walls. I'll not experiment, but I assume that I could flip matches all day at a wall, and not set wallpaper afire. The reporter asked Mrs. Dawson whether the girl had any knowledge of chemistry. According to him, the answer was that this little girl, aged 14, who had been brought up in an orphan asylum, was "well-versed in the rudiments of the science." Basing upon this outcome of his investigations, and forgetting that he had called the well-versed, little chemist "half-witted," or being more sophisticated than I seem to think, and seeing no inconsistency between scientific knowledge and imbecility, the useful reporter then needed only several data more to solve the mystery. He enquired in the town, and learned that the well-versed and half-witted little chemist was also "an incorrigible little thief." He went to the drug store, and learned that several times the girl had been sent there on errands. The mystery was solved: the girl had stolen "some chemical," which she had applied to various parts of Dawson's house.

Occurrences of more recent date. Story in the London Daily Mail, Dec. 13, 1921, of a boy, in Budapest, in whose presence furniture moved. The boy was about 13 years of age. Since about his 12th birthday, fires had often broken out, in his presence. Alarmed neighbors, or "superstitious" neighbors, as they were described, in the account, had driven him and his mother from their home. It was said that, when he slept, flames flickered over him, and singed his pillow.

In the New York Times, Aug. 25, 1929, was published a story of excitement upon the West Indian island of Antigua. This is a story that reverses the particulars of some of the other stories. It is an account of a girl whose clothes flamed, leaving her body unscorched. This girl, a Negress, named Lily White, living in the village of

[p. 925]

[paragraph continues] Liberta, flamed, while walking in the streets. However, at home, too, the clothes of this girl often burst into flames. She became dependent upon her neighbors for something to wear. When she was in bed, sheets burned around her, seemingly harmlessly to her, according to the story.

Early in March, 1922, an expedition, composed of newspaper reporters and photographers, headed by Dr. Walter Franklin Prince, arrived at a deserted house that was surrounded by snow banks out of which stuck the blackened backs, legs, and arms of burned furniture. The newspapers had told of doings in this house, near Antigonish, Nova Scotia, and had emphasized the circumstance that, "in the dead of winter," Alexander MacDonald and his family had been driven from their home, by "mysterious fires," unaccountable sounds, and the meanderings of crockery. The phenomena had centered around Mary Ellen, MacDonald's adopted daughter. With the idea that the house was haunted, the expedition entered, and made itself at home, everybody quick on the draw for note paper or camera. Mostly, in poltergeist cases, I see nothing to suggest that the girls--boys sometimes--are mediums, or are operated upon by spirits; the phenomena seem to be occult powers of youngsters. In MacDonald's house, the investigators came upon nothing that suggested the presence of spirits. Mary Ellen and her father, or father by adoption, were induced to return to the house, but nothing occurred. Usually, in cases of poltergeist girls, phenomena are not of long duration. Dr. Prince interviewed neighbors, and recorded their testimony that dozens of fires had broken out, in this girl's presence: but more striking than any testimony by witnesses was the sight, outside this house, of the blackened furniture, sticking out of snow banks.

New York Sun, Feb. 2, 1932--a dispatch from Bladenboro, North Carolina. "Fires, which apparently spring from nowhere, consuming the household effects of C. H. Williamson, here, have placed this community in a state of excitement, and continue to burn. Saturday a window shade and curtain burned in the Williamson home. Since then fire has burst out in five rooms. Five window shades, bed coverings, tablecloths, and other effects have suddenly burst into flames, under the noses of the watchers. Williamson's daughter stood

[p. 926]

in the middle of the floor, with no fire near. Suddenly her dress ignited. That was too much, and household goods were removed from the house."

In the New York Sun, Dec. 1, 1882, is an account of the occult powers of A. W. Underwood, a Negro, aged 24, of Paw Paw, Michigan. The account, copied from the Michigan Medical News, was written by Dr. L. C. Woodman, of Paw Paw. It was Dr. Woodman's statement that he was convinced that Underwood's phenomena were genuine. "He will take anybody's handkerchief, and hold it to his mouth, rub it vigorously, while breathing on it, and immediately it bursts into flames, and burns until consumed. He will strip, and will rinse out his mouth thoroughly, and submit to the most rigorous examination to preclude the possibility of any humbug, and then by his breath, blown upon any paper, or cloth, envelop it in flames. He will, while out gunning, lie down, after collecting dry leaves, and by breathing on them start a fire."

In the New York Sun, July 9, 1927, is an account of a visit by Vice-President Dawes, to Memphis, Tennessee. In this city lived a car-repairer, who was also a magician. "He took General Dawes' handkerchief, and breathed upon it, and it caught fire."

Out of the case of the Negro who breathed dry leaves afire, I conceive of the rudiments of a general expression, which I expect to develop later. The phenomena look to me like a survival of a power that may have been common in the times of primitive men. Breathing dry leaves afire would, once upon a time, be a miracle of the highest value. I speculate how that could have come about. Most likely there never has been human intelligence keen enough to conceive of the uses of fire, in times when uses of fire were not of conventional knowledge. But, if we can think of our existence as a whole--perhaps only one of countless existences in the cosmos--as a developing organism, we can think of a fire-inducing power appearing automatically in some human beings, at a time of its need in the development of human phenomena. So fire-geniuses appeared. By a genius I mean one who can't avoid knowledge of fire, because he can't help setting things afire.

I think of these fire-agents as the most valuable members of a savage community, in primitive times: most likely beginning humbly,

[p. 927]

regarded as freaks; most likely persecuted at first, but becoming established, and then so overcharging for their services that it was learned how, by rubbing sticks, to do without them--so then their fall from importance, and the dwindling of them into their present, rare occurrence--but the preservation of them, as occasionals, by Nature, as an insurance, because there's no knowing when we'll all go back to savagery again, degrading down to an ignorance of even how to start fires--so then a revival of the fire-agents, and civilization starting up again--only again to be overthrown by wars and grafts, doctors, lawyers, and other racketeers; corrupt judges and cowardly juries--starting down again, perhaps this time not stopping short of worms. Occasionally I contribute to the not very progressive science of biology, and, as I explain atavistic persons in societies, I now make suggestions as to vestigial organs and structures in human bodies--that the vestigial may not be merely a relic, but may be insurance--that the vestigial tail of a human being is no mere functionless retention, but is a provision against times when back to the furry state we may go, and need means for wagging our emotions. Conceive of a powerful backward slide, and one conceives of the appearance, by only an accentuation of the existing, of hosts of werewolves and wereskunks and werehyenas in the streets of New York City.

Mostly our data indicate that occasional human beings have the fire-inducing power. But it looks as if it were not merely that, in the presence of the Negress, Lily White, fires started: it looks as if these fires were attacks upon her. Men and women have been found, burned to death, and explanations at inquests have not been satisfactory. There are records of open, and savage, seizures, by flames, of people.

Annual Register, 1820-13--that Elizabeth Barnes, a girl aged 10, had been taken to court, accused by John Wright, a linen draper, of Foley-place, Mary-le-bon, London, of having repeatedly, and "by some extraordinary means," set fire to the clothing of Wright's mother, by which she had been burned so severely that she was not expected to live. The girl had been a servant in Wright's household. Upon January 5th an unexplained fire had broken out. Upon the 7th, Mrs. Wright and the girl were sitting by the hearth, in the

[p. 928]

kitchen. Nothing is said, in the account, of relations between these two. Mrs. Wright got up from her chair, and was walking away, when she saw that her clothes were afire. Again, upon January 12th, she was, with the girl, in the kitchen, about eight feet from the hearth, where "a very small fire" was burning. Suddenly her clothes flamed. The next day, Wright heard screams from the kitchen, where his mother was, and where the girl had been. He ran into the room, and found his mother in flames. Only a moment before had the girl left the kitchen, and this time Wright accused her. But it was Mrs. Wright's belief that the girl had nothing to do with her misfortunes, and that "something supernatural" was assailing her. She sent for her daughter, who arrived, to guard her. She continued to believe that the girl could have had nothing to do with the fires, and went to the kitchen, where the girl was, and again "by some unknown means, she caught fire." "She was so dreadfully burned that she was put to bed." When she had gone to sleep, her son and daughter left the room--and were immediately brought back by her screams, finding her surrounded by flames. Then the girl was told to leave the house. She left, and there were no more fires. This seemed conclusive, and the Wrights caused her arrest. At the hearing, the magistrate said that he had no doubt that the girl was guilty, but that he could not pronounce sentence, until Mrs. Wright should so recover as to testify.

In Cosmos, 3-6-242, is a physician's report upon a case. It is a communication by Dr. Bertholle to the Societe Medico-Chirurgicale:

That, upon the 1st of August, 1869, the police of Paris had sent for Dr. Bertholle, in the matter of a woman, who had been found, burned to death. Under the burned body, the floor was burned, but there was nothing to indicate the origin of the fire. Bedclothes, mattresses, curtains, all other things in the room, showed not a trace of fire. But this body was burned, as if it had been the midst of flames of the intensity of a furnace. Dr. Bertholle's report was technical and detailed: left arm totally consumed; right hand burned to cinders; no trace left of internal organs in the thorax, and organs in the abdomen unrecognizable. The woman had made no outcry, and no other sound had been heard by other dwellers in the house. It

[p. 929]

is localization, or specialization, again--a burned body in an almost unscorched room.

Upon the night of Dec. 23, 1916--see the New York Herald, Dec. 27, 28, 1916--Thomas W. Morphey, proprietor of the Lake Denmark Hotel, seven miles from Dover, N. J., was awakened by moaning sounds. He went down the stairs, and found his housekeeper, Lillian Green, burned and dying. On the floor under her was a small, charred place, but nothing else, except her clothes, showed any trace of fire. At a hospital, the woman was able to speak, but it seems that she could not explain. She died without explaining.

One of my methods, when searching for what I call data, is to note, in headlines, or in catalogues, or indexes, such clue-words, or clue-phrases, as I call them, as "mystery solved," or an assurance that something has been explained. When I read that common sense has triumphed, and that another superstition has been laid low, that is a stimulus to me to be busy--

Or that story of the drunken woman, of Whitley Bay, near Blyth, who had told of finding her sister burned to death on an unscorched bed, and had recanted. Having read that this mystery had been satisfactorily explained, I got a volume of the Blyth News.

The story in the local newspaper is largely in agreement with the story in the London newspapers: nevertheless there are grounds for doubts that make me think it worth while to re-tell the story.

The account is of two retired schoolteachers, Margaret and Wilhelmina Dewar, who lived in the town of Whitley Bay, near Blyth. In the evening of March 22, 1908, Margaret Dewar ran into a neighbor's house, telling that she had found her sister, burned to death. Neighbors went to the house with her. On a bed, which showed no trace of fire, lay the charred body of Wilhelmina Dewar. It was Margaret's statement that so she had found the body, and so she testified, at the inquest. And there was no sign of fire in any other part of the house.

So this woman testified. The coroner said that he did not believe her. He called a policeman, who said that, at the time of the finding of the body, the woman was so drunk that she could not have known what she was saying. The policeman was not called upon to state how he distinguished between signs of excitement and terror,

[p. 930]

and intoxication. But there was no accusation that, while upon the witness stand, this woman was intoxicated, and here she told the same story. The coroner urged her to recant. She said that she could not change her story.

So preposterous a story as that of a woman who had burned to death on an unscorched bed, if heeded, or if permitted to be told, would be letting "black magic," or witchcraft, into English legal proceedings. The coroner tried persistently to make the woman change it. She persisted in refusing. The coroner abruptly adjourned the inquest until April 1st.

Upon April 1st, Margaret Dewar confessed. Any reason for her telling of a lie, in the first place, is not discoverable. But there were strong reasons for her telling what she was wanted to tell. The local newspaper was against her. Probably the coroner terrified her. Most likely all her neighbors were against her, and hers were the fears of anybody, in a small town, surrounded by hostile neighbors. When the inquest was resumed, Margaret Dewar confessed that she had been inaccurate, and that she had found her sister burned, but alive, in a lower part of the house, and had helped her up to her room, where she had died. In this new story, there was no attempt to account for the fire; but the coroner was satisfied. There was not a sign of fire anywhere in the lower part of this house. But the proper testimony had been recorded. Why Margaret Dewar should have told the story that was called a lie was not inquired into. There are thousands of inquests at which testimonies are proper stories.

Madras Mail, May 13, 1907--a woman in the village of Manner, near Dinapore--flames that had consumed her body, but not her clothes--that two constables had found the corpse in a room, in which nothing else showed signs of fire, and had carried the smoldering body, in the unscorched clothes, to the District Magistrate. Toronto Globe, Jan. 28, 1907--dispatch from Pittsburgh, Pa.--that Albert Houck had found the body of his wife, "burned to a crisp," lying upon a table--no sign of fire upon the table, nor anywhere else in the house. New York Sun, Jan. 24, 1930--coroner's inquiry, at Kingston, N. Y., into the death of Mrs. Stanley Lake. "Although her body was severely burned, her clothing was not even scorched."

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 931]

  

14

THE story of the "mad bats of Trinidad" is that the discoverer of them had solved a mystery of many deaths of human beings and cattle. "Dr. Pawan, a Trinidad scientist, had discovered that the infection had been caused by mad vampire bats, affected by rabies, which they transmitted in a new form of insidious hydrophobia."

But the existence of hydrophobia is so questionable, or of such rare occurrence, even in dogs, that the story of the "mad bats of Trinidad" looks like some more of the sensationalism in science that is so obtrusive today, and compared with which I am, myself, only a little wild now and then. It is probable that the deaths of human beings and cattle, in Trinidad, have not been accounted for. Once upon a time the explanation would have been "witchcraft." Now it's "rabid vampires." The old hag on her broomstick is of inferior theatrical interest, compared with the insane blood-sucker.

The germ-theory of diseases is probably like all other theories, ranging from those of Moses and Newton and Einstein and Brother Voliva down, or maybe up, or perhaps crosswise, to mine, or anybody else's. Many cases may be correlated under one explanation, but there must be exceptions. No pure, or homogeneous, case of any kind is findable: so every case is variously classifiable. There have been many cases of ailments and deaths of human beings that have not been satisfactorily explained in the medical terms that are just now fashionable, but that will probably be out of style, after a while. Nowadays one is smug with what one takes for progress, thinking of old-time physicians prescribing dried toads for ailments. Here's something for the enjoyment of future smugness. Newspapers of Jan. 14, 1932--important medical discovery--dried pigs' stomachs, as a cure for anaemia. I now have a theory of what is called evolution, in terms of fashions--that somewhere, perhaps on high, there is a Paris--where, once upon a time, were dictated the modes in bugs

[p. 932]

and worms, and then the costumes of birds and mammals; grotesquely stretching the necks of giraffes, and then quite as unreasonably reacting with a repentance of hippopotami; passing on to a mental field of alternating extravagances and puritanisms, sometimes neat and tasteful, but often elaborate and rococo, with religions, philosophies, and sciences, imposing upon the fashion-slaves of this earth the latest thing in theories.

In the New York Sun, Jan. 17, 1930, Dr. E. S. Godfrey, of the New York State Department of Health, told, in an interview, of mysterious deaths on a vessel. In a period of four years, twenty-seven officers and men had been stricken by what was called "typhoid fever." Taking his science from the Sunday Newspapers, which had full-paged the story of "Typhoid Mary," a scientific detective, with his microscope, boarded this vessel, and of course soon announced that he had "tracked down" one of the sailors, as a "typhoid carrier." Such sleuthing has become a modernized witch-finding. There are, in New York State, today, persecutions that are in some cases as deadly as the witchcraft-persecutions of the past. "There are 188 women and 90 men recorded as typhoid-carriers, in New York State." Why there should be twice as many women as men is plain enough: the carrier-finders, with "Typhoid Mary" in mind, probably went looking for women. It may be a matter of difficulty, or it may be impossible, in times of general unemployment, for somebody in the grocery or dairy business, to change into some other occupation: but these 278 "typhoid-carriers," tracked down by medical Sherlock Holmeses, who had read of "typhoid-carriers," are prohibited from working in food-trades, and have to report to district health officers once every three months. But this is for the protection of the rest of us. But that is what the witch-finders used to say. Chivalry can't die, so long as there is tyranny: every tyrant has been much given to protecting somebody or something. It is one of the blessings of our era that we are tormented by so many abominations, enormities, and pestiferous, smaller botherations that we can't concentrate upon the germ-scares that the medical "finders" would spread, if it were not for so much competition. They did spread, with some success, with their parrot-scare, in the year 1929. Abandoned parrots, in their cages, were found, frozen to death, in parks

[p. 933]

and doorways. Probably the psittacosis scare, of 1929, did not become the hysteria of former scares, because lay-alarmists were checked by their inability to pronounce the name of it.

There must be something the matter with the germ-theory of diseases, or the nursing and medical professions would not be so overcrowded. There must be something the matter with the germ-theory of diseases, if there is something the matter with every theory.

I looked up the case of "Typhoid Mary." With the preconceptions of everybody who looks up cases, I went looking for something to pick on. It was impossible for me to fail to find what I wanted to consider a case of injustice, if ours is an existence of justice-injustice. I of course found that the case of "Typhoid Mary" as a germ-carrier was not made out so clearly as the "finders" of today suppose.

In the year 1906, it was noted that in several homes, in New York City, where Mary had been employed as a cook, there had been illnesses that were said to be cases of typhoid fever. The matter was investigated, according to what was supposed to be scientific knowledge, in the year 1906. The germ-theory of diseases was the dominant idea. Not a thought was given to relations between this woman and her victims. Had there been quarrels, before illnesses of persons, living in the same house with her, occurred? What was the disposition of the woman? There are millions of men and women, with long hours and little pay, who may, in their states of mind, be more dangerous than germs. There are cooks with grievances, as well as cooks with germs. But Mary's malices were not examined. It was "found" that, though immune herself, she was a distributor of typhoid bacilli. For three years she was "detained" in a hospital, by the public health officials of New York City.

And then what became of Mary's germs? According to one examination, she had them. According to another examination, she hadn't them. At the end of three years, Mary was examined again, and, according to all tests, she hadn't them. She was released, upon promising to report periodically to the Board of Health.

Probably because of lively impressions of "detention," Mary did

[p. 934]

not keep her promise. Under various aliases, she obtained work as a cook.

About five years later, twenty-five persons, in the Sloane Maternity Hospital, New York City, were stricken with what was said to be typhoid fever. Two of them died. See the Outlook, 109-803. And Mary was doing the cooking at the hospital. The Public Health officials "detained" her again, following their conclusion that they said was obvious. I know of hosts of cases that are obvious one way, and just as apparent some other way; conclusive, according to one theorist, and positively established, according to opposing theorists.

She had them, when, to support a theory, she should have them. She hadn't them, when her own support, as "detained," was becoming expensive. She had--she hadn't--But it does seem that in some way this woman was related to the occurrence of illnesses, sometimes fatal.

Of all germ-distributors, the most notorious was Dr. Arthur W. Waite, who, in the year 1916, was an embarrassment to medical science. In his bacteriological laboratory, he had billions of germs. Waite planned to kill his father-in-law, John E. Peck, 435 Riverside Drive, New York City. He fed the old man germs of diphtheria, but got no results. He induced Peck to use a nasal spray, in which he had planted colonies of the germs of tuberculosis. Not a cough. He fed the old man calomel, to weaken his resistance. He turned loose hordes of germs of typhoid, and then tried influenza. In desperation, he lost all standing in the annals of distinctive crimes, and went common, or used arsenic. The old-fashioned method was a success. One's impression is that, if anything, diets and inhalations of germs may be healthful.

It is not that I am attacking the germ-theory of diseases as absolute nonsense. I do not attack this theory as absolute nonsense, because I conceive of no theory that is more than partly nonsensical. I have some latitude. Let the conventionalists have their theory that germs cause diseases, and let their opponents have their theory that diseases cause germs, or that diseased conditions attract germs. Also there is room for dozens of other theories. Under the heading "Invalidism," I have noted 43 cases of human beings who were ill, sometimes temporarily, and sometimes dying, at the time of uncanny--

[p. 935]

though rather common--occurrences in their homes. No conventional theory fits these cases. But the stories, as collected by me, are only fragments.

One day, in July, 1890, in the home of Mr. Piddock, in Haferroad, Clapham, London--see the London Echo, July 16, 1890--the daughter of this household was dying. Volleys of stones, of origin that could not be found out, were breaking through the glass of the conservatory. It is probable that not a doctor, in London, in the year 1890--nor in the year 1930--if what is known as a reputable physician--would admit any possibility of relationship between a dying girl and stones that were breaking windows.

But why should any doctor, in London, in the year 1890, or any other year, accept the existence of any relation between a bombardment of a house and a girl's dying condition? He would be as well-justified in explaining that there was only coincidence, as were early paleontologists in so explaining, when they came upon bones of a huge body, and, some distance away, a relatively small skull--explaining that the skull only happened to be near the other bones. They had never heard of dinosaurs. If many times they came upon similar skulls associating with similar other bones, some of them would at least refuse any longer to believe in mere coincidence; but the more academic ones, affronted by a new thought, would continue in their thought-ruts, decrying all reported instances as yarns, fakery, imposture, nonsense.

The dying girl--showers of stones--

New York Sun, Dec. 22, 30, 1883--that, in a closed room in a house in Jordan, N. Y., in which a man was dying, stones were falling.

In the home of Alexander Urquhart, Aberdeen, Scotland, there was an invalid boy. Stories of doings in this house were told in London newspapers, early in January, 1920. The boy was simply set down as "an invalid boy," and presumably doctors were not mystified by his ailment. Nobody was recorded as suspecting anything but coincidence between whatever may have been the matter with him, and phenomena that centered around him, as he lay in his bed. It was as if he were bombarded by unseen bombs. Explosive sounds that shook the house occurred over his bed, and, according

[p. 936]

to reports by policemen, the bed was violently shaken. Policemen reported that objects, in the boy's room, moved--

London Daily News, Jan. 10, 1920--"Aberdeen ghost laid low--prosaic explanation for strange sounds--nothing but a piece of wood that the wind had been knocking against a side of the house."

That probably convinced the London readers who preferred something like the "mice-behind-the-baseboards" conclusion to such stories. But the Glasgow Herald, of the 13th, continued to tell of "thumping sounds that shook the house and rattled the dishes."

The data are protrusions from burials. The body of a girl--the body of a crow. Somebody. dying--and hostile demonstrations that cannot conventionally be explained. But if there were connecting circumstances, they are now undiscoverable. It is said that there is a science of comparative anatomy, by which, given any bone of an animal, the whole skeleton can be reconstructed. So stated, this is one of the tall stories of science. The "father" of the science of comparative anatomy never reconstructed anything except conventionally. The paleontologists have reconstructed crowds of skeletons that are exhibited as evidences of evolution: but Cuvier not only never reconstructed anything new, but is now notorious as a savage persecutor of evolutionists. There cannot be reconstruction, unless there be a model. We may have a comparative anatomy of our fragmentary circumstances, if we can fit the pieces to a situation-model. And it may be that we are slowly building that. Of course anything of the nature of old-fashioned, absolute science is no dream of mine.

From the Port of Spain (Trinidad) Mirror, and the Port of Spain Gazette, I take a story of phenomena that began Nov. 12, 1905, in Mrs. Lorelhei's boarding house, in Queen Street, Port of Spain. The house was pelted with stones. A malicious neighbor was suspected, but then, inside the house, there were occurrences that, at least physically, could be attributed to nobody. Objects were thrown about. Chairs fell over, got up, and whirled. Out of a basket of potatoes, flew the potatoes. Stones fell from unseen points of origin, in rooms. A doctor was quoted as saying that he had seen some of these doings. He had been visiting a girl, who, in this house, was ill.

In the Religio-Philosophical Journal, July 15, 1882, as copied from the New York Sun, there is a boardinghouse story. Mrs. William

[p. 937]

[paragraph continues] Swift's boardinghouse, 52 Willoughby Street, Brooklyn--the occupant of the back parlor was ill. Raps were heard. Several times appeared a floating, vaporous body, shaped like a football. Upon the ailing boarder, the effect of this object was like an electric shock.

In the Religio-Philosophical Journal, March 31, 1883, and the New York Times, March 12, 1883, there are accounts of the bewitchment of the house, 33 Church Street, New Haven, Conn. Tramping sounds--objects flying about. A woman in this house was ill. While she was preparing medicine in a cup, the spoon flew away. Sounds like Hey, diddle, diddle! Then it was as if an occult enemy took a shot at her. An unfindable bullet made a hole in a glass.

In the Bristol (England) Mercury, Oct. 12, 1889, and in the Northern Daily Telegraph, Oct. 8, 1889, are accounts of loud sounds of unknown origin in a house in the village of Hornington, near Salisbury. Here a child, Lydia Hewlett, aged nine, "was stricken with a mysterious illness, lying in bed, never speaking, never moving, apparently at death's door." It was said that this child had incurred the enmity of a gypsy, whom she had caught stealing vegetables in a neighbor's garden.

One of the cases of "mysterious family maladies," accompanied by poltergeist disturbances, was reported by the Guernsey Star, March 5, 1903. In the home of a resident of the island of Guernsey, Mr. B. Collinette, several members of the family were taken ill. Things were flying about.

Early in the year 1893--as told in the New York World, Feb. 17, 19, 1896--an elderly man, named Mack, appeared, with his invalid wife, and his daughter Mary, in the town of Bellport, Long Island, N. Y., and made of the ground floor of their house a little candy store. The account in the World is of a starting up of persecutions of this family that were attributed to hostility of other storekeepers, and to dislike "probably because of their thrift." Stones were thrown at the house "by street gamins." Several boys were arrested, but there was no evidence against them. At the time of one of the bombardments, Mary was on the porch of the house. A big dog appeared. He ran against her, knocking her down, injuring her spine so that she was a cripple the rest of her life. All details of this story are in terms of persecutions by neighbors: in the terms of the telling, there

[p. 938]

is no suggestion of anything occult. Unidentified persons were throwing stones.

The terrified girl took to her bed. Stones thumped on the roof above her, throwing her into spasms of fright. In one of these convulsions, she died. Missing in this story is anything relating to Mack's experiences before arriving in Bellport. His daughter was crippled, and died of fright. He arrived with an invalid wife.

In his biography of the Bishop of Zanzibar (Frank, Bishop of Zanzibar)--I take from a review in the London Daily Express, Oct. 27, 1926--Dr. H. Maynard Smith, Canon of Gloucester, tells of poltergeist persecutions, near the mission station, at Weti. Clods of earth, of undetectable origin, were bombarding a house in which lived a man and his wife. Clods fell inside the house. The bishop investigated, and he was struck by a clod. Inside the house, he saw a mass of mud appear on a ceiling. The door was open, but this point on the ceiling was in a position that could not be hit by anyone throwing anything from outside. There was no open window.

The bishop came ceremoniously the next morning, and solemnly exorcised the supposed spirit. That these stories indicate the existence of spirits is what I do not think. But it seems that the bishop made an impression. The mud-slinging stopped. But then illness came upon the woman of this house.

Upon the night of Aug. 9, 1920, as told in the London Daily Mail, Aug. 19, 1920, a shower of small stones broke the windows in the top floor of Wellington Villa, Grove-road, South Woodford, London, occupied by Mr. H. T. Gaskin, an American, the inventor of the Gaskin Life Boat. There were many showers of stones of undetectable origin. Upon the night of the 13th, policemen took positions in the house, in the street, on roofs, and in trees. The upper floor of the house was bombarded with stones, but where they came from could not be found out. Night of the 14th--a procession. Forty policemen, some of them local, and some of them from Scotland Yard, marched down Grove-road, and went up on roofs, or climbed into trees. Volleys of stones arrived, but the forty policemen learned no more than had the smaller numbers of the preceding investigations. Nevertheless it seems that they made an impression. Phenomena stopped.

[p. 939]

The patter of stones--and policemen on roofs, and policemen in trees, and the street packed with sightseers--and this is a spot of excitement--but it has no environment. I can pick up no trace of relations between anybody in this house and anybody outside.

In one of the rooms lay an invalid. Mr. Gaskin was suffering from what was said to be sciatica. In an interview he said that he could not account for the attack upon him, or upon the house: that, so far as he knew, he had no enemy.

In some of these cases, I have tried to dig into blankness. I have shoveled vacancy. I have written to Mr. and Mrs. Gaskin, but have received no answer. I have looked over the index of the London Times, before and after August, 1920, with the idea of coming upon something, such as a record of a law case, or some other breeder of enmity, in which Mr. Gaskin might have been involved, but have come upon nothing.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

15

NOW I have a theory that our existence is a hermaphrodite--

Or the unproductivity of it, in the sense that the beings, and seas, and houses, and trees, and the fruits of trees, its "immortal truths," and "rocks of ages" that it seems to produce are only flutters that seem to be real productions to us, because we see them very slow-motioned.

My interpretation of theology is that, though mythologically much confused, it is an awareness of the wholeness of one existence--perhaps one of countless existences in the cosmos--and that its distortions are founded upon intuitive knowledge of the unproductive state of this one existence, as a whole--and so its visions of a divine sterility, which are illustrated with figures of blonde hermaphrodites. Of course there are stray legends of male angels, but such stories are symbols of the inconsistency that co-exists with the consistency of all things phenomenal--

[p. 940]

Or that parthenogenesis is the essential principle of all things, beings, thoughts, states, phenomenal.

I'd be queried, if I should say, of the consummation of any human romance, that it is parthenogenetic: but humanity, regarded as a whole, is sustained by self-fertilization. Except for occasional, vague stories of external enrichments, there are no records of invigorations imparted to the human kind from gorillas, hyenas, or swine. Elephants fertilize elephants. I conceive of no bizarre, little love story, with a fruitful outcome, of the attractions of a rhinoceros to a humming bird. Though I have a venerable, little story--account sent to me by Mr. Ernest Doerfler, Bronx, N. Y.--of an eighteenth-century scientist, whose theory it was that human females can be pollinated, and who experimented, by exposing a buxom female to the incidence of the east wind, and of course was successful in establishing his theory, I have no other datum of human and vegetable unions: so this reported occurrence must be considered one of the marvels from which this book of not uncommon events holds aloof.

The parthenogenetic triumphs of the human intellect are circular stupidities. The mathematicians, in their intuitions of the state of a whole, have represented what to the devout is divinity, with the circle, which, to them the "perfect figure," symbolizes getting nowhere.

Much of the argument in this book will depend upon our acceptance that nothing in our existence is real. The Whole may be Realness. Out of its phenomena, it may be non-phenomenally producing offspring-realnesses. That is not our present subject. But up comes the question: If nothing phenomenal is real, is everything phenomenal really unreal? But, if I accept that nothing is real, in phenomenal existence, I cannot accept that anything, therein, is really unreal. So my acceptance, in accordance with our general philosophy of the hyphen, is that all things perceptible to us are real-unreal, varying from the direction of one extreme to the other, according to whatever may be the degree of their appearance of individuality. If anybody has the notion that he is a real being--and by realness I mean individuality, or call it entity, or unrelatedness--let him try to tell why he thinks he exists, in a real sense. Recall the most celebrated

[p. 941]

of the parthenogenetic attempts to make this demonstration:

I think: therefore I am.

We have to accept that in order to think, the thinker must be of existence, prior to the thought.

Why do I think?

Because I am.

Why am I?

Because I think.

The noblest triumphs of the human intellect are about as sublime as would be the description of a house in terms of its roof, whereas the description would be equally sublime, if in terms of the cellar, or the bathroom. That is Newtonism--or a description of things in terms of one of their aspects, or gravitation. It is Darwinism--a description of all life in terms of selection, one of its aspects. Gravitation is only another name for attraction. Sir Isaac Newton's contribution to the glories of human knowledge is that an apple falls because it drops. All living things are selected by environment, said Darwin. Then, according to him, when he shifted aspects, all things constituting living environment are selected. Darwinism--that selection selects.

The materialists explain all things, except what they deny, or disregard, in terms of the material. The immaterialists, such as the absolute and the subjective idealists, explain all things in terms of the immaterial. My expression is in terms of the continuity of the material and the immaterial--or that one of these extremes is only an accentuation on one side, and the other only an accentuation on the other side, of the hyphenated state of the material-immaterial.

I am a being who thinks: therefore I am a being who thinks. In this circular stupidity there is a simple unity that commends it to conventional lovers of the good, the true, and the beautiful.

I do not think. I have never had a thought. Therefore something or another. I do not think, but thoughts occur in what is said to be "my" mind--though, instead of being "in" it, they are it--just as inhabitants do not occur in a city, but are the city. There is a governing tendency among these thoughts, just as there is among people in any community, or as there is in the movements of the planets, or in the arrangements of cells constituting a plant, or an

[p. 942]

animal. So far as goes any awareness of "mine," "I" have no soul, no self, no entity, though at times of something like a harmonization of "my" elements, "I" approximate to a state of unified being.

When I see--as for convenience "I" shall say, even though there is no I that is other than a very imperfectly co-ordinated aggregation of experience-states, sometimes ferociously antagonizing one another, but mostly maintaining a kind of civilization--but when I see that my thoughts are ruled by tendencies, such as to harmonize, organize, or co-ordinate: that they tend to integrate, segregate, nucleate, equilibrate--I am conscious of mere mechanical processes that mean no more in the arrangements of my ideas than they mean in the arrangements of my bones. I'd no more think of offering my ideas as immortal truth than I'd think of publishing X-ray photographs of my bones, as eternal. But the organizing tendency implicit in all things--along with the disorganizing tendency implicit in all things--has admirably expressed itself in the design that is my skeleton. I think so. I have no reason to think that my skeleton is in any way inferior to anybody else's skeleton. I feel that if I could arrange my ideas with the art that has arranged my bones, I'd have, for writing a book, the justification that all writers feel the need of, trying to excuse themselves for writing books.

But I do not think that mechanism is all that there is in our existence. Only the old-fashioned absolutist conceives, or says he conceives, of our existence as absolutely mechanical. There is an individuality in things that is not of mechanical relations, because individuality is unrelatedness. I conceive of our existence as positive-negative, or as mechanical-immechanical.

But my methods are the largely mechanical methods of everybody, and of everything, that harmonizes, or organizes. One of these methods is classification. I am impelled to arrange my materials under headings--quite as a wind arranges fallen leaves, of various sizes, into groups--as a magnet makes selections from a pile of various things. So, again, when I see that my thoughts are coerced by conventional processes, I can think of my thoughts as nothing but the products of coercions. I'd not do these slaves the honor of believing them. They impose upon me only to the degree of temporary acceptance of some of them.

[p. 943]

Merely thoughtfully, or only intellectually, I have made a collection of notes, under the classification of "Explosions." Some of the occurrences look as if explosive attacks, of an occult order, have been made upon human beings; or as if psychic bombs have been thrown invisibly at people, or at their property.

In the New York Tribune, Jan. 7, 1900, there is an account of poltergeist disturbances in a house, in Hyde Park, Chicago. According to the now well-known ways of chairs and tables, at times, these things hopped about, or moved with more dignity. It was as if into this house stole an invisible but futile assassin. See back to accounts of visible but futile bullets. Time after time there was a sound like the discharge of a revolver. It was noted that this firing always occurred "at about the height of a man's shoulder." In a booklet, A Disturbed House and its Relief, Ada M. Sharpe tells of a seeming psychic bombardment of her home in Tackley, Oxen, England. Beginning upon April 24, 1905, and continuing three years, at times, detonations, as if of exploding bombs, were heard in this house. Upon the 1st of May, 1911 (Lloyd's Weekly News, July 30; Wandsworth Borough News, July 21) unaccountable fires broke out in the house of Mr. J. A. Harvey, 356 York-road, Wandsworth, London. Preceding one of these fires, there were three explosions of unknown origin. In January, 1892 (Peterborough Advertiser, Jan. 10, 1892), a house in Peterborough, England, occupied by a family named Rimes, was repeatedly shaken, as if bombed, and as if bombed futilely. Nobody was injured, and there was no damage.

In the Religio-Philosophical Journal, Dec. 25, 1880--copied from the Owatonna (Minn.) Review--there is a story maybe of a psychic bomb that was tossed through the wall of a house, in Owatonna, penetrating the wall, without leaving a sign of its passage through the material. It was in a house occupied by a family named Dimant. There had been petty persecutions by an uncatchable: such as persistent ringing of the doorbell. One evening, members of this family were in one of the rooms, when something exploded. Mrs. Dimant was knocked insensible. Fragments of a cylindrical glass object were found. But no window had been open, and there had been no other way by which, by known means, this object could have entered this house.

[p. 944]

I note something of agreement between notions that are now developing--notions that will be called various names, one of which is not "practical"--and experiments by inventors that are attempts to be very practical. It is said that by means of "rays" inventors have been able to set off distant explosives. If by other means, or by subtler "rays," explosions at a distance can be made to occur, whatever the practical ones are trying to do may be far more effectively accomplished--if the data of this chapter do mean that there have 'peen explosions that were the products of means, or powers, that are at present mysterious.

There are stories of brilliantly luminous things that are called "globe lightning" that have appeared in houses, and have moved about, before exploding, as if guided by intelligence of their own, or as if directed by a distant control. These stories are easily findable in books treating of lightning and the freaks of lightning. I pick out an account from a periodical. There seems to be no relation with lightning. In the English Mechanic, 90-140, Col. G. T. Plunket tells of an experience, in July, 1909, in his home, in Wimbledon, London. He and his wife were sitting in one of their rooms, when his wife saw a luminous thing moving toward them. It went to a chair, upon the back of which it seemed to rest, for a moment. It exploded. Col. Plunket did not see this thing, but he heard the explosion. As to the lightning-explanation, he writes that it was a fine evening.

London Daily Mail, July 23, 1925--"Explosion riddle--mystery of a boy's wounds." "Injured by a mysterious explosion, which occurred in his mother's house, at Riverhall-street, South Lambeth, S.W., yesterday morning, Charley Orchard, 5, was conveyed to hospital in a serious condition. He was hurt on the face and chest, and some of his fingers were blown away.

"His mother had just called him to breakfast when the explosion occurred.

"Neighbors who heard the report of the explosion thought there was an outbreak of fire and summoned the fire brigade.

"An all-day search failed to discover the cause of the explosion."

The London newspapers, Sept. 26, 1910, told of a tremendous, unexplained explosion in a house in Willesden, London. I take from

[p. 945]

the local newspaper, the Willesden Chronicle, September 30--"a fire of a most mysterious character ... absolutely no cause can be assigned for the outbreak, which was followed by a terrific explosion, completely wrecking the premises." But in no account is it made clear that first there was a fire, and that the explosion followed. A policeman, standing on a nearby corner, saw this house, 71 Walm-lane, Willesden, flame and burst apart. "Windows and doors in the back of the house were blown a distance of 60 feet." "On examination of the premises, it was found that the two gas meters under the stairs had been shut off: so it was evident that the explosion was not caused by gas. Representatives of the Salvage Corps and of the Home Office investigated, but could conclude nothing except that chemicals, or petrol, might have exploded."

The occupants of this house, named Reece, were out of town, week-ending. Mr. Reece was communicated with, and it was his statement that there had been nothing in the house that could have exploded.

Willesden Chronicle, October 7--"Mystery cleared up. A charred sofa in the drawing room and other evidence reveal the cause of the outbreak." Before leaving the house, Saturday morning (September 24th), Mr. Reece, while smoking a pipe, had leaned over this sofa, and sparks from his pipe had fallen upon it. For 36 hours a fire, so caused, had smoldered, before bursting into flames. There were two standard spirit lamps in the room. In the fire, they must have exploded simultaneously.

The writer of this explanation picked the remains of a sofa out of a wreck of charred furniture. He leaned Reece over the sofa, because that would make his explanation work out as it should work out. Reece made no such statement, and he was not quoted. The explosion of two spirit lamps could do much damage, but this explosion was tremendous. The house was wrecked. The walls that remained standing were in such a toppling condition that the ruins were roped off.

The jagged walls of this wrecked house are more of our protrusions from vacancy. We visualize them in an environment of blankness. Somewhere there may have been a witch or a wizard.

Upon June 13, 1885, a resident of Pondicherry, Madras, India,

[p. 946]

was sitting in a closed room, when a mist appeared near him. At the same time there was a violent explosion. This man, M. Andre, sent an account to the French Academy. I take from a report, in L'Astronomie, 1886-310. M. Andre tried to explain in conventional terms, mentioning that at the time the weather was semi-stormy, and that an hour later rain fell heavily.

In times still farther back, the mist would have been told of, as the partly materialized form of an enemy, who had expressed his malices explosively. In times, still somewhere in the future, this may seem the most likely explanation.

Or the mist was something like the partly visible smoking fuse of an invisible bomb that had been discharged by a distant witch or wizard. And that does not seem to me to be much more of a marvel than would be somebody's ability to blow up a quantity of dynamite, though at a distance, and with no connecting wires.

In the New York Herald Tribune, Nov. 29, 1931, there is an account of the doings of Kurt Schimkus, of Berlin, who had arrived, in Chicago, to demonstrate his ability to discharge, from a distance, explosives, by means of what he called his "anti-war rays." According to reports from Germany, Schimkus had so exploded submarine mines and stores of buried cartridges. Herr Schimkus will have success and renown, I think: he knows that nothing great and noble and of benefit to mankind has ever been accomplished without much lubrication. He announced that slaughter was far-removed from his visions: that he was an agency for peace on earth and good will to man, because by exploding an enemy's munitions, with his "anti-war rays," he would make war impossible. Innocently, myself, I speculate upon the possible use of "psychic bombs," in blowing up tree stumps, in the cause of new pastures.

In the New York Herald Tribune, March 25, 1931, there is a story of an explosion that may have been set off by "rays" that at present are not understood. It is the story of the explosion that wrecked the sealing ship, Viking, off Horse Island, north of New Brunswick. It reminds me of the woman, who, in the New York hotel, feared fire. This ship was upon a moving picture expedition. Varrick Frissell, film producer, aboard this vessel, started to think of the kegs of powder aboard, and he became apprehensive. He started

[p. 947]

to make a warning sign to hang on the door of the powder room. Just then the ship blew up.

New York Herald Tribune, Dec. 13, 1931--an account of disasters to two wives of a man--not a datum of his relations, or former relations, with anybody else. In the year 1924, illness was upon the wife of W. A. Baker, an oil man, who lived in Pasadena, California. It was said that her affliction was cancer. She was found, hanged, in her home. It was said that despondency had driven her to suicide. In the year 1926, Baker married again. Upon the night of Dec. 12, 1931, there was an explosion, somewhere under the bed of the second Mrs. Baker, or in the room underneath. The bed was hurled to the ceiling, and Mrs. Baker was killed. It was a tremendous explosion, but nobody else in the house was harmed.

Bomb experts investigated. They concluded that no known explosive had been used. They said that there had been no escape of gas. "The full force of the explosion seemed concentrated almost beneath Mrs. Baker's room."

In the years 1921-22, and early in the year 1923, there were, in England and other countries, explosions of coal such as had never occurred before. There was a violent explosion in a grate in a house in Guildford, near London, which killed a woman, and knocked down walls of the house (London Daily News, Sept. 16, 1921). There were other explosions of coal, during this year, but in 1922 attention was attracted by many instances.

In this period there was much disaffection among British coal miners. There was a suspicion that miners were mixing dynamite into coal. But, whether we think that the miners had anything to do with these explosions, or not, suspicions against them, in England, were checked by the circumstances that no case of the finding of dynamite in coal was reported, and that there were no explosions of coal in the rough processes of shipments.

There came reports from France. Then stoves, in which was burned British coal, were blowing up in France, Belgium, and Switzerland. The climax came about the first of January, 1923, when in one day there were several of these explosions in Paris, and explosions in three towns in England.

About the first of January, 1921, Mr. T. S. Frost, of 8 Ferristone

[p. 948]

road, Hornsey, London, bought a load of coal. In his home were three children, Gordon, Bertie, and Muriel. I take data from the London newspapers, but especially from the local newspapers, the Hornsey Journal, and the North Middlesex Chronicle. In the grates of this house, coal exploded. Also, coal in buckets exploded. A policeman was called in. He made his report upon coal that not only exploded, but hopped out of grates, and sauntered along floors, so remarkable that an Inspector of Police investigated. According to a newspaper, it was this Inspector's statement that he had picked up a piece of coal, which had broken into three parts, and had then vanished from his hands. It was said that burning coals leaped from grates, and fell in showers in other rooms, having passed through walls, without leaving signs of this passage. Flatirons, coal buckets, other objects "danced." Ornaments were dislodged, but fell to the floor without breaking. A pot on a tripod swung, though nobody was near it. The phenomena occurred in the presence of one of the boys, especially, and sometimes in the presence of the other boy.

There has been no poltergeist case better investigated. I know of no denial of the phenomena by any investigator. One of the witnesses was the Rev. A. L. Gardiner, vicar of St. Gabriel's, Wood Green, London. "There can be no doubt of the phenomena. I have seen them, myself." Another witness was Dr. Herbert Lemerle, of Hornsey. Dr. Lemerle told of a clock that mysteriously vanished. Upon the 8th of May, a public meeting was held in Hornsey, to discuss the phenomena.

In the newspapers there was a tendency to explain it all as mischief by the children of this household.

The child, Muriel, terrified by the doings, died upon April 1st. The boy, Gordon, frightened into a nervous breakdown, was taken to the Lewisham Hospital.

The coal in all these cases was coal from British coal mines. The newspapers that told of these explosions told of the bitterness and vengefulness of British coal miners, enraged by hardships and reduced wages, uncommon in even their harsh experiences--

Or see back--

There's a shout of vengefulness, in Hyde Park, London--far away, in Gloucestershire, an ancient mansion bursts into flames.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 949]

  

16

BUT why this everlasting attempt to solve something?--whereas it is our acceptance that, in a final sense, there is, in phenomenal affairs, nothing--or that there is only the state of something-nothing--so that all problems are only soluble-insoluble--or that most of the social problems we have, today, were at one time conceived of as solutions of preceding problems--or that every Moses leads his people out of Egypt into perhaps a damn sight worse--Promised Lands of watered milk and much-adulterated honey--so why these everlasting attempts to solve something?

But to take surgical operations upon warders of Sing Sing Prison, and the loss of rectitude by lace curtains, and the vanishing man of Berlin; "Typhoid Mary," and a Chinese hair-clipper, and explosions of coal, and bodies on benches in a Harlem Park--

Robert Browning's conception was to take three sounds, and make, not a fourth, but a star.

Out of seven colors, not to lay on daubs, but to paint a picture. Out of seven million Americans, Russians, Germans, Irishmen, Italians, and on, so long as geography holds out, not to pile a population, but to organize--more or less--into New York City.

Sulphur and lava in a barren plain, and a salty block of stone, shaped roughly like a woman--signs of erosion on rocks far above water-level--a meteor that had set a bush afire--the differences of languages of peoples--and all the other elements that organized into Genesis.

Data of variations and heredity and adaptations; of multiplications and of checks and of the doctrine of Malthus; of acquired characters and of transmissions--and they organized into The Origin of Species--

Just as, once upon a time, minerals that had affinity for one another came together and took on geometrical appearances. But a crystal is not supposed to be either a prohibition or an

[p. 950]

anti-prohibition argument. I know of a crystal of quartz that weighs several hundred pounds. But it has not been mistaken for propaganda--

Or all theories--theological, scientific, philosophical--and that they represent the same organizing process--but that self-conscious theorists, instead of recognizing that thought-forms were appearing in their minds, as in wider existence have appeared crystalline constructions, have believed that it was immortal Truth that they were conceiving.

Oxygen and sulphur and carbon--

Or Emma Piggott and Ambrose Small and Rose Smith--

Or let's have just a little, minor expression, or organization, a small composition, arranging the data of poltergeist girls. The elements of this synthesis are moving objects, fires, girls in strange surroundings, youth and the atavism of youth.

Case of Jennie Bramwell--she was an adopted daughter. The Antigonish girl was an adopted daughter. See the Dagg case--adopted daughter. "Adoption" is a good deal of a disguise for getting little girls to work for not much more than nothing. It is not so much that so many poltergeist girls have been housemaids and "adopted daughters," as that so many of them have been not in their own homes; lost and helpless youngsters; under hard taskmasters, in strange surroundings--

Or the first uncertain and precarious appearances of human beings upon this earth--and a need for them, and a fostering, a nurturing, a protection, far different from conditions in these swarming times, when the need is for eliminations--

A lost child in primordial woods--and the value of her, which no genius, king, or leveler of kings, has today--

That objects moved in her presence--fruits of trees that came down from the trees and set themselves beside her--the shaking of bushes that cast, to her, berries--then night and coldness--faggots, joining twigs, and dancing around her--heaping--the crackling of flames to warm her--

Or that, to this day, grotesque capers of chairs, the antics of sofas, and the seeming wantonness of flames are survivals of co-operations

[p. 951]

that once upon a time moved even the trees, when a child was lost in a forest.

The old mathematicians had this aesthetic appraisal of their thoughts: they wrought theorems and calculi "for elegance," and were scornful of uses. But virtually everything that they produced "for elegance" was put to work by astronomers, navigators, surveyors. I assemble, compositionally, what I call data: but I am much depressed, perhaps, fearing that they have meaning outside themselves, or may be useful.

There is, upon this earth, today, at least one artist. Prof. Albert Einstein put together, into what he called one organic whole, such a diversity of elements as electro-magnetic waves and irregularities in the motions of the planet Mercury; the fall of a stone from a train to an embankment, the geometry of hyper-space, and accelerated co-ordinate systems, and Lorentz transformations, and the displacements of stars during eclipses--

And the exploitation of everything by something, or, more or less remotely, by everything else--the need of astronomers for Einsteinism, because it was so encouragingly unintelligible, whereas schoolboys were beginning to pick Newtonism to pieces--and in the year 1918 it was announced that the useful Einstein had predicted displacements of stars, according to his theory, and that his predictions had been confirmed.

For purposes of renewed confirmation--or maybe in innocence of trying to confirm anything, or at least not consciously intending to observe whatever was wanted--an expedition was sent by Lick Observatory to report upon the displacement of stars during the solar eclipse of October, 1922. The astronomers of this expedition agreed that the displacements of stars confirmed Einstein, the Prophet. Einstein was said to be useful, and, in California, school children, dressed in white, sang unto him kindred unintelligibilities. In New York, mounted policemen roughly held back crowds from him, just as he, to make his system of thoughts, had clubbed many astronomical data into insensibility. He had taken into his system of thoughts irregularities of the planet Mercury, but had left out irregularities of the planet Venus. Crowds took him into their holiday-making, but omitted asking what it was all about.

[p. 952]

Upon June 12, 1931, Prof. Erwin Freundlicher reported to the Physics Association of Berlin that, according to his observations, during the eclipse of May 9, 1929, stars were not displaced, as, according to Einstein, they should be--or that, outside itself, Einsteinism is meaningless.

There was no excitement over this tragedy, or comedy, because this earth's intellectuals, mostly, take notice only when they're told to take notice; and to orthodoxy it seemed wisest that this earth's thinkers should not think about this. Prof. Freundlicher's explained the astronomers of the Lick expedition, quite as I explain all astronomers. He gave his opinion that they had confirmed Einstein because "they had left out of consideration observations that did not fit in with the results that they wanted to obtain." If there be much more of such agreements with me, I shall have to hunt me some new heresies. For an account of Prof. Freundlicher's report, see the New York Herald Tribune, June 14, 1931.

Outside itself Einsteinism has no meaning.

As a worthless thing--As an unrelated thing its state is that of which artists have dreamed, in their quest for absoluteness--the dream of "art for art's sake."

Up to Dec. 6, 1931, I thought of Prof. Einstein's theories as almost alone, or as representing almost sublime worthlessness. But New York Times, Dec. 6, 1931--scientists of the University of California, experimenting upon an admixture of phosphorus in the food of swine, were developing luminous pigs. "Just what they will be good for has not yet been announced."

Mine is a dream of being not worth a displaced star to anybody. I protest that with the elements of this book my only motive is compositional--but comes the suspicion that I protest too much.

There has been a gathering of suggestions--that there are subtler "rays" than anything that is known in radioactivity, and that they may be developed into usefulness. The Ascot Cup and the Dublin jewels--and, if they were switched away by a means of transportation now not commonly known, a common knowledge may be developed to enormous advantage in commercial and recreational and explorative transportations.

In the period of my writing of this book, Californian scientists

[p. 953]

were trying to make pigs shine at night. Another scientist, who could not yet announce much usefulness, was feeding skimmed milk to huckleberries. For all I know one of us may revolutionize something or another.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

17

LONDON Daily Chronicle, March 30, 1922--"It is incredible, but nothing has been heard of Holding."

For three weeks a search had been going on--cyclists, police, farmers, people from villages.

At half past ten o'clock, morning of the 7th of March, 1922, Flying Officer B. Holding had set out from an aerodrome, near Chester, England, upon what was intended by him to be a short flight in Wales. About eleven o'clock, he was seen, near Llangollen, Wales, turning back, heading back toward Chester

Holding disappeared far from the sea, and he disappeared over a densely populated land. One of my jobs was that of looking over six London newspapers for the years 1919-1926, and it is improbable that anything was learned of what became of Holding, later, without my knowing of it. I haven't a datum upon which to speculate, in the Holding mystery: but now I have a story of two men, whose track on land stopped as abruptly as stopped Holding's track in the sky: and this time I note an additional circumstance. The story of these men is laid in a surrounding of hates of the intensity of oriental fanaticism.

Upon July 24, 1924, at a time of Arab hostility, Flight-Lieutenant W. T. Day and Pilot Officer D. R. Stewart were sent from British headquarters, upon an ordinary reconnaissance over a desert in Mesopotamia. According to schedule, they would not be absent more than several hours. I take this account from the London Sunday Express, Sept. 21, 28, 1924.

The men did not return, and they were searched for. The plane was soon found, in the desert. Why it should have landed was a

[p. 954]

problem. "There was some petrol left in the tank. There was nothing wrong with the craft. It was, in fact, flown back to the aerodrome." But the men were missing. "So far as can be ascertained, they encountered no meteorological conditions that might have forced them to land." There were no marks to indicate that the plane had been shot at. There may be some way, at present very exclusively known, of picking an aeroplane out of the sky. According to the rest of this story, there may be some such way of picking men out of a desert.

In the sand, around the plane, were seen the footprints of Day and Stewart. "They were traced, side by side, for some forty yards from the machine. Then, as suddenly as if they had come to the brink of a cliff, the marks ended."

The landing of the plane was unaccountable. But, accepting that as a minor mystery, the suggested explanation of the abrupt ending of the footprints was that Day and Stewart had been captured by hostile Bedouins, who had brushed away all trails in the sand, starting at the point forty yards from the plane. But hostile Bedouins could not be thought of as keeping on brushing indefinitely, and a search was made for a renewal of traces.

Aeroplanes, armored cars, and mounted police searched. Rewards were offered. Tribal patrols searched unceasingly for four days. Nowhere beyond the point where the tracks in the sand ended abruptly, were other tracks found. The latest account of which I have record is from the London Sunday News, March 15, 1925--mystery of the missing British airmen still unsolved.

London Evening News, Sept. 28, 1923--"Second-Lieut. Morand, while at shooting practice, at Gadaux, France--himself firing at a target on the ground, while a sergeant piloted the machine--suddenly fell back, calling to the pilot to land, as he had been wounded. It was found that he had a serious wound in his shoulder, and he was taken to Bordeaux, by the hospital aeroplane." It was said that he had been shot. "But no clue has been found, as to the origin of the shot."

I especially notice this case, because it was at a time of other "accidents" to French fliers. The other "accidents" were different, in that they did not occur in France, and in that they were not

[p. 955]

shootings. I know of no case that in all particulars I can match with the disappearance of Day and Stewart: but there are records of airmen who, flying over a land where the sight of them directed hate upon them, were unaccountably picked out of the sky.

In this summer of 1923, French aviators told of inexplicable mishaps and forced landings, while flying over German territory. The instances were so frequent that there arose a belief that, with "secret rays," the Germans were practicing upon French aeroplanes. From a general impression of an existence of rationality-irrationality, we can conceive that the Germans were practicing upon French aeroplanes something that they were most particularly endeavoring to keep secret from France--if they had any such powers. But I think that they had not--or that officially they had not. There may have been a hidden experimenter, unknown to the German authorities.

An article upon this subject was published in the London Daily Mail, Sept. 1, 1923. "Two theories have been put forward. One is that by a concentration of wireless rays the magneto of the aeroplane may be affected; and another is that a new ray, which will melt certain metals, has been discovered. In this connection it is notable that most of the forced landings of the French aeroplanes, when flying from Strasbourg to Prague, have taken place in the vicinity of a German aerodrome, near Furth." It was said that for some time, at the German wireless station at Nauen, there had been experiments upon directional wireless, with the object of sending out rays, concentrated along a certain path, as the beams of a searchlight are directed. The authorities at Nauen denied that they had knowledge of anything that could have affected the French aeroplanes, in ways reported, or supposed. Automobiles can be stopped, by wireless control, if they be provided with special magnetos: otherwise not. Sir Oliver Lodge was quoted, by the Daily Mail, as saying that he knew of no rays that could stop a motor, unless specially equipped. Professor A. M. Low's opinion was that some day distant motors may be stopped--"I feel confident that, in 50 or 60 years' time, such a thing will be possible." Prof. Low said that he knew of laboratory experiments in which, over a distance of two feet, rays of sufficient power to melt a small coil of wire had been transmitted. But, as to the reported "accidents" in Germany, Prof.

[p. 956]

[paragraph continues] Low said: "There is a wide difference between transmitting such a power over a distance of a foot or two, and a distance of one or two thousand yards."

In the Daily Mail, April 5, 1924, was an account of invisible rays, which had been discovered by Mr. H. Grindell-Mathews, powerful enough, under laboratory conditions, to stop the engine of a motorcycle at a distance of fifty feet.

Of course high among virtues are the honorable lies of Governments. Whether virtuously said, or accurately reported, I don't know: but it is said, or reported, that, in the year 1929, the British Government spent $500,000 investigating alleged long-distance "death-rays," and developed nothing that was effective. It is said, or reported, that the Italian navy gave opportunity to an inventor to demonstrate what he could do with "death-rays," but that his demonstrations came to nothing. We have no data for thinking that, in the year 1929, any Government was in possession of a secret of long-distance "death-rays." The forced landings of French aeroplanes, in the summer of 1923, remain unexplained.

There may be powerful rays that are not electromagnetic. French aviators may have been brought to earth by no power that is called "physical"--though I know of no real demarcation between what is called physical and what is called mental. See back to the series of "mysterious attacks," in England, in April and May, 1927. Three times, as if acted upon by an unknown influence, automobiles behaved unaccountably.

Our data are upon "accidents" that have not been satisfactorily explained. There have been occurrences that were similar to effects that inventors are, by mechanical means, striving for, in the cause of military efficiencies. And these experimenters are practical persons. It may be that we are on the track of a subtler slaughter. It looks as if a lonely possessor of a secret, such as is called "occult," operated wantonly, or in the malicious exercise of a power, upon automobiles, in England, in the months of April and May, 1927. He was a criminal. But I am a practical thinker, and a useful citizen, on the track of much efficiency, which will be at the disposal of God's second choice of people--which I think we must be, judging by the afflictions that are upon us, at this time of writing--a power

[p. 957]

that would, by this great nation, be used only righteously, if anybody could ever distinguish between righteousness and exploitation and tyranny. One of the engaging paradoxes of our existence--which strip mathematics of meaning--is that a million times a crime is patriotism. I am unable to conceive that a power to pick planes out of the sky would be so terrible as to stop war, because up comes the notion that counter-operations would pick the pickers. If we could have new abominations, so unmistakably abominable as to hush the lubricators, who plan murder to stop slaughter--but that is only dreamery, here in our existence of the hyphen, which is the symbol of hypocrisy.

New York Times, Oct. 25, 1930--that about forty automobiles had been stalled, for an hour, on the road, in Saxony, between Risa and Wurzen.

About forty chauffeurs were probably not voiceless, in this matter; and, if the German Government were experimenting with "secret rays," that was some more of its public secrecy. In the Times, October 27, was quoted the mathematician and former Premier of France, Paul Painleve--"No experiment thus far conducted would permit us to credit such a report, nor give any prospect of seeing it accomplished in the near future."

Upon May 26, 1925--see the London Daily Mail, May 28, 1925--at Andover, Hampshire, England, a corporal of the R.A.F., making a parachute practice jump, was killed by a fall of 1,900 feet from an aeroplane. There is not a datum for thinking that there was anything to this occurrence that aligns it with other occurrences told of in this chapter. But there is an association. About the time of the accident, or whatever it was that befell this man, and at the same place, Flight Sergeant Frank Lowry, and Flying Officer John Kenneth Smith, pilot, were in an aeroplane, making wireless tests. They had been in the air about fifteen minutes, when Smith, having called to his companion, without hearing from him, looked around, and saw smoke coming from the back cockpit, and saw Lowry in a state of collapse.

Lowry was dead. "Flight-Lieut. Cyril Norman Ellen said that there was nothing in the machine likely to kill a man, and that

[p. 958]

[paragraph continues] Lowry must have come in contact with an electric current in the air. No similar case has been reported."

In the Daily Mail, Oct. 14, 1921, a writer (T. Gifford) tells of a scene of "accidents," at a point on a road in Dartmoor. This story is like the account of the series of "accidents" to automobiles, in England, in April and May, 1927, except that the "accidents" were strictly localized.

The story told by Gifford is that one day in June, 1921, a doctor, riding on his motor-cycle, with his two children in a side-car, suddenly, at this point, on the Dartmoor road, called to the children to jump. The machine swerved, and the doctor was killed. Several weeks later, at this place, a motor coach suddenly swerved, and several passengers were thrown out. Upon Aug. 26, 1924 a Captain M.--for whom I apologize--it is not often that a Mr. X. or a Captain M. appears in these records--was, at this point on the road, thrown from his motor-cycle. Interviewed by Gifford, he told, after evasions, that something described by him as "invisible hands" had seized upon his hands, forcing the machine into the turf.

More details were published in the Daily Mail, October 17, of this year. The scene of the "accidents" was on the road, near the Dartmoor village of Post Bridge. In the first instance, the victim was Dr. E. H. Helby, Medical Officer of Princetown Prison.

In Light, Aug. 26, 1922, a correspondent noted another "accident" at this point. Details of the fourth "accident" were told, in the London Sunday Express, Sept. 12, 1926. The victim was traveling on his motor-cycle. "He was suddenly and violently unseated from his mount, and knew no more until he regained consciousness in a cottage, to which he had been carried, after a collapse." The injured man could not explain.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 959]

  

18

I RECORD that, once upon a time, down from the sky came a shower of virgins.

Of course they weren't really virgins. I can't accept the reality of anything, in such an indeterminate existence as ours.

See the English Mechanic, 87-436--a shower of large hailstones, at Remiremont, France, May 26, 1907. Definitely upon some of these objects were printed representations of the Virgin of the Hermits.

It used to be the fashion, simply and brusquely to deny such a story, and call it a device of priestcraft: but the tendency of disbelievers, today, is not to be so free and monotonous with accusations, and to think that very likely unusual hailstones did fall, at Remiremont, and that out of irregularities or discolorations upon them, pious inhabitants imagined pictorial representations. I think, myself, that the imprints upon these hailstones were of imaginative origin, but in the sense that illustrations in a book are; and were not simply imagined by the inhabitants of Remiremont, any more than are some of the illustrations of some books only smudges that are so imaginatively interpreted by readers that they are taken as pictures.

The story of the hailstones of Remiremont is unique in my records. And a statement of mine has been that our data are of the not extremely uncommon. But, early in this book, I pointed out that any two discordant colors may be harmonized by means of other colors; and there are no data, thinkable by me, that cannot be more or less suavely co-ordinated, if smoothly doctored; or that cannot be aligned with the ordinary, if that be desirable.

I am a Jesuit. I shift aspects from hailstones with pictures on them, to pictures on hailstones--and go on with stories of pictures on other unlikely materials.

According to accounts--copied from newspapers--in the Spiritual Magazine, n.s., 7-360, and in the Religio-Philosophical Journal, March 29, 1873, there was more excitement in Baden-Baden, upon

[p. 960]

[paragraph continues] March 12, 1872, than at Remiremont. Upon the morning of this day, people saw pictures that in some unaccountable way had been printed upon windowpanes of houses, with no knowledge by occupants as to how they got there. At first the representations were crosses, but then other figures appeared. The authorities of Baden ordered the windows to be washed, but the pictures were indelible. Acids were used, without effect. Two days later, crosses and death's heads appeared upon window glass, at Rastadt.

The epidemic broke out at Boulley, five leagues from Metz. Here, because of feeling, still intense from the Franco-Prussian War, the authorities were alarmed. Crosses and other religious emblems appeared upon windowpanes--pictures of many kinds--death's heads, eagles, rainbows. A detail of Prussian soldiers was sent to one house to smash a window, upon which was pictured a band of French Zouaves and their flags. It was said that at night the pictures were invisible. But the soldiers did not miss their chance: they smashed a lot of windows, anyway. Next morning it looked as if there had been a battle. In the midst of havoc, the Zouaves were still flying their colors.

This story, I should say, then became a standardized newspaper yarn. I have a collection of stories of pictures appearing upon window glass that were almost busily told in American newspapers, after March, 1872, not petering out until about the year 1890.

But it cannot be said that all stories told in the United States, of this phenomenon, or alleged phenomenon, were echoes of the reported European occurrences, because stories, though in no such profusion as subsequently, had been told in the United States before March, 1872. New York Herald, Aug. 20, 1870--a representation of a woman's face, appearing upon window glass, in a house in Lawrence, Mass. The occupant of the house was so pestered by crowds of sightseers that, not succeeding in washing off the picture, he removed the window sash. Human Nature, June, 1871--copied from the Chicago Times--house in Milan, Ohio, occupied by two tenants, named Horner and Ashley. On windowpanes appeared blotches, as if of water mixed with tar, or crude oil--likenesses of human faces taking form in these places. New York Times, Jan. 18,

[p. 961]

[paragraph continues] 1871--that, in Sandusky and Cincinnati, Ohio, pictures of women had appeared upon windowpanes.

Still, it might be thought that there was one origin for all the stories, and that that was the spirit-photograph controversy, which, in the early eighteen-seventies, was a subject of intense beliefs and disbeliefs, in both Europe and America. A point that has not been taken up, in this controversy, which continues to this day, even after the fateful spread of knowledge of double exposure, is whether the human imagination can affect a photographic plate. I incline to the idea that almost all spirit-photographs have been frauds, but that a few may not have been--that no spirits were present, but that, occasionally, or very rarely, a quite spookless medium has, in a profound belief in spirits, engendered, out of visualizations, something wraith-like that has been recorded by a camera. Against the explanation that stories of pictures on windowpanes probably had origin in the spirit-photograph craze, I mention that similar stories were told centuries before photography was invented. For an account of representations of crosses that appeared, not upon window glass, but upon people's clothes, as told by Joseph Grunpech, in his book, Speculum Naturalis Coelestis, published in the year 1508, see Notes and Queries, April 2, 1892.

"After the death of Dean Vaughan, of Llandaff, there suddenly appeared on a wall of the Llandaff Cathedral, a large blotch of dampness, or minute fungi, formed into a life-like outline of the dean's face" (Notes and Queries, Feb. 8, 1902).

Throughout this book, my views, or preconceptions, or bigotries, are against spiritual interpretations, or assertions of the existence of spirits, as independent very long from human bodies. However, I think of the temporary detachability of mentalities from bodies, and that is much like an acceptance of the existence of spirits. My notion is that Dean Vaughan departed, going where any iceberg goes when it melts, or where any flame goes when it is extinguished: that intense visualizations of him, by a member of his congregation, may have pictorially marked the wall of the church.

According to reports, in the London Daily Express, July 17 and 30, and in the Sunday Express, Aug. 12, 1923, it may be thought, by anybody so inclined to think, that, in England, in the summer

[p. 962]

of 1923, an artistic magician was traveling, and exercising his talents. Somebody, or something, was perhaps impressing pictures upon walls and pillars of churches. The first report was that, on the wall of Christ Church, Oxford, had appeared a portrait of the famous Oxford cleric, Dean Liddell, long dead. Other reports came from Bath, Bristol, and Uphill, Somerset. At Bath--in the old abbey of Bath--the picture was of a soldier, carrying a pack. The Abbey authorities scraped off this picture, but the portrait, at Oxford, was not touched.

There is a description, in T. P.'s and Cassell's Weekly (London), Sept. 11, 1926, of the portrait on the wall of Christ Church, Oxford, as seen three years later. It is described as "a faithful and unmistakable likeness of the late Dean Liddell, who died in the year 1898." "One does not need to call in play any imaginative faculty to reconstruct the head. It is set perfectly straight upon the wall, as it might have been drawn by the hand of a master artist. Yet it is not etched; neither is it sketched, not sculptured, but it is there plain for all eyes to see."

And it is beginning to look as if, having started somewhat eccentrically with a story of virgins, we are making our way out of the marvelous. Now accept that there is a very ordinary witchcraft, by which, under the name of telepathy, pictures can be transferred from one mind to another, and there is reduction of the preposterousness of stories of representations on hailstones, window glass, and Other materials. We are conceiving that human beings may have learned an extension of the telepathic process, so as to transfer pictures to various materials. So far as go my own experiences, I do not know that telepathy exists. I think so, according to many notes that I have taken upon vagrant impressions that come and go, when my mind is upon something else. I have often experimented. When I incline to think that there is telepathy, the experiments are convincing that there is. When I think over the same experiments, and incline against they, they indicate that there isn't.

New York Sun, Jan. 16, 1929--hundreds of persons standing, or kneeling, at night, before the door of St. Ann's Roman Catholic Church, in Keansburg, N. J. They saw, or thought they saw, on the dark, oak door, the figure of a woman, in trailing, white robes,

[p. 963]

emitting a glow. The pastor of the church, the Rev. Thomas A. Kearney, was interviewed. "I don't believe that it is a miracle, or that it has anything to do with the supernatural. As I see it, it is unquestionably in the outline of a human figure, white-robed, and emitting light. It is rather like a very thin motion picture negative that was under-exposed, and in which human outlines and detail are extremely thin. Yet it seems to be there."

Or pictures on hailstones--and wounds that appeared on the bodies of people. In the name of the everlasting If, which mocks the severity of every theorem in every textbook, and is not so very remote from every datum of mine, we can think that, by imaginative means, at present not understood, wounds appeared upon people in Japan, and Germany, and in a turning, off Coventry Street, London, if we can accept that in some such way, pictures ever have appeared upon hailstones, windowpanes, and other places. And we can think that pictures have appeared upon hailstones, windowpanes, and other places, if we can think that wounds have appeared upon people in Japan and other places. Ave the earthworm!

It is my method not to try to solve problems--so far as the solubility-insolubility of problems permits--in whatever narrow specializations of thought I find them stated: but, if, for instance, I come upon a mystery that the spiritualists have taken over, to have an eye for data that may have bearing, from chemical, zoological, meteorological, sociological, or entomological sources--being unable to fail, of course, because the analogue of anything electrical, or planetary, is findable in biological, ethical, or political phenomena. We shall travel far, even to unborn infants, to make hailstones reasonable.

I have so many heresies--along with my almost incredible credulities--or pseudo-credulities, seeing that I have freed my mind of beliefs--that, mostly, I cannot trace my infidelities, or enlightenments, back to their sources. But I do remember when first I doubted the denial by conventional science of the existence of prenatal markings. I read Dr. Weismann's book upon this subject, and his arguments against the possibility of pre-natal markings convinced me that they are quite possible. And this conversion cost me something. Before reading Dr. Weismann, I had felt superior to

[p. 964]

peasants, or the "man in the street," as philosophers call him, whose belief is that pregnant women, if frightened, mark their offsprings with representations of rats, spiders, or whatever; or, if having a longing for strawberries, fruitfully illustrate their progeny, and were at one time of much service to melodrama. I don't know about the rats and the strawberries, but Dr. Weismann told of such cases as that of a woman with a remarkable and distinctive disfigurement of an ear, and of her similarly marked offspring. His argument was that thousands of women are disfigured in various ways, and that thousands of offsprings are disfigured, and that it is not strange that in one case the disfigurement of an offspring should correspond to the disfigurement of a parent. But so he argued about other remarkable cases, and left me in a state of mind that has often repeated: and that is with the idea that much mental development is in rising down to the peasants again.

If there can be pre-natal markings of bodies, and, as I interpret Dr. Weismann's denials, there can be, and, if they be of mental origin, my mind is open to the idea that other--and still more profoundly damned stories of strange markings--may be similarly explained. If a conventional physician is scornful, hearing of a human infant, pre-natally marked, I'd like to hear his opinion of a story that I take from the London Daily Express, May 14, 1921. Kitten, born at Nice, France--white belly distinctly marked with the gray figures, 1921--the mother cat had probably been looking intently at something, such as a , so dated. "Or reading a newspaper?" said scornful doctor would ask, pointing out that, if I think there are talking dogs, it is only a small "extension," as I'd call it, to think of educated cats keeping themselves informed upon current events.

London Sunday News, Aug. 3, 1926--"Dorothy Parrot, 4-year-old child of R. S. Parrot, of Winget Mill, Georgia, was marked by a red spot on her body. Out of this spot formed three letters, R. I. C. Doctors cannot explain."

London Daily Express, Nov. 17, 1913--phenomena of a girl, aged 12, of the village of Bussus-Bus-Suel, near Abbeville, France. If asked questions, answers appeared in letterings on her arms, legs,

[p. 965]

and shoulders. Also upon her body appeared pictures, such as of a ladder, a dog, a horse.

In September, 1926, a Rumanian girl, Eleonore Zegun, was taken to London, for observation by the National Laboratory for Psychical Research. Countess Wassilko-Serecki, who had taken the girl to London, said, in an interview (London Evening Standard, Oct. 1, 1926), that she had seen the word Dracu form upon the girl's arm. This word is the Rumanian word for the Devil.

Or the Handwriting on the Wall--and why don't I come out frankly in favor of all, or anyway a goodly number of, the yarns, or the data, of the Bible? The Defender of Some of the Faith is clearly becoming my title.

In recent years I have noted much that has impressed upon my mind the thought that religionists have taken over many phenomena, as exclusively their own--have colored and discredited with their emotional explanations--but that someday some of these occurrences will be rescued from theological interpretations and exploitations, and will be the subject-matter of--

New enlightenments and new dogmas, new progresses, delusions, freedoms, and tyrannies.

I incline to the acceptance of many stories of miracles, but think that these miracles would have occurred, if this earth had been inhabited by atheists.

To me, the Bible is folklore, and therefore is not pure fantasy, but comprises much that will be rehabilitated. But also to me the Bible is non-existent. This is in the sense that, except in my earlier writings, I have drawn a dead-line, for data, at the year 1800. I may, upon rare occasions, dip farther back, but my notes start in the year 1800. I shall probably raise this limit to 1850, or maybe 1900. I take for a principle that our concern is not in marvels. It is in repetitions, or sometimes in almost the commonplace. There is no desirability in going back to antiquity for data, because, unless phenomena be appearing now, they are of only historical interest. At present, there is too much history.

Handwritings on walls--I have several accounts: but, if anybody should be interested enough to look up this phenomenon for himself, he will find the most nearly acceptable record in the

[p. 966]

case of Esther Cox, of Amherst, Nova Scotia. This case was of wide notoriety, and, of it, it could be said that it was well-investigated, if it can be supposed that there ever has been a case of anything that has been more than glanced at, or more than painstakingly and profoundly studied, simply to confirm somebody's theory.

If I should tell of a woman, who, by mental picturings, not only marked the body of her unborn infant, but transformed herself into the appearance of a tiger, or a lamppost, or became a weretiger, or a werelamppost--or of a magician, who, beginning with depicting forest scenes on window glass, had learned to transform himself into a weredeer, or a weretree--I'd tell of a kind of sorcery that used to be of somewhat common occurrence.

I have a specimen. It is a Ceylon leaf insect. It is a wereleaf. The leaf insect's likeness to a leaf is too strikingly detailed to permit any explanation of accidental resemblance.

There are butterflies, which, with wings closed, look so much like dried leaves that at a distance of a few feet they are indistinguishable from dried leaves. There are tree hoppers with the appearance of thorns; stick insects, cinder beetles, spiders that look like buds of flowers. In all instances these are highly realistic portraitures, such as the writer, who described the portrait of Dean Liddell, on the church wall, would call the handiwork of a master artist.

There have been so many instances of this miracle that I now have a theory that, of themselves, men never did evolve from lower animals: but that, in early and plastic times, a human being from somewhere else appeared upon this earth, and that many kinds of animals took him for a model, and rudely and grotesquely imitated his appearance, so that, today, though the gorillas of the Congo, and of Chicago, are only caricatures, some of the rest of us are somewhat passable imitations of human beings.

The conventional explanation of the leaf insect, for instance, is that once upon a time a species of insects somewhat resembled leaves of trees, and that the individuals that most closely approximated to this appearance had the best chance to survive, and that in succeeding generations, still higher approximations were still better protected from their deceived enemies.

[p. 967]

An intelligence from somewhere else, not well-acquainted with human beings--or whatever we are--but knowing of the picture galleries of this earth, might, in Darwinian terms, just as logically explain the origin of those pictures--that canvases that were daubed on, without purpose, appeared; and that the daubs that more clearly represented something recognizable were protected, and that still higher approximations had a still better chance, and that so appeared, finally, highly realistic pictures, though the painters had been purposeless, and with no consciousness of what they were doing

Which contrasts with anybody's experience with painters, who are not only conscious of what they're doing, but are likely to make everybody else conscious of what they're so conscious of.

It is not merely that hands of artists have painted pictures upon canvas: it is that, upon canvas, artists have realized their imaginings. But, without hands of artists, strikingly realistic pictures and exquisite modelings have appeared. It may be that for crosses on windowpanes, emblems on hailstones, faces on church walls, pre-natal markings, the stigmata, telepathic transferences of pictures, and leaf insects we shall conceive of one expression.

To the clergyman who told the story of the hailstones of Remiremont, the most important circumstance was that, a few days before the occurrence, the Town Council had forbidden a religious procession, and that, at the time of the fall of the hailstones, there was much religious excitement in Remiremont.

English Mechanic, 87-436--story told by Abbe Gueniot, of Remiremont:

That, upon the afternoon of the 26th of May, 1907, the Abbe was in his library, aware of a hailstorm, but paying no attention to it, when a woman of his household called to him to see the extraordinary hailstones that were falling. She told him that images of "Our Lady of the Treasures" were printed on them.

"In order to satisfy her, I glanced carelessly at the hailstones, which she held in her hand. But, since I did not want to see anything, and moreover could not do so, without my spectacles, I turned to go back to my book. She urged: 'I beg of you to put on your glasses.' I did so, and saw very distinctly on the front of the hailstones, which were slightly convex in the center, although

[p. 968]

the edges were somewhat worn, the bust of a woman, with a robe that was turned up at the bottom, like a priest's cope. I should, perhaps, describe it more exactly by saying that it was like the Virgin of the Hermits. The outline of the images was slightly hollow, as if they had been formed with a punch, but were very boldly drawn. Mlle. Andre asked me to notice certain details of the costume, but I refused to look at it any longer. I was ashamed of my credulity, feeling sure that the Blessed Virgin would hardly concern herself with instantaneous photographs on hailstones. I said: 'But do you not see that these hailstones have fallen on vegetables, and received these impressions? Take them away: they are no good to me.' I returned to my book, without giving further thought to what had happened. But my mind was disturbed by the singular formation of these hailstones. I picked up three in order to weigh them, without looking closely. They weighed between six and seven ounces. One of them was perfectly round, like balls with which children play, and had a seam all around it, as though it had been cast in a mold."

Then the Abbe's conclusions:

"Savants, though you may try your hardest to explain these facts by natural causes, you will not succeed." He thinks that the artillery of heaven had been directed  the impious Town Council. However people with cabbages suffered more than people with impieties.

"What appeared most worthy of notice was that the hailstones, which should have been precipitated to the ground, in accordance with the laws of acceleration of falling bodies, appeared to have fallen from a height of but a few yards." But other, or unmarked, hailstones, in this storm, did considerable damage. The Abbe says that many persons had seen the images. He collected the signatures of fifty persons who asserted that they had been witnesses.

I notice several details. One is the matter of a hailstone with a seam around it, as if it had been cast in a mold. This looks as if some hoaxer, or pietist--who was all prepared, having prophetic knowledge that an extraordinary shower of big hailstones was coming--had cast printed lumps of ice in a mold. But accounts of big hailstones, ridged or seamed, are common. Another detail is something

[p. 969]

that I should say the Abbe Gueniot had never before heard of. The detail of slow-falling objects is common in stories of occult occurrences, but, though for more than ten years I have had an eye for such reports, in reading of hundreds, or thousands, of hailstorms, I know of only half a dozen records of slow-falling hailstones.

In the English Mechanic, 87-507, there is more upon this subject. It is said that, according to the newspapers of Remiremont, these "prints" were inside the hailstones, and were found on surfaces of hailstones that had been split: that 107 persons had given testimony to the Bishop of Sainte-Die; and that several scientists, one of whom was M. de Lapparent, the Secretary of the French Academy, had been consulted. The opinion of M. de Lapparent was that lightning might have struck a medal of the Virgin, and might have reproduced the image upon the hailstones.

I have never come upon any other supposition that there can be manifold reproductions of images, or prints, by lightning. The stories of lightning-pictures are mostly unsatisfactory, because most of them are of alleged pictures of leaves of trees, and, when investigated, turn out to be simply forked veinings, not very leaf-like. There is no other record, findable by me, of hailstones said to be pictorially marked by lightning, or by anything else. It would be much of coincidence, if, at a time of religious excitement in Remiremont, lightning should make its only known, or reported, pictures on hailstones, and make those pictures religious emblems. But that the religious excitement did have much to do with the religious pictures on hailstones, is thinkable by me.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 970]

  

19

THE astronomers are issuing pronouncements upon what can't be seen with telescopes. The physicists are announcing discoveries that can't be seen with microscopes. I wonder whether anybody can see any meaning in an accusation that my stories are about invisibles.

I am a sensationalist.

And it is supposed that modern science, which is supposed to be my chief opposition, is remote from me and my methods.

In December, 1931, Dr. Humason, of Mount Wilson Observatory, announced his discovery of two nebulae that are speeding away from this earth, at a rate of 15,000 miles a second. There was a race. Prof. Hubble started it in the year 1930, with announced discoveries of nebulae rushing away at--oh, a mere two or three thousand miles a second. In March, 1931, somebody held the record with an 8,000-mile nebula. At this time of writing, Dr. Humason is ahead.

When a tabloid newspaper reporter announces speedy doings by more or less nebulous citizens, as "ascertained" by him, by methods that did not necessarily indicate anything of the kind, his performance is called sensationalism.

It is my statement that Dr. Hubble and Dr. Humason are making their announcements, as inferences from a method that does not necessarily indicate anything of the kind.

In the New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 6, 1932, Dr. Charles B. Davenport, of the department of genetics, in Carnegie Institution, received only four inches of space for one of those scares that used to be spread-headed--unknown disease that may wipe out all humanity. "Sometime in the future our boasted skyscrapers may become inhabited by bats, and the safe deposit vaults of our cities become the caves of wild animals." The unknown disease is antiquated

[p. 971]

sensationalism. I look back at my own notion of the appearance of werethings in the streets of New York--

I now have a little story that pleases me, not so much because I think that I at least hold my own with my professorial rivals, but because, with it, I exercise some of those detective abilities that all of us, even professional detectives, possibly, are so sure we have. I reconstruct, according to my abilities, an incident that occurred somewhere near the city of Wolverhampton, England, about the first of December, 1890. The part of the story of which I have no record--that is the hypothetical part--is that, at this time, somewhere near Wolverhampton, lived a tormented young man. He was a good young man. Not really, of course, if nothing's real. But he approximated. Though for months he had not gone traveling, he was obsessed with a vividly detailed scene of himself, behaving in an unseemly manner to a female, in a railway compartment. There was another mystery. Somebody had asked him to account for his absence, somewhere, about the first of December, whereas he was convinced that he had not been absent--and yet--but he could make nothing of these two mysteries.

Upon the Thursday before the 6th of December, 1890--see the Birmingham Daily Post, December 6--a woman was traveling alone, in a compartment of a train from Wolverhampton to Snow Hill. According to my reconstruction, she began to think of stories of reprehensible conduct by predatory males to females traveling alone in railway compartments.

The part of the story that I take from the Birmingham Post is that when a train went past Soho Station, a woman fell from it. She gave her name as Matilda Crawford, and said that a young man had insulted her. An odd detail is that it was not her statement that she had leaped from the train, but that the insulting young man had pushed her through a window.

In the next compartment had sat a detective. At an inquiry, he testified that--at least so far as went his observations upon visible entrances and exits--there had been nobody but this woman in this compartment.

In the New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 23, 1932, was published an

[p. 972]

explanation, by Dr. Frederick B. Robinson, president of New York City College, of some of us sensationalists:

"'Professors have not scored so well in making good appearances from the publicity standpoint,' Dr. Robinson said. 'Living sheltered lives,' he added, 'they yearn for public notice and sometimes get it at the expense of their college. Surely a great New England institution was not elevated in public esteem when one of its professors of English engaged in a series of publicity-stunts, the first of which was to give solemn advice to young men to be snobs.'"

At a meeting of the American Chemical Society, at Buffalo, N. Y., Sept. 3, 1931, Dr. William Engleback told of cases in which, by the use of glandular extracts, the height of dwarfed children had been increased an inch or two. For the announcement of this mild little miracle, he received several inches of newspaper space. New York Times, Dec. 16, 1931--meeting of the Institute of Advanced Education, at the Roerich Museum, New York--something more like a miracle. I measured. Dr. Louis Berman got eleven inches of newspaper space. Dr. Berman's announcement was that the sorcerers of his cult--the endocrinologists--would breed human beings sixteen feet high.

Meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in New Orleans, December, 1931--report upon the work of Dr. Richard P. Strong, of the Harvard Medical School, in the matter of the filaria worms that infest human bodies--and an attempt to make it more interesting. That an ancient mystery had been solved--Biblical story of the fiery serpents at last explained. There's no more resemblance between these tiny worms and the big fiery things that--we are told--grabbed people, than between any caterpillar and a red-hot elephant. But that the filaria worms had been "identified" as the fiery monsters of antiquity was considered a good story, and was given much space in the newspapers. However, see an editorial, not altogether admiring, in the New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 5, 1932.

Still, I do, after a fashion, hold my own. New York Sun, Oct. 9, x931--that, shortly after the Civil War, Captain Neil Curry sailed from Liverpool to San Francisco. The vessel caught fire, about

[p. 973]

[paragraph continues] 1,500 miles off the west coast of Mexico. The Captain, his wife, and two children, and thirty-two members of the crew took to three small boats, and headed for the mainland. Then details of suffering for water.

"Talk of miracles!" In the midst of the ocean, they found themselves in a volume of fresh water.

I note the statement that Capt. Curry discovered fresh water around the boats, not by a disturbance of any kind, but because of the green color of it, contrasting with the blue of the salt water.

I wrote to Capt. Curry, who at the time of my writing was living in Emporia, Kansas, and received an answer from him, dated Oct. 21, 1931, saying that the story in the Sun was accurate except as to the time; that the occurrence had been in the year 1881.

Here is something, both very different and strikingly similar, which I take from Dr. Richardson's Journal, as quoted by Sir John Franklin, in his Narrative of a Journey to the Polar Sea, p. 157--a story of a young Chipewyan Indian. His wife had died, and he was trying to save his new-born child. "To still its cries, he applied it to his breast, praying earnestly to the great Master of Life, to assist him. The force of the powerful passion by which he was actuated produced the same effect in his case, as it has done in some others, which are recorded: a flow of milk actually took place from his breast."

Intensest of need for water--and it may be that, to persons so suffering, water has been responsively transported. But there have been cases of extremest need for water to die by. One can think of situations in which more frenziedly have there been prayers for water, for death, than ever for water to live by.

New York Sun, Feb. 4, 1892--that, after the burial of Frances Burke, of Dunkirk, N. Y., her relatives, suspecting that she had been in a trance, had her body exhumed. The girl was found dead in a coffin that was full of water. It was the coroner's opinion that she had been buried alive, and had been drowned in her coffin. No opinion as to the origin of the water was published.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 974]

  

20

THE importance of the invisible--

That I'd starve to death, in the midst of eatables, were it not for the invisible means of locomotion by which I go and get them, and the untouchable and unseeable processes by which I digest them--

That every stout and determined materialist, arguing his rejection of the unseeable and the untouchable, lives in a phantom existence, from which he would fade away were it not for his support by invisibles--

The heat of his body--and heat has never been seen.

His own unseeable thoughts, by which he argues against the existence of the invisible.

Nobody has ever seen steam. Electricity is invisible. The science of physics is occultism. Experts in the uses of steam and electricity are sorcerers. Mostly we do not think of their practices as witchcraft, but we have an opinion upon what would have been thought of them, in earlier stages of the Dark Age we're living in.

Or by the "occult," or by what is called the "supernatural," I mean something like an experience that I once saw occur to some acquaintances of mine.

A neighbor had pigeons, and the pigeons loafed on my window sill. They were tempted to come in, but for weeks, stretched necks, fearing to enter. I wished they would come in. I went four blocks to get them sunflower seeds. Though I will go thousands of miles for data, it is most unusual for me to go four blocks--it's eight blocks, counting both ways--for anybody. One time I found three of them, who had flown through an open window, and were upon the frame of a closed window. I went to them slowly, so as not to alarm them. It seems that I am of a romantic disposition, and, if I take a liking to anybody, who seems female, like almost all birds, I want her to perch on my finger. So I put out a finger. But

[p. 975]

all three birds tried to fly through the glass. They could not learn, by rebuffs, but kept on trying to escape through the glass. If, back in the coop, these pigeons could have told their story, it would have been that they were perched somewhere, when suddenly the air hardened. Everything in front was as clearly visible as before, but the air had suddenly turned impenetrable. Most likely the other pigeons would have said: "Oh, go tell that to the sparrows!"

There is a moral in this, and it applies to a great deal in this book, which is upon the realization of wishes. I had wished for pigeons. I got them. After the investigation by the three pioneers all of them came in. There were nine of them. It was the unusually warm summer of 1931, and the windows had to be kept open. Pigeons on the backs of chairs. They came up on the table, and inspected what I had for dinner. Other times they spent on the rug, in stately groups and processions, except every now and then,, when they were not so dignified. I could not shoo them out, because I had invited them. Finally, I did get screens: but it takes. weeks to be so intelligent. So the moral is in the observation that, if you wish for something, you had better look out, because you may be so unfortunate as to get it. It is better to be humble and contented with almost nothing, because there's no knowing what something may do to you. Much is said of the "cruelty of Nature": but, when a man is denied his "heart's desire," that is mercy.

But I am suspicious of all this wisdom, because it makes for humility and contentment. These thoughts are community-thoughts, and tend to suppress the individual. They are corollaries of mechanistic philosophy, and I represent revolt against mechanistic philosophy, not as applying to a great deal, but as absolute.

Nevertheless, by the "occult," or the "supernatural," I do not mean that I think that it is altogether exemplified by the experience of the pigeons. In our existence of law-lawlessness, I conceive of two magics: one as representing unknown law, and the other as expressing lawlessness--or that a man may fall from a roof, and alight unharmed, because of anti-gravitational law; and that another man may fall from a roof, and alight unharmed, as an expression of the exceptional, of the defiance of gravitation, of universal inconsistency, of defiance of everything.

[p. 976]

London Times, October--

Oh, well, just as an exception of our own--never mind the data, this time--take my word for it that I could cite instances of remarkable falls, if I wanted to.

It looks to me as if, for instance, some fishes climb trees, as an expression of lawlessness, by which there is somewhere an exception to the generalization that fishes must be aquatic. I think that Thou Shalt Not was written on high, addressed to fishes. Whereupon a fish climbed a tree. Or that it is law that hybrids shall be sterile--and that, not two, but three, animals went into a conspiracy, out of which came the okapi. There is a "law" of specialization. Evolutionists make much of it. Stores specialize, so that dealers in pants do not sell prunes. But then appear drugstores, which sell drugs, books, soups, and mouse traps.

I have had what I think is about the average experience with magic. But, except in several periods, I have taken notes upon my experiences: and most persons do not do this, and forget. We forget so easily that I have looked over notes, and have come upon details of which I had no remembrance. From records of my own experiences, I take an account of a series of small occurrences, several particulars of which are of importance to our general argument.

I was living in London--39 Marchmont Street, W. C. 1. I was gathering data, in the British Museum Library. In my searches, I had noted instances of pictures falling from walls, at times of poltergeist disturbances: but I note here that my data upon physical subjects, such as earthquakes and auroral beams and lights on dark parts of the moon were about five to one, as compared with numbers of data upon matters of psychic research. Later, the preponderance shifted the other way. The subject of pictures falling from walls was in my mind, but it was much submerged by other subjects and aspects of subjects. It was so inactive in my mind that, when I was told of several pictures that had fallen from walls in our house, I put that down to household insecurities, and paid no more attention.

The abbreviations in the notes are A, for my wife; Mrs. M., for the landlady; E, the landlady's daughter; the C's the tenants upstairs.

[p. 977]

[paragraph continues] According to me, this is not the unsatisfactoriness of so many stories about a Mr. X, or a Mrs. Y., because, according to me, only two of us, whom I identify, were more than minor figures: also we may suspect that, of these two, one was rather more central than the other--according to me. However, also, I suspect that, if E should tell this story, I'd be put down, much minored, as Mr. F. A and I occupied the middle floor, which was of two rooms, one of them used by us as a kitchen, though it was furnished to rent as a furnished room.

March 1, 1924--see Charles Fort's Notes, Letter E, Box 27--"I was reading last night, in the kitchen, when I heard a thump. Sometimes I am not easily startled, and I looked around in a leisurely manner, seeing that a picture had fallen, glass not breaking, having fallen upon a pile of magazines in a corner. Two lace curtains at sides of window. Picture fell at foot of left curtain. Now, according to my impression, the bottom of the right-hand curtain was vigorously shaken, for several seconds, an appreciable length of time after the fall of the picture.

"Morning of the 12th--find that one of the brass rings, on the back of the picture frame, to which the cord was attached, had been broken in two places--metal bright at the fractures.

"A reminded me that, in the C's room, two pictures had fallen recently."

I have kept this little brass ring, broken through in one place, and the segment between the breaks, hanging by a metal shred at the point of the other break. The picture was not heavy. The look is that there had been a sharp, strong pull on the picture cord, so doubly to break this ring.

"March 18, 1924--about 5 P.M., I was sitting in the corner, where the picture fell. There was a startling, crackling sound, as if of window glass breaking. It was so sharp and loud that for hours afterward I had a sense of alertness to dodge missiles. It was so loud that Mrs. C., upstairs, heard it."

But nothing had broken a windowpane. I found one small crack in a corner, but the edges were grimy, indicating that it had been made long before.

"March 28, 1924--This morning, I found a second picture--or the

[p. 978]

fourth, including the falls in the rooms upstairs--on the floor, in the same corner. It had fallen from a place about three feet above a bureau, upon which are piled my boxes of notes. It seems clear that the picture did not ordinarily fall, or it would have hit the notes, and there would have been a heartbreaking mess of notes all over the floor."

Oh, very. Sometimes I knock over a box of notes, and it's a job of hours to get them back in their places. I don't know whether it has any meaning, but I think about this: the accounts of pictures falling from walls, which were among these notes.

"The glass in the picture was not broken. This time, the cord, and not a ring, was broken. I quickly tied the broken cord, and put the picture back. I suppose I should have had A for a witness. Partly I did not want to alarm her, and partly I did not want her to tell, and start a ghost-scare centering around me."

I would have it that, in some unknown way, I was the one who was doing this. I'd like to meet Mrs. C., sometime, and perhaps listen to her hint that she has psychic powers, and hint that she was the one who went around psychically, knocking down pictures in our house.

The cord of this second, or fourth, picture was heavy and strong. It was beyond my strength to break a length of it. But something had broken this strong cord. I looked at the small nail in the wall. It showed no sign of strain.

Of course I was reasoning about all this. Said I: "If, when this house was furnished, all the pictures were put up about the same time, their cords may all weaken about the same time." But a ring broke, one of the times. Upstairs, one of the pictures had fallen in a kitchen, and the other in a living room, where conditions were different. Smoke in a kitchen has chemical effects upon picture cords.

"April 18, 1924--A took a picture down from the kitchen wall, to wash the glass--London smoke. The picture seemed to fall from the wall into her hands. A said: 'Another picture cord rotten.' Then: 'No: the nail came out.' But the cord had not broken, and the nail was in the wall. Later, that day, A said: 'I don't understand how that picture came down.'"

[p. 979]

There was nothing resembling a "scare" in the house. There were no discussions. I think that there was an occasional laughing suggestion--"Must be spooks around." I had three or four reasons for saying nothing about the matter to anybody.

"July 26, 1924--Heard a sound downstairs. Then Fannie called up: 'Mrs. Fort, did you hear that? A picture fell right off the wall.'"

I go on with my account, or with the mistake that I am making. Just so long as I gave the New York Something or Another, or the Tasmanian Whatever, for reference, that was all very well. But now I tell a story of my own, and everybody who hasn't had pictures drop from walls, in his presence, will resent pictures falling from walls, because of my occult powers.

There are several notes that may indicate a relation between my thoughts upon falling pictures, and then, later, a falling picture.

"Oct. 22, 1924--Yesterday, I was in the front room, thinking casually of the pictures that fell from the walls. This evening, my eyes bad. Unable to read. Was sitting, staring at the kitchen wall, fiddling with a piece of string. Anything to pass away time. I was staring right at a picture above corner of bureau, where the notes are, but having no consciousness of the picture. It fell. It hit boxes of notes, dropped to floor, frame at a corner broken, glass broken."

There was another circumstance. I remember nothing about it. The notes upon it are as brief as if I had not been especially impressed by something that I now think was one of the strangest particulars--that is, if by indicating that I had searched for something, I meant that I had searched thoroughly.

"The cord was broken several inches from one of the fastenings on back of picture. But there should have been this fastening, a dangling piece of cord, several inches long. This missing. I can't find it."

"Night of Sept. 28-29, 1925--a picture fell in Mrs. M's room." Note the lapse of time.

I am sorry to record that a note, dated Nov. 3, 1926, is missing. As I remember it, and according to allusions, in notes of November 4th, it was only a remark of mine that for more than a year no picture had fallen.

[p. 980]

"Nov. 4, 1926--This is worth noting. Last night, I noted about the pictures, because earlier in the evening, talking over psychic experiences with France and others, I had mentioned falling pictures in our house. Tonight, when I came home, A told me of a loud sound that had been heard, and how welcome it was to her, because it had interrupted E, in a long, tiresome account of the plot of a moving picture. Later, A exclaimed: 'Here's what made the noise!' She had turned on the light, in the front room, and on the floor was a large picture. I had not mentioned to A that yesterday my mind was upon falling pictures. I took that note after she had gone to bed. I looked at the picture--cord broken, with frayed ends. I have kept a loop of this cord. The break is under a knot in it. Nov. 5--I have not strongly enough emphasized A's state of mind, at the time of the fall of the picture. E's long account of a movie had annoyed her almost beyond endurance, and probably her hope for an interruption was keen." Here is an admission that I did not think, or suspect, that it was I, who was the magician, this time.

In October, 1929, we were living in New York, or, anyway, in the Bronx. I do not have pictures on walls, in places of my own. I can't get the pictures I'd like to have: so I don't have any. I haven't been able to get around to painting my own pictures, but, if I ever do, maybe I'll have the right kind to put up.

"October 15, 1929--I was looking over these notes, and I called A from the kitchen to discuss them. I note that A had been doing nothing in the kitchen. She had just come in: had gone to the kitchen to see what the birds were doing. While discussing those falling pictures, we heard a loud sound. Ran back, and found on the kitchen floor a pan that had fallen from a pile of utensils in a closet."

"Oct. 18, 1930--I made an experiment. I read these notes aloud to A, to see whether there would be a repetition of the experience of Oct. 15, 1929. Nothing fell."

"Nov. 19, 1931--tried that again. Nothing moved. Well, then, if I'm not a wizard, I'm not going to let anybody else tell me that he's a wizard."

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 981]

  

21

I LOOKED at a picture, and it fell from a wall.

The diabolical thought of Usefulness rises in my mind. If ever I can make up my mind to declare myself the enemy of all mankind, then shall I turn altruist, and devote my life to being of use and of benefit to my fellow-beings.

Everything that is of slavery, ancient and modern, is a phenomenon of usefulness. The prisons are filled with unconventional interpreters of uses. If it were not for uses, we'd be free of lawyers. Give up the idea of improvements, and that is an escape from politicians.

Do unto others as you would that others should do unto you, and you may make the litter of their circumstances that you have made of your own. The good Samaritan binds up wounds with poison ivy. If I give anybody a coin, I hand him good and evil, just as truly as I hand him head and tail. Whoever discovered the uses of coal was a benefactor of all mankind, and most damnably something else. Automobiles, and their seemingly indispensable services--but automobiles and crime and a million exasperations. There are persons who think they see clear advantages in the use of a telephone--then the telephone rings.

If, by looking at it, a picture can be taken down from a wall, why could not a house be pulled down, by still more intently staring at it?

If, occultly, mentally, physically, however, a house could be pulled down, why could not a house be put up, by concentrating upon its materials?

Now visions of the Era of Witchcraft--miracles of invisible bricklaying, and marvels of masonry without masons--subtle uses and advantages that will merge both A. D. and B. C. into one period of barbarism, known as B. W.--

But the factories and labors and laborers--everything else that is

[p. 982]

now employed in our primitive ways of buildings houses. Unemployment and starvation and charity--political disturbances--the outcry against putting the machines out of work. There is no understanding any messiah, inventor, discoverer, or anybody else who is working for betterment, except by recognizing him as partly a fiend.

And yet, in one respect, I am suspicious of all this wisdom. The only reason that it is not conventional mechanistic philosophy is that the conventionalist is more subdued. But, if to every action there is a reaction that is equal and opposite, there is to every advantage, or betterment, an equal disadvantage, or worsement. This view--except as quantitatively expressed--seems to me to be in full agreement with my experiences with advantages and uses and betterments: but, as quantitatively expressed, it is without authority to me, because I cannot accept that ever has any action-reaction been cut in two, its parts separated, and isolated, so that it could be determined what either part was equal to.

I looked at a picture, and it fell from a wall.

Once upon a time, Dr. Gilbert waved a wand that he had rubbed with the skin of a cat, and bits of paper rose from a table. This was in the year 1, of Our Lord, Electricity, who was born as a parlor-stunt.

And yet there are many persons, who have read widely, who think that witchcraft, or the idea of witchcraft, has passed away.

They have not read widely enough. They have not thought widely enough. What idea has ever passed away? Witchcraft, instead of being a "superstition of the past," is of common report. I look over my data for the year 1924, for instance, and note the number of cases, most of them called "poltergeist disturbances," that were reported in England. Probably in the United States more numerously were cases reported, but, because of library facilities, I have especially noted phenomena in England. Cases of witchcraft and other uncanny occurrences, in England, in the year 1924, were reported from East Barnet, Monkton, Lymm, Bradford, Chiswick, Mount-sorrel, Dudley, Hayes, Maidstone, Minster Thanet, Epping, Grimsby, Keighley, and Clyst St. Lawrence.

New York newspapers reported three cases, close together, in the

[p. 983]

year 1927. New York Herald Tribune, Aug. 12, 1927--Fred Koett and his wife compelled to move from their home, near Ellenwood, Kansas. For months this house had been bewitched--pictures turned to the wall--other objects moving about--their pet dog stabbed with a pitch fork, by an invisible. New York Herald Tribune, Sept. 12, 1927--Frank Decker's barn, near Fredon, N. J., destroyed by fire. For five years there had been unaccountable noises, opening and shutting doors, and pictures on walls swinging back and forth. Home News (Bronx), Nov. 27, 1927--belief of William Blair, County Tyrone, Ireland, that his cattle were bewitched. He accused a neighbor, Isabella Hazelton, of being a witch--"witch" sued him for slander--L5 and costs.

My general expression is against the existence of poltergeists as spirits--but that the doings are the phenomena of undeveloped magicians, mostly youngsters, who have no awareness of their powers as their own--or, in the cases of mischievous, or malicious, persecutions, are more or less consciously directed influences by enemies--or that, in this aspect, "poltergeist disturbances" are witchcraft under a new name. The change of name came about probably for two reasons: such a reaction against the atrocities of witchcraft-trials that the existence of witches was sweepingly denied, so that continuing phenomena had to be called something else; and the endeavor by the spiritualists to take over witchcraft, as evidence of the existence of "spirits of the departed."

If witches there be, there must of course be some humorous witches. The trail of the joke crosses our accounts of the most deadly occurrences. In many accounts of poltergeist disturbances, the look is more of mischief than of hate for victims. The London Daily Mail, May 1, 1907, is responsible for what is coming now:

An elderly woman, Mme. Blerotti, had called upon the Magistrate of the Ste. Marguerite district of Paris, and had told him that, at the risk of being thought a madwoman, she had a complaint to make against somebody unknown. She lived in a flat, in the Rue Montreuil, with her son and her brother. Every time she entered the flat, she was compelled by some unseen force to walk on her hands, with her legs in the air. The woman was detained by the magistrate, who sent a policeman to the address given. The policeman

[p. 984]

returned with Mme. Blerotti's son, a clerk, aged 27. "What my mother has told you, is true," he said. "I do not pretend to explain it. I only know that when my mother, my uncle, and myself enter the flat, we are immediately impelled to walk on our hands." M. Paul Reiss, aged fifty, the third occupant of the flat, was sent for. "It is perfectly true," he said. "Everytime I go in, I am irresistibly impelled to walk around on my hands." The concierge of the house was brought to the magistrate. "To tell the truth," he said, "I thought that my tenants had gone mad, but as soon as I entered the rooms occupied by them, I found myself on all fours, endeavoring to throw my feet in the air."

The magistrate concluded that here was an unknown malady. He ordered that the apartments should be disinfected.

There used to be a newspaper story of the "traveling needle." People perhaps sat on needles, though they thought it more dignified to report that needles had entered their bodies by way of their elbows. Then, five, ten, twenty, years later, the needles came out by way of distant parts. We seldom hear of the "traveling needle," nowadays: so I think that most--not all--of these old stories were newspaper yarns. I was interested in these stories, as told back in the eighteen-eighties and nineties, but never came upon one that seemed to me to be authentic, or to offer material much to speculate upon. I took suggestion from the method of "black magic," of piercing, with a needle, the heart, or some other part, of an image of a proposed victim, and, according to beliefs, succeeded in affecting a corresponding part of a human being

An inquest, in the Shoreditch (London) Coroner's court, Nov. 14, 1919--a child, Rosina Newton, aged thirteen months, had died. A needle was found in her heart. "There was no skin-wound to show where it had entered the body." It was the short life of this child that attracted my attention. The parents had no remembrance of any injury to her, such as that of a needle entering her body.

It seems unlikely that anybody so intensely hated this infant as to concentrate upon a desire for her death: but I have stories that may indicate the doing of harm to children as vengeance upon parents.

And in the annals of "black magic" often appears the sorcerer,

[p. 985]

who obtains something of the belongings, or of the body, of a victim, to secure a contact, or a sense of contact. Parings of fingernails are recommended, but the procuring of a lock of the victim's hair is supposed to be most effective. There may be psychic hounds, who, from a belonging, pick up a scent, and then maintain, and operate along, a path, or a current, between themselves and their victims. In such terms, of harm, or of possession, may be understandable the hair-clippers of our records.

There is a strange story, in the Times of India (Bombay), Aug. 30, 1928. A part of this story that does not seem so very strange to me is that three times a new-born infant of a Muslim woman, of Bhonghir, had been "mysteriously and supernaturally" snatched away from her. The strange part is that the police, though they had explained that these disappearances were only ordinary, or "natural," kidnapings, had gone to the trouble of taking this woman, who for the fourth time was in a state of expectation, to the Victoria Zenana Hospital, at Secunderabad; and that the hospital authorities had gone to the trouble and expense of assigning her to a special ward, where special nurses watched her, night and day. The fourth infant arrived, and this one, so surrounded by test-conditions, did not mysteriously vanish: so it was supposed to be demonstrated that the three disappearances were ordinary kidnapings. The explanation that occurs to one is that, though it was not mentioned in the Times of India, there was probably a scare, at Bhonghir, and that this demonstration was made to allay it.

Just how, by ordinary, or "natural," means, anybody could, time after time, without being seen, snatch a new-born infant from a woman, was not inquired into. All such "demonstrations" start with the implied assumption that there is not witchcraft, and then show that there is not witchcraft. That is, there is no consideration for the thought that a witch might exist and might fear to practice so publicly as in a hospital ward. The "demonstration" was that there was not witchcraft in a hospital ward, and that therefore there is not witchcraft. Many of our data are of most public, or daring, or defiant occurrences: but it is notable that they stop--mostly, though not invariably--when public attention is aroused. Sometimes they stop, and then renew periodically.

[p. 986]

About the first of May, 1922, Pauline Picard, a Breton child, aged 12, disappeared from her home on a farm, near Brest, France. I take this account from various issues of the Journal des Debats (Paris), May and June, 1922. Upon May 26th, a cyclist, passing Picard's farm, saw something in a field, not far from the road. He investigated. He came upon Pauline's naked and headless body. At the roadside were found her clothes. It was noted that they were "neatly folded."

The body was decomposed. Hands and feet, as well as head, were missing. This body, visible from the road, was found at a point half a mile from the Picard farmhouse.

It seems most likely that, if it was seen by a passing cyclist, it could not long have been lying so conspicuous, but unseen, by members of the Picard family. Nevertheless, that it had so lain was the opinion that was accepted at the inquest. It was said that the child must have wandered from home, and, returning, must have died of exhaustion; and that the body had been defaced by rats and foxes. This story of the wandering child, dying of exhaustion, half a mile from her home, was given plausibility by the circumstances that once before Pauline had wandered far, and that she had been affected mentally. At least, she had disappeared, and had been found far away.

Upon April 6th, of this year 1922, Pauline disappeared. Several days later, a child was found wandering in the streets of Cherbourg. The Picards were notified, and, going to Cherbourg, identified this child as Pauline, who, however, did not recognize them, being in a state of lapsed consciousness, or amnesia. If Pauline Picard, aged 12, had made this journey afoot, or by means that are called "natural," between a farm near Brest and Cherbourg, in a state of amnesia, which it seems would somewhere be noted, but had not been reported, she had gone, unreported, a distance by land of about 230 miles.

Twice Pauline Picard disappeared. The first disappearance was not an ordinary runaway, or was not an ordinary kidnaping, because something had profoundly affected this child mentally. I have notes upon more than a few cases of persons who have appeared, as if they had been occultly transported, or at any rate have

[p. 987]

appeared in places so far from their homes that they were untraceable, and were amnesiatics. An expression for which I should like to find material is that, three times, in distant parts of India, "wolf children" were reported, after the times of disappearance of the infants of Bhonghir. The official explanation of the second disappearance and the death of Pauline Picard bears the marks of dictation by Taboo. If the body of this child had been also otherwise mutilated, the explanation of defacement by rats and foxes would be more nearly convincing: but something, or somebody, had, as if to prevent identification, removed, without other mutilations, hands and feet and head--and also, contradictorily, had placed the body in a conspicuous position, as if planning to have it found. The verdict at the inquest required belief that this decomposed body had lain, conspicuous, but unseen, for several weeks, in this field. There is a small particular that adds to the improbability. It seems that the clothes--also conspicuous by the roadside--had not been lying there, for several weeks, subject to the disturbing effects of rains and wind. They were "neatly folded."

It is as if somebody had removed head, hands, and feet from this body, and had stripped the clothes from it, so that it could not be identified; and had placed the clothes near by, so that it could be identified.

A field--the dismembered body of a child--a farmhouse near by. But I can pick up no knowledge of relations with environment. Friendly neighbors--or a neighbor with a grudge--all around is vacancy. A case that was called "unparalleled" was told of, in the New York newspapers, April 30, 1931. Here, too, the surroundings are blankness: in the usual way the story was told, as an unrelated thing. Perhaps, somewhere near by, brooding over a crystal globe, or some other concentration-device, was the origin of a series of misfortunes.

Early in April, 1931, Valentine Minder, of Happauge, Long Island, N. Y., was suffering with what was said to be mastoiditis. His eight children were stricken with what was said to be measles, and then, one after another, in a period of eight days, the eight children were taken ill with mastoiditis, and were removed to a hospital. The

[p. 988]

circumstance, because of which these cases were called "unparalleled," is that mastoiditis was supposed to be not contagious.

These cases, which, if "unparalleled," were mysterious, were a culmination of a series of misfortunes. About two years before, Minder's home had burned down. Then came his illness, a loss of vitality, the loss of his job, and a state of destitution. Toward the end of 1930, Mrs. Minder was stricken with an indefinable illness, and became an invalid.

So far as was known, mastoiditis is not contagious. Out of many cases of family maladies, misfortunes, and fatalities, I pick one in which it seems that even more decidedly there is no place for the idea of contagion. Of course there is a place for the idea of coincidence. That is one square peg that fits into round holes and octagonal holes; dodecagonal holes, cracks, slits, gaps--or seems to, so long as whether it does or doesn't is not enquired into. London Daily Chronicle, Nov. 3, 1926--that Mr. A. C. Peckover, the well-known violinist, one of the examiners to the Royal College of Music, had at the home of his sister, in Skipton, awakened one morning, to find himself blind. He was taken to the Bradford Eye and Ear Hospital. Here was his father, who, almost simultaneously, had been stricken with blindness.

In the matter of the deaths that followed the opening of Tut-Ankh-Amen's tomb, it is my notion that, if "curses" there be, they lose their vitality, anyway after several thousand years--

Or that a tomb was violated, and that funerals followed--by the deadly magic of no mummy, but of a living Egyptian--that, somewhere in Egypt, a sense of desecration became an obsession, from which came "rays," or a more personal and searching vengeance.

I wonder why the "wealthy farmer" appears in so many records of more or less uncanny doings. Perhaps any farmer who becomes wealthy, so becomes by sharp practices, and has enemies, whose malices against him demonstrate. In November, 1890, the household of Stephen Haven, a wealthy farmer, living near Fowlerville, Michigan, was startled by cries, one night. Haven was found at the bottom of a deep well. He had walked in his sleep. Two months later, he was again missing from his bedroom, was searched for,

[p. 989]

and was found, standing, with the water up to his neck, in Silver Lake. Other members of the family were alarmed and alert. They heard slight sounds, one night--Haven was found, fast asleep, trying to set the house afire. Another time--and a thud was heard. The man, asleep, had tried to hang himself. According to the story, as told in the Brooklyn Eagle, Nov. 18, 1892, Haven had finally been found dead at night. He had fallen from the upper-story doorway of his barn.

See back to occurrences in Sing Sing Prison, in December, 1930. New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 18, 1932--"Warden Lewis E. Lawes fell this evening on the sleet-covered steps of his home, at the prison, and his right arm was broken in three places."

In matters of witchcraft, my general expression--as I say, to signify that neither as to anything in this book, nor anywhere else, have I beliefs--my general expression upon poltergeist girls is not that they are mediums, controlled by spirits, but that effects in their presence are phenomena of their own powers, or talents, or whatever: but that there are cases in which it seems to me that youngsters were mediums, or factors, not to spirits, but to living human beings, who had become witches, or wizards, by their hates--or that, in some cases, sorcery, unless so involuntarily accompliced, cannot operate. See back to the Dagg case--here there seemed to be a girl's own phenomena, and also the presence of another being, who was invisible. The story was probably largely a distortion. The story was that there was a feud--that a "voice" accused a neighbor, Mrs. Wallace, of having sent it into the Dagg home. If this woman could invisibly transport herself into somebody else's home, for purposes of malice and persecution, we'd not expect her to accuse herself--but there is such an element in a hate, as a sense of dissatisfaction with injuring an enemy, unless the victim knows who's doing it. Also the accusation was soon confused into an acquittal.

I have noted a case of occurrences in a shop, in London, which I tell of, mostly because it has highly the look of authenticity. Not a girl but a boy was present. I'd think that the doings were his own phenomena, were it not for the circumstance of "timing." By "timing," in this case, I mean the occurrence of phenomena upon the same days of weeks. The phenomenon of "timing," or the occurrences

[p. 990]

of doings, about the same time each day, appears in many accounts of persecutions by invisibles, for which I have found no room, in this book.

London Weekly Dispatch, Aug. 18, 1907--disturbances in the stationery shop of Arthur Herbert George, 20 Butte Street, South Kensington, London, according to Mr. George's sworn statement, before the Commissioner for Oathes, at 85 Gloucester-road, South Kensington. George and his assistant, a boy, or a young man, aged 17, saw books and piles of stationery slide unaccountably from shelves. Everything that they replaced fell again, so that they could make no progress, trying to restore order. No vibration, no force of any kind, was felt. Two electric lamps in the window toppled over. Then there was livelier action: packages of note paper flew around, striking George and his assistant several times. George shut the door, so that customers should not come in and be injured. The next day boxes of stationery and bottles of ink were flying around, and four persons were struck. To this statement was appended an affidavit by an antique dealer, Sidney Guy Adams, 23 Butte Street, testifying that he had seen heavy packages of note paper flying around, and that he had been struck by one of them. In the Weekly Dispatch, September 1, it was said that there had been a repetition of the disturbances, upon the same days of the week (Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday) as the days of former phenomena. The damage to goods amounted to about L10.

Upon May 31, 1905, Englishmen--in a land where reported witchcraft is of common occurrence--were startled. This tabooed subject had been brought up in Parliament. A member of the House of Commons had told of a case of witchcraft, and had asked for an investigation.

See back to "mysterious thefts." Accept data and implications of almost any of the succeeding groups of stories, and "cat burglars," and other larcenous practitioners, become thinkable as adepts in skills that are not describable as "physical."

Dean Forest Mercury, May 26, 1905--that L50 had been stolen from a drawer in the home of John Markey near Blakeney (Dean Forest). The disappearance of this money was considered unaccountable. Just why, I could not find out, because the influence of

[p. 991]

[paragraph continues] Taboo smothered much, in this case. The members of this household could not explain how this money could have vanished, and brooding over the mystery made them "superstitious." They asked a woman, who, according to her reputation, had much knowledge of witchcraft, to investigate. Then came occurrences that made them extremely, hysterically, insanely "superstitious." It was as if an invisible resented the interference. Soon after the arrival of this woman--Ellen Haywood--something went through this house, smashing windows, crockery, and other breakables.

That is about all that I can pick up from the local newspaper, and from other newspapers published in the neighborhood.

Markey's daughter broke down, with terror. There is only this record: no particulars of her experiences. Without detail, or comment, it is told that Markey's granddaughter became insane. Both women were removed, one to a hospital, and the other to an asylum. Markey's wife ran screaming from the house, and hid in the forest. A Police Inspector came from Gloucester, and organized a search for her; but she was not found. For three days, without food or shelter, she hid. Then she returned, telling that she had seen the searchers, but had been in such a state of terror--by whatever was censored out of the records--that she had been afraid to come out of hiding. Markey's son became violently insane, smashing furniture, and seriously injuring himself, crying out that the whole family was bewitched. He, too, was taken to an asylum.

There was a demand for an inquiry into this case, and it was voiced in the House of Commons. It was voiced against Taboo. There is no more to tell.

I have notes upon another case that looks like resentment against an intrusion--if a woman died, but not in an epileptic fit, as alleged. There were accounts in the London newspapers, but I take from a local newspaper, the Wisbech Advertiser, Feb. 27, 1923, home of Mr. Scrimshaw, at Gorefield, near Wisbech. Other members of Scrimshaw's household were his mother, aged 82, and his daughter, Olive, aged 16. The phenomena were in the presence of this girl. First, Mrs. Scrimshaw's lace cap rose from her head. Then a washstand crashed to the floor. Objects, such as books, dishes, a water filter, fell to the floor. There was much smashing of furniture

[p. 992]

and crockery. Names of neighbors, who witnessed these unconventionalities, are John Fennelow, T. Marrick, W. Maxey, and G. T. Ward. A piano that weighed 400 pounds moved from place to place. Police-constable Hudson was a witness of some of the phenomena. As to a suggestion that, for any reason of notoriety, or hoaxing, Scrimshaw could be implicated, it was noted that the damage to furniture amounted to about L140.

A woman--Mrs. J. T. Holmes--who, sometime before, had been accused of witchcraft, went to this house, and practiced various incantations to exorcise the witch, or the evil spirit, or whatever. She died suddenly. It was said that she was subject to fits, and had died in one of her convulsions. Whether his decision related to Taboo, or not, the coroner decided not to hold an inquest.

Upon Dec. 12, 1930--see the Home News (Bronx), Dec. 22, 1930--a resident of the Bronx, Elisha Shamray--who had changed his name from Rayevsky--opened a pharmaceutical laboratory, in Jackson Street, lower East Side, New York. During the night he died. His brother, Dr. Charles Rayevsky, came from Liberty, N. Y., to arrange for the funeral. He died a week later. The next night, the third of these brothers, Michael Shamray, Tremont Ave., Bronx, was on his way to arrange for the second funeral. He was struck by an automobile, and was killed.

In August, 1927, Wayne B. Wheeler was the general counsel of the Anti-saloon League of America. Upon August 13th, an oil stove exploded, in his home, and his wife was killed. Later, his father dropped dead. Upon the 5th of September, Wheeler died.

New York Sun, Feb. 3, 1932--Mount Vernon, Ohio, February 3--"Fear that the mysterious illness which has killed three young brothers may strike again in the same family gripped surviving members of the household, today."

Upon the 24th of January, Stanley Paazig, aged 9, died in the home of his parents, on a farm, near Mount Vernon. Upon the 31st, Raymond, aged 8, died. Marion, aged 6, died, February 2nd.

The State Health Department had been unable to identify the malady. "Chemists spent twenty-four hours making tests of the youngest victim's blood, without finding a trace of poison."

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 993]

  

22

BELIEF in God--in Nothing--in Einstein--a matter of fashion--

Or that college professors are mannequins, who doll up in the latest proper things to believe, and guide their young customers modishly.

Fashions often revert, but to be popular they modify. It could be that a re-dressed doctrine of witchcraft will be the proper acceptance. Come unto me, and maybe I'll make you stylish. It is quite possible to touch up beliefs that are now considered dowdy, and restore them to fashionableness. I conceive of nothing, in religion, science, or philosophy, that is more than the proper thing to wear, for a while.

"Typhoid Mary"--I doubt her germs--or I suspect that she was more malicious than germy. But nobody else--at least so far as go the published accounts--which could not be expected to go very far back in the years 1906-14--thought of ignoring her germs, and of bottling her "rays." For my own suspicion that this was a case of witchcraft, I shall, for a while, probably be persecuted, by an amused tolerance, but, if back in the year 1906, anybody had given his opinion that "Typhoid Mary" was a witch, he'd have been laughed at outright.

Nobody accused "Typhoid Mary," except properly. According to the demonology of her era, she was distributing billions of little devils. Her case is framed with the unrecorded. As to her relations with her victims, I have nothing upon which to speculate.

The homes of dying men and women have been bombarded with stones of undetectable origin. Nobody was accused. We have had data of unexplained explosions, and data of seeming effects of "rays," not physical, upon motors. To me it is thinkable that a distant enemy could, invisibly, make an oil stove explode, and kill a woman, and then--if by means other than any known radioactivity, aeroplanes ever have been picked from the sky--pick from

[p. 994]

existence other members of her family. The explosion of the oil stove is simply a bang, such as cartoonists sometimes draw, with a margin of vacancy.

But there have been cases of persons who were accused of witchcraft.

This statement--like every other statement, issuing from the Supreme Court of the United States of America, from a nursery, from a meeting of the Amer. Assoc. Ad. Sci., or from the gossip of imbeciles--means whatever anybody wants it to mean. One interpretation is that superstitious people have attributed various misfortunes, which were probably due to their own ignorance and incompetence, to the malice of neighbors. At any rate, these cases are sketches of relations with environment, and so far we have been in a garden of evil, in which blossomed deaths and destructions, without visible stems, and without signs of the existence of roots.

New York Evening World, Sept. 14, 1928--Michael Drouse, a farmer, living near Bruce, Wis., who shot and fatally wounded John Wierzba, forty-four, told Sheriff Dobson that he did it because Wierzba had bewitched his cows. New York Times, Sept. 8, 1929--action by the Rye (N. Y.) National Bank against Leland Waterbury, of Poundridge, for recovery of properties, which the bank alleged had been taken from its client, Howard I. Saires, by "evil eye" methods. "The case has come to be known as the 'Westchester witchcraft case'." New York Times, Oct. 9, 1930--charges of sorcery brought against Henry Dorn, of Janesville, Wis. "After a member of the State Board of Medical Examiners listened to the charges of sorcery, he said that he was convinced that they were unfounded." Dorn's sister had accused him of "casting spells of sickness" upon members of her household.

So that case was disposed of.

I am not given to fortune-telling. I dislike the idea of fortune-telling, so called, or termed more pretentiously. But I do think that anybody could tell the fortune of any member of any State Board of Medical Examiners, who would say, of any charge of sorcery, that he was convinced that it was well-founded.

There were other charges against Dorn. They remind one of accusations in old-time witchcraft trials--

[p. 995]

That Dorn had caused apples to rot on trees, cows to go dry, and hens to cease laying.

Opponents to the idea of witchcraft are much influenced by their inability to conceive how anybody could make apples rot; inability to visualize the process of drying a cow, or entering into the organism of a hen, and stopping her productions. And science does not tell them how this could be done. So.

Also they cannot conceive how something makes apples grow, or why they don't rot on trees; how the milk of a cow is secreted, or why she shouldn't be dry; how the egg of a hen develops. And science does not tell them.

It's every man for himself, and save who can--and damnation is in accepting any messiah's offers of salvation. We're told too much, and we're told too little. We rely. And for two pins--having had experiences by which I am pretty well assured that nobody ever has two pins, when they're called for--I'd finish this book, as a personal philosophy, or for myself, alone, and then burn it. It's everybody for himself, or he isn't anybody.

It's every thinker for himself. He can be told of nothing but surfaces. Theological fundamentalists say, rootily, they think, that all things have makers--that God made all things. Then what made God? even little boys ask. Space is curved, and behind space, or space-time, there is nothing, says Prof. Einstein. Also may he be construed as saying that it is only relatively to something else that anything can be curved.

Throughout this book there is a permeation that may be interpreted as helplessness and hopelessness--absence of anything in science more than approximately to rely on--solaces and reassurances of religion, but any other religion would do as well--all progresses returning to their points of origin--philosophies only intellectual dress-making--

But, if it's every man for himself, it is my expression that out of his illusion that he has a self, he may develop one.

In records of witchcraft trials, often appears the statement that the accused person was seen, at the time of doings, in a partly visible, or semi-substantial, state. In June, 1880, at High Easter, Essex, England (London Times, June 24, 1880), there were poltergeist disturbances

[p. 996]

in the home of a family named Brewster. Furniture wandered. A bed rocked. Brewster saw, or thought he saw, a shadowy shape, which he recognized as that of his neighbor, Susan Sharpe. He and his son went to the home of the woman, and dragged her to a pond. They threw her into the pond, to see whether she would sink or float. But, though once upon a time, this was the scientific thing to do, fashions in science had changed. Brewster and his son were arrested, and were bound over to keep the peace--just as should be any woman, who, during rush hours in the subway, should appear in a hoop skirt.

A case that was a blend of ancient accusations and modern explanations was reported in the London Evening News, July 14, 1921--that is, "mysterious illnesses" attributed to the doings of an enemy, but an attempt to explain materialistically. Residents of a house in Putney had, in the London South Western Court, accused their neighbor, Frank Gordon Hatton, of "administering poisonous fumes down their chimney." Saying that the complainants had failed to prove their case, the magistrate dismissed the charge.

If anybody could have a sane idea as to what he means by insanity, he might know what he is thinking about, by bringing in this convenient way of explaining unconventional human conduct. Whatever insanity is supposed to be, it cannot so satisfactorily be applied as the explanation of two persons' beliefs relatively to one set of circumstances. According to newspaper accounts of a murder, in July, 1929, Eugene Burgess, and his wife, Pearl, went insane together, upon the same subject. It was their belief that, when Burgess's mother died, in the year 1927, she had been "willed to death" by a neighbor, Mrs. Etta Fairchild. It was their belief that this woman had cast illness upon their daughter. They killed Mrs. Fairchild. In an account, in the New York Sun, Oct. 16, 1929, Mrs. Burgess is described: "Belying the comparison to the ignorant peasant women, who have stood for trial for similar crimes, for hundreds of years, Mrs. Burgess looks like a prosperous clubwoman."

These are accounts of accusations of witchcraft, by persons, against other persons, according to their superstitions, or perceptions. Now

[p. 997]

there will be accounts of cases in which there are suggestions of witchcraft to me, according to my ignorance, or enlightenment.

Chicago Tribune, Oct. 14, 1892--marvelous--though not at all extraordinary--doings in the home of Jerry Meyers, a farmer, living near Hazelwood, Ohio. Meyers had been absent from his home, driving his wife to the railroad station. When he returned, he heard a hysterical story from his niece, Ann Avery, of Middletown, Ohio, who was visiting him. Soon after he and Mrs. Meyers had left the house stones were thrown at her, or fell around her. Objects in the house moved toward her. Mr. Meyers was probably astonished to hear this, but what he wanted was his dinner. The girl went to the barn to gather eggs. On her way back, stones fell around her. Whether Meyers got his dinner, or not, he got a gun. Neighbors had heard of the doings. Stationed around the house were men with shotguns: but stones of unknown origin continued to bombard the house. Ann Avery fled back to her home in Middletown. Phenomena stopped.

In this case of the girl who was driven from her uncle's home, the circumstance that I pick out as significant is that assailments by stones began soon after Mrs. Meyers left the house. It was said that she had gone to visit friends, in the village of Lockland. Of course hospitalities often are queer, but there is a good deal of queerness in the hospitality of somebody who would go visiting somewhere else, while her husband's niece was visiting in her home.

About the last of November, 1892, in the town of Hamilton, Ontario, a man was on his way to a railroad station. In a cell, in a prison, in Fall River, Massachusetts, sat a woman.

Henry G. Trickey was, in Hamilton, on his way to a railroad station. In the Fall River jail was Lizzie Borden, who was accused of having murdered her parents.

In August, 1892, Trickey, a reporter of the Boston Globe, had written what was described as a "scandalous article" about Lizzie Borden. The Globe learned that the story was false, and apologized. Trickey was indicted.

He went to Canada. This looks as if he had fled from prosecution.

Lizzie Borden sat in her cell. There may have been something more deadly than an indictment, from which there was no escape

[p. 998]

for Trickey. While boarding a train, at Hamilton, he fell, and was killed.

In the town of Eastbourne, Sussex, England, in April, 1922, John Blackman, a well-known labor leader, was committed to prison, under a maintenance order, for arrears due to his wife. The judge who committed him died suddenly. When Blackman was released, he still refused to pay so back he went to prison. The judge who sent him back "died suddenly." He continued to refuse to pay, and twice again was re-committed to prison, and each time the judge in his case "died suddenly." See Lloyd's Sunday News (London), Oct. 14, 1923.

Upon Nov. 29, 1931, there was an amateur theatrical performance in the home of Miss Phoebe Bradshaw, 106 Bedford Street, New York City. Villain--Clarence Hitchcock, 23 Grove Street, New York. Wronged husband--John L. Tilker, 1976 Belmont Avenue, Bronx. Tilker was given a cap pistol. Also he carried a loaded revolver of his own, for which he had a permit. When the time came, Tilker, with his own revolver, fired at Hitchcock, shooting him in the neck. "He was apparently new at play-acting, and in his excitement fired his own revolver, instead of the dummy."

Hitchcock lay dying in St. Vincent's Hospital. Soon something occurred to Tilker. He was taken to the Willard Parker Hospital, suffering from what was said to be scarlet fever. Hitchcock died, Jan. 17, 1932. See the New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 18, 1932.

New York Evening Journal, Feb. 6, 1930--"Two bitter women enemies are teetering on the verge of death, today, one of them 'doing satisfactorily,' while the other is weaker, and in a highly critical condition. Both are sufferers from cancer. They are Mrs. Frances Stevens Hall and her most hated opponent, in the famed Hall-Mills trial, Jane Gibson, whose testimony was used in an effort to send Mrs. Hall to the electric chair."

Upon the 8th of February, Jane Gibson died.

In the Fall of 1922, Mrs. Jane Gibson was a sturdy woman-farmer. It was her accusation that, upon the night of the murder of Dr. Edward Hall and Elinor Mills, Sept. 14, 1922, she had seen Mrs. Hall bending over the bodies. So she testified. She returned to her home, and soon afterward was stricken. At the re-trial, in November,

[p. 999]

[paragraph continues] 1926, she repeated the accusation, though she had to be carried on a cot into the court room. "Most of her days since that time were spent in the hospital."

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

23

DEAD men in a Harlem park--and houses are torn by explosions, of unknown origin--the sneak of an invisible clipper of hair--vampires and murder--theatrically a girl is stabbed, on a staircase, in the presence of a large audience--the internal organs of a woman are burned into unrecognizability--

And the stoutest opponents of witchcraft, one with persecutions, and the other with denials, have been religion and science--

And more power to them, for it--

Except that witchcraft is appalling.

In our existence of the hyphen, the appalling can be only one view of a state that combines the direst and the most desirable. Religion is belief in a supreme being. Science is belief in a supreme generalization. Essentially they are the same. Both are the suppressors of witchcraft, and I shall take up these oppositions together. But, in a state of realness-unrealness, there cannot be real opposition. In our existence of the hyphen, what is called opposition is only one view of the state of opposition-stimulation.

There is no way of judging anything, except by its manifestations. Just as much as it has been light, religion has been darkness. Today it is twilight. In the past it was mercy and charity and persecution and bloody, maniacal, sadistic hatred--hymns from chapels and screams from holy slaughterhouses--aspirations going up from this earth, with smoke from burning bodies. I can say that from religion we have never had opposition, because there never has been religion--that is that religion never has existed, as apart from all other virtues and vices and blessings and scourges--that, like all other alleged things, beings, or institutions, religion never has, in a final sense, had identity. An atheist, of zeal, may be thought of as religious. Or

[p. 1000]

[paragraph continues] I can take the unmonistic view, and accept that there is, or used to be, religion, just as, practically, I ignore that all things and beings of my daily experiences are so bound up with one another that they have not identities, and go about my daily affairs as if things and beings really were entities.

New York Sun, March 26, 1910--eruption of Mt. Etna--people of Borelli praying--the oncoming lava. The molten flood moved onward toward a shrine. Here the praying ones concentrated. The lava reached the shrine, and suddenly changed its course.

New York Times, July 27, 1931--"A revival of the ancient rain dance of Northern Saskatchewan Indians, despite the ban by the government agents, is reported to have occurred recently. Fields were parched and cattle were suffering when Chief Buffalo Bow, head of the File Hills Reserve, decided to invoke the Great Spirit. The forty-eight-hour dance, led by six singers in relays, centered about a great tree, on the bark of which a petition for aid had been carved. The Great Spirit seemed to answer, for soon after the mystic rites had been performed, the rain began and continued for two days, July 14 and 15, bringing relief all over Saskatchewan."

If, according to the views of the majority of the inhabitants of this earth, both Jehovah and the Great Spirit are myths, lava, if it would not have changed its course anyway, and rain, if it would not have fallen anyway, were influenced by witchcraft, if there be witchcraft. My general situation is that of any mathematician. Consider any of his theorems. The parallelogram of forces. In the textbooks, this demonstration works out--if the incident forces be without irregularities--if resistances be unchanging--if the body acted upon be changeless--if the student has no awareness of the changes and the irregularities that are everywhere.

In the London Daily Chronicle, July 7, 1924, was reported a case of an English girl who had come back from Lourdes, cured, she thought. It is not often that the doctors will have anything to do with one of these cases; but it was arranged to investigate this case. At the Hospital of St. John and St. Elizabeth, St. John's Wood, London, the girl was examined by 50 doctors. She had gone, with a nurse, to Lourdes. The nurse was questioned, and testified that the girl's hand had been covered with sores, from blood poisoning, and

[p. 1001]

that she had been cured, at Lourdes. The diseased condition of the girl, when she arrived in Lourdes, was certified by three doctors, of Lourdes. The sores had disappeared, but some contraction of the hand remained. The official decision of the 50 doctors, who were not of Lourdes, was: "On the evidence submitted, the cure is not proven."

I should like to come upon a record of the opinions of 50 drivers of hansom cabs, as to automobiles, when automobiles were new and uncertain, but were of some slight menace to the incomes of hansom cabbies.

In the New York World-Telegram, July 24, 1931, there is a story of a boy, who, at the Medical Center Hospital, New York, was cured of paralysis by the touch of a bit of bone of St. Anne, taken to the hospital from the Church of St. Anne, 110 East 12th Street, New York City. The boy was the son of Hugh F. Gaffney, 348 East 18th Street, New York City.

If, according to the views of the majority of the inhabitants of this earth, there is no more divinity at Lourdes, or at 110 East 12th Street, than anywhere else, there are reasons for thinking that it is witchcraft that is practiced at these places.

The function of God is the focus. An intense mental state is impossible, unless there be something, or the illusion of something, to center upon. Given any other equally serviceable concentration-device, prayers are unnecessary. I conceive of the magic of prayers. I conceive of the magic of blasphemies. There is witchcraft in religion: there may be witchcraft in atheism.

In the New York Evening World, Sept. 19, 1930, is an account of joy in Naples: the shouts of crowds, and the ringing of church bells. In the Cappella del Tesora Cathedral had been displayed the phial containing the "blood of St. Januarius." It had boiled.

It is my notion that, if intenser than the faith in Naples, had been a desire for a frustration of this miracle, the "blood of St. Januarius" might have frozen.

Upon the 5th of March, 1931--see the New York Herald Tribune, March 6th-15,000 worshipers were kneeling, at a pontifical high mass, in the Municipal Plaza, at San Antonio, Texas. Considering the intense antagonism to Catholicism in Mexico, at this time, one

[p. 1002]

thinks of the presence of some of this feeling in San Antonio. From a palm tree, the topmost tuft fell into the kneeling congregation. Six persons were taken to the hospital.

My general expression is that some of the reported phenomena that are called "miracles" probably have occurred, but have been arbitrarily taken over by the religionists, though they are the exclusive properties of priests no more than of traveling salesmen--that scientists have been repelled by the reported phenomena, because of a fear of contamination from priestcraft--but that any scientist who preaches the "ideals of science," and also lets fear of contaminations influence him is as false to his preachments as ever any priest has been.

See the New York Herald Tribune, Dec. 6, 1931--an account of the opening, in Goa, Portuguese India, of the coffin of Saint Francis Xavier.

"A special emissary, sent by Pope Pius XI, led the ceremonial procession, in which marched three archbishops, fifteen bishops, and hundreds of other members of the clergy. A throng of ten thousand persons heard the papal mass and benediction, in the Church of Don Jesus.

"The congregation passed before the coffin, and kissed the dead saint's feet."

But there have been scientists, especially medical scientists, who, in spite of contaminations, have not been held back from investigations.

In January, 1932, the New York newspapers told that many miracles had been reported in Goa.

There is no opposition, as sheer, to witchcraft, by religionists. It is competition.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1003]

  

24

OUR only important opposition is, not science, but a belief that we are in conflict with science.

This is an old-fashioned belief.

There is nothing told of in this book that is more of an affront to old-time dogmas than is the theory of the Nobel Prize-winner, Dr. Bohr, that the sun is "deriving" its energy from nowhere.

The quantum theory is a doctrine of magic. The idea of playing leapfrog, without having to leap over the other frog, is simply another representation of the idea of entering a closed room without passing through the walls. But there is a big difference between "authoritative pronouncements" and my expressions. It is the difference between sub-atomic events and occurrences in boarding houses. The difference is in many minds--unlike my mind, to which all things are phenomena, and to which all records are, or may be, data--in which electrons and protons are dignified little things, whereas boarders and tramps on park benches can't be taken solemnly. Charles Darwin was similarly received when, in the place of academic speculations upon evolution, he treated of bugs and bones and insides of animals. Not, of course, that I mean anything by anything.

Quantum-magic is a doctrine of discontinuity. So it seems to be opposed to my expressions upon hyphenation, which seem to be altogether a philosophy of continuity. But I have indicated that also I hyphenate in another "dimension." I conceive of all phenomena as representing continuity in one "dimension," and as representing discontinuity in another "dimension"--that is, all phenomena as inter-dependent and bound up with one another, or continuous, and at the same time so individualized that nothing is exactly like anything else, or that everything is alone, or discontinuous. I conceive of our existence as one organic state, or being, that is an individual, or that is unrelated to anything else, such as other existences,

[p. 1004]

in the cosmos, its state of oneness expressing in the continuity of its internal phenomena, and its state of individuality, or apartness from everything else in the cosmos, expressing in a permeation of that individuality, or discontinuity, throughout its phenomena. Of course, if the word cosmos means organized universality, I misuse the word here. For various reasons I let it stand.

There are hosts of persons, who consider themselves up-to-date, or ahead of that; who bandy arguments in the latest, scientific lingo, and believe anything that they're told to believe of electrons, but would be incapable of extending an idea from electrons to boarders--even though they argue that every boarder is only a composition of electrons--and go right on thinking of affairs, in general, in old-fashioned, materialistic terms.

Well; then, in old-fashioned terms, what had I this morning for breakfast?

I think: therefore I had breakfast.

If no line of demarcation can be drawn between one's breakfasts and one's thoughts, or between a cereal and a cerebration, this is the continuity of the material and the immaterial. If there is no material, as absolutely differentiated from the immaterial, what becomes of any opposition from what may still survive of what is called materialistic science?

"Science is systematized and formulated knowledge."

Then anybody who has systematized and formulated knowledge enough to appear, on time, at the breakfast table, is, to that degree, a scientist. There are scientific dogs. Most of them have a great deal of systematized and formulated knowledge. Cats and rabbits and all those irritating South American rodents that were discovered by cross-word puzzle-makers are scientists. A magnet scientifically picks out and classifies iron filings from a mass of various materials. Science does not exist, as a distinguishable entity.

Our data have been upon witchcraft in love affairs; in small-town malices, and occasional murders of no importance. According to the phantom, materialistic science, there is no witchcraft. In the monistic sense, I agree. Witchcraft is so bound up with other "natural forces," that it cannot be picked out, as having independent existence. But, in terms of common illusions, I accept that there is witchcraft; and,

[p. 1005]

just for the sake of seeming to have opposition, which makes for more interest, I pretend that there is science.

Stars and planets and ultra-violet radiations from the sun--paleolithic and neolithic inter-relationships, and zymotic multiplications, and tetrahedronic equilaterality--

And the little Colwell girl, who kept the firemen busy--and a kid named "Rena" got a haircut--there was a house in which a pan of soft soap wandered from room to room--a woman alone in a compartment of a railway train, and then maybe she wasn't alone

The disdain of any academic scientist--if among the sensationalists of today, there survive an academic scientist--for what I call the data of witchcraft--

And now my subject is witchcraft in science.

In the year 1913, the German scientist, Emil Abderhalden, announced his discovery of the synthesis of inorganic materials into edible substances. It was said that to avoid all uncertainties--this back in those supreme old days when all scientists were certain--this announcement had been long-delayed. But experiments had been successes. Dogs fed upon synthetic foods had gained weight astonishingly, as compared with dogs that had been fed ordinary meals. Reports were much tabulated. Statistics--very statistical. Then came the War. If Dr. Abderhalden, or anybody else in Germany, could out of muds of various kinds have produced those alleged meals, perhaps we'd all be fighting to this day. As it is, we have had a rest, and can do the necessary breeding, before again starting up atrocities. So, at least for the sake of vigorous new abominations, it seems to be just as well that some of the widely advertised scientific successes aren't so successful.

But the dogs got fat.

There is scarcely an annual meeting of any prominent scientific association at which are not made, by eminent doctors and professors, announcements of great discoveries that, by long and careful experimentation, constructive and eliminative tests, and guards against all possible sources of error, have been established. A year or so later, these boons to suffering humanity are forgotten.

Almost always these announcements are not especially questioned, and bring no confusion upon their sponsors. There is much "scientific

[p. 1006]

caution." A scientist doesn't know but that he may make an announcement, himself, someday. But about the middle of July, 1931, Professor Wilhelm Gluud, of the Westphalian University of Munster, was not received with the usual "caution." Prof. Gluud announced--these Professors never merely say anything--that synthetic albumen could be produced from coal. This dreamery was attacked, and later, in July, Prof. Gluud admitted that he had been "premature" in his announcement.

But something had convinced a scientist, of international reputation, so that he had risked that reputation by making his announcement.

So one inclines to think.

If he had made no experiments, and had simply and irresponsibly squawked into publicity, we have some more monism, and can draw no line between a Westphalian Professor and any Coney Island "barker." But, if he did make experiments, and, if, in spite of later developments, which showed that, according to chemical principles, success was impossible, he nevertheless had reasons to believe that some of his experiments were successes, these successes that agreed with his theory were realizations of his imaginings.

About the same time (July, 1931) another scientist was embarrassed. The Russian physiologist, Pavlov, had announced that he had taught white mice to respond to a bell, at meal time--

But now see here!

Just how disdainful should persons who put in their time ringing dinner bells for mice be of others who collect accounts of meandering pans of soft soap?

It was Pavlov's statement, or "announcement," that he had taught white mice to respond to a bell, at meal time, and that a second generation of white mice had been keener in so responding. This improvement was supposed to represent cumulative hereditary influences.

But Sir Arthur Thompson, of Aberdeen, Scotland, made an announcement.

And now see here, again! I should like to hear Sir Arthur's opinion upon the dignity of such subjects as "the vanishing man,"

[p. 1007]

and stones that were pegged at a farmer's niece. He, too, had been ringing dinner bells for animals.

Thompson's announcement was that he had noted no improved teachableness in a second generation of white mice. Whereupon Pavlov withdrew his announcement, saying that he must have been deceived by his assistant.

This is becoming a stock-retreat. Before he shot himself, in August, 1925, Prof. Kammerer, accused of having faked, with India ink, what he called acquired characters on the feet of toads, explained that he had been betrayed by an assistant.

I conceive that, though Pavlov retreated before a "higher authority," his white mice may have been keener in a second generation, though nobody else's white mice would have been of any improved discernment in a fifteenth generation--and that, though biologically, nuptial pads could not possibly appear upon the feet of Prof. Kammerer's toads--

Pictures on hailstones--a face on a cathedral wall--and an insect takes on the appearance of a leaf--

That it may be that a man did not altogether deceive himself and others, but that faint markings did appear upon the feet of toads, as responses to his theory--but in all the uncertainty and the evanescence of the incipient--that, convinced that he was right, Prof. Kammerer may have supplemented faint markings with India ink, just to tide over, at a time of enquiry--then exposure--suicide.

The story of cancer-cure announcements is a record of abounding successes in the treatment of cancerous dogs, cats, chickens, rats, mice, and guinea pigs--followed by appeals to the public for funds for the study of the unknown causes, and the still undiscovered cure for cancer. Look over the records of cancerous growths that, according to triumphant announcements have been absorbed, or stopped, in mice and guinea pigs, and try to think that all were only deliberate deceptions. My good-bad opinion of human nature won't stand it. But, if some of these experiments were the successes they were said to be, and if the treatments are now repudiated or forgotten, these successes were realized imaginings. I know of nothing in science that has the look of better establishment than that there have been some cures of cancer, under radium-treatment. But, in the year

[p. 1008]

[paragraph continues] 1930, the British Radium Commission issued a warning that the use of radium had not been established as a cancer-cure. The look to me is that, in all the earnestness and charlatanry; devotion to ideals, and fakery, and insincerity; exploitations and duperies of this cult, some cures, as if by the use of radium, have occurred; but that applications of soft soap, if subject to an equal intensity of thought, would have done just as well--

Which brings us to the appalling unnecessity of vivisection, if experiments upon the animals of a toy Noah's Ark, to cure them of their splinters, would be just as enlightening, if anything can be construed into meaning anything that anybody wants it to mean--in. an existence in which there is not meaning, but meaning-meaninglessness.

And--not wanting to write three or four hundred pages upon this subject--I shall not go much into records of professorial rascals, or faithful and devoted scientists, who have exploited, or have tried to minister unto, the desire of old codgers to caper. I take from the New York Evening Post, April 12, 1928, an account of "discoveries of major importance to the science of rejuvenation," as announced, in Berlin, by Professor Steinach, to the annual Congress of German Surgeons. Professor Steinach's announcement was that he had discovered the secret of rejuvenation in uses of the pituitary gland. If any reader isn't quite sure where the pituitary is, I remind him that it is connected with the fundibulum. It is in a part of the body that is most profoundly engaged in sex-relations. It is in the brain.

Dr. Steinach announced that, with twelve injections of pituitary serum, in senile rats, he had "restored their failing appetites, induced a new growth of hair, rejuvenated all bodily functions, and had generally transformed ailing, or half-dead, creatures into youthful animals."

There is witchcraft in science--

If bald old rats have turned young and hairy--if dogs, fed on coal-products, have astonishingly fattened--if tens of thousands of mice and guinea pigs have magically gone fat, or gone thin, in the presence of experimenters--

If, in not all these cases has the treacherous, or perhaps kindhearted, assistant slipped, say, a brisk and hairy young rat into the

[p. 1009]

place of a decrepit old codger; or has not, in secret rascality, or benevolence, meatily supplemented the fare of dogs supposed to be thriving upon coal-products--

If not in all these cases have eminent trappers lied snares for dollars.

My pseudo-conclusion, or acceptance--which is as far as I can go, in the fiction that we're living--is that some of these announcements have been pretty nearly faithful reports of occurrences; and that, by witchcraft, or in response to intense desires of experimenters, senile rats have lost the compensations of old age, and have suffered again the tormenting restlessness of youth--all this by witchcraft, and not by injections that in themselves could have no more of a rejuvenating effect upon either rats or humans than upon mummies.

But, if Prof. Steinach, by witchcraft, or by the effects of belief, did grow hair upon the bald skin of a rat--to say nothing of the more frolicsome effects of his practices--how comes it that he was not equally successful with the human subjects of his sorcery? Today the Steinach treatment stands discredited. Especially destructive have been Dr. Alexis Carrel's attacks upon it. It may be that the Professor's own greed defeated him. It may be that he failed because he dissipated his sorcery among many customers.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

25

IF I can bridge a gap--

Then that, in a moment of religious excitation, an inhabitant of Remiremont, focusing upon a point in the sky, transferred a pictorial representation from his mind to hailstones--

The turning, off Coventry Street--streets in Japan, Kiel, Berlin, New York City--other places--and that wounds, as imagined by haters of people, have appeared upon the bodies of people--

Or the story of the sailor aboard the steamship Breeshe, in December, 1931--and that it was during a storm--and that in the mind of somebody else aboard this vessel a hate pictured this man, as

[p. 1010]

struck by lightning, and that upon his head appeared a wound, as pictured.

The gap, or the supposed gap, is the difference, or the supposed, absolute difference, between the imagined and the physical.

Or, for instance, the disappearance of Ambrose Small, of Toronto--and it was just about what his secretary, who had embezzled from him, probably wished for, probably unaware that an inventory would betray him. A picturization, in the secretary's mind, of his employer, shooting away to Patagonia, to Franz Josef Land, or to the moon--so far away that he could never get back--but could the imagined realize? Or why didn't I keep track, in the newspapers of December, 1919, for mention of the body of a man, washed up on a beach of Java, scarcely decipherable papers in the pockets indicating that the man was a Canadian? Are the so-called asteroids bodies of people who have been witched away into outer space?

Rose Smith--that when she was released from prison, her visualizations crept up behind her former employer, and killed him? According to some viewpoints, I might as well try to think of a villain, in a moving picture, suddenly jumping from the screen, and attacking people in the audience. I haven't tried that, yet.

Case of Emma Piggott--and the fires in the home of her employers were just about what the girl, alarmed by the greediness of her thefts, may have wished for. Also there are data that may mean that, because of experiences unknown to anybody else, this girl knew that, from a distance, she could start fires.

There is an appearance of affinity between the Piggott case and the fires in the house in Bedford. There was a sulphur fire that was ordinary. It was followed by a series of fires that were, at least according to impressions in Bedford, extraordinary. In no terms of physics, nor of chemistry, was an explanation possible; yet investigators felt that a relationship of some kind did exist. The relationship may have existed in the mind of Anne Fennimore. After the sulphur fire had been put out, she may have started fearing fires, especially in the absence of the only male member of the household. Her fear may have realized.

Story of the Colwell girl--here, too, fires in a house seem to have related to a girl's mental state--or that the fires were related to her

[p. 1011]

desire to move to another house. Having the not uncommon experience of learning how persuasive are police captains, she "listened to advice," and confessed to effects, in terms of ordinary incendiarism, though, according to reports by firemen and policemen, some of the fires could not have been produced by flipping lighted matches.

In the case of Jennie Bramwell, there is no knowing what were the feelings of this girl, who had been "adopted," probably to do hard farm-work. If she, too, had nascently the fire-inducing power, which manifested under the influence of desire, or emotion, I think of her, in the midst of drudgery, wishing destruction upon the property of her exploiters, and fires following. At any rate, the story of the little Barnes girl, which quite equals anything from the annals of demonology, is very suggestive--or the smolder of hate, in the mind of a child, for an exploiter--and flames leaped upon a woman.

There is a particular in the case of Emma Piggott that makes it different from the other cases. In the other cases, fires broke out in the presence of girls. But, according to evidence, Emma Piggott was not in the house wherein started the fires for which she was accused. Then this seems to be a case of distance-ignition, or of distance-witchcraft. I'd not say that invisibly starting a fire, at a distance, by means of mental rays, is any more mysterious than is the shooting-off of distant explosives by means of rays called physical, which nobody understands.

I am bringing out:

That, as a "natural force," there is a fire-inducing power;

That, mostly, it appears, independently of wishes, or of the knowledge, of the subjects, but that sometimes, conformably to wishes, it is used--

That everything that I call witchcraft is only some special manifestation of transformations, or transportations, that, in various manifestations, are general throughout "Nature."

The "accidents" on the Dartmoor road--or that somewhere near this road lived a cripple. That his mind had shaped to his body--or that somewhere near this road lived somebody who had been injured by a motor car, and lay on his bed, or sat in his invalid's chair, and radiated against the nearby road a hate for all motorists,

[p. 1012]

sometimes with a ferocity, or with a directness, that knocked cars to destruction.

Or Brooklyn, April to, 1893--see back to the supposed series of coincidences--man after man injured by falling from a high place, or being struck by a falling object--or that somewhere in Brooklyn was somebody who had been crippled by a fall, and, brooding over what he considered a monstrous injustice that had so singled him out, radiated influences that similarly injured others.

See back to the account of what occurred to French aeroplanes, flying over German territory. Tracks in the sands of a desert. Occurrences, about Christmas Day, 1930, in Sing Sing and Dannemora Prisons--or a prisoner in a punishment-cell--and nothing to do in the dark, except to concentrate upon vengefulness. I think that sometimes, coming from dungeons, there are stinks of hates that can be smelled. It was a time that for almost everybody else was a holiday.

Tracks that stopped, in a desert--or the tracks of a child that stopped, on a farm, in Brittany--the story of Pauline Picard:

Or the hate of a neighbor for the Picards, and vengeance by teleporting their offspring--the finding of Pauline in Cherbourg--again her disappearance--

That this time the body of the child was mutilated and stripped, so that it could not be identified, and was transported to some lonely place, where it decomposed--

But a change of purpose, or a vengefulness that required that the parents should know--transportation to the field, of this body, which probably could not be identified--transportation of the "neatly folded" clothes, so that it could be identified.

In the matter of the two bodies on benches in a Harlem park, I have another datum. I think I have. The dates of June 14 and June 16 are close together, and Mt. Morris Park and Morningside Park are not far apart--

Or a man who lived in Harlem, in June, 1931--and that he was a park bencher--about whom I can say nothing except that his trousers were blue, and that his hat was gray. Something may have sapped him, pursued him, driven him into vagrancy--

But that he probably had the sense of localization, as to benches,

[p. 1013]

that everybody has in so many ways, such as going to the same seat, or as near as possible to the same seat, upon every visit to a moving picture theater--that every morning he had sat on a particular bench, in Mt. Morris Park--

But that, upon the morning of June 14th, because of a whim, suspicion, or intuitive fear, he went to Morningside Park instead--

That somebody else sat on his particular bench--that there  something that was an intensification of the experiences of John Harding and another man, when crossing Fifth Avenue, at Thirty-third Street--to the man who was sitting on this particular bench, and to another man upon a nearby bench--

But that, two days later, the trail of the intended victim was picked up--

Home News (Bronx) June 17, 1931--that, in Morningside Park, morning of the 16th, a policeman noticed a man--blue trousers and gray hat--seemingly asleep on a bench. The man was dead. "Heart failure."

At a time of intensely bitter revolts by coal miners against their hardships, there were many coal explosions, but in grates and stoves, and not in shipments. No finding of dynamite in coal was reported. If in coal there is storage of radiations from the sun, coal may be absorbent to other kinds of radiations--or a savagely vengeful miner's hope for future harm in every lump he handled. If, in the house in Hornsey, there were not only coal-explosions, but also poltergeist doings, we note that these phenomena occurred only in the presence of the two boys of the household--or especially one of these boys. Between the occultism of adolescence and the occultism of lumps of coal, surcharged with hatreds, there may have been rapport.

That, somewhere near the town of Saltdean, Sussex, September, 1924, somebody hated a shepherd, and stopped the life of him, as have been stopped the motions of motors--and that the place remained surcharged with malign vibrations that affected somebody else, who came along, in a sidecar. The wedding party at Bradford--and the gaiety of weddings is sometimes the bubbling of vitriol--or that, from a witch, or a wizard, so made by jealousy, mental

[p. 1014]

fumes played upon this house, and spread to other houses. At the same time, there are data that make me think that volumes of deadly gases may be occultly transported. And a young couple, walking along a shore of the Isle of Man--that, from a state of jealousy, witchery flung them into the harbor, and that somebody who stepped into the area of this influence was knocked after them. See back to the story of a room in a house in Newton, Massachusetts. See other cases of "mass psychology." See a general clearing up--

If I can bridge the gap between the subjective and the objective, between what is called the real and what is called the unreal, or between the imaginary and the physical.

When, in our philosophy of the hyphen, we think of neither the material nor the immaterial, but of the material-immaterial, accentuated one way or the other in all phenomena; when we think of the imaginary, as deriving from material sustenance, or, instead of transforming absolutely, only shifting accentuation, we accept that there is continuity between what is called the real and what is called the unreal, so that a passage from one state to the other is across no real gap, or is no absolute jump. If there is no realness that can be finally set apart from unrealness--in phenomenal being--my term of the "realization of the imaginary," though a convenience is a misnomer. Maybe the word transmediumization, meaning the passage of phenomena from one medium of existence to another, is not altogether too awkward, and is long and important-enough-looking to give me the appearance of really saying something. I mean the imposition of the imaginary upon the physical. I mean, not the action of mind upon matter, but the action of mind-matter upon matter-mind.

Theoretically there is no gap. But very much mine are inductive methods. We shall have data. Not that I can more than really-unreally mean anything by that. The interpretations will be mine, but the data will be for anybody to form his own opinions upon.

Granting that the gap has not been disposed of, inductively, I reduce it to two questions:

Can one's mind, as I shall call it, affect one's own body, as I shall call it?

[p. 1015]

If so, that is personal witchcraft, or internal witchcraft.

Can one's mind affect the bodies of other persons and other things outside?

If so, that is what I shall call external witchcraft.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

26

HATES and malices--murderous radiations from human minds--

Or the flashes and roars of a thunderstorm--

And there has been the equivalence of picking strokes of lightning out of the sky, and harnessing them to a job.

A house afire--or somebody boils an egg.

Devastation or convenience--

Or what of it, if I bridge a gap?

I take it that the story of Marjory Quirk is only an extreme instance of cases of internal, or personal, witchcraft that, today, are commonly accepted. London Daily Express, Oct. 3, 1911--inquest upon the body of Marjory Quirk, daughter of the Bishop of Sheffield. The girl had been ill of melancholia. In a suicidal impulse she drank, from a cup, what she believed to be paraffin. She was violently sick. She died. "There had been no paraffin in the cup. There was no trace of it in her mouth or throat."

New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 30, 1932--Boston, Jan. 29--"Nearly half a hundred students and physicians living in Vanderbilt Hall of the Harvard Medical School have experienced mild cases of what apparently was paratyphoid, it was learned today. The first thirty of the group fell ill two weeks ago, following a fraternity dinner, at which Dr. George H. Bigelow, state health commissioner, discussed 'food poisoning.' A few days later twenty more men reported themselves ill. The food was prepared at the hall.

"Today state health officers started an examination of kitchen help in the belief that one of the employees may be a typhoid carrier. College authorities said they did not believe the food itself was at

[p. 1016]

fault, but were inclined to think the subject of Dr. Bigelow's address may have influenced some of the diners to diagnose mere gastronomic disturbances more seriously. All of the students have recovered."

To say that fifty young men had gastronomic disturbances is to say much against conditions of health in the Harvard Medical School. To say that the subject of illness may have induced illness is to say that there was personal, or internal, witchcraft, usually called auto-suggestion. See back to "Typhoid Mary" and other probable victims of carrier-finders. To say that there may have been a carrier among the kitchen help is to attribute to him, and is to say that it was only by coincidence that illnesses occurred after a talk upon illnesses. It's a hell of a way, anyway, to have dinner with a lot of young men, and talk to them about food-poisoning. Hereafter Dr. Bigelow may have to buy his own dinners. If he tells shark-stories, while bathing, he'll do lonesome swimming.

Physiologists deny that fright can turn one's hair white. They argue that they cannot conceive how a fright could withdraw the pigmentation from hairs: so they conclude that all alleged records of this phenomenon are yarns. Say it's a black-haired person. The physiologists, except very sketchily, cannot tell us how that hair became black, in the first place. Somewhere, all the opposition to the data of this book is because the data are not in agreement with something that is not known.

There have been many alleged instances. See the indexes of Notes and Queries, series 6, 7, 10. I used to argue that Queen Marie Antoinette's deprivation of cosmetics, in prison, probably accounted for her case. Now that my notions have shifted, that cynicism has lost its force to me. Mostly the instances of hair turning white, because of fright, are antiques, and can't be investigated now. But see the New York Times, Feb. 8, 1932:

Story of the sinking of a fishing schooner, by the Belgian steamship, Jean Jadot--twenty-one members of the crew drowned--six of them saved, among them Arthur Burke, aged 52.

"Arthur Burke's hair was streaked with gray before the collision, but was quite gray when Burke landed yesterday, at Pier 2, Erie Basin."

[p. 1017]

It may be that there have been thousands, or hundreds of thousands, of cases in which human beings have died in violent convulsions that were the products of beliefs--and that, also, merciful, but expensive, science has saved a multitude of lives, with a serum that has induced contrary beliefs--just as that serum, if injected into the veins of somebody, suffering under the oppressive pronouncement that twice two are four, could be his salvation by inducing a belief that twice two are purple, if he should want so to be affected--

Or what has become of hydrophobia?

In the New York Telegram, Nov. 26, 1929, was published a letter from Gustave Stryker, quoting Dr. Mathew Woods, of Philadelphia, a member of the Philadelphia County Medical Society. Dr. Woods had better look out, unless he's aiming at cutting down expenses, such as dues to societies. Said Dr. Woods:

"We have observed with regret numerous sensational stories, concerning alleged mad dogs and the terrible results to human beings bitten by them, which are published from time to time in the newspapers.

"Such accounts frighten people into various disorders, and cause brutal treatment of animals suspected of madness, and yet there is on record a great mass of testimony from physicians asserting the great rarity of hydrophobia even in the dog, while many medical men of wide experience are of the opinion that if it develops in human beings at all it is only upon extremely rare occasions, and that the condition of hysterical excitement in man, described by newspapers as 'hydrophobia,' is merely a series of symptoms due usually to the dread of the disease, such a dread being caused by realistic newspapers and other reports, acting upon the imaginations of persons scratched or bitten by animals suspected of rabies.

"At the Philadelphia dog pound where on an average more than 6,000 vagrant dogs are taken annually, and where the catchers and keepers are frequently bitten while handling them, not one case of hydrophobia has occurred during its entire history of twenty-five years, in which time, about 150,000 have been handled."

My own attention was first attracted, long ago, when I noticed, going over files of newspapers, the frequency of reported cases of

[p. 1018]

hydrophobia, a generation or so ago, and the fewness of such reports in the newspapers of later times. Dogs are muzzled, now--in streets, in houses they're not. Vaccines, or powdered toads, caught at midnight, in graveyards, would probably cure many cases, but would not reduce the number of cases in dogs, if there ever have been cases of hydrophobia in dogs.

In the New York Times, July 4,:931, was published a report by M. Roeland, of the Municipal Council of Paris:

"It will be noticed that rabies has almost entirely disappeared, although the number of dogs has increased. From 166,917 dogs in Paris, in 1924, the number had risen, in 1929, to 230,674. In spite of this marked increase, only ten cases of rabies in animals were observed. There were no cases of rabies in man."

Sometimes it is my notion that there never has been a case of hydrophobia, as anything but an instance of personal witchcraft: but there are so many data for thinking that a disease in general is very 'much like an individual case of the disease, in that it runs its course and then disappears--quite independently of treatment, whether by the poisoned teat of a cow, or the dried sore of a mummy--that I suspect that once upon a time there was, to some degree, hydrophobia. When I was a boy, pitted faces were common. What has become of smallpox? Where are yellow fever and cholera? I'm not supposed to answer my own questions, am I? But serums, say the doctors. But there are enormous areas in the Americas and Europe, where vaccines have never penetrated. But they did it, say the doctors.

Eclipses occur, and savages are frightened. The medicine men wave wands--the sun is cured--they did it.

The story of diseases reads like human history--the rise and fall of Black Death--and the appearance and rule of Smallpox--the Tubercular Empire--and the United Afflictions of Yellow Fever and Cholera. Some of them passed away before serums were thought of, and in times when sanitation was unpopular. Several hundred years ago there was a lepers' house in every good-sized city in England. A hundred years ago there had not been much of what is called improvement in medicine and sanitation, but leprosy had virtually disappeared, in England. Possibly the origin of leprosy

[p. 1019]

in England was in personal witchcraft--or that if the Bible had never devastated England, nobody there would have had the idea of leprosy--that when wicked doubts arose, the nasty suspicions of people made them clean.

So it may be that once upon a time there was hydrophobia: but the indications are that most of the cases that are reported in these times are sorceries wrought by the minds of victims upon their bodies.

A case, the details of which suggest that occasionally a dog may be rabid, but that his bites are dangerous only to a most imaginatively excited victim, is told of, in the New York Herald Tribune, Nov. 16, 1931. Ten men were bitten by a dog. "The dog was killed, and was found to have the rabies." The men were sailors aboard the United States destroyer, J. D. Edwards, at Cheefoo, China. One of these sailors died of hydrophobia. The nine others showed no sign of the disease.

In such a matter as a fright turning hair gray, it is probable that conventional scientists mechanically, unintelligently, or with little consciousness of the whyness of their opposition, deny the occurrences, as unquestioning obediences to Taboo. My own concatenation of thoughts is--that, if one's mental state can affect the color of one's hair, a mental state may in other ways affect one's body--and then that one's mental state may affect the bodies of others--and this is the path to witchcraft. It is not so much that conventional scientists disregard, or deny, what they cannot explain--if, in anything like a final sense, nothing ever has been, or can be, explained. It is that they disregard or deny, to clip concatenations that would lead them from concealed ignorance into obvious bewilderment.

Every science is a mutilated octopus. If its tentacles were not clipped to stumps, it would feel its way into disturbing contacts. To a believer, the effect of the contemplation of a science is of being in the presence of the good, the true, and the beautiful. But what he is awed by is Mutilation. To our crippled intellects, only the maimed is what we call understandable, because the unclipped ramifies away into all other things. According to my aesthetics, what is meant by the beautiful is symmetrical deformation. By Justice

[p. 1020]

[paragraph continues] --in phenomenal being--I mean the appearance of balance, by which a reaction is made to look equal and opposite to an action--so arbitrarily wrought by the clip and disregard of all ramifications of the action--expressing in the supposed condign punishment of a man, regardless of effects upon other persons. This is the arbitrary basis of the mechanical theory of existence--the idea that an action can be picked out of a maze of interrelationships, as if it were a thing in itself. Some wisdom of mine is that if a man is dying of starvation he cannot commit a crime. He is good. The god of all idealists is Malnutrition. If all crimes are expressions of energy, it is unjust to pick on men for their crimes. A higher jurisprudence would indict their breakfasts. A good cook is responsible for more evil than ever the Demon Rum has been: and, if we'd all sit down and starve to death, at last would be realized Utopia.

My expression is that, if illnesses, physical contortions, and deaths can be imposed by the imaginations of persons upon their own bodies, we may develop the subject-matter of a preceding chapter, with more striking data--

Or the phenomenon of the stigmata--

Which, considered sacred by pietists, is aligned by me with hydrophobia.

This phenomenon is as profoundly damned, in the views of all properly trained thinkers, as are crucifixes, sacraments, and priestly vestments. As to its occurrence, I can quote dozens of churchmen, of the "highest authority," but not one scientist, except a few Catholic scientists.

Over and over and over--science and its system--and theology and its system--and the fights between interpretations by both--and my thought that the freeing of data from the coercions of both, may, or may not, be of value. Once upon a time the religionists denied, or disregarded much that the scientists announced. They have given in so disastrously, or have been licked so to a frazzle, that, in my general impression of controversies that end up in compromises, this is defeat too nearly complete to be lasting. I conceive of a return-movement--open to freethinkers and atheists--in which many of the data of religionists--scrubbed clean of holiness--will be accepted.

As to the records of stigmatics, I omit the best-known, and most

[p. 1021]

convincingly reported, of all the cases, the case of the French girl, Louise Lateau, because much has been published upon her phenomena, and because accounts are easily available.

In the newspapers of July, 1922--I take from the London Daily Express, July 10th--was reported the case of Mary Reilly, aged 20, in the Home of the Sisters of the Good Shepherd, Peekskill, N. Y. It was said that intermittently, upon her side, appeared a manifestation in the form of a cross of blood. Mostly the appearances are of the "five wounds of Christ," or six, including marks on the forehead. For an account of the case of Rose Ferron, see the New York Herald Tribune, March 25, 1928. According to this story, Rose Ferron, aged 25, of 86 Asylum Street, Woonsocket, R. I., had, since March 17, 1916, been a stigmatic, wounds appearing upon her hands, feet, and forehead. The hysterical condition of this girl--in both the common and the medical meaning of the term--is indicated by the circumstance that for three years she had been strapped to her bed, with only her right arm free.

At this time of writing, I have, for four years, been keeping track of the case of Theresa Neumann, the stigmatic girl of Konnersreuth, Germany: and, up to this time, there has been no exposure of imposture. See the New York Times, April 8, 1928--roads leading to her home jammed with automobiles, carriages, motorcycles, vans, and pilgrims on foot. Considering the facilities--or the facilities, if nothing goes wrong--of modern travel, it is probable that no other miracle has been so multitudinously witnessed. A girl in bed--and all day long, the tramp of thousands past her. Whether admission was charged, I do not know. The story of this girl agrees with the stories of other stigmatics: flows of blood, from quick-healing wounds, and phenomena on Fridays. It was said that medical men had become interested, and had "demanded" Theresa's removal to a clinic, where she could be subjected to a prolonged examination, but that the Church authorities had objected. This is about what would be expected of Church authorities: and that the medical men, unable to have their own way, then disregarded the case is something else that is about what would be expected.

My expression is that, upon stigmatic girls have appeared wounds, similar to the alleged wounds of a historical, and therefore doubtful,

[p. 1022]

character, because this melodrama is most strikingly stimulative to the imagination--but that an atheistic girl--if there could be anything for an atheistic girl to be equally imaginatively hysterical about--might reproduce other representations upon her body. In the Month, 134-249, is an account of Marie-Julie Jahenny, of the village of La Fraudais (Loire-Inferieure), France, who, upon March 21, 1873, became a stigmatic. Upon her body appeared the "five wounds." Then, upon her breast appeared the picture of a flower. It is said that for twenty years this picture of a flower remained visible. According to the story, it was in the mind of the girl before it appeared upon her body, because she predicted that it would appear. One has notions of the possible use of indelible ink, or of tattooing. That is very good. One should have notions.

If a girl drinks a liquid that would harm nobody else, and dies, can a man inflict upon himself injuries that would kill anybody else, and be unharmed?

There is a kind of stigmatism that differs from the foregoing cases, in that weapons are used to bring on effects: but the wounds are similar to the wounds of stigmatic girls, or simply are not wounds, in an ordinary, physical sense. There is an account, in the Sphinx, March, 1893, of a fakir, Soliman Ben Aissa, who was exhibiting in Germany; who stabbed daggers into his cheeks and tongue, and into his abdomen, harmlessly, and with quick-healing wounds.

Such magicians are of rare occurrence, anyway in the United States and Europe: but the minor ones who eat glass and swallow nails are not uncommon.

But, if in Germany, or anywhere else, in countries that are said to be Christian, any man ever did savagely stab himself in the abdomen, and be unhurt, and repeat his performances, how is it that the phenomenon is not well-known and generally accepted?

The question is like another:

If, in the Theological Era, a man went around blaspheming, during thunderstorms, and was unhurt, though churches were struck by lightning, how long would he remain well-known?

In March, 1920, a band of Arab dervishes exhibited in the London' music halls. In the London Daily News, March 12, 1920, are

[p. 1023]

reproduced photographs of these magicians, showing them with skewers that they had thrust through their flesh, painlessly and bloodlessly.

Taboo. The censor stopped the show.

For an account of phenomena, or alleged phenomena, of the Silesian cobbler, Paul Diebel, who exhibited in Berlin, in December, 1927, see the New York Times, Dec. 18, 1927. "Blood flows from his eyes, and open wounds appear on his chest, after he has concentrated mentally for six minutes, it is declared. He drives daggers through his arms and legs, and even permits himself to be nailed to a cross, without any suffering, it is said. His manager asserts that he can remain thus for ten hours. His self-inflicted wounds, it is declared, bleed or not, as he wishes, and a few minutes after the knife or nails are withdrawn all evidence of incisions vanishes."

The only thing that can be said against this story is that it is unbelievable.

New York Herald Tribune, Feb. 6, 1928--that, in Vienna, the police had interfered with Diebel, and had forbidden him to perform. It was explained that this was because he would not give them a free exhibition, to prove the genuineness of his exhibitions. "In Munich, recently, he remained nailed to a cross several hours, smoking cigarettes and joking with his audience."

After April 8, 1928--see the New York Times of this date--I lose track of Paul Diebel. The story ends with an explanation. Nothing is said of the alleged crucifixions. The explanation is a retreat to statements that are supposed to be understandable in commonplace terms. I do not think that they are so understandable. "Diebel has disclosed his secret to the public, saying that shortly before his appearance, he scratched his flesh with his fingernails, or a sharp instrument, being careful not to cut it. On the stage by contracting his muscles, those formerly invisible lines assumed blood-red hue and often bled."

I have heard of other persons, who have "disclosed" trade secrets.

Upon March 2, 1931, a man lay, most publicly, upon a bed of nails. See the New York Herald Tribune, March 3, 1931. In Union Square, New York City, an unoriental magician, named Brawman,

[p. 1024]

from the unmystical region of Pelham Bay, in the Bronx, gave an exhibition that was staged by the magazine, Science and Invention. This fakir from the Bronx lay upon a bed of 1,200 nails. In response to his invitation, ten men walked on his body, pressing the points of the nails into his back. He stood up, showing deep, red marks made by the nails. These marks soon faded away.

I have thought of leaf insects as pictorial representations wrought in the bodies of insects, by their imaginations, or by the imaginative qualities of the substances of their bodies--back in plastic times, when insects were probably not so set in their ways as they now are. The conventional explanation of protective colorations and formations has, as to some of these insects, considerable reasonableness. But there is one of these creatures--the Tasmanian leaf insect--that represents an artistry that so transcends utility that I considered the specimen that I saw, in the American Museum of Natural History, misplaced: it should have been in the Metropolitan Museum of Art. This leaf insect has reproduced the appearance of a leaf down to such tiny details as serrated edges. The deception of enemies, or survival-value, has had nothing thinkable to do with some of the making of this remarkable likeness, because such minute particulars as serrations would be invisible to any bird, unless so close that the undisguisable insect-characteristics would be apparent.

I now have the case of what I consider a stigmatic bird. It is most unprotectively marked. Upon its breast it bears betrayal--or it is so conspicuously marked that one doubts that there is much for the theory of protective coloration to base upon, if conspicuously marked forms of life survive everywhere, and if many of them cannot be explained away, as Darwin explained away some of them, in terms of warnings.

It is a story of the sensitiveness of pigeons. I have told of the pigeons with whom I was acquainted. One day a boy shot one, and the body lay where the others saw it. They were so nervous that they flew, hearing trifling sounds that, before, they'd not have noticed. They were so suspicious that they kept away from the window sills. For a month they remembered.

[p. 1025]

The bleeding-heart pigeon of the Philippines--the spot of red on its breast--or that its breast remembered--

Or once upon a time--back in plastic times when the forms and plumages of birds were not so fixed, or established, as they now are--an ancestral pigeon and her mate. The swoop of a hawk--a wound on his breast--and that sentiment in her plumage was so sympathetically moved that it stigmatized her, or reproduced on offsprings, and is to this day the recorded impression of an ancient little tragedy.

A simple red spot on the breast of a bird would not be conceived of, by me, as having any such significance. It is not a simple, red spot, only vaguely suggestive of a wound, on the breast of the bleeding-heart pigeon of the Philippines. The bordering red feathers are stiff, as if clotted. They have the appearance of coagulation.

Conceiving of the transmission of a pictorial representation, by heredity, is conceiving of external stigmatism, but of internal origin. If I could think that a human being's intense mental state, at the sight of a wound, had marked a pigeon, that would be more of a span over our gap. But I have noted an observation for thinking that the sight of a dead and mutilated pigeon may intensely affect the imaginations of other pigeons. If anybody thinks that birds have not imagination, let him tell me with what a parrot of mine foresees what I am going to do to him, when I catch him up to some of his mischief, such as gouging furniture. The body of a dead and mutilated companion prints on the minds of other pigeons: but I have not a datum for thinking that the skeleton, or any part of the skeleton, of a pigeon, would be of any meaning to other pigeons. I have never heard of anything that indicates that in the mind of any other living thing is the mystic awe that human beings, or most human beings, have for bones--

Or a moth sat on a skull--

And that so it rested, with no more concern than it would feel upon a stone. That a human being came suddenly upon the skull, and that, from him, a gush of mystic fright marked the moth--The Death's Head Moth.

On the back of the thorax of this insect is a representation of a human skull that is as faithful a likeness as ever any pirate drew.

[p. 1026]

[paragraph continues] In Borneo and many other places, there is not much abhorrence for a human skull: but the death's head moth is a native of England.

Or the death's heads that appeared upon windowpanes, at Boulley--except that perhaps there were no such occurrences at Boulley. Suppose most of what I call data may be yarns. But the numbers of them--except, what does that mean? Oh, nothing, except that some of our opponents, if out in a storm long enough, might have it dawn on them that it was raining.

If I could say of any pictorial representation that has appeared on the wall of a church that it was probably not an interpretation of chance arrangements of lights and shades, but was a transference from somebody's mind, then from a case like this, of the pretty, the artistic, or of what would be thought of by some persons as the spiritual, and a subject to be treated reverently, would flow into probability a flood of everything that is bizarre, malicious, depraved, and terrifying in witchcraft--and of course jostles of suggestions of uses.

In this subject I have had much experience. Long ago, I experimented. I covered sheets of paper with scrawls, to see what I could visualize out of them; tacked a sheet of wrapping paper to a ceiling, and smudged it with a candle flame; made what I called a "visualizing curtain," which was a white window shade, covered with scrawls and smudges; went on into three dimensions, with boards veneered with clay. It was long ago--about 1907. I visualized much, but the thought never occurred to me that I marked anything. It was my theory that, with a visualizing device, I could make imaginary characters perform for me more vividly than in my mind, and that I could write a novel about their doings. Out of this idea I developed nothing, anyway at the time. I have had much experience with visualizations that were, according to my beliefs, at the time, only my own imaginings, and I have had not one experience--so recognized by me--of ever having imaginatively marked anything. Not that I mean anything by anything.

There is one of these appearances that many readers of this book may investigate. Upon Feb. 23, 1932, New York newspapers

[p. 1027]

reported a clearly discernible figure of Christ in the variegations of the sepia-toned marble of the sanctuary wall of St. Bartholomew's Church, Park Avenue and Fiftieth Street, New York City.

In the New York Times, Feb. 24, 1932, the rector of the church, the Rev. Dr. Robert Norwood, is quoted:

"One day, at the conclusion of my talk, I happened to glance at the sanctuary wall and was amazed to see this lovely figure of Christ in the marble. I had never noticed it before. As it seemed to me to be an actual expression on the face of the marble of what I was preaching, 'His Glorious Body,' I consider it a curious and beautiful happening. I have a weird theory that the force of thought, a dominant thought, may be strong enough to be somehow transferred to stone in its receptive state."

In 1920, a censor stopped a show: but, in 1930, the Ladies' Home Journal published William Seabrook's story--clipping sent to me by Mr. Charles McDaniel, East Liberty P.O., Pittsburgh, Pa. There was a performance in the village of Doa, in the Ben-Hounien territory of the French West African Colony.

It is a story of sorceries practiced by magicians, not upon their own bodies, but upon the bodies of others.

"There were the two living children close to me. I touched them with my hands. And there equally close were the two men with their swords. The swords were iron, three-dimensional, metal, cold and hard. And this is what I now saw with my eyes, but you will understand why I am reluctant to tell of it, and that I do not know what seeing means:

"Each man, holding his sword stiffly upward with his left hand, tossed a child high in the air with his right, then caught it full upon the point, impaling it like a butterfly on a pin. No blood flowed, but the two children were there, held aloft, pierced through and through, impaled upon the swords.

"The crowd screamed now, falling to its knees. Many veiled their eyes with their hands, and others fell prostrate. Through the crowd the jugglers marched, each bearing a child aloft, impaled upon his sword, and disappeared into the witch doctor's inclosure."

Later Seabrook saw the children, and touched them, and had the

[p. 1028]

impression that he would have, looking at a dynamo, or at a storm at sea, at something falling from a table, or at a baby crawling--that he was in the presence of the unknown,

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

27

THE twitch of the legs of a frog--and Emma Piggott swiped a powder puff.

The mysterious twitchings of electrified legs--and unutterable flutterings in the mind of Galvani. His travail of mental miscarriages--or ideas that could not be born properly. The twitch of trivialities that were faint and fantastic germinations in the mind of Galvani--the uninterpretable meanings of far-distant hums of motors--these pre-natal stirrings of aeroplanes and transportation systems and the lighting operations of cities--

Twitch of the legs of a frog--

A woman, from Brewster, N. Y., annoyed a hotel clerk.

My general expression is that all human beings who can do anything, and dogs that track unseen quarry, and homing pigeons, and bird-charming snakes, and caterpillars who transform into butterflies, are magicians. In the lower--or quite as truly the higher, considering them the more aristocratic and established--forms of being, the miracles are standardized and limited: but human affairs are still developing, and "sports," as the biologists call them, are of far more frequent occurrence among humans. But their development depends very much upon a sense of sureness of reward for the pains, travail, and discouragements of the long, little-paid period of apprenticeship, which makes questionable whether it is ever worthwhile to learn anything. Reward depends upon harmonization with the dominant spirit of an era.

Considering modern data, it is likely that many of the fakirs of the past, who are now known as saints, did, or to some degree did, perform the miracles that have been attributed to them. Miracles, or stunts, that were in accord with the dominant power

[p. 1029]

of the period were fostered, and miracles that conflicted with, or that did not contribute to, the glory of the Church, were discouraged, or were savagely suppressed. There could be no development of mechanical, chemical, or electric miracles--

And that, in the succeeding age of Materialism--or call it the Industrial Era--there is the same state of subservience to a dominant, so that young men are trained to the glory of the job, and dream and invent in fields that are likely to interest stockholders, and are schooled into thinking that all magics, except their own industrial magics, are fakes, superstitions, or newspaper yarns.

I am of the Industrial Era, myself; and, even though I can see only advantages-disadvantages in all uses, I am very largely only a practical thinker--

Or the trail of a working witchcraft--and we're on the scent of utilities--

Or that, if a girl, in the town of Derby, set a house afire, by a process that is now somewhat understandable, a fireman could, if he had a still better understanding, have put out that fire without moving from his office. If the mechanism of a motor can invisibly be stopped, all the motors of the world may, without the dirt, crime, misery, and exploitation of coal-mining, be started and operated. If Ambrose Small was wished so far away that he never got back--though that there is magic in a mere wish, or in a mere hope, or hate, I do not think--the present snails of the wheels and planes may be replaced by instantaneous teleportations. If we can think that quacks and cranks and scientists of highest repute, who have announced successes, which were in opposition to supposed medical, physical, chemical, or biological principles--which are now considered impostures, or errors, or "premature announcements"--may not in all cases have altogether deceived themselves, or tried to deceive others, we--or maybe only I--extend this suspicion into mechanical fields.

Now it is my expression that all perpetual motion cranks may not have been dupes, or rascals--that they may have been right, occasionally--that their wheels may sometimes have turned, their marbles rolled, their various gimcracks twirled, in an excess of reaction over action, either because sometimes will occur exceptions to any

[p. 1030]

such supposed law as "the conservation of energy," or because motivating "rays" emanated from the inventors--

That sometimes engines have run, fueled with zeals--but have, by such incipient, or undeveloped, witchcraft, operated only transiently, or only momentarily--but that they may be forerunners to such a revolution of the affairs of this earth, as once upon a time were flutters of the little lids of teakettles--

A new era of new happiness and new hells to pay; ambitions somewhat realized, and hopes dashed to nothing; new crimes, pastimes, products, employments, unemployments; labor troubles, or strikes that would be world-wide; new delights, new diseases, disasters such as had never before been heard of--

In this existence of the desirable-undesirable.

Wild carrots in a field--and to me came a dissatisfaction with ham and cabbage. That was too bad: there isn't much that is better. My notion was that probably all around were roots and shoots and foliages that might be, but that never had been, developed eatably--but that most unlikely would be the cultivation of something new to go with ham, in the place of cabbage, because of the conventionalized requirements of markets. But once upon a time there were wild cabbages and wild beets and wild onions, and they were poor, little incipiencies until they were called for by markets. I think so. I don't know. At any rate, this applies to wild fruits.

There are sword swallowers and fire eaters, fire breathers, fire walkers; basket tricksters, table tilters, handcuff escapers. There is no knowing what development could do with these wild talents: but Help Wanted if for--

Reasonable and confidential accntnts; comptometer oprs., fire re-ins., exp., Christian; sec'ys, credit exp., advance, Chris.; P & S expr.; fast sandwich men; reception men, 35-45, good educ., ap. tall, Chris.--

But I do think that one hundred years ago an advertisement for a fast sandwich man would have looked as strange as today would look an advertisement for "polt. grls."

Against all the opposition in the world, I make this statement--that once I knew a magician. I was a witness of a performance that

[p. 1031]

may some day be considered understandable, but that, in these primitive times, so transcends what is said to be the known that it is what I mean by magic.

When the magician and I were first acquainted, he gave no sign of occult abilities. He was one of the friendliest of fellows, but that was not likely to endear him to anybody, because he was about equally effusive to everybody. He had frenzies. Once he tore down the landlord's curtains. He bit holes into a book of mine, and chewed the landlord's slippers.

The landlord got rid of him. This was in London. The landlord took him about ten miles away, and left him, probably leaping upon somebody, writhing joy for anybody who would notice him. He was young.

It was about two weeks later. Looking out a front window, I saw the magician coming along, on the other side of the street. He was sniffing his way along, but went right on past our house, without recognizing it. He came to a point where he stopped and smelled. He smelled and he smelled. He crossed the street, and came back, and lay down in front of the house. The landlord took him in, and gave him a bone.

But I cannot accept that the magician smelled his way home, or picked up a trail, taking about two weeks on his way. The smelling played a part, and was useful in a final recognition: but smelling indiscriminately, he could have nosed his way, for years, through the streets of London, before coming to the right scent.

New York Sun, April 24, 1931--an account, by Adolph Pizaldt, of Allentown, Pa., of a large, mongrel magician, who had been taken in a baggage car, a distance of 340 miles, and had found his way back home, in a week or so. New York Herald Tribune, July 4, 1931--a curly magician, who, in Canada, had found his way back home, over a distance of 400 miles.

New York Herald Tribune, Aug. 13, 1931--The Man They Could Not Drown--

"Hartford, Conn., Aug. 12--Angelo Faticoni, known as 'The Human Cork,' because he could stay afloat in water for fifteen hours with twenty pounds of lead tied to his ankles, died on

[p. 1032]

[paragraph continues] August 2 in Jacksonville, Fla., it became known here today. He was seventy-two years old.

"Faticoni could sleep in water, roll up into a ball, lie on his side, or assume any position asked of him. Once he was sewn into a bag and then thrown headforemost into the water, with a twenty-pound cannonball lashed to his legs. His head reappeared on the surface soon afterward, and he remained motionless in that position for eight hours. Another time he swam across the Hudson tied to a chair weighted with lead.

"Some years ago he went to Harvard to perform for the students and faculty. He had been examined by medical authorities who failed to find support for their theory that he was able to float at such great lengths by the nature of his internal organs, which they believed were different from those of most men.

"Faticoni had often promised to reveal the secret of how he became 'The Human Cork,' but he never did."

There are many accounts of poltergeist-phenomena that are so obscured by the preconceptions of witnesses that one can't tell whether they are stories of girls who had occult powers, or of invisible beings, who, in the presence of girl-mediums, manifested. But the story of Angelique Cottin is an account of a girl, who, by an unknown influence of her own, acted upon objects in ways like those that have been attributed to spirits. The phenomena of Angelique Cottin, of the town of La Perriere, France, began upon Jan. 15, 1846, and lasted ten weeks. Anybody who would like to read an account of this wild, or undeveloped, talent, that is free from interpretations by spiritualists and anti-spiritualists, should go to the contemporaneous story, published in the Journal des Debats (Paris) February, 1846. Here are accounts by M. Arago and other scientists. When Angelique Cottin went near objects, they bounded away. She could have made a perpetual motion machine whiz. She was known as the Electric Girl, so called, because nobody knew what to call her. When she tried to sit in a chair, there was low comedy. The chair was pulled away, or, rather, was invisibly pushed away. There was such force here that a strong man could not hold the chair. A table, weighing 60 pounds, rose from the floor, when she touched it. When she went to bed, the bed rocked

[p. 1033]

And I suppose that, in early times of magnetic investigations, people who heard of objects that moved in the presence of a magnet, said--"But what of it?"

Faraday showed them.

A table, weighing 60 pounds, rises a few feet from the floor--well, then, it's some time, far ahead, in the Witchcraft Era--and a multi-cellular formation of poltergeist-girls is assembled in the presence of building materials. Stone blocks and steel girders rise a mile or so into their assigned positions in the latest sky-prodder. Maybe. Tall buildings will have their day, but first there will have to be a show-off of what could be done.

I now have a theory that the Pyramids were built by poltergeist-girls. The Chinese Wall is no longer mysterious. Every now and then I reconstruct a science. I may take up neo-archaeology sometime. Old archaeology, with its fakes and guesses, and conflicting pedantries, holds out an invitation for a ferocious and joyous holiday.

Human hopes, wishes, ambitions, prayers and hates--and the futility of them--the waste of millions of trickles of vibrations, today--unorganized forces that are doing nothing. But put them to work together, or concentrate mental ripples into torrents, and gather these torrents into Niagara Falls of emotions--and, if there isn't any happiness, except in being of use, I am conceiving of cataractuous happiness--

Or sometime in the Witchcraft Era--and every morning, promptly at nine o'clock, crowds of human wishers, dignified under the name of transmediumizers, arrive at their wishing stations, or mental power-houses, and in an organization of what are now only scattered and wasted hopes and hates concentrate upon the running of all motors of all cities. Just as they're all nicely organized and pretty nearly satisfied, it will be learned that motors aren't necessary.

In one way, witchcraft has been put to work: that is that wild talents have been exhibited, and so have been sources of incomes. But here is only the incipiency of the stunt. In August, 1883, in the home of Lulu Hurst, aged 15, at Cedarville, Georgia, there were poltergeist disturbances. Pebbles moved in the presence of the girl,

[p. 1034]

things vanished, crockery was smashed, and, if the girl thought of a tune, it would be heard, rapping at the head of her bed. In February, 1884, Lulu was giving public performances. In New York City, she appeared in Wallack's Theatre. It could be that a girl, aged 15, if competently managed, was able to deceive everybody who went up on the stage. She at least made all witnesses think that, when a man, weighing 200 pounds, sat in a chair, she, by touching the chair, made it rise and throw him to the floor--

And I am very much like an Indian, of long ago; an Indian, thinking of the force of a waterfall; unable to conceive of a waterwheel; simply thinking of all this force that was making only a little spectacle--

Or the state of melancholy into which I am perhaps cast, thinking that a little poltergeist girl, if properly trained, could make all witnesses believe that she raised building materials forty or eighty stories, by simply touching them--thinking that nobody is doing anything about this--

Except that I am not clear that anything would be gained by it--or by anything else.

Lulu Hurst either had powers that far transcended muscular powers, or she had talents of deception far superior to the abilities of ordinary deceivers. Sometimes she tossed about zoo-pound men, or made it look as if she did; and sometimes she placed her hands on a chair, and five men either could not move that chair, or were good actors, and earned whatever the confederates of stage magicians were paid, at that time.

In November, 1891, Mrs. Annie Abbott, called the Little Georgia Magnet, put on a show, in the Alhambra Music Hall, London. She weighed about 98 pounds, and, if she so willed it, a man could easily lift her. The next moment, six men, three on each side of her, grasping her by her elbows, could not lift her. When she stood on a chair, the six men could not, when the chair was removed, prevent her from descending to the floor. If anybody suggests that, when volunteers were called for from the audience, it was the same six who responded, at every performance, I think that that is a pretty good suggestion. Because of many other data, it hasn't much force with me; but, in these early times of us primitives, almost any

[p. 1035]

suggestion has value. I take these accounts from Holms' Facts of Psychic Science. I have theme from other sources, also.

In September, 1921, Mary Richardson gave performances, at the Olympic Music Hall, Liverpool. Easily lifted one moment--the next moment, six men--same six, maybe--could not move her. By touching a man, she knocked him flat. It is either that she traveled with a staff of thirteen comedians, whose stunt it was to form in a line, pretending their utmost to push her, but seeming to fail comically, considering the size of her, or that she was a magician.

It is impossible to get anywhere by reasoning. This is because--as can be shown, monistically--there isn't anywhere. Or it is impossible to get anywhere, because one can get everywhere. I can find equally good reasons for laughing, or for being serious, about all this. Holms tells that he was one of those in the audience, who, though not taking part, went up on the stage; and that he put his hand between Mrs. Richardson and the leader of the string of thirteen men, who were almost dislocating one another's shoulder blades, pushing their hardest against her, and that he felt no pressure. So he was convinced not that she resisted pressure, but that pressure could not touch her.

Suppose it was that pressure could not touch her. Could blows harm her? Could bullets touch her? Did Robert Houdin have this power, when he faced an Arab firing squad, and is the story of the substituted blanks for bullets only just some more of what Taboo is telling everywhere? One untouchable man could own the world--except that he'd have a weakness somewhere, or, in general, could be no more than the untouchable-touchable. But he could add to our bewilderments by making much history before being touched. Well, then, if there are magicians, why haven't magicians seized upon political powers? I don't know that they haven't.

It may be the secret of fire-walking--or that wizards walk over red-hot stones, unharmed, because they do not touch the stones. However, for some readers, it is more comfortable to disbelieve that anybody ever has been a fire-walker. For an uncomfortable moment, read an account, in Current Literature, 32-98--exhibition by a Hawaiian fire-walker, at Honolulu, Jan. 19, 1901. The story is that this wizard walked on stones of "a fierce, red glow," with flames

[p. 1036]

spouting from burning wood, underneath; walking back and forth four times.

There is a muscular strength of men, and it may be that sometimes appears a strength to which would apply the description "occult," or "psychic." In the New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 24, 1932, was reported the death of Mrs. Betsy Anna Talks, of 149 Fourteenth Road, Whitestone, Queens, N. Y.--who had often performed such feats as carrying a barrel of sugar, weighing 400 pounds--had carried, under each arm, a sack of potatoes, whereas, in fields, usually two men lug one sack--had impatiently watched two men, clumsily moving a 550-pound barrel of salt, in a cart, and had taken it down for them.

There are "gospel truths," and "irrefutable principles," and "whatever goes up must come down," and "men are strong and women are weak"--but somewhere there's a woman who takes a barrel of salt away from two men. But we think in generalizations, and enact laws in generalizations, and "women are weak," and, if I should look it up, I'd be not at all surprised to learn that Mrs. Talks was receiving alimony.

I now recall another series of my own experiences with what may be my own very wild talents. I took no notes upon the occurrences, because I had decided that note-taking would make me self-conscious. I do not now take this view. I was walking along West Forty-second Street, N. Y. C., when the notion came to me that I could "see" what was in a show window, which, some distance ahead, was invisible to me. I said to myself: "Turkey tracks in red snow." It should be noted that "red snow" was one of the phenomena of my interests, at this time. I came to the window, and saw track-like lines of black fountain pens, grouped in fours, one behind, and the three others trifurcating from it, on a background of pink cardboard.

At last I was a wizard!

Another time, picking out a distant window, invisible to me--or ocularly invisible to me--I said "Ripple marks on a sandy beach." It was a show window. Several men were removing exhibits from it, and there was virtually nothing left except a yellow-plush floor

[p. 1037]

covering. Decoratively, this covering had been ruffled, or given a wavy appearance.

Another time--"Robinson Crusoe and Friday's footprints." When I came to the place, I saw that it was a cobbler's shop, and that, hanging in the window, was a string of shoe soles.

I'm sorry.

I should like to hear of somebody, who would manfully declare himself a wizard, and say--"Take it or leave it!" I can't do this, because I too well remember other circumstances. Maybe it's my timidity, but I now save myself from the resentment, or the mean envy, of readers, who say, of a distant store window, "popular novels," and it's pumpkins. My experiments kept up about a month. Say that I experimented about a thousand times. Out of a thousand attempts, I can record only three seemingly striking successes, though I recall some minor ones. Throughout this book, I have taken the stand that nobody can be always wrong, but it does seem to me that I approximated so highly that I am nothing short of a negative genius. Nevertheless, the first of these experiences impresses me. It came to me when, so far as I know, I was not thinking of anything of the kind, though sub-consciously I was carrying much lore upon various psychic subjects.

These things may be done, but everybody who is interested has noticed the triviality and the casualness of them. They--such as telepathic experiences--come and go, and then when one tries to develop an ability, the successes aren't enough to encourage anybody, except somebody who is determined to be encouraged.

Well, then, if wild talents come and go, and can't be developed, or can't be depended upon, even people who are disposed to accept that they exist, can't see the good of them.

But accept that there are adepts: probably they had to go through long periods of apprenticeship, in which, though they deceived themselves by hugely over-emphasizing successes, and forgetting failures, they could not impress any parlor, or speakeasy, audience. I have told of my experiments of about a month. It takes five years to learn the rudiments of writing a book, selling gents' hosiery, or panhandling.

Everybody who can do anything got from the gods, or whatever,

[p. 1038]

nothing but a wild thing. Read a book, or look at a picture. The composer has taken a wild talent that nobody else in the world believed in; a thing that came and went and flouted and deceived him; maybe starved him; almost ruined him--and has put that damn thing to work.

Upon Nov. 29, 1931, died a wild talent. It was wild of origin, but was of considerable development. See the New York Herald Tribune, Nov. 30, 1931. John D. Reese had died in his home, in Youngstown, Ohio. Mr. Reese was a "healer." He was not a "divine healer." He means much to my expression that the religionists have been permitted to take unto themselves much that is not theirs exclusively. Once we heard only of "divine healers." Now there are "healers." It is something of a start of a divorcement that may develop enormously. Sometime I am going to loot the records of saints, for suggestions that may be of value to bright atheists, willing to study and experiment. "Reese had never studied medicine. The only instruction he had ever received was from an aged healer, in the mountains of Wales, when he was a boy. Physicians could not explain his art, and, after satisfying themselves that he was not a charlatan, would shrug, and say simply that he had 'divine power'." But Reese never described himself as a "divine healer," and, though by methods no less divine than those of the Salvation Army and other religious organizations, he made a fortune out of his practices, he was associated with no church. He was about thirty years old when he became aware of his talent. One day, in the year 1887, a man in a rolling mill fell from a ladder, and was injured. It was "a severe spinal sprain," according to a physician. "Mr. Reese stooped and ran his fingers up and down the man's back. The man smiled, and while the physician and the mill hands gaped in wonder, he rose to his feet, and announced that he felt strong again, with not a trace of pain. He went back to work, and Mr. Reese's reputation as a healer was spread abroad."

Then there were thousands of cases of successful treatments. Hans Wagner, shortstop of the Pittsburgh Pirates, was carried from the baseball field, one day: something in his back had snapped, and it seemed that his career had ended. He was treated by Reese, and within a few days was back shortstopping. When Lloyd George

[p. 1039]

visited the United States, after the War, he shook hands so many times that his hand was twisted out of shape. Winston Churchill, in a later visit, had what was said to be an automobile accident, and said that he was compelled to hold his arm in a sling. But Lloyd George was so cordially greeted that he was maimed. "Doctors said that only months of rest and massage could restore the cramped muscles." "Reese shook hands with the statesman, pressed gently, and then harder, disengaged their hands with a wrench, and Lloyd George's hand was strong again."

One of the most important particulars in this story of a talent, or of witchcraft, that was put to work, is that probably it was a case of a magician who was taught. Reese, when a boy, received instructions in therapeutic magic, and then, in the stresses of making a living, forgot, so far as went the knowledge of his active consciousness. But it seems that sub-consciously a development was going on, and suddenly, when the man was thirty-two years of age, manifested.

My notion is that wild talents exist in the profusion of the weeds of the fields. Also my notion is that, were it not for the conventions of markets, many weeds could be developed into valuable, edible vegetables. The one great ambition of my life, for which I would abandon my typewriter at any time--well, not if I were joyously setting down some particularly nasty little swipe at priests or scientists--is to say to chairs and tables, "Fall in! forward! march!" and have them obey me. I have tried this, as I don't mind recording, because one can't be of an enquiring and experimental nature, and also be very sensible. But a more unmilitary lot of furniture than mine, nobody has. Most likely, for these attempts, I'll be hounded by pacifists. I should very much like to be a wizard, and be of great negative benefit to my fellow beings, by doing nothing for anybody. And I have had many experiences that lead me to think that almost everybody else not only would like to be a wizard, but at times thinks he is one. I think that he is right. It is monism that if anybody's a wizard, everybody is, to some degree, a wizard.

One time--spring of 1931--my landlord received some chicks from the country, and put them in an enclosure at the end of the yard. They grew, and later I thought it interesting, listening to the

[p. 1040]

first, uncertain attempts of two of them to crow. It was as interesting as is watching young, human males trying to take on grown-up ways. But then I thought of what was ahead, at four o'clock, or thereabouts, mornings. I'm a crank about sleeping, because at times I have put in much disagreeable time with insomnia. I worried about this, and I spoke about it.

There was not another sound from the two, little roosters. At last!

Months went by. Confirmation. I was a wizard.

One day in October, the landlord's son-in-law said to me: "There hasn't been a sound from them since."

I tried not to look self-conscious.

Said he: "Last May, one day, I was looking at them, and I said, in my own mind: 'If we lose tenants on account of you, I'll wring your necks.' They never crowed again."

Again it's the Principle of Uncertainty, by which the path of a particle cannot be foretold, and by which there's no knowing who stopped the roosters. Well, we're both--or one of us is--very inferior in matters of magic, according to a story that is told of Madame Blavatsky. The little bird of a cuckoo clock annoyed her. Said she: "Damn that bird! shut up!" The cuckoo never spoke again.

By the cultivation of wild talents, I do not mean only the learning of the secret of the man they could not drown, and having the advantage of that ability, at times of shipwreck--of the man they could not confine, so that enormous would be the relief from the messiahs of the legislatures, if nobody could be locked up for failure to keep track of all their laws--of the woman they could not touch, so that there could be no more automobile accidents--of myself and the roosters--though just here my landlord's son-in-law will read scornfully--so that all radios can be stopped immediately after breakfast, and all tenors and sopranos forever

Only the secret of burning mansions in England; appearances of wounds on bodies, or of pictures on hailstones; bodies on benches of a Harlem park; strange explosions, and forced landings of aeroplanes, and the case of Lizzie Borden

Those are only specializations. If all are only different manifestations

[p. 1041]

of one force, or radio-activity, transmediumization, or whatever, that is the subject for research and experiment that may develop--

New triumphs and new disasters; happiness and miseries--a new era, in which people will think back, with contempt, or with horror, at our times, unless they start to think a little more keenly of their own affairs.

In the presence of a poltergeist girl, who, so far as is now knowable, exerts no force, objects move.

But this is a book of no marvels.

In the presence of certain substances, which so far as is now knowable, exert no force, other substances move, or transmute into very different substances.

This is a common phenomenon, to which the chemists have given the name catalysis.

All around are wild talents, and it occurs to nobody to try to cultivate them, except as expressions of personal feelings, or as freaks for which to charge admission. I conceive of powers and the uses of human powers that will some day transcend the stunts of music halls and seances and sideshows, as public utilities have passed beyond the toy-stages of their origins. Sometimes I tend to thinking constructively--or batteries of witches teleported to Nicaragua, where speedily they cut a canal by dissolving trees and rocks--the tumults of floods, and then magic by which they cannot touch houses--cyclones that smash villages, and then cannot push feathers. But also I think that there is nothing in this subject that is more reasonable than is the Taboo that is preventing, or delaying, development. I mean that semi-enlightenment that so earnestly, and with such keen, one-sided foresight fought to suppress gunpowder and the printing press and the discovery of America. With the advantages of practical witchcraft would come criminal enormities. Of course they would be somewhat adapted to. But I'd not like to have it thought that I am only an altruist, or of the humble mental development of a Utopian, who advocates something, as a blessing, without awareness of it as also a curse. Every folly, futility, and source of corruption of today, if a change from affairs primordial, was at one time preached as cure and salvation by some messiah or

[p. 1042]

another. One reason why I never pray for anything is that I'm afraid I might get it.

Or the uses of witchcraft in warfare--

But that, without the sanction of hypocrisy, superintendence by hypocrisy, the blessing by hypocrisy, nothing ever does come about--

Or military demonstrations of the overwhelming effects of trained hates--scientific uses of destructive bolts of a million hate-power--the blasting of enemies by disciplined ferocities--

And the reduction of cannons to the importance of fire crackers--a battleship at sea, or a toy boat in a bathtub--

The palpitations of hypocrisy--the brass bands of hypocrisy--the peace on earth and good will to man of hypocrisy--or much celebration, because of the solemn agreements of nations to scrap their battleships and armed aeroplanes--outlawry of poison gases, and the melting of cannon--once it is recognized that these things aren't worth a damn in the Era of Witchcraft--

But of course not that witchcraft would be practiced in warfare. Oh, no: witchcraft would make war too terrible. Really, the Christian thing to do would be to develop the uses of the new magic, so that in the future a war could not even be contemplated.

Later: A squad of poltergeist girls--and they pick a fleet out of the sea, or out of the sky--if, as far back as the year 1923, something picked French aeroplanes out of the sky--arguing that some nations that renounced fleets as obsolete would go on building them just the same.

Girls at the front--and they are discussing their usual not very profound subjects. The alarm--the enemy is advancing. Command to the poltergeist girls to concentrate--and under their chairs they stick their wads of chewing gum.

A regiment bursts into flames, and the soldiers are torches. Horses snort smoke from the combustion of their entrails. Reinforcements are smashed under cliffs that are teleported from the Rocky Mountains. The snatch of Niagara Falls--it pours upon the battlefield. The little poltergeist girls reach for their wads of chewing gum.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1043]

  

28

THAT everything that is desirable is not worth having--that happiness and unhappiness are emotional rhythms that are so nearly independent of one's circumstances that good news or bad news only stimulate the amplitude of these waves, without affecting the ratio of ups to downs--or that one might as well try to make, in a pond, waves that are altitudes only as to try to be happy without suffering equal and corresponding unhappiness.

But, so severely stated, this is mechanistic philosophy.

And I am a mechanist-immechanist.

Sometimes something that is desirable is not only not worth having, but is a damn sight worse than that.

Is life worth living? Like everybody else, I have many times asked that question, usually deciding negatively, because I am most likely to ask myself whether life is worth living at times when I am convinced it isn't. One day, in one of my frequent, and probably incurable, scientific moments, it occurred to me to find out. For a month, at the end of each day, I set down a plus sign, or a minus sign, indicating that, in my opinion, life had, or had not, been worth living, that day. At the end of the month, I totaled up, and I can't say that I was altogether pleased to learn that the pluses had won the game. It is not dignified to be optimistic.

I had no units by which to make my alleged determinations. Some of the plus days may have been only faintly positive, and, here and there, one of the minus days may have been so ferociously negative as to balance a dozen faintly positive days. Of course I did attempt gradations of notation, but they were only cutting pseudo-units into smaller pseudo-units. Also, out of a highly negative, or very distressing, experience, one may learn something that will mean a row of pluses in the future. Also, some pluses simply mean that one has misinterpreted events of a day, and is in for much minus--

Or that nothing--a joy or a sorrow, the planet Jupiter, or an electron--

[p. 1044]

can be picked out of its environment, so as finally to be labeled either plus or minus, because as a finally identifiable thing it does not exist--or that such attempted isolations and determinations are only scientific.

I have picked out witchcraft, as if there were witchcraft, as an identifiable thing, state, or activity. But, if by witchcraft, I mean phenomena as diverse as the mimicry of a leaf by a leaf-insect, and illnesses in a house where "Typhoid Mary" was cooking, and the harmless impalement, on spears, of children, I mean, by witchcraft in general, nothing that can be picked out of one commonality of phenomena. All phenomena are rhythmic, somewhere between the metrical and the frenzied, with final extremes unreachable in an existence of the metrical-unmetrical. The mechanical theory of existence is as narrowly lopsided as would be a theory that all things are good, large, or hot. It is Puritanism. It is the text-book science that tells of the clock-work revolutions of the planet Jupiter, and omits mention of Jupiter's little, vagabond moons, which would be fired from any job, in human affairs, because of their unpunctualities--and omits mention that there's a good deal the matter with the clock-work of most clocks. Mechanistic philosophy is a dream of a finality of exact responses to stimuli, and of absolute equivalences. Inasmuch as the advantages and disadvantages of anything can no more be picked out, isolated, identified, and quantitatively determined, than can the rise of a wave be clipped from its fall, it is only scientific dreamery to say what anything is equal and opposite to.

And, at the same time, in the midst of a submergence in commonality, there is a permeation of all phenomena by an individuality that is so marked that, just as truly as all things merge indistinguishably into all other things, all things represent the unmergeable. So then there is something pervasive of every action and every advantage that makes it alone, incommensurable, and incomparable with a reaction, or a disadvantage.

Our state of the hyphen is the state of the gamble. Go to no den of a mathematician for enlightenment. Try Monte Carlo. Out of science is fading certainty as fast as ever it departed from theology. In its place we have adventure. Accepting that there is witchcraft,

[p. 1045]

in the sense in which we accept that there is electricity, magnetism, or life, the acceptance is that there is no absolute poise between advantages and disadvantages

Or that practical witchcraft, or the development of wild talents, might be of such benefits as to draw in future records of human affairs the new dividing line of A. W. and B. W.--or might be a catastrophe that would drive all human life back into Indians, or Zulus, or things furrier--

If by any chance the evils of witchcraft could compare with, or beat to an issue, the demoralizations of law, justice, business, sex, literature, education, pacifism, militarism, idealism, materialism, which at present, are incomprehensibly not yet equal and opposite to stabilizations that are saving us from, or are denying us, the jungles--

Or let all persons of foresight, if of sedentary habits, shift positions occasionally, so as not to suppress too much their vertebral stubs that their descendants may need as the bases of more graceful appendages.

But my own expression is that any state of being that can so survive its altruists and its egotists, its benefactors and its exploiters, its artists, gunmen, bankers, lawyers, and doctors would be almost immune to the eviler magics of witchcraft, because it is itself a miracle.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

29

STUNTS of sideshows, and the miracles of pietists, and the phenomena of spiritualistic medium--

Or that the knack that tips a table may tilt an epoch.

Or much of the "parlor magic" of times gone by, and now it is industrial chemistry. And Taboo, by which earlier experimenters in the trained forces of today were under suspicion as traffickers with demons.

I take for a pseudo-principle, by which I mean a standard of judgment

[p. 1046]

that sometimes works out, and sometimes doesn't work out--which is as near to wisdom as I can arrive, in an existence of truth-nonsense--that, someday to be considered right, is first to be unholy. It is out of blasphemy that new religions arise. It is by thinking things that schoolboys know better than to think that discoveries are made. It is because our visions are not delirious enough, or degraded, or nonsensical enough, that all of us are not prophets. Let any thoughtful, properly trained man, who has had all the benefits of an academic education, predict--at least, then, we know what won't be. We have, then, at our command, a kind of negative clairvoyance--if we know just where to go for an insight into what won't be.

The trail of a working witchcraft--but, if we are traffickers with demons, the traffic isn't much congested, at present. Someday almost every particular in this book may look quaint, but it may be that the principle of putting the witches to work will seem as sound as now seems the employment of steam and electric demons. Our instances of practical witchcraft have been practical enough, so long as they were paying attractions at exhibitions, but the exhibition implies the marvel, or what people regard as the marvel, and the spirit of this book is of commonplaceness, or of coming commonplaceness--or that there isn't anything in it, except of course its vagaries of theories and minor interpretations, that won't someday be considered as unsensational as the subject-matters of textbooks upon chemistry and mechanics. My interest is in magic, as the daily grind--the miracle as a job--sorceries as public utilities.

There is one manifestation of witchcraft that has been put to work. It is a miracle with a job.

Dowsing.

It is commonly known as water-divining. It is witchcraft. One cannot say that, because of some unknown chemical, or bio-chemical, affinity, a wand bends in a hand, in the presence of underground water. The wand bends only in the hand of a magician.

It is witchcraft. So, though there are scientists who are giving in to its existence, there are others, or hosts of others, who never will give in. Something about both kinds of scientists was published in Time, Feb. 9, 1931. It was said that Oscar E. Meinzer, of the

[p. 1047]

[paragraph continues] U. S. Geological Survey, having investigated dowsers, had published his findings which were that "further tests ... of so-called 'witching' for water, oil, or other minerals, would be a misuse of public funds." Also it was shown that conclusions by Dr. Charles Albert Browne, of the U. S. Department of Agriculture, disagreed with Mr. Meinzer's findings. "On a large sugar-beet estate, near Magdeburg, Dr. Browne saw one of Germany's most famed dowsers at work. Covering his chest with a padded leather jacket, the dowser took in his hands a looped steel divining rod, and began to pace the ground. Suddenly the loop shot upward, and hit him a sharp blow on the chest. Continuing, he charted the outlines of an underground stream. Then, using an aluminum rod, which he said was much more sensitive, he estimated the depth of the stream. A rod of still another metal indicated that the water was good to drink. When Dr. Browne tried to use the rod, himself, he could get no chest blows, unless the dowser was holding one end. Dr. Browne then questioned German scientists. The majority answered that, with all humbuggery discounted, a large number of successes remained, which could not be accounted for by luck or chance." For queer places--or for places in which scientists of not so far back would have predicted that such yokelry as dowsing would never be admitted--see Science, Jan. 23, 1931, or the Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1928, p. 325. Here full particulars of Dr. Browne's investigation are published.

The Department of Public Works, of Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, has employed a dowser, since the year 1916 (Notes and Queries, 150-235). New York Times, July 26, 1931--two Australian states were employing dowsers.

I don't know that I mean much by that. The freaks and faddists who get themselves employed by governments make me think that I am not very convincing here. But I have no record of a dowser with a political job before the year 1916: and, wherever I got all this respectfulness of mine for the job, it is the entrance of magic into the job that I am bent upon showing.

In the London Observer, May 2, 1926, it is said that the Government of Bombay was employing an official water diviner, who, in one district of scarcity of water, had indicated about fifty sources of

[p. 1048]

supply, at forty-seven of which water had been found. The writer of this account says that members of one of the biggest firms of well-boring engineers had informed him that they had successfully employed dowsers in Wales, Oxfordshire, and Surrey.

In Nature, Sept. 8, 1928, there is an account, by Dr. A. E. M. Geddes, of experiments with dowsers. Dr. Geddes' conclusion is that the faculty of water-divining is possessed by some persons, who respond to at present unknown, external stimuli.

It is not that I am maintaining that out of the mouths of babes, and from the vaporings of yokels, we shall receive wisdom--but that sometimes we may. Peasants have believed in dowsing, and scientists used to believe that dowsing was only a belief of peasants. Now there are so many scientists who believe in dowsing that the suspicion comes to me that it may be only a myth, after all.

In the matter of dowsing, the opposition that Mr. Meinzer represents is as understandable as is the opposition that once was waged by priestcraft against the system that he now represents. Let in, against the former dominant, data of raised beaches, or of deposits of fossils, and each intruder would make a way for other iniquities. Now, relatively to the Taboo of today, let in any of the occurrences told of in this book, and by its suggestions and affiliations, or linkages, it would make an opening for an irruption.

Very largely, dowsing, or witchcraft put to work, has been let in.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

30

IT has been my expression that, for instance, African fakirs achieved the harmless impalement of children by a process that would ordinarily be called imposing the imaginary upon the physical, but that is called by me imposing the imaginary-physical upon the physical-imaginary. I think that this is the conscious power and method of adepts: but I think that in the great majority of our stories, effects have been wrought unconsciously, so far as went active awareness, by witches and wizards. I am impressed more

[p. 1049]

with an experience of my own than with any record of other doings. I looked, or stared, at a picture on a wall. Somewhere in my mind were many impressions of falling pictures. But I was not actively thinking of falling pictures. The picture fell from the wall.

See back to the Blackman case--the four judges, who "died suddenly." It was Blackman, who called attention to these deaths. Why? Vanity of the magician? I think that more likely these victims were removed by a wizardry of Blackman's of which he was unconscious. I think that if a man so earnestly objected to paying alimony that, instead, he went to jail four times, he'd overlook his judges and take a shorter cut, on behalf of his income, if he consciously reasoned about it.

It would seem that visualizations have had nothing to do with many occurrences told of in this book. Still, by a wild talent I mean something that comes and goes, and is under no control, but that may be caught and trained. Also there are cases that look very much like controlled uses of visualizations upon physical affairs. In this view, I have noted an aspect of doings that is a support for our expression upon transmediumization.

The real, as it is called, or the objective, the external, the material, cannot be absolutely set apart from the subjective, or the imaginary: but there are quasi-attributes of the imaginary. There have been occurrences that I think were transmediumizations, because I think that they were marked by indications of having carried over, from an imaginative origin, into physical being, or into what is called "real life," the quasi-attributes of their origin.

A peculiarity of fires that are called--or that used to be called--"spontaneous combustions of human bodies," is that the fires do not communicate to surrounding objects and fabrics, or that they extend only to a small degree around. There are stories of other such fires, which cannot be "real fires," as compared with fires called "real." In the St. Louis Globe-Democrat, October 2, or about Oct. 2, 1889, there is a story of restricted fires, said to have occurred in the home of Samuel Miller, upon a farm, six miles west of Findlay, Ohio. A bed had burst into flames, burning down to a heap of ashes, but setting nothing else afire, not even scorching the floor underneath. The next day, "about the same time in the afternoon," a chest

[p. 1050]

of clothes flamed, and was consumed, without setting anything else afire. The third day, at the same time, another bed, and nothing but the bed burned. See back to the fires in the house in Bladenboro, N. C., February, 1932. A long account of these fires, from a San Diego (Cal.) newspaper, was sent to me by Margaret M. Page, of San Diego. In it one of the phenomena considered most remarkable was that fires broke out close to inflammable materials that were unaffected by the flames. Names of several witnesses--Mayor J. A. Bridger, of Bladenboro, J. B. Edwards, a Wilmington health officer, and Dr. S. S. Hutchinson, of Bladenboro.

It is as if somebody had vengefully imagined fires, and in special places had localized fires, according to his visualizations. Such localizing, or focusing, omitting surroundings, is a quasi-attribute of all visualizations. One vividly visualizes a face, and a body is ignored by the imagination. Let somebody visualize a bed afire, and exhaust his imaginative powers in this specialization: I conceive of the bed burning, as imagined, and nothing else burning, because nothing else was included in the mental picture that transmediumized, it having been taken for granted, by the visualizer, that, like a fire of physical origin, this fire would extend. It seems to me to be only ordinarily impossible to understand the burning of a woman on an unscorched bed as the "realization" of an imagined scene in which the burning body was pictured, with neglect of anything else consuming.

See back to unsatisfactory attempts to attribute punctures of windowpanes and automobile shields, to a missile-less weapon. The invisible bullets stopped short, after penetrating glass. If we can think of an intent, more mischievous than malicious, that was only upon shooting through glass, and that gave no consideration to subsequent courses of bullets, we can think of occurrences that took place, as visualized, and as restricted by visualizations.

Doings in closed rooms--but my monism, by which I accept that all psychical magic links somewhere with more or less commonplace physical magic

New York Times, June 18, 1880--Rochester, N. Y.--a woman dead in her bed, and the bed post hacked as if with a hatchet. It

[p. 1051]

was known that nobody had entered this room. But something had killed this woman, leaving no sign of either entrance or exit.

It was during a thunderstorm, and the woman had been killed by lightning.

The man of one of our stories--J. Temple Thurston--alone in his room--and that a pictorial representation of his death by fire was enacting in a distant mind--and that into the phase of existence that is called "real" stole the imaginary--scorching his body, but not his clothes, because so was pictured the burning of him--and that, hours later, there came into the mind of the sorcerer a fear that this imposition of what is called the imaginary upon what is called the physical bore quasi-attributes of its origin, or was not realistic, or would be, in physical terms, unaccountable, and would attract attention--and that the fire in the house was visualized, and was "realized," but by a visualization that in turn left some particulars unaccounted for.

Lavinia Farrar was a woman of "independent means." Hosts of men and women have been shot, or stabbed, or poisoned, because of their "independent means." But that Mrs. Farrar was thought to death--or that upon her, too, out of the imaginary world in somebody's mind, stole a story--that it made of her, too, so fictional a being that of her death there is no explanation in ordinary, realistic terms

That here, too, there was an after-thought, or an after-picturation, which, by way of attempted explanation, "realized" a knife and blood on the floor, but overlooked other details that made this occurrence inexplicable in terms of ordinary murders--or that this woman had been stabbed in the heart, through unpunctured clothes, because it was, with the neglect of everything else, the wound in the heart that had been visualized.

The germ of this expression is in anybody's acceptance that a stigmatic girl can transfer a wound, as pictured in her mind, into appearance upon her body. The expression requires that there may be external, as well as personal, stigmatism.

It seems to me to be as nearly unquestionable as anything in human affairs goes, that there have been stigmatic girls. There may have been many cases of different kinds of personal stigmatism,

[p. 1052]

There are emotions that are as intense as religious excitation. One of them is terror.

The story of Isidor Fink is a story of a fear that preceded a murder. It could be that Fink's was a specific fear, of somebody whom he had harmed, and not a general fear of the hold-ups that, at the time, were so prevalent in New York City. According to Police Commissioner Mulrooney, it was impossible, in terms of ordinary human experience, to explain this closed-room murder

Or Isidor Fink, at work in his laundry--and his mind upon somebody whom he had injured--and that his fears of revenge were picturing an assassination of which he was the victim--that his physical body was seized upon by his own picturization of himself, as shot by an enemy.

      
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

31

IN February, 1885, in an English prison, there was one of the dream-like occurrences that the materialists think are real. But every character concerned in it was fading away, so that now there is probably no survivor. From time to time repairs had to be made, because the walls of the prison were dissolving. By way of rusts, the iron bars were disappearing.

Upon February 23, 1885--as we say, in terms of our fanciful demarcations--just as if a 23rd of February, which is only relative to rhythms of sunshine, could be a real day--just as if one could say really where a January stops and a February begins--just as if one could really pick a period out of time, and say that there ever was really a year 1885--

Early in what is called a morning of what is so arbitrarily and fancifully called the 23rd of February, 1885, John Lee, in his cell, in the penitentiary, at Exeter, England, was waiting to be hanged.

In the yard of a prison of stone, with bars of iron, John Lee was led past a group of hard and motionless witnesses, to the scaffold. There were newspaper men present. Though they probably considered

[p. 1053]

it professional to look as expressionless as stones, or bars of iron, there was nothing in Lee's case to be sentimental about. His crime had been commonplace and sordid. He was a laborer, who had lived with an old woman, who had a little property, and, hoping to get that, he had killed her. John Lee was led past a group, almost of minerals. It was a scene of the mechanism and solidity of legal procedure, as nearly real as mechanism and solidity can be.

Noose on his neck, and up on the scaffold they stood him on a trap door. The door was held in position by a bolt. When this bolt was drawn, the door fell--

John Lee, who hadn't a friend, and hadn't a dollar--

The Sheriff of Exeter, behind whom was Great Britain.

The Sheriff waved his hand. It represented Justice and Great Britain.

The bolt was drawn, but the trap door did not fall. John Lee stood with the noose around his neck.

It was embarrassing. He should be strangling. There is something of an etiquette in all things, and this was indecorum. They tinkered with the bolt. There was no difficulty, whatsoever, with the bolt: but when it was drawn, with John Lee standing on the trap door, the door would not fall.

Something unreasonable was happening. Just what is the procedure, in the case of somebody, who is standing erect, when he should be dangling? The Sheriff ordered John Lee back to his cell.

The people in this prison yard were not so stolid. They fluttered, and groups of them were talking it over. But there was no talk that could do John Lee any good. This was what is called stern reality. The Sheriff did not flutter. I have a note upon him, twenty years later: he was in trouble with a religious sect of which he was a member, because he ordered his beer by the barrel. He was as solid as beer and beef and the British Government.

The warders looked into the matter thoroughly--except that there wasn't anything to look into. Every time they drew back the bolt, with John Lee out of the way, the door fell, as it should fall. One of the warders stood in Lee's place, where, instead of placing the noose around his neck, he clung to the rope. The bolt was drawn,

[p. 1054]

the door fell, as it should fall, and down dropped the warder, as he should drop.

There was a woman they could not push. A man they could not crucify. The man they could not drown. There was the man they could not imprison. The dog they could not lose.

John Lee was led back to the scaffold. The witnesses did not know whether to be awed or not. But, after all, it was just one of those things that nobody could explain, but that could not happen again--

Or that to a college professor it could not--to anybody educated in the first principles of mechanics and physics it could not--that, to anybody, not an untutored laboring man, but committed to unquestioning belief in everything that a professor of physics would say in maintaining that the trap door would have to fall--

The bolt was drawn.

The trap door would not fall.

John Lee stood unhangable.

That when, the first time, John Lee was led past these newspaper men, and town officials, and others who had been invited to the ceremony, any one of them could have overstepped any line that all were told to toe would have been little short of inconceivable. But a doctor, whose professional appearance was much faded, interceded. Others were shaky. The Sheriff said that John Lee had been sentenced to be hanged, and that John Lee would be hanged.

They had done everything thinkable. Any suggestions? Somebody suggested that rains might have swollen the wooden door, causing friction. There had been, in all tests, no friction: but, by way of taking every possible precaution, a warder planed the edges of the door. They experimented, and, every time, the door fell, as it should fall.

They stood him on the scaffold again.

The door would not fall.

This scene of an attempted execution dissolved, like a dream-picture. The newspaper men faded away, or burst away. The newspaper men ran out into the streets of Exeter. In the streets, they ran, shouting the news of the man who could not be hanged. The Sheriff, who had tried hard to be a real Sheriff, went to pieces. He'd do this about it, and then he'd do that about it, and then

[p. 1055]

[paragraph continues] "Take him away!" He communicated with the Home Secretary. There was something about all this that so shook the Home Secretary that he authorized a delay.

The matter was debated in the House of Commons, where some of the members denounced a proposed defeat of justice by superstition. Nevertheless the execution was not attempted again. Lee's sentence was commuted to life-imprisonment, but he was released in December, 1907. His story was re-told in the newspapers of that time. I take from Lloyd's Weekly News (London) Jan. 5, 1908.

I have tried to think of a conventional explanation, in the case of John Lee. All attempts fail. He hadn't a dollar.

There may be some commonplace explanation that I have not thought of: but my notion is that the explanation that I have thought of will some day be considered as commonplace as are now regarded the impenetrable mysteries of electricity and radio-activity.

     
Wild Talents, by Charles Fort, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

32

IT'S the old controversy--the action of mind upon matter. But, in the philosophy of the hyphen, an uncrossable gap is disposed of, and the problem is rendered into thinkable terms, by asking whether mind-matter can act upon matter-mind.

I am beginning to see whence all my specialization, not much short of hypnotization, upon magic, as the job. Just why am I so bent upon cooping people into multicellular formations, and setting batteries of disciplined sorcerers at work, bewitching into useful revolutions all the motors of the world?

As to the job, and anything that is supposed to be not a job, there is only the state of job-recreation, or recreation-job. I have cut out of my own affairs very much of so-called recreation, simply because I feel that I cannot give to so-called enjoyments the labors that they exact. I'd often like to be happy, but I don't want to go through the equivalence of digging a ditch, or of breaking stones, to enjoy myself. I have seen, by other persons, very labored and painful

[p. 1056]

efforts to be happy. So then I am so much concerned with the job, because, though it hyphenates, there isn't anything else.

Probably it will be some time before any college professor, of whatever we think we mean by importance, will admit that, by witchcraft, or by the development of what are now only wild talents, all the motors of this earth may be set going and kept at work. But "highest authority" no longer unitedly opposes the more or less remote possibility of such operations. See an interview, with Dr. Arthur H. Compton, Professor of Physics, at the University of Chicago, published in the New York Times, Jan. 3, 1932. Said Dr. Compton: "The new physics does not suggest a solution of the old question of how mind acts on matter. It does definitely, however, admit the possibility of such action, and suggests where the action may take effect."

I don't know that I am much more of a heretic, myself. In my stories, I have admitted possibilities, and I have made suggestions.

But the difference is that the professors will not be concrete, and I give instances. Dr. Compton's views are ripe with the interpretation that transportation systems, and the lighting of cities, and the operation of factories may someday be the outcome of what he calls the "action of mind on matter," or what I'd call mechanical witchcraft. But toyers with abstractions falter, the moment one says--"For instance?"

The fuel-less motor, which is by most persons considered a dream, or a swindle, associates most with the name of John Worrell Keely, though there have been other experimenters, or impostors, or magicians. The earliest fuel-less motor "crank" of whom I have record is John Murray Spear, back in the period of 1855, though of course various "cranks" of all ages can be linked with this swindle, dream, or most practical project. The latest, at this writing, is a young man, Lester J. Hendershot, of Pittsburgh, Pa. I take data from the New York Herald Tribune, Feb. 27-March 10, 1928. It was Henderson's statement that he had invented a motor that operated by deriving force from "this earth's magnetic field." Nobody knows what that means. But Hendershot was backed by Major Thomas Lanphier, U. S. Army, commandant of Selfridge Field, Detroit. It was said that at tests of Selfridge Field, a model of the "miracle motor"

[p. 1057]

had invisibly generated power enough to light two 110-volt lamps, and that another had run a small sewing machine. Major Lanphier stated that he had helped to make one of these models, which were of simple construction, and that he was sure that there was nothing fraudulent about it.

This espousal by Major Lanphier array, considering that to orthodox scientists it was the equivalence of belief in miracles, seem extraordinary: but it seems to me that the attacks that were made upon Hendershot were more extraordinary--or significant. It would seem that, if a simple, little contrivance, weighing less than ten pounds, were a fraud, the mechanics of Selfridge Field, or anywhere else, could determine that in about a minute, especially if they had themselves made it, under directions. If the thing were a fraud, it would seem that it would have to be obviously a fraud. Who'd bother? But Dr. Frederick Hochstetter, head of the Hochstetter Research Laboratory, of Pittsburgh, went to New York about it. He hired a lecture room, or a "salon," of a New York hotel, telling reporters that he had come to expose a fraud, which would be capable of destroying faith in science for 1,000 years. If so, even to me this would not be desirable. I should like to see faith in science destroyed for 20 years, and then be restored for a while, and then be knocked flat again, and then revive--and so on, in a healthy alternation. Dr. Hochstetter exhibited models of the motor. They couldn't generate the light of a 1-volt firefly. They couldn't stitch a fairy's breeches. Dr. Hochstetter lectured upon what he called a fraud. But the motive for all this? Dr. Hochstetter explained that his only motive was that "pure science might shine forth untarnished."

It was traveling far, and going to trouble and expense to maintain the shine of a purity, the polish of which was threatened by no more than a youngster, of whom most of the world had never heard before. What I pick up is that there must have been an alarm that was no ordinary alarm, somewhere. I pick up that at tests, in Detroit, in Hendershot's presence, his motors worked; that, in New . York, not in his presence, his motors did not work.

Then came the denouement, by which most stories of exposed impostors end up, or are said to end up. Said Dr. Hochstetter--dramatically, I suppose, inasmuch as he was much worked up over

[p. 1058]

all this--he had discovered that concealed in one of the motors was a carbon pencil battery.

Just about so, in the literature of Taboo, end almost all stories of doings that are "alarming." There is no chance for a come-back from the "exposed impostor." He is shown as sneaking off-stage, in confusion and defeat. But some readers are having a glimmer of what I mean by taking so much material from the newspapers. They get statements from "exposed impostors." They ridicule and belittle, and publish much that is one-sided, but they do give the chance for the come-back.

Came back Hendershot:

That Dr. Hochstetter was quite right in his accusation, but only insofar as it applied to an incident of several years before. In his early experiments Hendershot, having no assurance of the good faith of visitors, had stuck into his motor various devices "to lead them away from the real idea I was working on." But, in the tests at Selfridge Field there had been no such "leads," and there had been no means of concealments in motors that mechanics employed by Major Lanphier had made.

Two weeks later, Hendershot dropped out of the newspapers. Perhaps a manufacturer of ordinary motors bought him off. But he dropped out by way of a strange story. It is strange to me, because I recall the small claims that were made for the motor--alleged power not sufficient to harm anybody--only enough to run a sewing machine, or to light lamps with 220 volts. New York Herald Tribune, March 10, 1928--that Lester J. Hendershot, the Pittsburgh inventor of the "miracle motor," was a patient in the Emergency Hospital, Washington, D. C. It is said that, in the office of a patent attorney, he was demonstrating his "fuel-less motor," when a bolt estimated at 2,000 volts shot from it, and temporarily paralyzed him.

It was Hendershot's statement that his motor derived force from "this earth's magnetic field." It is probable that, if the motor was driven by his own magic, he would, even if he knew this, attribute it to something else. It is likely that spiritualistic mediums--or a few of them--have occult powers of their own: but they attribute them to spirits. Probably some stage-magicians have occult powers: but, in a traditional fear of persecutions of witchcraft, they feel that

[p. 1059]

it is safer to say that the hand is quicker than the eye. "Divine healers" and founders of religions have been careful to explain that their talents were not their own.

In November, 1874, John Worrell Keely exhibited, to a dozen well-known Philadelphians, his motor. They were hard-headed business men--as far as hard heads go--which isn't very far--but they were not dupes and gulls of the most plastic degree. They saw, or thought they saw, this motor operate, though connected in no way with any conventionally recognized source of power. Some of these witnesses considered the motor worth backing. Keely, too, explained that something outside himself was the moving force, but nobody has ever been able to explain his explanations. Unlike Hendershot's simple contrivance, Keely's motor was a large and complicated structure. The name of it was formidable. When spoken of familiarly, it was a vibratory generator, but the full name of the monster was the Hydro-pneumatic-pulsating-vacue-engine. A company was organized, and, after that, everything was very unsatisfactory, except to Keely. There was something human about this engine--just as any monist, of course thinks there is to everything--such as rats and trees and people. It was like so many promising young men, who arrive at middle age, still promising, and go to their graves, having, just before dying, promised something or another. It can't be said that the engine worked. The human-like thing had talents, and was capable of sensational stunts, but it couldn't earn a dollar. That is, at an honest day's toil, it could not, but with its promises it brought tens of thousands of dollars to Keely. It is said that, though he lived well, he spent much of this money in experiments.

Here, too, just what I suspect--though don't have it that I think I'm the only one who has had this idea--was just what was not asserted. That his motor moved responsively to a wizardry of his own, was just what Keely never said. It could be that it was a motivation of his own, but that he did not know it. Mesmer, in his earlier phases, believed that he wrought cures with magnets, and he elaborated very terminological theories, in terms of magnets, until he either conceived, or admitted, that his effects were wrought by his own magic.

[p. 1060]

I should like to have an opinion upon fuel-less engines, from an official of General Motors, to compare with what the doctors of Vienna and Paris thought of Mesmer.

For eight years there was faith: but then (December, 1882), there was a meeting of disappointed stockholders of the Keely Motor Co. In the midst of protests and accusations, Keely announced that, though he would not publicly divulge the secret of his motor, he would tell everything to any representative of the dissatisfied ones. A stockholder named Boekel was agreed upon. Boekel's report was that it would be improper to describe the principle of the mechanism, but that "Mr. Keely had discovered all that he had claimed." There is no way of inquiring into how Mr. Boekel was convinced. Considering the billions of human beings who have been "convinced" by bombardments of words and phrases beyond their comprehension, I think that Mr. Boekel was reduced to a state of mental helplessness by flows of a hydro-pneumatic-pulsating-vacue terminology; and that faithfully he kept his promise not to explain, because he had not more than the slightest comprehension of what it was that had convinced him.

But I do not think that any character of Mr. Keely's general abilities has ever practiced successfully without the aid of religion. Be good for a little while, and you shall have everlasting reward. Keely was religious in preaching his doctrine of goodness: benefits to mankind, releases from enslavement, spare time for the cultivation of the best that is in everybody, promised by his motor--and in six months the stock will be quoted at several times its present value. I haven't a notion that John Worrell Keely, with a need for business, and a throb for suffering humanity, was any less sincere than was General Booth, for instance.

In November, 1898, Keely died. Clarence B. Moore, son of his patron, Mrs. Bloomfield Moore--short tens of thousands of dollars in his inheritance, because of Keely and his promises--rented Keely's house, and investigated. According to his findings, Keely was "an unadulterated rascal."

This is too definite to suit my notions of us phenomena. The unadulterated, whether of food we eat, or the air we breathe, or of

[p. 1061]

idealism, or of villainy, is unfindable. Even adultery is adulterated. There are qualms and other mixtures.

Moore said that he had found the evidences of rascality. The motor was not the isolated mechanism that, according to him, the stockholders of the Keely Motor Co. had been deceived into thinking it was: he had found an iron pipe and other tubes, and wires that led from the motor to the cellar. Here was a large, spherical, metallic object. There were ashes.

Imposture exposed--the motor had been run by a compressed air engine, in the cellar.

Anybody who has ever tried to keep a secret twenty-four hours, will marvel at this story of an impostor who, against all the forces of revelation, such as gas men, and coal men, and other persons who get into cellars--against inquisitive neighbors, and, if possible, even more inquisitive newspaper men--against disappointed stockholders and outraged conventionalists--kept secret, for twenty-four years, his engine in the cellar.

It made no difference what else came out. Taboo had, or pretended it had, something to base on. Almost all people of all eras are hypnotics. Their beliefs are induced beliefs. The proper authorities saw to it that the proper belief should be induced, and people believed properly.

Stockholders said that they knew of the spherical object, or the alleged compressed air engine in the cellar, because Keely had made no secret of it. Nobody demonstrated that by means of this object, the motor could be run. But beliefs can be run. So meaningless, in any sense of organization, were the wires and tubes, that I think of Hendershot's statement that he had complicated his motor with "leads," as he called them.

Stones that have fallen in houses where people were dying--the rambles of a pan of soft soap--chairs that have moved about in the presence of poltergeist girls--

But, in the presence of John Worrell Keely, there were disciplined motions of a motor. For twenty-four years there were demonstrations, and though there was much of a stir-up of accusations, never was Keely caught helping out a little. There was no red light, nor semi-darkness. The motor stood in no cabinet. Keely's stockholders

[p. 1062]

were of a superior intelligence, as stockholders go, inasmuch as many of them investigated, somewhat, before speculating. They saw this solemn, big contrivance go around and around. Sometimes they saw sensational stunts. The thing tore thick ropes apart, broke iron bars, and shot bullets through a twelve-inch plank. I conceive that the motivation of this thing was a wild talent--an uncultivated, rude, and unreliable power, such as is all genius in its infancy--

That Keely operated his motor by a development of mere "willing," or visualizing, whether consciously; or not knowing how he got his effects--succeeding spasmodically sometimes, failing often, according to the experience of all pioneers--impostor and messiah

Justifying himself, in the midst of promises that came to nothing, because he could say to himself something that Galileo should have said, but did not say--"Nevertheless it does move!"

 

 

 

 

    
